Essaies POLITIC, and MORAL. By D. T. Gent.

printer's device of Humphrey Lownes, a compartment featuring two angels or
cherubs with Lancashire and Yorkshire roses at the top, and a lion and dragon
separated by a corinthian column at the bottom (not in McKerrow)

Printed By H. L. for Matthew Lownes, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard. 1608.

The chief Heads, handled in this Book.
Of Persuasion: wherein is discoursed Of Opinion. Of Affection. Of The force of
Reason.
Of Praises. Of Pains, and Industry. Of cautions in Friendship. Of three
things prejudicial to Secrecy. Of Reputation. Of Accusation.
To the Right Honorable, and virtuous LADY, the Lady Anne Harington.
MAdam,
The desire I had to manifest my serviceable affection toward your Honor in
outward Complement, has on such idle hours, as remained free to me from
your employments, begot this young and tender Infant; whom I presumed, upon his
birth (being yet an Embrio in his fathers brain) to devote, and consecrate
wholly to your honorable Self, as to the chief, and final end of his
being. His capacity is not of the weakest: and therefore, howsoever he may
now seem altogether vnfashion'd, I make no doubt, but by conversing with your
Ladyship (whose bosom the hand of heaven has so richly furnished with all
exemplary virtues, that from among so many, Wisdom selected you, to be the
Governesse, from whom the Princely issue of a royal bed might receive
instruction) his ruder ignorance may be reduced to a better form. Essaies are
the things he utters. His years deny him that length of breath, which
should enable him to hold out in a continued, and long discourse. My self
have imparted unto him, part of that beauty and Perfection, which Art, and
Nature has bestowed on me. Such therefore as he is, I present him to your
Honors view; who, I hope, will affoorde him such worthy entertainment, as may
hold some even correspondencie, with his desires, as well as his deserts. And
so in the humblest degree of service, that either love, or dutiful observance
can imagine, I kiss your Honorable hands; desirous of nothing more, then
always to be reputed,

Madam, Your Honors most affectionate servant, D. T.

Of Persuasion.
TO ground a persuasion of what nature soever, in the hearts of a public
Audience, there are three things necessarily required: The one consists in the
opinion had of the party persuading: The other, in the affection of the
parties to be persuaded: and the last, in the perspicuitie, and soundness of
the reason it self, by which he labors to persuade them. As concerning the
first, it was thought by the Magistrates of Sparta, to be a matter of so great
importance, that when they perceived one of loose, and dissolute behauior,
ready to propounde unto the people, an advertisement, the approbation whereof,
they knew, would be no small enlargement to the good, and quietness of their
State, and Commonwealth, they did immediately command him silence (fearing, it
should seem, least his known manners might have preiudic't the excellency of
the thing) and entreated one, who for his grave and virtuous carriage, was of
some honor and reputation amongst them, to take upon him the invention, and to
deliver it unto the^, as if it had proceeded merely from himself. And it has
bin always the practice of wiser Statesmen, for the better co^posing of
exasperated minds, whither it were in the blodie factions of the greater, or in
the tumultuous broils of the meaner, to choose some one whose grave
representation, accompanied with a remarquable, honest, and virtuous
disposition, might upon his very first approach, work an awful respect toward
his person, and withal a reverend attentio^ toward his words, in the hearts
and minds of such as should behold him. For there are not any so mutinous and
turbulent assemblies, howsoever they may seem to consist of those active and
working spirits, quibus quieta movere, as Salus said of some of his time,
magna merces videtur: that think the very disturbance of things established, a
sufficient hyre to set them on work, but will somewhat (though incensed
Passions arm them with never so desperate a resolution, to effect their
mischievous projects and designs) honor the sight and presence of such a one:
especially, when they think he is not interested in the cause, or induced by
any private obligation, to seek the good of the one party, with any hurt, or
disadvantage to the other: but that his love and affection, does equally
border upon both, and that the reducing of the^ to a peaceable agreement of
their differences for the public good, and welfare of the State, is the
chiefest, and only mark he aims at: and this was excellently described by
the Poet, when he said,

-- Magno in populo cum saepe coorta est
Seditio, saeuitque animis ignobile vulgus:
Cu^que faces, et saxa volant: furor arma ministrat.
Tu^pietate graue^, ac meritis, si forte viru^ que^
Conspexere, silent: arrectisque auribus adstant.
And for this cause it has been a custom among the Spaniards, to make choice
of Churchmen for the better managing of such businesses: yea, they have been
oftentimes employed by him in matters of treaty, with an intent and purpose,
to lend a greater Majesty to his negotiations, and more feinedly to color
his subtle fetches and devices: as when for the assurance of his new-got
conquest of Navarre, he sent 2. Cordeliers into France, to talk with the
Queen about a peace, who by reason of the credit their profession had gained
them, returned homewards with no ill success. Whereas if they be men of a
differing fame, that have the carrying of such affairs, their reasons, be they
never so appara^tly good, do lightly serve to no better use, then to sharpen
and stir up the ill-affected humors of their crazie minds the more; whereby
in the end, themselves become a subject for their distemperature to work upon:
especially, when that small sparkle of Understanding (which is usually the
portion of the vulgar) is dimmed, and obscured with any mist of prejudice, or
cloud of Passionate affection. And the reason hereof is, the shallow ignorance
of a wavering and vnsteadie multitude, which being for the most part led to
judge of matters only by a Sensitive apprehension they have of the^, and not
able of themselves to look further into the depth of things, then the
superficial bark will suffer the eye of their external Sense to wind it
self into them, do often times by reason thereof grow jealous even of Virtue
it self; as the many exiles, and Ostracismes practiced in those
Democraticall, and Popular states of elder times can sufficiently witness:
and therefore are the more to be excused, if they suspect the ends and purposes
of such, as are not known to them at all, or not known to them at least for
any eminent good quality that is in them, but rather for the contrary; it
being an Axiom approved of most men, that Malus, Publius.
vbi bonum se simulat, tunc est pessimus. So that howsoever good Wine let not
to be good by being poured out of an earthen vessel: yet to present a
wholesome medicine, to a weaker stomach in an unhandsome box, is to the grieved
Patient oft-times a cause of disease; and by consequence, may fall out to be a
means of utter refusal. For indeed, (...). Good things loose the grace of
their goodness, when in good and convenient manner they be not performed: and
so likewise, when by good and convenient persons they be not propounded.
Eccles. 20. ver: 19. Hist. l. 1.
Invisum semel principem, says Tacitus, seu been, seu male facta premunt. A
Prince, after he has once incurred the hatred and ill opinion of his
subjects, and by some one particular bad action or other, alienated and
estranged their affections from him, shall find the glory of whatsoever
enterprise he shall undertake, to be blasted eue^ in the very blossom, by some
sinister and scandalous interpretation: neither will the lawfulnes, or
goodness of his intention, be a sufficient plea, to prevent it from being
burdensome unto him. For the illustration whereof, I need produce no other
instance then that of Vitellius, who as Tacitus reports, after his entrance
into Rome, Omne^ infimae plebis rumore^ affectabat, endeuord, all he could, to
mark and fashion out his actions, by the square and rule of Popular
approbation, doing many things, which had they proceeded from a virtuous
ground, would have been received as pleasing, and acceptable; but in him,
memoria vitae prioris, indecora et vilia accipieba^tur, by the memory of his
fore-spent life, they were of most men accounted as dishonorable, and base.
Tiberius, when Spanish Adulation would have erected a temple to the perpetual
honor of his name, did most earnestly oppose himself against their
determination, eue^ in open Senate: Ego me P. C. says he, mortale^ esse, et
hominu^ officia fungi satisque habere, si locu^ principe^ impleam, et vos
testor, et meminisse posteros volo: qui satis, superque memoriae meae tribuent,
vt maioribus meis dignum, rerum vestrarum providum, constantem in periculis,
offensionum pro vtilitate publica non pavidum credant: haec mihi in animis
vestris templa, hae pulcherrimae effigies, et mansurae: That I am mortal, and
that I undergo the offices of humane frailty, and that it suffices me, if I
can perform the place whereunto I am called, I take you to witness, O chosen
Senators, and I would posterity should be mindful of it, who shall
sufficiently honor my remembrance, when they are persuaded, that I am worthy
my Ancestors, provident in your affairs, constant in dangers, and careless of
offenses, where question is of the public good. These shall be to me those
honorable temples, and those excellent statues, which once grounded in your
minds, shall remain for ever: whereof one says, they were praeclara verba,
sed non pro Tiberio: they were excellent words, had they been uttered by an
excellent man: but proceeding from him, they served but to aggrauate, and make
worse, the fore-conceiued suspicion they had of his dissembling carriage.

So likewise, Legi a se militem, non emi, said Galba: whereof Tacitus speaking,
says it was Vox pro Repub. honesta, sed ipsi anceps, an honest, and
well-beseeming voice in regard of the common wealth, but doubtful in respect
of himself. Nec enim ad hanc formam caetera erant: for the rest of his life
was not agreeable hereunto. And hence it is, that the Oracle of heaven,
speaking by the mouth of Timothy, 2. Epis. 2. ver. 19.
warns every one that calls upon the name of Christ, to depart from
iniquity: (...). Non est enim, says Theophilact, speciosalaus in ore
peccatoris. And this is the reason why Christ himself in Mark 1. v. 25.
rebuked the unclean spirit, and commanded him to hold his peace, even then,
when he proclaimed him to be (...), the holy one of God: and why Paul
likewise, Act. 16. ver. 18.
being vexed with the praises, and commendations of the Pythonist, who
following him, and his company, continually cried out, (...), these men are the
servants of the most high God, (...), who make known unto us the way of
salvation, commanded the spirit to come forth of her, quasi nolens sanctus ab
immundo ore co^mendari. Neither was it without reason, that a grave and wise
Philosopher of former times, suspected the vprightnes of his own carriage,
when he heard himself commended by one, whose life and conversation was of a
differing strain. How then can those impious, those irreligious and
Pharisaicall Levites of this corrupted and depraved age, free themselves from
those aspersions and imputations, which eue^ by the least discerning judgments
(such is the palpablenesse of their irregular enormities) may be justly cast
upon them; for that notwithstanding the spirit of Truth and Knowledge has
enobled them so far, as to entitle them the Salt of the earth (wherewith
whatsoever is not seasoned, is fatuous and unsavory) and graced the^ with so
high a vocation, as is the dispensation of his heavenly mysteries, do run
themselves breathless in a course of life, which is altogether
disproportionable to the grounds and principles of Virtue, derogating thereby
not a little from the excellency and majesty of his celestial and eternal
Word? For whence is it, that profane Atheism has taken such sure footing in
the hearts of ignorant, and simple men; who for the most part being unable to
judge, or conceive of universalities, suffer themselves (as I said before) to
be wholly guided by their external sense, but only from the boundless
dissolutions of some Churchmen, Romans 2. v. 24.
who practice not themselves, that which they propound to others.

Wherefore I cannot choose but commend his policy, who having converted a Jew
a friend of his, to Christianity, and perceiving him presently after desirous
for his better satisfaction to go to Rome, labored by all means to dissuade
him from it; fearing, least the corrupt, and disordered manners of the Clergy
there, might have wrought in him some dislike of the Religion, and so by
consequence have moved him to turn Jew again. So that whosoever would
effectually work upon the minds of men, with advantage to himself, he must
not only say well, but do well also. Facta mea, non dicta vos milites sequi
volo, nec disciplinam modo, sed exemplum etiam a me petere, qui hac dextra mihi
tres Consulatus, summamque laudem peperi; said Valerius Corvinus to his
soldiers, when they were to march against the Samnites. The very air and
Echo of which words, according to the apprehension my self have of them, was
sufficient to have breathed a warlike motion, and resolution, into the very
steel wherewith their hands were armed, and made the palest-liuerd wretch
amongst them, suddenly Conqueror.

Wherefore, he that thinks much the words of his mouth should be neglected, he
must so carry himself, that his deeds may be always ready to give
authority, and countenance to his words: yea there must not be any thing in
him, or about him, but what may work a wondrous admiration of him in the
hearers eye, and a zealous imitation of him in his heart: finally, he must
have in him those three tongues whereof the Scripture makes mention; and which
are found in every well-disposed natural man. The first is the tongue of the
heart: Qui loquitur veritatem in Cord suo. Psalm. 15. v. 2. The other is the
tongue of the mouth; Qui non egit dolu^ in lingua sua. v. 3. The third and
last, is the tongue of our works; whereof Christ says, Ioh. 10. v. 25.
(...). Opera quae ego facio, testimoniu^ perhibent de me: and whereat Saint
John the Baptist aimed, when after the Jews had sent their deputies to enquire
of him what he was, his answer to them first was altogether negative, to
wit, that he was not Christ, that he was not Elias, that he was not a
Prophet; till constrained by their importunacie, to tell them positiuelie what
he was, he said unto them: (...). I am the voice of him that cries in the
desert. Showing thereby, that his whole course of life, was but a tongue; the
particular actions whereof were so many several voices, which with a silent
Rhetoric, did most apparently make known the soundness, and sincerenesse of
that infallible truth which he was sent to teach. So that without the help and
assistance of this last, all the exhortations, persuasions, encouragements and
instructions, that can possibly be produced by any man, be they never so good,
can little or nothing prevail. And therefore was it, that God himself being
about to send Jsaias abroad to preach, he did first of all, to purify his
lips, touch them with a coal from the Altar: and that to encourage Jeremie,
he said unto him; Antequa^ exires de vulua, sanctificaui te. Spiritu
principali confirma me Deus: establish me, O God, says the kingly prophet, by
thy free spirit, and then docebo iniquos vias tuas; I will instruct the wicked
in thy ways: et impij convertentur ad te: and sinners shall be converted unto
thee. Wherefore, (...): thou that take upon thee to reform the manners of
others, redress thine own, that thou may free both thy self, and that
which thou vtterest, from the traducements and detractions of a vulgar
ignorance; and that it may not be said of thee:

Clodius accusat moechos, Catilina Cethegum. For then shall thou be able to
graft a persuasion of whatsoever thou shall deliver, in the minds of thy
Auditors.

It is an excellent harmony, and I know not if vnparallell'd by that concent
of Spheres; to see the words of men accompanied with their thoughts, and
followed by their deeds: and besides, there is a natural inclination in all
men, to learn the Theorie, of such as they know to have been excellent in the
Practike.

Hannibal will but scorn the Philosopher that takes upon him in his presence
to discourse of War: and Cleomenes will account that Orator but a chattering
Swallowe, that shall presume (he being by) to describe the office and duty of
a General: the like happens to those depraved and exulcerated minds,

-- qui de virtute locuti
clunem agitant --
For who can with patience endure to hear Vitellius preach against
intemperancie: or Gracchus complain of seditious and mutinous assemblies?
Manus, quae sordes abluit, mu^da esse debet; says S. Gregory: and therefore,

Quis coelum terris non misceat, et mare coelo,
Si fur displiceat Verri, aut homicida Miloni?
Wherefore let every man (as Saint Paul says) so run, 1. Cor. 9. v. 27.
that he may obtain; so fight, that he may not beat the air: but as in
other things, so likewise in this, be followers of his example: (...), etc. I
beat down my body, and bring it into subjection; least after I have preached
to others, my self should be reproved.

It is said of Vespasian, that being himself antiquo cultu, victuque, he was
to the Romans praecipuus adstricti moris author, even then when riot and
excess were the only Stewards that attended them in public and private
meetings. Obsequium enim inde in Principem, et aemulandi amor validior quam
poena ex legibus, et metus, says Tacitus.

And hence it came, that Theodoric King of the Goths writ unto the Roman
Senate in this manner: Facilius est errare natural, it is easier for Nature to
err, quam dissimilem sui Princeps possit Remp: formare, then that a Prince
should frame a Commonwealth unlike unto himself: so much availeable with
inferiors, is the force of an example in any person of authority. But if I may
lawfully, and without offense oppose my weakness against Majesty, I will
briefly show him, that his opinion does in some sort merit co^tradiction. For,
Sylla being a disordered liver, made his Citizens reformed: and Lysander on the
contrary, polluted his with vices, wherewith himself was no way blemished.

Of Affection.
A Second thing to help and further Persuasion, is Affection: which being once
thoroughly wrought and settled in the hearts and minds of a Multitude, and that
specially through a good opinion conceived of the Party persuading, is
sufficient of it self, though the matter which is propounded be never so weak,
and the reasons that should usher it never so lame, to make an easy and
speedy passage for it through all the oppositions, and contradictions of any
deeper discerning Spirit whatsoever. Witness Pisistratus, who being brought
(according to his own appointment) in a Chariot to the Marketplace, and there
having in the sight of all men, charged others with those wounds which his own
hands had wrought: Solon could come and tell him, that he did not rightly
counterfeit the person of Ulysses; for the Ithacans intent was, only to beguile
his foes: whereas what he did, was to deceive his friends: but he could not
prevent him for all this, from being followed by the people; so great a
commiseration toward himself, and so wrathful an indignation toward his
enemies, had the view of those selfe-made hurts effected in the hearts of the
vulgar: who, not discovering the depth of his dessignes (nor yet considering
with themselves, that the desire of Sovereignty and rule, is so great in the
minds of ambitious men, that they will not stick to purchase it at the
highest rate the Heavens can hold it at) gave sentence in his behalf,
according to the apprehension they had of that bloody object, which was before
their eyes.

And the reason hereof is not far from hand. For Passions are certain
internal acts, and operations of our soul, which being joined and linked in
a most inviolable, and long-continued league of friendship with the sensitive
power, and faculty thereof, do conspire together like disobedient and
rebellious Subjects, to shake off the yoke of Reason, and exempt themselves
from her command and controlement, that they may still exercise those
disordered motions, in this contract world of our frail and human bodies,
which during her nonage or minority, they were accustomed to do. And for the
better effecting hereof, they do first of all (through the help of a corrupt
imagination) set upon the Wit, and afterward upon the Will, which
harboring in it self two diverse inclinations: the one to follow Reason as her
Sovereign; the other to content the Senses as her friends, is easily brought
(being by the^ corrupted, and bribed with pleasure) entirely to love the one,
and utterly to leave and forsake the other: or at least, like a careless
Magistrate (who, for the avoiding of some particular men's displeasure, neglects
the good and profit of the Commonweal) to omit that care, which as Gouernesse
of the Soul, she is bound in duty to have over it: loathing to see the
quietness of her own estate interrupted by the divided factions, and tumultuous
partialities of inferior ministers; especially when she perceiues the soul to
be partaker likewise of those benefits wherewith herself is fee'd, and
undermined, by the Passions. So that when our hearts are once possessed with any
vehement affection, the Wit on the one side labors to find out reasons
presently, that may countenance and grace it: and the Imagination on the other
side, like a deceitful Counselor, seeking to blind the eyes of the Judge,
represents them to the Understanding in a most intensiue manner; and with more
show and appearance then they are indeed. Neither can the Soul (which by
reason of her limited influence, cannot possibly at one and the same instant,
impart sufficient actiuity to 2. differing operations) exactly then consider
the soundness of such arguments, as might stay the violence of her course in
following the affections: but like a weaker Prince, suffers herself (for
quietness sake) to be led away by the suggestions of such her followers. And
hence it was that a certain Orator, with no small advantage to himself, as often
as he was to plead, would most earnestly entreat the Judges, that he might be
first heard, but specially when himself distrusted the sou^dnes of his cause.
For he knew full well, that when he had ended, their minds would be so busied
in examining the weight and firmness of his reasons, that they could not
possibly give any diligent attention to the allegations of his adversary.
Wherefore who-so-euer perceives those proofs and inducements that should
maintain his cause, to be wanting, let him settle himself to work upon the
affections of such as are to further it. For, if he gain never so little
footing here, he need not despair of any thing. It was a saying of a prince
of Sparta, that for a man to keep himself strictly to the rule of Justice, in
matters which concerned his friends, was but a color, wherewith such as were
unwilling to do for them, were content to shadow their inhumanitie: and
therefore writing to Idrien, Prince of Caria, for the deliverance of a certain
friend of his; If Nicias, says he, have not offended, deliver him; if he have
offended, deliver him for my sake: but howsoever the matter go, deliver him.

Brutus and Cassius contending one against the other for the Vrbane
Praetorship, Caesar having heard their allegations, said unto his friends; It
is true, that the reasons which are alleged by Cassius are most just: but
Brutus nevertheless must be preferred. So Brutus had the first place, and
Cassius the second.

Out of which examples we may easily discern, that Reason may give out
precepts, which Passion will not stick to countermaund. For, Reason teaches
us, that it is a point of civility, to continue always steadfast, and
faithful to our friends; but with this caution, (...), not beyond the Altar,
that is, no further then the rules of piety and equity will give us leave:
which, blinder Passion does not a whit regard. And this, Agesilaus knew full
well, when being constrained one day to vnlodge somewhat in have, and to leave a
certain sick friend of his, who as he was ready to depart, besought him that
he would not abandon and forsake him: O, quoth he, returning back, how
difficult a thing is it, to love, and to be wise, and both at once! Besides, it
is the nature, and property of Passions, even to make those things make with
them, which (were not the eye of our Understanding dimmed, and obscured, with
such mistie humors as distill from the^) would otherwise peradventure prove to
be as rubs and lets, which would turn the by as of men's consent a clean
contrary way from our desires: and therefore they are not much amiss compared
to a green glass, which makes every thing seem of the same color, that is
seen thorough it. That fore-alledged Sparta^ being very much importuned by his
wife, to make her brother Lysander, his Admiral for the seas, considered with
himself, that he had many Nobles of far more years, and greater experience then
he; and that to invest him (being but a youth) with a charge so far
surmounting his sufficiency, was to hazard at one cast, the flourishing estate
of his whole kingdom: but in the end, after many long suspensions, and
irresolute determinations, the vehement affection which he bore his Queen,
commanded him to throw the dice, and to abide the chance. It is said of
Agrippina, that she did so work upon the love which Claudius bore her, that
nondum vxor potentia vxoria vtebatur, being as yet but only affianced unto
him, she took upon her the state and power of an Emperesse: but afterward,
when she was thoroughlie assured of her marriage, and that her thoughts had got
a stronger wing to soar withal, then did she dare to motion a match between
Octauia, Caesar's daughter, and her own son Domitius, which (because her
father had betroathed her to Silanus not long before) could not be brought to
pass without impiety: but that did nothing discourage her. For, nihil arduum
videbatur (says Tacitus) in animo principis, Lib. 12. 240. et 267.
cui non iudiciu^, non odium inerat, nisi indita, et iussa: no difficulty
could hinder her from obtaining any thing at the hands of a Prince, that had
neither life, nor soul, but what was breathed into him by her and hers.

And hence it was, that Vitellius, vayling his servile flatteries under the
name of Censor, was embold'ned to fasten upon Silanus, laboring by forged
accusations to obscure his merit, and procure his overthrow, which shortly
after he effected: Caesar being (as our Author says) accipiendis aduersum
generum suspicionibus caritate filiae promptior; somewhat prone to entertain
suspicions against his son in law, by reason of the charitable affection
which he bore his daughter. And indeed the malignant aspect of any person in
authority toward his inferior, is thought a sufficient warrant for every man
to wrong him. And this is the reason, that in the courts of princes, few or
none, after they once begin to slide, can recover their footing, and keep
themselves from falling finally. For, those Court-Parasites, that have their
eyes continually fixed upon the sky of their Sovereigns inclination, and make
the sundry revolutions of his affections, the only heaven of their
conte^plation, do labor upon the least distaste that is offered, to procure an
utter dislike; that so they may come to be sharers in those offices and places
of dignity, which while they were gracious in the sight of their Master, were
appropriated to none but them: verifying heerby that excellent saying of the
Greeks; (...): when the tree begins once to fall, every one haste^s to gather
sticks. Wherefore let no man fear to be ouerbold in this case, but rest
undoubtedly assured, that where Reason cannot prevail, Affection will. And
therefore it is not without cause, that such as aspire to a crown, and scepter,
do first of al (considering their want of right, that should authorize, and
make lawful such a claim) endeavor (as the only means to vvinde themselves
into the hearts of the people) to seem religious, and virtuous; as Pepin did,
who stryuing to put the house of Merouee from the throne of France, and to
appropriate it wholly to him and his, did most infinitely honor, and most
affectionatly embrace, such as had any charge or office in the Church; knowing
well, that those which have rule over the conscience, are of great authority,
and estimation among the rest. Secondly, they do labor to perform all offices
of Love, that may serve to shaddowe forth in some apparent manner, a desire in
them to further the public good of the State and Commonweal. And thus did
Absalom, when to every one that came toward him, he put out his hand, and
took him and kissed him: wishing withal, that he were once made Judge in the
Land, that such as had any suits, or controversies, might come to him, that he
might do them Justice. And thus likewise did those ancient Roman Captains,
who powered out the wealthy treasures of whole kingdoms in excessive donatiues,
and prodigalities toward their Soldiers; and that with no better intent, then
to make sure such hopes and expectations, as Ambition long before had nourished
in their breasts, by the so-wonne aid, and assistance of their military and
warlike Legions. For indeed these two actions are the only harbingers that
must lodge Persuasion in the bosom of a multitude. And therefore have they
always been put in practice by the chief patron of wicked Policies, Satan,
the common and professed enemy of mankind. For, as concerning the first, the
Scripture does assure us, that he does often times, the better to deceive,
tra^sforme himself into the glorious similitude of an Angel of light: and
hence was it, that not without good advice, and judgment of the Paynter, in
some ancient impressions of the Testament, he was pictured out in the
religious garment of a Monk; not to signify that the life and conversation of
such Monastical persons, was diabolical; but to show, that this being the
habit of holiness and piety, there was not a more easy and certain way for
him to surpryze the consciences of wel-meaning men, then it. And as concerning
the second, experience has taught us, that al he aims at, is to work an
impression in our weaker minds, that whatsoever he seeks to induce us to, is
for the good, and benefit of mankind: and therefore in his very first assault,
wherein was successively included the utter ruin and overthrow of us all, he
told our first parents, that Gods forbidding the^ to eat of the tree of good
and evil, proceeded not from any other ground, the^ from an envious fear he had
of that happiness and prosperity, which was like to redound to the^ thereby:
and withal, having considered with himself, that all things in the world,
are said in some sort to seek the highest, and to covet more or less the
participation of GOD himself; but especially man, whom he knew did foster in
his breast these three desires; the one to live always, as GOD is eternal:
the other, to rule all, as GOD is Lord over all: the third, to know all, as
GOD is wise above all: he came like a cunning Rhetorician, who^ practice, and
long experience, has taught how to advantage himself, by working upon the
known inclinations, and affections of his Auditory, and lays before them a
full and perfect satisfaction in every one. For, says he, if once ye but taste
of this forbidden fruit, nequaqua^ moriemini, ye shall never die; here was a
continued being: sed eritis sicut Dij, but ye shall be like Gods; here was an
absolute command: scientes bonum, et malum, understanding both good and evil;
and herein was comprehended a universal, and boundless knowledge.

Wherefore, he that can handle men aright in their affections, and knows at
what times, in what manner, and by what means they may best be stirred up, may
rest assured, that before his mind be thoroughly known, he is already Master
of what his heart desires.

Of the force of Reason.
THE third, and last means to ground belief in the minds of men, is out of
probable conjectures to gather sufficient reasons, by force whereof, we may
demonstrat the thing which we propound, to be either actually, or at least
apparently necessary, and convenient, and no ways repugnant to the rules and
principles of justice, or honesty. And these are so much availeable, that
where there is neither opinion, nor affection, but rather an obstinate, and
selfe-will'd resolution in the hearer, to put back all persuasions, they will
enforce him notwithstanding to alter his so-decreed determination, and to give
credit and approbation to what he hears. Witness Caesar, who when he understood
that Cicero had taken upon him to defend Ligarius, whom the unhappiness of
the times had accused to have borne arms against him, and having not heard him
of a long time before; What will it now annoy us, said he (by way of jesting)
to certain of his friends, if we go and listen awhile to Cicero; for, as for
Ligarius, he is by me already irrevocably condemned? But the pregnant reasons,
and forcible allegations of the Orator, did so wonderfully move him, that
before he departed, mauger that prejudicat opinion wherewith he came, he was
constrained to absolve him.

And for a further confirmation hereof, I will produce that memorable
apothegme of Thucydides, who when Archidamus demanded of him, which was the
better wrastler of him, or Pericles, his answer was, that when he had cast
him, he had so excellent a tongue to deny it, that he made the standers by
believe he was not foiled, and persuaded them the contrary of what their eyes
had seen.

So that here we may discover an incongruitie committed by M. Brutus, in the
managing of State affairs; when not considering the force of Eloquence, but
presuming upon the good opinion his Citizens had of him, and the great
affection they bore toward him, he permitted Anthony to perform the exequies
of Caesar in such solemn manner as he would himself. For, by this means, the
hearts of such as were so desperately bent, and inclyn'd to embrace his
faction, that they would not at the first so much as lend an ear, no not upon
his entreaties, to the speeches of the other; upon the hearing of his sunerall
Oration, were on a sudden violently carried a clean contrary way. Such is
the force of these Rhetorical Enthymems, and Inductions; especially, when they
be seconded by a lively and decent action: to which, Demosthenes did attribute
so much, that in desyning an Oration, he said, the first and principal part
thereof, was action; the second, the same; and the third, no other. For, in an
Orator, there is both an eloquence of speech, and a decency of action
necessarily required. He must not only ornate dicere, sed etiam concinne
agere: the one co^sists in the fitnes of his words, and soundnes of his
reasons; the other, in the variation of his voice, and qualification of his
gestures. So that when I consider in how eminent a degree these two things did
appear in Cicero, I cannot so much admire (as otherwise I should) that notable
speech of his, when being vehemently displeased with Munatius (who^ once his
eloquence had patronized in a most dangerous cause) for that he did egerlie
follow the extreamitie of law against a certain friend of his, he could not
refrain from telling him, that it was not long of his innoce^cie that he was
last absolved, but of the dust, which he had cast into the eyes of his Judges,
which hind'red them from discerning aright the quality of his misdeede.
Aeschines after his banishment being arryu'd at Rhodes, in an Oration composed
for the purpose, laid open to the people the cause of his exile: who wondering
thereupon at the Athenians, that had banished him so undeservedly; O (quoth he)
ye did not hear the forcible reasons by which Demosthenes cou^termanded mine:
ascribing wholly the cause of his misfortune, to the eloquence of his
adversary. Wherefore, he did not greatly err, that compared Rhetoric in an ill
cause, to a dangerous weapon in a mad man's hand. It is an instrument which was
at first inve^ted for the easier managing of an unruly populace, and which is
never imploid in his right kind, but in the weak and crazie languishment of
Estates. And indeed, if we do well consider, we shall find that it has most
flourished, where quietness of government has been most impoverished, as in
those Commonwealths, where either the people, or the ignorant, or all, have
borne all the sway; as namely, that of Athens, of Rhodes, of Rome, where al
things did continually labor of a dangerous Epilepsie. For, in better
established Governments, as those of Sparta, and of Crete, it was never had in
any great account, or estimation. Nay, they would have whipped him out of their
dominions, that should have made profession of such a lying and deceitful Art.

But it is not my purpose, for the abuse of any thing, to condemn the use of
it: I will only heerevpon advertise him, that goes about by Reasons to induce
Persuasion, to imitate heerin the practice of wise Physicians, who apply the
same Medicines to the same Maladies; but with particular respect, and
consideration of the constitution of the Patient. For, the learned, and the
ignorant, are not to be handled both alike. Popular allegations they pryze not,
and deeper demonstrations these pearce not. Wherefore, he must labor to find
out a mean, by which he may deliver deep reasons perspicuously, and
plausible persuasions sharply; that by the plainness of the one, and the
acuteness of the other, he may yield a full and perfect satisfaction to them
both. And for the better performance heerof, I will refer him to a diligent
survey of such Topicall heads, and Common-places, as are by Orators accounted
to be the arcenalls, and storehouses of perswasiue provision; from whence, as
need requires, they draw those solid amplifications, which lend a maiestical,
and glorious luster to their reasons: for, being nakedly delivered, the motion
they produce is either weak, or none at all. So that where there is neither
opinion, nor affection to purchase credit, we must seriously endeavor to find
out reasons, and inductions that may serve the turn, and know, that it will
be no small furtherance to our intention, if either by the representation of
any visible object, or by some preceding extraordinary action, that carries
engraven in the very front of it, the honored characters of love and loyalty:
we can strengthen our own persuasion, and work an alteration in the hearers
passion. An example of the former we have in Cato: who perceiving that the Rom
did neglect, and contemn the forces of the Carthaginians, because they were
somewhat remote, and far distant from them, whereupon some inco^venience might
happily have redounded to the Co^monwelth, showed the^ presently green figs,
which at that instant were brought from thence, whereby they conceived, that the
country was not so far as they imagined: for otherwise the figs would have bin
dried, or corrupted; and thereupon altered their opinion, and became more
respective. Of the latter, in Seianus: who having very prodigally ventured his
own safety for the preserving of Caesar's, and that in a most dangerous, and
disastrous accident, where sad Destruction seemed to have enlarged her throat,
for the speedier devouring of them, got this advantage thereby, that as Tacitus
says, quanquam exitiosa suaderet, vt non sui anxius, cu^ side audiebatur: when
his so-dooing, peradventure was grounded upon no better consideration, then the
minority of his ambitious purposes. But (for a final conclusion of this
discourse) let Delphidius assure himself, that if reasons, and arguments be
altogether wanting, it will little avail him to accuse Numerius; and
afterward, feeling himself sorely travailed for want of proofs, and
witnesses to co^vince him, to cry out in the vehemency of his distempered
passion, Ecquis erit nocens, florentissime Caesar, si negare sufficient? will
any man be found guilty, when to deny the fault, may be sufficient to absolve
him? For, Julian, out of the serener calmnes of his more settled judgment, will
presently reply: Ecquis erit innocens, si accusare sufficient? will any man be
found guiltless, when to accuse him, may be sufficient to condemn him?

Of Praises.
THE love of Praise, though it be a vice, yet because that by means of it, far
greater vices are suppressed, has always (of the better sort of judgments)
been honored, and respected as a Virtue: the contempt whereof, was made an
argument to co^vince Tiberius, of contemning likewise those heroical and
princely actions, whereby men are led through many difficult and dangerous
passages, in a most eager and violent pursuit thereof. Contemptu famae contemni
virtutes, says Tacit. Optimi. n. quique mortalium altissima cupiunt. And
indeed, if we but cast an eye a little on the Romans, we shall find that the
only thing which made men think, that some extraordinary Genius did
continually wait, and attend upon al their attempts, raising the valor of
every particular, and individual person amongst them, to a far higher pitch,
then humane weakness was ever thought possible to attain unto, was only an
insatiable desire, to leave behind them a prosperous remembrance of their name,
from the effecting whereof, not death it self (had he never so fearfully
disguised his countenance) could ever have deterred them. Witness that
undaunted Curtius: who when the Oracle had commanded some one to be cast
headlong into that open pit, which seemed to threaten ruin, and desolation to
them all, as an attoneme^t, that might alay the incensed fury of the Gods
toward the people; armed himself presently, and with such a fearlesse and
constant resolution, hied him to the place, as if upon his very first approach
he had intended to triumph over Death, and give Destruction the overthrow. So
Brutus, when for the good and preservation of his Country (against the liberty
whereof, his sons, as men wholly possessed with dislike, and coffeehouse at
things present, did underhand oppose themselves) he was to be not only a
Spectator, but an Actor likewise in their tragic fall, could not choose but
feel himself sorely shaken, with the furious and violent incounters of
divided Passions: Popular applause distracting him on the one side, and
Fatherly affection on the other. But this in the end (like too weak an enemy
to confront so great an adversary) was constrained to forsake the field, and
to resign the honor and glory of the victory to us.

Vicit amor patriae, laudisque immensa cupido. But, not to stand upon
particulars, the whole Nation in general was so transported with this appetite
of Praise, that all other irregularities whatsoever, did as it were lie buried
in this one. Wherefore, (I think) there is no readier way to breed a
willingness in the minds of vnriper youth, whereby to make them seriously
addicted to embrace the harsher rudiments of Virtue, that afterward they may
attain to a more essential knowledge in the managing, and performance of
honorable imploiments, then to inflame their tender bosoms with a desire of
Commendation; which is in every generous, and ingenious disposition, the only
spur to any virtuous action. Compertum ego habeo (said Catiline to his
soldiers) verba virtutem non addere, neque ex ignauo strenuum, neque forte^ ex
timido exercitum oratione Imperatoris fieri. No, no (says he) quemneque
gloria, neque pericula excitant, nequicquam hortere. By virtue of which words,
he did inspire the^ with such a valiant resolution, that after the unfortunate
event of war had bereft them of their General, it was wonderful to see the
invincible courage, which had spread it self through every particular branch
of his whole Army. For, as Sallust wrytes, que^ quisque vivus pugnando locum
ceperat, eu^ amissa anima corpore tegebat: look what place every one had
taken to fight in whilst he was alive, the same did he cover with his body
after he was dead: leaving behind them an example, whereupon posterity might
ground the memorable saying of that worthy Martialist Consalvo, who when his
Captains advised him (by reason of the weakness of his forces) to turn back to
Capua, did utterly repel their counsel, as prejudicial to the honor and
reputation of a Souldior; telling them, if the true spirit of Magnanimity had
harbored in their bosoms, they would have desired rather to have had their
graves dug presently a foot further, then by retyring, to have prolongd
their lives a hundred years.

The fore-alledged Historian, speaking of the ancient flourishing estate of
Rome, before such time as the dissolute excess, and effeminate nycenesse of
corrupter age, had (like a Canker) eaten into the very marrow of her, and
through a vicious inbred habit and disposition, alt'red the sweet complexion
of her countenance, ranks this desire of praise amongst the chiefest causes of
her transcendent happiness. Her Children (says he) were laudis auidi, full
of thrift in husbanding their honor; but pecuniae liberales, very prodigal in
spending of their wealth: gloriae maximum certamen inter ipsos erat; Glory was
the only subject of all their differences and contentions. Laudatas oftendit
avu Iunonia pennas: Si tacitus spectes, illa recondit opes.
Sic se quisque hostem ferire, murum ascendere, conspici, dum tale facinus
faceret, properabat: which I cannot think proceeded so much from vanity, as
from a desire to publish and make known their sufficiency, that afterward for
the good of their Country, they might be called to offices of a higher nature.

A certain Laconien at the feast of Olympike-games, being offered a great sum
of money, not to present himself to combat, would by no means be persuaded to
accept it. And in the end, being demanded of one, what the praise which with
such labor, and sweat he had purchased, could avail him; his answer was in
smyling manner, that he should fight for it in battle before the King. Eo
labor, et periculum a plerisque impe^ditur, vnde bonos, et emolumentu^
speratur, says Liuie. And indeed, if we suffer our Senses to be guided a
little by Observation, we shall easily perceive, that in those Camps, where
Praise and Honor have been joined patent with Exercise, for the training up of
youth in arms, there has not been a private soldier, but when occasion has
brought him on the scene to bide some trial of his proficiencie, has been
thought worthy, by reason of his Martial carriage and aspect, to have the
leading, and conducting of an army. Witness the Ottomans: who by taking notice
of every extraordinary action, performed by the least, and meanest in their
troops, have so enflamed the courage of their Musulmans, that now the
soundding of a Trumpet amongst the^, is but to foretell the erecting of a
Trophie; and the striking up of a Drum, is as a passing bell to give warning,
of the approaching ruin and subversion of a Kingdom.

And, by this means have they marched (like tryumphant Conquerors) over the
bellies of the most victorious Nations; making (as they pass along) the
wretched carkases of slaughtered Christians, litter for their ambitious and
aspyring pride to trample on. Peuertie, with them is not made an argument of
baseness and pusillanimitie, nor thought a let or impediment, to hinder Desert
from any place of eminency. It is no principle in their Philosophy, to
measure Virtue by the ell of Fortune, or to respect her the less, for having
bin trayn'd up in a homely cottage. No, the greatest among them, will think it
no detraction from their reputation, to com, when, or whersoeuer, the star of
merit shall appear within the compass of their Hemisphere, and offer presents
of great value to her deerdeere Infants, lay they in a Manger. And herein may
their practice serve like a seuerer Censor, to condemn us of high treason
against her glorious and imperial Majesty; and summoning the blood into our
faces, make us ashamed of our erroneous, and senseless folly, qui omnia prae
diuitijs humana spernimus, nec honori magno locum, nec virtuti putamus esse,
nisi effusae affluant opes: that judge of her greatness by outward
circumstances; thinking it a thing impossible, that such a puissant, and mighty
Princess, should abase herself so far, as to vouchsafe to lodge within the
enclosure of a smokie roof, or veil her glory under the threadbare habit of
miserable, and wretched Want. But for all this, the goodness of such
proceedings, makes me not so far delighted with those barbarous, and hellish
infidels, as that I should erect a Tabernacle, with an intent to dwell in a
continual meditation of their virtuous disposition in this kind: and therefore
I will now pass them over, and come to other Considerations of more weight,
and moment in this discourse.

The first whereof is, whom we praise; the second, to whom; the third, for
what; the fourth and last, is the end Why. In the first, men are very likely to
err, by too easily granting out their commendatory Letters; making them the
escorte and guide, to bring a man upon some future hopes, into the love, and
favor of a third. Heerin therefore ought every one to be very circu^spect: for,
if the merit of the party, do not in some sort answer the relation that is
made of him, it is always so much out of the Writers reputation.

Quale^ co^mendes, etia^, atque etia^ aspice; ne mox
Incutiant aliena tibipeccata pudorem.
Polyperchon, having entertaind a fellow for the report Xenocrates gave of him,
and finding afterward by his actions, that he did no way deserve it, writ to
him, that thence-forwarde he should be more diligent in examining the worth
and value of a man, before he did commend him. But, because the hearts of men
are to him only known, who is the searcher of all hearts, and who alone could
testify of Nathanael with such certainty as he did, that he was an Jsraelite,
in whom there was no guile, and that the rules of piety command us to
conceive of their inward disposition, by their outward conversation, that is,
by conjectures of charity, and not by demonstrations of knowledge; our
judgments may be easily mistaken in them:

Fallimur, et quondam non dignu^ tradimus. -- And therefore the verse following
may serve here for a precept:

Quem sua culpa premet, deceptus omit tueri. For he that takes upon him the
patronage of any man in this case, he makes himself an accessory to the
crime. But for the better avoiding of all these inconveniences, it is good in
matters of this nature, to make use of that restraint of Plato, who writing to
Dionysius the Tyrant, in the behalf of Helicon the Cizicenien; and fearing
least he should attribute too much to his words, limited his belief with this
caution, that what he writ, he writ, (...): of a creature, who by nature was
the very object of change. And indeed man is a Tree, the fruit whereof is
never ripe but in the latter season: his nature cannot easily be discerned
while it is in green: we must see the flower, and the fruit of it. His first
actions lightly never issue forth, but shadowed with the beauteous mask of
formal dissimulation: and such a one enters into the Popedom, as common rumor
did report of Boniface, like a Fox, that reigns in it like a Lion, and goes
out of it like a Dog. Il di loda la sera, says the Italian; It is the
evening must commend the day: and the life of man must be censured by his end.
There are some which now resolve with themselves to put on the gravity of Cato;
but presently show themselves in public, apparelled with the dissolute
lightness of Vatinius. One while Curious is not austere enough for them,
Fabricius not poor enough, Tubero not sparing and thrifty enough: yet by and
by they will not stick to provoke Licinius with their riches, Apicius with their
riots, Mecaenas with their dainties: so great and difficult a thing is it, vnu^
homine^ agere, to measure out this earthly course of ours, with one, and the
same pase. No: there are few in this corrupted age, that are not somewhat
tainted with the humor of that fantastical Musician, who, as the Poet writes of
him, -- saepe velut qui
Currebat fugiens hoste^: saepe velut qui
Iunonis sacra ferret: habebat saepe ducentos,
Saepe dece^ servos; modo, reges, atque tetrarchas,
Omnia magna loquens: modo, sit mihi mensa tripes, and
Co^cha salis puri, et toga, quae defendere frigus
Quamvis crassa queat: --
When notwithstanding this his outward profession of frugalitie, -- decies cent
ena dedisses
Huic parco, paucis contento, quinque diebus
Nilerat in loculis: noctes vigilabat ad ipsum
Mane: diem totu^ stertebat: nil fuit vnquam
Sic impar sibi. --
Yea, there is not one, of whom that may be truly said, which the Spirit of
all truth observed to be true in Helcana, Samuels Father; who, for that he
suffered not himself to be carried away with any such humorous fluctuatio^,
but remained continually firm upon his square, and unshaken, was said to be
vnus vir, one and the self same man always, what sinister accidents soever
did befall him. And therefore let not him that is careful of his credit, launch
too far out into the praises of any man, but keep near unto the shore, and
on the lee-side of such unfortunate events as may any ways endanger it: let
him not be too forward in superlatiues; but so commend good men, as he may
still reserve a caveat for their errors.

The second consideration that we are to have in matters of Praises, is, to
whom. Many men (what by reason of the weakness of their judgments, somewhat
tainted with Self-conceit, or the greatness of their Spirits, not principled
peradventure with such sound instructions as they ought to be) are so tender,
and jealous of their own reputation, that whatsoever they hear attributed to
the worth, and merit of another, is presently taken by them, as derogated from
their own. And hence it is, that to commend a man for any special virtue, or
eminency that is in him, either to his superior, or his equal, is to make him
oftentimes suspected of the one, enuyed of the other, and himself that does
it, hated of both.

Solomon the great, having heard the acclamations, and cries of joy, which by a
general consent of the whole Camp, were given to Mustapha his son, at his
return from Persia, grew so enraged thereat, that after he had most sauagely
strangled him in his inner chamber, he caused his dead body to be cast out to
the view of his whole Army: proclaiming withal, that as there was but one God
in heaven; so was there but one Sultan upon earth. Nor was the massacre of this
his warlike son the period of his fury. He likewise exercised this his
inhumane and beastly cruelty upon Sultan Gobe, his second Son, for
bewayling only the fatal and untimely miscarriage of his brother: and upon
Sultan Mehemet, his third, because he fled for fear; construing these their
actions, by no better rules, then his own disordinate and criminal
affections, to be most sensible reproouers of that his barbarous, and
unnatural inhumanitie: So little could he brook a sharer with himself, in
the glory of his so great an Empire.

But (alas!) he is not the only man, that has bin subject to the command of
such irregular, and confused Passions. Many have deserved to be paralleled
with him in the like kind. For, howso-euer they made not so open a profession
of tyranny as he, but like cunning Paynters, could so shadow their malicious
proceedings, as that they never came abroad in their own likeness, but
apparrell'd with the outward habit of Law and Justice; yet can they not be
altogether freed from the deepe-wounding stroke of such deserved imputations.

I could instance the truth of this assertion upon many: but, for brevity
sake, I purpose to omit them, and come to Tiberius; who, understanding that the
Senate was minded to grace the remembrance of his Mother, with fresh additions
of honorable titles, endeavors by wise pretexts to alter their so decreed
determination: tells them they must observe a moderation, in granting any
special preheminences, or prerogatives to women: himself would express the
like temperancie, in qualifying those that should be attributed to him. But,
what-soeuer he pretended in words, it is manifest, that this his outwardly
professed modesty, proceeded from no better ground, then from an envious
distaste he had of her advancement. And therefore (as Tacitus reports) he
would not so much as assign her one lictor, Muliebre fastigiu^ in diminutione^
sui accipiens: thinking with himself, that unless he topt the spredding
branches of her glory, they could not choose but fall out to be very hurtful
and prejudicial, by their ouershaddowing greatness, to the prosperous and
flourishing vprising of his own. Alexander will at no hand admit of any more
then one only Sun: and whosoever shall presume to parallel his atchiuements
(were it with the valorous attempts of his Father) shall hardly free himself
from being made the tragic subject of his ince^sed fury. Princes cannot
brook, that either their Virtues, or their Fortunes, should admit comparison.
As they have the start of all men in the one: so love they not to be
out-stript by any in the other. Such as are beneath the^ in estate, and bound
by reason of their birth to acknowledge (as inferior homagers) a dependencie
upon their greatness, must (in their presence) esteem of themselves, how
qualified soever, but even as bare and naked Ciphers. Themselves alone will be
thought the Numbers, that give a substantial existence to the being of them
all. Dionysius, because he could not equal Philoxenus in Poetry, nor Plato
in discourse, condemned the one to the Gallyes, and sent the other to be sold
for a slave in the Island of Aegina. And hence was it, that Brisson, running a
match with Alexander, was willing (instructed peradventure by the like
examples) somewhat to conceal, and obscure his own ability in the course:
knowing (as it is indeed) that as to be permitted to contend in any thing with
a Prince, is glorious; so to do it with that obstinacy, as not to give over
without victory, is very dangerous. Favorinus therefore, the Philosopher, had
reason, when his friends vpbraided him, for yielding himself vanquished by
Adria^ the Emperor, in a controversy which was betwixt them, about the
interpretation of a word, to fashion them this reply: What, said he, would you
that I should seem to be more learned then he who is Commander over thirty
legions? Augustus writ verses against Asinius Pollio, and I, says Pollio, hold
my peace. It is no wisdom for a man to show himself a Scribe against him, who
(if he once be nere so little moved) can easily proscribe. And from this
consideration, grew that witty saying of Carneades, that the children of
Princes, never learnt any thing so well, as the managing of horses. For, in all
other exercises they took in hand, every man was content to disable himself to
hearten them: but a horse, that was neither Courtier, nor flatterer, threw the
heir apparent of a kingdom, with as little respect as he would the son of a
Cobbler. Wherefore every man (as well for his own security, as his friends
safety) must be very nyce in commenting upon his worthiness, in the
hearing of any sovereign authority.

Regibus (says Sallust) boni, quam mali suspectiores sunt; semperque his
aliena virtus formidolosa est. The goodness of a subject, gives Princes
oftentimes occasion to suspect; and his virtue does but furnish them with
matter of fear. Yea, the like respect must not be altogether neglected, in
relating it, though but before their equals, and such, as in the nearest
degrees of consanguinity, may seem allied unto him. For, oftentimes there is
danger even in those: for proof whereof, I will produce one only accident,
which not long since happened between two brethren of Ferrara. The one was the
Cardinal Hippolitus da Este, who fell extremely in love with a near
kinswoman of his own: and perceiving that she with no less affection doted
likewise on Don Giulio, his natural brother, whom very often, eue^ unto him,
out of the vehemency of her Passion, she would commend for the
best-deseruing gentleman that Italy then affoorded, extolling (among many
other extraordinary parts wherewith Nature had sufficiently inricht him both in
body and mind) the beauty, and fairness of his eyes, which she protested
to the Cardinal, were the principal, and chief Solicitors of her affections
toward him: Heereat he grew presently so much enraged, that having waited his
time, and opportunity, one day as Giulio was a-hunting, most inhumanelie he
deprived him of the^ both; glutting the violence of his beastly fury, with
the ruinous defacing of those parts, which were the main disturbers of his
hopes: A tragedy fit to be recorded, as well in regard of the person by whom
it was acted, as in regard of the thing that occasioned the action. Which may
serve us likewise, for a precedent whereon to ground this Caution; that it is
not good to commend any man, so, as that the hearer may think himself any
kind of way disabled thereby. And therefore, it will not be amiss for wiser
men, so to qualify the approbation of their friends deserts, as that they may
not seem, either by their inward passion, or their outward words, to insinuate
an impossibility to the sta^ders-by, of ever matching their so eminent
perfections, or to vpbraid them with a defective want of such good parts, as
they confidently give out to be so excellent in them: for this is but to
expose himself to danger, and his friend to envy.

L. Quintius, surnamed Cincinnatus, when he took upon him to plead for his
son Cso (who by carrying himself as a professed enemy to popular
proceedings, had incurred the hatred, and displeasure of the Tribunes, and
thereby so endangered his life, as that nothing was left him but the very bare
chance of the dyce to save it) knew that to allege his worthiness, and known
deserving, as other his friends had done, was not the way to secure him from
their malice; but a means rather to set an edge upon that envious dislike,
which so appara^tly threatened his utter overthrow. And therefore, directed (as
it were) by a better discerning wisdom then the rest, he chooses out a path
(for the safety of his Son) directly contrary to that which they had
trod: omits the recital of his merits, as things not fitting to be seen
of a distempered sight; acknowledges a fault; and in that regard, with great
instancie, desires the people (in humble and submissiue terms) to bear with
the weakness of his years, and not to urge the forfeiture of his unadvised
error.

And indeed, it is far better sometimes to confess our selves tainted
with such imputations, as (being undeservedly cast upon us) cannot greatly
blemish our reputation, then (by standing obstinately upon terms of
innocence) to contend with Greatness; who would willingly enough (perhaps)
in colder blood, admit a reconcilement, so it might not seem to proceed from
any diversity or alteration of opinion in themselves.

The third consideration is, for what. No^ omnis fert omnia tellus: every
ground is not fit for every seed; no more is every man for every action. The
powerful hand of irreprooueable wisdom, has divided our sufficiency into
little portions; so that he who is excellent in the leading of a Company, may
happily prove insufficient in the guiding and conducting of an Army: which
Saturninus did not stick to instance on himself, when those which were his
equals in the wars, were minded to invest him with that absolute command.
Wherefore, whosoever he be, that out of desert (as it were) shall seem to
challenge a special approbation of his own dexterity beyond all men, in the
right performance of all things, he does but manifest his ouerweening
weakness in presumptuous arrogancy; and what-ere he be, that shall yield to
him heerin, his unworthy baseness in servile flattery.

The heathen thought it a thing impossible, that any one Deity should be of
power so infinite, as to be able of it self, to swaye the rule, and government
of this whole Universe: and therefore did they seek out Gods of an inferior
nature, on whom (as upon ministering Spirits) Jupiter, the Superior of the
Covent, might in some sort unburden himself of so great a care; allotting to
every one of them (according to their several endowments) a special charge.

And heer-hence it came, that one was surnamed ENYALIOS; another, MANTOOS; a
third, KERDOOS; and that Venus had her sovereignty allotted her in
Nuptiall-chambers, rather then in Martiall-tents: as being a thing altogether
indecent, that one of her composition, should any way intermeddle with Arms.

But, that we may descend again a little lower, to creatures of our own
moulde; do we not plainly see, that in the dispensation of spiritual gifts,
there is so great a difference, and variety, that he who has the spirit of
wisdom, may want the utterance of knowledge? he that has faith, may be
altogether destitute of the power to work miracles? and he that is endued
with diverse tongues, may be thoroughlie unfurnished of the means to interpret
them?

The reason whereof, is delivered by the mouth of Truth, in the 12. of the first
to the Corinthians, to be only this, viz. that there might be amongst us a
necessary use one of another; and that like so many several members, we might
serve for the comforting, and building up of one and the same body. Moses,
howsoever he excelled in all the learning of the Egyptians, yet because
himself was not an Aaron, that could utter things; nor a Iethro, that could
order them in such manner as was requisite; he was feign to crave the
assistance of the one, and willingly follow the directions of the other. There
is the like diversity in the distribution of such gifts as are usually
termed natural: so that he who is swiftest in running, is not always the
nimblest in wrestling. Castor gaudet equis; ovo prognatus eodem, pugnis. Every
man has his special talent given him from above; and ought therefore to
endeavor, as much as in him lies, to beautify, and adorn that Sparta which is
befalne him. For, whosoever shall attempt further, he shall but manifest his
weakness, and reap deserved laughter for his recompense.

Antony, angling one day in the presence of Cleopatra, grew discontent because
he caught not any thing: but she, perceiving it, willed him (in smyling
manner) to lay-by the line, as fitter for the Egyptians to handle, then for
him, whose hands were better taught how to subdue whole Countries, and conquer
Kingdoms, then how to manage so mean an instrument.

Hence is it, that to give out confidently of any man, and without exception,
that he is skillful in many things, is but secretly to insinuate, that he is
eminent in none. Man's judgment and capacity, is bounded with very strict
limits. And it is a proverb no less true then ancient, that he which grypes
at most, does always lightly fasten upon least. Wherefore, what-ere he be,
that desires to advantage his friend by any commendations, let him instance
his speeches always on particulars: besides, let him have regard to the
quality of his person. Philip, hearing his son Alexander sing wonderful
well at a certain banquet, whereunto himself was invited, did not stick to
vpbraid him with his excellency therein; asking him, if he were not ashamed
to be so skillful in a faculty, which was so far below him: thinking, it
should seem, that the following of such things, as were no less full of
vanity, then void of profit, might argue a neglect of honorable enterprises;
and so fall out to be prejudicial to his the^growing reputation, rather then
otherwise.

And indeed Praises are no way graceful, unless they be presented with the
troop, and in the train of such as are proper unto us. It is a kind of
scorn and indignity, to pryze a man by such abilities, as hold not some
decent correspondencie with his rank; as likewise by such as ought not to be
the chief and principal in him. And this, Demosthenes knew full well: who
having always been a professed enemy to the fore-saide Philip, King of
Macedon, and hearing that Aeschines and Philocrates highly commended him for
that he was well-spoken, fair of countenance, and could with ease swallow
down the largest cups, did not stick to retort their speeches back, to his
disgrace; telling them, that none of all those qualities, were any way
beseeming the person of a prince. For, the one was rather the property of an
Advocate; the other, of a Woman; and the third, of a Sponge. So that praises,
unless they be somewhat suitable to the estate, and condition of the party who^
we praise, they may prove to be burdensome unto him, rather then otherwise;
and therefore, due consideration must be had of those things, for which we go
about to commend such as we affect, before we do apply the^; though of
themselves, and without extrinsecall relation, they be never so laudable. For,
that which is a beauty in one face, (the right proportion of lineaments well
considered) may be a blemish in another.

The fourth and last consideration, is the end Why. Men's actions can not well
be construed by a better rule, then by the scope whereat they aim. The first
apparances of things are very dangerous, and deceitful: and therefore, out of
them it is impossible to extract a settled judgment of their sequel. The end
alone is that, which must entitle them by the attribute of good, or evil.
Wherefore, howsoever we are bound to give our neighbors proceedings a
charitable interpretation; yet in those things, which may somewhat neerelie
concern our selves, and wherein we discover not the drift of their
dessignes, a wise distrust, and slowenesse of belief, is not prohibited. They
are the sinews of wisdom: and whosoever is so nyce and scrupulous, as to
refuse the benefit of them in this case, is no way to be pitied, if at length
he reap the fruit of his supersticious folly.

Many there are, that have honey in their mouths, but wormwood in their hearts;
and like unto our Ower-men, look one way, and row another: which, Alfonso king
of Naples, very wisely discovered in a certain Gentleman, that was a follower
of his Court. For, having one day (with no better intent, the^ to make the
smoother passage for his calumnious detractions) exceedingly commended unto him
the worth, and good deserving of one, whom he hated even unto death; Surely,
said the King to those that were about him, this fellow goes about to lay some
snare wherein to entrap his enemy. And heerin was he nothing deceived: for,
shortly after (when by reason of his former commendations, he thought his
speeches might pass without suspicion either of envy or malice) he came unto
him with a contrary note. Wherefore, it behooues every man to stand warily
upon his guarde; as well for other men's good, as for his own. Fronti nulla
fides. Harpies have Virgins faces, but Vultures talents: and the Hyaena, though
it look like a friend, deuoures like a foe. This world is a Theater, wherein
nothing is represented unto us, but in a personated fashion. Look into Epeus
horse; and whatsoever the outside promise, you shall find in the bowels of it,
the destruction of Troy. It may well argue a generous spirit, but with all, a
want of judgment in any man, that on the sudden shall repose much trust,
and confidence in a reconciled friendship. The Lion is a Lion, though he shrink
up his claws: and there be many, who (notwithstanding they pretend a
sincerenesse of love, Eccle. 13.
and affection, in all their doings) want not a will to conceive a mischief,
if they had means, and opportunity to effect it. Tacitus, making a brief
recapitulatio^ of those causes, which brought Agricola into disgrace with
Domitian, among others, ranks these kind of persons, as the chief. Causa
periculi, says he, non crime^ vllu^, aut querela laesi cuiusqua^: sed gloria
viri; ac pessimu^ inimicorum genus, laudantes. That which endangered him, was
not any crime in himself, or complaint in others: but the greatness of his
worth; and (the most dangerous kind of enemies) those that commended him. And
indeed, in the courts of Tyrants (where, as Tacitus reports, honores pro
crimine, honorable atchiuements are accounted capital offenses; et ob virtutes
certissimum exitium, and Virtue is rewarded but with sure destruction) there
needs nothing to procure the downfall of a hated enemy, but a cunning
applauding of his once suspected merits. In vita Agric.
Sinistra illic erga eminentes interpretatio; nec minus periculum ex magna
fama, quam ex mala. It is the nature of those inhumane Caniballs, to grow
jealous of such abilities as are reported to be so excellent in others; and
whereof they find so great a want, and defect in themselves. Their own vicious
disposition, makes them apt, and prone enough to interpret the nature, and
quality of men's desires, by the greatness of their deserts.

Hence was it that Tigellinus, a man renowned under the government of Nero for
devilish practices, Annal. lib. 14.
that he might with more ease, and less suspicion, effect the overthrow both
of Plautus and Sylla, began (as our historian says) metum principis rimari, to
search the fears, and iealousies of his Sovereign: which after he had once
found out, he did so cunningly work upon them, that with comme^ding unto him
their Nobility, together with their sufficiency, he brought him shortly after,
to be the bloody actor of that unhappy Tragedy, whereof himself had bin the
accursed author. But Princes are not always to be burdened with the
disastrous eue^ts of such proceedings. They do but as weaker Patients, who by
the counsel, and advise of their Physician, do swallowe oftentimes a deadly
poison, in stead of a wholesome drug: themselves being altogether unable to
discover the deceit, when art and skill has cunningly disguised it. In fenny
regions, says Varro, 1. Dear Rust. 15.
there are certain creatures bred, of quantity so small, that no eye can
possibly discern the^; which being drawn with the very air thorough the
nostrils, into the brain, and through the mouth, into the body, are afterward
the cause of many dangerous diseases. Thus, in the head of an Italian (as
Holerius writes) was engendered a Scorpion, Cap. 1. Praxis Medic:
and that by his often smelling to the herb Basile. For even so likewise may
those little Atomies be snuft up with the air. No marvel then if, with the
praises of an ill-affected mind, there steal into the ears of Princes, that
which may poison, and corrupt their judgment, moving their fancies to a
causeless jealousy of the party praised.

All men are prone to believe those things, that carry any show with them of
securing, either themselves, or their estates; as likewise to distrust the
contrary. And howsoever a Caesar, or a Guisard, who never understood the
meaning of that word Fear (out of the height of their undaunted courage)
might in a careless manner seem to neglect the true relations of intended
treacheries, or (scorning as it were a strict inquiry) confront them only with
an invincible spirit, and say, On n'oseroit, they dare not attempt it: yet
where wisdom is used as an ingredient to qualify that, which exceedes in
either, they may be taken as sovereign preservatives, and that without fear of
prejudice to a generous and virtuous mind.

But, that we may not leese our selfs in things extrauagant, let us draw
somewhat nearer to our home. There are another kind of cunning vndermyners,
who, when they see their adversaries, or such as they affect not, advanced to
any place of dignity, the discharge whereof, requires an extraordinary
sufficiency, will not let, as often as occasion is given, highly to commend
their worth: but, if we observe them, it is never lightly, but with disabling
them in the maine. Thus has Subtlety been oftentimes the supplanter of true
Desert, and crafty Ignorance the deposer and dispossesser of an able Virtue.
Thus was Taurion wrought out of the government of Peloponnesus by Apelles,
whilst he persuaded the King that he should do well, to employ such worthy
men as he, about his person: which consideration, served but as a color to
shadow his sinister aims; for, his direct and principal end, was to invest a
creature of his own with that charge and dignity. Wherefore, it behooves
Princes, not to give too much credit to the informations that are given them by
others, of such as they employ in any charges of importance; but for their own
safety, and theirs, to have a certain experimental knowledge, of themselves.

The Fencer sometimes cunningly takes his aim at the foot, when his intent
is to reach the head: and many men, by blaming the servant, have sought the
overthrow of the Master.

Francis Sforza, being very desirous to remove both Troilus and Peter Brunorus,
two Leaders of no small account, from the service of Alfonso, king of Naples,
framed a Letter, in the end whereof he willed, that without delay they should
put in execution the consultations that had past betwixt them; which he
conveyed in such manner, as it fell into the hands of the king: who,
understanding the contents, sent them thereupon as prisoners into Catalogne;
and by that means, deprived himself of the benefit, and use of two
experienced Co^manders, and gave his enemy that contentment which he looked
for.

I could insta^ce the truth of this assertion on many more examples: but I am
called away by another kind of sinister praysers, who are not absolutely led
with any malicious intent to offend others, but only with a desire to benefit
themselves; and these are usually termed flatterers. Their end is altogether
different from the former: and howsoever they prove to be no less hurtful
the^ any of the rest, yet is it but by accident, and as the Ivy, corrupts the
wall which it embraces. But because they are easily discerned by purer
judgments, and such as are not tainted with any humorous Self-conceit, I
will hear leave both them and this discourse.

Of Pains and Industry.
THere is no better mark of a true generous disposition, the^ to attempt those
things, which are hard to be atchiued. The easiness of doing, works
oftentimes in some, an utter distaste of what is to be done. Ingrata quae
tuta: Virtue admits not facility for her companion; the path she treads, it
must be rough and thorny. No accidents have power to make her turn her back.
Labor and pains, are the only food wherewith she fats herself. The threats
of Tyrants, tortures, and torturers, are so far from dismaying her, that they
serve rather to breathe a second life into her.

Duris vt ilex tonsa bipennibus
Nigrae feraci frondis in Algido,
Per damna, per caedes, ab ipso
Ducit opes, animumque ferro.
Like a topt Elm, whom harder Axe bereaues
In Algid's fruitful soil of his black leaves,
Through loss, through slaughter, and excessive pain,
Even from her wounds she gathers strength again.
It is no part of hers, to go creeping into a hollow Cave, or be beholding to
a massy toombe for freeing her from the strokes of an incensed fortune. She
breaks not off her intended purposes, neither does she alter her propounded
courses, what-soeuer storm, or tempest is like to happen.

Si fractus illabatur orbis,
Impavidam ferient ruinae.
Though the wide world,
being broke, should chance to fall,
Her may the ruins hurt,
but not appall.
No: 't is in vulgar, and adulterate spirits, that the soul of Motion is
wholly derived from the likelihood of Action. Avida est periculi Virtus: true
noble dispositions, cannot relish any enterprise, further then it is seasoned
with difficulties and dangers. Edward the third of England, understanding on
what nice terms the life of the Blacke-Prince, his son, did stand, when at
the town of Crecy (by reason of the great advantage the French had of him,
both in multitude of men, and commodiousnesse of place) he was (in all men's
judgments) accounted but as matter, out of whose ruins his enemies might
frame unto themselves a glorious victory: and fearing least by sending fresh
supplies, he might hap to derogate from his transcending reputation, returns
him no better comfort, then this short answer could affoorde him; That either
he must win the field, or lose his life: himself would remain a witness of
his valor, ready to second what he had begun, when need required. This
unexpected message, in so great a necessity, from a father, was so far from
dismaying him, as that it rather added vigor to his strength: so that,
considering with himself if he overcame, his glory would be the more; if he
were overcome, it could not be much less; he hastens to the field, gives the
onset, and ennobles both the day, and place by the fall of thirty thousand of
his adversaries, 1500. of them being Earls, Barons, and Gentlemen of note:
which, like a dangerous fever, did so shake every particular member of the
Realm of France, as that long time after, it lay bedridden of that overthrow.
And indeed, the despair of conquering, yea, and sometimes the fear of being
conquered, has to many Armies been the only means, by which they have
obtained what they little sought for. Witness the first just battle, which the
Romans fought against Hannibal, under the conduct of Sempronius the Consul: in
which, a troop of well nigh ten thousand footmen were seized on the
sudden with such an affright, that not seeing which way else they might make
passage for their fainting baseness, they cast themselves athwart one of the
thickest ranks of their opposites, which they pierced with a wonderful fury,
to the great amazement, and discomfiture of the Carthaginians: but (alas!) 't
was but a shameful and dishonorable flight, bought at the same price they
might have done a glorious and renowned victory.

Julius Caesar made known unto the world the singular proof of his valor,
when being (with his Cohorts) to pass the River Rubicon (which was the
utmost bound and limit of his Province) and having weighed with himself, the
danger that attended so high an enterprise (whereas Peace and Safety offered to
kiss his feet upon the alteration of his proceedings) he sets up his rest,
throws the dyce, and in a desperate resolution, cries Have at all: intending,
it should seem (rather then he would miss the purchase of his aims) to
polish and fashion out his the^ rough-hewen fortune, with the edge of his
subduing sword; and to make way for his ambitious hopes, through fields of
Iron, and streams of blood, to that imperial dignity, wherewith in the end,
he saw himself most honorably possessed.

That Virtue is but weak, and ill deserves the grace and credit of so high a
style (being of it self unable to give life to any heroical dessigne) that
cannot with a fixed countenance out-stare the threatening eye of Danger, and
make day for them, through all opposed discourageme^ts whatsoever.

Pelopidas, being advertised that Alexander came against him, with a far
greater Army then his, was nothing moved ther-with, but aunswers presently:
So much the better; we shall subdue the more. The Lacedaemonians were never
wont to ask, (...), how many are our enemies, but (...), where be they:
knowing their valor to be of so sound, and strong a temper, as could not any
way be daunted with advantages. And this same warlike humor, which was
naturally bred in them, has upon urgent necessity been found in many.

It is an error therefore, and an ouer-sight (which in a skillful Commander
merits no excuse) To deprive his enemies of all means and opportunity of
flight; enforcing them to exercise the strength of their hands, when their own
baseness would willingly (perhaps) have embraced any occasion, that might have
put in use the swiftnes of their heels.

It was Scipios opinion; Viam hostibus, qua fugiant, munienda^. For indeed,
there is nothing so hard to be withstoode as armed Fear. Those of Gaunt,
perceiving Lewis, Earl of Flaunders, unwilling at all hands to receive them
again into his favor, unless with halters about their necks, they would ask
pardon of him for their past offense; assembled themselves together to the
number of 5. thousand; went and confronted his Army of forty thousand;
overcame it, and freed themselves wholly from that Despotical kind of
government, to which before (upon indifferent terms) they offered to submit
both themselves and theirs.

The Earl of Fois, who in less the^ three months (showing himself a
Captain, when he was scarce a Soldier) had with such valor, and celeritie,
ennobled his name, by so many victories obtained in Italy, against the
Spaniards, in the year 1512. was slain by a troop of their Infantrie, whilst
he strove to perfect his victory; being not able to endure, that (all the
rest being scattered and discomfited) it alone should depart the field as
tryumphant, with her ranks unbroken, and vnsever'd.

It is not good therefore for any man to presume too much upon his fortune.
Vitrea est: tune cum sple^det, frangitur. And, as the French proverb does
testify, Par trop presser l'anguille, on la perd: he that grypes an Eele too
hard, is in danger to lose it. Many have had the victory snatched (as it were)
out of their jaws, and themselves become the dishonorable pryze of whom they
had erst most honorably surpryz'd, for not making a golden bridge for the
retyring forces of their enemy to pass over: So great a power has necessity,
to rowze up the drowsy courages of men, and to inflame their paler livers,
with a resolution to sell their lives at as high a rate as possibly they can,
rather then offer themselves gratis, and vnrevenged, to be like sheep
slaughtered by the fury of their adversary. Vna salus victis, nulla^ sperare
salute^. What greater motives or encouragements could have been used, to
support the weakness of a yielding Army, then those which Vectius applied to
his soldiers, when he perceived them to faint under the furious encounter of
the Romans? What (says he) are you desirous to see your houses, your wives,
your parents and your children? follow me. There are no walls, nor ra^parts, to
interrupt your passage: Arms only are opposed to arms: your valor does
altogether equal theirs: but now necessity gives you the upper hand of them.
And indeed, where have we seen greater valiancie, then in those desperate
troops, that like Catilines sedicious followers, divitias, decus, gloriam,
libertatem, atque patriam, in dextris portarunt; carried their wealth, their
honor, their freedom, and their country in their hands. Witness those several
inundations of warlike legions, which the populous fruitfulnes of Scythia, and
the rest of those colder clymats in former times have afforded; who wanting
place to inhabit in at home, have sought abroad, and by virtue of their swords,
entitled themselves in most of the chiefest parts of Christendom, disseising
the right owners, and making themselves Franc-tena^ts of their kingdo^s, and
possessions, both in law, and deed.

The proof hereof we may see in the Longobards: who being driven (by want)
to forsake their native soil (which was an Island in the Alman-sea, called
Scandinavia) entered into Italy, made themselves absolute Lords of Gallia
Cisalpina, and styled it afterward (in remembrance of their so won conquest)
by the name of Lombardie: as likewise in the Huns, and Garians, who under the
ensigns of that victorious, and so renowned Attila, their king, after his
expulsion out of the territories of France, possessed themselves with the whole
Country of Panonia, and by a compound name, called it Hungaria. And, that we
may draw a little nearer to our own home; the Normans (a people gathered
together not only from Denmark, but from Suedland, and other Septentrionall
Countries there adjoining) took such sure footing in Neustria (by the^ now
Normandy) during the time that Charles, surnamed the Gross, commanded it,
that he was feign, considering he could not do otherwise, to grant it the^,
conditionally they would acknowledge themselves ever after, liegehomagers for
it to the Crown of France.

Virtue is never in her proper element, but when death and danger seem to have
hemmed her in on every side: she scorns the pryze, whose purchase requires
not the use of all her nerves. Imperia dura toll, quid virtus erit? says the
Tragic. Inveniet via^, aut faciet: Wheresoever she become, she will either
find a way, or make one. No calamity is of power sufficient to bring her
under. This Majesty alone, knows not what it is to suffer check: it can
neither be elevated, nor dejected. Her greatness (like the highest heavens) is
always firm and without clouds. Are you desirous to see her? you shall find
her in the Temple, in the market, in the Court: you shall find her standing at
a breach, or scaling of a wall; her garments dustie, her countenance all
tanned, and her hands as hard as Iron. Wherefore, whosoever is possessed with
her, let him prepare himself for dangerous assaults.

The Gladiator thinks it a disgrace, to see himself composed with one, either
in strength, or skill, inferior to himself; knowing (as it is indeed) the
victory cannot be glorious, which is not dangerous. Bellum cum captivis, and
foeminis, gerere non possum: Armatus sit oportet, que^ oderim, said Alexander.
And at the games of Olympus, he would not run, unless he might have Kings
for his competitors in the pursuit of the victory.

Paul. Aemylius, by reason of the base, and fearful speeches, that issued out
of the mouth of Perseus after his captivity, thought himself nothing honored
by the overthrow of so faint, and cowardly a foe.

In Tauros ruunt Lybici Leones:
Non sunt Papilionibus molesti.
Against stout Bulls
the Lybian Lions hie:
And never molest
the weaker Butterfly.
The like does Fortune; Fortissimos sibi pares quaerit, she looks out the
strongest for her Antagonists: the rest she passes over with disdain.
Transit tutos Fortuna sinus:
Medioque rates quaerit in alto,
Quarum feriunt suppara nubes.
Wherefore, whosoever he be, whose happiness was never shaken with any rough
encounter, may rest assured, that she sees nothing in him able to sustain it;
so that he need never fear her. His own baseness does sufficiently secure him.
Servantur magnis isticervicibus vngues;
Nec gaudet tenui sanguine tanta sitis.
She seeks a Mutius, when she is armed with fire: and glories in his virtue,
that (like Fabricius) can show himself an Atlas against her under the heavy
burden of Poverty: or that can with Rutilius, co^front her in the force of
banishment: or with Regulus outstare her in the horrible aspect of hell-bred
tortures. Give her a Socrates for her adversary, that can swallow poison with
as unchanged a countenance, as he would a delightful potion: or a Cato, that
dares challenge the field of Death, and hold him at hard play with his own
weapons, and then she is pleased. An easy yielding spirit, she esteems a
subject too unworthy for her ambition to work upon. Wherefore, whosoever shall
at all times have been so pamperd with prosperity, as that he never felt
the heavy hand of Affliction, let him not glory in the mildness of his
stars, attributing that peaceable, and calm tranquillity to the goodness of
God toward him; for this were but to flatter himself in an erroneous
opinion. Let him rather take notice of his own defects, and be assured, that
he is altogether destitute of that heroical, and generous heat, that should
enable him to make head against Adversity, and is therefore purposelie past
over. Had he been a Samson, many thousand Philistines should have bent the
force of their malicious minds against him: or had he been a David, a Lion
should have been sent to try him, and a Giant to provoke him.

Did the all-seeing Eye of heaven discern but the least spark of virtue in
any, he would not suffer it to lie buried under the embers of a secure, and
vncontroll'd estate: some stormy accident, or other, should have served for
wind to kindle it, and make it blaze forth to the sight of the whole world.
Had not Rutilius bin wronged, his innocence had nere bin known. Illustrat
fortuna aliquos, dum vexat. Cross accidents are oftentimes the publishers of
a concealed virtue. Zeno knew himself fitter for a Philosopher, then a
Merchant; yet seeing the life he led was both pleasant, and profitable, he was
loath to give it over, to embrace the other: but having understood that the
ships he had at sea, being very richly laden and upon return, were cast
away, he did then acknowledge a superior providence; and out of a careless
apprehe^sion (it should seem) of so great a loss, tells Fortune she did well
to range him to the gown, and to the study of Philosophy. Languet per
inertiam saginata virtus. The edge of Industry is clean abated by the force
of pleasure, and security. It is never busied but when some urgent
inconvenience does find it work.

After that man had forfeited those fair possessions, in which his Lord, and
Maker (out of the abundance of his fatherly love) had placed him, and was
enforced thereby with his posterity to shift for himself in so vast, and
desolate a wilderness, as the world was then; how quickly sundry arts
Mechanical, which otherwise perhaps had nere bin heard of, were found out, who
can be ignorant? Want was their mother, howsoever Plenty afterward fell out to
be their Nurse. Yea, the like may be likewise seen in creatures of an
inferior nature: and hence is that of the Satyrist;

Quis expedivit Psittaco suum (...),
Picasque docuit nostra verba conari?
Where did the Parot learn
Good morrow Sir to cry,
Or who the chattering Pyes did teach,
our words to prove and try?
The reason whereof, is by himself set down in the verses following.

Magister artis, ingenique largitor,
Venture, negatas artifex sequi voces.
That which does art impart,
and wit bestow,
The belly, skilled voices
denied to know.
This was it, that brought them to it, says he. But there are many other
respects sufficient of themselves, without the aid of this, to work the like
effect in man: as, hope of gain, fear of danger, and such like. Yet there be
many of so effeminate, and soft a disposition, that they are ready to swoune
at the very first allaru^ of any sinister, and disastrous accident: and whereas
they should employ themselves in seeking to redress what they cannot avoid,
stand gazing one at another in the greatest dangers, expecting aid from the
immortal Gods but not remembering, that (as the Grecian proverb says) they
must (...), add their own industry to th'invocation of divine assistance;
and not be followers of that Rustic in the Apologue, who, when his cart was
laid fast up in the mire, stood still, and looked upon it, desiring Hercules, by
his celestial power, to help him out with it: who being present, bad him put
his own hand to the wheel, prick forward his Oxen, and so call upon GOD. For,
as Cato said in his answer to Julius Caesar, No^ votis, nec supplicijs
muliebribus, deorum auxilia parantur. Gods help is not gotten only by
wishes, prayers, and womanish supplications. It is by watching, by laboring,
and taking good advise, that matters gain a prosperous and true success. Vbi
socordiae, atque, ignaviae te tradideris, nequicquam Deos implores: irati,
infestique sunt. If thou give thy self over to sluggishnes and sloth, in vain
dooest thou call upon him: he is displeased, and offended with thee. The clay,
unless it be thoroughlie wrought, cannot possibly receive the form or fashion
of a pot. Ceres, when she showed Triptolemus the use of Corn, she gave him
this aviso withal, (...): unless thou cleanse, and grind it, thou can never
eat it. Insinuating as it were thereby, that no man could possibly attain any
thing, to the purchase whereof he added not his own industry.

Charles the Emperor bore for an Impresa the sign Capricorn, the
constellation under which he was borne: and the word that gave it life, was
Fidem fati virtute sequemur: Our virtue shall pursue that, which our fate has
promised; A Motto fitting the person of so noble and victorious a Prince. For,
in every action, it is GOD that gives the matter: but we are they that must
second him in the giving of it form. He does nothing that concerns us,
without us; no, not so much as save us. Dij laboribus omnia vendunt. Without
pains and industry nothing can be got; and with it, most things may: Et labor
ingeniu^ miseris dedit. --

Demosthenes had many imperfections, which in an Orator were much unseemly: to
redress the^ therefore (says Valerius) praeliatus est contra rerum naturam,
he made open war against Nature, and went his way at length with triu^phant
conquest; having by the obstinacy of his own mind, maister'd the malignitie
of hers: whereupon it was rumored, that his Mother had brought forth one
Demosthenes, and Industry another. Wherefore, though it be somewhat troublesome
to take pains, yet once learn of a Mimik, Feras quod laedit, vt quodprodest,
perferas. Bear that, which does a little displease thee, that thou may
bear away that, which will much profit thee. Fortiter malu^ qui patitur, says
the Comike, post potitur bonu^. Sour accidents are seasoned with sweet events;
and stormy tempests, are often followed with quiet calmes. And this was,
though obscurely, yet most elegantly set out by Homer in that herb Moly, to
which he attributes a black root, and a white flower; signifying the
troublesomnesse of labor by the one, by which that tranquillity of mind is
obtained, which is the reward of an absolute virtue, expressed in the other.

Cautions in Friendship.
IT was not without reason, that Anacharsis when he slept, was always wont to
hold his right hand on his mouth, and his left hand on his natural parts; as
if the one had needed a far stronger restraint then the other. For there are
many men of such a temper, that they can with greater patience endure to carry
burning coals in their breasts, then secrets: and hence is it, that those
things oftentimes, which are whispered in the ear, are presently after
published in the Market.

There are few, that can say, and say truly, as that Grecian of former times
did, who being told that his breath did smell, answered, that it was by reason
of the many secrets, which had a long time layne rotting, and putrefying within
him. Nay, many are never quiet, till they have unburdened their bosoms of
what they go with (and that oftentimes without any respect, or choice) upon
the first they happily encounter, though the matter concern either themselves,
or their friends never so nearly: but (alas!) in the end, they reap the fruit
of their unadvised folly. It is an ancient saying, but very true; The good, or
ill hap
in all a man's life,
Is the good, or ill choice
of a friend, or a wife.
Wherein, the cleerest, and best discerning judgments, may easily be
deceived. Many have honey in their mouths, but a Razor at their girdle: and few
do use to carry a map of their minds engraven in their forheads. Multis
simulationum involucris, says the Orator, tegitur, et quasivelis quibusdam
obtenditur vniuscuiusque natura. Frons, oculi, vultus persaepe mentiuntur;
oration saepissime. Dissimulation has set her foot upon the throat of
Simplicity: and how-soeuer it be good, yet is it dangerous to measure others
by our own innocence. The Marquess of Pescara, was wont (as Guicciardine
reports) to draw men into dangerous practices, and afterward, by his
duplicitie, and double dealing, to discover them himself; making other men's
offenses, the first step to his own greatness.

It was not mine enemy, says the kingly Prophet, that disgraced me, for
then I could have borne it: neither did he that hated me, extol himself
against me; for then would I have hid me from him: but thou; a man, whom I
pryz'd as dearly as my self, my guide, and my familiar: who sweetened our
secrets by imparting them together, and went in each others company to the
house of the Lord.

As who should say, 't was not my open enemy, nor my known adversary, that
wronged me: but he whose friendship I esteemed, not only for worldly
respects, but likewise for the zealous, and religious affection, which he
seemed to nourish in his bowels toward the house of the Lord, 't was he, 't
was he that deceived me. Hence was it that Antigonus in his prayers, was wont
to desire the Gods they would defend him against his friends. And being
demanded, why not rather against his enemies: from them, says he, that openly
profess hostility, I can easily beware; but from those that veil a wrinkled
heart, under a smiling countenance, I stand in need of divine protection. And
indeed, fearful diftrust secures us from the malice of the one: but fearlesse
confidence betraies us to the treacheries of the other. Who but our Savior
Christ could have discovered the secret practices of Judas? considering how
forward he was to kiss him, and likewise to perform all other ceremonious
offices of love that were required.

Ave is uttered oftentimes by some, who if their tongues should not belie their
hearts, Cave would sound the truest in their mouths. Joab takes Amasa by the
bearde to kiss him, when he intends to kill him: and indeed, as the Poet
witnesses; Tuta, frequensque via est, Ovid. li. 1 de art.

per amici fallere nomen.
It is a safe, and common way,
by friendship to deceive.
And Socrates thereupon exclaimeth; (...): Friends, there is not any man a
friend; meaning such a one as the Comic speaks of, Cui tuam rem cum
credideris, sine omni cura dormias: to whom, when thou have committed any
business that concerns thy self, thou need'st not interrupt thy own sleep,
with careful thinking on it. Some such there are, but not in every soil: they
must be sought for amongst liberal Arts; amongst honest, and virtuous offices;
amongst painful, and industrious exercises: thy sumptuous entertainment
affoordes the^ not. Quae inter pocula contrahitur amicitia, says Seneca,
vitrea est, and fragilis. Cup-friendship, is of too brittle and glassie a
substance to continue long. Hu^c que^ coena tibi, que^ me^saparavit amicu^, non
te; Martial. lib. 9. Epigr. 15.

Esse putas fidae pectus amicitiae?
Aprum amat, and mullos, and sumen, and ostrea,
Tam been si coenem, noster amicus eris.
Whom plentious meals,
and tables make thy friend,
Think thou, his love
can have a trusty end?
He likes thy dainty cates;
he likes not thee:
Make me such cheer,
and thou my friend shall be.
These are like the Swallow, that changes her habitation with the season; and
when comfort fails her in one place, repaireth presently to another: and such
a one was Crottos mouse; for while he was in prosperity, it fed continually
with him: but his house being set on fire, it fled immediately from him.
Whereupon he took occasion to frame this distich, not so much to denote the
ungratefulness of so imperfect and base a creature, as the mutabilitie, and
fleeting disposition of trencher-amitie: Vixistimecum, Fortuna matre; noverca,
Me fugis: at poteras aequa, et iniqua pati.
Thou wast content to live with me
while Fortune was a Mother:
When she a cruel stepdame grew,
thou left'st me for another:
But if so thou a creature vile,
and thanklesse had not bin,
Thou wold'st not have denied to share
the troubles I was in.


He therefore (says Seneca) does mainly err, qui amicum in atrio quaerit,
in convivio probat; that seeks a friend in the Court, and without further
trial, confirms him in the Cup. It is a preposterous order, first to trust,
and afterward to judge: a methodicall proceeding, would require an inverted
course. We are to deliberate of all things, with our friend; but first, of our
friend himself. There is no man so simple, but, before he intend to make use
of a new vessel, tries by the infusion of water, whither it be well bound,
and fit to contain more precious liquour, or no. Alcibiades conveyed the
image of a man into the darkest part of his house, and thither having brought
his friends, one by one, told them he had slain a man, and withal defired,
that by their aid, and counsel, he might be so assisted, as that the murder
might be concealed: All of them deny to be partakers with him in so great a
fact. Only Callias willingly condescends to satisfy his demands, by doing
him the best offices, which in that case he possibly could, being as yet
altogether ignorant of the verity of the thing: whereupon he made no
difficulty to embrace him ever after as his bosome-friend, and confidently to
impart, unto him, the utmost, and inmost of his secrets: yet, in those things
by which his life might become questionable, he would not trust his Mother, for
fear she might mistake the black bean, for the white. Wherefore, every man
ought to be somewhat nyce and scrupulous in this kind; and not impart any thing,
that may import either himself, or his friend, but with sufficient caution.
For, as the Italian proverb witnesses: Servo d'altrui si fa,
Chi dice il suo secreto, a chi no'l sa.
He makes himself a servile
wretch to others evermore,
That tells his secrets unto such,
as knew them not before.
Unity never passes his bounds; but remains in it self always one, and is
therefore called (...): but the binary number is indefinite, and the beginning
of divorce; because in doubling the unity, it turns into plurality.

A word, whilst it remains in him that first knew it, is secret: but when it
comes to another, it begins to have the name of a common report. And
howsoever the Florentine be of opinion, that with one, any thing may be
spoken, because the affirmation of the one, in case of detection, is no more
availeable then the negation of the other (provided always he have not suffered
himself to be led by the persuasions of any, as Plautine was by Saturnine the
Tribune, to commit any part of his mind to writing, whereby his own hand,
afterward may be made the only means to convince him; yet would I
willingly give no assent unto him. For, howsoever it may seem, for the
faciliting of treacherous, and disloyal practices, a necessary Axiom, by
force whereof, the lewd Conspirator being emboldned, does freely open
himself, to such as he is persuaded may be easily drawn to second his
mischievous attempts; knowing, that if his expectation should chance to fail
him in any one, he keeps himself notwithstanding out of the danger, and
compass of the law; whose Equity pronounces not the sentence of death
against any man, without a just, and lawful conviction, which in this case
(considering the many disordered passions, wherewith men are led to sca^dalize
each other) can not be had (witness those several duells, and combats, which
heere-to-fore both in this Kingdom, and diverse others, have been assigned by
Princes for the avoiding of such differences; the stain of infamy and
dishonor, resting always, how justly oftentimes God knows, with the party
vanquished, whither Plaintiff, or Defendant): yet for the concealing of honest
counsels, it is very hurtful, and dangerous. I call honest Counsels, such
as concern the public good of my Prince, or the private good of my friend;
which indeed is so far forth to be accounted good, as it stands with the
good, or at least not against the good of my supreme Sovereign; to whom, by a
threefold law, to wit, Divine, Natural, and Civil, I am bound to purchase
(with my best endeavors) all the good, and safety, that I can. I owe all
faith, and loyalty to both; and am as a friend to satisfy with all alacrity
the desires of the one, so far forth as they impugn not the allegiance,
which, as a subject, I am to render to the other.

But, as I would not willingly nourish a Serpent in my bosom, which in the end
should devour me: so on the other side, I would not be too strict and rigorous
a Censurer of his dessignes; least by my rash, and scandalous delations, I
brand both my self, and him, with an opprobrious mark of everlasting ignominy,
and that that of the Satyrist may not be truly said of me; Stoicus occidit
Baream
delator amicum.


Histories abound with examples of this kind: but the powerful hand of
heaven has frustrated the ambitious hopes of their effected villainy; and,
whereas they expected honor, and promotion, has justly requited them with
neuer-dying shame, and utter confusion. But because a tragical Catastrophe to
a friendly discourse, might seem (peradventure) somewhat ominous, I will
stretch the thread of my subject to a further length.

There are some that fashion themselves to nothing more, the^ how to become
speculatiue into another, to the end to know how to work him, or wind him, or
govern him: but this proceeds from a heart that is double, and cloven; and
not entyre, and ingenuous. And as in friendship it argues a great defect, and
want of integrity: so likewise toward some persons, a defect of duty: and
such as please themselves in these barbarous speculations, are to be no better
accounted, then the very Gangrenes, and Cankerwormes of humane society. Scire
volunt secreta domus,
atque inde timeri.
They seek the secrets
of our house to know,
That thence in us
some fear of them might grow.
And indeed, if they chance to come, where Dissolution is the Steward of a
disord'red family, their hopes fly right to their sinister aim; they gin to
be beloved: but (alas!) that love is but the spurious, and adulterate issue of
a conscious and guilty fear: Carus erit Verri, qui Verre^ tempore quo vult
Accusare potest --
To him no kindness
Verres will refuse,
That, when he please,
can Verres life accuse.


Hence was it, that Tigellinus (as our Historian witnesses) to add the better
strength to his transcending fortune, endeavored (as much as in him lay)
principem sibi societate sceleru^ obstringere, to endeare the Prince unto
himself, by making him a partner in his villainies: which according to his
brutish expectation he cunningly accomplished. But, those that like Agesilaus,
who in travailing took up his lodging always in the Temples, to the intent
that men, and Gods might see into his actions: or, like Julius Drusus, who,
when certain Masons had offered him for three thousand crowns, so to contriue
his house, as that his neighbors should no longer enjoy that open prospect
into it, which they had: I will give you, says he, fix thousand, and frame it
so, that they may look into it on every side: those, I say, that like these
men, do all things, tanqua^ spectet aliquis, as if they had a Cato in their
bosom, that did continually behold them, cannot easily be touched, or tainted
with the noisome corruption of such dangerous and hurtful flies: nor likewise
those that shall but diligently observe the difference, between a star, and
a Meteor, a true friend, and a false: The one, is curious, and inquisitiue to
learn more then he should; the other, is afraid to know more then he would:
following therein the example of Philippides, who, when Lysimachus demanded of
him, what of so many things that were his, he should communicate unto him;
Whatsoever it shall please you Sir, answered he, (...), so it be not of your
secrets: distrusting it should seem his own imperfection, for the concealing
them; or knowing (as it is indeed) arduu^ nimis esse meruisse Principis
secretum, vbi si quid cognoscitur, prodi velab alio formidatur. A prying eye, a
listening ear, and a prating tongue, are all birds of one wing; and by reason
thereof, seldom times found separated one from an other. For the better
avoiding therefore of such dangerous inconveniences, as the commerce and
society of such intemperate persons might happily bring with it, it would not
be much amiss, secretly to examine, what his carriage has been toward
others his associates in former times: and thereafter as we find it, to frame a
settled resolution in our selves; if faulty, absolutely to avoyde him: if
otherwise, co^fidently to embrace him. For to distrust without a cause, is
very dangerous: I do but teach another to deceive, by fearing overmuch my
self to be deceived. This was it, which did annihilate the practices of peace
between Charles the fifth, and Francis king of France, in the year 1528. For,
having (in a manner) accorded all their differences, the question only was,
which of them both did best deserve to be trusted. Caesar gave out he might not
safely trust him, that had once deceived him: whereunto, the Orators of France
did wittily reply; that the more he did pretend himself to have been
deceived by the King their master, the more might the King their master
imagine he should be deceived by him.

Hence was it that Otho, after the overthrow of Galba, Tacit. histo. lib. 1.
having delivered Celsus, per speciem vinculorum, under the color of severer
punishment, from the fury of his followers; non quasi ignosceret, not by way
of pardon (for he would not seem to tax him of any crime) but, least being an
enemy, metum reconciliationis adhiberet, the sincereness of his reco^cilement
might any way prove questionable, he rankt him presently amongst his dearest
friends, and made him withal, a special Co^mander in his afterwars: in which,
he behaved himself as loyally, as ever he had done in the employments of his
formerly deposed Sovereign. Upon the good event of which example, Lew. 12. did
peradue^rure ground that memorable answer, wherewith he nipt the bloody
instigations of those Parasits, that, after he was come unto the crown, by
the decease of Charles the eight, did animate him to vengeance, against Lewis
de la Trimouille, who during the reign of that aforesaid Prince, had, in the
battle of Saint Aubin, overthrown his Army, and taken him. It is not fit
(said he) a King of France should marry the quarrels of a Duke of Orleans. If
he served faithfully the king his Master against me, who then was but Duke of
Orleans; it is not to be feared, but he will do the like for me henceforward,
who now am king of France. But where we find a defect of loyalty in any
toward others, it is not safe to hazard our selves upon the hope of their
amendment toward us.

-- vetabo, qui Cereris sacrum
Vulgarit arcanae, sub ijsdem
Sit trabibus, fragilemque mecum
Solvat faselum. --
It is true, that many are content to take the benefit, and advantage of a
treacherous subject against his Master, in cases of hostility; but never love
to put him in trust with any thing that concerns themselves: or if they do, it
is with more then Juno's jealousy, or Argus observation.

Charles the fifth, during the difference between the Imperialls and the
French, was willing to make what use he could, of the disloyal service of the
D. of Bourbon against his Lord and Master, Francis the first: but howsoever he
loved his actions, he never liked his person. His infidelity had purchased him
the hatred, and dislike of all men: for, after his arrival to the Emperors
Court, Caesar having entertained him with all the friendly demonstrations, that
were possible, sent afterward to desire the house of one of his Nobles for to
lodge him in: who answered the Messenger with a Castilian courage, That he
could not but satisfy his Majesty's demand: but let him know, said he,
that Bourbon shall no sooner be gone out of it, but I will burn it; as being
infected with his infamy, and thereby made unfit for men of honor to inhabit
in.

Virtue, and Vice are utter opposites: and how-so-euer many several accidents,
and occasions may bring them to some complementall enterviewe, yet is it
altogether impossible to establish a true, and perfect league of amity betwixt
them. There can be no true fellowship between Light and Darkness, between
Christ and Belial, Saint Michael and the Serpent. Where there is a difference
therefore in Religion, there is always lightly a discordancie in affection.
And hence has risen that deadly hatred between the Pagan, and the Christian:
and among Christians, between the Catholic and the Protestant, the Protestant
and the Puritan, the Puritan and others, whilst every one contends to justify
the soundness, and sincerenesse of his own: but the Lord of heaven, the
unity of trinity, unite their hearts, and minds, together in the bonds of
CHARITY, and grant that the Church may not always speak in a confounded
Dialect, to the distraction of weaker Ignorance, who is not able (among so many
divided cries) to distinguish the voice of her lawful Shepherd. The Church
of SARDIE gives out, that she alone does live: and that of LAODICEA, that she
alone does see, that she alone is clothed: whereas, the Holy-one of holy ones
pronounces of the one, that she is dead; and of the other, that she is both
blind, and naked.

But, that I may not seem to gather sweetness from every flower, wandering too
far from my propounded course; there can be lightly no great affection between
those that are of one profession, whether it be liberal, or mechanical.
Figulus figulo, says the Proverb. There can be nothing but Envy, and
Emulation between those that run at one, and the same goal, whatsoever
(whither Gain, or Honor) be the proclaimed pryze of their contention. The one
seeks continually to supplant the other, for his own advantage. Hectora
Priamide^ animosu^, atque inter Achille^
Irafuit capitalis, vt vltima diuideret mors:
Non alia^ ob causam, nisi quod virtus in vtroque
Summa fuit. --
So likewise, where there is a disproportion either in means, or minds, there
can be no other friendship, then that Microphilie, which Plato had with
Dionysius the Tyrant. Eccle. 13
Quid enim communicabit olla ad cacabum? Wherein can the earthen Pipkin benefit
the brazen Pot? Which considered, the Emperor had reason, when word was
brought him, that a certain Cardinal of the court of Rome, who before times
had much affected him, was advanced newly to the Popedom, to say, that of a
trusty friend, being a Cardinal, he would become a deadly enemy being a
Pope: and indeed, he did prognosticate aright; for it fell out according to
his expectation. Wherefore, if thou would not be deceived, (...), take one,
whose greatness may not ouerawe thee: and so when thou stand'st in need of his
assistance, thou shall not fear that co^fortlesse reply, which Abraham gave to
Dives in his torments; Nimis magnus est hiatus interte, et nos: there is too
great a distance between us and thee.

Last of all, there can be no safe or settled conversation with him, who, as the
Poet says; -- absentem rodit amicum:
Aut non defendit alio culpante: solutos
Qui captat risus hominum, famamque dicacis:
Fingere qui non visapotest: commissa tacere
Qui nequit --
Gnawes, like a Cur,
upon his absent friend,
Or from Detraction
does him not defend:
Affects profused laughter
at a feast,
And would be famous
for some biting jest:
Can feign the things,
which he did never see;
But not conceal ought
that he knows, from thee.
Hic niger est -- he carries hay in his horn; and therefore -- hunc tu Roman
caveto: avoyde his company, if thou respect thine own safety.

Of three things prejudicial to Secrecy.
HE that has made his bosom, tanquam secretorum aerariu^, as it were the
Storehouse, or Eschequer of his friends secrets, must diligently take heed of
three things, not suffering himself in any case to be vanquished by any of
them: and those are, Wine, Women, and Anger.

As for the first, Momus having taken a general survey of those infinite
deceits, which continually were bred, and fostered in the heart of man, did most
impiouslie tax his maker, and Creator, of indiscretion, in that he made not
some window open into his bosom, by which, the visual beams of our external
Sense, not meeting with an impenetrable object, might easily discover what was
done within: but we, that know the works of God to be every way so absolute,
that, as the Poet says, -- Non vllum carpere Livor
Possit opus Domini --
will with Plutarch answer him, In Sympos. lib. 3.
That we need not the profane invention of his fantastical imagination, to
make known unto us, the darker minds, and meanings one of another. Wine, says
he, does in a most abundant manner disclose our inward thoughts, and vnbare us
of that disguised, and personated habit, under the which we are accustomed to
march. The wiser sort of Princes therefore, according to that verse of Horace,
In Art Poet.
are reported, -- multis vrgere culullis,
Et torquere mero, quem perspexisse laborant,
An fit amicitia dignus. --
And indeed, the nature and disposition of man, does never lightly (as a
certain Author wittily affirms) open, and discover it self at full, but
either in oculis, loculis, or poculis.

One of the chiefest causes of the overthrow of Claudius, was a word, which
unadvisedly slipped from him in his drunkenness; to wit, vt coniugum flagitia
ferret, dein puniret: that for a while, he would bear with the intemperancies
of his wife, but in the end he would severely punish them: which, Agrippina
fearing, as fatal to herself, went presently about, for the better preventing
of her own end, to hasten his. And indeed, Il vino, non ha timone; wine, says
the Italian, has no stern. Wherefore, he that tastes of it beyond the Cup of
pleasure, puts himself in exceeding great danger of suffering shipwreck;
considering how many are the envious Rocks, and insatiable Quicksands, that
desire nothing more, then to split such vessels in sunder, that they may see,
what Merchandise the inward bulk contains. Yea, it has been the practice of
sundry Nations (and that in the persons of Ambassadors) under a pretense of
drinking healths to their Sovereign, first to drown their wisdom in their
Grecian Cups, that afterward they might draw, from them, that, which by
means of it, was before kept secret to themselves. And surely, few or none
have ever failed in this their enterprise; unless it were by ouer-hastilie
striving to effect that, which they so earnestly desired: it having then
befalne the^, as it did to Aesops Woman, who gave her hen more meat, to make
her lay more eggs: but it fell out otherwise; for, through extreme fatness,
she surceast from laying any. And no marvel the danger should be so
eminent. For, Wit is not then any longer their Pilote, nor the light of Reason
the Pole, by which their actions should be co^ducted to their wonted haven.
Judgment, and Discretion are both away; which, like two firm anchors, should
secure them in the greatest tempests, from the merciless and furious violence
both of Wind, and Wave.

Quid non ebrietas designat? says the Poet; -- operta recludit. And indeed,
That which is in the heart of the sober, is in the tongue of the drunkeard.

How many can with right apply that answer of Bias to themselves? who, being
carpt at for his silence in a certain banquet by a fellow, whose Wit had
been always Traine-bearer to his Tongue, answered only this, that silence
in Wine, was no argument, or sign of folly: to show that his taciturnitie
proceeded not from any defect, as he had falsely, and foolishly surmyzed.
Surely, there are few, that are possessed with so great, and marvailous a
moderation, and that have so absolute, and powerful a command over
themselves, as this. Wherefore, let him that is wise, keep himself from being
overtaken with the envenomed cups of this enchaunting, and sensebereaving
Circes; unless he make light account of ruinating both himself, and others.

The second thing, are Women: who with an artificial disposing of those
several beauties, wherewith Nature, desirous (as it were) to stall forth her
treasures, has prodigally adorned them, have made the spoils of the greatest
Conquerors, trophies of their victories, and led in triumph the hearts, and
minds of the wisest; and that in such manner, as he that has once suffered
himself to be captivated by the powerful attractio^ of their starry looks,
thinks nothing to be done amiss, that is done to purchase, of them, even the
least favorable aspect that may be: deeming in his fond conceit, that liberty
is no where to be found, but in the enclosure of his Mistress arms. And
because he thinks his tongue too weak an instrument to express the strength,
and vigor of his affection toward her, he makes his heart ascend up into his
eyes, thorough which, as thorough transparent glasses, he discouers unto her,
yet still thinks he discouers not enough, the very secret bedchamber of his
most retired cogitations; Not remembering (silly wretch as he is) that such
kind of creatures, have oftentimes been made the instruments, to effect the
downfall, and confusion of many: nor yet weighing with himself, the
weakness and imbecillitie of the sex: which, as it harbors in it self a
certain curious desire to know all things, so is it accompanied with a
kind of careless respect to conceal any.

They are for the most part, (...), leaking vessels: and like that Comike
servant, plenae rimarum, huc atque illuc effluentes. And therefore has the
Spirit of the Highest (the better to express the nature, and property of such
a one) allotted her, in the sacred volumes of his diuinest Oracles, the name of
Nachabah, from the word Nacab, which signifies perforare; showing us, as 't
were, that she is no fitter a vessel, then either a Sieve, or a Colander, to
have that infused into her, the loss whereof we any thing regard. A Roman
Lady was very importunate with her husband to know of him, what secret
matter had that day been handled in the Senate, with great oaths, and
protestations never to reveal it: he desirous to try her, made use of his
invention; told her that the Priests had seen a Lark flying in the air,
(...), having a golden helmet, and a lance: and how they had consulted
together, to know whether this prodigy might portend either good, or evil to
the Commonwealth. Scarce had she heard it, but presently she disclosed it to
one of her maids; the maid to another of her fellows: so that the report was
spread, and known throughout the whole Palace, before he came thither himself:
but all of them are not made in the same mould. There is, sometimes, plus
virtutis in stola, quam in armis.

Nero, after the detection of Piso's conspiracy, remembering that Epicharis was
likewise of the Faction, commanded she should presently be set upon the
rack; imagining, says Tacitus, muliebre corpus impar dolori, that being a
Woman, she would never be able to overcome the pain. But all the tortures
that either he, or his could possibly devise, were not sufficient to draw from
her, the least confession of any thing, that was then objected against her. The
first days quaestion she so utterly contemned, that the very chair, in which
they conveyed her from the place, did seem as a Chariot, whereon she rid
triumphing over the barbarous assaults of their inhumane cruelty. The morrow
following, being brought thither again, to play her Maister-pryze with
impious Tyranny, her courage (after many rough encounters) remained so
unshaken, that Wrath it self grew mad, to see the strokes of an obstinate, and
unrelenting fury, fall so in vain upon the softer temper of a Woman; and
thereupon, did add new vigor to the hands of her tormentors: which she
perceiving, took a scarf from about her neck, and with it (to manifest their
weakness in her fall) knits up within her bosom the knowledge she had of
the fact, together with that little remainder of Spirit, whereof by force and
violence they labored to deprive her. Clariore exemplo (says our Historian)
in tanta necessitate alienos, ac prope ignotos, protegendo, cum viri,
Senatores, and equites Romani, intacti tormentis, clarissima quaeque suorum
pignorum proderent.

Former ages have likewise produced a Portia, and a Leaena; the remembrance of
whose virtue, shall remain for ever, as an exemplary precedent to all
Posterity. For, after her 2. lovers, Armodius and Aristogiton, having failed
in the execution of their enterprise, had been put to death, she was brought to
the torture, to be made declare, what other Accomplices there were of the
Conspiracy: but she continued so constant, that she never detected any one. In
remembrance of which fact, the Athenians caused a Lion of brass to be erected,
which had no tongue, and placed it at the entrance of a Castle: showing her
invincible courage by the generositie of the beast; and her perseverance in
secrecy, in that they made it without a tongue. Sed non omne mare
generosae est fertile testae.
Every soil aboundes not with golden oar; nor every channel with precious
pearls: wherefore, it behooues a man to be very circumspect, and wary in
opening himself to any of them, till sufficient trial shall have manifested
the soundness of their disposition. But (alas!) -- quid deceat, non videt
vllus amans. Awake Samson, the Philistines are upon thee, so often repeated,
was a sufficient aviso of intended treachery; had not the Eye of Reason, with
the ravishing sound of Dalilah's voice, as was Argus with the delightful tunes
of Mercuries pipe, been lulled asleep in the lap of heedlesse Sensuality. He
must needs tell her (so far had the force of her enticing tongue prevailed with
him) wherein it was that his strength consisted, though the hazard of his life
(by revealing it) were never so eminent.

Antonie cannot choose, but yield himself a prisoner in the height of his
conquest, to the imperious looks of Cleopatra, though the shameful eclypse of
his glory, be the sequel of his folly. Curious, to make himself gracious in
the eyes of his Fulvia, will, who-so-euer says nay, disclose unto her, the
secret plots and practices of Catiline, though himself have as deep a hand in
them as he. The Prior of Capua, can no sooner purpose any thing against the
state of the Venetians, but his loue-sick soldier will presently give notice
of it to his Curtizan, and she to the Senate.

It is the nature of high-aspiring spirits, always to affect that company,
where they may be most eminent: and therefore usually, they make choice of
Women to frequent withal; imagining that whatsoever they do, or say, will be
esteemed, and wondered at by them: whereupon, to make their admiration more
extreme, they will not let to acquaint them even with their highest thoughts:
and the^, the opinion that they are beloved, begets a fearelesse confidence of
secrecy; whereby, whatsoever they intend to do, shall be disclosed unto them.

They must of necessity, now and then, out of the humor of their jollities,
give vent unto the smoke of their Ambition: and then, out comes that, which
racks nor tortures could ever have revealed. Yea, these are the creatures their
wisdoms deem most fit to impart their high-built purposes unto; who, either
for love, or want of wit, will willingly (they think) conceal, what ever they
hear.

But (alas!) woeful experience has taught many, that they levelled (in so
conceiting of them) at a wrong mark. Wherefore, let us, with David, make a
covenant with our eyes; and, like Alexander, not vouchsafe so much as to glance
a look upon the daughters of Darius, least we be made the spoil of their
beauty. For indeed, the pregnant force of wisdom, is hardly to be presumed
upon in this case. Nescio quid latentis veneni, says an ancient father, habet
caro foeminea, vt prudentiores citius corrumpat. And hence proceeded that
pleasant Motto of the Grecian Courtizan, in derision of those bearded Stoiks,
Qui curios simulant,
et Bacchanalia vivunt;
that in public places seem to be as grave as Saturn, but in private corners
are as waggish as Jupiter: I know not, J, said she, what books, what wisdom,
what Philosophy; but sure I am, such manner of men knock at my gates as often as
any other. They are Angels in complexion: but if they be not the like in
condition, let him esteem of them no better then of whited Sepulchers; for all
this while they be but Semipulchrae. They have a face to beguile the Eye, and
an Eye to bewitch the Heart: yea, there is not any one thing in them, or about
the^, but is (though a silent, yet) a forcible Solicitor of man's Will.

The Creator of all things, did frame her exquisitlie beautiful, to please
man; and the Devil made use of her perfection, to deceive him. They have
caused many to fall down wounded. Prove. 7. ver. 26. and the strong men are all
slain by them. Their lips drop as an hony-combe, and their mouth is more soft
then Oil: but the end of the^ is bitter as Wormwood, and sharp as a twoedged
sword: their feet go down to death, and their steps take hold on hell. Yea, GOD
himself (the searcher of all hearts, and who alone intuitiuelie knows all
things) has even from heaven assured us, by that mirror of true wisdom,
Solomon, Prove. 6. v. 26. that the precious life of man, is the only thing,
which like bloodthirsty Tigers, they most eagerly hunt for: and therefore, not
without just cause, did he add to their style, in regard of their
proceedings, the attribute of strange. Prove. 5.3.

The Hebrew word, Zonah, signifies not only Meretrix, but withal, Caupona,
and Arma: from whence we may gather the craft, and subtlety of her practices,
as she is Meretrix, in affecting the downfall, and overthrow, of such as are
earnest, and devoted followers of her sect. First, she is Caupona, and then
Arma. First she feeds, and satisfies their desires, with the daintiest dishes
that possibly she can; giving the^ the best entertainment, that an affected
countenance and gesture can afford: but when they once draw near the Lees,
then begin they to be minus grati, less welcome unto her; and that for no
other reason, quam quod inopia minus largire possu^t, then that Poverty has
cut the wings of their former Bounty: then are her sweet words converted
into sharp swords; so that look whatsoever she knows by thee, or has at any
time known from thee, that she thinks may procure thy overthrow, shall now be
revealed. She is become Arma, she is become a weapon to destroy thee.

I speak not, all this while, of such as heaven has allotted men for
companions, to beguile the tediousness of this their earthly pilgrimage,
linking them together in love, and unity, by the bond of an honorable and
lawful Hymen: Though even in those, considering them as one, and the
selfsame body, it is not always requisite, that the left hand should know,
what the right hand does. Seianus had no better means to work the tragic
overthrow of Drusus, who, like a dangerous rub, hind'red the smoother running
of his ambitious thoughts, then by assaulting her, whose bosom he had made, as
't were, the Cabinet of his inmost purposes. For, after he had tried many
things, promptissimu^ visum, says Tacitus, ad vxore^ eius Livia^ convertere;
the readiest way he found, was to set upon his wife: wherein he sped so well,
that, corrupta illa, secreta eius prodebantur; from her he had intelligence of
all his secrets. The night it self could not secure him; for, even the^ did
she observe his vp-sitting, and his down-lying, leaving not so much as his
sighs vnregistred, vigilias, somnos, suspiria patefecit: she betrayed him
wholly to his enemy. It was Esops lesson therefore, Commit no secrets to the
concealment of a Woman; which the Poet secondeth in this manner: Creed rate^
ventis; animu^ ne creed puellis:
Namque est foeminea tutior vnda fide.


Octavius Caesar, found a want of this principle in his friend Mecaenas; who,
being somewhat more vxorious then was meet, and one who (as Seneca said of him
in his Epistles) having but one wife, was married yet a thousand times,
revealed to his Terentia a secret, that Caesar had imparted to him, concerning
the detection of Muraena's conspiracy; by which means it was suddenly
vented, and became of no importance. And Augustus imputed this Eccho-like
disposition of reiterating vvhat-so-euer is heard, to Fulvius, as the true
Symptom of a distempred, and unsettled judgment. For, having disclosed unto
him the grief, which he conceived, concerning the succession of his Livia's
children in the Empire, for want of issue of his own; Fulvius went and related
it to his wife, and she again to Livia, who sharply reprehended the Emperor
her husband for it: whereupon, the morrow after, coming to salute him with
Salvus sis Caesar, he was requited with Sanus sis Fulvi.

But, least I seem an uncivil, and snarling Satyrist, in taxing (without
exception) a Sex in general, I will add (in praise of some particulars) that
saying of Menander, (...): Penu virtutis, generosa mulier. And though neither
Cato, nor Euripides were so fortunate, as ever to be partakers of so great a
happiness, which indeed incited them to fasten those undeserved imputations
upon the^, that they did; yet Rubius Celer is able to avouch it, against the
strongest opposer of them all: who, as him self commanded to be engraven
upon his Monument, lived with Caia Ennia his wife, 43. years 8. months; and
that, Sine querela: without any difference, complaint, or jarre.

The third, and last thing, which is to be refrained, is Anger. Seianus
heartned Drusus against his brother Nero, and made him an instrument, to hinder
him from succeeding Tiberius in the Empire: yet in such manner, as he did not
forget to lay the groundwork likewise of his future overthrow: but he did not
seem to hasten it at all; gnarus, says Tacitus, praeferoce^ et insiaijs magis
opportunu^: knowing, as experience teaches, that the fiercest courage does
always lie most open to treacherous attempts. Fabius therefore, notwithstanding
the provocations of his enemies, and the exprobrations of his friends, who, not
sounding aright the depth of his proceedings, challenged him (by reason of his
protractions and delays) of base and servile cowardice, would never be diverted
from that course, which in his own reason and judgment, he thought surest,
and fittest to recreate the ill-affected forces of the Empire: and indeed, si
tantum ausus esset, quantum ira suadebat, it had utterly been subverted. For,
Anger is prone to rashness; and, so it endanger others, cares not for securing
it self. Wherefore, it were not amiss for any man, to imitate those ancient
Champions, whose policy like to Fabius, was only to ward the blows of their
adverse parties, till such time as they perceived their strength in assaulting
to be well-nigh spent; never using to strike, themselves, when wrath persuaded
them, but when Occasion.

The wakefull Eye of Reason must continually keep Sentinel over his Passions:
and settled Patience must be the Fort, that must protect him from the furious
battry of all incensing, and blooddisturbing speeches whatsoever. They are
charms of a cunning Charmer: against which, if (like the wiser Adder) he stop
not his ear, his utter ruin cannot choose but instantly follow. For they are
used, either to avert him from some course he has already undertaken, which
in the end, being thoroughly followed, would prove prejudicial to the^, as by
the fore-alledged example of Fabius, may be easily discerned; or to vrge-him
thereby, to manifest some part of his most inward, and private thoughts: whereof
the Poet being nothing ignorant, does most elegantly call Passions, tortures;
whereby men are urged, and enforced to confess their secrets: Hor. Epistl.
lib. 1 Epist. 18.
-- Et vino tortus, et ira. Tiberius, Annal. 4.
who, as Tacitus reports, nullam aeque ex virtutibus suis, quam dissimulationem
diligebat, feeling himself stung with a sharp invectiue of Agrippina,
concerning the accusation of Claudia Pulchra, her Cosen germane, came a step
forth of his dissimulation, when he said, You are hurt, because you do not
reign. Of which, our Historian says: Audita haec raram occulti pectoris vocem
elicuere, correptamque Graeco versu admonuit, ideo laedi, quia non regnaret.
And Catiline, qui ad omnia dissimulanda paratus, did likewise err in this.
For, had he prosecuted his first dessigne (which was, with an outward and
forced appearance of true humility, expressed by the liueliest characters he
could, both in his gesture, countenance, and words, to dash the accusations of
his Adversaries, and to insinuate himself into the love, and favor of the
Senate) he might peradventure (having freed himself by this means from all
sinister conceit of theirs) easily have effected his purpose. But, when he
heard those odious titles of Enemy, and Paricide, cast upon him by the
fullmouth'd multitude, then Quia circumventus ab inimicis praeceps agor,
incendium meu^ ruina extinguam must needs discover the mark of his
disordinate Ambition, and make known unto the world, what massacrous, and
impious thoughts, had (notwithstanding his smooth external carriage) anchred in
his bosom.

Wherefore, let every man endeavor, by all means possible, to calm, and
allay, those sudden, and tempestuous motions of the mind; and to be that
which few are, so true to himself, and so settled, that at no time, either upon
heat, or upon braverie, or upon kindness (as I showed before) or upon trouble
of mind, and weakness, he open himself, or suffer his tongue to eliminate
any part of his thoughts: no, not though he should be put to it by a
Counter-dissimulation; which is a fashion of enquiry, very current with many,
who will not stick, according to the Spanish Adage, Dezir mentira, para sacar
verdad; to tell a lie, for to extort a truth.

Of Reputation.
THere is nothing more hard, and difficult to com by, the^ a true and certain
knowledge of the inward disposition, and abilities of man. His mind is subject
to many secret inclinations: 't is like a Labyrinth, full of crooked windings,
and turnings. His deeds, words, and gestures, are never lightly beautified,
but with some outward imposture: they are fraught with vanity, and deceit:
and, like that specious Fig Tree in the Gospel, do make a glorious flourish,
but afford no fruit.

The silly Sheep (said Archidamas) can never change his natural voice: but
man can alter, and fashion his, to as many several, and sundry Dialects, as he
please, till such time as his Ambition have attained to that, which it desired.

Some have been thought vvoorthie of advauncement, save when they had it: and
some again, have purchased to themselves good reputation, and been well
esteemed in place of Greatness, which before were otherwise.

It has been often seen, that such as became a meaner part well, have failed
in a greater, and disgraced it. Hence was it that Galba, mayor privato visus,
dum privatus fuit, et omnium consensu capax imperij, nisi imperasset: when he
was a private subject, did seem to out-runne the meandness of his fortune;
and, by a general consent of all men, was thought worthy to rule, if he had
never ruled: whereas, the contrary was bruted of Vespasian, to wit, that,
omnium ante se principum in melius mutatus, of all the Princes that ever did
precede him, he alone was changed to the better: which may be likewise
instanced upon the Son of Bullingbrooke, entitled after the decease of his
Father, Henry the fifth of England. Ignorance, therefore, is of too dull an
apprehension to censure aright the nature of men's actions. She depriueth
Reason of her discursiue faculty, and frames her judgment, according to the
illiterate verdict, that ouward Sense gives of them. And hence comes it
oftentimes, that many are reputed wise, and valiant, who, were the ground of
their so co^ceited merit well examined, would seem the contrary. True Valor
consists not in being desperately ventrous. It is not the love of virtue, but
the hate of life, that makes men so. Antigonus had a Soldier, whose
forwardnes upon any dangerous service he much admired; and therefore having
understood, that he was troubled with an Impostume in his body, gave his
Chirurgians express command to see him diligently cured: which done,
Antigonus perceived, that he showed not himself so valiant as he was wont,
and thereupon rebuk't him for it: but the Soldier answered him, that he
might blame himself; for it was he, that had made him less hardy then he
was before, in causing him to be cured of those ills, which had made him
altogether careless of his life. And hither may that speech of the Sibaritans,
concerning the Lacedaemonians austerer kind of living, be well referred: That
it was no marvel, they sought for death so furiously in the wars,
considering how laboursome, and strict a life, they did endure at home: Rebus
in angustis facile est contemnere vita^. And therefore, that Reputation which
is purchased this way, cannot possibly be of any long continuance. It is a
vapor, drawn out of the earthy bosom of Popular admiration, which, where the
rays of cleerer Apprehension do shine out, is suddenly dispersed. True Virtue
is always like herself, she squares with every accident, and keeps a just
proportion in all her actions. She will not fear to die, as Cato did, though
Caesar were her dearest friend. Such therefore, as being in the prime, and
flower of their youth, do seem content with every breath of honor; and, after
they have gained some little reputation in the world, betake themselves
immediately upon it, to a retired life, confining their so begun fortune,
within the bounds of some solitary Mansion: it is to be suspected, they were
generous but only in appearance, and that the consciousnesse, and distrust of
their own weakness, made them withdraw themselves from action, least by
their insufficient managing of matters, they might happily lose that
accidental glory, which upon no certain principles they had formerlie got.
For, honor serves but as a sawee, to whet the appetite of those, whose hearts
are firm, and of a noble, and vnyeelding temper. It is a gale, which bears
the^ speedily to the undertaking of every haughty enterprise. The praise of
having well conducted the course of one, is a bayte, which draws them on to
the vnder-going of another.

Hercules, in his travails, vvil not leave so much as Hell vnvisited: but even
upon the gates thereof, will strive to erect a trophy to his triu^phant merit.
Yea, in military matters, the report of any one thing valorously executed,
especially upon the beginning of an employment, is that, which makes a smooth,
and easy passage for future attempts. It is a means to drive the wavering
affection of ambiguous friends to a certain stand, and to bring forth an
increase of love in the hearts, and minds of such, as are firm, and loyal. It
works a willing Obedience in thy whole Army, and procures thee means, and
munition, with store of all other warlike necessaries from thy friends and
allies, and that without pain and trouble to thy self; For, whilst every one
contends to be thought a means in the raising of thy transcending fortune,
thy worth cannot possibly want ladders by which to climb. And therefore
Domitius Corbulo, at his first coming to the government of Armenia, endeavored
to do somewhat, as Tacitus reports, vt famae inserviret, that in those parts
might purchase him the credit, and reputation of sufficiency; which in nevve
businesses is most availeable. And Julius Agricola, at his first arrival into
Britain, carried himself in the like manner, non ignarus instandum famae, ac
provt prima cessissent, fore vniversa; that fame was to be follovved, and as
he sped in the first, such it was likely would his success be in the rest. But
it is here, as it is in meats: if taken immoderatly (though they be never so
nourishing) they prove a burden to the body, rather then otherwise. It is
requisite therefore, that we sometimes clip the wings of our Reputation, and
not suffer them to grow beyond the compass of our neast. Insani sapiens nomen
ferat, aequus iniqui,
Vltra qua^ satis est, virtute^ si petat ipsam.
The wiser sort will of their own accord, a little now and then, degrade the
opinion of their worth, by stripping themselves awhile of all employments. They
know there is nothing lost, by making themselves (for a time) less then they
are. Overmuch Estimation has bin the bane of many. Alcibiades, by reason of
the sundry great exploytes he had atchiued in the behalf of his Country, had
got so great an opinion of Sufficiency, that when he failed in the due
performance of any thing, he was presently suspected: every one was apt to
judge, that it was not, because he could not do it, but because he would not;
and that where-soeuer he was minded to employ himself, nothing could possibly
escape him.

Hence likewise was it, that John Guicciardine was accused to have been
corrupted by those of Lucca, because he failed in the expugnation of their
City. The safest way therefore to secure our selves from danger, is to attire
our worthiness in such manner, as it may still be the same it was in inward
substance; only altered, and disguised a little in outward show.

It is reported of Poppaeus Sabinus, Tac. Annal. lib. 6.
that for the space of 24. years, and that in the days of tyranny, he was
still made Ruler over the greatest Provinces belonging to the Empire, nullam ob
eximiam artem, not for any excellent ability that was in him; Sed quod par
negotijs, neque supra erat; but that his sufficiency did no more then equal
the charge, which was imposed upon him. And to speak plainly, Wise Men, in
the choice of instruments, are sildome willing to make use of such, in matters
of importance, whose cunning judgment, they think can sound the depth of
their intent, or, out of their employments, contriue any thing whereby to grace
themselves.

Agricola (says Tacitus) notwithstanding his many services done to the Empire,
Nunquam in suam famam gestis exsultavit, did never boast of any action to his
own fame; but (as an inferior Planet) did modestly acknowledge the light he
had, to be wholly derived from a higher Sun: thus did he steal from Envy,
and not defraude himself of his deserved glory. Germanicus likewise, having
calmed and alayed the tumultuous broils, and insurrections of the Germans,
caused a pyle of weapons to be raised, with this stately title; DEBELLATIS,
INTER RHENVM ALBIMQVE NATIONIBVS, EXERCITVM TIBERII CAESARIS EA MONIMENTA
MARTI, ET IOVI, ET AVGVSTO SACRAVISSE. That the Nations between Rhene, and
Albis being overcome, Tiberius Caesar's Army had consecrated those Moniments
to Mars, Jupiter, and Augustus: but added nothing of himself, metu invidiae,
for fear that either Envy or Detraction, might find a subject in him, for
their malicious, and envenomed teeth to gnawe upon: or thinking (as it is) the
conscience of a well-done deed, to be a sufficient recompense for the doing
it. And this it was that kept them upright, amidst the ruins of so many
Woorthies, in those unworthy times.

But (alas!) the high-erected thoughts of an ambitious heart, cannot possibly
be brought to conceive the meaning of this principle. They will always sail
by the Card and Compass of their own mind; and rather then yield in their
popular dependencies, their entertainments, gifts, or public grace, most
wilfully hazard the distaste of all men. Caesar cares for nothing, but the
execution of his dessignes; his spirit is beyond the reach of fear. If the Sea
swell in waves to let his passage to Brundusium: he swells again in words,
and bids the Mariner, Sail on, Thou carriest Caesar, and his Fortunes with
thee. And indeed, his Fortune was the only thing, that kept both him, and his
estate from being shaken, and disjoynted, by the violent events of such
resolved courses.

Of Accusation.
IT is no golden age in which we live; but an age so corrupted, and depraved,
that in comparison of others, many are esteemed virtuous, at a reasonable rate.
Yea, he is thought to do good enough, who, when he is in place of authority,
does but little ill.

Iampridem equidem rerum vocabula amisimus; Sallust: bello Catil.
quia bona aliena largire, liberalitas; malarum rerum audacia, fortitudo
vocatur. All things have undergone an alteration, both in name and nature.
Simplicity has principled her self with stronger Axioms then heretofore,
and has learned to square and order the whole course of her conversation by
an other kind of Method, then that she practiced during the harmless
infancy of the World. The silly Dove has been constrained, for her own
security, to join in friendship with the Serpent: and the Lion thinks it no
disparagement, to case his valor (if need require) under the outside of the
subtle Fox. For, Piety now is counted but a fantastic fiction: and
Vpright-dealing, but an aierie apparition. True virtuous actions, are never
seen upon the Scene, but when by the necessity of Laws, they are enforced to
show themselves. For, where election abounds, and that all liberty may be
used, every thing is presently brought to a most irregular, and confused
motion. The Will of man is so perverted, that Goodness is sildome made the
scope of his dessignes.

It is said of Catiline, that when he wanted present matter for his mischievous
mind to work upon, he was no way scrupulous to circumvent, and kill,
insontes, sicuti sontes, those that had never purchased his hateful fury by
offending him, as well as others: and least either his heart, or hand, might
happily wex numme, for want of employment, gratuito potius malus, atque
crudelis erat, he would be voluntarily cruel, and without expectance of
reward.

And what was said of him, I fear me, may be too truly justified in many.
For (alas!) the conscience of a virtuous deed, is too weak a motive to incite
our dull affections to the doing of it. It Is either hope of Reward, or fear of
Punishment, that in the attempt of things, orders, and directs our choice.
Give way but to Impunitie, and ye shall see how Vncivilitie, like a ravening
Deluge, will (on the sudden) wash away the print, and form of all Mortality.

Non sum moechus -- I am not an Adulterer, says one;

-- neque ego hercule fur, vbi vasa
Praetereo sapiens argentea. --
But, as the Satyrist affirms in the verses following, -- toll periclum,
Iam vaga prosiliet fraenis
natura remotis.


So that, for the better ordering, and preserving of a Commonwealth, 't is
very requisite, there should be such Ministers appointed in it, as may without
respect, or partiality, give Justice information of the particular proceedings
of private men. For, by this means, either the fear of being accused, will
curb their ambitious purposes, and keep them from attempting any thing
against the liberty of that State, in which they live: or, having attempted,
the accusation it self will presently suppress them. Besides, it will give
air enough for the venting forth of those pestiferous tumors and
inflammations, which thorough hatred, or emulation, are bred in the crazie
minds of ill-affected persons. Yea, there is nothing, that can more firmly
settle and establish a Commonwealth, then to order it in such manner, that the
alteration of those humors, which do travail and molest it, may find a Recipe
at home, for her recovery, prescribed by the Law.

Wherefore, if at any time we see, that in the divisions, and distractions of
an unsettled Populace, either party shall have need to rank themselves with
foreign corresponde^cie, the cause heerof may lawfully be suspected to proceed
from some manifest defect in the institution of that government. But, if with
us (as heere-to-fore in Rome, and such like Popular and Democraticall Polities
of elder times, Envy and Malice were authorized, either by Ostracisme, or any
other such specious kind of proceedings, to top the branches of a spreading
Virtue, there should not an Aristides breathe amongst us, but every base, and
illiterate groom, would strive (not knowing why perhaps) to procure his
banishment.

Nothing can escape the forked tongue of Detraction. Slander, we see, did
fasten her envenomed teeth upon the precious body of our Savior Christ himself,
and gave him not over until death; yet was his nature no way so imperfect, as
to offend. It was the advertiseme^t of Medius, a damnable Promoter, in the
court of Alex. That a man should not spare to bite the reputation of any one,
with untruths and forged accusations: for, howsoever (said he) the hurt may
happily be cured, the scar yet will still remain. And what success did follow
upon the practice of this his diabolical positio^, may easily be discovered in
the fall of Callisthenes, Parmenio, and Philotas. Wisdom therefore and
moderation, should continually sit in the ears of Greatness, and there most
carefully distinguish between Truth and Falsehood, between a lawful accusation,
and that which is fained.

It was an easy matter (considering the suspicious nature of Tiberius) for
Caepio Crispinus, who (as Tacitus reports) by humouring his bloody mind, with
close, and scandalous delations, had set a golden outside upon his formerlie
dejected and ragged fortunes, to call the life of Innocence it self in
question. He ouerthrewe Marcellus, by accusing him to have spoken somewhat
sinisterly of Caesar, which then (says our Historian) was accounted an
inevitable crime; by reason that the Accuser did (by continual observing)
gather out of the vicious carriage, and disposition of the Prince, whatsoever
was most vile, and apt to be reproch't, and upon that did frame and fashion his
Inditeme^ts, Nam quia vera erant, etiam dicta credeba^tur. For, every thing was
prone to be believed, because 't was known to be deserved. But, howsoever
barbarous and inhumane Tyrants, may think by countenauncing such Sycophants,
to secure themselves, and their estates; yet milder Princes will warily avoid
them. Ambitious Usurpation, has bin seen to cut the throat of lawful
Sovereignty, and (afterward) to seat it self by this means, in the chair
of Majesty.

K. Richards banishing of Mowbray, upon the difference between him and
Bullingbrooke, was his own deposing. The Emperor Valentinian II. having
caused Aetius to be executed, demanded afterward of Proximus, how he approov'd
the fact: who answered, that he knew not whither he had lawfully put him to
death, or no; but sure he was, that by so doing, with his own left hand, he
had cut off his right. Which happened shortly after to be very true; for he was
slain by Maximus, a Roman Patrician, whose treacherous attempts, during the
life of Aetius, were so over-awed, that they durst never offer so much as once
to show themselves. Alexander had deprived himself of a true and faithful
Physician, if he had suffered himself to be led away with the reports, and
iealousies of others. It Is therefore requisite, some exemplarie punishments
should be inflicted upon those, that spightfully endeavor to soil, and
black, the reputation of any man, with the filthy slime of their malicious and
viperous jaws. For, otherwise, the silly Lamb shall never drink at the
fountain, but the greedy Wolf will accuse him without cause, and devour him
without law.

Let Haman hang upon the gallows, which by his command was erected for the
death of Innocence: let those rank and Goatish-eyed Elders, undergo that
cruel sentence, which their unsatisfied Lust, had wickedly co^triv'd against a
spotless Chastity. Finally, let the Prophet Daniel be quit; and those, which
falsely did accuse him, be condemned by Darius to the Lions den.

-- Neque n. Lex iustior vlla est,
Qua^ necis artifices art perire sua.
FINIS.

