A hundredth good points of Husbandry, lately married unto a Hundredth good
points of Huswifery: newly corrected and amplified with diverse proper lessons
for Householders, as by the table at the latter end, more plainly may appear:
Set forth by Thomas Tusser Gentle man, servant to the right honorable Lord
Paget of Beudesert.

In aedibus Richardi Tottylli Cum priuilegio. Anno. 1570.

The Preface.
WHat look thou here for to have?
Trim verses, thy fancy to please?
Of Surry (so famous) that crave,
Look nothing but rudeness in these.
What other thing look thou then?
Grave sentences herein to find?
Such Chaucer has twenty and ten,
Ye thousands to pleasure thy mind.
What look ye, I pray you? show what,
Terms painted with rethorike fine?
Of makers of English look that,
But never in me nor in mine.
What look thou then at the last?
Good lessons for thee and thy wife?
Then keep them in memory fast,
From youth, to the last of thy life.
What look ye for more in my book?
Things needful in time for to come?
Else miss I of that I do look,
If pleasant thou find not some.
The commodities of husbandry.
Let house have to fill her,
Let land have a tiller.
No dweller, what good does the house for to stand?
What profit uninhabited, brings the land?
No labor, no meat,
No host, dye in streate.
No husbandry used how soon shall we sterue?
House keeping neglected, what comfort to serve?
Ill father no gift,
No knowledge, no thrift.
The father an unthrift, what hope to the son?
The ruler unskillful, how quickly undone?
As true as thy faith,
Thus husbandry says.
The praise of husbandry.
I Seem but a drudge, yet I pass any king,
To such as can use me great wealth I do bring.
Since Adam first lived, I never did dye,
When Noe was a sea man there also was I.
The earth is my store house, the sea my fisheponde:
What they have to pleasure with, is in my hand.
what has any life, but I help to preserve,
What thing without me, but is ready to sterue?
In Woodland, or Champion, City or town,
If I be long absent, what falls not down?
If I be long present, what goodness can want,
Though things at my coming, were never so scant.
Of such as do love me (what need to recite)
(Ye though of the poorest) who^ make I not knight.
Great Kings I do succor, else wrong it would go:
The King of all kings has appointed it so.
To the right honorable and my special good Lord and master the Lord Paget
of Beudesert.
T TIme tries the truth in every thing,
H How ever man does blase his mind:
O Of works, which best may profit bring.
M Men apt to judge be often blind.
A As therefore truth in time does crave:
S So let this book just favor have.
T Take you my Lord, and Master than,
V Unless mischaunce mischaunceth me:
S Such homely gift of me your man,
S Since more in court I may not be.
A And let your praise won heretofore,
R Remain abroad for evermore.
M My serving you, thus understand,
A And God his help, and yours withal,
D Did cause good luck to take mine hand
E Erecting one most like to fall.
M My serving you I know it was,
E. Enforced this to come to pass.
Since being once at Cambrige taught,
Of Court ten years I made assay.
No music then was left unsought,
Such care I had to serve that way.
My joy began slack, then made I change,
Expulsed mirth, for music strange.
My music since has been the plough,
Entangled with some care among,
The gain not great, the pain enough,
Has made me sing another song,
Which song if well I may auow,
No man I crave to judge but you.
Your servant Thomas Tussar.

To the Reader.
I Have been prayde
to show mine aid,
in taking pain
not for the gain,
but for good will
to show such skill
as show I could:
That husbandry
with huswifery
(as Cock and Hen
to Country men)
all strangeness gone
might join in one
as lovers should.
I trust both this
performed is,
and how that here
if shall appear,
that I by prouse
to thy behouse
have brought to pass?
That such as wiue,
and feign would thrive,
may here be taught
almost for naught,
to judge and spy
of husbandrye
as in a glass.
What should I gain,
to show in vain
my losses past,
that ran more fast,
than running stream,
from reame to reame,
that flees so swift:
For that I could
not get for gold
to teach me how,
as this do you,
so plain a way
from day to day
to come by thrift
What is a grote
(or twain) to note,
once in thy life
for man and wife,
to save a pound
in house and ground
each other week?
What more for wealth?
what more for health?
what needs less,
run Jack help Besse,
to stay amiss
thou having this
not for to seek.
I do not crave
more thanks to have,
than given to me,
al ready be:
but this is all
that such as shall
peruse this book:
That for my sake
they gently take
what ere they find
against their mind,
when he or she
shall minded be
thereon to look.
FINIS.
The description of Husbandry.
OF husband does husbandry challe^ge that name,
of husbandry husband does likewise the same.
Where huswife and huswiferie ioineth with these,
there weith in abundance is gotten with ease.
The name of a husband, what is it to say?
of wife and of household the band and the stay.
Some husbandly thriueth that never had wife,
yet scarce a good husband in goodness of life.
The husband is he that to labor does fall,
the labor of him I do husbandry call.
If thrift by that labor be any way caught,
then is it good husbandry, else is it naught.
So household and housholdrie I do define,
for folk and the goods that in house be of thine.
Houskeping to them as a refuge is set,
which like as it is, so report it does get.
Thus household and huswiferie lovers must be,
with husband and huswife: yea further we see,
Housekeping and husbandry (if they be good)
must love one another as cosins in blood.
The Ladder to thrift.
1
TO take thy calling thankfully,
To shun the path to beggary.
2
To grudge in youth no drudgerie,
To come by penny luckely.
3
To get more to it wittily.
To keep thy gettings covertly.
4
To spend at first but nigardly,
To lay for age continually.
5
To hark to profit earnestly,
To currey fauell willingly.
6
To get good plot to occupy,
To store and use it husbandly.
7
To get good wife for company,
To live in wedlock honestly.
8
To store thy house with housholdrie,
To make provision thriftilie.
9
To join to wife good family,
To keep no more but nedefully.
10
To govern household skilfully,
To suffer none live ydely.
11
To courage wife in huswifery,
To use well doers gentely.
12
To buy and sell with policy,
To meddle not with pylferie.
13
To keep thy touch substancially,
To make thy bonds advisedly.
14
To use thy neighbor neighbourly,
To use no friend deceitfully.
15
To take good heed of surety,
To love to live at liberty.
16
To hate to live vnthriftylye,
To stop thy mouth fro perjury.
17
To win thy foe by honestye,
To undermine his subtlety.
18
To answer stranger courteously,
To keep thy doings secretly.
19
To do thy doings orderly,
To play the subject subiectly.
20
To trouble no man wilfully,
To hinder no man wittingly.
21
To offer no man villainy,
To stay a mischief spedilye.
22
To keep that thine is manfully,
To live by all men quietly.
23
To think well in adversity,
To do well in prosperity.
24
To get good love and amity,
To help relieve the poverty.
25
To keep good hospitality.
To hate all prodigality.
26
To keep thy self fro maladye,
To ease thy sickness spedely.
27
These be the steps unfeignedly,
To clymbe to thrift by husbandry.
XXiiii. Lessons always to be observed.
1
GOd never sent mouth, but he sent it meat,
who doing his will ever wanted to eat?
Love God above al things, who althings does give,
show love to thy neighbor, and lay for to live,
2
True wedlock best is, for avoiding of sin,
the bed undefiled much honor does win.
Though love be in chosing far better than gold,
let love come with somewhat the better to hold.
3
Where couples agree not is rancour and strife.
where such be together is never good life:
Where couples in wedlock do lovely agree,
there foysen remains if wisdom there be.
4
Who looks to mary must lay to keep house,
for love may not always be plaiyng with dowse.
If Children increase and no house of thine own,
what trouble it is, to thy self shall be known.
5
Good husbands that loves good houses to keep,
be often full careful when others do sleep:
To spend as they may, or to stop at the furst,
for running behind hand, or fear of the wurst.
6
Then count with thy cofers when harvest is in,
thy Cards being told, how to save or to win:
Of tone of them both, if a savor we smell,
house keeping is godly where ever we dwell.
7
Make money thy drudge for to follow thy warke,
make wisdom controller, good order thy Clarke:
Provision Cater, and skill to be Cook,
make Steward of all, pen, ink and thy book.
8
Make hunger thy sause as a medicine for health,
make thirst to be Butler as Phisyke for wealth.
Make eye to be Vssher, good usage to have,
make bar to be Porter to stop out a knave.
9
Make Husbandry Baylye, abroad to provide,
make huswiferie daily at home for to guide.
Make Cofer fast looked, thy treasure to keep,
make house to be suer the safer to sleep.
10
Make Bandog thy watchman to bark at a thief,
make courage (for like) to be captain chief,
Make trapdoore thy Bulwark, make Bell to begin,
make gunstone and arrow show who is within.
11
The Husband he trudgeth to bring in the gains,
the Huswife she drudgeth refusing no pains.
Though Husband without be to count ye wot what
the Huswife within is as needful as that.
12
What helps in store, to have never so much,
half lost by ill usage, ill huswiues and such?
So twenty lode bushes cut down at a clap,
such head may be taken shall stop but a gap.
13
With some upon Sundaies their tables do reke,
and half the weke after their dinners to seek:
At no time to much, but have always enough,
is housholdly fare, and the guise of the Plough.
14
Each day to be feasted what husbandry worse?
each day for to feast is as ill for the purse.
Yet measurely feasting with neighbors among.
shall make thee beloved and live the more long.
15
Make handsomely all things as cause ye do see.
but build not for glory that think to thee:
Who fondly in doing consumes his stock*
in the end for his doing does get but a mock
16
Spend none but thine own howsoever thou spend
for bribing and shifting have never good end.
Tithe truly for all thing, with God do not wrest,
the just in his dealing God prospers best.
17
At sometime to borow esteem it no shame,
if justly thou kepest thy touch for the same.
Who quick be to borow, and slow be to pay,
their credit is naught go they never so gay.
18
Who living but lendes? and be lended they must,
else forty years purchase might lie in the dust:
But crafty and naughty that desperate are,
make many full honest the worser to fare.
19
Use Legem pone to pay at thy day,
Oremus (to bear with thee) use not (I say)
But Presta quesumus out at a grate,
of all other Collectes, the lender does hate.
20
Leave Princes affairs vntalked upon,
and tend to such doings as stands thee on.
Although that thy substance be never so much,
delight not in parasites, harlots, and such.
21
Keep truly thy Saboth the better to speed,
keep servant fro gadding but when it is need.
Keep Fish day and fasting day, when they do fall,
what custom thou kepest let others keep all.
22
Pay wekely thy workme^ their households to feed
pay quarterly servants to buy what they need.
Give garment to such as deserve and no more,
least thou and thy wife without garment do go.
23
Beware raskabilia slothful to wurke,
proloyners and filchers that loves to lurk.
Away with such lubbers so loath to take pain,
that spends a shilling for one penny gain.
24
Good wife and good children, are worthy to eat,
good servant, good labourer, earneth their meat.
Good friend, and good neighbor, that fellowly gest
with welcome at al times should have of the best.
A hundredth good points of husbandrye.
August.
1
WHen harvest is ended, take ship or go ride,
for saltfish and stockfish for Lent to provide.
To buy them at first as they come to the rode,
shall pay for thy charges thou spendest abroad.
2
Choose wisely thy saltfish not burnt at the stone,
buy such as be good, or else let them alone:
Get home that is bought, and go stacke it up dry,
with pease straw between it the saffer to lie.
3
(Thou going abroad) bid thy folk to make speed,
to compest thy Barley land when it is need:
One acre well compest, excedeth some three,
thy Barn shall at harvest declare it to thee.
4
This good shall be learned by riding about,
the prices of vitailes, the year thoroughout:
Both what to be selling, and what to refrain,
and what for to buy, to be likely to gain.
5
Though buying and selling, does wonderful well,
to him that has knowledge to buy and to sell:
Yet chopping and changing I can not commend,
with knave and his fellow, for fear of ill end.
6
The rich in their bargaining need not be taught,
of feller and buyer fro far they be taught:
Yea herein consists a part of the text,
who buyet at first hand, and who at the next.
7
At first hand he buyeth that paieth all down,
at second that has not so much in the town,
At third hand he buyeth that all borow must,
at his hand who buyeth shall pay for his lust.
8
As often as ye bargain for better or wurse,
let always one bargain remain in the purse.
Good credit does well, but thy credit to keep,
is pay and dispatch him or ever ye sleep.
9
Be mindful abroad of the Mihelmas spring,
for thereon depends a husbandly thing.
When ge^tles use walking with Hawks on their hands,
good husbands by grasing do purchase their lands.
10
Thy market dispatched turn home again round,
least gaping for penny thou losest a pound.
Provide for thy wife (else look to be shent)
good milchcow for Winter, an other for Lent.
11
In travailing homewarde, buy.xl. good Crones.
and fat up the bodies of those sely bones.
Leave milking and dry up old Mulley thy Cow,
the crooked and aged to fatting put now.
12
Get downn with thy brakes, ere ye showers do come,
that cattle the better may pasture have some.
In June and in August, as well does appear,
is best to mow Brakes, of all times in the year.
Wife pluck fro thy karle, thy fimble hemp clean,
this looks more yellowe, the other more grene.
Take this to thy usage, leave Michel the other,
for shoethreede, for halter, for rope and such other.
While wormwood has sede, get a bu^del or twain
to save against March, to make flea to refrain.
Where chamber is swept, and ye wormwood is strowne,
no flea for his life, dare abide to be known.
Get gryest to the Mill, to have plenty in store.
least Millers lack water as many do more.
The meal the more yealdeth, if servant be true,
if Miller that tolleth take noue but his due.
Pare Saffron between the two saint Mary days
or set, or go shift it, that know the ways:
What year will ye shift it, the better to yield?
the fowerth in the gardeyne, the third in the field.
In having but forty foot cunningly dight,
take Saffron enough for the house of a knight.
All winter time after (as practice does teach)
what plot can be better thy linen to bleahce.
13
Some ploweth, some burns their wheat stubble low
some after their barley, lay wheat for to sow.
Which ever thou mindest, now time it is best,
else spare it for Cattle and so let it rest.
14
Some uses the first year his fallow to make,
the next to sow Barley the better to take:
The third year his peason, the same year his wheat,
then fallow again or to pasture for neat.
15
Still crop upon crop many farmours do take,
and gain little money for gredynesse sake,
Though wheat after Barley a cropper be found,
no cropper count Pease but a comfort to ground.
16
Ere winter does come while the wether is good,
for gutting thy pasture, get home with thy wood.
Now carry thy gravel to fill up a hole,
thy timber, thy furzen, thy turffe, and thy cole.
17
House sedges and turffe, chip and cole of the land
pyle tallwood and billet, stacke all that has band.
Root, block, pole and bough, set upright to the thetche,
the nerer more handsome in winter to fetch.
18
At Bartilmew tide, or at Sturbrege fair,
buy all thing that needs thy house to repair.
Then sell to thy profit thy butter and chese,
who sells it sohner, the more he does lose.
September.
19
THresh sede and to fanning, the plough may not lie
September does bid ye be sowing of Rye.
Go harrow the ridges, ere ever ye strike,
this point of good husbandry Suffolk does like.
20
Take heed to thy man in his fury and heat,
with whipstock and ploughstaffe for maiming thy neat
To thresher for hurting thy beast with his flaile,
or making thy hen to play tapple up tail.
21
Sow winter corn timely to follow his last,
sow wheat as ye may, but sow Rye in the dust.
Be careful for seed, or else such as you sow,
look justly and surely to reap or to mow.
22
Thy seed being sown, waterforow thy ground
that rain when it comes may run away round.
Then out we thy slinges, we thine arrows and bows,
til ridges be green, set a boy to keep crows.
23
Saint Mighel does bid thee, amend thy marshwal
the breck, and the crabhole, the foreland and all,
One noble in season, bestowed thereon,
may save thee an hundredth, ere winter be gone.
24
Go geld with the gelder, the Ram, and the bull,
buy Cattle for Rowen, sell webster thy wull.
Thy Hoppes go and gather, but not in the dew,
and crabbes and thy walnuttes for feate of a shrew.
Now burn up the Bees, of the Hiue that ye drive,
at Midsomer drive them and save them alive.
Allow them one cottage set Southly and warm,
and take for thy labor twice yearly a swarm.
25
At Mighelmas safely, go stye up thy Bore,
least mast being plenty, thou see him no more,
The leaner thou put thy Bore into stye,
the sounder he proves, this proved have I.
26
To look to thy mast, it shall stand the upon,
set servants to gether, ere mast be all gone.
Some left among bushes, shall pleasure thy swine,
for fear of a mischief keep Acornes fro Kine.
27
For rowting thy pasture, ring hogs thou have need
which being well ringed, the better do feed.
The young with the elder, will ever keep best,
then yoke well the greatest and favor the rest.
28
Yoke never thy swyne, while the acorne do last,
for diverse misfortunes, that happen to fast.
Or if that thou love whole ear on thy hog,
give eye to thy neighbor, and ear to his dog.
29
The Moon in the wane, gather fruit on the tree
less shaken more profit, for graffe, and for thee.
But Mychers that love not to buy nor to crave,
make some gather sooner, else few for to have.
October.
30
THy Rye in ye ground, while September does last,
October for Wheat sowing, calls as fast.
What ever it cost thee, what ever thou give,
have done sowing wheat, before Hallomas eve.
31
Get up with the barley land, dry as ye can,
when ever ye sow it, so look for it than.
Get always before hand, be never behind,
least Winter preventing, do hinder thy mind.
32
Sow Acornes ye owners, that Timber do love,
let Hawes be sown with them the better to prove.
If cattle or Cony, may come for to croppe,
no sooner Oak comes, but of goth his top.
33
When rain will not let thee be doing abroad,
get flayle into Barn, and to threshing good lode.
Thresh clean bid the threshers, though lesser they earn
and (looking to thrive) have an eye to the Barn.
34
If house rowme will serve thee, lay stouer up dry
and every sort by it self let it lie:
Or stacke it for litter if rowme be to poor,
and thetche out the residue for noying thy door.
November.
35 A Thallomas slaughter time enters in,
and then does the husba^dmans feasting begin:
From that time to shrouetyde, kill now and then some,
their offall for household the better shall come.
36
Both Barley and bullimong, thresh out to malt.
let Maulter be cunning, else lose it thou shall.
Thincrease of a seame, is a bushel for store,
the Barley is bad or some filcheth the more.
37
To winnow or fan, which is better we swerue
but casting is best if the flower will serve.
For seed go and cast it, for malt do not so,
but get out the Cockle, and so let it go.
38
Thresh Barley (as yet) but as need shall require,
fresh threshed for stouer, poor beast does desire.
And therefore that threshing forbear as ye can,
till Candlemas come, for to give it them than.
39
Save chafe of thy Barely, thy wheat and thy Rye,
from byrd and from foystnesse where it does lie,
First pike out the feathers, and sift out the dust,
then give it thy horses when labor they must.
40
Once every weke, go make up thy flower,
though slothful and pilferer thereat do lower.
Take tub for a season, take sack for a shift,
yet soller for grain, is the best for thy thrift.
Set Gardeine Beans after S. Edmond the king
the Moon in the wane, thereon hangs a thing,
Thincrease of a gallon, well proved of some,
shall pleasure thy household, or Pescod do come.
41
(For Easter) at Martilmas hang up a beef,
for Pease fed and stall fed, play pick purse the thief.
With that and such like, ere and grass beef come in,
thy folk shall look cherely, when others look thin.
42
When plowing is done (and no pasture to eat)
then stable thy plough horse, and tend them with meat.
Let season be dry when ye take them to house,
for danger of nittes, or for fear of a louse.
December.
43
WHen frost will not suffer to dyke nor to hedge,
then get the an heat with thy Betle and wedge.
Once Hallomas come, and a fire in thy hall,
such slyuers do well, for to lie by the wall.
44
Get grindstone and whetstone to sharpen thy tool
or else go and loyter, or let like a fool.
A Whelebarow also be sure for to have,
at hand of thy servant thy compest to save.
45
Give cattle their fodder, the plot dry and warm,
and count them for myering, or other like harm.
Young Coltes with thy wennels together go serve,
least lurched by others, they happen to sterue.
46
The rack I commend for the saving of dong,
so set as the old cannot mischief the young.
If tempest be great, or the wind in the East,
warm barth under hedge, is a comfort to beast.
47
Get trustye to serve them, not lubberly squire,
that loves all day to hang nose over fire.
Nor trust not to children thy cattle to feed,
but serve them let such as may help at a need.
48
Serve first out ye Rye straw, then wheat and then pease
then ote straw, the^ barley, the^ hay if ye please.
But serve them with hay, while the straw stoues last
they love no more straw, they had rather to fast.
49
Yoakes, forkes, and the like let thy servant spy out,
and gather the same, as he walks about.
And after at leisure let this be his hyre,
to beath them, and make them, at home by the fire.
50
As well at the full of the moon, as at the change
sea rages in winter, be often full strange.
Then look to thy marches, if doubt be to fray,
for fear of Ne forte drive cattle away.
51
Good fruit and good plenty, does well in thy loft,
then make thee an Orcharde and cherish it often.
For plant, and for stock, lay before hand to cast,
but set, or remove it ere Christmas be past.
52
Set one from another full twenty foot wide,
to stand as he stood, is a part of his pride.
The fayrer gotten, is best as ye know,
the deper ye set it, more likely to grow.
53
Ere Twelftide be gone, let thy horse be let blood.
for diverse intentes, it shall do them much good.
The day of Saint Steven, old husbands did use,
if that do mislike the, some other day choose.
A digression
Leave husbandry sleeping a while ye must do,
to learn of housekeping a lesson or two.
What ever is sent thee, by traueile and pain,
a time there is lent thee, to spend it again.
Though thou do defend it unspent for to be,
another shall spend it, no thank unto thee.
How ever we climb to accomplish the mind,
we have but a time, thereof profit to find.
A description of time and the year.
OF God to thy doings a time there is sent,
which ends with time, that in doing is spent.
For time is it self but a time for a time,
forgotten full soon, as the tune of a chyme.
In spring time we rear, we do sow, set and plant,
in summer get vittels, least after we want.
In harvest we carry in corn and the fruit,
in winter to spend as we need of each suit.
The year I compare as I find for a truth,
the spring unto childhode, the summer to youth.
The harvest to manhood the winter to age,
all quickly forgotten as a play on a stage.
Time past is forgotten, ere men be aware,
time present is thought on with wonderful care.
Time coming is feared, and therefore we save.
yet often ere it come we be gone to the grave.
A description of life and riches.
WHo living, but daily discern it he may,
how life as a shadow does vanish away.
And nothing to count on so sure and so just,
as surely to dye, and to turn into dust.
The lands and the riches that here we possess,
be none of our own, if a God we profess.
But lent us of him, as his talent of gold,
which being demanded who can it witholde.
God makes no writing that justly does say.
how long we shall have it, a year or a day:
But leave it we must (how soever we live)
when death shall come pluck us from hence by the sliue.
To death we must stoop, be we high, be we low,
but how, and how suddenly, few be that know.
what carry we then but a sheet to the grave,
to cover this carkas, of all that we have.
A description of house keeping,
WHat the^ of this tale^t, while here we remain
but study to yield it to God with a gain?
And that shall we do, if we do it not hide,
but use and bestow it as God does us did.
What good to get riches by breaking of sleep,
but (having the same) a good house for to keep?
Not only to bring a good fame to thy door,
but also the prayer to win of the poor.
Of all other doings house keeping is chief,
for always it helps the poor with relief.
The neighbor, the stranger, and all that have need,
which causes thy doings the better to speed.
Though hearken to this we should ever among,
yet chiefly at Christmas of all the year long
Good cause of that use may appear by the name,
though such as know least disaloweth the same,
A description of Christmas.
OF Christ comes Christmas, ye name with ye feast,
a time full of joy to greatest and least.
At Christmas was Christ (our savior) borne,
the world through sin altogether forlorn.
At Christmas the day does begin to take length,
of Christ our faith does begin to take strength.
As Christmas is only a figure or trope,
so only in Christ is the strength of our hope.
At Christmas we banquet the rich with the poor,
who then (but the Miser) but opens his door?
At Christmas of Christ, many Carols we sing.
and give many gifts, in the joy of that king.
At Christmas in Christ, we rejoice and be glad,
as only of whom our comfort is had.
At Christmas we joy altogether with mirth,
for his sake that ioyed us al with his birth.
A description of apt time to spend.
LEt such (so fantastical) liking not this,
(nor nothing else honest, that ancient is)
Give place to the time that so apt we do see,
appointed of God, as it seems to be.
At Christmas good husbands have corn in ye ground
in Barn and in soller worth many a pound.
Things plenty in house (beside Cattle and sheep,
all sent them (no doubt on) good houses to keep.
At Christmas the hardness of Winter does rage.
a nipper of all thing in every age.
Then lightly poor people, the young with the old,
be sorest oppressed with hunger and cold.
At Christmas by labor is little to get,
that wanting the poor man in danger is set.
What better a time than o^ all the whole year,
thy nedy poor neighbor to comfort and cheer.
Against fantastical scruplenesse.
AT this and at yt thing some make a great matter,
some help not, but hinder ye poor with their clatter.
Take custom from feasting what comes then, last
where one has a dinner, a thousand shall fast.
To dog in the maunger, some liken I could,
that hay will eat none, nor let other that would.
Some scarce in a year give a dinner or two,
nor well can abide any other to do.
Play thou the good fellow and harken to me,
hate none that be honest, though merry they be.
For often times seen, no more very a knave,
than he that does counterfeit most to be grave.
Christmas husbandly fare.
GOod husband and huswife now (chiefly) be glad,
things ha^dsom to have as they ought to be had
They both do provide against christmas do com,
to welcome their neighbors, good chere to have some.
Good bread and good drink, a good fire in the hall,
brawne pudding and souse and good mustard withal.
Biefe, mutton, and porke, and good Pies of the best,
pig, veale, gose and capon, and Turkey well dressed.
Chese, apples and nuttes, and good Charrols to hear,
as then in the country is counted good cheer.
What cost to good husband is any of this?
good household provision only it is.
Of other the like, I do leave out a meny,
that costeth the husband never a penny.
At Christmas be merry and thankful withal,
and feast thy poor neighbors the great with the small.
Yea all the year long to the poor let us gine,
gods blessing to have here as long as we live.
Ianuarye.
54
WHen Christmas is ended, bid feasting adieu,
go play the good husband, thy stock to renew.
Be myndefull of rearing, in hope of a gain,
dame profit shall give thee reward for thy pain.
55
Who both by his calfe, and his lamb will be known,
may well kill a neat, and a sheep of his own.
And he that will rear up a pyg in his house,
has cheaper his bacon, and sweter his souse.
56
who eats his veale, pig and lamb being froath,
shall thrice in a week go to bed without broth.
Unskillful that pass not but sell away sell,
shall never keep good house where ever they dwell.
57
Be gredy in spending and careless to save,
and shortly be nedy and ready to crave.
Be wilful to kill and unskillful to store,
and never look long to keep house any more.
58
Lay dirt upon heaps fair yard to keep seen,
when frost will abide, into field with it clean.
In winter a fallow some love to bestow,
where pease for the pot they intend for to sow.
59
In making or mending, (as needs) thy ditch,
get set to quick set it, learn cunningly which.
In hedging (where clay is) cut stake as ye know,
of Popler and Sallow, for fuel to grow.
60
Leave killing of Cony, let Do go to Bucke,
and vermin thy borrowe for fear of ill luck.
Feed Dove (no more killing) old dove house repair,
save Dove dong for hopyard, in making holes fair.
Dig Gardain, stroy malow now may ye at ease,
and set (as as a deintie) thy runcyfall pease.
Go cut and set Roses the best to be got,
of all the year long, better time there is not.
61
In time go and bargain lest worser do fall,
for fuel, for making, for carriage and all.
To buy at the stub, is the best for the buier,
more timely provision, more cheaper the fire.
62
Some burns a load at a time in his Hall,
some never leave burning, till burnt they have all.
Some making hauock with out any wit,
make many poor souls without fire to sit.
63
From Christmas, till May be well entered in,
al cattle wax faint, and look poorly and thin.
But when as the prime grass, at first does appear,
then most is the danger of all the whole year.
Calves fair, that come between Christmas and Le^t
take huswife to rere, or else after repent.
Of such as fall between change and the prime,
no rering, but sell, or go kill them in time.
House Calfe, and go suckle it twice on a day,
and after a while set it water and hay,
Stake ragged to rub on, no such as will bend,
then weane it (well tended) at fifty days end.
The senior weaned, his younger shall teach,
both how to drink water, and hay for to reach.
More stroke^, more made on, when ought they do aile,
more gentle ye make them for yoke or to paile.
64
Young brom or good pasture, thine ews do reqre
warm barth and in saftie their Lambs do desire:
Look often well to them for Foxes and dogs,
for pittes and for brimbles, for vermin and hogs.
65
Geld bulcalfe and ram lamb, as soon as they fall,
for therein is lightly no danger at all.
Some spares the tone for to pleasure the eye,
to have him show great when the butcher shall buy.
Sowes ready to farow, this time of the year,
are for to be made on and counted full dear.
For now is the loss of a fare of thy Sow,
more great than the loss of two calves of thy Cow,
Of one Sow at once rere few above five,
and choose of the fairest and likest to thrive.
Vngelt of the best keep a couple for store,
one Boar pig, one Sow pig, that sucketh before.
66
Geld under the dame within fortnight at least,
and save both thy money and life of thy beast.
Geld later with Gelders as many one do,
and look of a dozen to geld away two.
67
Thy Coltes for the saddle geld young to be light.
for Cart do not so if thou iudgest aright.
Nor geld them but when they be lusty and fat.
for there is a point to be learned in that.
68
Geld Fillies but tittes, ere and nine days of age,
they dye else of gelding, else many do rage.
But Fillies most likely, of bulk and of bone,
keep such to bring Coltes, let their gelding alone.
69
For gaining a trifle, sell never thy store,
what joy to acquaintance what pleasureth more?
More larger of body the better to bread,
more forward of growing, the better they speed.
70
A Cow good of milk that is fair and sound,
is yearly for profit as good as a pound.
And yet by the year have I proved or now,
as good to the purse, is a Sow as a Cow.
71
Keep one and keep both with as little a cost,
then al shall be saved and nothing be lost.
Both having together, what profit is taught,
good huswiues I warrant ye need not be taught,
Go look to thy Bees if the hiue he to light,
set water and honey together well dight.
Put strawes in a dishe to the same in the hiue,
from dangers a number ye save them alive.
72
In January husband that poucheth up grotes,
will break up his lay or be sowing of Otes.
Otes sown in January lay by the wheat,
in May by thy hay, for the cattle to eat.
Februarye.
73
NOw timely for Lentstuffe, thy money disburse,
the longer thou tariest (for profit) the worse.
If one penny vauntage be therein to save,
of Coastman or Fleming now look it to have.
74
Thy Vines and thy Osyers cut and go set,
if grape be unpleasant a better to get.
Feed Swan and go make her up strongly a nest,
for fear of a flood, good and high is the best.
75
Go ear in thy stubble, take timely thy season,
be sowing of Beans, thy Tares, and thy peason.
The sooner thou sowest, the sooner they come,
and better for household they fill up a rome.
76
White peason, both good for the pot and the pursse,
by sowing to timely prove often the wursse.
Because they be tender and hates the cold,
prove March ere ye sow them, then may ye be bold.
77
In every green, if the fence be not thine,
go stub up the bushes, the grass to be fine.
Else neighbor will daily so hacke them beliue,
that neither thy grass, nor thy bushes shall thrive.
78
Go lop for thy fuel, the pollengers grown,
that hinders the corn, or the grass to be mowen.
In lopping and cropping, save edder and stake,
thine hedges, where need is to mende or to make.
79
In lopping old Iocham, for fear of mishap,
leave one bough vnlopped to cherishe the sap.
The second year after then boldly ye may,
for hindering his fellows, that bough cut away.
80
The sticks and the stones, go and gather them clean,
for hurting thy Sith, or for harming thy grene.
For walkers by Moon shine get home with the rest,
when frozen the ground is then carriage is best.
81
In cropping or felling, take heed to this thing,
be skilful and careful for saving the spring.
Leave topping of timber for making of wast,
least landlord by law, does avoid thee in have.
82
Spare medows at shroftide, thy marshes at pask,
for fear of dry Summer no longer time ask.
Then hedge them and dych them, bestow thereon pence,
corn, meadow, and marshes, crave ever good fence.
83
Friend, always let this be a part of thy care,
for shift of good pasture, lay pasture to spare.
Then seauer thy grounds, and so keeping them still,
and cattle at ease, and have pasture at will.
84
Kill crow, pie, and caddow, rooke, bussard, and raven,
or else go desire them to seek a new haven,
In scalling the youg for to pluck of his beck,
beware how thou scalest for breaking thy neck.
March.
85
Sow Barley in March, and in April and May,
the latter in sand and the sooner in claye.
What worser for Barley, then wetnesse and cold?
what thing to take time when a man may be bold?
86
Keep Crows and go harrow it finely as dust,
then woorkmanly trench it, and fence it ye must.
This season well handled, set sowing an end,
and praise and pray God, a good harvest to send.
87
Sow wheat in a measure, sow Rye not to thin,
let Beans and thy Peason be scatered in.
Sow Barley and Otes good and thick, do not fear,
land looks for seed, or the weed for to bear.
88
Otes Barley and Pease, harowe after ye sow,
for Rye harrow first (not after I trow.)
Leave Wheat little clod for to cover his head,
that after a frost he may forth and go spread.
89
In March is good graffing, yt skilful does know.
as long as the wind in the Cast does not blow.
From Moon being changed, till past be the prime,
for graffing and cropping is excellent time.
90
Things sown set, or planted, the greatest and least
defend against tempest, the bird, and the beast.
Defended shall prosper, the the other is lost,
the thing with thy labor, the time and the cost.
In March and in April, from morning to night,
in sowing and setting good huswiues delight.
To have in their Gardeine or other like plot,
to trim up their house, and to furnish their pot.
The virtue of herbs dame Phisike does show,
time teaches them all to be known, save a few.
To set or to sow, or once sown to remove,
how this should be learned, by practice go prove.
Good Parsneps and Mellons, all Winter and Lent,
Beans plenty in July, save fish to be spent.
Those having with pottage the belly full than,
thou winnest the heart of thy laboring man.
April.
FRom April begin to saint Andrew be past,
so long with good huswiues their dayries do last.
Good lease and good pasture, good husbands provide,
the residue good huswiues know how for to guide.
Such huswiues as know not to make their own chees
with trusti^g of others have this for their fees.
Milk flapped in corners, cream slabbred and sost,
milk pan so nigh flot, that the cheses be lost.
Where some of a Cow, do make yearly a pound,
with these fiely huswiues, no penny is found.
The servants rebuked for that they have done,
with one thing or other away they do roone.
Then neighbor for god sake, if any you see,
good servant for dairy, help wane her to me.
Such master such man, and such Mistress such maid,
such husband and huswife, such houses araide.
91
Sell bark to the Tanner ere timber ye fell,
fell low by the ground, or else do ye not well.
In breaking save crooked for milles and for ships,
and ever in hewing save Carpenters chippes.
May.
92
From May til October leave cropping, learn why,
in wood sere what ever thou croppest will dye.
Where Iuie embraces the tree very sore,
kill Iuie, or tree else will adle no more.
Good flax and good hemp, for to have of her own,
good huswife in May will see it be sown.
And afterward trim it to serve at a need,
the fimble to spinne, and the karle for her sede.
The knowledge of stilling is one pretty feate,
the waters be wholesome, the charges not great.
What timely thou gettest, while Summer does last,
think Winter will help thee to spend it as fast.
In May is good sowing, thy buck or thy frank,
that black is as Pepper, and smells so rank.
It is to thy land, as a comfort or mucke,
and all thing it makes as fatt as a bucke.
93
At Phillip and Jacob, go put of thy lambs,
that think to have any milk of their dammes.
At Lammas leave milking for fear of a thing,
least Requiem eternam in Winter they sing.
94
To milk and to fold them, is much to require,
except thou have pasture to fill their desire.
The nights being short, such head ye may take,
not hurting their bodies, much profit to make.
Five ewes to a Cow milk, go prove by a score,
shall double thy dairy, else trust me no more.
Yet may a good huswife, that knows the skill,
have mixed, or unmixed, at her pleasure and will.
95
Gredy of gain over lay not thy ground,
and then shall thy cattle be lusty and sound.
But pinch them of pasture, while summer does last,
and pluck at their tails, ere and winter be past.
96
To grass with thy calves in some meadow plot nere
where never their mothers may see them nor here:
Where water enough is, and barth to fit warm,
and look well unto them for taking of harm.
97
Pinch wennels at no time of water or meat,
if ever ye hope for to have them good neat.
In Summer at all times, in Winter in frost,
if cattle lack drink, they be utterly lost.
From May to mid August, from dinner to two,
let Patche sleep a snatch how so ever ye do,
Though sleping one hour refreshes among.
yet trust not Hob grouthed for sleping to long.
98
In May at the furdest twy falow thy land,
much drowt may else after cause plough for to stand.
This tilth being done, thou have passed the wurst,
then after who ploweth, plough thou with the furst.
99
Get home with thy fuel mede ready to fet,
the sooner, the easier, carriage to get.
Take heed to thy Bees, that be ready to swarm,
the loss thereof now is a crowns worth of harm.
June.
100
IN June get a wedehoke, and a knife and a glove,
and wede out such wedes as ye corn does not love
Slack never thy weding, for dearth nor for cheap,
the corn shall reward it, or every reap.
101
The May wede does burn, and the thistle do freat
the time pulls downward the Rye and the Wheat.
The Docke and the Brake, noy corn very much,
like Boddle to Barley, no wede there is such.
102
Wash sheep (for the better) where water does ru^,
and let them go clenly (and dry) in the Sun.
Then share them and spare not, at two days an end,
the sooner, the better, their corpse will amend.
103
Reward not thy sheep when thou take his cote
with two or three notches as broad as a grote.
Let no such ungentleness happen to thine,
least fly with his gentleness make it to pine.
104
Let lambs go vnclipped til June be half worn,
the better their coats will be grown to be shorn.
The Pie will discharge the for pulling the rest,
the lighter poor sheep is, then fedeth it best.
105
At midsommer down with thy brimbles and brakes
and after abroad with thy forkes and thy rakes.
Set mowers a work, while ye meadows be grown,
the longer (now) standing the worsse to be mowne.
106
Provide of thine own to have all thing at hand
least work and the workman, vnwroughten do stand.
Love seldom to borrow, that think to save,
for he that once lends, twice looks to have.
107
Good husbands that lay to save al thing upright
for tumbrels and carts have a shed ready dight.
A store house for trinkets as close as a iayle,
that nothing be wanting the worth of a nail.
108
Thy carts would be searched without and within
well clouted and greased ere hay time begin.
Thy hay being carted, though Carters had sworn,
carts bottom well boorded, is saving of corn.
July.
109
GO muster thy servants be captain thy self,
providing them weapon, and other like pelf.
Get bottels and wallets, keep field in the heat,
the fear is not much, but the danger is great.
110
With tossing and taking and setting on cocks,
grass lately in swathes is hay for an Ox.
That done, go and Cart it and have it away,
the battle is fought, ye have gotten the day.
111
Let hay be well made, or auise else a vous,
for moulding in goef, or for fyering thy house.
Lay coursest aside for the Ox and the Cow,
the finest for sheep, Calfe and Gelding allow.
112
Then down with thy hedlondes the corn about
leave never a dalop vnmowne and had out.
Though grass be but thin about barley and pease,
yet picked up clean, it shall do thee great ease.
113
Thy fallow betime for destroiyng of weed,
least Thistle and Dockefall to bloming and seed.
Such season may chance, it shall stand thee upon.
to till it again ere the Summer be gone.
114
Thy houses and barnes would be looked upon,
and al thing amended ere harvest come on.
Things thus set in order at quiet and rest,
shall further thy harvest and pleasure thee best.
115
Saint Iaimes does advise to get reapers at had,
the corn being ripe does but shed if it stand.
Be thankful and saving what ever is sent,
God sends the same for none other intent.
116
Grant harvest Lord more by a penny or two,
to call on his fellows the better to do.
Give reapers thy larges, a larges to cry,
and always to loyterers have a good eye.
117
Reap well, scater not gather clean that is shorn,
bind fast, shock a pace, have an eye to thy corn.
Lode safe, carry home, follow time being fair,
golfe just in the barn, it is out of despair.
118
In goeuing at harvest, learn skilfully how,
each grain for to lay by it self on a mow.
Sede barley, and peason golfe out of the way,
all other nygh hand golfe as just as ye may.
119
Corn carried, let such as be poor go and clean,
and after let cattle go mouse it up clean.
Then spare it for pasture till Rowen be past
to lengthen thy dairy no better thou have.
120
All harvest time, harvest folk, servants and all,
must make altogether good cheer in thy Hall.
Go fill them the black boll of bleeth to their song,
and let them be merry all harvest time long.
121
Once ended thy harvest let none be beguilde,
please such as did help thee, man, woman, and child
Thus doing (with always such help as they can)
thou winnest the name of a husbandly man.
Now think upon God, let thy tongue never cease,
in thanking of him for his mighty increase.
Accept my good will, for a proof go and try,
the better thou thriuest, the gladder am I.
Of all thing this seems the sum, one going, another to come.
World lasting look never to lin,
year ended again to begin.
Who looks to wealth to attain,
must travail again and again.
Good therefore it is (as I say)
prouidyng for age, while we may.
The kindly property of every month.
11 January
A kindly good Ianiuere.
freaseth pot by the fire.
12 February
Fill (Feuerill) dike,
with what thou do like.
1 March
March dust to be sold,
worth raunsomes of gold,
2 April
Sweet April showers,
do spring the May flowers.
3 May
Cold May and a windy,
makes Barnes fat and findy.
4 June
Calm weather in June,
corn sets in tune.
5 Iulye
No tempest good July,
least all things look ruly.
6 August
Dry August and warm,
does harvest no harm,
7 September
September blow soft,
till fruit be in lofte.
8 October
October good blast,
to shake the Hog mast,
9 November
November take flaile,
let ship no more sail.
10 December
Oh dirtie December,
for Christmas remember.
Compairing good husband with unthrift his brother, the better descerneth the
tone from the the other.
1
IL husbandry braggeth to go with the best,
good husbandry baggeth up gold in his chest.
2
Ill husbandry trudgeth with unthrifts about,
good husbandry snudgeth for fear of a dout,
3
Ill husbandry spends abroad like a mome,
good husbandry tends his charges at home.
4
Ill husbandry sells his corn on the ground,
good husbandry smells no gain that way found.
5
Ill husbandry loses for lack of good fence,
good husbandry closes and gains the pence.
6
Ill husbandry trusts to him and to her,
good husbandry lusts him self for to stir.
7
Ill husbandry eats him self out a door,
good husbandry meateth his frind and the poor.
8
Ill husbandry dayeth or lets it lie,
good husbandry pays the cheaper to buy.
9
Ill husbandry lurketh and steals a sheep,
good husbandry works his household to keep.
10
Ill husbandry lives by that and by this,
good husbandry gives to every man his.
11
Ill husbandry takes and spends up all,
good husbandry makes good shift with a small.
12
Ill husbandry prays his wife to make shift,
good husbandry says take this of my gift.
13
Ill husbandry drowseth at fortune so awke,
good husbandry rowseth him self like a hawke.
14
Ill husbandry lies in prison for det,
good husbandry spieth where profit to get.
25
Ill husbandry ways has to fraud what he can,
good husbandry praise has of every man.
16
Ill husbandry never has wealth to keep touch,
good husbandry ever has penny in pouche.
17 Good husband his boon or request has a far,
ill husbandry as soon has a tode with an R.
A Sonet where playnelye ye see, each word to begin with a T.
THe thrifty that teaches the thriuing to thrive,
teach timely to trauerse the thing that thou triue.
Transferring thy toil to the times to thee tought,
that teaches thee te^perance to temper thy thought.
Think truly to travail, that think to thee,
the trade that the teacher taught truly to thee.
Then temper thy travail to tarry the tide,
this teaches thee thriftinesse twenty times tried.
Take thankfully things, thank tenderly those,
that teaches thee thriftely thy time to transpose.
Troth teached thee two times, teach you two times te^,
this trade thou that take, take thrift to thee then.
Thomas Tusser.

A Comparison between Champion and Several.
THe country enclosed I praise,
the the other likes not me.
For nothing the wealth it does raise,
to such as inferior be.
Though Champion partly I know,
what need I much thereof to show?
2
There swineheard that keeps the hog,
there neathearde with curre and his horn,
There shepeheard with whistle and dog,
be fence to the meadows and corn.
There horse being tayed on a balke,
is ready with thief for to walk.
3
Where all thing in common does rest.
corn field with the pasture and mede,
Though commen thou do for the best,
yet what does it stand thee instead?
There commune as communers do,
as good else to cobble a shoe.
4
What layer much better than there?
or cheaper (thereon to do well)
What drudgery more any where,
less good thereof where can ye tell?
What gotten by Summer is seen,
that winter there eats not cleene.
5
Example by Leicester shire,
what soil can be better than that,
For any thing heart can desire.
and yet it does want ye se what,
Mast, covert, close pasture, and wood,
and other things needful as good.
6
All these does enclosure bring,
experience teaches no less,
I speak not to boast of the thing.
but only a troth to confess.
Example (if doubt ye do make)
by Essex and Suffolk go take.
7
More plenty of mutton and biefe,
corn butter, and cheese of the best:
More wealth any wheare (to be brief)
more people, more handsome and pressed,
Where find ye? (go search any coast)
than there where enclosure is moaste.
8
More work for the laboring man,
as well in the town as in the field,
Or thereof (devise if ye can)
more profit what country do yield?
More seldom where see ye the poor,
go begging from door unto door?
9
More profit is quieter found,
(where pastures in several be)
Of one siely acre of ground,
than Champion makes of three.
Again what a joy is it known,
when men may be bold of their own.
10
The tone is commended for grain,
yet bread made of beans they do eat:
The the other for one loaf have twain,
of mastlin, of rye, or of wheat.
The Champion lives full bare,
when woodland full merry does fare.
11
Tone gives his corn in a darth
to horse, sheep and hog ery day,
The the other give cattle warm barth,
and feed them with straw and with hay.
Corn spent of the tone so in vain,
the the other does sell to his gain.
12
Tone barefoote and ragged does go,
and ready in winter to sterue,
When the other ye see do not so,
but has that is needful to serve.
Tone pain in a cottage do take,
when the other trim bowers does make.
13
Tone lays for turffe and for sedge,
and has it with wondefull suite,
When the other in every hedge,
has plenty of fuel and fruit.
Evils twenty times worser then thease,
enclosure full quicklye would ease.
14
In woodland the poor men that have,
scarce fully two acres of land,
More merrily live, and do save,
than the other with twenty in hand,
yet pay they as much for the two,
as the other for twenty must do.
15
The labourer coming from thence,
in woodlande to work any where.
(I warrant you) goes not hence
to work any more again there.
If this same be true (as it is)
why gather they nothing of this?
16
The poor at enclosing do grutch,
because of abuses that fall.
Least some men should have but to much,
and some again nothing at all.
If order might therefore be found*
what were to the several ground.
FINIS.
The Preface to the book of Huswiferie.
TAke weapon away, of what force is a man?
take huswife from husband and what is he than?
2
As lovers desires together to dwell,
so husbandry loves good huswiferie well.
3
Though husbandry seems to bring in the gains,
yet huswiferie labors seem equal in pains.
4
Some respite to husbands the weather does send,
but huswiues affairs have never none end.
As true as thy faith,
This Huswiferie says.
I Serve for a day, for a week, for a year, The praise of huswiferye.

for life time, for ever, while man dwells here.
For richer for porer, from north to the south,
for honest, for hardhed, or dainty of mouth.
For wed, and unwedded, in sickness and health,
for all that well lives in good common wealth.
For City, for country, for Court and for Cart,
to quiet the head, and to comfort the heart.
To the right honorable and my special good Lady and Mistres, the Lady Paget.
THough pain seems mickle,
and favor to fickle,
yet good will does tickle
my pen for to write,
Some knack not vnpretie,
of Huswiferie nettie,
how Huswiues should iettie
from morning to night.
Not mynding by writing,
to set them a spiting,
but show by endyting,
as troth may be bold:
How husbandry eases,
so huswiferie pleases,
and many pursse greaseth
with silver and gold.
Because I did fear me
least some would forswere me
of troth I do bear
upright as ye see:
Full bent for to love all
and not to reprove all
but only to move all
good Huswiues to be.
For if I should mind some
or descant behind some,
and miss where to find some,
displease so I mout:
Or if I shoudl blend them
and so to offend them,
what talk God should send them
I stand in a dout.
As now if I make this
and some do well take this,
if other forsake this,
what profit were that
Naught else but to pain me
and nothing to gain me
but make them disdain me
I wot nere for what.
Least clock miss with dyall,
least proof make denial,
least some stand to trial,
some murmr and grudge:
Give judgment I pray you
(for justly so may you)
so fancy so say you,
I make you my judge.
In time you shall try me,
by troth you shall spy me,
so find so set by me
according to skill:
How ever tree grows
the fruit the tree shows
your Ladyship knows
my heart and good will.
Though Fortune does measure,
and I do lack treasure,
yet if I may pleasure
your honor with this:
Then will me to mende it,
or mende ere ye send it,
or any where lend it,
if ought be amiss.
Your Ladyships servant Thomas Tusser.

A description of Huswife and Huswiferie.
OF huswife does Huswiferie challenge that name,
of Huswiferie Huswife does likewise the same.
Where Husband and Husbandry joins with these,
there wealth being got is preserved with ease.
The name of a Huswife, what is it to say?
the wife of the house, to the Husband a stay.
If huswife does that, that belongs to her,
if Husband be honest there needs no stir.
The Huswife is she that to labor does fall,
the labor of her I do huswiferie call.
If thrift by that labor be saved or got;
then is it good huswiferie, else is it not.
The woman the name of a Huswife does win,
by keeping her house, and her doings therein.
(...) she that with husband will quietly dwell,
(...) think on this lesson and follow it well.
FINIS.
Twenty Lessons always to be observed.
Serve God is the first, 1
THe principal point of huswife in deed,
is God to remember the better to speed.
True love is not worst. 2
A very good lesson of huswiferie thought
is huswife with husband to live as she ought.
Wife comely no grief, 3
Though tricksie to see to, be gallant to wiue,
yet comely and wise is the huswife to thrive.
Man out huswife chief. 4
The husband abroad, the good wife must be chief,
and look to their labor that eats her biefe.
Both out not allow, 5
Where husband and huswife be both out of place,
there servants do loyter and reason their case.
Keep house huswife thou. 6
The huswife so named of keeping the house,
must tend on her profit as Cat on the Mouse.
Seek home for thy rest, 7
As huswiues keep home and be stirrers about,
so speedeth their winninges, the year throughout.
For home is the best 8
Though home be but ho^ly yet huswifes are taught
that home has no fellow to such as have aught.
Use all thing with skill 9
Good usage with skill, being sober with all,
make huswiues to shine as the sun on the wall.
And ask what ye will. 10
What husband refuses things comely to have,
that has a good wife that will huswifly save.
Be ready at need, 11
The case of good huswiues thus daily does stand
what ever shall chance, to be ready at hand.
That thine is to feed. 12
This care has a huswife each hour in her head,
that all thing in time may be huswifely fed.
By practice go muse, 13
Dame practice is she that to huswife must tell,
which way for to govern her family well.
How household to use. 14
Use laborers gently, keep this as a law,
make child for to fear thee, keep servant in awe.
Who careless do live 15
Have every where a respect to thy ways,
that none of thy life any slander may raise.
Occasion do give 16
What many do know, though a time it be hid,
at length will abroad when a mischief shall bid.
No neighbor reprove 17
The love of thy neighbor shall stand the in steed
the poorer the gladder to help at a need.
So shall thou have love. 18
Use friendly thy neighbor else trust him in this,
as he has thy friendship, so trust unto his.
Strike nothing unknown 19
Revenge not thy wroth upon any man's beast,
least thine by thine enemy come to like feast.
Take heed to thine own. 20
What husband provides with money his drudge,
that huswife must look to, which way it does trudge
A digression
NOw out of the matter this lesson I had,
Cock crowing.
concerning Cockcrowing, what profit is had.
Experience teaches as true as a clock,
how winter nights passes by marking the Cock.
At midnight one Cock croweth timely but six,
with pause to his neighbor to answer betwix.
At three a clock thicker, and then as ye know,
like all in to mattens nere day they do crow.
At midnight, at three, and an hour ere day,
Cocks crow in their language, and thus they do say.
If noise ye do here
look all thing be clear.
Chant. midnight Answer
How dame it is midnight, what rubbing is that?
take heed to false harlots, and more ye wot what.
Both maiden and man
mend now what ye can.
Maids.iii. a clock, knede, Chant. Three a clock.
lay your bucks or go brew
and cobble and botche ye that can not buy new.
Maid up I beseech you
least Mistres do breech you.
Answer Chant. Toward day. Answer
Past five a clock holla maid sleping beware,
least quickly thy dame do uncover thy bare.
Count labor half won
that early is done.
Count gain half lost.
with watching cost.
A hundredth good points of Huswiferye.
No sooner Sun up.
morning.
GEt up in the morning as soon as thou will,
with over long slugging good servant is spilt.
But nose in the cup. 2
Some slouens from sleping no sooner be up,
but hand is in Aumberie, and nose in the cup.
That early is done. 3
Some works in the morning may trimly be done,
that all the day after can never be won.
Count huswifely won. 4
Good husband without makes welthy and fat,
good huswife within is as needful as that.
Cast dust in the yard. 5
Sluttes corners avoided, shall farther thy health,
much time about trifles shall hinder thy wealth.
Go spin and go card. 6
Set some about charning, some seething of souse,
some carding, some spinning, some trimming up house.
Do as ye shall think. 7
Set some to grind malt, or thy russhes to twine,
set some to peele hemp, or to seething of brine.
Let meat never stink. 8
Some corneth, some brineth, some will not be taught
where meat takes vent, there the huswife is naught.
To breakfast that come.
Brekfast
9 Call servants to breakfast by day star appear,
a snatch and to work fellows, tarry not here.
Give every one some. 10
Let huswife be caruer, let pottage be eat,
a dishfull each one with a morsel of meat.
No more tittle tattle. 11
What tacke in a pudding says gredy gut wringer
give such ye wot what, ere pudding they finger.
To serving your cattle.
Fore no^e works.
12 Let servants once served, thy cattle go serve,
else master and mistress may quickly go sterue.
Learn you that will thee. 13
No breakfast of custom provide not to save,
but only to such as deserves to have.
Some dainty will be. 14
No showing to servant what vitailes in store,
show servants their labor and show them no more.
Of hauock beware. 15
Where al things is common, what needs a hutch?
where wants a sauer, there hauock is much.
False Cattes will not spare. 16
Where windows stand open ye cattes make a fray
yet wild cats with two legs are worser then they.
Look well unto thine. 17
An eye in a corner who uses to have,
reueleth a drab, and preuenteth a knave.
Slut slothful must whine. 18
Make maid to be clenly, or make her cry creake,
and teach her to stir when her mistress does speak.
Let holly wand threat. 19
A wand in thy hand though ye fight not all,
make youth to their business the better to fall.
Let fisgig be beat. 20
For fear of a fool had I wist cause thee to wail
let fisgig be taught to shut door after tail.
To easy the wicket. 21
With her that will clicket, make danger to cope,
least happily her wicket be easy to open.
Will still appease clicket. 22
As rod little mendeth where manners be spilt,
so naught will be naught say and do what thou will.
Fight seldom ye shall. 23
Much brauling with servants what man ca^ abide
pay home when thou fightest but love not to chide.
Love never to brall. 24
As order is heavenly where quiet is had,
so error is hell, or a mischief as bad.
What better law. 25
Such law as a warning will cause to beware,
does make the whole house the better to fare.
To servants than awe. 26
The less of thy council thy servants does know
their duty the better such servants shall show.
Good music regard. 27
Such servants are often both paineful and good
that sing in their labors as birds in the wood.
Good servant reward 28
Good servants hope justly some friendship to feel,
and look to have favor what time they do well.
By one time or twice. 29
Take runnagate Robbins to pity their need,
and look to be filched as true as thy Creed.
Is good to be wise. 30
Take warning by once, that a worse do not hap,
foresight is the stopper of many a gap.
Some change for a shift. 31
Make few of thy council to change for the best,
least one that is trudging in fetches the rest.
Much change little thrift. 32
The stone that is rolling can gather no Moss,
for Maistres and maids, by often changing is loss.
Both liberal sticks. 33
One Dog for a Hog, and one Cat for a Mouse,
one ready to give is enough in a house.
Some prouender pricketh. 34
One gift ill accepted, keep next in thy purse,
whom prouender pricketh are often the wurse.
Brewe somewhat for thine. 35
Where brewer is needful be brewer thy self,
what fills the roof, will help furnish thy shelfe.
Else bring up no Swine. 36
In buying thy drink by the firkin or Pot,
the skore does arise, the Hog profits not.
Well brewed worth cost. 37
One busshell well brewed, out lasts some twain
two troubles for one thing is cost to no gain.
Ill used half lost. 38
To new is no profit, to stale is as bad,
drink sower or dead makes husband half mad.
Remember good Gill. 39
Put grains to more water while grains be yet hot,
and sees them and stir the^ as otemeale in pot.
Take pain with thy swill. 40
Though heating be costly, such swil yet in store,
shall profit thy porkelings a hundredth times more.
New bred is the Devil. 41
New bread is a waster, but moldy is wurse,
what Dog gets that way that loses the purse.
Much crust is as evil. 42
Much dowebake I praise not, much crust is as ill
the mean is the huswife, say nay if ye will.
Good dairy does ease. 43
Good servant in dairye that needs not be told,
deserves her fee to be paid her in gold.
Good cokerye does please. 44
Good Cook to dress dinner, to bake and to brewe,
is better than gold being honest and true.
Good droye young or old. 45
Good droy to serve hogs, to help wash and to milk,
is some time as needful as some in their silk.
Good whitemeat worth gold. 46
Keep dayrie house clenly, keep pan sweet and told
keep butter and cheese to look yellow as gold.
Make clenly thy guts. 47
Save charmmilke, save welcord, save puddig and souse,
such offall does stop many gappes in a house.
And learn to know sluttes. 48
Though homely be milker, let clenly be Cook,
for dropnose and slut may be known by their look.
In dairy no Cat. 49
Though Cat being good is a jewel in house,
yet ever in dairy have trappe for a mouse.
Lay bane for a Rat. 50
Take heed how thou layest the bane for the rats,
for poisoning servants, thy self and thy brattes.
No scouring for pride. 51
Though scouring be needful, yet scourig to mutch
is pride without profit, and robs thine hutch.
Keep kettle whole side, 52
Keep kettles from knocks, and set tubs out of sun,
for mending is costly, and cracked is soon done.
Take heed when ye wash. 53
Maids wash well and wring well, but beat ye wot how.
if any lack beating, I fear it be you.
Else run in the lash. 54
In washing by hand, have an eye to thy boll,
for Launders and millers be quick of their toll.
Dry Sun or dry wind. 55
Go wash well says Somer, with su^ne I shall dry,
go wring well says winter, with wind so shall I.
Safe bind and safe find. 56
To trust without head is to venture a joint,
give tale and take count is a huswifely point.
Where none fall a packing. 57
When he^nes fall a cackling, take heed to their nest
when drabbes fall a whistring take heed to the rest.
There nothing is lacking. 58
What Husband refuses things comely to have,
that has a good wife that will huswifely sane.
Ill made better left. 59
The place may be so, and the Kill may be such,
to make thine own Malt, shall profit chee much.
Wood dried has a west. 60
Some dries with straw, and some dries with wood
wood asks more charge, and yet nothing so good.
Let Malt be made well. 61
Malt being well spered the more it will cost,
malt being well dried the longer will last.
Take heed to thy kell. 62
Let Gillet be singing, it does very well,
to keep her from sleping and burning the kell.
For hunger or thirst. 63
By noone let your dinner be ready and neat,
let meat tarry servant not servant his meat.
Dress cattle well first. 64
The plough teme a bayting, Dinner.
call servants to dinner,
the thicker, so much be the charges the thinner.
Together is best. 65
Dew season is best, altogether is gay,
dispatch has no fellow, make short and away.
For hostis and gest. 66
Beware of Gill laggose disordering thy house,
more dainties who catches the^ crafty fed Mouse.
Let such have enough. 67
Give servants no dainties, but give the^ enough,
to many chappes walking does beggar the plough.
That follow the plough. 68
Poor seggons half sterued work faintly and dull,
and lubbers do loyter, their bellies to full.
Give never to much, 69
Feed lazy that thresheth a flap and a tap,
like slothful that all day be stopping a gap.
To lubbers and such. 70
Some housholdly lubber more eats then twoe,
yet leaves undone that a stranger will do.
Spare such as thou have, 71
Some cutteth thy linen, some spilleth their broth
bare table to such does as well as a cloth.
Where nothing will last. 72
Trene dishes does well, wodde^ spones go to wrack
where stone is no laster, take tankarde and jack.
Knap boy on the thumbes, 73
That pewter is never for manerly feast,
that daily does serve an vninanerly beast.
And save him his crummes. 74
Some gnaweth and leueth so^e crusts and some crumbs,
eat such their own leauigs, or gnaw their own thu^bs
Serve God ever furst, 75
At Dinner, at Supper, at Morning at Night,
Give thanks unto god for his gifts in thy sight.
Take nothing at wurst. 76
Good husband and huswife will some tune alone,
dyne well with a morsel and suppe with a bone.
Enough thou art told, 77
Three dishes well dressed, and welcome withal,
both pleases thy friend and becomes thine Hall.
To much will not hold. 78
Enough is a plenty, to much is a pride,
unskillful the holder, plough goes aside.
After none works.
Make company break, 79
When Dinner is ended set servant to work,
and follow such Merchants as loves to lurk.
Go cherishe the weak. 80
To servant in sickness see nothing ye grutch.
a thing of a trifle shall comfort him mutch.
who many do feed, 81
Put chipping in dippings, use parings to save,
fatt Capons or Hens ye that look for to have.
Save much they had need. 82
Save drippings and skimmings how ever ye do,
for medicine, for cattle, for Carte, and for shoo.
Leave Capon unmeet, 83
All of corn thy pulleine must have for their fee,
feed willingly such as do help to feed thee.
Fatt costly unsweet. 84
Though fat fed be dainty, of this I the warn,
be cunning in fatting for robbing thy barn.
Piece hole to defend, 85
Good semesters be sowing of fine pretty knackes,
good huswiues be mending and peecing their sackes.
Things tymely amend. 86
Though making and mending be huswifely ways,
yet mending in time is the huswife to praise.
Buy new as ye may. 87
Though Ladies may rend and by new ery day,
good huswifes must mende and by new as they may.
Lose nothing I say. 88
Call quarterly servants to court and to let,
write every Couerlet, Blanket and Shete.
Shift slouenly elfe, 89
Though shifting to often be a thief in a house,
yet shift goodman slouen for fear of a louse.
Be Jailer thy self. 90
Grant doubtful no keye of his chamber in pursse,
least Chamber door lock be to thiefrie a Nursse.
Save feathers for gest, 91
Save wing for thresher when Gander does dye,
save feathers of all thing the softer to lie.
These four rob chest. 92
Much spice is a thief, so is candle and fire,
sweet sause is as crafty as ever was Friar.
wife make thine own candle, 93
Provide for thy tallow ere frost comes in,
and make thine own Candle ere winter begin.
Leave penny to handle. 94
If penny for all thing be suffered to trudge,
trust long not to penny, to have him thy drudge.
Time drawing to night, 95
When he^nes go to house, set thy cook to dress meat
some milk, and serve hogs, and set some to serve neat.
See all things go right. 96
Where twain be enough, be not served with three
more knaves in a company worser they be.
Make Lackie to trudge, 97
For every trifle leave iauncing thy Nagge,
but rather make Lacky of Jack boy thy Nagge.
Make servant thy drudge. 98
Make servant at night, lug in wood or a Log.
let none come in empty but slutte and thy Dog.
False knave ready pressed, 99
Where pulleine use nightly to perch in the yard,
there two legged Foxes keep watches and ward.
All well is the best. 100
See cattle well served without and within,
and all thing at quiet ere Supper begin.
Take heed it is needful, 101
No clothes in garden, Evening works
no trinkets without,
no door left vnbolted for fear of a doubt.
True pity is meedefull. 102
Thou woman whom pity becomes the best,
grant all that has labored, time to take rest.
Use mirth and good word,
Supper
103 Provide for thy husband to make him good chere,
make merry together while time ye be here.
At bed and at boorde. 104
At bed and at board how so ever be fall,
what ever God sends be merry withal.
No skirmishing make 105
No taunts before servants for hindering thy fame
no iarring to loud for avoiding of shame.
No jealousy take. 106
As fransie and heresy roueth together,
so jealousy leads a fool ye wot whether.
Reward as ye have, 107
Young children and chickens would ever be eating,
good servants look duly for gentle entreating.
No talkatiue knave, 108
No servant at table use sausly to talk,
least tongue set at large out of measure do walk.
No snatching at all, 109
No lurching, no snatching, nor striving at all,
least one go without and another have all.
Sirs harken now all, 110
Declare after Supper, take heed thereunto, Works after supper.

what work in the morning each servant shall do.
Thy soul has a clog, 111
Remember those children whose parents be poor,
which hunger, yet dare not to crave at thy door.
Forget not thy Dog. 112
Thy bandog that serves for dyucrs mishappes,
forget not to give him thy bones and thy scrappes.
Make keys to be kepers, 113
Where mouths be many to spend that thou have
set keys to be kepers for spending to fast.
To bed drousie slepers. 114
To bed after supper, let drousie go sleep,
least knave in the dark to his marrow do creep.
Keep keys as thy life, 115
Such keys lay up safe ere ye take ye to rest,
of dairy, of Buttery of Cuphorde and Chest.
Fear candle good wife. 116
Fear candle in hay loft in Barn and in Shed,
fear flea smock, and mendbreech, for burning their bed.
Night works trouble head, 117
The day wills done what so ever ye bid,
the night is a thief if ye take not good heed,
Lock doors and to bed. 118
Wash dishes, lay leauens, safe fire and away,
lock doors and to bed a good huswife will say.
To bed know thy guise, 119
In winter at nine; and in Summer at ten,
to bed after Supper both maidens and men.
To rise do likewise. 120
In winter at five a clock servant arise,
in Summer at four is ever the guyse.
Live well and long.
forbear now among.
Be lowly not solen if ought go amiss,
what wresting may lose thee, that win with a kiss,
Both hear and forbear now and then as ye may,
then Wenche God a mercy thy husband will say.
FINIS.
The plough man's feasting times.
This would not be slept,
old guise must be kept.
GOod Huswiues whom God has enriched enough Feasting days

forget not the feasts that belong to the Plough,
The meaning is only to joy and be glad,
for comfort with labor would sometune be had.
Plough Monday.
Plough Monday, the next after Twelftide be past, At twelfe tide

bids out with the plough, the worst husband is last.
If Ploughman get hatchet or whip to the screne,
maids loses their Cock if no water be seen.
Shroftide.
At shroftide to shrouing, go thresh the fat hen, At shroftid

if blindfilde can kill it then give it thy men.
Maids fritters and Pancakes enough see ye make,
let slutte have one pancake for company sake.
Sheep shering.
Wife make us a feast, spare flesh neither corn, At midsomer.

make Wafers and Cakes, for our sheep must be shorn,
At sheep shering neighbors no other thing crave,
but good chere and welcome, like neighbors to have.
The wake day.
To Oven with the flawnes maid, pass not for sleep, Wake day.

to morrow thy father his wake day shall keep:
Then trimly go dance with what Lover ye will,
though love make you beaten, keep Lover yet still.
Harvest home.
In August.
For all this good feasting yet art thou not loose,
till thou give the Ploughman in harvest his goose.
Though goose go in stubble, yet pass not for that
let goose have a goose be she lean be she fat.
Seed Cake.
At Hallomasse.
Wife some time this week if that all thing go clear,
an end of wheat sowing we make for this year.
Remember you therefore, though I do it not,
the Seed Cake, the Pasties, and Furmentie pot.
Twice a weke roast.
Good Ploughmen look wekely of custom and right,
Twice a weke roast.
for rostmeat on Sondayes and Thursdaies at night.
Thus doing and keeping such custom and guise,
they call thee good huswife, they love thee likewise.
The good huswifely Physic.
GOod huswiues provide ere an sickness does come,
of sundry good things in her house to have some.
Good Aqua composita, Vinegar tart,
Rose water and Treacle to comfort the heart,
Cold herbs in her Garden for Agues that burn,
that over strong heat to good temper may turn.
With Endive and Suckery, with Spinach enough,
all such with good pot herbs should follow ye plough.
Get water of Fumetory, Liver to cool,
and others the like, or else go like a fool.
Conserve of Barbery, Quinces and such,
with Sirops that eases the sickly so much.
Physician
Ask Medicus council ere medicine ye make,
and honor that man for necessities sake.
Though thousands hate Physic because of the cost
yet thousands it helps that else should be lost.
Good broth and good keeping does much now and than,
good diet
good diet with wisdom best helps a man.
In health to be sturring shall profit thee best,
in sickness hate trouble, seek quiet and rest.
Remember thy soul, Think on thy soul Have a good heart
let no fancy prevail,
make ready to Godward let heart never quail.
The sooner thy self thou submittest to God,
the sooner he cease to scourge with his rod.
The good motherly Nusserie.
Good huswiues take pain, Mother best nurse
and do count it good luck,
to make their own breasts their own child to give suck
Though wrauling and rocking be noisome so near,
yet lost by ill nursing is worser to hear.
But one thing I warn thee, let huswife be nursse,
least husband does find thee to frank with his purse.
What hilbacke and fill belly makes away,
that help to make good, Hilbak and fill belly Big and the twig.
or else look for a fray.
Give child that is fitly give baby the big,
give hardenesse to youth and give coperipe a twigge
We find it not spoken so often for naught,
that children were better unborn than untaught.
Some Cockneis with cocking are made very fools
fit neither for Prentice, for plough nor for schools.
Teach child to ask blessing, serve god
serve God and to church,
then bless as a mother: else bless him with burch.
Thou huswife thus doing what further shall need,
but all men to call thee good huswife in deed.
Think on the poor.
REmember the poor, that for Gods sake do call,
for God both rewards and blesses with all.
Take this in good part, what so ever thou be,
and wish me no worse than I wish unto thee.
FINIS.
For men a perfect warning, what child shall come by learning.
ALl you that feign would learn a perfect way,
to have your children in music some thing seen:
Ask nature first what thereto she does say,
ere further suit ye make to such a Queen.
For doubtless Crossum Gaput is not he,
of whom the learned Muses seen will be.
Once tried that nature trim has done her part,
and Lady Music far in love withal:
Be wise who first does teach thy child that art,
least homely breaker mar fine ambling ball.
Not rod in madbraines hand is that can help,
but gentle skill does make the proper whelpe.
Wheare choice is hard, count good for well a fine,
skill mixed with will, is he that teaches best:
Let this suffice for teaching child of thine,
choose quickly well for all thy lingering rest.
Mistaught at first how seldom proves well?
trim taught (O God) how shortly does excel?
Although as ships must tarry wind and tide,
and perfect hours abide their stinted time:
So likewise, though of learning (daily tried)
space must be had ere wit may thereto clime:
Yet easy steps, and perfect way to trust,
does cause good speed, confess of force we must.
Thus in the child though wit enough we find,
and teacher good near hand, or other where:
And time as apt as may be thought with mind,
nor cause in such thing much to doubt or fear:
Yet cocking Mams, and shifting Dads from schools,
make pregnant wits to prove unlearned fools.
Ere learning come, to have first art thou taught,
apt learning child, apt time that think to frame,
Apt cunning man to teach, else all is naught.
apt parents glad to bring to pass the same.
On such apt ground the Muses love to build,
this lesson learn: adewe else learned child.
A sonet to the Lady Paget.
SOme pleasures take, and can not give,
but only make poor thanks their shift:
Some meaning well in det do live,
nor cannot tell how else to shift.
Some knock and feign would open the door,
to learn the vain good turn to praise:
Some show good face, and be but poor,
yet have a grace good fame to raise.
Some owe and give, yet still in det,
and so must live for ought I know:
Some wish to pay and cannot get,
but night and day still more do owe.
Even so must I for pleasures past,
still wish you good while life does last.
A Comparison between good Huswifery and evil.
Comparing together good huswife and bad,
The knowledge of either the better is had.
1
IL huswiferie lies till nine of the clock,
good huswiferie tries to rise with the Cock.
2
Ill huswiferie tooteth to make her self brave,
good huswiferie looks what household must have.
3
Ill huswiferie trusts to him and to her,
good huswiferie lusts her self for to stir.
4
Ill huswiferie cares not for this nor for that.
good huswiferie spares for fear ye wot what.
5
Ill huswiferye pricketh her self up in pride,
good huswifery tricketh her house as a bride.
6
Ill huswifery o thing or other must crave,
good huswifery nothing but needful will have.
7
Ill huswifery moves with gosseps to spend,
good huswifery loves her household to tend.
8
Ill huswifery wants with spending to fast,
good huswiferye scanteth, the longer to last.
9
Ill huswiferye eases her self with unknown,
good huswiferye pleases her self with her own.
10
Ill huswiferie brooketh mad toies in her head,
good huswifery looks that al things be fed.
11
Ill huswifery brings a shilling to naught,
good huswiferie sings, her cofers all fraught.
12
Ill huswiferie renteth and casts a side,
good huswiferie mendeth, else would it go wide.
13
Ill huswiferie swepeth her linen to gage,
good huswiferie keeps to serve her in age.
14
Ill huswiferie craves in secret to borrowe,
good huswiferie saves to day for to morrow.
15
Ill huswiferie pineth (not having to eat)
good huswifrie dineth with plenty of meat.
16
Ill huswiferie lets the Devil to take all,
good huswiferie sets good brag of a small.
17
17 Good huswife good fame has of best in the town,
ill huswife ill name has of every Clown.
FINIS.
Husbandly posies for the hall.
1
Friend here I dwell, and here I have a little wordly pelf:
which on my friend I keep to spend, as well as on my self.
2
What ever fare thou hap to find, take welcome for the best:
that having then, disdain thou not, for wanting of the rest.
3
Bachyting talk, the flattering blabs, know wily how to ble^ge,
the wise does note, the friend does hate, the enmie will revenge.
4
The wise will spend, or give and lend, yet keep or have in store:
if fools may have from hand to mouth, they pas upon no more.
5
Where ease is sought, at length we see, that plenty waxes sca^t:
who careless live, go borrow must, or else, full often want.
6
The world does think the welthy man is he that least shall need
but God does know the virtuous man is he that best shall speed.
Posies for the parler.
1
AS hatred is the serpents noisome rod,
so friendship is the loving gift of God.
2
The dronken friend is friendship very evil,
the frantike friend, is friendship for the Devil.
3
The quiet friend all one in word and deed,
great comfort is like ready gold at need.
4
With brauling fools, that wrall for every wrong,
firm friendship never can continue long.
5
In time that man shall seldom friendship miss,
that wayeth what thing, touch kept in friendship is.
6
Often times a friend is got with east cost,
which used evil, is often as quickly lost.
7
Have thou a friend as heart may wish at will?
then use him so to have his friendship still.
8
Would have a friend? would know what friend is best?
have God thy friend, who passes all the rest.
Posies for the geastes chamber.
1
THe slouen and the careless man, the roynish nothing nice,
to lodge in chamber comely decked, are seldom suffered twice.
2
With curteine some make scabert clean, with couerlet their sho,
all dyrt and mire some wallow head, as spaniels love to do.
3
Though boots and spurs be never so foul what passes some thero^
what place they foil, what thing they tear, by tumbling thereupon.
4
Foul male some cast on fair board, be carpet nere so cleene,
what manners careless master has, by knave his man is seen.
5
Some make the Chimney chamber pot, to smell like filthy sink,
yet who so bold so sone to say, fough how these howses stink.
6
They therefore such as make no force, what clenly thing they spil
must have a kabben like them selves, although against their will.
7
But gentlemen will gently do, where gentleness is showed,
observing this, with love abide, or else hence al beshrewd.
Posies for thine own bed Chamber.
1
WHat wisdom more, what better life, tha^ pleases God to send
what worldly goods, what longer use tha^ pleseth god to le^d
2
What better fare than well content, what mirth to quiet wealth,
what better gest than trusty friend, in sickness and in health?
3
What better bed than quiet rest, to pass the night with fleepe,
what better work than daily care, fro sin thy self to keep.
4
What better thought than think on God, and daily him to serve,
what better gift than to the poor, that ready be to sterue?
5
What greater praise of God and man, than hatred to forsake,
what mercylesse shall mercy get, that mercy none will take.
6
What worse despair than loath to die, for fear to go to Hell,
what greater faith than trust in god, through christ in heaven to dwell.
Principal points of Religion.
1 TO pray to God continually. 2 To learn to know him rightfully. 3 To honor
God in Trinity, The Trinity in Unity, The Father in his Majesty, The Son
in his humanity, The Holy ghostes benignity,
4 To serve him always holily. 5 To ask him all thing needefully. 6 To praise
him always worthily. 7 To love him always steadfastly. 8 To dread him always
fearfully. 9 To ask him mercy heartily. 10 To trust him always faithfully. 11 To
obey him always willingly. 12 To abide him always patiently. 13 To thank him
always fatherly. 14 To live here always virtuously. 15 To use thy neighbor
honestly. 16 To look for death still presently. 17 To help the poor in
misery. 18 To hope for heavens felicity. 19 To have faith, hope, and
charity. 20 To count this life but vanity. be points of Christianity.

The husband man's belife.
1
THis is my steadfast Creed, my faith and all my trust,
that in the heavens there is a God, most mighty true and just.
That made the hanging Skies, so decked with diverse lights,
of darkness made the cherefull days, and all our restfull nights,
2
That clad this earth with herb, with trees of sundry fruits,
with beast, with bird, both wild and tame, of strange and sundry suites
That intermixed the same, with mines (like veins) of ore:
of silver, gold, or precious stones, and treasures many more.
3
That joined brooks to Dales, to Hills fresh water springes:
with Ryuers sweet alonges the Medes to profit many things.
That made the hory Frostes, the flaky Snowes so trim,
the honey Dewes, the blustering wind to serve as pleases him.
4
That made the surging Seas, in course to ebb and flow:
that skillful man with sailing ship, might travel to and fro.
And stored so the same, for man's unthankful sake,
that every nation under heaven, might thereby profit take.
5
That sends thundering claps, like terrors out of Hell,
that man may know what God it is that in the heavens does dwell
That sends threatening plagues to keep our lives in awe,
his benefits if we forget, or do contemn his law.
6
This is that Lord of hosts, the father of us all,
the maker of what ere was made, my God, on whom I call.
Which for the love of man, sent down his only Son,
begot of him before the worlds were any whit begone.
7
This entered Mary's womb, as faith affirms sure.
conceived by the holy ghost, borne of that virgin pure,
This was both God and man, of Jews the hoped king,
and lived here, save only sin, like man in every thing.
8
This was that virgins child, that same most holy priest,
that Lamb of God ye Prophet great, whom scripture calls Christ.
This that Messiah was, of whom the Prophet spoke,
that should tread down the serpents head, and our atonement make.
9
This Judas did betray to false dissembling Jews:
which unto Pilate being Judge, did falsely him accuse.
Who (through that wicked Judge) and of those Jews dispight,
condemned and tormented was with all the power they might.
10
To living wight more ill what could such wretches do?
more percing wounds, more bitter pains, then they did put him to.
They crowned him with thorn that was the king of kings,
that thought to save the soul of man above all wordly things.
11
This was the Pascall lamb, whose love for us so stood,
that on the mount of Caluerine, did shed for us his blood.
Where hanging on the Cross, no shame he did forsake,
till death given him by pearcing spear, an end of life did make.
12
This Joseph seeing dead, the body thence did crave,
and took it forthwith from the Cross, and laid it in his grave.
Down thence he went to hell, in using there his will,
his soul I mean, his slayed corpse, in Tomb remaining still.
13
From death to life again, the third day this did rise,
and seen on earth to his elect, times often in sundry wise.
And after into heaven, ascend he did in sight,
and sits on the right hand there of God the father of might.
14
Where for us wretches all, his father he does pray,
to take respect unto his death, and put our sins away.
From thence with sounded trump, which noise all flesh shall dread,
he shall return with glory again, to judge the quick and dead.
15
Then shall that voice be heard, come come ye good to me,
get you to hell you workers evil where pain shall ever be.
This is that loving Christ, which I my Savior call,
and only put my trust in him, and in none else at all.
16
In God the holy ghost I firmly do believe,
which from the father and the Son proceeding, life does give.
Which by the prophets spoke, which does all comfort send,
which I do trust shall be my guide, when this my life shall end.
17
A holy Catholic Church, on earth I grant there is,
and those which frame their lives by that, shall never speed amiss.
The head whereof is Christ, his word the chiefest post,
preserver of this Temple great, is God the holy ghost.
18
I do not doubt, there is a multitude of Saints,
more good is done resembling them, then showing the^ our plaints.
Their faith and works in Christ, that glory them did give,
which glory we shall likewise have, if likewise we do live.
19
At God of Heaven there is, forgiveness of our sins,
through Christ's death, through faith in it, and through none other gine
If we (whiles here we live) repentant mercy crave,
through sted fast hope and faith in Christ, for giuenesse we shall have.
20
I hope and trust upon the rising of the flesh:
this corpse of mine (that first must dye) shall rise again afreshe.
The body and soul even then, in one shall joined be:
As Christ did rise from death to life, even so through Christ shall we.
21
As Christ is glorified, and never more shall dye,
As Christ ascended is to heaven, through Christ even so shall I.
As Christ I count my head, and I a member of his:
so God I trust for Christ his sake, shall settle me in bliss.
Thus here we learn of God, that there be persons three,
the Father, Son, the holy ghost, one God in trinity.
In substance all like one, one God, one Lord, one might:
whose persons yet we do divide, and so we may by right.
As God the father is, the maker of us all:
so God the Son redemer is, to whom for help we call.
And God the Holy ghost, does make us pure and clean:
and moves us to wail for grace, we being over seen.
This is that God of Gods, whom every soul should love:
whom all men's hearts should quake for fear, his wrath on the^ to move
That this same mighty God, above all other chief,
shall save my soul from doleful Hell, is all my whole belief.
Of the omnipotency of God and debilitie of man.
1
O God thou glorious god what god is like to thee,
what life, what strength is like to thine, as al ye world may see?
Thy heavens, thine earth, the Seas, and all thy works therein,
do show to who^ thou would to know what thou have ever been.
2
But all the thoughts of man are bent to wretched euels,
man does commit Idolatry, bewitched of the Devils.
What evil is left undone, where man may have his will:
man ever was an hipocrite, and ever will be still.
3
What daily watch is made, the soul of man to sle,
by Lucifer, by Balsabub, Mammon, and Asmode.
In diuelishe pride, in wrath, in covering to much,
in fleshly lust, the time is spent, the life of man is such.
4
The joy that here he has, is as a spark of fire,
his acts be like the smoldering smoke, himself but dirt and mier:
His strength even as a reed, his age like to the flower,
his breath or life is but a puff, uncertain every hour.
5
But for the Holy ghost, and for his gifts of grace,
the death of Christ, the mercy great, man were in woeful case.
O grant us therefore Lord, tamende that is a miss,
and when from hence we do depart, to rest with thee in bliss,
Th. Thusser.

FINIS.
Note that those staves which be marked with this mark or Paraph () before
them, do appertain to Huswiferie, and are fitly intermixed with Husbandrye for
the apt time and use of them.

The table to Husbandry
THe Preface. fo. 2 The commodity of husbandry. fo. 2 The praise of
husbandry fo. 2 The Epistle to the Lord Paget. fo. 3 The Epistle to the reader
fo. 3 The description of husbandry. fo. 4 The Ladder to thrift. fo. 4 xxiiii.
Lessons always to be observed. fo. 5 Husbandry for August. fo. 7 Husbandry
for September fo. 9 Husbandry for October. fo. 10 Husbandry for November fo.
10 Husbandry for December. fo. 11 A digression. so 12 A description of time
and the year. fo. 12 A description of life and riches. fo. 12 A description of
housekeping fo. 13 A description of Christmas. fo. 13 A description of apt
time to spend fo. 13 Against fantastical scruplenes. fo. 14 Christmas
husbandly fare fo. 14 Husbandry for January fo. 14 Husbandry for February fo.
16 Husbandry for March. fo. 17 Husbandry for April fo. 18 Husbandry for May
fo. 18 Husbandry for June fo. 20 Husbandry for July, fo. 20 The kindlye
property of every Month. fo. 22 A comparison between good husbandry and
evil fo. 20 A Sonet fo. 23 A comparison between Champion and Several. fo. 23
The table to Huswiferie.
THe Preface fo. 26 The praise of Huswiferie fo. 26 The Epistle to ye lady
Paget. fo. 26 A description of Huswife and Huswiferie. fo. 27 Twenty Lessons
always to be observed. fo. 27 A digression of Cock crowning. fo. 28 Huswiferie
before breakefast or morning works fo. 29 Huswiferie between breakfast and
dinner or fornoone works. fo. 29 Dinner. fo. 32 After noone works fo. 33
Evening works. fo. 34 Supper. fo. 34 Works after supper fo. 35 The Ploughmans
feasting days fo. 36 The good huswifely Phisik. fo. 36 The good motherly
nurssery. fo. 37 What children should be trained up in Music. fo. 37 A Sonet
to the Lady Paget fo. 38 A comparion between good huswiferie and evil. fo. 38
Husbandly poesies for ye hall. fo. 39 Poesies for the Parlour. fo. 39. Poesies
for the Geastes Chamber. fo. 40 Poesies for the bed chamber. fo. 40 Principal
points of religion. fo. 41 The Husbandmans belief fo. 41 Of the omnipotency of
God, and debilitie of man. fo. 43
FINIS.
Imprynted at London in Fletestrete within Temple bar at the sign of the
Hand and star, by Rychard Tottel. Anno. 1570.

Cum priuilegio.


