printer's device of a compartment with cross-sword arms at top and a naked man
and woman to the sides (not in McKerrow)

The names of herbs in Greek, Latin, English Duche and French with the
commune names that Herbaries and Apotecaries use. Gathered by William Turner.

To the most noble and mighty Prince Edward by the grace of God Duke of
Summerset Earl of Hertforde, vicount beuchamp, lord Semour vnele unto the
Kings highness of England, governor of his most royal person and
Protector of al his realms dominions and subjects, lieuetenaunt general of
al his majesty's armies boeth by land and sea, Treasurer and Erlmarfhal of
England, Gouernoure of the Isles of Gerneley and Iersey, Knight of the garter,
William Turner his servant wishes prosperity boeth of body and soul.
IN a certain little book which I set forth.iiii. years ago and somthynge more,
which I dedicated unto the Kings Grace that now is I promised that if I
perceived that he would take in good worth that little treaties, to set forth
an herbal and an other book also of fishes. Partly to fulfill this my promise
straight way after, I began to labor to make up a latin herbal, which thing
I have finished.ii. years ago, but when I had intended this year to have set it
forth, and axed the advice of Phisicianes in this matter, their advise was that
I should cease from setting out of this book in latin till I had seen those
places of England, wherein is most plenty of herbs, that I might in my
herbal declare to the great honor of our country what number of souereine
and strange herbs were in England that were not in other nations, whose
counsel I have followed deferryng to setout my herbal in latin, till that I have
seen the west country, which I never saw yet in all my life, which country of
al places of England, as I hear say is most richely replenished with al
kinds of strange and wonderful works and gifts of nature, as are stones,
herbs, fishes and metalles when as they that moved me to the setting forth of
my latin herbal, heard this so reasonable an excuse they moved me to set out
an herbal in English as Fuchsius did in latin with the discriptions, figures
and properties of as many herbs, as I had seen and knew, to whom I could make
no other answer but that I had no such leisure in this vocation and place that
I am now in, as is necessary for a man that should take in hand such an
interprise.

But this excuse could not be admitted for both certain scholars, poticaries,
and also surgeans, required of me if that I would not set forth my latin
herbal, before I have seen the west parts, and have no leisure in this place
and vocation to write so great a work, at the least to set forth my judgment
of the names of so many herbs as I knew whose request I have accomplished, and
have made a little book, which is no morebut a table or regestre of such books
as I intend by the grace of God to set forth here after, if that I may obtain
by your graces healp such liberty and leisure with a convenient place. as
shall be necessary for such a purpose.

This little book co^teineth the names of the most part of herbs, that all
ancient authors write of both in Greek, Lattin, English, Duche and French,
I have set to also the names which be commonly used of the poticaries and
common herbaries. I have told also the degrees of so many herbs as Galene the
chief Doctor of al phisicians has written of, and because men should not
think that I write of it that I never saw, and that Poticaries should be
excuselesse when as the right herbs are required of the^, I have showed in
what places of England, Germany and Italy the herbs grow and may be had for
labor and money, whereof I declare and teach the names in this present
treates. Which how profitable it shall be unto all the sick folk of this
Realm, I refer the matter unto all them which are of a right judgment in
physic. This small book of mine I dedicate unto your grace, signifiyng
thereby, only what mind I bear unto your grace, desirynge you to take this in
good worth till that I may have leisure and occasion to write some greater and
more worthy work to your highness, who^ almighty God long continue in all
virtue and honor to his pleasure Amen.

From your graces house at Syon Anno Dom. M.CCCCCxlviij. Martii.xv.
Abies.
ABies is called in greek Elate, in english a fur tree, in duch, Ein dannen,
in french Sapin, it grows in the alps naturally and in certain gardines
planted and set by man's hand boeth in England and in Germany.

Abrotunum.
Abrotonu^ is called in greek, Abrotonon, in english Sothernwod, in duche
Alfrush, in french Auronne. There are two kinds of Sothernwod, the male and
the female.

The male grows plentuously in gardines in England, but the female did I
never see growing in England, it is found in Italy in plenty enough.
Sothernwod is hot and dry in the third degree.

Absinthium.
Absinthium is called in greek. Apsinthion, in english wormwod, in Duche
wermout, in french, Absince or Aluyne. There are three kinds of wormwod,
beside the commune wormwod, wormwod pontike, called in latin Abunthium
ponticum, in english may be also called wormwod gentle, it is called of Mesue
and of the Potecaries of Germany Absinthium romanum the Coloners call it grave
crut, the Freses call it wild rosmary. The best bind of this wormwode gentle
or pontike that I have seen came from Rome, an other kind of the same is to be
had in Anwerp and through al Germany in plenty The second kind is called in
latin Absinthium marinum and Seryphum, it grows commonly in diches whereinto,
the salt water uses at certain times to come, it is plentuous in
Northumberlande by holy Island, and in Northfolke beside Lin, at Barrowe in
Brabant, and at Norden in est freslande. Some take this herb against the
truth for pontike wormwod. The third kind is called in latin Absinthium
santonicum, I never se the herb but ones, it may be called in english
french wormwod. Our commune wormwod is called in latin Absinthium rusticum.
And here is to be marked that they are far deceived that use this for po^tike
wormwod. I report me to Galene (xi. Methodi medendi) whether it be so or no.
Pontike wormwod, is hot in the first degree and dry in the third. Sea
wormwod is hot in the second degree and dry in the first, french wormwod is
weaker then Sea wormwod is.

Acanthium.
Acanthium is called in greek Acanthion, it is named of some herbaries carduus
asininus, I have not heard the name of it in english, but I think it may be
called in english otethistle, because the seeds are like unto rough otes, or
gum thistle, or coiten thistle, because it is gummy and the leaves have in the^
a thing like cotton, which appears when they are broken. It grows in
gardines in Bonony, I have also seen it in England in gardines, but never a
broad. The herb is of an hot and a subtle nature.

Acanthus.
Acanthus is called in greek Acantha, in english Branke vrlin, in duche welshe
bearenklawe, in french branke vrsine, branca vrsina grows in many places of
England in gardines and in the greatest plenty that I ever saw it, I did see
it in my Lord Protectours graces gardine at Syon, some err sore which abuse
for this herb berefote. The rote of bra^keursine dries and cutteth humors
lightly, and is of subtle parts, the leaves have power metely to drive
humors to their places.

Aconitum.
There are.ii. kinds of the herb called Aconitum, the one kind is called
Pardalianches, which we may call in english Lihardbayne or one bery. It is
much in Northumberland in a wodde beside Morpeth called Cottingwod. It has
four leaves like unto great pla^taine, and in the ouermost top a little black
bery like a black morbery, but blacker and greater. The other kind is called
Lycoctonum, and in english it may be called wolfes bayne. But this kind is
divided into two other kinds, of which I never saw any kind in England,
the one has leaves like crowfote, and blewe flowers like hodes, and it is
called muench kappen in duche, and it may be called in english monks coule
or blewe wolfsbaine. The other kind has leaves like a plain tree or like
Palma christ and yelowe flowers, this may be called in English yelowe
wolfesbayn. I have seen the former kind in great plenty upon the alps between
Clauena and Spelunca, and in many gardines in Brabant, the latter kind did I
never se but in gardines.

Acorus.
Acorus grows not in England, wherefore they are far deceived that use the
yelowe slourdeluce, which some call gladen, for Acorus, for Acorus is hot,
bytinge and opening, but gladen is cold, unsavory and astringent. I think
that the great Galanga is the true Acorus. If they have not it they may use
Calamus aromaticus, or Asarabacca for Acorus. Acorus is hot and dry in the
third degree.

Adiantum.
Adiantum is called in greek Adianton, in duche iunkfrawen hare, of the
herbaries Capillus veneris and grows not in england for it that is taken here
for Adiantum is trirhomanes in Dioscorides. How be it ye may use trichomanes
for Adianto, for they are of like virtue. Adiantum grows in Italy in wells,
and in the alps in watery or drepyng rocks, and especially whereas the first
water begins to stand, if that a rock like a browe, hang over the well or
water, it may be named in english Venus heir or Colo^der maidens heir. Venus
heir is in a mean tempre between hot and cold.

Agaricus.
Agaricus is called in greek agaricos, in english agarike, in duch
danne^sthawm. Agarike grows not in England, but in the alps which divide
Germany and France from Italy. Agarike is hot and dryueth away and breaks
in small pieces, humors.

Albucus
Albucum is called also Hastula regia, and in greek asphodelos, asphodillus
grows not in England. It grows in gardines in Anwerp, it may be named in
english white affodil, or duche daffodil, this that we take for daffodil is a
kind of Narrissus mentioned in pliny, it dryueth away humors and sends
them abroad.

Alcea.
Alcea is called in greek alcea, in Duche figmarswortes, of the Herbaries Herba
hungarica, in french guimane, it has no name in english that I know, it
may be named Veruen mallowe, or cut mallowe. It grows plentnously in
Germany at Bon by the Rhene side.

Allium.
Allium is called in greek scorodo^, in English garlike, in duche knobloch, in
french anlouanx, it is divided into three kinds, the first kind is the common
garlike, the second kind is called allium anguinum in latin, and
ophioscorodo^ in greek, in english crow garlike, or wild garlike. The third
kind is called in latin Allium vrsinum, and in english Ramsey, or bucra^mes
or ra^mes. The first kind grows in gardines only. The second kind grows
in the fields. The.iij. kind grows also in gardines Garlyke is hot and dry
in the fourth degree.

Alnus.
Alnus is called in greek Clethra, in English an alder tree or an aller tree,
in duche erlinbaum, it grows by water sides and in marrishe middowes.

Aloe.
Aloe is so called in greek, latin and english, It grows not in England but
by the sea side and in Islands, I have seen it in gardines in Italy, but it
dureth not in gardines above three years. Aloe is after Paulus hot in the
first degree and dry in the third. Mesue says that it is hot in the second
and dry in the third, but this is so to be understand that it is very hot in
the first degree and meanly hot in the second.

Alsine.
Alsine is called in english chike weed, in duch vogell craute, in french
mauron, of the herbaries Morsus galline, it is moist and cold, it grows on
old houses and in all places all most in summer.

Altercum.
Altercum, sieve Apollinaris is named in greek hyosciamos, in english Henbane,
in duch bylse^ craute, in french Alaha^bane, of the Poticaries Iusquiamus. It
is cold in the third degree.

Althea.
Althea called also Hibiscus, and Euitcus, is named in greek althaia, in
English marish mallowe or water mallowe, in duch ibish, it grows in watery
places, some take not as they should do holyhoke for althea. Mershe mallowe.

Alysson Plinij.
Alyscon Plinij is a rare herb which I could never see but once in England
and that was a little from Syon. It had leaves like madder and purple flowers,
it may be named in english purple goosgrafe.

Amarantus.
There are two kinds of Amara^tus, the one kind is called in greek of
Discorides Helichryson, and this kind is found in Italy. The other kind is
called here in England of some purple velvet flower, of other flouramore.

Amygdala.
Amygdala is called in greek amygdale, in english an almon tree, in duche en
mandel baum, in french amander, it grows in Italy and in high Germany in the
fields, but in England, only in gardines. Almondes have a temparate heat.

Ami.
Ami is called in english amy, of the poticaries ammeos, it grows not in
England, it grows in many gardines in Italy and in Germany. It is hot and
dry in the third degree.

Amomum.
Amomum were Rosa hierecuntis if it sauoured well, but for lack of that, this
rose of hierico seems to be amomis.

Anagallis.
Anagallis, sieve Corchorus, is called in english pympernel, in duche
gauchheyl, in french morgelina, it grows commonly among the corn. The male
has a crimsin flower, and the female has a blewe flower. They are somethynge
hot and dry.

Anagyris.
Anagyris grows not in England, it has seed like a bean and I have seen
it in Bonony, it may be called stynkynge trifoly in english, or bean tree.
It is hot of complexion.

Anchusa.
Anchusa grows in sa^dy grounds and sometime among the corn with a red rose
and leaves like Buglos, it is called in french orchanet, it may be named in
english wild Buglos or orchanet, as the french men do. The herb is cold and
dry.

Androsaemon.
Androsaemon is the herb (as I door g^^^^ which we call totsan, and the
Poticaries falsely call Agnus castus, it grows in gardines in England and no
where else that I have seen, it dries by his natural power.

Anemone.
Anemone grows much about Bon in Germany, I have not seen it in England, it
is called of the common herbaries Herba ve^ti, it may be called in english rose
perseley.

Anethum.
Anethum is called in greek anethon, in english and duche, dill, in french
anet, anet is hot far in the second degree and is duller in drives in the
same degree, Anethum is wrong englished, of some, anise.

Anisum.
Anisum is called in greek anison, in English anise, the anise which we use
now adays is not so hot as Galen says that his anise is, for he says
that anise is hot and dry in the third degree.

Anonis.
Anonis called also Ononis is called of the herbaries Resta bouis, Remora
aratri, and acutella, and in duche hawhekell and stalcraute, and in french
Bugraues, in Cambryge Shyre a whyne, it grows in many places about cambryge.
The root of this herb is of an hot nature.

Aparine.
Aparine sieve Philanthropos, sieve Omphacocarpos is called in english goosgrasse
or Goosehareth, in Duche Klebkraute, in french Grateron, the herb scoureth
away and dries.

Anthenus.
Anthenus sieve Chamaemelo^ is called in english Cammomyle, in duch camillen,
in french camomille, Camomilla is divided into three kinds, the first kind
is called leucanthemo^ because it has a white flower and of the commune
herbaries Camomilla romana, and in english cammomyle, this herb grows on
Rychmund grene, and in Hundsley heth in great plenty. The second is called in
greek chrysanthemon because it has a golden flower. I found it once in a
corn field between Basyle and Surike, and have never seen it any where else in
all my life, it may be called in english yealowe camomyle. The third kind
is named in greek Eranthemon because it grows in the spring of the year. I
have sent it in England but very rare, some call it amariscam rubeam, and they
call it in English red mathes, alij, red maid wed, alij, purple camomyle.
Camomyle is hot and dry in the first degree

Antirrhinon.
Antirrhinon is of two sorts, the one is described of Pliny with leaves like
flax, and the other is described of Dioscorides with the leaves of pimpernel,
Plinies antirrhinon grows in many places of Germany in the corn fields, and
it may be called in english calfe snoute. The other kind have I in my
gardine whose seed came from Italy, it may be called broad calfe snoute.

Apios.
Apios is called also Ischas, chamebalanos, and carica, it is called in
english an ernute or an earth nute, it grows plentuouslye in Northumberland,
beside morpeth and in Germany between Redkyrke and Colo^.

Apiastrum.
Apiastru^ sieve Citrago, is named in greek Melissophillon, ant Meliphillo^, in
english Baume, in duche Melessen oder Hertes kraut and Confili, in french
Melesse. The Baume that we have in England here is not the right
Melissophyllon, but it grows in Germany in many gardines, and has a great
deell better smell then this common Melissa has, it may be called in english
Baum gentle, Baume is hot in the second degree, but it dries not so much.

Apium.
Apium is named Selino^, in english Perseley, in duch Peterlinge either
Petersely, in french Persil It is hot in the second degree and dry in the
midst of the third. Some use for it with an error Paludapio, that is
Smallage for apio. Perseley grows no where that I know, but only in gardines.

Aristolochia.
Aristolochia is of three sorts. The first is called in latin aristolochia
rotunda, and it may be named in english round Ofter Lurior astrolochia, or
round hertworte. Some abuse for this herb, Holwort, which is in Pleni Capnos
phragmites. But their error is easily perceived by the reading of the
description of Dioscorides. This kind grows not in England, but in Italy and
in France plentuously. The second is called Aristolochia longa, and it grows
very little in England that I have seen, but about Bon in Germany it grows in
many hedges by the vineyardes, but there it brings forth no fruit, but
beside Lake decome, it brings forth fruit like black pears and seed like
men's hertes, this kind may be called in english long Hertworth or long
Astolochia The third kind is called Clematites and it may be called in english
small Hertworte, it grows in high Almany, in Basile. Herteworte is hot and
dry about the third degree.

Armoracia.
Armoratia is named in greek Raphanis it grows not in England that I wotte
of, but it grows in Italy and it is called Larmoratia, it might be called in
english if we had it, wyld Radish, it is hot of complexion.

Arum.
Arum is called in greek aron, in english Cuckopintell, Wake Robin, or Rampe,
in duche Psaffen bind, in french Vidchaen, the Poticarie calls it Pes
vituli, Serpentaria minor, Luph minus grows in every hedge almost in England
about towns in the spryng of the year. Some write that it is but hot and
dry in the first degree, how be it our aron is hot in the third degree.

Arbutus.
Arbutus grows in Italy, it has leaves like Quicke^tree, a fruit like a
strawbery, wherefore it may be called in english strawbery tree, or an arbute
tree.

Arthemisia.
Arthemisia otherwise called Parthenis, is commonly called in english
mugworte, and in duch Bifusse, it is not the very same that Dioscorides
describes. I saw the right Mugwort in an Island beside Venice, and it may be
called in english little Mugwort. Arthemisia is of three sorts, the first is
the herb that I call sea Mugworte, the second kind after Fuchsius, is
Feuerfew, and the third kind Tansey. This broad and common kind may be used
for the right till we may get better. Mugworte heateth in the second degree,
and dries either vehemently in the end of the first degree, or else lightly in
the beginning of the second.

Arundo.
Arundo is called in greek Calamos, in english a reed, in duch Ein ror oder
ried, in french nug roseau, it grows in water sides, and in fennes, and such
other watery places

Asarum.
Asarum is named in greek asaron, in english azarabacca or Folefote, in duche
Haselwortz, in french Cabaret, it is hot and dry in the third degree. It
grows in Germany wild under Hasell trees, whereupon it has the name. It
grows in England only in gardines that I wotte of.

Ascyron.
Ascyron is not very common in England, how be it I saw it this last year in
Syon parck, it has a foursquared stalk, and is like saint Iohans grass, but
it is greater and not with such holes as are in saint Iohans grass,
wherefore it may be called in english square saint Iohans grass or great
saint Iohans grass.

Asclepias.
Asclepias is called of the Herbaries Hirundinaria, of the duche men
Schwalbenwirt, and of some poticaries Vincetoxicum. It grows in Germany in
high mountains, and in stony ground among busshes I have not seen it in
England, it may be called in english, Swallowurt.

Asparagus.
Asparagus is of.ij. kinds, the one kind is called in latin asparagus
altilis, or asparagus alone, of the Poticaries sparagus, in English Sperage,
in Duche Spargen, in french Esperage, it grows very plentuously in the
Islands of cast Freeseland, but in England it grows no where else that I
know, but in gardines. The other is named in latin Corruda or asparagus
syluestris I never saw this kind but only in Italy in the mount aperune, it
may be called in english pricky Sperage, because it is all full of pryckes.

Asplenum.
Asplenum or asplenium named in greek asplenon, or Scolope^drion, in duche
Steinferne, is called of the poticaries Citterache. It may be called in
english Citterach, or Scaleferne, or Fingerferne. This herb grows communely
in great rocks and in moist walls, it is very much in big he Germany
beside Embis has, and beside S. Goweris. I hear say that it is also ple^tuous
in the west country here in England.

Astragalus.
Astragalus is called in low duche land Erde nut, and in Berglande Erdeklin,
it may be called in english peaserthnut. It grows in the mountains of
Germany, and has leaves and stalks like a pease, black little rotes with
knoppes like acornes, Fuchsius took this herb to be apios, but the description
agrees not. Astragalus has a nature to dry, I have seen this herb of late
in Coome park more astringe^t the^ it of Germany.

Atractilis altera.
Atractilis altera, named of the poticaries Cardo benedictus, and so is it also
named in English, it grows no where in England that I know, but in
gardines.

It dries humors by nature.

Atriplex.
Atriplex called in greek atraphaxys, or Chrysolachano^, in english Orech or
Orege, in Duche Milten, in French arroches, is moist in the second degree
and cold in the first, it grows in gardines and in some Cornefieldes.

Auena.
Auena named in greek Bromos, in english Otes or hauer, in duche Haber or
hauer, in french auoine, is something of a cold nature and a stoppyng.

Bacchar.
Bacchar or Baccaris is the herb (as I think) that we call in english Sage of
Jerusalem, but I will determine nothing in this mattertyl I have seen
further. Let learned men examine and judge.

Balanus myrepsica.
Balanus myrepsica, is called of the Poticaries Ben, and so mayt it be also
named in english, it scoureth and cutteth with a certain astriction. It
grows not in Europa that I have heard tell of.

Ballote.
Ballote named of some marrubiastrum or marrubium nigrum is named in english
stynkyng Horehound or black Horehound in duche stynkend andorne, in french
marrubin nore, it grows in hedges communely in every country.

Barba Hirci.
Barba Hirci named in greek Tragopogon or Come, grows in the fields about
London plentuously, and it grows much in the middowes of Colon and in many
places in duch land. The duch herb has some bitterness in the root and a
white seed, but ours is sweet and has black seed, therefore ours is the
better herb. It may be called in english gotes bearde.

Bellis.
Bellis or Bellius named in English a Dasie, is called of the Herbaries
Co^solida minor, in duch Massible and Cleyn Iritlossen, in french Margarites or
Petit consyre. Dasies grow in all grene places in great plenty.

Beta.
Beta named in greek Seutlon and Teutlon, is called in English a Beat, in
Duche Mangolt, in french Porree, on Iotte. It is called of Plenie and
Theophrastus, Sicula. Betes grow in England, as far as I know in gardines
only.

Betonica
Betonica called in Greek Cestron or Psychotrophio^, is named in english
Betony or Beton, in duche Betonien, in french Betoine, it grows much in
woddes and wild forestes. Betony is hot and dry.

Betonica Pauli aeginete.
Betonica Pauli, is a little herb growing not higher then Penny ryal with leaves
also like Penny ryal with seeds in coddes like Bursa pastoris, it grows
ple^tuously in Germany about Bon, and in England in a park beside London, it
may be called in english Paul's Betony or wodde Penny ryal.

Betula.
Betula or as some write it, betulla, is called in greek Semida, in english a
birch tree or a birke tree, in duche ein birck baum, in french bouleau ou
beula. It grows in woddes and forestes.

Blitum.
Blitum is named in greek blito^ or bleto^ in duch maier, in french dublite, I
never saw it in England but in my lords gardine, and there it was unknown. It
may be named a blete. Blete after Galene is cold and moist in the second
degree.

Botrys.
Botrys is called in english Oak of Jerusalem, in duche trauben krante, in
french pijmen as some teach. It grows in gardines much in England.

Brassica.
Brassica is named in greek krambe, in english colewuries, cole or keele, in
duche kol, in french chauls, in the Poticaries latin caulis.

Brassica marina.
Brassica marma is called in greek krambe thalastia, in duche mere kole, in
french soldana. I have not seen it in England, but I think that it grows
ple^tuously in England It may be called in english seafolfote it grows
plentuously in east Freeslande about the banks of diches whereinto the salt
water comes at every ^^^ynge tide, it grows also much in middowes by the
seasyde, which are sometime ouerflowed with the salt water.

Brassica syluestris.
Brassica syluestris grows in Dover cliffes where as I have only seen it in all my life. It may be named in english sea cole

Bryon thalassion.
Bryon thalassio^ named in latin Muscus marinus is of two sorts, the one is
described of Dioscorides to be very small after the manner of heirs, this kind
is of two sorts. The one kind is called Vsnea marina, and it may be called in
english sea moss, it grows about stones and shelles in the sea. An other of
the same kind is called of certain Herbaries Corallina. Both these have very
small branches, the first like wod, the other like stone. The other kind is
described of Plenie and Theophrastus to have leaves like letties, and this
kind is called in english slauke. It grows in the sea about shelles and
stones also. It coleth and byndeth.

Bryonia.
Bryonia called in greek Ampelos leuce in english bryonie or wild Neppe, in
duch wild Kur^^^ teufels Kirs, it is named in french C^^^nree and de fen
ardant. It grows in many places of England in hedges. It scoureth away and
dries up.

Buglossum.
Buglossum called of the Poticaries borago, is called in english borage, in
duche borretsch, in french borache, borage is moist and warm. I ^are say that
there is a better kind of Buglosse found of late in Spain, but I have not
seen that kind as yet. The commune buglosse that we use, is not cirsion, as
afterward I shall declare but a certain kind of right buglosse.

Bulbine.
Bulbine called in Duche hundes vllich may be called in english dogs Leike,
it grows much about Bon in Germany. It has a round root and a yealowe
flower.

Bunium.
Bunium is a rare herb in England, to me at the least, for I could never
find it here, but Lucas the reader of Dioscorides in Bonomy showed it me. It
may be called in english square perseley. Bunium is hot of complexion.

Buthalmus.
Buthalmus is like Chrysanthemon, but the flower is a great deele greater. I
have seen it in Italy and in high Germany, but no where in England. It may be
called in english Oxeye.

Buxus.
Buxus named in greek Pyxos is called in english box, in duch bucksz baume,
and in french bouys.

Calamintha.
Calamintha is of three kinds, the first kind is like wild Meriorum and it
grows much about Syon in England, and by Bon in Germany. It may be called
in english bush calamint, because it grows ever among the busshes, or hoar
calamynt. The second kind grows much in the corn, and therefore it is
called in duch cornemynt. It is also called in english corn mint and calamynt.
The third kind is called in latin Nepeta, in english Nepe, in Duche
Katzenkrante oder Katzenmuntz, in french herb Anchat. Calamynt is hot and
dry in the third degree.

Caltha.
Caltha is called of the Herbaries calendula, in english a Marygolde, in Duche
Ringebloumen, in french Soulsie.

Canabis.
Canabis is called in English Hemp, in duche Hanffe in french chanure.

Cantabrica.
Cantabrica of Plenie, is called in english wild Gelouer or gelesloure, in
duch wylder neglebloum, in french Armoris. Some call the same herb
Garyophilsata^ siluestre^.

Capnos.
Capnos called in latin Fumaria, and in english Fumitarie, in duche Kernel
oder Erdrauch, in french furniterre, it grows among the corn, and it has
a sharp and a bitter quality.

Capnos phragmites.
Capnos prior Pliuij, or Capnos phragmites in Theophrastus, is called in duche,
Holewurte, and falsely of the commune sort Aristolochia rotunda. It grows
plentuously in Germany about Bon in the hedges, it may be called in english
Holewurte

Capparis.
Capparis or Inturis is called in english Capers, in duche Kappers, in french
Capres. Capers is hot in the second degree, and dry in the third after
Auerois.

Carduus.
Carduus called in latin Scolimus after Galene, Aetius and Paulus is a sundry
herb from Cinara. But other authors make only this difference that Carduus
should be wild Archichoke and Cinara should be the gardin Archichoke.

Careum.
Careum called also Carium, and in greek Karos, is called in english
Carruwayes, in high duch Weisz kymmer, in low duch Hoffe cumyn, in french
Carni, the poticaries call it also Carni, it is almost hot and dry in the
third degree.

Carex.
Carex is called in english a Sege, it grows in fennes and in watery places,
it is called in Northumberla^d Shearegrasse because it cutteth men's hands
that touch it.

Cassutha.
Cassutha called in greek Cassitas, is named in english Doder, in duch Filtz
kraut, Doder, and wrang, in french Gout de line, the Poticaries call it
Cuscutam and Podagram lini. Some abuse this herb when it grows about small
grass, or Time, or Sauery for Epithymo of the old writers. How be it they
are deceived. For the Doder that grows about Time is only Epithymum Mesues,
and not Galeni and Dioscoridis. Doder grows about Flax, Tares, Nettels,
Time, Sauery, Hoppes, and many other such like, it is much more ple^tuous in
Germany the^ it is in England.

Castanea.
Castanea called Castonos in greek, and of some Dus balanos, is named in
english a Chestnut tree in duche en Kesten baum, in french Castaiginey.

Celtis.
Celtis named in greek Lotos is called in french as Gesnere says, Algsier or
Ledomier, but how that it is called in english and in duche I ca^ not tell, for
I never saw it neither in Germany nor in England, but I have seen it in
Italy, it has a leaf like a Nettel, therefore it may be called in english
Ntetel tree or Lote tree.

Centaurium.
Centaurium is of two sorts, the one is called centaurium magnum and it is
called of the Poticaries Ruponticum, and in English Rupontike. It grows
only in gardines, I never saw it saving only in Italy and Germany. The
second kind is called in latin Ce^^aurium minus, in english Ce^torie, in
duch ^usent gulden, in french Fiel be terre. Ce^torie scouteth away and dries
up.

Centunculus.
Centunculus named in greek Guaphalion is named in duche Rurkraut and in
english in some places Cartaphilago. How be it that is an other herb as
afterward I shall declare. It may be called in english Chafweede, it is
called in York supre cudweede.

Cepe.
Cepe or Cepa called in greek Crommyon is of diverse sorts, the first kind
is called in latin Cepa ascaloma, in greek Crommyon askalonton, and in english
a Scalion. The second is called Crom^yon Schiston, in english in some place
Hole leke, it were better to call it Wynterouyon, because it has blades as
Onions and not like seeks and endures all the winter. The Duche call this
Onyon Seer or Suer. I see it no where else but in gardines. Onyons are hot in
the fourth degree.

Cepaea.
Cepaea is diversely described of Dioscorides and Plan, Cepaea that Dioscorides
describes as I judge is the herb which is called in english Brooklem, and
in Duche Bauchhung. It grows in water sides, and by brooks, and sprynges.
Cepaea Plinij grows by the sea side, and because it is very like Purcellayne,
it may be called in english sea Purcellayne.

Chamaecyparissus.
Chamaecyparissus is supposed of some men to be the herb that we call Lauander
cotton, whose opinion as I do not utterly reject, yet I found an herb in the
mountains above Bon, which being in all points much more like a Cypres tree,
then Lauander cotton is, me think is rather Chamaecyparissus then it is, it
may be called in english heath Cypres, because it grows among heath, or
dwarf Cypres.

Camedrys.
Chamedrys called in latin Trissago, in english Germander or english Triacle,
in duche Bamanderlin, in french Gelimand^e. It is called of the Potecaries
Chamedryos. Germander grows in the rocks of Germany over against Byng
beside Cre^fiel^e. In England I saw it no where saving only in gardines. It
is hot and dry in the third degree.

Chameleuce.
Chamelence named in latin Populago, Farfagium and Farranu^ is called in
Northumberlande a Lucken gollande. It grows in watery middowes with a leaf
like a water Rose, wherefore it may be called also Petie nunefar.

Chamepence.
Chamepence is a very rare herb, which I never saw growyng, saving only in
the aspes, it boweth like the ear of rye, wherefore it may be called in
english Aspeare or Petie Larix.

Chamepitys.
Chamepitys called in latin Aiuga, and of the Poticaries Iua muscata, is called
in duche Ye leuger, and in french Ine muscate and it may be called in english
Ground pyne. It grows much in the mount Appenine beside Bonony and above
Bon in Germany. I have not seen it in England. It is dry in the third
degree and hot in the second.

Chondrilla.
Chondrilla is not in England that I have seen, it is much in high Germany
and because it has leaves like Succorye, and stalks like Rysshes, it may be
named in english Ryshe Succory or gum Succory because it has a clammy humor
in it.

Cicerbita.
Cicerbita is named in greek Sogthas, in english a Sow thistle, in duche
Salenkoel or gensz distel, in french Lattero^, it grows common enough in all
countries. The nature of the herb is to cool.

Cicer.
Cicer is called in greek Erebinthos, in duche Kicherus, kicherbs and
Zisserne, in french Cich ou Pois ciches Cicer is much in Italy and in Germany.
I have seen them but seldom in England. Cicer may be named in english Cich, or
ciche pease, after the french tongue.

Cicercula.
Cicercula named in greek Lathyros, grows in Germany in great plenty above
Bon, the pulls may be called in English cichlynge, or little or Petie ciche.

Cicera.
Cicera and cicercula diffre by these marks. Cicercula has white seed and
full of squares, and Cicera has black seeds. Cicera may be called in
english black cichlynge.

Cicuta.
Cicuta is called in greek Concion, in english Homlocke or Hemlocke, in duche
Sheirlynge, in french Cigue or secu. The leaves of our H^mlocke are not so
small, as Dioscorides requires in his cicuta. He^locke is told in the
extremity, that is in the fourth degree.

Cingulum.
Cingulum is named in greek Zoster, it grows in the sea, and is like a
gyrdel, wherefore it may be named in english, fysshers gyrdle or sea gyrdel,
or sea ^elte. I have seen it in east Freslande by the sea side.

Cirsium.
Cirsium named in greek Cirsion has been supposed of many to be our Bogl^sse,
but they are deceived. I think that our Lang debefe should be the right
Cirsim, if it had purple flowers, as it has yealowe. Howbeit I think that it
is the right Cus^on, for the color of the herd is diverse in diverse places.

Cisthus.
Cisthus grows plentuously in Italy, and one kind of cisthus grows in my
Lords gardine in Syon. Cisthus is called of some Herbaries Rosa canina and
rosago. It that grows in Italy, which I saw in Ferraria has shorter
leaves, then this cisthus that grows in Syon. Cisthus may be named in english
cistsage or bushsage, for the lykenes that it has with sage. Cisthus binds
and dries.

Cistus ladanifera.
Cisthus ladanifera has longer and smaller leaves, then has the other
cisthus, it grows much in Spain and also in Italy, whereas I have seen it,
it may be named in England, London or Ladonshrub. It is almost hot in the
second degree and binds somthynge.

Clematis daphnoides.
Clematis daphnoides is called of the latin writers Vinca peruinca, and in
english Perewincle, in duche ingrien, and in french peruitica.

Clematis altera.
Clematis altera is not wythwynde, as Ruellius gessed, but an other herb far
unlike, which I saw once in Farraria, it has sharper and longer leaves the^
peruinca has. It may be named in english bush Perewincle.

Clinopodium.
Clinopodium grows plentuously about Bon by the Rehne side. I hear say
that it grows also about Oxford. It may be called in english horse Time,
because it is like great Time, it is hot and dry in the third degree.

Clymenum.
Clymenum seems not to be al one herb in Plime and Dioscorides, clymenum of
Dioscorides, is water Betonie as I suppose called of some Herbaries Scrofularia
mayor. Clymenos of Pliny seems to ibe an herb called in duche about Colon,
saint John's kraute, it grows in wodes about hedges, and the other kind
grows ever in water sides.

Cnecus.
Cnecus or cuicus is called in greek cuecos, in english Bastard saffron or
mock saffron, in duche wild saffron, in french saffran bastard, it is hot
in the third degree. It is much in high Germany sown in fields, as saffron
is set here. The Poticaries call this herb carthamus.

Cholchicum.
Cholchicum is abused of some Poticaries for Hermodactylus. Cholchicum has
leaves and seeds in summer, and flowers like saffron flowers about
Mihelmesse. It is much in Germany about Bon in moist middowes and in woddes.
It may be called in english, wild saffron.

Colocasia.
Colocasia called in greek Cyamos aegyptios and in latin Faba, also Egyptia,
it may be called in english a Been of Egypt. I have seen the right colocasia in
Italy, and a kind of the same in Germany.

Colutea.
Colutea as Ruellius judges is the tree, which is called of the Poticaries
Seen, and in english Seen, I have seen it a little from Bououy in the mount
Appennine.

Coniza.
Coniza is of two sorts, the greater and the less. I have seen both the
kinds in Italy between Cremona and Farraria by the Padus bank, the less
grows much in Germany by the Rhene, they are both hot and dry in the third
degree. Coniza may be called in english Flebayne.

Consiligo.
Consiligo whereof is made mention in Cohimella and Pleme, is the herb which
is called in english hearfot, in duch Christwurtz, in french Pate d^lyon.

Conuoluulus.
Conuoluulus called in greek Helxine Cissampelos, it is the herb which is
called of the herbaries Volubilis, in english withwynde or byndeweede, in duche
Winden, in french Lizet, lizeron, or campanet. Co^noluulus wyndeth it self
about herbs and busshes.

Coriandrum.
Coria^dru^ or Corianu^ is called in greek Corio^ and coriano^, in english
Cola^der or coriander, in duch koria^der, and in french coria^dre. It is hot
in the first degree after Auerrhois, I think that he means of the seed

Cornus.
Cornus is called in greek crania, in duch thierlinbaume, in french Coruner or
coriner, the male of this kind have I seen often in Germany, but never yet in
England. It may be called in english long chery tree. The female is
ple^tuous in England and the buchers make pricks of it, some call it Gadrise
or dog ^ree, how be it there is an other tree that they call dogrise also.

Corunopus.
Coronopus named in greek coronopous is called in Cambryge, herb Iue, and it
might also well be named crowfore weybreade, it grows much about Shene
above London, it loves well to grow by the sea banks also.

Corylus.
Corylus called in greek Carya Po^tike, is called in english an Hasyle tree,
in duche Ein hasessta^d, in french couldre. The fruit of this is called in
latin, Auellana.

Crataeogonum.
Cataeogonu^ sieve crataegonum, is the herb which the herbaries name
Parsicariam, english men call Arssinerte, duche men floechkraut, and french
men Rassel and curage, it grows in watery and moist places.

Crithmus.
Crithmus named also crithamus and Batis is called in english Sampere, it is
named of some Herbaries creta marina, it grows much in rocks and cliffes
beside Dover

Crocus.
Crocus is named in greek Crokos, in english Saffron or safforne, in duche,
Saffran, in french Safrone, it is hot in the second degree and dry in the
first.

Cucumis.
Cucumis is called in greek Sicyos or Sicys, in english a cucummer, in duch
Cucumren, in french a co^combre. It is in a manner cold and moist in the
second degree.

Cucumis syluestris.
Cucumis syluestris called in greek Sicys agrios, and of other cucumis
anguinus, of the common Herbaries Asininus, grows ple^tuously about Bonony
in Italy, and in some gardines in England. It may be called in english wild
cucummer or leapyng cucumer. It is hot in the second degree.

Cucurbita.
Cucurbita is called in greek Colocynthe, in english a Gourde, in duche
Kurbsz, intrenche Courge, a Gourde is cold and moist in the second degree.

Cucurbita syluestris.
Cucurbita syluestris is called in greek Colocynthis, it is called in
english, and of the apoticaries coloquintida. It grows in certain gardines
in Germany.

Cuminum.
Cuminum is called in greek Cyminon in english cummyn, in duche cummich or
cumyn, in french cumyne. Cumine is hot in the third degree, it grows in
Candy, I have not seen it in England.

Cupressus.
Cupressus is named in greek Cyparissos, in english a cypress tree.
Cypresses grow in great plenty in my Lords graces gardine at Syon.

Cyanus.
Cyanus is named in greek Cyanos, in english Blewbottel or a blewblaw, in duch
Blaw Cornblowme^, in french Blaueole, or blanet, the herb grows among the
corn.

Cyclaminus.
Cyclaminus otherwise called Ichthyoteron, Rapum terre, vmbilicus terre, panis
porcinus, is named in duche erd apselseubrot, in french pain de porceu, it
grows plentuously beside Bonony in the mount Appenine, and in swechyrlande
beside Wallense, I hear say that it grows also in the welt country of
England, but I have not heard yet the english name of it. Me think that it
might well be called in english Rape Violet because it has a root like a Rape
and floores like a Violet or sowbrede. It is hot and dry in the beginning of
the third degree.

Cynaglossus.
Cynaglossus the second of Plenie, which he describes to have little bures, is
the common cynaglossus, which the Paticaries use, and is called in english
Hounds tongue or dogs tongue. It grows in sandy grounds and about cities and
towns, I have not seen that I wotte of yet cynaglossum Tioseoridis, which
has no stalk at al.

Cynorrhodus.
Cynorrhodus named of the latins Rosa canina, is called in english a sweet
brere or an Eglentyne, in duche wild Rosen or Eglenter, in trenche Rose savage
or eglentier. It grows in Germany much in the fields and in gardines in
England.

Cyperus.
Cyperus is called in latin Iuncus angulosus, in english, english Gala^gal, in
duch wyld Galge^, in french Souchet. The best and rightest Cyperus grows in
Rome in certain gardines. One kind of it which we call Galangal grows in
many gardines in England. Cyperus Babilonions is the commune Balanga sold in
the Puticaries shoppes, after Ruellus and after the same, cyperus indicus is a
root called of the Poticaries curcuma. Cyperus is hot and dry.

Cytisus.
Cytisus grows plentuously in mount Appennine, I have had it also growyng in
my gardine in high Germany, I have not seen it in England. Cytisus may be
called in english tretrifoly.

Daphnoides
Daphnoides called of the commune sort Laureola, in english, Lauriel, Lorel or
Loury, grows ple^tuously in hedges in England, and some abuse the seed of it
for coecognidio.

Daueus.
There are many kinds of Daueus after Dioscorides, three at the least, whereof
I know none suerly but one, which is called in latin pastinaca syluestris, in
english wild carot, and in greek Staphilitios agrios, for the other kinds ye
may use carawey seed, or carot seed. Some learned me^ not without a cause
hold that both the Saxifrages, that is the english, and the Italion may be
occupied for Daueo. Daucus is sharp and heateth.

Dictamnus.
Dictamnus grows in Ca^dy and has round thick rough leaves, I have not
seen It growyng, but dry often. It may be had in Venice and at Anwerp. Some
abuse for this Fracinella, Dictamnus may be named in english right Dittany,
for some call Lepidium also Dittany.

Dipsacos.
Dipsacos called in latin Labrum Veneris, is called in english wild Tasel, in
duch Karten distel, in french Chardo^ a Carder. it grows by dich sides and in
watery grounds, it is dry in the second degree. The common Herbaries call this
herb Virgam pastoris.

Dracunculus.
Dracunculus is named in greek Dracontia, in english Dragon, in duche gross
naterwurtz, in french Serpe^tarie. The Poticaries call it Serpentaria^ maiorem.
It grows only in gardines in England, it is sharper then Aron.

Dryopteris.
Dryopteris grows in old Oaks and in old walls with wall Saxifrage and
Trichomanes in Loua^ and Auwerp. Some abuse it for right Venus heir. I have
found it in bushe roots often times in Germany, it may be called in english
petie Fern, or okeferne.

Ebulus.
Ebulus is called in greek Chameacte, in english Walwurt or Danewurt, in duch
Allich, in french Hieble, it grows abroad in Cambryge fields in great
plenty.

Elatine.
Elatine is like wythwynde, but it has seeds and flowers like Buckwheate, it
grows among the corn and in hedges, it may be named in english running
Buckwheate or bind corn, it is cold in the root.

Elioselinum.
Elioselinum is called in latin Paluda pium of Gaza, it is called in english
Smallage, it grows in watery places and also in gardines. Some have taken
this for Apio, but the error was not very great because they are like in
strength.

Ephemerum non lethale.
Ephemeru^ is called in duch meyblumle, in french Muguet. It grows
plentuously in Germany, but not in England that ever I could see, saving in
my Lords gardine at Syon. The Poticaries in Germany do name it Litium
co^nallium, it may be called in english May Lilies.

Erice.
Erice is called in greek Ereice, it is named in english Heth hather, or ling,
in duch Heyd, in french Bruyer, it grows on fr^th and wyld mores, some use to
make brusshes of heath both in England and in Germany.

Eruca
Eruca is named in greek Euzomos, in english rokket, in duch also rokket, in
french Roquetie. After Dioscorides and Pliny there are two kinds of rokket.
The one is gardine Rokket, which is much greater then the other, and it has
a white leaf, some abuse this for white mustarde. The other kind called in
latin Eruca syluestris, is co^munely called in english Rokket, it has a
yealowe flower, and both these kinds are found no where in England, saving
only in gardines.

Eruilia.
Eruilia grows in Italy, I have had it also growing in my gardine in Colon.
If is like a pease, the shale is roughe within, and the seed has little black
spots in it, It may be called in english peale eruyle.

Eruum.
Eruum is named in greek Orobos, it grows in Italy and in high Germany
about Mense, it is greater and bytterer then a Fych, it may be called in
english bitter Fyche. Bitter Fyche dries far in the second degree, and is
hot in the first.

Eryngium.
Eryngium is named in english sea Hulner or sea H^lly, it grows plentuously
in England by the sea side. The herbs that Fuchsius and Riffius paint for
Eryngium are not the true Eryngium.

Euonymus.
Euonymus is called of some writers Fusago or Fusaria, it is a very brytel tree
yealow within and the young branches which come streyghte from the root are
al four square, wherefore some call it Euonomum, I have seen it between Barkway
and Ware in the hedges. It may be called in english Spyndle tree or square
tree.

Eupatorium.
Eupatorium named in greek Eupatorion, is called in english Agrunony, in duch
Agrimonien, in french Aigremoine. This is not Eupatorium Mesues, for that is
called in english Maudlene. It is hot in the first degree.

Faba.
Faba is named in greek Cyainos, in english a bean, in duche Ein bou, in
french Febue. Beans grow in all country is in ple^tie enough.

Fagus.
Fagus is named in greek Phegos, in duch Ein buchbaume, in french Fan. Bech
trees grow plentuously in many places of England. Two of the greatest that
ever I saw, grow at Morpeth on.ij. hills right over the Castle.

Ferula.
Ferula is called in greek Narthex, but how that it is named in english, as
yet I can not tell, for I never saw it in England but in Germany in diverse
places. It may be named in english herb Sagapene or Feuel gyante, it is hot
and makes subtle.

Ficus.
Ficus is called in greek Syce, in english a fig tree, in duch Ein fyge^ baume,
in french vng figuer. There are diverse Fyg trees in England in gardines, but
no where else.

Ficus Aegyptia.
Ficus Aegyptia is called also Morus Aegyptia and Sycomorus, it is one tree,
having a name of a Fyg tree and a Mulbery tree, wherefore it may be called a
Mulbery fyg tree, it is to be found in Egypt, but not in this part of Europa
that I know of.

Filix.
Filix is called in greek Pieris, in english a Fern or a brake, in duche Ein
walt farn, in french Fauchier. There are two kinds of brakes. The one kind
is called in latin Filix mascula and in greek Pteris, it grows communely
upon stones, it is al full of little wings even from the root. The second
kind is called in greek Thelypteris, in latin Filix femina, this is the
commune Fern or brake, which the Northern men call a bracon. It has a long
bare stalk and the leaves only on the top of that.

Filicula.
Filicula is called in greek Polypodion, in inglishe Polipodium or walferne,
in duche Engelsuet, in french Polypody. It grows in Oak trees, and in old
walls. It dries without bytyng.

Feniculum.
Feniculum is called in greek Marathro^, in english Fenel or fenkel, in duch
Fenchel, in french Fenoul. Fenel is hot in the third degree and dry in the
first. Feuel grows in gardines in all countries.

Fenum grecum.
Fenum grecum is called in greek Telis, in english Fenegreeke, in duche
Buhshorne, in french Fenecreke. It grows in Italy, and in Germany. Fenegreke
is hot in the second degree and dry in the first.

Fragraria.
Fragraria is called in english a strawbery leaf, whose fruit is called in
english a strawbery, in duche Erdeber, in french Fraysne. Every man knows
well enough where strawberies grow.

Fraxinus.
Fraxinus is called in greek Melia, in english an Ash tree, in duch an Ash
baume in french Fraisne. Ashes grow in every country.

Galion.
Galion or gallion is named in english in the North country Maidens heir, in
duch Be hstrowe, in french Petit Muguet. It grows much in busshes and it is
like Goosgrasse or gooshareth.

Galeopsis.
Galeopsis after my judgment is the herb, which is called in english red
Archaungel. It is like Archaungel, but it has a purple flower, and less
leaves and shorter. It grows in hedges.

Genista.
Genista is named in english Broume, in duch Genist, in french Dugenet. Broume
grows in all countries of England, where as I have been. Genista is not
Spartum, as I shall prove in my latin Herball.

Gentiana.
Gentiana called in greek Gentiane, is called in english Gentiane, in duche
Entian, in french de la entienne. It grows much in the Alps, and a basterde
kind of it grows in the middowes about Bon.

Geranium.
Geranium is of two kynd^s. The one kind is called Pinke nedle or Cranes byl,
the other is called Pes columbinus of the commune Herbaries, and it may be
called in english Douefote.

Gethium.
Gethium is called in english a Syue, achiue, or a ciuet, in duche Suitlauch,
in french Ciues and cucions. Ciues grow only in gardines that I know of, in
England, but a little above Bon they grow in great plenty by the Rhene side
unset or sown.

Geum.
Geum is called in english Auennes, in duch Benedicte^ kraut, in french
Salmond. It is named of the herbaries Garyophyllata Sanamunda and benedicta. It
grows communely about hedges.

Gingidium.
Gingidium except I be deceived with a great sort of learned me^, is the herb
which is called in english Cheruel, in duche Keruel oder korbel kraute, in
french Cerfuile. Cheruel is called of some writers Cherephillum, and of the
common sort Lerefolium.

Git.
Git is named in greek Melanthion, in english herb Git or Nigella romana, in
duche Schwartz kummich, in french Niel. It grows in gardines only that I
have seen, saving that in Germany there grows in the corn fields after the
corn is carried away a certain kind of Git which has a good savor, and is
in all points like the gardine Nigella, saving that the veselles which hold
the black seed are not al in one, as the other have, and smells not so well
full out, as the other do. It is hot and dry in the third degree.

Glastum.
Glastu^ is called in greek Isatis, in english wad, and not Ode as some
corrupters of the english tongue do nikename it, in duch waid or weid, in
french Guesde. Wad is common in Iuliker land, and some is now set in England.
The wild wad grows ple^tuously in Germany beside the Rhene, and in many corn
fields in hye Almany. Wyld wad is called in english ash of Jerusalem. It
dries much.

Glaux,
Glaux is very strange in England, for I never saw the right Glaux in
England, saving it that was brought out of Italy by John Falconer. It grows
in Flanders by the sea side, as I remember.iij. miles from Dunkyrke. It may be
called in english sea Trifoly.

Glycyrrhiza.
Glycyrrhiza called in latin Radix dulcis is named in english Lycores, in duch
Sueszholtz, or Lycoris or Clarish, in french Erculisse or Rigolisse. It
grows in the Rocks of Germany without any setting or sowyng. It is warm
and in a manner hot.

Gossipium.
Gossipiu^ is called of Barbarus writers, Bombax and Cotonum, in english Coton
in greek Pylon, in duche Baumewoll, in french ducotton. I never saw it
growyng saving only in Bonony.

Gramen.
Gramen is called in greek Agrostis, in english great grass, in duch, grass.
Some take Stichwurt for the true grass, but they are deceived. The best Gramen
and most agreyng with Dioscoridis description, did I see in Germany with other
manner of roots, then the commune grass has.

Halimus.
Halimus grows plentuously in the Islands of east Freselande where as the
inhabiters make verince of the red beries. I have seen it also in Flaunders by
the sea side. It may be called in english sea wyllowe or prickwylowe because
it has the leaves of a wylowe and pricks like a thorn.

Heliotropium.
Heliotropiu^ called also scorpyuros grows plentuously about Bonony. I have
had it growing much in my gardine in Germany. They are foully deceived and
shamefully deceive other which hold in their wrytynges that our Marigold is
Heliotropium Dioscoridis. Heliotropium may be called in english Scorpiones
tail. It is hot in the third degree and dry in the second.

Helxine.
Helxine or pardition is called in english Par^etorie or Pelletorie of the
wall, in duche saint Peter's kraut, or Tag vnd naught, in french Du parietaire.
The Herbaries call it Parietariam. It grows on walls.

Hieracium.
Hiera cium is of two kinds. The one is called in latin Hieracium magnum. It
may be called in english great Haukweede or yealowe Succory. It grows in
Germany about Colo^. The second is like Dandelyon, it grows in many myddowes
in Germany. I think it may be found also in England. It may be called in
english less Hawk weed.

Hippoglossum.
Hippoglossum is called of the Poticaries and the Herbaries of Germany and
Italy Vnularia, in duche Zaflinkrant. I have not seen it in England. It is
called of some writers Laurus alixandrina. It may be called in english Tongue
Laurel because it has little leaves like tongues growyng out of the greater
leaf, which is like a Laurel leaf. It is manifestly hot.

Hirundinaria.
Hirundinaria called in greek Chelidonion, is of.ij. kinds. The one kind,
that is the greater, is called in english Sele^^^e, in duch Schelwurtz, in
french Theliddine or Esclere. It grows in hedges in the spring and has
yealowe iuce. The second kind called in latin Chelidonium minus, is called in
english Fygwurte, it grows under the shadows of ash trees. It is one of
the first herbs that has flowers in the spring. Celendine is hot and dry in
the third degree. Hixundinaria minor is hot in the fourth degree.

Hordeum.
Hordeum called in greek Crithe, in english Barley, in duche Gerst, in
french Orge, it is of diverse kinds. The first kind is called in latin
Hordeum distichum, in english Barley. The second kind is called in latin
Hordeum tetrastichum, in english By Barley or bear, or byg alone. This kind
grows much in the North country. The third kind is called in latin
Hordeum Hexastichum, I have not seen this kind in England, but often times in
high Germany, wherefore it may be called in english duch Barley. The fourth
kind is called of Galene in the greek tongue, Gymnochrithon, in latin Hordeum
nudum of other some Hordeum mundum. It may be called in english wheat Barley
because it has no mo Husks on it the^ wheat has. It grows in Italy.

Hordeum murinum.
Hordeum murinum, which Plenie calls also Phenicea seems to be in
Dioscorides Phoenix, as touching the name, but in the thing they seem somewhat
to vary, for Phenicea or Hordeum murinum of Plenie, is the wall Barley, which
grows on mud walls. Phoenix Dioscoridis seems to be the herb which is
called in Ca^brig shire Way bent. It is like unto barlei in the ear

Hyacinthus.
Hyacinthus verus grows plentuously in the mount Appe^nine. The common
Hyacinthus is much in England about Syon and Shene, and it is called in
English crowtoes, and in the North parts Crawtees. Some use the roots for
glue.

Hyosiris.
Hyosiris is a little rough herb like Dandelyon, less then little Haukeweede.
It grows in baron grounds and in sandy diches.

Hypericon.
Hypericon is called of barbarus writers Fuga demonum, in english saint
Iohans wurte or saint Iohans grass, in duch saint Iohans kraute. It grows
co^munely in all places of England, and especially in woddes.

Hissopus.
Hissopus is called in english Hysope, in duch Ispe, in french Dehylope.
Hysope grows in gardines only, in England as far as I have seen.

Iasme.
Iasminu^ otherwise called Iasme, is called in english Gethsamyne, in french
Iasemin. It grows communely in gardines about London.

Iberis.
Iberis otherwise named Kardamantike grows plentuously in Germany about Bon
where as it is called Besemkraute. It grows in great plenty in east
Freselande about the sea banks. Fuchsius takes the herb which I take for
Iberis, to be Thlaspi secundum.

Intubus.
Intubus which is named in greek Seris, is of two sorts. The one is called
Intubus hortensis, and the other is called Intybus syluestris. Intybus
hortensis is of two sorts, the one is called Endyue, or white Eudyue, and the
other is called gardine Succory. Intybus syluestris is of two sorts, the one
is called in latin Cichorium, and in english Succory or hardewes, and the
other is called of Theophrastus Aphaca, of Pliny Hedypnois, in english Dan de
lion or priests crown, in duche Pfaffenblat, it grows every where. These
kinds are cold and dry about the second degree.

Inula
Inula is called in greek Helenion, in english Alecampane, or Elecampane, in
duch Alantz wurtz, in french, and in the Poticaries shopped Enula ca^pana. It
is hot and dry in the second degree.

Irio.
Irio is named in greek Erisimo^, in english winter cresse, it grows about
towns and about water sides, but not where as the water comes, as
watercresse does. The Coloners call this herb winter cersse.

Inglans.
Inglans called also Nux regia, and in greek Carya Basilica is called in
english a Walnut tree, in duche Em nosz baume, in french Vng noier.

Iuncus odoratus.
Iuncus odoratus sieve rotundus, is called in greek Schenos, in english
squinant, in duche Kamelhewe, in the Poticaries shoppes Squinantum. It is
measurably hot and byndynge.

Iuniperus.
Iuniperus is called in greek Arcenthus, in english ieneper or juniper, in
duche Rekholterbaume, in french Geneure. It grows much in Germany and in
many places of England also. It is hot and dry in the third degree.

Labrusca.
Labrusca which is called in greek Ampelos agria or Omphax, is of two sorts,
the one kind is so wild that it has only flowers and goes no further, and
this is called Ena^the. The other has flowers and also little grapes. I have
seen of both the sorts ple^tuously in Italy in diverse places, by the floude
Padus, and in high Almany also. It may be called in english a wild vine.

Lactuca.
Lactuca called in greek Thridax, in english Lettis, in duch Lattich, in
french Vng laictue, is of diverse sorts. One is called in latin Lactuca
capitata, and in english Cabbage lettis, an other is called in latin Lactuca
sessilis, in english spredynge Lettis. The third sort is called in latin
Lactuca syluestris, in english grene Endyue, the Poticaries have long abused
this herb for right Endyue, but they have been deceived. It is measurably
cold and moist.

Lagopus
Lagopus called also Logopyros grows much among the corn, it has a rough
top like Down, and leaves like a Clauer, wherefore it may be named in
english rough Trifoly or harefote, the duch me^ call it. Katzenklee, the french
men Pede de leure. It dries manifestly.

Lamium.
Lamium called also Vrtica iners and Auonium, is named in english dead nettle
or white nettle, in duche Weiszueslen, in french Ortie morte, it grows
commonly in hedges

Lampsana.
Lampsana Plinij, seems to be the weed that we call communely in english
wild Cole, and in other places Carlocke, it grows co^munely among the
corn. Dioscorides describes one with smouther leaves which I have seen in
Bonony and in Colon also.

Larix.
Larix or larex grows in the highest tops of the Alps higher then the
fyrres do, the duch me^ call Laricem ein larchen baume, the french men call it
Vularge. It may be called in english a Larche tree.

Laserpitium gallicum.
Laserpitium gallicum as Ruellius judges, is the herb called of the Herbaries
Angelica, but I rather hold with Fuchsius which says that the herb, which
english me^ call Pillitorie of Spain, the duch men Meisterwurtz, the Herbaries
Osturtium and magistrancia, is Laserpitium gallicum, for the leaves of it are
lyker unto Perseley.

Lathyris.
Lathyris is called in english communely Spourge, in duch Sprynkorner, in
french Espurge. It is called of some Esula mayor. This kind of Spurge has
sweet seeds as witness Dioscorides and Pliny.

Lauer.
Lauer or Sion is called of some english men Bellragges, of other some yealowe
watercresses. How be it there is an other herb like Rocket which grows in
the waters and brokes, which is the right watercresse. Yealowe water cresse
grows in water sides and in sprynges and well heads.

Laurus.
Laurus is called in english a Baye tree, or a Laurel tree, in greek Daphne,
in duche a Lorber baume, in french Vnglaurier. Bay trees are common in
gardines in the South part of England, but they are very skarse in Germany.
It is vehemently hot and dry.

Lens.
Lens is named in greek Phacos, in english Lentil, in duche Liuses, in french
Lentille. Lentilles are sown in corn fields and grow as Tares do.

Lens palustris.
Lens palustris called in greek Phacos epiton telmato^, is called in english
Duckes meat or water Le^ulles, in duch wasser liuse

Lentiseus
Lentiscus is called in greek Schinos, in duche Mastix baume, in french
Lentisque, I never saw it sanynge only in Italy. It may be called in
english Mastike tree.

Lepidium.
Lepidium is well known in England and is called with a false name Dittany,
duche men call it Pfefferkraut, it grows in Morpeth in Northumberlande by a
water called Wanspeke in great ple^tie alone with out any setting or sowyng. It
is hot in the fourth degree.

Libanotis.
Libanotis called in latin Rosmarinus is of.iij. kinds, where we have none
saving only Rosmarinum Coronarium, which we call in english Rosmary, which
grows plentuously in gardines in England. It is hot in the second and dry
in the first.

Lichen is called in englise Liuerwurte, in duch Steinliberkraut, in french
Hepatique, the Poticaries call it Hepatica^. It grows upon stones and moist
grounds, and where as the sun comes not.

Ligusticum.
Ligusticum or Libysticum grows neither in England nor Germany that ever I
could see or hear tell of. I have seen it in Italy, but no where else. It may
be called in english Lumbardy Louage, it is manifestly hot.

Ligustrum.
Ligustrum is called in greek Cypros, in english Prim print or Priuet, though
Eliote more holdely then lernedly, defended the contrary as I shall prove in my
latin herbal when it shall be set fourth.

Lilium.
Lilium is named in greek Crinon, in english a Lily, in duche Ein gilgen, in
french Vng Lis.

Limonium.
Limonium named of the Herbaries Vyrola, is named in duch wintergrowe^, it
grows in woddes in Germany in great ple^tie, and in an Island of east
Freseland called Nordeney. It may he called in english wyntergreue.

Linum.
Linum is called in english Flax, line or lynte, in duche Flachs, in french
du line.

Lithospermon.
Lithospermon is called of the Herbaries M^in^^ solis, in english Grummel, but
it should be called Gray mile, in duch steensome^, in french Gre myl. It
grows ple^tuously about woddes and busshes.

Lolium.
Lolium is named in greek Ara, in english Darnel, in duch Kaweitze^ or Lulch,
or dort in frce^h Some take cockel for lolio, but they are far deceived as I
shall declare at large if God will, in my latin herbal. Darnel grows among the
corn and the corn goes out of kind into Darnel.

Lotus vrbana.
Lotus vrbana called in greek Lotos emeros is not growing in England that
ever I could spy. It grows in Ferraria in the black friars gardine, and in
claue^na, it is like cuckowes meat, but that it has a yealow flower. It may
be named in english gardine Clauer or gardine Trifoly.

Lotus syluestris.
Lotus syluestris is called in greek Lotus agrios, in duche stund kraute, in
Freseland, wit Nardus. It grows much in east Freselande in gardines, of this
kind are the herbs which are callad here in english Melilotes. This herb
grows now in Syon gardine. It may be called in english wild lote.

Lupus salictarius.
Lupus salictarius is named in greek Bryon, in english hoppes, in duche
hopten in french Hupelon. Hoppes do grow by hedges and bussnes both set and
baset.

Lycopsis.
Lycopsis Dioscoridis seems to be unto Ruellius, and to diverse other learned
men Lynaglossa, of the Poticaries which is called in english Hounds tongue,
and after my judgment the description in all points agrees well saving that
there is no mention made of the burres in the tops.

Lycopus.
Lycopus is called of the commune Herbaxies Cardiaca, in english Motherwurt,
in duche Hertzgespan, in french Agri palma. It grows in hedges and about
walls.

Lysimachia.
Lysimachia is of two sorts. The one is described of Dioscorides, and it has
a yealowe flower. Some call it Lycimachiam luteam, it grows by the Temes side
beside Shene, it may be called in english yealow Louss^ryfe or herb Wylowe.
The other kind is described of Pliny, and it is called Lysimachia purpurea,
it grows by water sides, also and may be called in english red loosstryfe,
or purple losestryfe.

Malua.
Malua is called in greek Malache, in english a Mallowe or a Mallo. Malua is
divided into Maluam hortense^ and syluestrem. Malua horte^sis is of two kinds.
The one is called alone in greek Malache in english Holyhoke, and of this
sort is the iagged mallowe. The other kind as Pliny says is called in
greek Molloche, or malope, it is called in english french Mallowe. Malua
syluestris is of.ij. sorts. The one is called in latin Malua sylueliris, in
greek Malache Chersaia, in English a wild Mallowe, in duche Halen pappel, in
french Malue savage. The other kind is called of Dioscorides Althea and
Hibiscus, of Pliny Aristalthea, of Galene Anadendron, of Etius Deudromalache,
in english marrishe Mallowe.

Mandragoras.
Ma^dragoras is called in english a Ma^drage, Ma^drag^ is well known in
England, and it grows in diverse gardines. The duch men call it Alram.
Maudrage is cold in the third degree, but the Apples have some heat in them.

Marrubium.
Marrubium is called in greek Prasion, in english Horehound, in duch Wesen
Andorn, in french Du marrubium, it grows about towns and villages. It is
hot in the second degree and dry in the third.

Medica.
I have not seen Medica^ grow in England, wherefore I know no english name
that it has. It has leaves like a clauer and horned cods wherein it has sede
something facioned like Fenegreekt. Therefore it may be called in english
horned Clauer or snail Trifoly because the coddes are so wrythen in again as a
water snayle or saint corniliusses horn. It grows in many places of Italy.

Malus.
Malus is named in greek Melea, in english an Apple tree, in duche Eiu Opfel
bauine, in french un pommier.

Malus medica.
Malus medica otherwise called Malus Assyria, or Citrus is called an Orange
tree and under the name of Citrus are contained both Limoues and also Lytrones
and Ore^ges. These trees grow in Spain and Italy.

Malus Cotonea.
Malus Cotonea is called in greek Melea Cydonios, in english a Quince tree,
in duch Kutte^ baume or ein quidde^ baume, in french Un Coignier.

Malus Persica.
Malus persica is called in greek Melea Persice, in english a Peche tree, in
duch Ein pfersike baume, in french un Perchier.

Malus punica.
Malus Punica is called in greek Roia in english a Pomgranat tree, in duche
Em Graunat baume, in french Vng Pomier des granades, Pomgarnat trees grow
plentuously in Italy and in Spain, and there are certain in my Lords gardine
at Syon, but their fruit comes never unto perfection. The poticaries call the
fruit of this tree Pomum granatum.

Malus armeniaca.
Malus armeniaca is called in Greek, Melea armeniace, in high duche Land ein
amarel baume, in the dioses of Colo^kardumelker baume, in french Vng
abricottier, and some english me^ call the fruit an Abricok. Me think saying
that we have very few of these trees as yet, it were better to call it, an
hasty Peche tree because it is like a pech and it is a great while ripe before
the pech trees, wherefore the fruit of this tree is called malum precox. There
are in Colo^ great plenty of hasty peche trees.

Melfrugum.
Melfrugum named in greek Meleas, sitos grows much in Germany beside Bon,
and that always among the corn it is very like the commune Melilote, but
that it has white flowers. It may be called in english white melilote.

Meutha.
Meutha is called in greek Ediosmos, in english Mynte, in duche muntzen, in
french dela meant. Mynt is common enough in all countries. Mynte is hot in the
third degree.

Menthastrum.
Menthastrum is called in greek Ediosmos agrios, in english wild mynte, it
grows in watery places with a round leaf and thycke with a long ear in
the top.

Mercurialis.
Mercurialis is called in greek Ermoupoa or Linozostis, in english Mercury,
in duche Recroute and Bingelkraute, in french mercuriallo. The herb which is
co^munely called in english mercury has nothing to do with mercurialis,
whereof I spoke now. Let the Poticaries use this mercury and let the commune
mercury alone. Mercury is as common about Colon in the gardines, as any weed
is commune in gardines in England. It is hot and dry in the first degree.

Mespilus.
Mespilus called in greek mespile, is of two sorts, the one has three stones
in the fruit, and that kind is not with us. The other kind has in the
fruit, five stones, and this kind is commune in England, and it is called in
englshe a medler tree or an open ars tree.

Meum.
Meum called of the grecians Meon and Meion is called of the Poticaries Men, in
duch Bearwurtz. Some Poticaries in Anwerpe use this herb for Pencedano and so
they call it. I never saw this herb in England saving once at sayute
Oswarldes where as the inhabiters called it Speknel, it grows in great
plenty eighte mile above Bon in a field beside Slide in Germany. It may be
called in english mewe or duche Dyl. The roots are hot in the third degree
and dry in the second.

Milium.
Milium is called in greek Cegchros, and Piston, in duche Hirsz, in french Du
millet. I have not seen it in England, but very much in high Germany. It may
be called in english Hirse or millet.

Milium indicum,
Milium indicum is now much sown in Italy, and it is in some gardines in
Germany where as it is called turkishe corn, and some call it in England
wheat of turkey. How be it there is an other thing that is the true turkish
wheat, it were better to call it after my judgment turkish millet

Morus.
Morus is called in greek morea, in english a mulbery tree, in duch
maulberbaum (...) dines in England.

Myrica.
Myrica, otherwise named tamarix, and of the Herbaries Tamariscus is named in
duche tamariske, in french tameris. I did never see this tree in England, but
often in high Germany, and in Italy. The Poticaries of Colon before I gave them
warning used for this, the bows of vghe, and the Poticaries of London use now
for this quik tree, the scholemaisters in Englanoe have of long time called
myrica^ heath, or lyng, but so long have they been deceived al together. It
may be called in english, Tamarik.

Myrrhis.
Myrrhis is called in Ca^bryge shyre casshes, in other places mockecheruel, in
duche wilder Peterlin, in french Persil de asne. It grows in hedges in every
country, but the best that ever I saw was in Germany beside Bon.

Myrtus.
Myrtus is called in greek myrrine, in english a myrtle tree, or a myrt tree,
in frech meurte. Myrt trees grow in great plenty in Italy in the mount
Appenine beside Bo^ony. Some al use a little shrub called Gal in english,
which grows in fennes and waterish mores formyr^o, but they are far deceived.

Napus.
Napus is named in greek Bounias, in duche Stekruben, in french Ranonet or
naueau, I have heard some call it in english a turnepe, and other some a naued
or a nauet, it may be called also long Rape or nauet gentle, as a rape has a
round root, so has a nauet a long root and somthynge yealowishe. This herb
grows plentuously at Andernake in Germany.

Narcissus.
Narcissus is of diverse sorts. There is one with a purple flower, which I
never saw, and an other with a white flower, which grows ple^tuously in my
Lords gardine in Syon, and it is called of diverse, white Laus tibi, it may
be called also white daffadyl. Plenie makes mention of a kind called
Narcissus herbaceus, which is after my judgment our yealowe dasfodyl.

Nardus.
Nardus is named in greek Nardos, in english Spykuarde, the Potecaries name
it Spicam Nardi, it grows not in Europa that I have heard tell of. It is hot
in the first degree and dry in the second.

Nardus celtica.
Nardus celtica, otherwise called Saliunca, is in great plenty growyng in the
alps. The Germans call it mariend magdalene kraut, it may be called in
english french spiknarde, when the indish spiknard is old and dusty and
rotten, it is better to use this in medicines then it.

Nasturtium.
Nasturtium is called in greek Cardamon, in english Cresse or Kerse, in duche
Cressich, in french Cresson, Aleuois, and nasitorte. Cresses grow no where,
but in gardines. It is dry and hot in the fourth degree after Auerrois.

Nerion.
Nerion otherwise called Rhododendro^, and Rhododaphne, is named in duch
Osa^der, in french Rosage. I never saw it but in Italy. It may be called in
english Rose bay tree or rose Laurel. This tree is named of some oleander.

Nux castanea.
Nux castanea is called in greek Castanon, in english a Chestnut tree, in duch
Castene^, in french, Ong Chastagne. Chesnuttes grow in diverse places of
England. The maniest that I have seen was in Kent.

Nymphea.
Nymphea is also named in greek nymphaia, and madonais and is called in
english water Roses, and some with the Poticaries call it nenufar. The duch me^
call this herb Seeblumen. Boeth the kinds of water Roses grow in standing
waters.

Ocymum.
Ocymum is called in english Basyl, in duche Basilien, in french du basilike,
the Poticaries call it Basilicon. It grows in England only in gardines. It
is hot in the second degree.

Oenanthe.
Oenanthe is called boeth of the Herbaries and of al our country men
Filipendula, in duch Rotensteynbrech. Some say that the same herb is called
Phellandryon in Pliny. Filipendula grows in great plenty beside Syon and
Shene in the middowes.

Olea.
Olea or oliua is called in greek Elaia, in english an Olyue tree, in duche
Ein olbanine, in french Ong oliuerier. Olive trees grow plentuously in Italy.

Olus atrum.
Olus atrum is called in greek Hyposelinon, in english Alexander, in duch
schwartz, Petersily or gross eppich, in french meichero^ or Alexa^dry. Some
poticaries though falsely, call it Petroselinum macedonicum.

Opulus.
Opulus is a tree commune in Italy and Germany, but I have not seen it that I
remember in England. It is called in french as Gesnere says opier, and so
may it be also called in english till we find a better name

Origanum.
Origanum is called in english organ, how be it I never saw the true organ
in England. I have seen diverse times organe which grew in Candy, much
hotter then this our commune organ is, which is called origanum syluestre in
latin, and in some places of England wild mergerum. It is hot and dry in the
third degree.

Orminum.
Orminum is called in english Clarie, in duche Scharlach, in french ornali,
how be it the description of Dioscorides does not in all points agree, some
call this herb sclarea^. Orminu^ syluestre is supposed to be the herb, which
is called oculus Christi.

Ornithigalum.
Ornithigalon is called in Colon Hondes vllich, but I can not tell how that it
is called in english, for I never saw it in England, saving only beside
Sheue herd by the Temmes side, how be it after the following of the duche
tongue it may be called dogleke or dogs onion.

Orobauche.
Orobanche is so rare an herb in England, that I never saw it in all
England, but in Northumberlande, where as it was called new chapel sloure.
It may be of his property called Chokeweede, because it destroys and choketh
the herbs that it tyeth and claspeth with his root. It is cold and dry in
the first degree.

Oryza.
Oryza is called in english Rise, in duch and french ryze. Rise grows
plentuously in watery myddowes between Myllane and Pauia.

Osyris.
Osyris or osyrias grows plentuously in England, but I do not remember what
name it has. If it have no name it may be called in english Lynary or todes
flax, for the Poticaries call it Linaciam, and the duch call it Krotenflaks.

Oxyacantha.
Oxyacantha is called in english as it is named of the poticaries berberes. Of
some, pipriges, in duch Santich, in french Espineniuet, or de Berberis.
Berberies grow wild in the hedges and woddes in Germany, but in England
only in gardines.

Oxyphenix.
Oxyphenix is called of the Poticaries Tamarindus, and it may be called in
english a tamarinde. I never saw the tree it self, but the fruit alone. It
is cold in the third and dry in the second degree.

Oxys.
Oxys is called in english Allelua, Cockowes meat, and wod sorel, in duche
Hasen ampfer, in french pain de Coquu. It grows in woddes about tree
roots and among busshes.

Peonia.
Peonia is also named in greek Glicyside, it is called in english peony or
pyony, in duch peonienrose, in french penoisne and pinoine. Peony the female
grows in every country, but I never saw the male saving only in Anwerp.
Peony root is hot in the first and dry in the third degree.

Palma.
Palma is called in greek phoenix, in english a Date tree, in duch Ein dattel
baume in french Vng arbri dict palm. I never saw any perfect date tree yet, but
only a little one that never came to perfection. Date trees grow in Asia in
great plenty, but none in Europa, which bring forth any fruit.

Panicum.
Panicum is called in greek Elymos or melinos, in duche Fenike, in french
paniz. I have not seen it in England, saving in my Lords gardine a Syon, but
it may be called Panike, it grows in Italy and in high Almany in the fields.

Papauer.
Papauer is called in greek Mecon, in english Poppy or Chesboul, in duch
m^gsom or mansom, in french du pauot. It grows sown in gardines.

Papauer erraticum.
Papauer erraticu^ is called in greek Rosas, in english Redcornrose or wild
popy, in duche wild man, korne rosen, or klapper rosen.

Papauer corniculatum.
Papauer corniculatum is called in greek mecoon ceratites, in english horned
poppy or yealow poppy, in duch Gaelma^. It grows in Dover clyffes, and in
many other places by the sea side. It is cold in the forth degree.

Papyros.
Papyrus grows not in England, it has the facion of a great Docke. I have
seen it diuersetymes in Anwerp, wherein was sugar and of uerse other
marchaundise wrapped. It may be called in english water paper, or herb paper.

Parthenium.
Parthenium after the mind of Hermolaus, Ruellius and diverse other learned
me^, is the herb which is called in barbarus latin Matricaria, in english
feuerfew, in duch Matter, whose judgment I rather allow in this matter, then
the judgment of Fuchsius which would Parthenium to be stynkyng maydweede.

Pastinaca.
Pastinaca is called in greek Staphilinos in english a Carot, in duche
pasteney, in french Cariottes. Carettes grow in all countries in plenty.

Peplis.
Peplis grows by the sea side, not far from Venice. It is very like unto
wartwort but that it is shorter, thicker and spread upon the ground. It may be
be called in english sea wartwurt.

Peplum.
I never saw peplum but once in Bonony, it had little small leaves like time,
and in other facion like spourge, wherefore it may be called spourge time in
english, till we ca^ find a better name.

Periclymenum.
Periclymenum is called of the herbaries and poticaries Caprifolium and
Matrisylna, in english wod bind and Honysuccles, in duch walt gylge^, in
french Cheure fuelle. Wodbyne, is commune in every wodde.

Personata.
Personata is called in greek Arceion or prosopion, in english a Bur, in duche
gross kletten, in french Glerteron or Gluteron. The Herbaries call it Lappam
maiorem. It grows commonly about towns and villages.

Pecasites.
Petasites is called in the South parts of England a Butter bur, in the
North, it is called about Morpeth Eldeus, the duch call it pestilentz krante. It
grows in broke sides and in moist middowes which are overflowed some time
with the water. It dries in the third degree.

Petroselinum.
Petroselinum named in latin Apium saxatile is not our common persely, as
many have believed, but it is an other herb, as I do think, which is called
in some places of Italy Imperatoria. Which may be called in english stone
persely or Lumberdy persely. I never saw it in England neither in Germany,
saving only dry, I proved often in Germany, but I could never make the seed
grow there. For lack of this me^ may use the seed of pilletory of Spain
called masterwurt, or the seed of Angelica. Stone perseley has seed hot and
dry in the third degree.

Peucedanum.
Peucedanum is called in duch harstrang it grows plentuously in Germany
beside Erensfielde over against Byng, and also in the middowes beside Mence,
called other wise Maguncia.

Phalaris,
Phalaris is found in many places of Italy. It has seed like Panicum,
wherefore it may be called in english petie panicke, or because it is partly
like grass and partly like corn, it may be called grass corn.

Phasiolus.
Phasiolus otherwise called Dolichos, may be called in english long peasen
or faselles, in duche it is called Welshe bonem or faeselen, in french
phaseoles. Faselles grow in great ple^tie in Italy about Pauia.

Phu.
Phu is called in english setwal, of other some Capones tail, in duche Garten
baldriane, in french Vertentrete. The poticaries in Germany call it Valerianam.
There are two other kinds of Valeriane beside this. Of the which, the one is
growing about water sides, and in the moist plasshes and in morish grounds,
and it is called in english wild Valerian. The other kind is called
Valeriana greca, and this is our commune Valerian that we use against cuties
with a blewe flower.

Phyllitis.
Phyllitis as Cordus judges, is the herb which we call in english Hearts
tongue, the duch call Hirtze^ zuinge^, the french me^ Lang de Cerfe, the
poticaries Lingua^ ceruinam. To whose judgment I rather assent, then to
Ruellius and Fuchsius. Hearts tongue grows in wells and old walls.

Picea.
Picea is called in greek as Theodore Gaza turns, pitys, and after Ruellius
pence and it is called in duch rotten Dan, wherefore it may be called in
english a red fure tree.

Pinus.
Pinus as Theodore translateth, is called in greek Pence, in english a pyne
tree, in duch Ein forthen, in french Vng pin. Pines grow fairest in gardines.
There grows one fair one in Richmund Pine nuttes are hot and dry.

Piperitis.
Piperitis called also Siliquastrum after the judgment of Fuchsius is the
Herb which is called in english Indishe peper, in duche indisshouer pfefer.
If this herb be not it that it is taken for, the yealow seeds which nughte
to be white do only hinder. The herb grows in certain gardines in England.

Pistacia.
Pistacia are called of the poticaries Fistica, they may be called in english
Fistikes or Festike nuttes. I never saw the Fistike tree saving only in Bonony,
the leaves were somthyng round and full of red spots.

Pisum.
Pisum is called in greek Lecithos, in english a pease, in duch Erbes, or
Erwiten, in french Puis. They grow communely in the fields.

Pityusa.
Pityusa is called of some Herbaries Esula minor, and in english Spourge, but
it ought to be called little Spourge, or Lintspourge, for it has small leaves
like Flax, or an other herb called Linaria, whereby the one is often taken for
the other, but the difference is known by this verse. Esula lactescit, Linaria
lac dare nescit. The other kind of this which grows almost into the
heighte of a small tree, grows a mile beneth Colon in a watery closse which
is often overflowed with the Rhene. It may be called in english, Spourge giant.

Plantago.
Plantago is called in greek Arnoglossos. There are two sorts of Plantaginis,
the one is called in english alone Plantaine or waybread, or great waybread.
The other is called Rybwurte, or Rybgrasse, and of some Herbaries Lancea lata.
They are cold and dry in the second degree.

Platanus.
Platanus is called in english a plain tree, in french plain. I never saw
any plain tree in England saving once in Northumberlande beside Morpeth, and
an other at Barnwel Abbay beside Cambryge.

Polium.
I have seen Polium of two sorts, the one had hoar leaves with the figure of
time, and the other had leaves like wyld Time, but they were a great dele
longer and greater. Polium may be called in english Poly. The first kind did
I see in Italy. The second in the Alps of Rhetia beside Cure. It is hot in
the second and dry in the third.

Polygonatum.
Polygonatu^ is called of Herbaries Sigillum Solomonis, in english Scala celi,
in duch wisz wuriz. It may be called in english white wurte, it grows
plentuously in the woddes of Germany, but I never saw it out of a gardine in
England.

Polygonum
Polygonum is called in latin Sanguinaria. There are two kinds of Polygonu^,
the former kind is called in english knotgrasse, or swyne grass, in duche
Weggrasz wegorat or wegtede, in french de la corrig^^^e. The second kind,
which is called Polygonum femina is called in English thycke Shanegrasse, or
short Shave grass. The first kind grows in high ways, the second kind
grows in many places by water sides, and some time among the corn.
Knotgrasse is cold in the second degree.

Populus.
Populus is of two kinds, the first kind is called in greek Leuce, in latin
Populus alba, in english white Popler or white Esptree, in duch wisz sarbach.
This kind is cummune about the banks of the floude Padus. The second kind
is called in greek Aigeiros, in english alone, a popler, or an Asp tree, or a
black popler.

Porrum.
Porrum is named in greek prason, in english a Leke, in duche Ein lauch, in
french Vng porrean. Beside the commune Leke there are two other kinds, the
one is called in latin porrum sectinum, in english a french Leke. The other
kind is called in greek Ampelo prason, in latin porrum syluestre, in duch
wyld Lanch. I never saw this kind but in certain closes in Germany about
Bon. Lekes are hot in the fourth degree.

Potamogeton.
Potamogeton is called in duche Samkrante, it may be named in english
Pondplantayne, or swymmynge plantayne, because it swymmeth above pondes and
standing waters.

Portualca.
Portulaca is called in english purcellaine, in greek Andrachne, in duch
Burgel grensel, and in neither land purcellane, in french porcellina.

Prunus.
Prunus is called in greek Coccimelea, in english a plum tree, in duche
empslanmen baume, in french Vun prunier. Prunus syluestris is called in
english a slo tree, or a sle tree.

Psyllium.
Psyllium is called in duch psilien kraut, in french herb puces or herb a
pulce, it grows plentuously in Italy and in certain gardines in Germany. It
may be called in english Flewurte. Flewurt is cold in the second degree, and
is in a mean tempre in dryinge and moist making.

Pulegium.
Pulegium is called in greek Glechoon, in english Penyryal or puddyng grass,
in duche poley, in french du pouliote. Penny ryal grows in such diches and
watery places as are full of water in winter, and are dyred up in the beginning
of Summer.

Pyrus.
Pyrus is called in greek Apios, in english a Pear tree, in duche ein
byrbaume, in french Vng poyrier.

Quercus.
Quercus is named in greek Drys, in english an Oak or an Eke tree, in duche
ein eich baume, in french vng Chesne.

Quinquefolium.
Quinquefolium is called in greek Pentaphyllon, in english Cynkfoly or five
fyngred grass, in duche Funffynger krante, in french quinte fuele. Cynkfoly
is commune in all places.

Radicula.
Radicula called otherwise Lanaria, is called in greek struthion, and of the
commune Herbaries it is called Saponaria and Herba fullonum, it grows in
certain gardines of Germany, but I never saw it in England, therefore I know
no english name for it. Howebeit, if we had it here, it might be called in
english sopewurt or skowrwurt. It is hot and dry in the third degree.

Radix.
Radix is called in greek Raphanos, in english a radice or radishe, in duche
ratrich, in french raforte. There are two kinds of radice, the one is the
commune radice with the long root, and that is called in latin Radix Cleonea
and algide^sis radix. The other kind has a round root like a rape, and this
is called radix Beotia and radix Spriaca. The former kind grows communely in
England, but I have seen the second kind no where else saving only in high
Almany, this may be called in english an Alman radice, or rape radice. Radice
is hot in the third degree and dry in the second.

Ranunculus.
Ranunculus is called in greek Batrachion, in english Crowfote or a Gallande.
The kinds of crowfote are al well enough known saving the second, which if
it be unknown, it makes no matter, for it has more hurt then goodness in
it.

Rapum.
Rapu^ or rapas is called in greek stroggyle, in english a rape, in duche ein
ruben. Rapes are commune in all countries.

Rhamnus.
Rhamnus grows in the mount Appe^nine above Bonony, it has very sharppe
pricks, round leaves and fruit like a little buckelet. The inhabiters call it
there spina^ Christ's. Wherefore it may be called in english Christ's thorn,
or buckeler thorn.

Rhus.
Rhus after Dioscorides is but of one kind, but Galene in the book of the
compositio^ of medicines according to the places names two kinds, the one he
calls Culinaria, and the other Coriaria. Pliny makes three kinds of Rhois,
of the which kinds I know one certainly, which is called of the Poticaries
Sinnache, and it may be so called also in english. I have seen it growyng
beside Bonony in certain gardines beside the black frieres. I think that I
know also Rhoa Coriaria^, for I suppose that the shrubbe which the Italians
about Bonony call Scotonum and about Cremona call Rhous, is Rhus Coriaria, for
the Italians use the same to tanne lethre with. This kind did I first see in
Bonony afterward beside Cremona, last in the rocks beside Lake de Come. Rhus
is dry in the third, and cold in the second degree.

Ricinus.
Ricinus is called in greek Cici or Crotoon, in english Palma Christi, or
ticke sede because it is like a tycke, it is called in duch wunden baume,
krentz baume and Zekken corner, in french Palma Christi. It grows only in
gardines that I have seen.

Rosa.
Rosa is called in greek Rhodon, in english a Rose, in duch ein rosen, in
french vne rose. It is cold and dry in the first degree.

Rubia.
Rubia is called in greek Erythrodano^, in english madder, in duche rot, in
french Garauce. Rubia grows in diverse places of Germany in the fields in
great plenty both set and unset. Wild madder grows in diverse wods of
Germany, and in greatest plenty about Bon. It is hot in the second degree
and dry in the third.

Rubus.
Rubus sine sentis is called in greek Ba^os, in english a Bramble or a black
bery bush, in duche ein bromber, in french rouce.

Rubus canis.
Rubus canis is called in greek Cynosbatos, in english a Brier tree or an Hep
tree, in duche wild rosen.

Rubus ideus.
Rubus ideus is called in greek Batos ^daia, in english raspeses or
hyndberies, in duche hyndberen, in french framboise. Raspeses grow most
plentuously in the woddes of east Freselande beside Aurik, and in the
mountains beside Bon, they grow also in certain gardines of England.

Rumex.
Rumex is called in greek Lapathon, in english a Docke or a docken. There
are.iiij. kinds of Dockes. The first kind is called in greek Oxylapatho^, in
english Waterdocke or sharpdocke. This is less then Patience and with a
sharper top or end of the leaf, and grows in diches and slow runnyng
waters, The second kind is called Rumex satiuus, this is called in barbarus
latin Reubarbarum monachoru^. The common Docke is of this same kind. The
third kind is the little commune Docke. The fourth kind called in greek
Oxalis, in barbarus latin Acetosa or Acidula, in english Sorel or sourdocke,
in duche saur ampsfer.

Ruscus.
Ruscus is called of the Poticeries Bruscum, in english buchers brom or
Petigrue. Petigrue grows in Kent wild by hedge sides, but it bears no
fruit as it does in Italy.

Ruta.
Ruta is called in greek Peganon, in english and french, Rue and herb
grace, in duche Ruten. Rue is hot and dry in the second degree, but wild
Rue is hot and dry in the fourth degree.

Sabina.
Sabina is called in greek Brathy, in english Sanyne, in duche seuinbaume, in
french sauinera or du sauiner. Sauin grows in many gardines in England. It
is hot and dry in the third degree.

Sambucus.
Sambucus or as some write Sabucus is called in greek Act, in english an
Elder tree or a Boure tree, in duche Hold or Hollender, in french Vng Susean.

Salix.
Salix is called in greek Itea, in english a wylow tree, a salowe tree or a
saugh tree, in duch weidenbaume, in french Vne saulge. Salix as Columella
writes is divided into two principal kinds the one is called Perticalis, and
the other is called Viminalis. Particalis salix is the great Wylowe tree
which has long rods and staves growing in it. Viminalis is an Osyer tree,
such as brings forth rods that baskettes are made of. Viminalis is of
diverse sorts, the first is called salix greca, the second gallica, the
third sabina. Salix greca which is yealowe in color grows in east
Freselande about a City called Aurik. Salix gallica which has red twigges
grows in many places of England. Salix sabina which is also called amerina
grows in Italy and in certain places of east Freselande.

Saluia.
Saluia is called in greek Elelisphacos, in english sage or sauge, in duche
salbey or selue, in french saulge. It heateth and somthynge stops.

Satureia.
Satureia is called in greek thymbra, in english saueray or sauery, in duch
saturei, in french sarriette. It is hot and dry in the third degree.

Satyrion.
Satyrion is very commune in Germany, and a certain right kind of the same
grows beside Syon, it brings forth white flowers in the end of harueste,
and it is called Lady traces. The great Satyrion may be called in english
white satyrion or great satyrion. There is an other kind of Satyrion which is
called satyrion regale in latin, in duche Kreutzblumen, in french du satyrion
royal. This may be called in english satyrion Ryal or hand satyrion, because
it is like a man's hand in the root. Satyrion is hot and very moist.

Scandix.
Scandix grows in Germany among the corn. The greatest ple^tie of it that
ever I saw, was between Bon and Popelsdorp in a corn field. It may be called
in english corn Cheruel. It is hot and dry in the third degree.

Secale.
Secale is called in english Rye, in duche Roggen or rug, in french Segle,
There is plenty enough of rye in all countries, and no where more the^ in
Germany, that I wotof

Scilla.
Scilla is named of the Poticaries squilla, in english a sea Onion, and in some
places, a french Onyon, in duch Meusz Zwybeln. Squilles grow in the sea cost
of Spain in great plenty. Scilla is hot in the second degree.

Scirpus.
Scirpus sieve Iuncus is called in greek Scoinos Eleos, in english a rishe or a
rash, in duche Bauchbint, in french Jove.

Scordium.
Scordium grows in diverse places of Germany, and is sold at Franckeforde
mart in great plenty, and I hear say that it grows also beside Oxforde.
It is called in duche Wasser batenig, and it may be called in english water
Germander or Garleke Germander.

Scordotis.
Scordotis altera whereof Pliny makes mention, is in leaves much like a
Nettle, but deaper endented with a four squared stalk, and with a somthynge
sharp taste, it grows about the Rhene side. Some take this for Verbena
recta, but it has no purple flowers, wherefore they are deceived. It may be
called in english bank Nettle.

Securidaca.
Securidaca called in greek Edysaron and Pelecinos, is so unknown in England,
and in Germany that I never saw it in either of these regions, but I have seen
it in Italy diverse times, and it may be called in english Axfiche or
Hachetfiche, because the seed resembles an Hatchet.

Sedum.
Sedum is called in greek Aeizooon, and the first kind and most spoken of,
of writers, is called in english Housleke or syngrene. The second kind is
called in English thryft or stoneroppe The third kind is called in English
Mouse tail or little stoneroppe, and in duche Maur pfesser. Al these kinds
grow on walls and houses. It is cold in the third degree.

Senecio.
Senecio is called in greek Erigeroon, in english Groundswel or Groundsel, in
duch Gryntkraut, in french du Senesson.

Serpyllum.
Serpyllum called in greek Irpyllon, is of.ij. sorts. The one is called in
latin serpyllum Hortense, and in english runnyng time. The second kind is
called in latin serpyllum syluestre, and in english wild time. The one
grows in gardines, and the other in sandy fields and bare grounds.

Sertula campana.
Sertula ca^pana sieve corona regia, is called in greek Melilootos, in duch
Guldenkle, in Welsher, steyncle, in french du Melilote. I never saw the right
Melilote yet in England, but I have seen the right Melilute which grows in
Italy, and has seeds in little horns. This herb which ye use in England
for Melilote, is a kind of Lotus syluestris. This right Melilotus may be
called in english Melilote, or right Melilote, or Lumberdy Melilote. Melilote
is hot and dry en the first degree.

Sesama.
Sesama^n did I never see in England, but I have seen it in Italy, and it may
be called in english, sesame or oil seed, for of al seed it is most oily.

Seseli massiliense.
Seseli massiliense is called in the Poticaries shoppes, siler montanum, it may
be called in english, siler mountain. The seed of this herb is commune in
every Poticaries shop.

Siligo.
Siligo is not as the commune sort of grammarians and phisicians suppose, the
corn called in english Rye, and in duche Rog, but it is a kind of right
wheat, as Columella and Pliny do testify. Therefore let it be called in
english light wheat.

Sideritis.
Sideritis prima, grows upon Colon walies and also in sandy grounds about
Colon. It is called in duch Glyderant, and may be called in english walsage or
stonisage. Sideritis secunda, is most like to Os^^^tide of the Poticaries, of
al herbs that ever I saw, and nothing is contrary unto the description
saving only the seeds. Sideritis tertia seems to be the herb called in
english, herb Roberte with the leaves like Colander.

Siliqua.
Siliqua is not as the commune sort take it for the shale only of a peascod,
or of such like pulse, but it is taken for a certain tree, and fruit which is
called in greek Ceratia, or Ceratonia, in Italian Carobe, in duche saint
Iohans Brot. I met with certain Grecians which dwelled in Pelopeneso, that
called it in their speech Xylocerato^. Itmay be called in english a Carobe
tree, and the fruit Carobes or Carobbeanes. I se in Colon one little Carob
tree, and no where else that I remember.

Sinapi.
Sinapi is called in greek sinepi, in english Mustarde, in duche sense, in
french Mustarde. It grows in all countries in plenty.

Sisaron.
Sisaron sieve siser, is called in english a Persnepe, in duche gross
Zammoren, and also Pinsternach, Fuchsius rekeneth that our shyrwort, or shyrwit
is a kind of siser. Persuepes, and skirwortes are commune in England.

Sison.
Sison called of other Sino^, is the herb whose seed the Poticaries in Anwerp
use for Amomo. There grows a kind of this beside Shene, and it may be called
in english wild Perseley. The best kind grows in Anthony the Poticaries
gardine of Anwerp.

Sisymbrium.
Sisymbrium horte^se is called in english haume Mynte, or water Mynte, in
duche fish Mynt, or wasser Muntz. Many learned me^ co^tayne the red Mynt that
grows by water sides, and is called of some horse Mynt under sisymbrio. It is
hot and dry in the third degree.

Sisymbrium alterum.
Sisymbrium alterum is called also Cardamine, and in english water cresses, or
rocket water cresses, in duche wasserkressich, in french du Cresson. This is
not the herb with leaves like Perseley communely called water Cresses, but it
is the true water Cresse with leaves like Rocket, and some call it in latin
Nasturtium aquaticu^. It grows much in brokes and water sides.

Smilax hortensis.
Smilax horte^sis is called in duch welshe arbs or welshe Bonen, in french as
some write Phascole. It may be called in english Kydney bean, because the
seed is like a Kydney, or arber beans, because they serve to cover an arber
for the time of Summer.

Sinilax aspera.
Smilax aspera grows not in England that ever I could see, I have seen it
in Germany where it is called gross Stechend wind, or shraffe wind. It may
be called in english Pryckewynde or Sharpbynde.

Smyrnium.
Smyrniu^ is neither Angelica nor yet Louage. I did see it once in Bonony. It
may be called in english black Louage, because it has leaves like Louage,
and yet black seed. It is hot and dry in the third degree.

Solanum hortense.
Solanu^ horte^se which is called in greek Strichnos Cepaios is called in
English Nyghtshade, or pety morel, in duche Nachshat, in french Morel. The
Poticaries call it Solatrum.

Solanum vesicarium.
Solanum vesicarium is called in greek Strichnos halicacabos, in Pottcarie
latin Alkakenge, in english Alcakeng or winter cheries, in duche Iudenkyrse,
in french Baganauldes. This herb grows much in my Lords gardine at Syon.

Sorbus.
There are four kinds of sorbus after Pliny, of the which I know three
kinds. The first kind that I know is commune about Bon. It has leaves like
a quicken tree, and a fruit like a little Pear, the duch call it ein speirlyng,
and ein sporopfel. This tree may be called in english a sorb tree, and the
fruit a sorb Appel. The second kind is called in duche ein Hauer ash, in
english a rountree or a Quicken tree. The third kind that I know of sorbus
and the fourth kind in Pliny is called sorbus torminalis, in english a
service tree.

Spartum frutex.
Spartium or spartum is not the Broume that we make besomes of in England, but
it is a bushe called of some gardiners french brom. It grows naturally by
it self in mount Appenuine, and it is found now in many gardines in England,
in my Lords gardine at Shene, and in my Lord Cobbains gardin a little from
Graves End

Spartum herba.
Spartum is also an herb as Pliny writes, by whose description I gather that
it is the rishe that the Fig frayles be made of, I have seen that rishe in the
Islands of east Freseland, and the people there make ropes of that rishe and
thach their houses also with the same It may be called in english Frailbenie.

Sphondilium.
Sphondilium is called in duche wild Pateney, or wild Bereuklawe, in french
Panaie savage. It may be called in english Cowpertsnepe or rough Persnepe. It
grows in watery middowes and in rain grounds about hedges.

Spina alba.
Spina alba mentioned in Columella is spina Appendix in Pliny, and it is
called in english an Hawthorne tree, or a white thorn, in duche ein wissen
dorne, or ein Hagendorne.

Stachys.
Stachys seems to Gesner to be the herb that we call in english Ambrose, and I
deni not but that it may be a kind of it, How be it I have seen the true
Italian staches, which has narower and whyter leaves then Ambrose has. It
may benamed in english little Horehounde or strayte Horehound. It is hot in
the third degree.

Staphis agria.
Staphis agria is called in english staves aker, in duch Bisz muntz or
Lanshraut, in french de lee staves agrie. I have seen it growyng in certain
gardines in Italy.

Sterhas.
I have seen in Italy diverse kinds of Stichados growyng. One was called
sterhas mo^tana, an other stechas prouincialis, and the third stechas Arabia. I
never saw any of these kinds growyng in England, but I have had them growing
in my gardines in Germany. The herb may be called in english stichas, or
Laua^der gentle, the Poticaries call this herb stichados. I suppose that our
laua^der is a kind of stichas. It is hot in the first degree and dry in the
second.

Symphytum.
Symphytum is of two sorts, the former is called Symphytum petreum, and this
herb grows about Syon, seven miles above London. It is like unto wild
Mergerum, but it is neither so hot neither so well smellyng. It may be called
in english unsavory Mergersi. The other kind called in latin Symphytum
alterum, is called in english comfrey or Blackewurt, and in duche walde wurtz,
or schwartz wurtz, in french de la confire.

Tarchon.
Tarchon is well known in England, and is called with us Tarrago^. Some call
this same herb Dracoue^ horte^sem Some other do put this herb unto the kinds
of Sauery.

Taxus.
Taxus is called in greek Smilar or taxos, in english an Vghe tree, or an yew
tree, in duch ein Iben baume, in french ^^ff The best Vghe grows in the
Alps. Common Vghe, grows in diverse parts of York shyre.

Thapsia.
Thapsia grows in diverse places of Italy that I have seen, and the best
learned of that country think that Mesues turbit is Thapsia. Thapsia may be
called in english thapfene, or thapsia.

Thlaspi.
Thlaspi or thlaspium is called in duche Baurenfense It grows wonders
plentuously about Bon in the corn fields, and among the corn. It grows
also ple^tuously beside Syon. It may be named in english dysmustard, or
triacle Mustard, or Bon^es Mustard, because the seed is like mustard seed in
color and in taste, and the vessel that co^teyneth the seed^ is like a disshe.
There is yet an other kind of thlaspie mentioned of Dioscorides and called
thlaspi alterum and sinapi persicuum. This kind grows in Morpeth in
Northumberland and there it is called Redco. It should be called after the
old saxon english Rettihcol, that is Radishe colle. The high Germans call it
mere Rettich.

Thymus.
We gather boeth by Dioscorides and Pliny, that there are two kinds of Thyme,
whereof I see but one kind as yet in England, for that runnyng thyme that we
take for thymo, is serpyllum and not thymus.

The great kind of thyme, whereof Dioscorides makes mention of in Epithymo,
is called now Venetian thyme, and the black kind that Pliny speaks of, is
our commune thyme that grows right up in our gardines. Thyme is hot in the
third degree.

Tussilago.
Tussilago is called in greek Bechion, in english Bulfote or horsehofe, in
duche Roshub, or houfe lattich, in french Pas de Asne, the Poticaries call it
Vngulam caballinam. This herb grows by water sides, and in marishe grounds.

Typha.
Typha grows in fennes and watersydes among the reeds, it has a black
thing Almost at the head of the stalk like black Velvet. It is called in
english cattes tail, or a Reedmace, in Duche Narren Kolb, or Mosz Kolb.

Verbascum.
Verbascum is called in greek Phlomos, in english Mullen higgis taper or Long
wurt, the Poticaries call it tapsus barbatus.

Verbasculum.
There are.iij. Verbascula called in greek Phlomides. The first is called in
barbarus latin Arthritica, and in english a Primerose. The second is called
in barbarus latin Paralysis, and in english a Cowslip, or a Cowslap, or a
Pagle. The third is called Thryallis, and Rosecampi in english.

Verbenaca.
Verbenaca recta is called in greek Peristereon yphos, in english Veruine, in
duch Eiser kraute, in french Veruayne. This herb grows in many places of
England. Verbena supina, is hard to find in England I never saw it in any
place saving in Swycherland. It is like Bugle, but the leaves are deaplyer
endented and grener then bugle leaves be. It may be called in english geagged
Bugle. It grows in shadowye places about tree roots.

Veratrum.
Veratrum is called in greek Helleborus in duche Niesz wurtes, in french
Viraire. It may be called in english Nesewurte. There are two kinds of
Helleborus, the one is called Veratrum album, and it is called in duche Wisz
Neiszwurtes, in english Nesewurt or white Nesewurt. This kind grows in Syon
Parcke in England, in the woddes of Bon in Germany, in the Alps between
Curela^d and Lumberdy, but it that grows in England, and in Germany has not
the strength that it has which grows in the Alps. The other kind is
called Veratrum nigrum. I have not seen this herb in Germany, neither in
England. For the herb called in english bearfote, in duche Christwurte,
which has been hither to taken for black Nisewurt, or Veratrum nigrum: is
Consiligo in Columel and Pliny, and not veratrum nigrum.

Vicia.
Vicia is called in greek Bicion, in English a Fiche, in duche Wicken, in
french La vesce.

Viola alba.
Viola alba is called in greek Leucoion. There are diverse sorts of
Leuecoio^. One is called in english Cheiry, Hertes ease or wall Gelefloure, it
grows upon the walls, and in the spring of the year, it has yealowe
flowers. The Arabians call it Cheiri. An other kind has white flowers, which
some call white stock gelefloure or Belenoures. The other have purple and blewe
flowers, and are called purple and blew stockgele flowers.

Viola nigra.
Viola nigra sieve purpurea is called in greek Ion melan, in english a Violet,
in duche violen, Viole or Violette, in french Violet martie. It is cold and
moist in the second degree.

Viola flammea.
Viola flommea otherwise called Phlox or Phlogion is the herb as Gesner
thinks, which is called in duche Fluelblum, and in english velvet flower or
french Marigoulde.

Viscum.
Viscum is called in greek Ixos, in englesh Miscelto or Misceldin, in duch
Miscel, Vogellym, and Affoler in french. This shrub grows only in trees and
no where else

Vitex
Vitex is called in greek Agnos, of the Poticaries of Italy Agnus castus, the
Poticaries of Germany in netherlande abuse Lign^ (...) ^^ticaries in Germany
abuse this herb for Scordio. This herb grows in hedges and diches in the
spring of the year.

Balsamine.
Balsamine is called of other Pomu^ Hierosolymitanum, and Pomum mirabile. Some
call it Chara^tia. It is called in duch Balsam kraute, it may be named in
english Balsam aple. It grows much in Italy and in some places of Germany,
but only in gardines.

Barbare herba.
Barbare herba grows about Brokes and water sides. It has leaves like
Rocket, wherefore it may be called in english woundrocket, for it is good for
a wound. Some call this Carpentariam.

Bipennella Italica.
Bipennella or bipenula Italica, is called in english Burnet. It grows much
about Syon and Shene, and in many other places of England. The Poticaries call
it Pimpinellam.

Bipennula Germanica.
Bipennula Germanica, is Saxifragia Italorum, and it is called in english
Pimpiuel, the duche call it Bibinellen.

Bistorta.
Bistorta is called of the Northern men Betes, in the South country
Astrologia, in east Freselande Leuercraut. This herb grows in England only
in gardines, in the woddes of Freseland, it grows without any setting alone.

Bursa pastoris.
Bursa pastoris is also called in english of many Bursa pastoris and of other
Shepherdes bag or Shepherdes purse. It grows by high ways, almost in every
place.

Cartafilago.
Cartafilago otherwise called Ceratophilax, is called in english Cudwurt or
Chafewurte, It grows gladly where as turns have been dug.

Consolida media.
Co^solida media is called in english Bugle. It is a black herb and it
grows in shaddowy places and moist grounds.

Cornu ceruinum.
Cornu ceruinum is the name of three herbs. The first is Coronopus, the
second is Hearts horn like a rishe, the third is common in the dioces of
Colo^, which is so called, because it has leaves like an Hearts horn.

Christophoriana.
Christophoriana grows ple^tuously in the woddes about Bon, but I have not
heard any duche name that it has. It may be (...) the duch call it Natter
Zunglin. It grows ple^tuously in middowes where as Lunary grows.

Leuisticum.
Leuisticum is called in english Louage in duche Lubstocke or Lieb stokel, in
french Liueshe. It grows only in gardines so much as I have seen.

Martagon.
Martagon is an herb with two leaves only, one of each side. It grows in
many places of England in watery middowes and in woddes. It is also called in
english Martagon.

Perfoliata.
Perfoliata is an herb with a leaf like a pease, and little black seeds in
the top. The Germans call it Durchwassz. It may be called in english
Thorowwax, because the stalk waxes through the leaves.

Pes anserinus.
Pes anserinus is called in duch geusz fusz, and it may be called in english
Goosef ote. It grows in the fields of Germany among the corn and about
towns and cities.

Pilosella.
Pilosella is of two kinds, the one has a yealowe flower and is communely
called in english Mouseare, and for difference sake it may be called in english
yealowe mouseeare. The other kind has purple flowers mengled with white
altogether, and this grows in heathes where as King or heath grows, and may
be called in english purple Mouseare or little Mouseare.

Portentilla.
Porte^tilla or as some write Potentilla, is named also Tanacetum syluestre. It
is named in english wild Cansey, in duche Genseric h, and in french Taunasi
Saluage.

Regalicum.
Regalicum is also named Ruta cararia, Galega, and Gaiarda. It grows very
plentuously about the banks of Padus in Italy. It may be called in english
mock Licores, because the leaves are like Licores.

Rhibes.
Rhibes is called in duche saint Iohans Treublin, and it is called in some
places of England a Rasin tree.

Sanicula.
Sanicula is named in english Sanicle, in duche Sanikel or Sharnikel. It
grows communely in woddes.

Saluia vita.
Saluia vita or Ruta muralis is called in duche Maurtanten and steinrauten. It
may be called in english Stone Rue or wall Rue Some have used this for Capillo
Veneris.

Solidago saracenica.
Solidago seracenica, otherwise called Herba fortis or Herba Iudaica, is called
in duch Heidnishe wuntkrant. I have not seen it in England, but diverse times
in duchland. It may be called in english Woundewurte.

Scabiosa.
Scabiosa is called in english Scabious or Maifellon, in duche Scabiosen, in
french la scabieuse.

Saxifragia.
There are four herbs, which al are called saxifragia. The english men's
Saxifragia, which they call Saxifrage, has leaves like small perseley, and it
grows in middowes. The Italians saxifragia is like the same, but it has
rougher leaves and greater, and an hotter root. The Germayns have two
Saxifrages, which other countries know not by those names. The greater has
great leaves, like smallage, and yealowe juice in the stalk, and this is
called of other writers Viride Marcum. It may be called in english, grene
Mark. This grows much by the Temmes side about Sheue. The other duche
saxifrage has leaves like Time, and it may be called in english
Timestonebreake. I have not seen it in England. It grows in sandy grounds
about the Rhene.

Tormentilla.
Tormentilla is called in greek Heptaphyllon, in english Tormentil, or
Tormerik, in duche Torme^til. It grows in Mores and Heathes.

Trinitaria or trinitatis herba.
Trinitatis herba, is of two sorts. The one has leaves like a Clarier, and it
grows in the Alps, and other high mountains. It may be called in english
mounttrifoly The other kind is called in english two faces in a hoode or
pauses. This is like unto a Violet in the flowers, and it grows often among
the corn.

Vua crispa.
Vua crispa is also called Grossularia, in english a Groser bushe, a Goosebery
bush. It grows only that I have seen in England, in gardines, but I have
seen it in Germany a broad in the fields among other busshes

Veronica.
Veronica grows in many places of England, and it is called in english
Fluellyng, in duche Erenprise.

Vuluaria.
Vuluaria is a stynkyng herb creapynge by the ground with leaves of Mergerum
or Organe. It grows much about the walls of Bon in Germany. I did se it
also in my Lord Cobbains gardine at Calice.

A table for the commune english names used now in all countries of England.
ALoe Agarik, Auenes, Arssmert Astrologia, Adders tongue, Apple tree, Abrecok,
Alexander, Alkakenge

Baye tree, Barley, Basyll, Burnette, Broume pricki, Broume, Belragges, Brier
brake, Bramble, Bulfote, Butter bur, Buchers broume, Bulfot, Bra^ke vrsme Baume
Baume, Mynte, Birche, Been, Brokelem, Beech tree, Blewblawe, Bind corn.

Camamil, Chickeweede, Citterach, Ce^tory, Capers, Cuckowe pintle, Caraweis,
Caret wild, Corn Mynte, Common, Cotton, Cheruel, Celendine, Crow toes.
Carlocke, Cresse of the gardine, Cresse of the water, Chestnut, Clarie, Cuckowes
meat, Comfrey.

Duckes meat, Dittany, Dittany of Ca^dy, Darnel, Dragon, Date tree, Dogs
tongue, Docke, Daffadyl, Daffadyl duche, Dasy, Doder.

Ehu tree, Earthnut, Egle^tine, Endyue Elecampane.

Foxgloue, Fluellin, Filipendula, Fiche, Firtree, Flouramor, Fumitory, Figtree,
Fern, Fenel, Fenegreke.

Gala^ga, Garleke, Garleke wyld, wild Goosegrasse, Gotesbearde, Gourd,
Gentiane, Gooseberies, Grass, Gethsamyne, Grummell, Groundsel.

Hearts horn, Hysope, Hoppes, Horehounde, Homsuccles, Hearts tongue, Houseleke
He^bayne, Horehounde stinkyng, Humlocke, Herb Iue, Hasel, Heath, Hulner or
Holy of the sea.

Jack of the hedge, Juniper.

Knotgrasse.

Ladies mantel, Lunary, Louage, Licores, Lettes, Laurel, Lauriel, Le^tilles,
Liuerwurt, Louage of Lumberdy, Little lick, Lange de beef, Ladies traces.

Mallowe, Mallowe verueyn, Moss, Mynt, corn Marygolde, Maiden heir,
Martagon, Mouseare, Mastike tree, Ma^dragge, Mynt, Mercury, Medler, Mewe,
Mulbery, Melilote, Mustarde, Mullem, Muscelto.

Nigella romana, Nettel, Nighteshade, N^pe. Orege, Orange, Otes, Oak, Oak of
Jerusalem, Onyon, Organ.

Prymet, Pomgarnat, Piony, Popy, Papyre, Pyneaple, Pease, Plantaine, Popler,
Purcellaine, Plame tree, Penirial, Peartree, Palina Christi, Pech tree,
Persuepe.

Quicken tree.

Rasin tree, Rosemary, Rise, Radice, Rape, Rose, Raspises, Rue, Rye, Ryshes,
Ra^pious, Ramses, Rampes, Reed, Rocket,

Sowthistle, Saint Iohans grass. Spourge, Sperage, Slauke, Saffro^, Setwall,
Saffron wild, Seen, Sampere, Stoncrop, Strawbery, Syues, Shepher, des bag,
Sanicle, Saxifrage, Staves aker Succory setwal, Scala celi, Sauine, Sallowe.
Sage, Sauery, Satyrion.

Twopeny grass, Thorowwax, Tor mentil, Two faces in a hode, Tamariske Turnepe,
Time, wild Time, Thorn tree, Tarragon, Thistle cotton, Trifoly, Tursan, Tasel
wild.

Wormwodde, Wulfes bayne Venus, heir, Velvet flower purple, water lyly, Water
betony, Wodbyne, Vinde, Wad, Walwurt, Weybent, Walnut, Vinewild, Water rose
waybrade, White root, Wylowe, Vghe, Verueyne, Violet.

Finis.
Fautes escaped in the printyng.
In Aristolochia: read Osterluci, for Ofter Luci. In Asclepias, read wurt, for
wixt. In Beta, read Pliny, for Plenie. In Castenea, read Diosbalanos, for
Dosbalanos. In Cicerbita, read Hascukoel, for Sasenkoel In Circium, read flour
for herb. In Cisthus ladanifera, read Laudan, for London. In Clinopodium, read
Rhene, for Rehne In Dictamnus, read Trarinella, for Tracinella. In Ebulus,
read for Allich, Attich. In Erise, for Frith, Hethes. In Goscipium, for Pylon,
Xylon In Hordium murinum, for Plenie, Pliny In Irio, for Cersse, Kersse. In
Libanotis, read second degree. In Limonium, read for wintergrowen:
wintergrune. In Lolmin, read Era, for Ara In Marubium, read witen for welen.
In Narcissus, read Pliny, for Plenie In Papauer, read Mansom, for Mansom. In
Ranunculus, read Golland for Galland In Rapum, read Rapa, for Rapas In
Serpyllum, read Erpyllon, for Iepyllo^ In Sideritis, read Gliderant, for
Glideraut. In Sphondilium, read Pasteney, for Pateney. In Stechas, read
arabica, for Arabia. In Thalspi, for Baurenfenfe: read Banrensenfe. In vitis
Syluestris, for Heguine, read Hedguine.
Imprinted at London by John Day and Wyllyam Seres, dwelling in Sepulchers
Parish at the sign of the Resurrection a little above Holbourne Conduite.

Cum gratia and priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


