THE DOVE AND THE SERPENT.

In which is contained a large description of all such points and principles,
as tend either to Conversation, or Negotiation.

Tuta velis; Tutus eris.

LONDON Printed by. T. C. for Laurence L'^sle, dwelling at the Tygre's head in
S. Paul's Churchyard. 1614.

The subject of every several Chapter contained in this Book.
Chap. 1. OF Secrecy; the means to attain unto it; the benefits it
brings; the inconueniencies, which ensue the contrary. Chap. 2. Of the
sinowes of Wisdom, wise distrust, and slownesse of belief. Chap. 3. Of the
wisdom of behavior in general. Chap. 4. How a man is to carry himself
toward those, on whom he has dependencie. Chap. 5. How to converse in Court,
and of the means whereby to purchase favor, and stand secure from the many
dangers, which are there incident to all. Chap. 6. Of the manner how to
converse with strangers in foreign regions, whereby to profit himself, and
benefit his Country. Chap. 7. Whether a man in the performance of employments;
upon hope of doing better, may digress from the directions of him that does
employ him: wherein the Negative is maintained. Chap. 8. What kind of
literature and knowledge is required to the enabling of a man for the
undergoing of any business, and the effecting of it with success.
(...) THE EPISTLE.
Virtue delights in those alone, whose goodness is the truest parallel to
their greatness. Her ambition hunts not after popular applause. Inuictam esse
oportet manum, quae Coelum condat: The garland, which is to crown her worth,
must not be framed or formed by any vulgar and illiterate hands: A weaker
pencill, then that of Apelles, is not allowed to limme her Beauties forth; nor
a less skillful hand then had Lysippus, to grave in Brass the comeliness of
her Proportion. Hence Sir it is, that I, her meanest Servant, do here offer
up these my labors particularly to you, and indeed to none but such as you:
Quos manibus proprijs finxit cordata Minerua; From whose judicious Censure,
whatsoever approbation they receive, I shall account my gain. I have been
taught long since, that Principibus viris placuisse non vltima laus est; And
therefore with the Satyrist, Non ego cum scribo, si forte quid aptius exit,
Quando haec rara avis est, si quid tamen aptius exit,
Laudari motuam: Neque enim mihi cornea fibra est.
Say that by chance, when I propound to write,
Some pretty thing, that is pleasing, I endite,
Though it be rare to see such Birds on wing;
Yet were I Author of some such like thing,
To reap what praise is due I would not scorn:
My Bosome's made of softer stuff then Horn.
So without further interrupting your more serious employments, I rest, with
all due reverence,

Your Worships, D. T.

Prooemium.
THat unadvised Rhetorician, whose judgment being so ouersway'd with
selfe-conceite, as that he durst most arrogantly presume, in presence of one of
the greatest Commanders, and best experienced Captains, that those times
afforded, with many tedious and frivolous Discourses to determine the office
and duty of a General, was recompensed, as he deserved, with a disdainefull
smile: which being accompanied with these words, that had those things been
handled by a Swallowe, he would have done the like; but if by an Eagle, have
lent them the best attention that he could, did more manifestly make known,
how much he had distasted his ouerdaring weakness. And indeed I may seem at
first in many men's judgments worthy the like censure and reprehension: but all
things rightly considered, I hope I shall easily avoid it. For though the
course I take seem somewhat preposterous in regard of that of the sacred
Vestalls, who first learned what they were to do; secondly, did what they had
learned; and last of all instructed others: yet is it answerable to that of the
Pythagorians, who after three years of silent contemplation, were permitted to
entermeddle with public actions, and to reduce their long conceived
speculations, into practice. Now therefore with the Poet, -- Fungar vice Cotis,
Horat: de art Poet.
acutum
Reddere quae ferrum valet, exsors ipsa secandi;
Munus and officium faciens nil, ipse docebo,
Quid deceat, quid non; quo virtus, quo ferat error:


(...) for whose safer Conuoy, he has engaged his fidelity. He shall meet
with many Pirates, that will strive to board him, not so much for the Vessel,
as the burden; and this they will be masters of, or their lives shall pay the
forfeiture of their miscarrying: But the Tongue is the Stern of this great
Caracke, which whosoever has the skill to guide, may easily disappoint them in
their aims.

It was the manner of those ancient Champions, which by the Greeks were called
Pancratiastae, to stand, being summoned to fight, with their arms lift up on
high, fortifying as with a Trench, their head and mouth, with their opposed
hands; and settling themselves in a readynes, before the beginning of the
combat, either to put by the blows of their Antagon^sts, or make them feel
the heavy weight of theirs. In the like posture should the mind of a wise man
be, against the ryotous and wanton violence of injurious persons; Erecta esse
debet, ardua, septa, solida, expedita, nunquam connivens, nusquam aciem suam
flecters; but continually producing Counsels and advise, against the
Batteries and Assaults of the deceitful, against the snares and treacheries of
the unjust, as the only arms and hands, whereby to repel their force, and
secure himself from being suddenly surprised. He must be like those mystical
creatures in Ezechiell, full of Eyes, (that is) exceeding vigilant, and
circumspect in his proceedings: But above all, he must put a bridle in his
mouth, and curb his tongue, from being too extrauagant.

Sp^ech is the only Character, by which a man expresses himself unto the
life; A Picture shows us but his outward lineaments, but in this, the nature
and quality of his mind is oftentimes decyphered to the full.

Laudibus arguitur vini vinosus Homerus. And hence no doubt, came that of
Socrates. Loquere, vt te vi^eam. That Noble man, which came into the Painters
shop, drew by his outward presence all due observance, and respect, even from
the Master; but when he began to speak, the boys brake forth in laughter at
his weakness; And indeed, by nothing better then her note, can we distinguish
the Bird.

It is said of Geese, that, when at the change of seasons, they pass from
Cilicia, over the mountain Taurus which abounds with Eagles: they carry stones
in their bills, for fear their cry should discover them to their enemies.
Reason should teach us that, which Nature has instructed them; but alas, it is
a thing of greater difficulty then so. For it is not possible that any man
should moderate his tongue, who has not first of all tamed his affections.

The son of Croesus was dumb even from his birth, yet when the Soldier had
advanced his sword to cut the thread of his fathers life, the violence of his
passion remoou'd the impediment of his speech, and he cried out, O stay thy
hand, It is the King thou have at that advantage; This which through natural
love was caused in him, has very often by the disordered and irregular motions
of the Mind, bin wrought in others. Philotas by his ambitious vaunts, and
windy ostentations, made a broad passage to his own confusion. Sampson, by
dallying too much with his Dalilah, betrayde his life and safety to the
Philistims: And Claudius, Tac: Annal: Lib: 12.
by ve^ting forth a word in his distemperature, gave Agrippina warning to
hasten his destruction. I will not stand to amplify this point with any more
particulars, but (in a word) advise thee, whosoever thou art, that shall thrust
thy self abroad into the day, so to compose thy inward mind, that thy outward
carriage may continually be calm and quiet. For thence it is, that all the
parts and members of our body have their stormy motions; Hunc igitur fraenis,
hunc tu compesce Catena:

If this be settled once, the Tongue cannot miscarrie. We may observe in Homer,
that such as are commended by him for their wisdom, are likewise said to be
most sparing of their speech: He makes Ulysses after his return, to give his
son this charge; If thou be mine, and from my blood derived,
Odyss
Let none perceive Ulysses is arrived:
Let not Laertes, nor Eumaeus know it,
Nor unto any of my Servants show it, etc.


And to speak truth, it is impossible, according to that saying of Demaratus.
A fool should hold his peace. Plutar. de Audit.
So that Spintharus did not meanly commend Epaminondas, when he said, He nere
had intercourse with any in all his life, that knew so much, and spoke so
little as he did. It is requisite therefore that they, which take upon them the
performance of any public office, should first bend their endeavors to the
attayning of Concealment; For without this, Li^tora bobus arant, and arenis
pemina mandant; They can neither be profitable to themselves, nor serviceable
to others.

Lib. (...).
(...). An open mouth, says Plutarke) serves the Master to no other use, then
does a house without a door, or a purse without a string. He must not in any
wise be like that place in the City of Olympias, which for the often resounding
of one and the selfsame voice, by reason of diverse and sundry reflections in
it, was not without just, and due consideration surnamed Heptaphonos. For
howsoever it be a very difficult thing to restrain the tongue from
intemperancie in this kind, and that many men are of such a temper, that they
could with greater patience endure to carry burning coals in their breasts,
then ^ecrets; Whereupon it oftentimes falls out, that those things which are
whispered in the ear, are presently after published in the market; yet is
there no excuse wherewith to color such a defect in one of public place. For
besides an imputation of weakness which he brings thereby upon himself, he
does first of all control the very purpose and intent of Nature, who to show
us the unruliness of the tongue, and with what strictness it is to be
observed, has as it were imprisoned it in the mouth; chained it with sinowes
to the throat; walled it about with gummes; hedged it in on every side with
teeth; and for fear it might any way break forth, shut it up closely with the
lips, as with a two-leau'd gate, so that his judgment, and discretion, which
have the charge and custody thereof, cannot but be liable to Censure, if it
make escape.

Secondly, he does digress from Reason, which confirms unto us every moment
by infinite examples, That the safety of the tongue is the tree of life; and
he which preserves it, according to that of the wise man, Ag^^opir quabit
Spirit^i.

Thirdly, Hor. Carm. lib. 3. Od. 2.
he makes himself thereby an enemy to all Society; -- vetabo qui C^reris
sacrum
Vulgarit arcanae, sub ijsdem
Si^ trabibus; fragil^mque mecum
Soluat f^^elum --
says the Poet; And in an other place he gives every one this caution:
Percun^^ator^m fugito; nam garruius idem est.

Fourthly, he does break and violate the laws of Nations. Amongst the
Persians, Lingua magis castigabatur, says Q. Curtius, quam vli^m probrum; Q.
Curt. lib. 4.
the tongue was more severely punished then any crime: nec magnam rem magis
sustine^i potuisse crediderunt ab eo cuitacere grave esset, quod facil^im^m
volu^^it esse Natura; yea, they disabled him, from ever having the managing of
any weighty charge, that had not in him the power of Concealment: and by this
discipline they prevailed so far, that neither fear nor hope, could ever
draw from them the least knowledge of that, which was not to be known:
witness Alexander, who notwithstanding the ^^ligent enquities, and industrious
searches which he made after the plots and proiects of Darius, could never
learn the course of his proceedings. Amongst the Egyptians likewise, it was a
capital offense. A Virgin in the Temple of Isis, was defloured by a Priest,
Diodor. Sic.
who having for the better compassing of his lustful desires, relied upon the
secrecy of a third, was by him betrayed unto the Magistrate, who pronounced
the sentence of death against the malefactors, and branded him, for the hyre of
his falsehood, with an infamous and shameful banishment. And in other
kingdoms where this was never punished as a fault, the contrary has still
been honored and rewarded as a Virtue. Est and fideli tuta silentio Merces.
--

Dionysius gave straight commandment, the head of Brias, one of the Gentlemen
of his Chamber, should be cut off, for telling Plato, who had demanded of him
what the Tyrant did, That he had stripped himself by reason of the heat, and
was painting in a Table. So that last of all, he makes a blot of his own
Security, and hazards upon the uncertain chances of the Dice, his dearest
safety.

Vipers are torn in sunder with the bringing forth of their young; and secret
words issuing out of the mouth, bring with them the utter ruin and subversion
of those that revealed them: It is an oracle uttered unto us by the mouth of
Wisdom, Proverb. 13 verse 3.
That he which keeps his mouth, keeps his life: And indeed it is as true
as tried -- Non tacuisse nocet, nocet esse locutum; according to the saying of
that good Simonides.

Amongst other Hieroglyphikes, by which the Egyptians did shadow Silence forth,
they made the Quince-tree one, whose fruit has the proportion of the heart,
and whose leaf is fashioned like the tongue of man: to signify thereby unto
us, that Speech which is the fruit as it were of the Understanding, should be
perpetually fastened unto that, and not to this. Yea, the spirit of Truth
enformeth us, that he which has knowledge, spares his words; but the mouth of
a fool is his own destruction, and his lips are a snare for his soul.
Wherefore he that is familiarly acquainted with his own infirmities, and
finds in himself this (...), this talkatiue intemperancie, let him stand
aloof, and not rashly undertake any weighty, or important charge; but salute
it at a safe and fearlesse distance, as young Hyppolitus did the Goddess
Venus, or his presumptuous ouer-weening, will have a tragical Catastrophe.

The times are dangerous and deceitful in which we live. The World affoords us
almost nothing now, which is not personated and disguised. Amongst men there
are many, -- Qui front politi, Pers: Sat: 5.
Astutam vapido servant sub pectore Vuloem.

They have honey in their mouths, but a Razour at their girdles; and as the
Comike says, Composita dicta pectore euolvunt suo,
Quae cum comp^nas dicta factis discrepant. Plaut.



In a word, the Owl has learnd to counterfaite the Nightingale: and Satan
that he may the better work upon a weak belief, has fashioned his Tongue
to the Dialect of Angels. Simolicitie lies speechless, and Vpright-dealing is
ready to give up the Ghost; the Bell has oftentimes rung out for them; by
reason whereof, D^ssimulation has long since entered upon their Possessions;
and like a cunning Usurper, enthroned herself within the hearts and minds of
frail Mortality; So that few are left, and those not easily to be discerned,
which are not as the Poet says, Introrsum turpes, speciosi pell^ decora.

Every man is now become a Sydonian, and has his Baal to himself: whilst he
that is the GOD of Gods, of power and Majesty so infinite, that (as the
Egyptians caused to be written on their Temple Gates) he is, Hermes. Po^m: 5.
(...). Whatsoever hat^ been, is or shall be, is made the subject of his
Hellish laughter. ^u^l^ci^ie, Romans 11. verse. ^6.
and Gain, are almost in as great esteem amongst us, as Virtue and Honor
were amongst the ancient ^omanes, their Temples are alike contrived; It is
impossible to come unto the last, but by the former: And hence proceeds that
of the Satyrist: Iuuenal. Sat. 13.
Quae tam festa dies, vt cesset prodere furem,
Perfidiam, frauds, atque omni ex crimine lucrum
Quaesitum, and partos gladio, vel pixide nummos.
No day so holy, but it still bewrayes
Thefts, guiles, deceits, and treacherous assayes:
Goods lewdly got, by Crimes, and vile offenses,
By murders, poysonings, and unchaste pretenses.


It i^ true, that in a man's own private businesses, he may assume what
liberty he please; but in those things which concern a third, he must be very
wa^ie how he does proceed. Icaru^ to satisfy his daring mind, may freely
(peradventure) and without controulment, soar above the strength of his waxen
wings, as long as the disastrous event of his presumption, extends it self
no farther, then the compass of his own grave: But Phaeton, must of
necessity be blamed, if wilfully and unadvisedly, he undergo a task, the
weak performance whereof, brings nothing but confusion to himself, and
others. And this is that our SAVIOVR CHRIST so often inculcated to his
Disciples, when bidding them beware of men, he commended unto them the Wi^edome
of the Serpent, in regard of his Church; but the Innoce^ci^ and Sim^l^^^ie of
Doves, in regard of themselves. It behooves every one therefore to take heed,
how, and to whom he open himself at any time, for fear he falsify the trust
which is reposed in him, and by so doing endanger all.

Let him imitate that Grecian of former times, who being told that his breath
did smell, Answered, It was by reason of the many Secrets, which had a long
while lain rotting, and putrefying within him.

Let his Bosom be like the Lions den in the Apologue; toward the mouth
whereof, the Prints and prickings of sundry sorts of Beasts might easily be
discerned, Sed nulla retrorsum, but from thence none at all.

Let him always talk with Harpocrates, at the sign of the Finger on the
Mouth; and learn of Anacharsis, that the Tongue has need of a more strong
restraint then Nature.

Let him not be too curious with them of Bethshemesh, 1. Sam. 6. verse. 19. 2.
King: 20. verse. 13.
in the search of other men's Secrets, nor yet too careless with Hezekiah, in the
discovery of his own. Morality gives him a prohibition for the one, and a
precept for the other.

Arcanum neque tu scrutaberis vllius vnquam;
Commissumque teges, and vino tortus, and ira. Hor: Epist. 18. lib. 1.

And indeed it is a profanation of duty, to publish any thing we should not.
Those things therefore which are to be concealed, let him conceal them, -- vt
Curia Martis Athenis; as close as either Silence or Darkness will afford him
means to keep them both from Eye and Ear: for the better effecting whereof,
there is necessarily required in him a Wise distrust, and flownesse of Belief,
wherewith his breast must so equally be balanced, that he may steddily run on,
without suffering shipwreck in such a doubtful and dangerous Course.

(...) unto our Savior Christ with a deceitful and captious interrogatorie,
praises of whose mouths are witchcrafts: of those are these.

The Poet alludes unto the^. Si vltra placitum laudarit, baccare frontem
cingite ne v^ti noceat mala lingua futuro. Virg. Ecl. 7. John 3. verse 26.


and said unto him, Master, Master, thinking that he perceiving himself so
honored and respected by them, might simply peradventure, and without
mistrust, discover and reveal unto them the secrets of his heart: but alas!
they mistook their aim, they missed their mark. He that intuitiuely knew all
things, did likewise know their salutation to be nothing else, but a
mischievous and treacherous insinuation; and therefore howsoever he accepted of
the like titles from the mouth of his Disciples; yet here the text says of
him, That he stouped down, and with his finger wrote upon the ground; to show,
that he was not delighted with their vanity, and that he knew the scope and
drift of their intent. Howsoever there are many so weak of understanding, that
measuring others by their own simplicity, they suffer both Discourse and
Judgment to be subdued by outward circumstance, and led in triumph by the
formal appearance of deluding Sycophants. Yea the wisest, if never so little
Iouially disposed, can hardly keep themselves from nibling at this bait. Men
for the most part are like the Peacocke, of which the Poet writes; Laudatas
ostendit avis Iunonia pennas;
Si tacitus spectes illa recondit opes;
Her praised plumes great Iunos bird spreads forth,
But viewed with silence, she conceales her worth:


Such as have any sense at all, are sensible in this; there is no Stoike but
desires it, no Cynike but delights in it. But they that shall consider with
themselves, that Esops Fox did not praise the Crow, but to beguile him of his
preye, will peradventure be wary, how they be transported and led away with
such vain persuasions. There is in speeches of this nature a certain
sweetness, Lib. 18. Epist. 106.
quae irrepit and blanditur, and non aliter, quam ebrietas, aut amor secreta
prodit, says Seneca, which having stolen into the heart, does with a tickling
kind of motion so please and sooth it, that no otherwise then Love or Wine, it
causes it to vent the most retired Secrets: but Wisdom prescribes us an
antidote, and bids us stop our Ears against the Charms and incantations of
such Sirens, and not suffer our selves to be like Pitchers, led up and down by
the sinister adulations of such double and clouen-hearted Parasites, that like
cunning Anglers do draw us on to swallow down the bait, that in the end they
may hang us on the hook.

There are others, that by enforcing an imaginary supposition, endeavor to
extort a truth; and this as it is usually practiced, so is it seldom
vneffected: provided always the thing objected be a matter of more
consequence, and such as would redound, if justified, with scandal to the
party that should report it. For feeling himself so urged, he will
instantly, to clear himself of the greater imputation, not stick peradventure
to confess the lesser. But these may easily be prevented, if we can keep our
selves from falling into passion, and seem but lightly touched with their
objections.

There are some again, Plin. lib. 1. Epist. 5.
that on the sudden and unawares, do set upon a man, and with some short,
and unexpected question labor to surprise him: These, howsoever they seeldome
make a full and perfect discovery of what they look for, yet having driven him
as it were, by this means to a stand, Ita intimos mentis affectus proditor
vultus enunciat, vt in speculo frontium imago extat animorum. Plin. Sec.
they think they may easily (as by observing the manner of his reply, by
noting the private and subtle motions of his countenance, and the fashions of
his behavior) collect some probability of their surmises; which done, they
bend all their practice to some other form, and cease not their pursuit, till
they be masters of the game: But the only means to delude their expectation,
is either to slight their question; to expostulate their opinion; to answer
little, and what they least look for; or in some cases not to answer at all;
but by way of opposition, and compensation to confront their interrogatories
and demands, with others of the like nature: As our Savior CHRIST did in the
Gospel, when the high Priests and Elders of the people came unto him, and
asked him by what authority he did those things, and from whence he had the
power to do them; Tell me, (says he) the Baptism of John, Math. 21. verse.
24:
Is it of heaven, or of men? and with this Dilemma, this two-edged argument,
he cut the throat of their inquisitiveness. There is another example of the
like nature, expressed by the Poet in the difference between Damoetas and
Menalcas: the one says, Virgil. Eclog. 3.
Dic quibus in terris, and eris mihi magnus Apollo,
Tres pateat Coeli spatium non amplius vlnas.
And the other, not able (it may be) to expound his riddle, or at least not
willing, requiteth him with the like: Dic quibus in terris inscripti nomina
Regum
Nascantur flores, and Phyllida solus habeto.
And this is a just and lawful retribution, and nothing else then to give our
adversary the foil at his own weapon.

To be brief, there are some that will not let to instance many feined matters
on themselves, by way of ostentation, or upon others by way of approbation,
that they may draw from their auditorie a true confession of the like. Of
these we must take heed, and withal, be diligently careful, that they work
not upon our weaknesses, and disaduantages; or make us the subject of such
experiments. And that we may the better secure our selves from them, we must
know it is their usual practice, when they meet with any so firmly settled in
their disposition that they cannot lead them; so close and private in their
desires, that they cannot win them; so furnished with rules and principles of
wise prevention, that they cannot awe them; to fasten upon their friends,
factions and dependences, or others that are interested in them, and so govern
them; And hence proceeded that of Sampson, Judges 14. verse 19.
Had ye not ploughed with my heifer, ye had not found out my riddle. Wherefore
it is good, never to impart our minds, but where it much imports; and in
matters of any moment to be always doubtful of the worst. Euripides.
For as the Poet says, (...)
(...): (...). Epichar.

Then wise distrust there is not any thing,
To mortal men that can more profit bring.


But if it be grounded upon vain imaginations and surmises, it is either an
argument of weakness, or of baseness, and who so uses it, must of
necessity be thought a traitor to humane Society. For as to believe all
things is childish, so to believe nothing is merely brutish. Besides, Multi
fallere docuerunt, dum timent falli; says Seneca. It is therefore requisite in
Civil policy, and no way derogating, as I take it, from the rules and
precepts of Morality, even in matters where there is greatest cause of
diffidence, especially if the parties be such as otherwise deserve respect, so
to disguise his fears and iealousies, Frontem aperiat, mentem tegat. Cic. pro
Cn. Plan.
that the discovery may neither prove offensive unto them, nor hurtful to
himself. There is no Argus, but, notwithstanding his wakefull observation,
shall find a Mercury to delude him. They that are free and liberal of their
discourse, are oftentimes the most secure from danger, if they err not in the
choice of their subject; whereas these Saturnines that stand continually upon
their watch and ward, and speak not but with Pythagoricall suspension, give
public notice to the world, that there is somewhat in their keeping, which
they would not willingly lose; and by this means whet and sharpen the wits of
the more curious sort against themselves, that in the end they cannot but be
made the spoil and prey of their Inventions: And with this agrees that worthy
speech of the Philosophers, (...) Ep^^^. ^9. lib. 9.
Multi aperta transeunt, condita and obstrusa rima^^^^r: f^^^m signata
sollicitant; vile videtur quicquid patet; aperta effractarius praeteri^: hos
mores habet populus, hos imperitissmu^ quisque, in secreta irrumpere cupit. But
I will slide from hence to that which does remain, as loath to torture the
Reader with prolixitie, or give him occasion to distaste the rest through
loathed satietie.

CHAP. III. Of the wisdom of Behavior in general.
THe wisdom which is required in one of public employment, is either
wisdom of behavior, or wisdom of negotiation; which in a word is nothing
but the Dove, and the Serpent. For as concerning the first; he must be kind
and courteous toward all men; full of mildness and affability in his
discourse; full of sobriety, and appliable demeanor in his conversation. The
mind of a wise man is by the mouth of Solomon compared to a glass, Prou. 27.
verse 19.
in which the forms and Characters of all diversity of Natures, and of all
variety of Customs are represented: so that hence I conclude with the Poet,
that, Qui sapit innumer^ moribus aptus erit. He will not like a Cato fashion
himself to none; nor like a Catiline conform himself to all: the one
favors exceedingly of wickedness, the other somewhat too much of
wilfulness.

Est modus in rebus, sunt certi denique fines,
Horat. lib. 1. Sat. 1.
Quos vltra citraque neo^it consistere rectum.
He will therefore out of his own discretion so level forth his carriage,
that it may hold a certain specious kind of correspondencie with most, and
not give by reason of distance, or disproportion, occasion of offense to any:
with some actually and indeed; with othersome apparently, and with relation
only to Society. For this, howsoever we dislike the unevenness of men's
proceedings, must always be preserved and kept vnviolated.

He must not disapproue of whatsoever is not bounded with the circumference of
his own opinion, or tends not to the same Center: nor give his judgment
upon any thing, though he be never so well able to decide it, but with
Apologies, and Cautions; to the intent that such as are in conference with him
may have no cause, either to envy his knowledge, or blush at their own
ignorance.

He must not like Aesops Ass grow proud and insolent of his employments, nor
think the better of himself because of his burden: but entertain such
private graces and favors as are shown him, with a settled modesty: and never
publish them, but with an abasement of his own merit, ascribing all such
accidents, more to the authors facility, or his own external felicity, then
to any skill or virtue that is inherent.

He must avoid all windy ostentation, which by the force of Selfe-Conceite,
may be drawn from any survey he has taken of his own worthiness. It is an
unseemly thing for any man to be the trumpet of his own sufficiency: and
whosoever it is that strives to be both Homer and Achilles; Virgil and Aeneas;
he does but manifest his own weakness, and want of wit. For his actions (if
any thing be in him) will in time prove sufficient blazoners of his worth. Let
us but rightly cast up our accounts, and we shall streightway find, that we
can never speak of our selves but with some prejudice: Our proper taxations
are received still as settled truths: but the commendations which we give our
own deseruings, cannot escape the censure of Misbeliefe. Plin: Epist: 8. lib.
1.
Besides, quod magnificum referente alio fuisset, ipso qui gesserat, (says
Pliny) recensente vanescit: (...) little Oar, we still dig further on in hope
of more, flattering our expectation with this conceit, that surely so small a
quantity was not alone, and impute the not attaining it, to nothing else but
our own unhappiness. It will not therefore, I take it, be much amiss for any
one to advantage himself, so often as he sees occasion, by the use and
practice of this principle.

In contracts of love and amity, I could advise every man to be always
mindful of that of Martial, Lib. 12. Epigr. 34.
Si vitare velis acerbu quaedam,
Et tristes animi cauere morsus,
Nulli te facias nimis sodalem;
Gaudebis minus and minus dolebis.
Who list not taste of bitter discontent,
But the sad bitings of the mind prevent,
Caesar, e duobus consulatus comperitoribus, Luceium sibi adiunxit, pactus vt
is, quoniam inferior gratia esset, pecuniaque polleret, nummos de suo communi
nomine per centurias pronunciaret. Sueton. Iul. distinct. 19.
Must make himself too fellow-like with none;
Less cause he will have to grieve, less cause to moan.
Or at least that he make choice of none to be familiarly acquainted with him,
but such as are honest and virtuous; of such as may delight him in their
conversation, by reason of a neerenesse in manners, and a likeness in
affections; or last of all, of such as are able to help him in the managing of
his affairs, by their discreet and provident directions, or furnish him if
need require, with supplies of an other nature, for the better furtherance of
his proceedings. For this indeed is that same threefold base, on which, as
Plutarke says, all friendship must be raised, or it will quickly fail.

There are some, that in the sunny vp-spring of our fortunes are with the
Swallow still at hand, and ready as it were to do us all the serviceable
offices they can: but when the winter of our happiness does once approach,
behold, they suddenly vanish, and grow strangers to us in our greatest need.
Some again, as indeed, Tuta, frequensque via est, per amicifallere nomen, that
will not stick to protest their pure and singular affection toward us, when
the scope of all their aims is only to deceive us. The Egyptians in their
hieroglyphikes were wont to shadow these forth by the Pie, which is white
before, but black behind. And in truth, as Triphon the Grammarian said, (...),
Mendacium in extrema part nigrescit.
Whatsoever is counterfeit, and adulterate, though it eye us with never so
fair a face, if we mark it well, we shall find it black always toward the
tail. That precept therefore of Pythagoras deserves our approbation, by which
he warns us, (...), not to admit a black-tayld hypocrite into our friendship.
Lastly, there are others so void of all civility, so destitute of all
humanity, that out of a vile and slavish disposition, the better to prevent
their associates, neighbors, and allies, from presuming any thing upon their
kindness, are not ashamed to give out, That the only way to have a friend, is
to make no use of him; intending it should seem, like churlish Nabals, to
taste of no man's cup themselves, because they would have no man to taste of
theirs: but these are utterly to be contemned and despised, as the detested
outcasts of Society. For as the Poet says of riches, Quo mihi diuitiae, si
non conceditur vti?
With wealthy sums of gold what should I do,
Unless I might both have, and use them too?
I likewise say of this.

To conclude, he must be careful, that as his speech is eloquent, his
utterance be likewise pleasing and amiable. Mercury cannot well be separated
from the Graces, nor they from him, but the musical consent of civil
Conversation will fall out to be very harsh and discordant. Above all, he must
endeavor that his words and countenance may seem like parallel lines derived
equally from one Center, that the reservedness of the last may not destroy the
credit of the former, and make good meaning liable to misconstruction. In a
word, he must in all things be free from affectation. There is nothing more
indecent in a man, then an ouercurious observance of decency. To intend the
fashioning of an external carriage and behavior so much, as to let it pass
into affectation, is even by the shallowest understandings condemned as
ridiculous, and accepted of all men (to the great disabling of his sufficiency
that uses it) as a most evident argument and proof of weakness and
indiscretion. Wherefore let him avoid all singularity, both in action,
gesture, and discourse, and so compose and govern himself in all such points
as appertain to conversation; that considering his care and circumspection in
declining from whatsoever is incongruous and absurd, that which that Satyrist
said of Ianus, may deservedly be pronounced of him.

Pers. Satyr. 1.
O Jane, a tergo, quem nulla Ciconia pinsit,
Nec manus auriculas imitata est mobilis albas,
Nec linguae, quantum sitiat Canis Apula, tantum.
All such occasions being far removed, as might any way betray his credit,
to the traducements of a vulgar and illiterate laughter. Lastly, Hor. Epist.
18. lib. 1.
Non sua laudabit studia, aut aliena reprendet:
Nec cum venari volet ille, poemata panget.
His proper courses he shall never commend,
Nor by reproouing other men's offend:
Ne when his friend by hunting sport would find,
Shall he incline to Poetry his mind.


Vespasian got the ill will of Nero by sleeping at his musical recreations;
whereas Pamphilus had the love of all by observing the former.

Terent. in Andr.
Sic vita erat, says his father, sacile omnes perferre ac pati
Cum quibuscunque erat vna, ijs sese dedere,
Eorum obsequi studijs, advorsus nemini
Nunquam praeponens se alijs --:
and hence he co^cludes, that whosoever shall carry himself in the like kind,
facillime Sine invidia inveniat laudem, and amicos paret.

CHAP. IIII. How a man is to carry himself toward those, on whom he has any
dependencie.
Whosoever he be that depends not entirely upon himself, but has reference
in his fortunes to some of nobler rank, from whom he hopes, by doing him all
the offices of a dutiful and faithful servant, to draw some means
wherewith to raise the low-built roof of his estate; let him first of all,
that he may the better instate himself within his grace and favor, to whom he
stands so devoted, and as I may say, get ground of his affections, observe
his nature and disposition; and when he has discovered and found out his
humors and his inclinations, endeavor, so they be not vicious and dishonest
(for I would not that he should like Tigellinus, as Tacitus reports, Tacit.
Annal. lib. 14.
principem societate scelerum obstringere, seek to endeare his Master to
himself by taking part in his unbounded dissolutions) by fulfilling them, to
give him the best contentment and satisfaction that possibly he may.

Let him never absent himself long from about his person, but continually be
at hand, and in fight; yea, let him feign occasions of access, rather then
want them, that so by entertaining a familiar kind of priuacie with him, he
may (by little and little) wind, and as it were serve himself through his
external show of diligence into his best affections. Further, let him be very
careful never to approach his presence, Qua^ta gloria sit, negotium aliquod
celeriter conficere, oste^dit nobis trium verboru^ ille titulus, quem Pontico
triumpho Caesar praetulit. VENI. VIDI. VICI. Suet. Iul. 37
but with a plausible and cheerful countenance; and at all times show a
special alacrity in the ready embracing of his will and commandments. Let
him as the child of Obedience, and the friend of Servitude, be continually
ready to undergo upon the least summons, what charge soever shall be imposed
upon him, and afterward effect it, with such quicknes and celeritie, that if
in the managing thereof, his cunning and sufficiency be never noted, his
expedition may.

Plaut. in Aulular.
Herile imperium ediscat, vt quod frons velit oculi sciant;
Quod iubeat, citis quadrigis citius properet exequi.
Let him not be like Phoebus his Crow, which having bin sent by him in haste
for water to the running springs, lighted upon a tree which was full of figs,
but so green, they could not well be gathered, and therefore as the Poet
relates it, Immemor Imperij sedisse sub arbore fertur,
Ovid. Fast. 2
Dum fierent tarda dulcia poma mora.
Not remembering his charge, loytered there till the fruit was ripe. Genesis 15.
verse. 11. Genesis 24. verse. 33.
Nor yet like Noah's, which forgetting his employment, busied it self amongst
the putrified and rotten carkases of the ceasing Deluge. Abraham will drive
these from him; he cannot endure their sight: his servants are principled so
well, that they will taste no meat till they have delivered their Message.

This practice is erroneous, and such as many times redou^deth with exceeding
disadvantage to the authors of the same. For it is avouched by an Oracle of
divine wisdom, That he which sends any weighty messages, by such as are of
weaker capacity, cutteth off the feet, and drinks damage. Pro. 26. verse.
6. Tacit: histor: lib. 2.
It is the nature of many in choice of Instruments, to select for their own use
and purpose, men of a plainer sort, and such as without searching into the
depth and quality of their designs, are able to do what ever is enjoined
them, and when the business is dispatched, return (without adding, or
subtracting any thing whereby to grace themselves) a true and faithful
relation of the success. He must not therefore be like Otho^ soldiers, qui
iussa ducum interpretari, quam exequimalebant; who took delight to comment
upon the directions of their Leaders, rather then perform them: but without
enquiring after the nature and scope of his intent, or searching on what
reasons, motives, and inducements it is grounded, borne as it were Daed^lijs
rem^g^^, as the Comike says, upon the wings of Daed^lus, cut through the midst
of all opposed interruptions and encumbrances whatsoever.

He must not always discover the full extent, and length of his reach, but in
some cases, caqu^ scit, ^esc^^t seem ignorant of what he well conceiues
especially when he sees his Patron is desirous to have them so closely
carried, that none may be acquainted with the substance, but himself, and
uses him but only as an instrument of better conueyance. When Tiberius with
dark and doubtful speeches (as his manner was) did still reject the Empire
from himself, Patribus, says Tacitus, Annal: lib: 2.
vnus metus ne intelligere viderentur; the Senators were afraid of nothing
more, then that he should perceive they understood him.

Passion does oftentimes misleade the wisest, and makes them resolve in their
distemperature upon the prosecution of many enterprises and attempts, which
were they followed and archieued, could not but black and soil the fairness
of their reputation. Now here it is the duty of a faithful and trusty
servant, howsoever he come by the knowledge of such unripe determinations,
whether by his own discovery, or his Masters imparting, to oppose, and divert
him as much as may be from engaging himself in such proceedings, by letting
him see the hazards and in conuenie^ces, that may follow thereupon: and this be
must do, not by precept, but example; not positiuely, but by implication; and
by bringing him in, as Nathan did the Prophet David, as a judge, 2. Sam. c. 12.
to censure his own error in the person of a third; for fear an honest
contradiction should be rejected as a consoriall taxation.

Such as are elevated in estates, and advanced above the pitch of ordinary men,
to places of dignity and promotion, can not endure to be controld in any
thing. Reproves are harsh to them, and clean against the hair. Whosoever
therefore would reform them, he must not take the nearer way, but the safer,
which is indeed by circumstance, by bouts, and windings. For to come bluntly
and directly to the point, might peradventure infer suspicion of contempt,
and want of due respect toward their person, in him that does it, whereby
their minds may be exasperated and incensed against him; whereas by fetching a
little compass, and by co^demning their headstrong and unbridled courses, or
commending the contrary, in others, not seeming to glance at any time at what
is done by them, he may discharge his duty without fear of danger. Plin. Sec.
lib. 3. Epist. 18.
Praecipere qualis esse debeat princeps, pulchrum quidem, sed onerosum, ac
prope superbum est: laudare vero optimum Principem, ac per hoc posteris, velut
e specula lumen, quod sequantur ostendere idem vtilitatis habet, arrogantiae
nihil. It is a means whereby impatient Patients are oftentimes most happily
recovered without cauterizing or incision. But if this softer opposition can
work within them no impression, let love and dutiful regard embolden him
against displeasure; and rather then they should perish through their own
wilfulness, let him confront them in a more open manner. Feri, sed tamen audi;
Strike me, but yet hear me, said Themistocles to one of Lacedaemon, and so
must he to them. His liberty of speech in this, cannot but receive from them
in colder blood, a charitable and good construction, and such as may answer
the lawfulness of his intent and meaning; provided always, that some
apologeticall excuse tending to mitigation, do either go before, or follow
after; informing them aright, that the boldness of his reproves and
dehortations, proceeded from no other ground, then from a dutious and obseruant
care he had of their security. For otherwise he hazardeth himself upon the
very instant, and that vainly, without any good effect at all. Q. Curt. lib. 1.
Witness Charidemus the Athenian, whom Darius impatient of all truth,
commanded for his honest counsel to be slain. Witness also Calisthenes,
whom Aristotle, tutor to Alexander the great, Plutar. in Alex.
was wont to reprehend and admonish for his unseasonable freedom in this kind
toward his Sovereign, presaging as it were unto him the tragical event,
which shortly after followed thereupon, by this verse of Homer; (...). Iliad.
lib. 18.

Forbear my son such round-spun talk to have,
Or it will bring thee to a sudden grave.


Witness likewise S. John the Baptist, and blessed Stephen, Matt. 14. verse 4.
Act. 7. verse 51.
with diverse others, to whom the like was alike disastrous; though indeed I
tax it not in them as a deficiencie; for what they spoke, was by the influence
and inspiration of the holy Ghost. I only quote them as apparent precedents of
those butcherous and tragical Catastrophes, that ensue such plainness.

In matters that are intricate and ambiguous, and wherein his counsel and
advise is asked, let him be wary how he does proceed. For to utter it as a
Maxim, or position, whereby to equal the conceit and opinion of his Patron;
or by way of Comparison, whereby to weaken and disable it, would peradventure
prove distastefull, and beget dislike. In the dissoluing therefore of such
knots, and doubts, let him abate and qualify the strength and vigor of his
judgment, with prudent limitations and cautions, and work him, so he know it
assuredly to be best, to a gentle acceptance of it, not by direct expression,
but slye insinuation. For as Cobaris the Mede advised Bessus, Seruo vtilius est
parere dicto, quam afferre consilium, quum illos, Q. Curt. lib. 7.
qui pareant, idem quod caeteros maneat, qui vero suadeant, proprium periculum.

Last of all, though he may show himself desirous of employment, and think it
an honor likewise to be imployd, yet must he not in any case voluntarily and
of himself make proffer of his service to him: for this were but to question
his authority, and doubt the power which he has to command him. Above all,
let him first in regard of himself, beware he do not thrust and obtrude it on
him, for fear acceptance should be thought a sufficient requital. Secondly,
that he observe a gradation in the discovery of his abilities, and abstain
from doing too much at once, for fear least what is well done might not be
thoroughly apprehended. Thirdly, that he feel not too soon the reward of his
virtue, whether it be in commendation, honor, favor, or applause: for if he
seem contented with a penie, it will be thought a prodigal and superfluous
thing to give him a pound. Men shape and fashion their liberalities according
to the minds and expectations of those, on whom they do bestow them. Let him
take heed therefore that by seeming pleased with a little, he give them not
occasion to suspect, he was never used to more. Lastly, that he do not thrust
himself without difference (whereby to publish and proclaim his own
deficiencies) into those employments, for which he is not proper: Iuvenal. Sat.
11. lib. 4.
-- nec enim loricam poscit Achillis
Thersites, in quase traducebat Ulysses.


It is not for a weaker then Milo to bear an Ox, nor a lesser then Atlas to
underprop the heavens. For according to that of the other Satyrist, Nauem si
poscat sibi peronatus arator
Luciferi rudis, exclamet Melicerta perisse
Frontem de rebus -- Pers. Sat. 5.
If for a Ship the hob-naild clown should call,
Which had no knowledge in the Stars at all,
Great Melicerta straight ways would exclame,
That earthly things were quite deprived of shame.


David refused the Armor of Saul, because he felt it cumbersome, and chose
that weapon to encounter his enemy withal which best became his strength and
education. They therefore which find themselves oppressed and ouercharged with
a burden, Abijciant potius, quam quo perferre iubentur, Hor. lib. 1. Epist. 13.

Cli^ellas stulti impingant, Asinaeque paternum
Cognomen vertant in risum, and fabula fiant.


CHAP. V. How to converse in Court, and of the means whereby to purchase
favor, and stand secure from the many dangers which are there incident to
any.
THe Court (says one) is like a raging and tempestuous Sea: Guarini, nelle
let.
their only difference is this, that he which saileth well in the one, and he
that does ill in the other, arriueth in the end with safety to his wisht-for
Haven. That which is elsewhere honored as a Virtue, is hated here (says he)
as a defect. Sincerity is clean excluded from amongst them, and simple
Purity is had in no esteem. To speak without feyning, to love without
flattering, are counted arguments of a base and sluggish disposition. But let
us imagine that this being uttered far beyond the Alps was meant but only
to the Florentine, and coming nearer home, consider a while the words of
Aretine, to Francis King of France, concerning certain Cardinals and Bishops
that did attend his Louvre. Vorrei (says he) che la bugia campeggiasse nella
mia bocca come fa la verita in quella del Clero. O that a lie could stumble in
my mouth, as truth it self does in the mouth of the Clergy. Now where the
salt is so unsavory, how can any thing be seasoned? Yet here with us, if
either imitation or patterns of Gods divine and exemplary goodness had any
power to reframe the minds of men, we should not need to be afraid of such
enormities. We have a Sovereign, that groundeth not the revenues of his Crown
upon the tears and sighs of the oppressed. He hates that gardener worse then
Alexander, that cutteth his herbs up by the root; Plutarch. in Alex: Sueton:
in Tibe:
and with Tiberius, Tondere mavult pecus quam degl^bere. His wisdom in the
placing of his favors and liberalities, exempteth him from the number of those
weaker Princes, whom Crates likened unto figtrees that grew upon some craggy
and rocky clifts, whose fruit none can approach, or taste of, but only Kites
and Ravens. In a word, he is as absolutely good, as we account him great; as
fully mild, as we account him mighty; as well renowned for mercy, as for
majesty: so that as Pliny the second reported of Traian, there remains
nothing to the accomplishing of our felicity, Sed vt Dij Caesarem imitentur,
Panegyr. Traia.
that the Gods would follow him, and continue as favorable and propitious
Lords to us, as he has been.

Those virtues which only by good discipline and education are bred in others,
were borne with him; there is nothing within the compass of his Imperial
bosom, that is either borrowed or feyned. Besides, there are many others that
attend his Princely person, so wise and heedfull in the effecting of their
purposes; so honest and religious in the performance of their promises; that
their words and actions, are even the precepts, and precedents of true
Morality. But as in heaven amidst the Angels, and in the sight of God
himself, there have been Lucifers; so I wish that in the circuit of great
Britains Court, there were not likewise some, who notwithstanding the benefit
of such examples, led by the instigation of their own corrupted and depraved
wills, run headlong on in many myery courses, and are conscious to themselves,
if not of worse, at least of those forenamed imputations: Some that care not,
so they purchase profit to themselves, Actaeone^suu^ comedent isti canes.
at what excessive rate they sell the Princes breath, to the poor needy
suppliant, nor with what vain delays they torture men's expectations, in hope
of further Fees; Some that having drunk of Machiauel's impure and troubled
streams, care not so much for Virtue it self, as for the outward show and
appearance thereof, because they are persuaded, That the credit of it is a
help, but the use of it a hinderance.

-- Pulchra Lauerna
Da mihi fallere, da iusto sanctoque videri; Hor. lib. 1. Epist. 16.

Noctem peccatis, and fraudibus obijce nubem.
Deigne sweet Protectresse of the Theeuish kind,
I may beguile, yet seem a Saint in mind:
Shade my offenses with a veil of Night,
And let a mist keep my deceits from light.
Weakness of Understanding is thought the ground of Honesty; and
Vpright-dealing, the way to Beggerie. But let not him, quem Titan finxit
meliore luto, be tainted with these impurities, or work for the more
compendious raising of his Fortunes, upon such dispensations from the rules of
Charity and Integrity. Let him think it a just judgment, Vt fumo pereat,
qui fumum vendit; and not do anything, whereby his soul may become obnoxious
to those hellish Furies, which attend the authors of unlawful practices. Let
him not flatter himself with any hope, that what he does may happily be
concealed; for this indeed is but a mere delusion. There is continually a God
within us, says the Stoike, there is an Angel still about us, Epict. in
dissertat. ab ^rri. d^g. lib. 7. cap. 14.
(...): and what need of any light have these to look into the nature of our
actions? Let no man therefore prostitute his voice for a small quantity of
glittering dross to base Injustice, nor teach his hands according to the
usual fashion to entertain a bribe, toward the impugning of an honest cause.
Plaut. in Asinar.
These oculatae manus, which as the Co^^ike says, quod vident, credunt, are
fitter in a house of brothelrie, then in a place of dignity. But who so
looseneth the raines to such impieties, let him know, that he cannot possibly
lessen, or extenuate his fault with any fair pretenses of necessity. For it
is otherwise in ours, then it was in the Court of Vitellius, Histor. lib. 2.
where, as Tacitus records, probitate, aut industria nemo certauit, no man in
competitio^ of any public charge did ever allege either his honesty, or
industry, whereby to purchase it; vnum ad potentiam iter, prodigis epulis and
sumptu, saginaque satiare inexplebiles Vitellij libidines: the only way to
greatness, was by bankettings, and prodigal expense, as likewise by cramming
the insatiable longings and desires of Vitellius.

-- Exeat aula
Qui velit esse pius --
is an Axiom, which in this place has no place at all. Such is the benignity
of our Prince, such now the security of our times, that Virtue need not any
longer be afraid to lay aside her habit of disguise, or doubt those scandalous
appeals, indictments, and delations, which in former ages have been framed
and preferred against her, by the envious spirits of malicious persons, to the
supplanting of an able worth. Goodness with us is not a thing in question,
witness examples that approve it, and the laws which do exact it.

Iam fides, and pax, and honor, Horat. Epod. lib.
pudorque
Priscus, and neglecta redire Virtus
Audet.
Wherefore howsoever a round and just proceeding may peradventure be despised
of a few, who out of Charity (if I may profane the word) to the prince of
darkness, as men intending peradventure to enlarge his empire and dominions,
endeavor, as much as in them lies, to fashion every one to their own mould,
and make them as distorted and prodigious in their life and conversation as
themselves, let no man notwithstanding, suffer himself to be diuerted from any
laudable and specious course, but whether he thrive by it or no (as this is
commonly the let and opposition, by which men's minds are deviated oftentimes
from what is good) go on in it with an even pase, and constant resolution,
rather to undergo with patience what accidents soever can befall him, then to
embrace the practice of any sinister and unlawful arts. It cannot but redound
unto him in the end with great advantage.

Virtus ipsa sibi pretium, nihil indiga laudis. Claudian.
The Spirit of Truth in the mouth of Wisdom has preached to the hearts of
men, That uprightness shall keep the innocent in his way, Pro. 13.6. and
withal, That the deceitful man shall not roast that which he takes in hunting.
Pro. 12. verse 27.

But I fear I have too long insisted upon this; and therefore for the Readers
better satisfaction, I will reduce the remainder of this head into as straight
a room as possibly I may.

If in the Court (as gawdie ignorance is no where else more insolent then
there) he be offered any wrongs, indignities and affronts, by men of greater
power, and richer outsides then himself, let him either not think upon them,
as Caesar did, who, as Tullie witnesses, had so excellent a memory, that he
seldom forgot any thing but injuries and disgraces; or let him slight both
them and their authors, as Cato did, who when a fellow struck him on the
mouth, would seem to take no notice either of him, or of his fact; or thirdly,
let him dissemble them, and with Antigonus wink at many things he both hears
and sees. De Ira. li. 3. cap. 12.
For according to Seneca, Multae iniuriae nos transeunt, ex quibus plerasque
non accepit, qui nescit: or last of all, let him with Socrates convert and
turn them to a jest.

Circumscribenda multis modis ira est; Anger, says the same Philosopher, is to
be circumscribed in diverse manners: Pleraque in lusum, iocumque vertantur; Most
things are to be made rather a matter of sport and laughter, then of any
discontent. For as Cremutius Cordus avouched in his defense before Tiberius,
Tacit. Annal. lib. 3.
spreta exolescunt, sin irascaris agnita videntur; being lightly set by, they
do streightway vanish; if thou stomach them, they seem to be acknowledged.
But if he perceive they presume upon his sufferance, and by reason of his too
much softness and facility of nature, make him the only subject of their
scorns, let him assume unto himself a more fortified kind of carriage, and
with some show of edge and spirit confront their daring impudency; provided
always they be not men, whose hye-built fortunes too much ouerlooke his own.
For then he will find it more convenient to proceed according to the former
directions, then by such violent, and open courses redeem himself from base
indignities.

CHAP. VI. Of the manner how to converse with strangers, in foreign Regions,
whereby to profit our selves, and benefit our Country.
SVch as are employed in matters of Embasie, and foreign treaties, must labor
(that they may the better co^uerse with men in nature and disposition differing
from themselves) to be thoroughly furnished with the wisdom of Application;
which consists only in a distinct and perfect knowledge of those precedent
humors, customs, and inclinations, to which we must accommodate and conform
our own.

Distance in manners, breeds difference in minds: witness Vonones, who by
the appointment of Tiberius being instituted and ordained king over the
Parthians, was entertained amongst them at the first with singular approbation
and applause, vt ferme ad noua imperia; according to the usual fashion of an
unsteady multitude, upon any change or alteration of government: but after they
had once observed the dissimilitude and disproportion which was between
themselves and him, Tacit: Annal. lib: 2.
and found that he was a man as Tacitus reports, diuersus a maiorum institutis,
raro venatu, segni equorum cura, fastuque erga patrias epulas, whose adverse
courses did seem to contradict the customs of their ancestors, being no way
given to those sportes and pastimes wherein themselves delighted, they did
vttterly distaste him. And upon this, or the like examples, did C. Caesar
peradventure ground that imitation of his Grandfather, (...) son, sent Hushai
the Archits to Jerusalem who meeting there with Absalom, did seek by
proffering him his service, to reconcile himself unto him; and when the Prince
(whether to try if his revolt were only feined, or whether upon any other more
private touch, which might concern himself) did vpbraide him thereupon with
foul ingratitude toward David, alleging many special favors he had
received at his hands, and how from time to time he had been honored by him
with a most sincere and singular affection; fashioned with all humility,
according to the directions which he received at his departure from his
Sovereign, 2. Sam. cap. 16. verse. 18.
this wise reply; Whom the Lord and this people, and all the men of Israel
have chosen for a Prince and leader, to go in and out before them, his will I
be (says he) and with him only will I dwell; Yea, look what homage and
service I have hitherto performed to him, the like with more dutious respect
will I henceforth render unto thee. And through this dexterous application of
himself unto him, he preuaild so far, that by discovering the plots and
proiects of Ahithopel, he confounded them, secured his country, saved his
Master. So that if we rightly weigh and consider the persons of the author and
the actor of this business, together with the reasons, motives, and
incitements upon which it was grounded, and observe withal, that the Lord
himself has no way taxed it in his holy and blessed word of any blemish,
lamenesse, or deficiencie, as he did those irregular and sinful actions of
his, which are there mentioned, and enrolled; but has rather, 2. Sam. cap. 17.
verse. 14.
as appears by the text, expressed himself to be a favorer and furtherer of
it; I do not see how any man can justly censure, and condemn it, as
unlawful, whereby the life of either might be thought worthy to be branded
with any mark of ignominy and reproach. For, as I noted before, there is a
difference between a public Society, and a private Family, where Virtue is
to show her self always in her own likeness, without any mask or habit of
delusion; whereas in the other, unless I err and fail in my accounts, she
may change her clothes, Vere sapiens non se in aliquibus mutat, sed aptat. And
such a one was Piso. Tacit. Annal. 6. and Lepidus. Annal. lib. 4.
if not disguise her countenance; and, so she direct and intend her course to
the same goal, run right or byas as she sees occasion. But I will step from
hence unto an other point, which is to be observed in this example, and that is
this, That the duty which we owe unto our King and Country, must always be
preserved and maintained with more religion and respect, then either life or
being.

There is infused and formed in all things a twofold imitation or propension
to what is good: the one, as every particular is a Total, and essential
substance of it self; the other, as it is a subordinate part or member to a
greater body, as appears plainly in those massier Elements, which of their
first and inbred form do make the center of the earth the only period of
their motion; yet rather then nature should suffer any divulsion, interruption,
or disturbance in the progress and continuance of her course, the water, we
see, forsakes the center, to which of it self it stands affectionate and
inclinable, and contrary to that inherent property of weighty bodies,
ascends upwards to relieve the world. In a man, unless he will belie the
author of his creation, through his degenerate and base proceedings, it is
expressed and set out in a far fairer Character. Romans cap. 9. verse 3. Exodus
cap. 32. verse. 32.
Saint Paul desires to be anathematized for his brethren; and Moses when the
Israelites, through their Idolatrous defection, had in a terrible and fearful
manner incensed the Lord of hoasts against themselves, becomes an humble
suter in their behalf, unto his heavenly Majesty, desiring him, that he
would cause his mercy to be known, in the free pardon and remission of their
sins: if not, that he would vouchsafe to raze his name out of those rolls
and registers of Immortality, which he himself had written. Yea, the very
Heathens have elevated and exalted this good which is communicatiue, above the
thought of any private or particular respects. Witness that memorable speech
of Pompey the Great, who (when he was in Commission of purueyance for a dearth
and scarsitie at Rome) being earnestly dissuaded by his friends from hazarding
himself upon the Sea in so rough a season, controlled their faint and crauen
allegations with this reply, Plut. Apophtheg.
Vt eam, non vt viuam necesse est: It is necessary that I should go, but not
that I should live; and so set foot into the ship.

Tull. lib. 1. de Offic.
Omnium societatum nulla est grauior, nulla carior, quam ea, quae cum Repub.
est vnicuique nostrum. Cari sunt parents, cari liberi, propinqui, familiares;
sed omnes omnium caritates patria vna complexa est, pro qua quis bonus dubitet
mortem oppetere, si ei sit profuturus? Of all societies and combinations there
is none so weighty, as that which consists between the Commonwealth, and
every home-borne Individual. Our Parents are dear, our Children dear, our
neighbors and acquaintance dear; but all this dearness our Country
deriueth wholly to it self, for whose advancement and commodity no good or
loyal Patriot will ever be afraid, says Tullie, to abandon and forsake his
life. The safety of our King must be preferred before the safety of our
nearest kin. So that our Agent, as an honest and faithful subject, must
always, but especially in foreign regions, where there is, has been, or in
time may be any hostile difference (as the leagues of love and amity between
Princes are not always of long continuance) so fashion and conform his
carriage, that the benefit of the public weal maybe the only mark and scope
of his endeauours.

He must labor to get good information of such particulars as lie within the
compass of that Clime, in which he does reside; as namely, of the situation
of the place, the nature and disposition of the people; their laws, customs,
statutes, and decrees; their manner of government, as well Oeconomicall as
Political; their forces and revenues; their friends, factions, and allies;
and from thence descend to a diligent survey of all Estates and conditions by
themselves, quoting in every determinate person of more honored rank, his
rules, his principles, and observations; his desires, ends, and actions; last
of all, his opposites, fautors, and competitors. For if afterward occasion of
enter-course befall him with any such, he shall by this means know how to
contriue, dispose, conduct, and manage the business to his best advantage.

In compassing the first there is no difficulty, if in the choice of his
acquaintance, he fit himself with such as are familiar and conversant with
those that look into the world, and are likewise generally well intelligenced
themselves in every several kind: and as for the last, it may be easily
effected, by getting priuacie and inwardnes with their enemies, friends, or
servants, which indeed do likely report them truest of any. For the malice of
the first will peradventure aggrauate and make worse their imperfections,
faults, and weaknesses; the affection of the second too highly prize, it may
be, their good deseruings, virtues, and abilities: whereas the last are quickly
drawn and won, by those that are familiar with them, to make a perfect and
exact delineation both of their worth and wants, discoursing of the one with
signs of joy and cheerful approbation; of the other with shows of grief and
sad commiseration.

But if he would understand their inclination from their own discovery, and
know by sounding how well affected they are unto their own established
government, if when need required they might not be wrought to second and
assist his Sovereign, in any enterprise or attempt that might be to his profit
and advantage, he were better proceed by way of argument and reasoning, then
direct enquiry. It is a course of greater certainty, of more security; and such
as with no small advantage and success was practiced by Brutus and Cassius,
who intending the deposition of Caesar; and having thereupon invited to a
supper certain of their friends, did set on foot the question of killing an
Usurper and a Tyrant, with no other intent, then to collect and gather by the
judicial and definitive arrest of each, which of the number present, might
best be made associates with them in the business: Or last of all, he may
follow the example of Germanicus, who when the time was come, that his army
should confront the forces of Arminius, considered with himself in what manner
he might come best to know, how well prepared and resolved his soldiers were
for that assault. He knew it was the fashion of the Tribunes and Centurions,
Laeta saepius quam comperta nuntiare, Tacit: Annal. lib: 2.
to relate matters of gladness rather then of truth: He knew that his Liberti
were of a base and servile disposition; that friends would rather flatter then
inform; last of all, he was not ignorant, that if he should command a
meeting and a congregation to be called, whatsoever were uttered there by the
voices of a few, would in an instant be confirmed by the consenting cries, and
suffrages of all; and therefore in the end he settled his suspension upon this
conclusion, penitus noscendas mentes, cum secreti, and incustoditi, inter
militares cibos, spem aut metum proferrent; That the only means to understand
their minds, was to observe and mark them, when being private, and unlooked
to, amidst their military feedings and refections, they freely vented both
their hopes and fears; and thereupon he clothed himself in an unknown
disguise, and went unto their Tents, where he discovered to the full their love
to him, their longing for the Combat; whilst one extolled the nobleness of
his birth, an other the comeliness of his person; most of them his patience,
his mildness, his immutable and constant mind in all things, whether light or
serious; all of them acknowledging that in the battle they would manifest
their gratefulnes unto him, by sacrificing those perfidious violaters and
breakers of the peace, to Glory and Revenge. So that our Agent, for the
procuring of better informatio^, may now and then resort to places of public
meetings. For here it is that men do often set aside their gravity, and
being in the height of all their iollitie, do of themselves, or at least upon
the least occasion lay open as it were the fences and enclosures of their
bosoms: And hence it was, the ancient Greeks would by no means suffer any in
their company at such assemblies, that would not fashion themselves unto the
rest: their ordinary word of entertainme^t was; (...), drink, or get thee gone;
to the intent, that nothing of whatsoever was done or spoken amongst them in
their wine, might be climinated, or so much as thought upon, by any then
present, the morrow following. They counted them no fit companions for
themselves in their loose and freer recreations, that did altogether
ouer-whelme, and drown their memories in the cup: as appears by Martial in
an Epigramme of his, composed against Procillus, on the like occasion.

Hesterna nocte tibi dixeramus,
Quincunces puto post december peractos, Lib. 1. Epigram. 28.

Coenares hodie Procille mecum.
Tu factam tibi rem statim putasti,
Et non sobria verba subnotasti,
Exemplo nimium periculoso.
(...).
Last night, my friend, when I did rashly say,
After Canary cups had drowned my wit,
Procillus thou shall sup with me to day;
Thou thoughtst, thou had a pretty perquisit;
And taking notice of my drunken words,
Gave ill example by such observation.
Procille, I loathe the mate, whose thought records
A table-tale breathed in vnsober passion.
finds, that these do far exceed the former, let him refrain from
altering any thing of whatsoever is appointed him: but if on the other side,
the benefit outwey the detriment, I see no reason why he may not (like wiser
Merchants, that will not stick to venture a little when there is any hope at all
of gayning much) somewhat decline from the precise and strict Mandamus of his
prime and principal Motor, to follow that which in his own discourse and
judgment he apprehends to be far more probable. Yet even in this I will
advise him to have respect unto the nature and disposition of him, to whom he
does retain, and govern both himself and all his actions continually
thereafter; because if there be in him that sowernesse and seuerenesse, which
is found in many, I would not wish him to alter in any point or circumstance
the form and order which is set him down, for fear least that should happen
unto him, which befell, as histories report, a certain Enginer of Athens, to
whom P. Crassus Mutianus, during his residence in Asia, sent for the greater of
the two Shipmasts which he had seen in Athens, to make a Ram thereof,
wherewith to batter down the walls of a certain town which he intended to
assault. The Enginer as one well understood in matters of that nature, knew
that the greater was no way fit for such a purpose; and because the lesser
might best be carried, and was most convenient for his turn, he sent him that.
But Mutianus perceiving how the business went, commanded instantly he should
be brought before him, and without admittance of excuses, caused him to be so
cruelly punished for his disobedience, that he dyed. To persons therefore so
austere and stern, he must be always wonderful respective. They abhor to
be counseled, when they desire to be obeyed.

It happens oftentimes, that in some cases, Fieri peradventure may be
utterly condemned, when Factum est, may be approved and commended; as did
appear by Pompey, when the Pirate Moenas came unto him, whilst Antonie and
Caesar, upon his inuitation, were feasting in his Galleys, and said, Will thou
that I cut the cables, and in one instant make thee Lord of all the Roman
Empire? Thou should have done it, answered he, and not have told me of it,
now let us content our selves with what we have; for as for me, I never learnt
to falsify my faith to any man, or seek my own advancement in his
overthrow, by acting or consenting to disloyal treason. So that here he may
proceed without direction, if his conceit and apprehension can out of the
nature and quality of the action, rightly consider the conclusion. There are
many that could wish in the distemperature of their passions some things were
done, which if they happen to be done, as Greatness can never want those that
will seek to satisfy her basest appetites, they do for ever abhor the
presence of the doer; and would not, Saul has no sooner spoke the word, but
Doegs weapon is in the bowels of the Priests.
if it were possible, retain one thought of him, or of his deed. Caesar could
not endure to look upon the head of his Competitor, nor yet upon Theodotus
that did present it to him: And Alexander condemned Bessus for the like, to a
seuerer torture. He must be therefore very wary what he undertakes, 1. Sam: c.
22
and have a special care that the performance of it may not be prejudicial
either to him or to his master. Ministri scelerum tanquam exprobra^tes ab
ipsis authoribus semper aspiciuntur. They see in them as it were by reflection,
Tacit: Annal: lib: 14.
the foul corruption of their own depraved will, which makes them loath and
detest the very sight of them. He must not therefore be careless of that which
he attempteth, but with all diligent attention see that it be no way repugnant
to the laws of God or Nature.

CHAP. VIII. What literature and knowledge is required in a man, for the better
enabling him to undergo all kinds of businesses whatsoever, and effect them
with success.
THe employments of a public man are of sundry kinds; and sometimes in the
behalf of his Prince, sometimes of himself, he is to negotiate with men of
several callings and professions. First therefore I think it meet he should
have past through all the several Pawnes of Secular and divine knowledge, not
parting thence (as Merchants usually from faires, whose repair thither, was
only to learn the price of things) till such time as he has purchased to
himself some ornament or other. He must taste of all kind of literature in
general, but make the ancient Registers of former ages his minds more
ordinary food; Lib. 1. Decad. 1.
in which says Liuie, Hoc praecipue salubre ac frugiferum, omnis eum exempli
documenta in illustri posita intueri, inde sibi, suaeque Reipub: quod imitetur,
capiat; inde foedum inceptu, foedum exitu quod vitet. They will serve him for a
Tutor in his private life, and for a Guide, in his public actions. Plut: in
Timol.
For in them, concerning the first, he may, (...), as by a glass, compose and
fashion his own life, according to those virtues that appear in others. And
concerning the last, (...), says Aristotle, 1. Rhetor: cap: 5.
(...). Those writings, wherein the Arts of men are registered, are as the
Arcenalls and storehouses of politic directions. For by the knowledge of
things past we learn how to manage things present, and how to dispose of
things that are to come. And indeed he that is altogether unacquainted with
the state of those times, which were long before Time had any estate in him, I
esteem him no other then an Infant, whose discursiue faculty never travailed
beyond the arches of his cradle: for though his body be aged, yet his wit is
childish, as being wholly destitute of experience, and unexercised in the
course of worldly affairs. Polyb: lib: 1.
And therefore Polybius did not rashly and without mature deliberation term
this historical kind of learning, (...), the truest discipline, exercise, and
institution, by which men may be trained and brought up to civil actions.
History therefore (I mean) both ancient and modern, must of necessity be one
part, and that not the least of his study. x. x. x.

The Civil law must likewise be an other: though indeed so accurate a
knowledge in this as in the former, is not absolutely required, yet a mean is
necessarily desired. Many gross and palpable errors have issued in matters of
treaty from the ignorance of Ambassadors and their ministers in this
profession. In confirmation whereof, I will allege that which happened long
since to the Carthaginians, who sent their Agents to yield themselves to the
mercy of the Romans, and to beseech the Senate, not to suffer one of the
fairest Towns of the world, and the pride and honor of their victories to be
unworthily wasted: notwithstanding all which, what by reason of the facility
of the Port, the factious and tumultuous nature of the people, the fyering of
it was for the preventing of future combustions thoroughly agreed upon: And
after that, the Ambassadors were admitted, who receiving (as they thought) an
answer then which themselves could not have framed a better for their
contentment, which was, Appian: lib: de bello Pun:
That they should retain their City, with all the Rightes, Vsufruites,
Charters, Liberties, Privileges, Immunities, and Prerogatives, which thitherto
they had enjoyed, returned home with great joy and gladness. But alas, it was
but a Meteor, that suddenly faded. For presently after, the charge of effecting
their former resolution, was by Commission delegated to the younger Scipio: who
hastening toward Africa with a great Navy, sent Censormus to receive of them
their Ships, and three hundredth Hostages: which done, he commanded all the
inhabitants of Carthage to avoid, and provide themselves an habitation
somewhat more discoasted from the Port then it; whereat (all astonished) they
began to show how the Senate had assured them the safety of their City:
whereunto reply was made, That the faith which had bin given them, should not
be violated in the least circumstance, but that their City was not tied to
the place, or to the walls of Carthage; which though it seem a kind of
sophysticall proceeding, yet had it Law and Reason to authorize it.

The word City, is a term that implies not any local place, as does the
word Town, which the Latins call vrh^m ab vrb^, i. ^ratro; because, as Varro
says, the circuit, and pourpris of Towns was wont to be traced out with
Plough; but it signifies the right uniting and incorporating of sundry persons
and families into one body, under one just and lawful kind of Polity; so
that the City may be said sometimes to forsake the Town. Non est inparietibus
Respub. said Pompey, when after he had drawn from Rome two hundredth Senators,
and such as were there besides of any credit, or esteem, he left the walls to
Caesar. Thus then were the poor inhabitants constrained to abandon their town
to the will and pleasure of the Romans, who perhaps had never had it so good
cheap, had their Ambassadors sooner understood the difference between Town
and City.

There is the like fault in the treaty made between the two Cantons of Berne,
and Friburgh, in the year one thousand five hundredth and five, where by the
second article it is agreed, that, The league between both Commonwealths
shall remain for ever, and as long as the walls of either town shall endure.
Many other fearful and dangerous falls have at sundry times happened unto such
as have neglected the benefit of so sure a stay; and that with no less danger
to their Country, then discredit to themselves. Wherefore I hold a
superficial knowledge herein at the least, to be necessarily required in one
of public place, that both at home and abroad he may be the better able to
maintain his own credit, and his Countries safety.

A ready skilfulnesse in neighbour-languages is an ornament, that cannot any
way be wanting in him; the attaining therefore of some perfection in them, must
of force be made a part of his practice. He shall have occasion oftentimes to
negotiate with strangers: to whom without these aids he cannot well impart
himself, but with much doubt and inconueniencie.

Lastly, he must be very careful, that whilst he seems a Patriot abroad, he
be not thought a stranger here at home. To talk of foreign nations, and in
some long and wearisome discourse to relate their manners and their Customs,
without some knowledge of his own, is but as idle Chat; and cannot be taken,
but as the symptom of a weak and crazie mind. The use of these things is
only but for application: they ought not to be followed any farther then they
can further us in the understanding of our own. Let him labor therefore with
all diligence in the histories of the kingdom in which he lives, as likewise
in the laws, decrees, and statutes of the same; that having out of them
discovered the nature and condition of the people, the situation of the
Country, and how and in what manner it is governed, he may the better employ
all other learning for his best advantage.

CHAP. IX. Of Negotiation in general: wherein the several Characters of men's
natures are largely described; and the means by which to negotiate with all
sorts of persons, is expressed to the full.
ALl practice consists either in working or discovering: the last I have
already touched; and therefore here I will only allege (to show that
howsoever it be not, because it is of Indiuiduals, comprised under precept, the
knowledge of it may be possible) that which the light of true Morality has
assured us; who says in the twentieth of the Proverbs, Proverb. 20. verse 5.
verse. 5. That the counsel in the heart of man is like deep waters, but he
that has understanding will draw it out. And as for the first, I understand
thereby, that forcible application of persuasiue arguments and allegations, by
which the parties with whom he does negotiate, are incited and induced to give
him a full and perfect satisfaction in all his demands; which may be easily
effected, if that which he propounds, have any reference to some wished for
object of the Appetite or Will: which as it is referred unto the end that man
desires, differs from that inferior natural desire, in that it looks
after nothing, but what Reason and Understanding, or the show of Reason does
prescribe; whereas the other is never moved, or delighted, but only with that
good, which is sensible and apparent. For all other goodness whatsoever, does
but weakly provoke it; and therefore many things are neglected, which are most
precious, only because themselves are, as it were, the graves and sepulchers of
their own worth and value.

Men are hardly wrought to any thing, which they conceit not to be either good,
profitable, or pleasant. He must of necessity therefore make these the grounds
of his persuasion; and having formerly observed the humors, passions, and
inclinations of his Auditors, apply them with such fitness in regard of
Circumstance, that when he speaks, his discourse may seem in all things to
answer their desire, and be generally accepted, approved, and embraced,
without examination, discussion, or opposition. Suae quisque inuentionifauet,
Plin. Sec. lib. 1. Epist. 20.
and quasi fortissimum amplectitur, quum ab alio dictum est, quod ipse
praeuidit. And therefore, Omnibus dandum est aliquid, quod teneant, quod
agnoscant: which that he may the better do, he must endeavor as much as in
him lies, to have a sound and perfect knowledge of the several Characters and
tempers of men's natures and dispositions; as likewise of those impressions
which are imposed upon the mind, by the Sex, by the Age, by the Climate, by
the good or evil Constitution of the body, and the like, which are inherent,
and Coevall with the substance: again, those, which are accidental, and have
their original but from the form and shape of outward fortune; for all men
are not to be won alike.

The younger sort are both incontinent and unconstant, changeable in their
Affections, and soon distaste what they did earnestly desire. Their Passions
are violent for the time, but they do quickly vanish: their Wills are like the
hunger and thirst of sickly persons, wonderful sharp, but of no long
continuance. They are exceeding prone to anger, impatient of injuries, unapt to
swallow base indignities, and always more ambitious then covetous. They care
not for looking after profit, because they never tasted of bitter want. Mallce
and subtle craft are like strangers, altogether unacquainted with their
bosoms: they have not yet proceeded in the school of worldly wisdom, and
are therefore ignorant, plain, and simple.

They are easy of belief, and credulous, as having not been often entangled
with the sophistical proceedings of base deceit. The greatest prop whereon
they rest their life, is Hope of future accidents: which notwithstanding it
emboldeneth their minds, and makes them constant, lays them open, and
unfenced, to treacherous and slye invasion. They are shamefaste, modest, and
withal magnanimous. In matters of action they always prefer honesty before
gain. It is Virtue that guides them, and not Discourse; which argues profit
to be the only aim and scope of the intention.

They delight in mirth and laughter, and are by reason thereof exceeding
studious of acquaintance, and continually making of appointments for public
meetings. As their actions are boundless, so are their affections: whether
they hate or love, or whatsoever they do, they pass the bounds of measure and
proportion. Their eyes are full of pity, and their hearts are stored with
compassion, at the sight, or hearing of an other man's misfortunes, and
disasters; because that measuring him by their own simplicity, they think
him altogether unworthy of his sufferings.

Old men are in a manner of a clean contrary inclination. For having by reason
of their years, and long experience, discovered, that whatsoever is under the
Sun is vanity, and liable to chance, they will not utter their opinion
positiuely in any thing, but undervalue every thing more then is requisite or
convenient. Their discourse is always limited with doubts, and suppositions,
and enterlaced with Peraduentures, It may bees, or other such like terms of
Moderation; so whatsoever they propou^d, they adhere to nothing. They are for
the most part left-handded (that is to say) malicious, and apt to conster all
things to the worst sense. Their hardness of belief does furnish them with
matter of suspicion; and the knowledge they have of worldly policy, does
authorize their incredulity. Their desires are lightly of a lowe-built-roofe,
and look but only after those things that may serve for the preservation of
their life and being. Hence it is, because riches are of the same rank and
livery, as likewise, because they are not ignorant that the wasting of wealth
and substance is easy, but the purchase of it hard and difficult, they are in
their expense so niggardly and sparing, that Plantus quoteth it as a wonder to
see an old man bountiful, Benigni^as huius sicut adolescentuli est. They are
seldom valiant, but cowardly and full of fear: which as Philosopers affirm,
is occasioned by the coldness of their temper. For fear is nothing else but a
frigiditie, or (as I may say) privation of that vigorous heat, which does
inflame the bloods of younger men, and makes them careless both of death and
danger. They delight in accusations and contentions, which is likewise a
branche of Pusillanimitie; and where there is hope of gain, they make no
scruple to dispense with honesty, not caring for the breath of rumor and
report. Their own timiditie, together with a long continued observation of
the mutability of worldly businesses, and their frequent interruptions and
miscarriages, does make them weak and feeble in their hopes and expectations.
They be wondrous talkatiue, and love to hear the stories of Antiquity,
especially such as have happened within the revolution of their own time, and
wherein themselves have peradventure been as Ministers and Agents. They are
apt enough to sympathize with others in matters of grief, and tenderly to
bemone the wretchedness of their condition: but this their Commiseration is not
the same with that of younger men. For the ground of it in these is courtesy
and humanity, but in those weakness and imbecility. They see their own
estate environed on every side with dangers and inconveniences, and therefore
pity others, because themselves are likely to endure the like. They are
somewhat froward, querelous, and peevish, apt to take exceptions at any thing;
and withal, to check and contradict all courses, but such as their own
experience has established, as Principles and infallible Maxims.

Now those of middle age, are as the mean between these two extremes, and
do alike participate of both. They are neither ouer-bolde, nor ouer-fearfull;
but hold indifferently with either. They are not incredulous of all things,
but shape their judgment according to the rule of truth. They are not sparing,
nor yet prodigal, but cut their garment according to their cloth, and at all
times accommodate their disbursements, and layings out, to the quantity and
proportion of their yearly commings in. Their modesty is backed continually
with valor, and their valor never but seconded with modesty: both which in
youth and age are utterly disioyned. For young men are valiant, but immodest;
old men are modest, but exceeding timorous. And to conclude all in one word,
look whatsoever is commendable in either of the other two, being considered
apart and by themselves, is seeldome wanting in this: but whatsoever sauoureth
either of excess, or of deficiencie in them, is but fit and moderate in these.
The Poet, as appears by the verses following, has reduced these differences
into a briefer form.

Imberbis iuuenis tandem custode remoto,
Horat: Art: Poet.
Gaudet equis, canibusque, and aprici gramine campi,
Cereus in vitium flecti, monitoribus asper,
Vtilium tardus provisor, prodigus aeris,
Sublimis, cupidusque, and amata relinquere pernix.
Conuersis studijs aetas, animusque virilis
Quaerit opes and amicitias, inseruit honori:
Commisisse cauet, quod mox mutare laboret.
Multa senem circumveniunt incommoda, vel quid
Quaerit, and inuentis miser abstinet, ac timet vti:
Vel quod res omnes timide, gelideque ministrat,
Dilator, spe longus, iners, auidusque futuri:
Difficilis, querulus, laudator temporis acti
Se puero, censor, castigatorque minorum.
The beardlesse youth does, freed from Tutors quite,
In horse, in hounds, in champion fields delight;
To vice, like wax, with ease he may be bent,
He harshly brooks a Monitors intent;
In looking to his profit he is slow,
Nor cares he how his money he bestow:
Haughty he is, and full of hot desire,
Ready to leave, what love did erst require.
By studies opposite the manly mind
Does labor hard, both wealth and friends to find,
He serves for honor, and does take great heed
Of doing ought, which he to change had need.
The old man seeks, yet like a wretch abstaines,
And dares not taste the sweetness of his pains;
He gouernes all things coldly, and with fear,
And in performance sluggish does appear;
Puts business off, with doubts and strange delays,
And on his hopes makes long and tedious stays.
To know things future greedily he longs,
Froward, perverse, complaining still of wrongs;
Commends the times which he a child did view,
And will be Censurer of the younger Crewe.
Now this which has hitherto been spoken, may serve as a light, whereby to
discover the rest of those inherent properties and impressions, which by reason
of these differences and mixtures, are daily stamped in the mind of man; as
likewise by the temperature of the air, in which they live, and the nature of
the heaven, under which they breathe; from whence S. Paul did reason and
conclude, that those of Crete were with sharpnes and severity of discipline to
be reproved: (...), etc. The Cretanes are always Liars, evil beasts, slow
bellyes; Tit: 1. ver. 12.13.
and therefore (says he) Rebuke them sharply. So that now I will pass from
these, and speak of such as are externe, and bred but by the access of some
unlooked for fortune.

Such is the composition of men's internal affections, that the nobler they
grow, the more ambitious they become. For there is none but desires always to
add somewhat to his first acquist, and to enlarge the heap by new supplies,
and fresh accumulations. Plus vitra is the soul of all their Emblemes and
devises. They love not any should be praised or commended but themselves, and
are apt withal to traduce the worth and good deserving of such as are like
their Ancestors. For those things which have been wrought and effected long
agone, are far more honorable, and afford more matter for ostentation, then
those which were of late achieved; so that the relation of them, should it
pass without some contradiction, or embasement of their price, might
peradventure they think obscure and dim the luster of their own.

Such manners, customs, and inclinations as attend on riches may easily be
discerned. They that are owners of never so little quantity, are for the most
part proud, and contumelious; They stand as highly conceited of themselves, as
if they had in their possession where with to purchase the fee-simple of the
whole world. For riches are indeed the price of whatsoever else is existent in
this earthly Globe, and by them alone the dignity thereof is valued and
esteemed. They are dainty, and do arrogate much unto themselves: the first,
to express by way of boasting those pleasures, and that happiness which they
enjoy; this other, because that all men do hunt and follow after that which
they themselves adore with love and admiration. They are seldom greatly
troubled with injuries or indignities, because the number of those that stand
in need of their help is in every Town and City very great. They challenge
to themselves precedencie of most men, and think that by reason of their great
abundance they should be lords and rulers over all, which indeed they are. For
as the Oracle of heavenly wisdom has assured us, The rich rules the poor,
Proverb. 22. verse 7.
and the borrower is no better then a servant to him that lends. But here
we must observe, that the manners and behavior of such as have attained to
some eminent promotion but of late and on the sudden, and theirs that have
enjoyed their glory, and their large possessions a longer season, are very
differing one from the other. All evils are more, and in a higher degree of
evil in them, then in the latter. For this same sudden flow and increase of
fortune does so seldom better the disposition, that as Tacitus reports,
Histor. lib. 1.
Vespasianus solus omnium ante se principum in melius mutatus est. So much
prosperity does oftentimes corrupt the wisest, and utterly overthrow the best
composed natures, so that with Pindarus his Tantale, (...): they cannot digest
too great a happiness: whereupon it follows, that their minds are
ouercharged, and oppressed with crudities, and many vlcerous inflammations.
That spurious and adulterate brat of rule, and soueraignetie, Licentiousness,
did so alter the noble constitution of Darius his princely mind, that he
remains a precedent to all posterity; homines cum se permisere fortunae,
etiam na^uram dediscere. Of himself he was mild, and tractable: but the
condition of his State corrupted many times the state of his condition, and
puffed him up with such conceits as were afterward upon more settled
consideration utterly disallowed. Curt. lib. 1.

Last of all, there is a difference in manners, which proceeds only from a
difference in nouriture and education. And this was well expressed by Lycurgus,
when in the presence of all the Lac^daemonians he brought forth two
Greyhounds, both of one breeding, though not of one bringing up, and set
before them a pot of Pottage, and a Hare; which was no sooner on foot, but
that which had been formerly accustomed to the field, did streightway
undertake it, and forgot the gruell to pursue the game; whereas the other that
had been always a Tenant to the Kitchen, as nothing moved with that
inticement, fell closely to his lap. All men are either ignorant, and
rusticall, or ingenuous and liberal; the first are, as the Italian calls
them, humanate bestie, such, as by reason of that small proportion of
understanding which is in them, care not but to satisfy their sensual
appetites, and are won to nothing which is not either profitable or pleasant.

Since all men therefore do approve that speech which has the nearest
affinity and resemblance with themselves, and which is fittest accommodated to
the private motions and propensions of their own humors and inclinations, I
shall not need to furnish him with any other precept, or instruction, but
only this, That he vary his Rhetorical proofs, inductions and persuasions,
according to the nature and disposition of his Auditors; vt quaelibet eorum
diuersa genera per plures dicendi species teneat. Plin. Sec. lib. 2. Epist. 5.
For one and the same thing, if intended to several persons, must be uttered
to them all respectively, and several ways; and therefore let him be as the
Poet says, Orpheus in syluis, inter Delphinas Arion. For without this voluble
and winding application, he may well write or speak, but he shall never be
able to prevail.

To negotiate with men by letters, unless in cases wherein he would advantage
himself by the reply, is dangerous, uncertain, and inconvenient. First,
because in them he lays himself more open to their Understanding, then in
ordinary Conference, in which his words are altogether Cursorie, and cannot
possibly be marked, or considered, but by glimpses, and in passage. Secondly,
because they do oftentimes miscarrie, and by reason of that, may many ways
prove hurtful and prejudicial. Lastly, because they are subject to
distorsions, wrestings, deprauations, and inconstructions. Plin. Sec. lib. 5.
Epist. 7.
Sermonem vultus, gestus, vox ipsa moderatur: Epistola omnibus commendationibus
destituta malignitati interpretantium exponitur.

It is better to deal with men by Attornie, then in person: for so shall he
draw all things on the sudden and without premeditation from them; but
himself get time to deliberate and think upon the business, and return
their words that answer, which is most convenient for his own turn: besides,
if the party that is employed be wise, and well experienced in matters of the
world, many articles and covenants may be underhand agreed upon, which
himself if after-occasions shall discover the performance of them to be
cumbersome, may disavow, as having past without his knowledge and approbation;
and so find means to free himself from inconveniences, by making his
startings and departures to his own advantage. But these Revocatorie
proceedings in matters whereunto his judgment, by the intercession of a third,
has formerly consented, are but sophistical and deceitful Elenches; yea,
such as cannot be practiced without dishonestie and soil of reputation. And
now will I pass from this, to come to that, which is more particular.

CHAP. X. Of the several kinds of Negotiation, viz: the Judicial,
Deliberatiue, and Demonstratiue: their several uses, natures and proprieties.
Whatsoever is the subject or occasion of Intercourse, and Debatement, is
either Judicial, Deliberatiue or Demonstratiue. The first consists in
accusing, and defending, in demanding, and denying; and comprehends under it
all such speeches as are either Conquestorie, Expostulatorie, or Refutatorie:
The second in exhorting and dehorting, and compriseth such as are Gratulatorie,
Complementall, or Officious: The third and last is altogether exercised in
praising and dispraysing, and contains in it such as are Petitorie,
Commenda^orie, Deprecatorie, Consolatorie, Obiurgatorie, and the like. So that
nothing is at any time in question or controversy between man and man, but it
may well be referred to some one of these. And therefore having once discovered
to what kind of cause, the matter which he is to treat of, be it by letter,
by personal conference, or howsoever, does naturally belong, he may
straightway know to what Topikes, heads, and common-places he should repair
for arguments, examples and inductions, with other such preparatorie store,
wherewith to strengthen, and corroborate his plea. Roscius non occidit patrem,
is a question Coniecturall Judicial, and is therefore handled in places proper
thereunto, viz. Voluntate and Facultate: that Roscius had neither the will to
do it, nor the means. Besides, the final aim, and scope of all his speech
will hereby easily appear. For not to stand upon the general ends thereof,
which are either Gnosticall, and have in them a plain and open exhortation,
either to Action or Imitation, as appears in the Demonstratiue, from whence
we slide to the Deliberatiue; or Practical, when any thing is expressly
commanded, as happens often in this and the Judicial; I will only handle those
that are more special, as namely the person of the Orator, the person of the
Auditor, and the quality of the thing: For in every several kind, these
three must with singular discretion and advertisement, be well considered.

In the Judicial it is the duty of an Orator to act the Plaintiff, or
Defendant; the part of a Judge to put on the habit of Mildnes, or Severity;
and the property of the Thing to be just, or unjust; lawful, or unlawful.

In the Deliberatiue the Speaker must altogether persuade or dissuade; the
hearer, either hope, or fear; and the thing it self make show of profit, or
of detriment.

In the Demonstratiue, the first must praise or dispraise; the second be
somewhat delighted with what is spoken; and the last seem good and honest, or
of a contrary grain. And thus much of their ends. Now will I delineate and
describe in a more exact and pe^fect manner the state of every several kind,
and first of that which is Iuridicall.

It is entitled by Rhetoricians Status qualitatis, a State of quality,
because in it the nature of the fact is examined, sifted, and defyned, whether
it partake with Equity, or Injustice; as likewise because in it the question
for the most part is de iure: And it is twofolde, viz. of the time past, and a
thing already done, which indeed is properly that State, which we surname
Iuridicall; or of the time to come, and whether a thing may justly be done, or
no; which kind of Constitution we call Negoti^ll. The Judicial state is
likewise twofolde; Absolute, when without assuming any thing for the
confirming, or approving of what is done, we pronounce by some direct
Enunciation, it is rightly done: or Assumptiue, when we lay hold on some
external ignorant and unlearned are oftentimes more moved with contumelies and
disgraces, then with whatsoever is honest or upright.

Comparisons, in regard that something may be honest, easy, profitable, and
commodious in a higher degree then others; yea, they may seem full often to
encounter, as where in Sophocles, Ismene and Antigone, consulting about the
burial of their brother; the one respected only honesty, the other, nothing
but security, and the obedience of the Magistrate.

Last of all, Affects and Motions, but especially in matters of some moment and
importance. Your Ancestors, (says Tullie,) in his oration for Manilius, have
often waged wars to revenge those injuries and indignities, which have been
offered to their Merchants and their Mariners. How then ought you to be
affected after the bloody massacre of so many thousand Roman Citizens, etc:
where all the four do manifestly concur, (viz:) the Example, the
Comparison, the Opposition, and the Motion.

CHAP. XII. Of the Demonstratiue, where are likewise shown the several kinds
thereof, together with the means how to enforce and press them for advantage.
x. x.
THE Demonstratiue is so entitled, because that in it the virtues and the
vices of a man are plainly shown. Or because in this kind Rhetoricians do
most of all lay open and unfold the chiefest ornaments and flowers of their
eloquence: by reason whereof, it may bewell suspected to be somewhat the more
sophysticall. Cicero calls it exornati^nem, a kind of beautifying; and Plato
will have it nothing else, In Sophista.
then (...), to speak with preparation, majesty, and pomp. The use of it is
altogether Ethicall, and is applied but to reform the mind. The matter of it
is the same with that of the other two, from which it differs only in the
handling. For the former consist in precepts; this in exposition. Glory not in
sumptuous rayments, but let thy whole delight be in the law of the Lord, is
a sentence, which contains in it instruction, counsel, and direction;
whereas, in saying by way of instance, That he gloried not in sumptuous
rayments, but his whole delight was in the law of the Lord; we do (but as it
were) encomiastically expound the sense and meaning of the first. Whosoever
therefore would commend, let him see what he would command; if command, let him
see what he would commend, as a thing in manners decent and convenient.

This Demonstratiue kind of speech is either serious, as in the praising of
Enagoras, in Isocrates; or sportfull, and for merriment, as that of the Fly in
Lucian. The subject thereof is threefold. For all praises are either of
persons, of deeds and atchiuements, or last of all, of things corporeal and
incorporeall. The handling of the first is either Natural, or Artificial.
Natural, when following the course of time, we make a direct enumeration and
recital of all such worthy accidents, and remarkable points and passages, as
may have happened from the day of a man's birth, to the hour of his burial.
Artificial, when we mingle and confound them; or when by logical divisions
and distributions we refer them to certain heads; as to the goods of the
mind, of the body, or of Fortune; or thirdly, when we climb up from the
lesser to the greater, or slide down from the greater to the lesser: or last
of all, when small things are enterueined with great; things dark and obscure,
with such as are clear, manifest, and apparent; those which are altogether
incredible, with such as are somewhat probable. Examples we have of every
kind; of the persons in Demosthenes, Isocra^es, Theoc^^tus, and diverse others,
who by Epitaphes, by Panegyrikes, and such like Epideicticall discourses, have
published unto the world the good deseruings of sundry men: Of the deeds, in
that Thanksgiving of the Israelites to God for their deliverance, Exodus: 15.
as likewise in many places of profane Authors. Of things themselves, in
Tullie's book De Senecture, where Pleasure is utterly condemned, and Husbandry
abundantly commended; besides, in the 11. of the Hebrews, where the blessed
Apostle S. Paul having defined the nature and the property of Faith. propounds
unto them an Encomiasticall description of the virtue, power, and efficacy
thereof; and so in several places.

But for the avoiding of all such inconveniences, as may happen in the handling
of this kind, we must first of all observe an omission, or at least a speedy
expedition, and dispatch of whatsoever may prove distastefull and unsavory in
the utterance; or secondly, we must color and disguise it with some fair
pretense: which like Ceruse, or some other more artificial beauty, may serve
to shadow whatsoever is either wrinkled or deformed: as where Isocrates in his
Helenes Encomio relates, that she was not stolen by Paris from her husband,
for any lust or wanton pleasure, but by the provocation of an ambitious desire,
which he had to be made and called the kins-man of Jupiter. On the contrary,
he that dispraiseth any thing, will willingly make use of nothing but of
defamatory traducements and reproaches: and howsoever, now and then he make
some recapitulation of such virtues and abilities, as are so manifest and
apparent to the world, that he cannot, as he would, without some prejudice
conceal them; yet notwithstanding he will be sure never to propound them but
with some dash, that shall obscure and blemish them, as in this, Caesar fuit
fortissimus, pationtissimus, Clementissimus: where, in a most ingenuous and
friendly manner, the Author seems to acknowledge and confess those
extraordinary parts and virtues, which were so eminent in Caesar, that the
smothering of them would peradventure have argued and convinced him to be both
envious and malicious: but that same, Haec omnia regni causa, comes in the
rereward, and darkeneth all. But I cannot indeed approve of this. For it is but
an adulterate kind of skill, yea such as is altogether disauowed by Virtue and
Morality. Aristotle has condemned such as are favorers of it, as having no
other end, then (...), to destroy that which is good, by mingling it with what
is bad. And indeed what is it else, then with that envious emie in the Gospel,
superseminare zizaniam and abire, Matt. 13. verse. 25.
to sow tares over the wheat and then be gone? I urge it not therefore as a
precept, Ego ille sum, qui scelera committi vetem: Author Theb.

Ego sum magister iuris, and moris probi.
I only propound it as a means of Discovery.

Last of all, we must first know, concerning this Demo^stratiue kind of
speech, that in a dry and barren subject, plura tractantur accessoria, quam
rei propria; a man may draw in many things, which are not altogether proper,
or peculiar; and by way of digression discourse of sundry matters, which carry
but a side respect unto the thing in hand. And hence it was, that Gorgias
peradventure did boaste, he never wanted whereof to speak. For if Achilles
(for example sake) were at any time to be commended, the praises of Peleus,
Aeacus, and Jupiter, would likewise follow.

Secondly, That Opinion, Conceit, or Commendation, may supply the room and
place of Exhortation, and Persuasion: as when we praise a Child, or any other,
for doing that, which we desire to have them do; as likewise in that of
Demosthenes, Olynth. 1.
who speaking to the Athenians, in stead of telling them, that it was their
duty to consider what was needful and convenient for the Commonwealth, and
not so gripingly retain the money, which was to be disburst for public uses;
I believe (says he) Athenians, that you more esteem the glory of your
Country, then any wealth, or treasure whatsoever: which is a figurative and
cunning kind of aggression, and such as may lawfully be practiced, and with
good success. It is easy for every man living to err, but so hard to wrest
from any man's mouth a plain acknowledgement of error, thar what has once
been unadvisedly resolved upon, the same is commonly persisted in, as long as
wit, by whetting it self, is able to find out any shift, be it never so
slight, whereby to escape the hands of present Contradiction. Deprehensus pudor
amittitur. Sen.
But when we see our faults pass undiscovered, and that we are praised for
the contrary, we do willingly, and of our own accord reduce our selves.

Thirdly, that in all things there be kept a true decorum, and a comeliness,
and that having regard unto the Auditor, nothing be uttered, but what is
honorable and gracious. And thus far of this. I will now come unto those parts
of speech, which are necessarily required for the better handling and enforcing
of each several kind.

CHAP. XIII. Of the several parts, whereof all speeches do consist, whether
they be Judicial, Deliberatiue, or Demonstratiue, and of diverse points which
are essential to the well composing of each.
THe several parts whereof all speeches, whether Judicial, Deliberatiue, or
Demonstratiue do usually consist, are six, viz. the Exordium, the Narration,
the Proposition, the Confirmation, the Refutation, the Peroration, or
Conclusion. The Exordium is properly that part, by which the mind of whosoever
is the Auditor, is made fit and willing to embrace the sequel. Tullie calls
it vestibulum and aditum ad causam, an entrance or portall into the cause. And
it is direct and manifest, as when by open and perspicuous motives we do
incite the hearer to attention; or it is winding and oblique, as when by bouts
and circuits we labor covertly to surprise him. The Greeks have termed this
an Incantation, the Latins an Insinuation. It was practiced with no mean
success by Sinon, when being brought before king Priamus, he did endeavor by
a true confession of some things in the beginning, to make the better passage
for those treacherous lies, which he intended should follow after.

Cuncta equidem tibi Rex, Vir. Aeneid. lib. 2.
fuerint quaecunque fatebor
Vera; says he, neque me Argolica de gente negabo.
And it is the ordinary practice of Deceit, Live. lib. 28.
fidem in paruis sibi praestruere, vt cum operaepretium sit, cum mercede magna
fallat, says our Historian.

It is needful when the matter in hand is such, as either for the grosenesse
or the strangeness thereof, may alienate the minds and affections of the
hearers from us; or when they are beforehand otherwise persuaded; or last of
all, when we perceive that they do faint, and are grown weary of hearing.
Sentio Iudices, says Cicero, occurrendum esse satietati aurium, animorumque
vestrorum. Quamobrem multa praetermittam. Ad ea autem quae dicturus sum,
reficite vos, quaeso Iudices, per Deos immortales, dum id Verris facinus
commemoro, quo tota prouincia Sicilia commota est; and this even toward the
end of his sixth Oration against Verres.

The only aim of an Exordium is chiefly to beget benevolence, which if the
cause be doubtful, and ambiguous, must of necessity be procured, and that
from the persons, or from the things. The persons either are our selves, and
such as we defend, and plead for; or secondly, they are our hearers; or last
of all our adversaries. It is drawn from our own persons by a modest
commendation of our abilities and deserts; as likewise by a commemoration and
recital of our cares and troubles; the first is Et^icall; the other in a mean
Patheticall; or by a refutation, and remouall of such obstacles and impediments
as may any way be hurtful and prejudicial to us. From the persons of our
Auditors, by alleging their praises; or by letting them know the hope and
estimation which men have of them. Fide sapientiaque vestra fretus, says the
Orator, plus oneris sustuli quam far me posse intestigo. Last of all, from
the person of our Adversaries, by bringing them into hatred through some
particular relation of whatsoever villainies and enormities have bin committed
by them; or by exposing them to envy, by some cunning blazoning of their
wealth, birth, power, and authority, as things on which they more rely, then
on the uprightness of their cause: or thirdly, by causing them to be contemned
through some rehearsal of their slothfulness, their ignorance, and other such
like weaknesses and imperfections.

An other end to be considered in the well composing of an Exordium, is the
begetting of attention; which is easily obtained, if we signify unto our
Auditors, that we are to speak of matters of importance; such as nearly
concern the commonwealth, are necessary to be known, and carry with them
profit and delight. Vtilissima munera, Plin. lib. 1. Epist. 8.
si non perinde popularia, comitate orationis inducenda. And therefore in this
we must imitate the wise Physicians, qui salubres, sed voluptate carentes cibos
blandioribus alloquijs prosequuntur. Or last of all, if in low and humble
manner we crave, and beg it at their hands.

A third and last end is, to instruct the hearer in the cause, if so it be
obscure; and for his better information to epitomize and abridge the business,
letting him see the sum of it, first in some general proposition, and
afterward in some particular division.

Now these in regard of the conceits and opinions which men have oftentimes
both of the persons and the things, are with all diligence to be considered: to
the intent, that having understood how all men stand affected to our Cause, and
knowing what they think both of the Plaintiff, and D^fendant; as likewise
what either friends or enemies could wish were principally done, we may
thereafter for our best advantage, frame and compose the beginning of our
speech.

There are some Proems, which seem, as it were, inartificiall, and withal
somewhat removed from the Cause in hand, but are notwithstanding very
cunningly connexed with it, and they are either P^ristaticall, such as are
drawn from circumstances, as from Time, Place, and the like; or they be
Gnomicall, such as are taken from Sentences, Proverbes, Examples, Precedents,
and Customs.

Those have in them always the best grace which are grounded upon the speeches
of our adverse party, because that seeming not to have been indicted at home,
but inverted there, the readiness of wit brings an increase of fame; and the
show of Simplicity an acquist of faith. Quo minus cupiditatis, Liu. lib. 4.
Dec. 3.
ac stu^ij v^^a est oration hubere, eo plus authoritatis habuit, says Liuie,
speaking of that Oration, which Apollonides the Siracusan applied to the
distempered minds of his divided countrymen. Ea demum magna voluptas ^st
(says Cicero) Crispe Sallusti, aequalem, ac parem verbis vitam agere. Retor:
lib. 3.
From whence we must observe according to that principle of Aristotle's, that he
which is Plaintiff must most of all enforce his accusations in the Epilogue,
but the Defendant must in the very first beginning refell all scandalous
imputations, that may hurt, or hinder.

Such as are puffed up and swollen, are utterly to be avoided; as likewise
those, which are vulgar, and may serve for many causes; or common, and which
our adversaries may use as well as we, with diverse others as vicious and
defective in some regard as these.

Sometimes they may be altogether omitted, as in Epistl^s, which are only
narratorie: yet in matters of moment, they cannot be neglected, no not of the
Athenians themselves, who were compelled by the Law to speak without Exordiums
or Affects.

After the Exordium comes the Narration, which is nothing else, but an
exposition of things done, or reputed to be done. Sometimes there is a kind of
preparation interposed, that it may seem to cohere the better with the former.
For it is not fit we should suddenly rush upon any thing, but come unto it
seasonably, and by degrees. Now every Narration is Grammatical, or Oratoriall.
A Grammatical Narration is that which is removed from civil pleas, and yet
is used for the better handling of such as are Oratoriall: and it is of
Persons, and expresses the inward manners, and the outward shape; or of
Things, and is either Historical, containing in it an act done; or
^lasm^ti^^ll and fained, whose argument is only but a fiction, yet such as may
be done; or Mythicall and fabulous, reporting that which never was done, nor is
ever likely to be done.

The Oratoriall narration is that which appertains to Civil causes, and is
used, as may appear in all the Orations of Demosthemes and Cicero, as a
special means whereby to overthrow our adversary, and obtain the victory.
It is either General, or Special: the first is the chief and primarie
Narration of the whole cause, and as I may say, the seat and foundation,
whereon we ground the faith and credit of our matter: the last is a Digression,
which happens sometimes upon some certain reason moving us thereunto. The
general Oratoriall Narration is either Simple, as in this; Occiditur ad
Balneas Palatinas redi^ns a coe^a S. Roscius, where neither the manner of the
murder is set down, nor any other circumstance, that might argue the truth of
that assertion. And here we must note, that those things, which depresse and
sad the spirits of our Auditors, are never to be uttered but with exceeding
brevity; whereas those that are well relished and accepted by them, are to be
rested on some longer time. And thus does Homer make Ulysses to relate the
stories of his wandering travails at large to those of Corcyra. Odyss: lib. 9.
vsque ad lib. 12.
who were themselves men fortunate, and studious of reports: Or secondly, it is
probable, and in it are sown the seeds of a future Confirmation: Or thirdly,
it is magnificent, and describes all things so exactly, and in such amplifying
manner, that we seem as it were to behold them with our eyes: Or last of all,
it is delightful, and is used more for pleasure then necessity.

The elements whereof Narrations do consist, are circumstances, which Plutarke
calls (...), In vita Homeri.
the occasions of every exposition; and they are either, 1. Persons. 2. Things
done. 3. Things pretermitted in the doing. 4. Reasons and inducements moving
men to either. 5. Opinions, Counsels, Aduises and Conceits. 6. The place
where. 7. The time, when. 8. The manner, how: in which the preparation,
together with such instruments as did belong to the performance are likewise
shown. 9. The final issue and event of all.


After the Narration follows the Proposition, which is the State it self, or
the principal Question, to which all proofs and arguments are referred. The
Narration may be sometimes omitted, as in disputations, suasorie Causes, and
judgments, as likewise when the thing is manifest and known: but the
Proposition must be always employed at least; for it is the scope of the
contention: and to speak, and not propound the sum of the matter, what is it
else but to beat the air, and to encounter with a shadow? It is the life or
soul of Speech, and is proportionably diffused through every part and member
of the same.

It happens sometimes, that in one and the same cause there may be many
separate Propositions; as when Socrates was accused in Xenophon to have
corrupted the younger sort, Apomne: 1.
and to have brought in superstitions that were never heard of. Sometimes
again there may be many, but all of them depending upon some one more
principal: so that here it is necessary and convenient, there should be a
division and enumeration of all such parts, as we would handle, together with
some information of those, which we were minded to omit. But here we must
beware that this division consist not of more then three, or four branches at
the most; and that, for fear the memory through over many might happily be
surcharged; or that exactness in this kind should be made an argument of
domestical Meditation: for which respect, Partitions many times are not at all
to be observed. But being seasonably applied, they grace and beautify the
speech exceedingly; Besides, the Auditors remember, and conceive things with
more facility, and are withal refreshed, when they know how much they are to
hear.

The Confirmation is an exposition of our arguments, accompanied with an
asseueration, and is referred wholly to the proving and authorizing of the
State, or principal question, which if that once faint, must of necessity
fall. In it the matter and form, whereof our arguments consist, must of
necessity be both considered: and withal we must observe, that if they be
firm and sound, they may be placed in it severally by themselves, and with
some distance one from an other: but if they be weak and crazie, they must be
heaped up together, that what they want in strength, may be supplied in number.

The Confutation is nothing else but a dissoluing of whatsoever our adverse
party shall allege toward the weakening and impugning of our Cause, Fab.
lib. 5. cap. 13.
which must be followed with exceeding diligence: because as it is harder to
heal then to hurt, so is it to defend then to accuse. Ad reprehendenda aliena
facta aut dicta ardet omnibus animus; Sallust. de Rep. ordin. 1.
vix satis aperium os, aut lingua prompta videtur, quae meditata pectore
euoluat. It is twofold, viz. either of the Form, as when we show their
Consequences and Collections to be bad, or of the Matter, which for the
diversity of arguments is very diverse. For that which is doubtful and
ambiguous can not be refelled, but by distinguishing; that which is false, no
otherwise then by an absolute denying of it, together with an allegation of
such reasons as move us to deny it; yet sometimes it may be seconded with a
division, which is a larger and more copious kind of defense, the Negation
being granted ex abundanti, as Rhetoricians term it, as in this; Say that
Roscius had been hated of his father, yet can it not be hence concluded, that
he would have killed him; the accuser therefore should have alleged some
weightier cause for his conviction. Those things which are light, and of little
moment, must be distinctly set upon, that so the troop may be the better
scattered.

Plut. in Apophthegm.
Scilurus lying on his deathbed, easily broke those arrows, that were then
brought unto him, one by one, which being bound together, none of his
fourscore sons were able to do. And thus by the appointment of Sertorius, a
sickly man did likewise without strayning of himself at all, pluck every
hair from out the tail of a strong and lusty horse; Idem in vita Sertorij.
which an able and well disposed Soldier taking hold of the whole tail of
one feeble and ready to dye, with both his hands could never do: Sometimes
again, they are refuted by a deflexion from the thing, to a reprehension of
the person. Cum hoc modo accusas Eruci, nonne hoc palam dicis? Ego quid
acceperim scio, quid dicam nescio. Vnum illud spectaui, quod Chrysogonus
aiebat, neminem isti patronum futurum; says Cicero in his defense for Roscius:
where the three former are to the matter, but the fourth digresseth from the
matter to the person.

Common things are best refelled by Inversion, when we show the signs or
causes, which are brought against us, to make directly for us: as in this.
Occidisti, quia sepelijsti; Thou sluest him, because thou buriedst him. Nay
rather, my burying of him, is an argument that I did not slay him. For had I
slain him, I would have sooner fled, then stayde to bury him. So that the
parts of this inverting kind of Confutation are two. For first, there is a
Negation of the sign, and then a reason of this Negation. Or secondly, they
may be overthrown by Violation, which is a forcible retorting of our
adversaries allegations on himself, and differs from Inversion, in that it
is Apologeticall, and defends; whereas the other is also Categoricall, and
accuses. The one is like Marcellus with his sword; the other like Fabius with
his shield. It is of greatest power, in that it is least looked for, and
cannot (being well pursued) but procure the victory. Heliodor. lib. 2.
In a word, it is nothing else, then (...), to cut a man's throat, with his own
weapons. Or thirdly, by Absolution, when we interpret the signs or causes,
otherwise then our adversary. He with scandal and maliciously; we with some
color to the better part, as in this, Sepelij, etc. I buried him, not because
I slew him, but because I had compassion on him. Things impertinent, and not
belonging to the question, may be rejected and contemned, as not deserving any
other refutation. Things clear and manifest, may be confronted with some
contrary Argumentation, or Compensation; or by ouer-whelming the hearers memory
with infinite Digressions, which is indeed a special kind of supplanting,
and such as Aeschynes desired the Judges to observe in Demosthenes.

The Peroration is the utmost bound of every speech; or the Conclusion
thereof, in which the principal Proposition is repeated. The parts of it are
two, Enumeration, by which whatsoever was handled in a scattering, and diffused
manner throughout the whole, is for remembrancesake reduced into one place; and
is oftener to be used by the Plaintiff, then by him that is Defendant. 2.
Amplification, which is a more pressing kind of Affirmation, and such as
having moved the minds, begets credit, and authority. It is applied,
either to incense men against the wicked, or to move them to pity the
distressed.

And thus far of the several parts, which are necessarily required in every
several kind of speech.

CHAP. XIIII. How to frame a Style which may be correspondent and agreeable to
each several kind of Negotiation: Of the care which must be had in fitting
it, both to the Person, and the Argument.
WHether it happen that a man be to negotiate in person, or by letter, he must
be very careful, that he deliver and set down his mind in such a style and
phrase, as may not be distastefull. For the effecting whereof, he must first
have a respect to the nature, rank, and ability of the persons, with whom
he is to treat. For if they be such as having in themselves an ability to do
well, carry not the least piece of an ear, that can swallowe, much less
digest a vulgar conceit it will behooue him so to frame it, as that it may
seem of pomp, yet free from affectation.

He must not make it savor so much of art, as of a certain Courtly
magnificencie, which by a kind of analogicall proportion, may somewhat answer
the greatness of the party, to whom he either writes or speaks. If it be to
one of high place and public action, he must endeavor to be brief, but
withal perspicuous.

Cum tot sustineas, cum tanta negotia solus;
Hor: lib: 2. Epist: 1.
Res Italas armis tuteris; moribus ornes;
Legibus emendes; in publica commoda peccem,
Si longo sermon morer tua tempora Caesar.
Such great affairs since thou alone sustain'st;
And by thy arms The Italian weal maintain'st;
Since thou alone with manners it adornest,
And her defects by prudent Laws reformest,
I should (great Caesar) wrong the public good,
If with long speeches I thy times withstood:
Says Horace, writing to the Majesty of Rome. Now for the difference of men's
natures, let him remember the complaint of the Poet, Tres mihi conuivae prope
dissentire videntur, Hor: lib: 2. Epist. 2.

Poscentes vario multum diuersa palato.
Three Guests I have, which plainly disagree,
Asking strange things, with differing taste, of me:
And have always a dish in store for every man's contentment: So that whether,
Carmine gaudebit; vel delectetur Iambis;
Sieve Bionaeis sermonibus, and Sale nigro:
He may find out a plate for his own Palate. Secondly, he must have regard
in the composing of his style to the quality and propriety of the Subjects,
whereof he is to treat; varying it, as occasion shall require, in a fit and
decent manner, according to the diversity of the same. And look what passions
he would stir up in others, he must first so express them in it, as he may
seem to be affected with the same himself; -- Tristia moestum
Vultum verba decent; iratum, plena minarum; Horat: de art Poet.

Ludentem lasciua; seuerum, seria dictu.


He that would move compassion in my heart, must show it in his own. Grief
is the child of Grief, and Tears are seldom procreated but by Tears: and
therefore as the Poet says, -- Male si manda^a loquetur,
Aut dormitabo, aut ridebo: --
If with bad vttrance he his part disgrace,
Or sleep I will, or floute him to his face.
For where there is a want of this conueniency, what other effect can possibly
be produced but laughter and contempt?

Romani tollent equites, peditesque cachinnum.
The nobler Crew, and eke the baser Croude,
Will burst their Spleens, with laughing ouer-loude.
He must not stuff it with words of a prodigious greatness, such as the Poet
terms- ampullas, and sesquipedalia verba; and cannot by reason of their
ouer-growne quantity be uttered without some dangerous extension of the voices
instruments. Aeschynes condemned them in Demosthenes, Monstrosa oration
monstrosae mentis indicium.
and branded them for ever with an opprobrious mark, calling them (...), non
(...), portenta, non verba: they must therefore of necessity be avoided. But
now and then, he may easily, as occasion requires, dispense with this. Pliny
reported of a certain Orator, because of the continued lowness of his style,
That he offended i^ nothing, Nihil peccat nisi quod nihil peccat. lib. 9. Ep.
26.
but in that he did not offend. Debet enim Orator, says he, erigi, attolli,
interdum etiam efferuescere, efferri, ac saepe accedere ad praeceps. For an
Orator must be erected, lifted up; yea, sometimes he must grow hot, bear
himself hye, and very often be ready to fall down headlong. Tutius per
plana, sed humilius, and depressius iter. It is only for weak and crazie
bodies to covet even ways: he that is strong and able, will make no
difficulty to try his legs, sometimes even in a rugged path, or if occasion
serve, to breathe himself up some hye and steep ascent. Such as do run, are
far more apt to fall, then those that creep; but these have never any
commendation, though they do not fall: the others though they do, have
always some. Nam vt quasdam arts, ita eloquentiam, nihil magis quam ancipitia
commendant. For it is with Eloquence as with other Arts, nothing more
beautifies and sets it forth, then doubtful and ambiguous accidents. We see
what clamours, and what cries resound throughout the Theater, when those that
walk there up the ropes, stand capring safely on the top, scorning the danger,
which every looker on fully presumed they would have fallen into. Those things
are always most admired, which are least expected, and cannot be performed but
with exceeding hazard.

He must not confound those things which are of a soaring and lofty strain,
with those that are altogether full of wind and tumor; nor censure that as
hyperbolicall, which well considered, is but round and full. Whatsoever
ouerpeereth, and is eminent in any thing, may easily be discerned: but we must
weigh with judgment and with reason, immodicum sit an grande; altum an enorme.

He must with all dexterity enterveine it with the choicest ornaments that
either words or sentences can possibly afford, Ne sutorem quidem, said
Agesilaus, probum putem, qui parvo pedi magnum circumdet calceum; when one
commended a Rhetorician to him for his faculty, in making a great matter of a
little. Plut.
and beautify it as far as the subject whereof he treats will bear, with
Tropes and Metaphors, and other such rhetorical decencies. For he that would
offer to draw Hercules his shoe upon the foot of a child, deserves no other
recompense or hire, then laughter and derision for his pains. Let him herein
therefore, like a cunning workman, fashion his garments according to the
making and proportion of him that is to wear them. Let not his speech be
either exiliter exanimata, or as Tullie says, gravius inslata and anhelata;
but in all things as near as may be correspondent to his argument.

Hor. Art. Poet.
Nec dum vitat humum, nubes, and inania captet. But there is notwithstanding a
certain kind of Amplification consisting both in words and sentences, which
may be used with commendation, when we would extol, aggrauate, or make worse
the matters that are in question. The Greeks have called it (...), because the
terms, by which it is expressed, do far surmount the greatness of the thing. For
they are either significant, or weighty, and fill the mind: as when to make
both Crime and Criminell the more detestable; in stead of the Genus, we allege
the Species; and whereas he did but hurt, affirm that he did kill: or
secondly, they be forcible and violent of sound, and fill the ears of those
that hear them; or thirdly they be full and round, and fill both their ears
and minds; or last of all, the better to make impression, they be tropicall,
and figurative: but these are never to be used, unless it be for necessity
sake, when the proper word is wanting; or when, though it be extant, it is not
altogether so expressiue and significant; or for ornament sake; or last of all
for honesty, as when the proper word is such as cannot be heard, or uttered,
but with a blushing and bashful countenance; for all vnsauourines of speech
must utterly be avoided. Salust: in Cicer:
Saepe grauius offendunt Auditorum animosij, qui aliena flagitia aperte
dixerunt, quam ij, qui commiserunt.

Hitherto belong all attributes and epithetes, which are nothing else but
Adjectives, borrowed either from the mind, or from the body, or extrinsecally
from fortune, and fitly added to some Substantive, to which they have the like
relation that sawces have to meats, and must therefore never be applied but
very sparingly. Aristotle condemned the writings of Alcidamas, Rhetor: lib: 3.
cap: 3.
as being (...), frozen, and ridiculous, by reason of his fond and foolish
affectation. (...). For he uses not his Epithetes, says he, as sawces, but as
meats. True Eloquence is grave, and Matron-like in her behavior; the apparel
which she wears is glorious, but not gawdie; it is comely, as well as costly:
She loves not to be decked with pide inventions, like a Courtisan; nor will she
fashion her self according to those Indians, who not content to wear
Eare-rings in such place of the ears as is most natural, and convenient,
thrust Jewels through their nose and lips, because they will be sure to be fine.

To this same Auxesis or Augmentation, is opposed Extenuation, which is a
lessening, or diminishing of whatsoever is objected, or propounded; as when in
defensorie pleas we make a Diminutiue of a Primitive; or leaving the Species,
have recourse to the Genus, and in stead of stealing, name taking; in stead of
wounding, touching. There is another kind of Diminution, which in regard it
proceeds from Modesty, is counted Ethicall, and is included in a Negative.
The Soldier to free himself from all suspicion of vainglory, which through
an open profession of his worth, he might have easily incurred, gave out, That
he was not unexercised in deeds of arms, nor ill experienced in Martial
discipline. And indeed the Negative is the same sometimes with an Affirmative,
as when for the avoiding of Tau^ologie, or the often repetition of one and the
same word, we say, He knows this, and is not ignorant of that: sometimes
again, it imports less, as in this; Hospes quonia^ nec malus, nec imprude^s
vir esse videris, etc. where because he was a stranger, and unknown, it was
thought sufficient courtesy to bear a charitable opinion and conceit of his
deseruings, not attributing any virtue absolutely unto him, for fear his
after-carriage might falsify the report: and sometimes more; as when Homer
speaking of Achilles, when he beheld the messengers, which were come by
Agame^nons appointment to fetch his lovely Brisis from him, in stead of saying,
he was wondrous sad, relates, he was not very glad. But this may peradventure
seem a little besides the line, and be condemned as nothing pertinent or
proper to the thing in hand, and therefore I will leave it, and return.

As in the composition, so likewise in the selection and choice of words, he
must not be too curious or precise; Cura verborum derogat affectibus fidem,
Quintil: lib. 9. cap. 3.
and vbicunque ars ostentatur, veritas abesse videtur. Too great an affectation
of them, argues a light affection in the mind: and Truth is often thought to
be away, where Art is so predominant. Passions, if legitimate and unfeigned, of
what nature soever they be, can hardly fashion themselves to any Dialect, but
their own. Their speech is seldom of any long continnance, but full of
breakings and imperfect periods. The heart contendeth with the tongue for to
express it self, but cannot find the means: which Petrarke having
discovered in him self, ingenuously cries out; Part: 1. Son: 138.
I veggi' hor bien, che caritate accesa,
Lega la lingua altrui, gli spirti invola.
Chi puo dir com' egl'arde, e'n picciol fuoco.
Now well I see, that true enkindled love
The tongue does bind, the spirits does remove.
He that has wit, and words to tell his heat,
May feel some warmth, but sure his flame's not great.


Let him therefore, the better to procure belief, make use of such as may
seem like Voluntaries; of themselves, and without pressing, or constraint, to
follow the leading of his Meditations, and marshall them with such dexterity,
that they may no way prejudice that feeling apprehension, which he has of what
he is to treat.

For the avoiding of prolixitie, then which nothing is more distastefull to a
judicious Auditorie, let him so order and contriue his speech, digesting the
whole into sundry parts, and allotting to every one their several points, with
such conueniencie, vt saepe incipere, saepe desinere videatur; and that the
Reader, if chance it were committed to writing, wheresoever he should begin,
wheresoever he should end, might find it in all things so coherent, that
reading where he left, he might think he began anew; so that notwithstanding
he seem long and tedious in the universal, Genus dice^di secutus est
Augustus elegas and temperatum, vitatis sententiaru^ ineptijs, inco^cinnitate,
and reconditoru^verborum, vt ipse dicere solebat; foetoribus. Sueto: Sect: 86,
He did rebuke M. Antony for writing so that men might rather wonder at him,
then conceive him. And commending in a certain Epistle the wit and
apprehe^sion of Agrippina his Niece, Opus est dare te operam, (says he) ne
moleste scribas, aut loquaris: ib. in vita Aug:
he may be counted brief in the particulars.

Let him not think to grace his style, by clothing it in the worme-eaten
habit of decayed Antiquity; but always utter his Conceits in the best
known, and most received phrase, and in all things (as I said before) labor
to be both plausible and perspicuous.

Hor: lib: 2. Epi: 2.
Audebit quaecunque parum splendoris habebunt,
Et sine pondere erunt, and honor indigna ferentur,
Verba mouere loco; quam vis inuita recedant:
Obscurata diu populo bonus eruet, atque
Proferet in lucem speciosa vocabula rerum,
Quae priscis memorata Catonibus, atque Cethegis,
Nunc situs informis premit, and deserta vetustas:
Adsiscet noua, quae genitor produxerit vsus:
Vehemens, and liquidus, puroque simillimus amni,
Fund^t opes, patriamque beabit diuite lingua.
Luxuriantia compescet, nimis aspera sano
Laeuabit cultu; virtute caerentia tollet.
Slight words, and such as little splendor have,
Or by their worth, for honor cannot crave,
He shall with boldness from their place remove,
Though loath they seem such Censure to approve.
Unto the people he (good man) shall show
Such as were long obscured, as none did know;
And bring to light the specious names of things,
Which practiced were in time of ancient Kings:
Now buried lie under th'oppressing rage
Of ill-shapt hoarynesse and forlorn age.
New shall he get, which Use has made of worth,
And like a River stream his riches forth
In a swift course, but clear and pure the while,
Gracing his Country with a wealthy style.
Such as do riot, he shall curb, restrain,
And make the rougher of a smoother grain;
But from his writings he shall banish quite,
Such as are bankroute of all force and might.
Last of all, let him adorn it with sentences of sundry kinds; De Orat: lib:
1.
For without these, whatsoever can be said, has but a hollow and an empty
sound: Nihil tam furiosum, (says Tullie) quam verborum vel optimorum, vel
ornatissimorum sonitus inanis, nulla subiecta sententia, nec Scientia.

Let him fitly therefore enterlace it with such ornaments, as learning can
afforde; that by so doing, no Eupolis may Censure or condemn him to be (...),
Or, (as Salust says) Loquacem magis quam facundum; a good talker, but a badde
speaker; or call him as Homer did Thersites, (...), a witless and immoderate
powrer forth of words. Iliad: b


These are the soul of Speech, and in these all the strength and vigor of it
does consist: for being beautified with these, it seems maiesticall and grave,
and is enabled to make a deep impression in the hearts and minds of such as
hear it; whereas without these it is altogether dull, and serves but as an
Antike motion, to move the laughter of the vulgar.

CHAP. XV. Of Sentences tending to the beautifying of the Style; their several
kinds, and applications: with the Authors Apology; serving for a Conclusion
to the whole.
A Sentence is a brief but general Enunciation, concerning those things,
which belong to life and civil conversation. It eyeth not the Individual, so
much as the Universal; and cannot well be used, but where there is Election
and choice of action. It is first of all, either Simple; as this, Pleasures the
seldomer they be used, the more they are to be commended: or it is compounded;
as here, Such is the nature and condition of an vnsteddie multitude, that it
estimateth nothing according to truth, most things according to opinion.
Secondly, it is positiuely true: as when we say, Religiosissimum esse Dei
cultum, imitari; that Imitation is the most religious kind of worship: or it
is only probable; as when we do affirm, that Speech is the lively Character
of the Heart: and that Every man resembles the Company, which he keeps: or
it is Hyperbolicall, and contains in it more then can be well believed by a
vulgar apprehension: as, Omnes sapientes sunt liberi; There is no wise man but
is free. Thirdly, it is hortatorie, or dehortatorie: as in the two last verses
of this Epigramme; which by reason of the elegancie thereof, I have here
inserted whole.

Vita^^^^uae faciunt beatiorem, Mart: lib. 10. Epigr: 47.

Iucundissime Martialis, haec sunt;
Res non parta labor, sed relicta;
Non ingratus ager, focus perennis,
Lis nunquam, toga rara, men's quieta,
Vires ingenuae, salubre corpus,
Prudens simplicitas pares amici,
Conuictus facilis, sine art mensa;
Nox non ebria, sed soluta curis;
Non tristis torus, attamen pudicus;
Somnus, qui faciat breues tenebras:
Quod sis esse v^lis, nihilque malis;
Summum nec metuas diem, nec optes.
The things that make man's life more happy seem,
Are these, delightful Martial, as I deem:
Wealth not by labor got, but left by Will;
A fruitful field, a fire burning still;
Mean clothes, no strife the minds rest to confound;
In different strength, a body firm, and sound;
Wary Simplicity and equal friends;
An easy Diet, which no art commends;
The Night not drunk, yet loose and free from care;
The bed not sad, though chaste beyond compare;
Sleep, which may make the longest darkes but short,
(Never disturbed with Thoughts of worldly sort).
Be still well-pleased, to be that which thou art,
And let thy choice affect no greater part;
Fear not the day, which must thy life vp-summe,
Nor wish the same before the time do come.
Live: lib: 5. Decad. 5.
Fourthly, it is Enunciatiue: as, In secundis rebus nihil in quenquam superbe,
ac violenter consulere decet, nec praesenti crelere fortunae, cum quid vesper
ferat incertus sis. A man should not says Liuie in prosperity determine any
thing either violently, or proudly against an other, considering that he is
uncertain what the Evening may bring with it. Fifthly, as Aristotle teaches
us, it is either (...) without a reason, Rhetor: lib: cap: 22.
being plain enough of it self, and easy to be presently understood: as in
this of Virgills, Nulla Fides, pietasque viris, qui castra sequuntur. Or (...),
with some reason, either going before, or immediately following after: as,
Mortalis cum sis, inimicitras immortales ne geras; Let not thy hatred be
immortal, when thou thy self art otherwise. Sixthly and lastly, it consists
either of proper words; as, Vnicus Dei cultus est, non esse malum: The only
worshipping of God, is not to be a sinner; or it is Tropicall: as here; Now
strike your sails, ye jolly Mariners,
For we be come unto a quiet rode, Spencer, Fa: Qu: lib 1. Cant: 12.

Where we must land some of our Passengers,
And light this weary Vessel of her lode.
As likewise in that of Maro's; Sed nos immensum spacijs confecimus aequor,
Georgie: lib. 2. 1.

Et iam tempus equum fumantia soluere colla.
Which I will here apply unto my self, as intending now to take a Farewell
of my Douely-Serpent; commending him to the conduct and protection of his
mildest stars: with this Apology, to such as shall embrace him in his
travails; that I have not fashioned him, as Tullie did his Orator, in so hye a
degree of perfection, that the reach of man's wisdom is no way able to attain
unto it. No, there is not any thing required here, but pains and industry
may easily effect. Yea, many (amongst which, my self may happily be one) which
seem of such a slender capacity, that Boeotum in crasso iurares aere natos,
cease not by daily employments to become fit to undergo great things. Plin:
lib: 6. Epist. 29.
Video (says Pliny the second) multos paruo ingenio, literis nullis, vt been
agerent agendo consecutos.

Antisthenes persuaded the Athenians one day to busy their Asses as well as
their horses in the tillage of their ground. Whereupon they answered him; that
such creatures were never made for any such purpose. That is all one, replied
he; it lies but in your will: For the most ignorant, and most incapable men,
that are employed by you in the commandments of your wars, let not to become
most worthy, by being imployde by you. It is in Action, as it is in Speech,
Vsus and est, and habetur optimus vtriusque Magister: Penelopen ipsam perstes,
modo tempore vinces: Capta vides sero Pergama, capta tamen.
Practice both is, and must be still accounted the best and truest
Schoole-maister of both.

Wherefore let no man alter his intended course, for any false surmised
difficulty or tediousness in the way.

Inuia virtuti nulla est via. And it is an excellent Motto, and which becomes
well the atchieuements of a generous Spirit, Non iuuat ex facili lecta corona
iugo.

FINIS.

