A preservative, or triacle, against the poison of Pelagius, lately renewed, and
styrred up again, by the furious sect of the Annabaptistes: devised by Wyllyam
Turner, Doctor of Physic.

Believe not every spirit, but prove the spirits, whether they be of God, or
no.

To the most steadfast, godly, and true preacher of Gods word, master Hughe
Latimer: Wylliam Turner Physicion, wyssheth long life, and good health: if it be
the will, and pleasure of almighty God: with continuance in all virtues, and
godlynes: and Christ our ryghteousnes.
THe same thing chances now, and has chanced ever since the beginning,
unto all true prechers, and defenders of Gods holy word: that chanced unto
the noble, and doughtye warryer, Hercules. Hercules for the love that he bare
unto his country took many a ieoperdous, and labor sum work in hand: and ever
after that one was ended, another began, so that they might have seemed to be
tied together with chains: one did always so continually, and almost
touchingly follow onother. But his trouble and business, that he had with the
kylling of the seven hedded water snake called Hydra: is most like in all
points, unto the labor sum work of Christ's soldiers, and true preachers,
for ever as he killed one head with his arrows, and struck it of with his
sword: There rose up another again, until that at the length he destr^ them
with fyrebrandes. Even so the Aposte^ of Christ, as they had ouerco^med one
labor, they were cumbred streigth way with another. First they had much a do,
in conuertyng the Jews from their evil life: and not a little to do, to pull
them from the false believe that they had, to be justified by the works of the
law: which for all that they kept not they had much to do, to bring the Jews
from the ceremonies of Moses law: and to make them believe, that they were put
down by the death of Christ. The turning of the heathen from ydolatry unto
the belefe in Christ, after that they had converted many of the Jews, was both
a ieoperdous, and a tumbrous labor. But after all these great labors, there
rose up a sort of heretics: who would have not only defaced, and blotted out
all of the praise, that the Apostels wan by their labors: but utterly have
destroyed, and undone all their doings. The names of the heretics were, Simon
Magus, Ebion, and Corinthus. Austen, Ambrose, and Hierom, with other like
fathers, in their times, had great trouble and beesines with the innumerable
enemies of Christ's truth. And we in our time are not in all points unlike
unto Hercules. For one labor ever successively receives, and follows
another. First in Cambridge about.xx. years ago, ye took great pains to put
men from their will works: as pylgrimage, and setting up of candels: and with
great labor ye brought many from them unto the works, that God commanded
expressedly in his holy scripture: and to the reading, and study of Gods word:
al dreams, and unprofitable gloses of men set a side, and utterly despised.
Then this fundacion of Gods word, ones laid, we that were your disciples,
had much to do in Cambridge: after your departing from us: with them that
defended praying unto saints, justification of works, holy water,
superfluous holy days, the sacrifice of the mass, lyinge of parsons from
their benefices, provision for purgatory, the syngle living of ministers, and
the superstitious choice of meats: and many such other doctrines, contrary
unto the scripture. And though this strife against Gods enemies, were common to
me (...) many: yet I had specially to do with a bucke: wi^ a certain man, that
had a name of the color of ^adder: with the fox and his foster: and with a
certain wytche, called maystres missa. But after I was easid from al these
monsters, by the help principally of almighty God, and by the ^yde of the king,
and his counsel: I thought to have been at good rest, and quietness from
contentious striuinges, wherewith I had been much troubled in times past: and
had fully purposed, to have set all my ordinance against gross vices, and
noughtye living of the people in this realm. But behold suddenly sterte out a
wood spirit, much perillouser then all the beasts, that I had to do with
before: not because he is stronger, then the other: but because his poison,
that he intenderh to spoute out, is more perilous, then the others poison
was. Some man peradventure will say, that if I would, I might have avoided
all these perilles: if I would have meddled with my Physic only, and not have
cumbred my self with matters of divinity: and that I am therefore well worthy
this trouble. To whom I answer, that if that I had had such a conscience, as
to many now a days have: that I could have found in my heart, to take the
dignities, rewards, and lyuynges of Christ's church, and to do nothing for
them, and if that I had not thought it better, that one man should run into
ieopardy, then that many thousands should have been poisoned with the poison of
Pelagius: I might in deed have easily avoided this perilous labor. But after
that my lord Archebyshop of York, had ones given me a prebende: I could not
be quiet, until that I had license to read, or preach. Which obtained: I
began to read, and so to discharge mi conscience. And because I did perceive,
that diverse began to be infected with the poison of Pellagius: I devised a
lecture in Thistelworth, against two of the opinions of Pelagius: namely
against that childer have no original sin, and that they ought not to be
baptized. But within a few wekes after: one of Pelagius disciples, in the
defense of his masters doctrine, wrote against my lecture, with all the cunnyng
and learning, that he had. But lest he should glory and crake among his
disciples, that I could not answer him: and to the intent, that the venomous
seed of his soweyng may be destroyed, and so hyndered from bryngyng forth
fruit: I have set out this book, to answer him, in the one of his opinions:
and (God wyllyng) when I have set out my Herbal, I shall aunsuer him to the
other. And this small work I dedicate unto you, as a worthy patron for it. I
might have dedicated it unto some great man of authority, power, and riches,
but consyderyng that nether authority, power, nor riches, are able to defend
my book, if the Pelagians should write against it: I have chosen you as a
patron, to defend it with your learning: which is only a better defense, then
all the dignity and riches of the world be they never so great. Now after
that I have desired you to be a patron unto my book: I must ask you counsel:
how that I, and my fellows shall behave our selves against this monstere of our
times: that ye may by our labors, be put afterward to less pain. This
monstre is in many points like unto the watersnake with seven heads. For as
out of one body rose seven heads: So out of Pelagius rose up these seven
sects: Anabaptists, Adamites, Loykenistes, Libertines, Swengfeldianes,
Dauidianes, and the spoylers. Sum would think: that it were the best way, to
use the same weapones against this manyfolde monstre, that the papists used
against us: that is material fire, and faggot. But me thynk: seeing it is no
material thing, that we must fight withal, but gostly, that is a wood
spirit: that it were most mete, that we should fight with the sword of
gods word, and with a spiritual fire against it: or else we are like to
profit but a little in our besynes. Paul, a noble capitayn of Christ's wars,
in his epistle, that he wrote unto the Ephesianes: counsels his young
scholars (which, he says, must fight against spiritual craftines and
subtelties) to put upon them all the hole armor of God, and to take the
spiritual sword, the word of God. Christ also in the.iiij. of Matthew
teaches us by his example to fygh, with spirits, with the spiritual wepones
of the word of God, as he did: and so did Austen, and Hierom, conjure, and
drive away spirits in their days. Then when as the enemy is a spirit, that
is, the ghost of pelagius, that old heretic: ones well laid, but now of late
to the great ieperdie of many raised up again: the wepones, and the warriers,
that must kill this enemy, must be spiritual. As for spiritual weapons, we
may have enough out of the store house, or armory of the scripture: to confound
and ouertrow all the gostly enemies be they never so many But where, and from
whence, shall we have spiritual warriers ynow fit for this fight? If that we had
no mo enamies, but this alone, the fewer soldiers would serve: but when as tie
spite of fornication and aduoutre, the ravening rentraysyng sprite, the sprite
of gluttony, the sprete, of Lucian, Iuliane, and Epicure, within finite swarms
mo of spiritual enemies, have besegd the church round about: we had need of a
great deal of mo soldiers, then all the scoles that are in this realm are able
to set forth: if so many scoles have been put down of late, as the common rumor
reports. But what would that help to the increase of warriers: if that the
old number of scoles were set up again: if either the scolars should want
livings to find the^, until they might come to be perfyt souldyers: or if they
grew up, and became good soldiers: then the living, that was ones appointed
only for spiritual soldiers: should be given either unto carnal wariers, or to
other that by their dignite have forsworn all common spiritual war, and might
get their living well enough otherwise by their own vocations? For that would
both discorage scolares from this kind of study: and would compel them, that
were able to exercise the spiritual war, to turn them selves to other
sciences, to get their liuinges therewith. For although the war be spiritual,
and the soldiers occupy chiefly their sprites* yet are they not without
bodies: which (as they are worthy) must needs have meat, drinck, and cloth, and
all other necessaries. Wherefore if that we will have the church of Christ,
delivered from the enemies, wherewith it is now besieged: we must provide not
only livings for young scolars, that they may continue in this godly study: but
also that the ripe, and perfect soldiers may have sufficient liuinges: that
they need not for lack of liuinges, to ru^ne to their adversaries, for better
wages, to commit treson against us. Almighty God preserve you: and grant you
strength, and health: that ye may continue in preachi^g, to the ouertrowing of
al wickedness, and to the promocion of the true word of God: to whom be al
honor and glory, for ever and ever Amen.

D. HVGONI LATIMERO NIcolaus Grimoaldus. S.
Optime non pigra florens Latimere senecta:
Que^ Rex, que^ regis prude^s, sapiensque Senatus,
Tempore que^ lo^go cupit haec respublica saluu^:
Ecce tui similis ueteranus hic, alter and ipse,
Ad debellandos in religione rebels
Millibus e multis te gaudet habere patronum.
Quam been spectatu^ spectatus, amicus amicu^
Aduocat: ut fractis pariter succurrere rebus
Possitis, domini quas impetit hostis acerbus?
Christiadas Christi sic sic defendere parts
Conuenit et iunctis huc huc co^currere turmis.
Atque utinam pugnatorum sic copia crescat,
Crescit ut hostilis numerus. Sed quodd querar? aut quos
Incusem? O mores tetros, o te^pora dira.
Sunt fuci, pecus ignauum: qui melle fouentes
Corpora, desertis stationibus, omnia produnt.
Sunt cessatores: quos tu, Latimere, notasti
Saepe (Deus faxit, fuerit ne fabula surdis
Dicta) suas qui cum res curent, and sibi uiuant:
Cum pulchros titulos, and nomen inane bonoru^
Bellatorum habeant: uberrima praemia capta^t,
Debita militibus nauis, strenuaeque cateruae.
Armatoru^ hominu^ loca, sed no^ arma capessunt:
Immo aciem turbant long turpissima monstra.
Ingruit ampla manus, uis multo maxima saeuit.
En inimica cohors: en Papa, Pelagius adsunt:
Cinctus adest crebro, sceleru^ caput, agmine Daemo^
No^ facile inuada^t, fu^da^t, uinca^tque, rega^tque
Ex qua part iacent torpentia me^bra ueterno?
Quid facimus? quae tanta uiros ignauia perdit?
Arua, facos, pecudes, uillas, armaria, tecta,
Diuitias, et opes fragiles, perituraque regna,
Quantis praesidijs ultro defendimus omnes?
Et tame^ (heu me^tes stupidas, heu mortua corda)
Eripitur coelu^, nobis stertentibus ipsum.
Ve miserae genti: populum quae sata Britannu^
Urgent, custodes ubi sunt uulpesque, lupique?
Nunquam hercle, nunquam uictoria clara redibit:
Ni somno addictos homines, and tempore belli
Castra relinquentes: faciant uel prorsus abire,
Cedentes alijs, proprium uel munus obire,
Qui res humanas aequa ditione gubernant.
Atque colant summis studijs, and honoribus illos:
Qui rectis imbuti animis, and robore magno,
Lubrica constanti superant mendacia uero:
Hic uti Turnerus fecit, fortissimus heroes.
Ad D. Guilielmum Turnerum.
Perge, faue^te Deo (Turnere grauissime) perge
Exornare libris tempora nostra tuis:
Et ui coelesti portenta nefanda domare,
Quae populu^ nostru^ peste noce^te premunt:
Du^ gaude^t uentres pingues, magnique magistri
Cum uafra obscuris art latere locis:
Co^pressisque sede^t manibus, gregibusque relictis:
Atque nouis nummis arca tumescit hians.
Praedentur uigiles, concesso tempore fures.
Sed quis erit finis? quis, rogo, finis erit?
Intoleranda dabit uindex tormenta supremus:
Et scelera horrebit talia quisque pius.
Tu uero instos reprimens acerrimus hosts,
Defendensque tui uerba colenda Dei:
Captabis nitido laetissima munera coelo,
Munera per nullos interitura dies.
Perg^ igitur Papas animo contemnere toto,
Clarum exe^pla uirum clara tene^da memor:
Neu quosuis facile Christi patiaris in aede
Quelibet ignaros dogmata praua sequi.
Immortale tibi fauet isto nomine numen,
Proque suo genitor pignore summus habet.
Et solidas grates imo de pectore promunt
Lucis amatores, candida turba tibi.
Est satius placuisse Deo, dum recta tueris:
Quam seruire stylo dissimulante, malis.
Est satius, paucis justice tua scripta probari,
Quam cum mill hominu^ laud silere leui.
Ergo, faue^te Deo (Turnere grauissime) perge
Illustrare libris tempora nostra tuis.
Ad Catabaptistam.
Amice, si sapis, tibi cave: cave,
Bonum ne nomen amittas apud bonos:
Item ne corpus in periculum trahas:
Neu mentes plurimas perdens, perdas tuam.
Duas res, obsecro, quantum potes, fuge.
Est una magna pestis, Ignoratio,
Quae ueritatis lucen nescit assequi.
Est altera, praeter hanc, lues uel maxima,
Doceri uelle se negans Superbia.
Autore me: qui non minus sane tibi
Recte consultum, quam mihi uolo, and meis:
Sacrum pia uocabis uoce Spiritum:
Qui pectori tuo talem modestiam
Instillet, ut sibi plane renunciet:
Verique noscendi te amore sedulo
Inspiret, abiectis malis affectibus.
Ad hunc modum, si comparare te uoles:
Tunc, tunc, uolume^ hoc cum cord legeris
Attento, candido, benigno, serio:
E doctus, optimam redibis in uiam.
To the reder.
Like as in time of Gods reuengyng wrath:
When fyry Mars, when Saturn cold and dry
With Soonne in Scorpion conspyrid has,
And from the south vnholsoome breath is do fly:
Venoomde vapors, they poison by and bye
The duskid air infectid is the water:
Corrupt is food of mennis substance the matter:
The moisture hoar then rottith inwardly:
Then stoppid ar the holes of outerskyn:
Then from the heart the heat to veins does hye:
Then native vice abatith all within,
Drawn fast together, dried, and driven full thyn^
Then wastith living wyghtis, without defense,
The ragyng plage, and cruel pestilence:
Right so ^he Devil out sent to trouble us,
With hellysh hotlynges, with Saturnians,
With creepyng beasts, the light defasyng thus,
As in this storm still stout Pelagians
Blows forth the blastes of Antichristians:
The bondessaues of Satan, sowers of lies,
Masters of myschief, trompes of heresies.
Now fostrid is a maddyng maladye
In heddis neewfanglid, and beewitched thaughtis:
Refusyng all good leachis remedy:
Goddis troth to fa^sies plucking, that be naughtis:
Lewd people drawyng by unskillful draughtis:
Until the simple souls, without redres,
Possessed of error fayntyth succourles.
Yet, lo, when as that murren is so brymme:
To his, God shapith soouerayne sauegarde:
By change of place: by purging every lymme:
By bitter soul, by thynne diet, and hard:
By mouyng members toward, and froward:
By Vipars body bet, with herbis not void
Of virtue: if her hedde, and tail be stroyde.
Likewise good helpis God gives against the sore
Disease of mind, and brain fantastical:
To seewe sage company, to use no more
Unwholesome stedis: to clenge, and to let fall
The Proud, and coye conceyte: withdrawyng all
Fat fare,, and fine, strange disshes to forsake:
For Alexander, Woolfbane lest thou take:
To practice heavenly lore, and wisdom brought
Down from above: this medicine to apply
To rescue folk, that has contagion cought,
And eeke to save a man continuallye
From dedly poysen: yea or else to try,
Which way thou may cut of the adders hedde,
Or ease thy friend unto thy ancorfledde.
Wylt thou be sound? wylt thou be safe, and sure?
Follow, follow this work, thou haste in hand.
Wylt thou him kenne, that cause is of cure?
He that abroad here, and out of the land,
He that in ward, did Antichriste witstande:
Good Doctor Turner: who by skyll is able
To prove the soothe, and to confound each fable.
Thomas Norton to the reder.
We may wit, if we will, by holy writ
The lore of the lord, that ledeth to life:
We may see, if we seche, and find in it
The fall of falshed, the steuching of strife:
The trial of truth: the guide of our gate:
Calbemesse of heart: what to love, or to hate.
Yea and so may we see, that it alone
Should be sought, to find that we ought to seche:
No mind of man to be builded on:
No counsel, no custom can be our leche,
To purge the poison: give salve for the sore:
Or has health for the harmed heart in store.
They more the mischief: they prolong the pain:
Ad more force to the fire, for the want
Of water of the word: and work in vain
Let us hye to him: whoes skill is not scant.
Whoes will does not, to better our bale:
To less our loss. Yea to quit us of all.
A pestilent plage, a poysonons ill
Has sown sores in certaigne now of late:
A wood sprited heart: with a wayward will:
A stubborn stomache, to nourishe debate:
Blered, yea blinded eyes: a brazen breast:
A leden brain: I reckon not the rest.
Against these evil airs thou may have here
(Take it, and taste it, yea let none be left)
A tried triacle, to keep the clear.
Lechecraft not only restores the rest,
But also preserves unharmed health.
This physike is free and esy God wealth.
And even as learned leches do oftentimes
(Trial techeth daily to fore our eyes)
Put in poison, to make for medicines:
So make their bale thy boot: their loss likewise
Thy gain, to warn the how thou ought to wyrche
To glory of God, and help of the Church.
A watcherime to the magistrates, for the
Catabaptistes, and their patriarchs.
Commune trial techeth them, that be wise,
Off things forepast to find, what will befall,
We have seen, hereof what end does arise:
CConfounding of kingdoms, decay of all.
Heed taken to warning saves from fall.
Qui uoudra bien du tressainct lauement
De Christ Sauueur la uerite scauoir,
Ce liuret lise, ou tout entierement
Turner l'escrit d'un haut style and scauoir
Au contrainct and meu pour ne vouloir
Du faux Satan ne des siens le poison
Estre espandu en saint maison
Que Jesus Christ de son sang alauee
Lesquelz auoient sans aucune raison
Encontre luy leur grand corn leuee.
Thomas Nortonus Sharpenhauius Lectori.
Quando sic summo pariter parenti
Constat and rerum domino placere,
Cuius in cunctis manet una semper
firma uoluntas:
Vt uel exipsis etiant malorum
Improbe factis sua proferatur
Laus, quod ruentus moderetur atque
tempora solus:
Commodum lector simul o beat
In tuum cedant, animosa quisquis
In tui causa ducis exhibebis
pectora Christi:
In tuum proles igitur Satanae
Quicquid hic Christum uomuit ueneni,
Robur integro, medicamen aegro
en tibi factum.
Is quod errauit, moneat supernae
Candido grates animo ferendas
Gratiae, quate sibi chariorem
praetulit illi.
Insuper quae sint, doceat cauenda.
Fausta Turnero medico precare
Tam pio: mentem quoque saniorem
haeresiarchae.
Randolphus Hurlestonus ad Lectorem.
Praecipit nobis, nihil ut patretur
Prosus unjust: sua set relinqui
Omni bus mandat deus ille sumo
summus olympo.
Nonne ius ductum uiolat nefande
Eripi qui uult puero tenello,
Dum nequit primos propriam per annos
dicere causam,
Illud aeterni solidum sigillum
Faederis, per quod sumus infauore:
Per quod and nobis rata cuncta fiunt
munera Christis
Nuperat quidam stygijs abundis
Proruens, parumspo^iare pubem
Nititur tanto precio, malignus
inuidus hostis.
Quem graui pugna strenue retundit
Ille Turnerus, decus atque lumen
Angliae: cuius fuit in Papistas
inclyta palma.
Consulas doctos igitur labores
In bonam partem, tibi qui dicantur:
Atque perpendas animo tenaci
quae liber offert.
FINIS.
Est Deus uerax, omnis homo mendax.
AS allmighty god is the auctor of al truth, yea even ye truth it self, as
Christ, in these words does testify: I am the way, the truth, and the life:
so all lyinge, and falshod comes from the devil: as Christ says in John: ye
devil is a liar, and the father of the same. Whereby it is not hard to know,
of what spirit ye be: which begin your book with so many vnshamefaced lies, and
goo forward with falsehod: and both in rehersyng of other men's doings, and
sayings, and also in matters of religion: do willingly, and advisedly, tread
down the truth: mainteyning the doctrine of ye devil (I mean heresy, and
false doctrine) with lies, falshod, and sometime with subtle Sophistry: which I
reken the devil at certain times powers into you, to defend his doctrine
with all, for all the learned men that have disputed with you in your opinions,
whit whom I have spoken, judge you to be so iklender a clerk: yt they think yt
ye never learned nether sophistry, nor logike nether any good science in all
your life, sauinge only musyke: wherein if I be so cunning, as the common report
makes you: it had been better for you to have song your part against me in
tune: the^ to have to unlearnedly, and lyingly written against me, out of
order, and out of tune, from the truth. first, as hereafter follows, thus do
ye begin. Master Turner intending to prove that infantes may well and ought
to be baptized in their infancye, by the word of God, began first, as I am
informed, to commend unto his audience the custom of colleges, and scoles in
Oxforth, and cambrydge, and such other: where it is ordained, that such as
shall be admytted to the feloweshyppe of such houses, shall hear the statutes
where unto they shall be bound.iiij. times in the year, that they may know
their charge thereby, and keep it: Which custom is in deed a reasonable and
landable custom, but not in all points agreeable to his purpose. For there they
receive no infantes to the felowshyppe of their houses: but such as are grown
to understanding, and do ernestly sewe to be received: and being received, have
their year of probation, to se whyther they can allow, and like the company with
all their statutes and condytyons, and the company them or not, or ever they
be admytted.

In the first sentence of your book, ye teach the readers of it* (to make them
like you) a loudly: that is to wit: that I did allege the custom of the
reding of the statutes of colleges, iiij. times in the year, to the fellows of
the colleges: to prove, that children in their infancy both ought, and might
well be baptized. which is plain false. For all though I intended in the end of
my sermond to prove, yt infantes might well be baptized in their infancy: yet in
the beginning of my sermo^d, I cited and alleged not ye manner of reding of
statutes in colleges, to prove that infantes should be baptized: but to teach
my hearers, that were present in the church: that I thought it as necessary
for Christen men, to have their baptyme to be often opened, and declared unto
them: wherein is contained in a small room, ye hole sum of a Christian man's
profession: as it was necessary for scolers to have their statutes red.iiij.
times in the year. For I had been worse then mad, to have said, that the
declaration of baptyme had been necessary for children, which can understand
never a word of the declaration. But let the words of my sermond be judge in
this matter. My words a little after the prayers were these. And because
baptysme is the sum of all the hole Christian profession, wherein we promised
to believe in Christ, and obey his commandments: it shall be fyttest for me
to entreat thereof. I think it well done, and do much praise, and allow the
custom used in vniuersytes, in every college or house.iiij, times in a year
to have the statutes laws, and ordinances of their houses, openly red unto
the^: whereby comes great profyt unto.ij. kinds of scolars, for in every
college or house of learning, there be commonly.iij. sorts of scolars: one
perfyt, and well learned: the second vnperfyt, yet desirous and labouryng to
attain to the perfection: yt third is utterly unlearned, and yet never
intends to come unto any learning: To the ij. first sorts of these
scolars, is the readyng of the laws, and statutes of their house very
profitable: to the perfyt, that by the often hearing of them, they may be by
no process or lenght of time, forgotten, and slyppe out of their mind: To
the vnperfyt, yet desyrrus, and lackyng time to come to perfectyon, it is very
profitable, that the customable hearing of the statutes and laws of their
house redd before them, may beat into their heads, and make them the better
to know what ordynances be appointed for them, whereby they may attain to a
perfectyon. And so are there three kinds of christen men. etc. and a little
after I said these words: As to the first sorts of scolers, the rehersall
if their statutes is very profitable: so to the.ij. first sort of
Chrystyans, the often readyng and repetyng of ye sum and abrigement of Gods
co^mandementes is very necessary. for as the statutes in colleges do show unto
scholars, what was their founders will, that they should keep: and whereunto
they be bound by the laws of their house: so ought we to have an abrigement or
sum of the commandments of God, to teach us what is our duty, and what we
have bound our selves to keep. When as these be my words: and of them no
other sentence can be gathered: but ye I thought, it was as necessary, that
baptysme (which conteyneth in it ye hole profession of a Christen man: and
declared, teaches him what is his duty, and what God requires of him) should
be often times rehearsed, and opened: as ye statutes of colleges, should be red
unto ye scolars, to put them in remembrance, what they are bound to, and what
their founder requires of them: how frowardly, and falselye do ye write my
words: and feign, that I bring them in, for to prove that chyldern might, and
ought to be baptized? or if ye will not have it done of malice, and
frowardnes: I must needs impute it to wonderful great ignorance, and want
both of wit and learning. ^or what learned man, replying against his
adversary, which had holden.iij. conclusyons, and made three resons in order
one after an other, to confyrme his conclusyons with all: would answer first to
ye last conclusyon: and say, that his adversaries reason defending the first
conclusyon, makes not in all points for the last conclusyon? In this your
doing ye follow very nere a certain unlearned limiter of Cambrydge. This
freer was long and many a day a lymyter, and a beggynge thief: which under
the pretense of long prayer had devoured the house of many a poor wydowe: and
whiles he did that, he learned nothing but knavery. this freer being old, by
the reason of his age, thought shortly to be pryor of the place: and if he
were bacheler of dyuynytye, he should the sooner come by his purpose. he gat his
grace with much labor, and many promises, to be bacheler of dyuynytye: but he
must answer first in a dysputation, in the dyuynytye schole. But the freer
perceiving him self unmeet for that matter, came unto the doctor that should
dispute with him: and desired him, to be good unto him: and to let him have
his arguments in writynge, and clerklye solutyons written in order for every
argument: promising to content him for his labor, the doctor did so. but when
ye doctor propounded the first argument in order, in ye beginning of the
disputation had in the scoles: the unlearned, and forgetful friar, applied the
last solution to the first argument. But the doctor spoke merely unto the freer
in these words: Domine, adhuc non sumus ibi, Sir we are not yet there. And so
must I say unto you, answering me like ye unlearned frear. Sir we are not so
far as yet. answer first to my first questyons, and to ye reasons made to
defend them: and when ye have confuted them, go in hand with them, that follow
in order. But let us go forward, and answer to the rest of the lies. Ye say,
that I began my sermon with the rehersing of ye custom of colleges, as year
informed: pretendinge, ye ye had not had not had ye copye of my sermon before
you: for this intent (as it does plainly apeare) yt ye might make a place for
mo lies, which ye purposed to bring in by ye window: yt is, if any man should
accuse you for rehersyng any thing hereafter, lyingly and falsely: yt ye might
say, I was so informed: as though ye had learned ye matter only by hear say,
and not by any writing. But the truth is, yt ye wrote not one word against me,
until yt ye had my hole sermon written in your hands. Therefore, if by your
information ye mean any thing, saving that ye were informed by my written
sermon: ye swerve far from ye truth. the lie whereunto ye made a place, in
your feined information, is contained in these words. He began first as I am
informed to commend unto his audience, the custom of colleges, and scoles in
Oxforth, and Cambrydge, and such other: where is ordained, that such as shall
be admitted to fellowship of such houses, shall hear the statutes: whereunto
they shall be bound.iiij. times in the year, that they may know their charge
thereby, and keep it.

If this be not a shameful lie, where ye say that I spoke of scolers, that were
yet to be admitted: I report me unto my hole auditory: and to all them that
have red, and shall read my sermond, faithfully gathered of me by Thomas
Norton. But because every man perchance, can not come by my sermond, I will
repete a few words of it: which shall prove ye gyltie of ye lie, that I laid
unto your charge. My words were these. As the statutes in colleges do show
unto scolars, what is their founders will, that they should keep, and whereunto
they be bound (lo here I say whereunto they be bound, and not whereunto they
shall be bound) by ye laws of their house: so ought we to have an abrygement,
or sum of ye commandments of God, to teach us, what is our duty (I say
not what shall be our duty) and what we have bound our selves to keep.

Mark here, how that I say: what we have bound our selves to keep, and not
what we shall bind our selves to keep. Then when as my example of the readyng
of the statutes of coileges, four times in the year, agrees in all points
with my purpose, that I applied it to: ye do me open wrong, to scourge me for
your feigned and false forged words: saying yt my example does not agree in all
points with my purpose, because it agrees not with your words: which ye bring
in after such a manner, as they were mine Now seeing that this playnsonge is
yours, the descant that ye make unto it, belongs nothing unto me, but se yt
ye singe in tune, they ye offend not the ears of as cunning artificers, as
you be.

After these lies, with which ye might have been content, if ye had not ben
insatiable with such: ye go fast forward to bring in mo, saying: That such a
like costome was once in our most holy relygyon, as was in colleges and in
orders of relygyon, where as none were admitted, before they had a year of
probation. Where unto ye put this that they that came to be baptized, demanded,
and desired to be received to the fellow ship of the christians after dew
proof of unfeigned repentance, and thereby were called competentes. Young men,
and wymen requyrynge baptysme: and then were taught the principles of the
christian faith and were first called Catecumeni. And after those principles
learned, were upon certain solemn days, at two times of the year approved,
therefore baptized: which was upon easter even, and wit sunday even: promysyng
for them selves thobseruaunce of Gods law, with the renouncyng of the deuell
and the world in their own person without Godfather or godmother, seven score
years long: till Iginius bishop of Rome ordened to baptyse an infant, a
godfather and godmother aunswerynge for him. Where as ye say that the like
manner was in out most holy religion, as the scolers and religious men had: that
none should be admitted, until they had been proved a year, and first called
competentes, and then cathecumeni. I maruayl what religion ye mean of: whether
ye mean of the popes religion, or christ's religion, or of the Catabaptistes
relygion: which is your religion in deed. If ye mean of the catabaptistes
relygyon, or the popes: it may be so: but this wot I well, that it was no
custom in Christ's most holy relygyon. for then should we have seen some mentyon
of it, either in the acts of ye Apostels, or in the epistels, or gospels. But
there is no mentyon of any such like custom. Therefore there has been no such
custom in Christ's most holy religyon: except there be a most holy relygyon
of Christ, whereof is no mentyon at all, nether in Christ's gospel, nether in
any part of the hole new testamente. Christ never tied unto any time the
receauinge of baptyme nether did the Apostles orden that at Easter even, and
Wytson even, baptism should be received: Nay: the custom of Christ's
primative church, and his Apostels, is contrary unto the custom used in your
most holy religion. For I read in the second chapter of ye acts of the
Apostles, that there was.iiij.M men baptized on the same day, that they hard
Peter's sermon: and that without any delay. The words of ye scripture are
these. When they had heard Peter's words, they were prycked in their heart, and
said unto Peter, and the other Apostles: what shall we do, ye men which are
our brethren? Peter said unto them: repent you of your sins: and let every
one of you be Baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, to the forgeuenes of
sins: and ye shall receive the gift of the holy ghost, to you, and to your
chylder: and to all them that are afar of, whom soever our Lord GOD shall call.

And with many other words he witnessed, and exhorted sayng, keep your selves
from this froward nation. Therefore they that gladly received the word were
baptized, and there came to the church that same day about.iij thousand souls.
How say you? find ye any mention of these words competentes, of Cathechumeni,
of differinge baptime unto easter even, and Witsoneuen, or of any year of
probation? After that Philip in the.iiij. of the acts of ye apostles, had with
in the space of few hours diligently instructed the gelded man. The Same said
unto Philip, who^ he saw the water: behold here is water, what let is there
but that I may be baptized? What would ye have done if that ye had been in
Philips place? it does appear by your writynge, that ye would have answered,
sir it is the custom in our most holy religion, to baptize only upon Easter
even, and witsonday even: and such as have been competentes, cathecumem, and
have been long time approved: and that have given a sufficient proof of true
repentance: But howsoever ye would have answered, Phylyp answered, and did
thus: If thou beleuest with all thy heart, thou may be baptized, and the Enuch
answered, I believe that Jesus Christ is the sone of God, and he commanded to
hold still the wagen: and they went both down into the water, Philip, and the
Enuch: and Philip baptized him. Did Philip require of this man, a year of
probatio^: that he should be catechumes, and competentes, a great while before
he should be baptized? No forfoth. For he Baptized him straight way, without
any delay at all. Peter in the.x. of the Acts, after that his here is had
received the holy ghost, said these words: can there any man let, but that
these may be baptized, which have received the holy ghost as well as we? what
would ye have answered unto S. Peter if ye had been there? It is likely: that ye
would have answered, lack of faith and age in all the^, that are under the age
of.xiiij. years and the use of Christ's primative church, is to baptyse none
with so sclender a trial of unfeigned repentance: another is it the custom in
our most holy religion, that any that have not ben long time tried, and have
not ben compete^tes and Cathechumeni, should be baptized: and the time serves
not, for it is another Easter eue^, nor Witsonday eue^. Well I can not suerelie
tell what ye would have answered, but Peter did command them al to be Baptized
in the name of the Lord, they were baptized with out any further delay or
trial. Ananias in the.ix. Chapter of the acts, came unto Paul layinge his
hands upon his head, and seide thus. Brother Saul, the Lord whom thou saw
in the way, wherein thou came, has sent me: that thou should receive thy sight
again, and be filled with the holy ghost, and forthwyth there fell from his
eyes, as they had been scales: and he saw again and rose, and was baptized.
How many wekes was Paul a competentes, and how long was he cathechumenus:
Can ye prove that Ananias did differ his baptime until Easter, or witsonday? In
the.xvi of the acts, Lidia was baptized with out any delay. The dysciples,
that were at Ephesus, and had been only baptized of John, with out any
prolongynge of time, were baptized out of hand.

It is also written of Paul, in the.xxij. of the Acts of the Apostels: that
Ananias said unto Paul, as soon as he had received his sight: why taryest
thou? rise up, and be baptized. It appears plainly, if you had be^ in Paul's
stead: that ye would have thus holyly, and wisely have answered Ananias: what
have? It has been a custom long in our most holy religion, that no man shall
be baptized, except he have been competens, and Cathechumenus: and have showed
some suer trial of his unfeigned repentance, yet for all the custom in your
most holy religion, Paul was straight way baptized. Now seeing that I have
brought forth.vij. sundry places, and examples: to prove that the custom in
Christ's holy Relygyon in the primative church, was contrary unto the
custom, that ye said was in your most holy relygyon seven score years: How
shameless a liar ye be, ye are sufficiently declared: if that ye mean by your
most holy religion, Christ's religion. By the same places is your
supersticious admitting of men to baptim, and your diabolic al delays, that
Christ's people have been long tried, and ben competentes and Cathechumeni,
utterly confunded. Where as ye say that your custu^ endured.vij score years, it
is not true, for though Hyginus (whom ye call very unlearnedly Iginius) had
ordened the baptisinge of children (which I will not grant you) yet had not
your scrupulous custom of dilaying of baptime endured seven score years, for
ye must take out the time, that goes between Christis birth: and the time that
Paul did preach: in which time were about.xlix. years after Christ's
nativity at the least, for Christ was about, xxxiiij. years old, when he
suffered. Thapostels preached after Christ's passion a great while, before
Paul was converted: which being but young, kept the clothes of them that
flew Steue^: and the^ a good while after was Paul called. Let me se, where
your dilayinge custom can be found in Christ's time: whose acts and doctrine
the four Evangelists have fully described and committed unto writing: and I
have proved that the custom of the primative church, is clean contrary unto
your custo^, this is also approved to be true, Higinus was bishop in Rome.
An.c.xxxix. years by the abrigement of Chronicles: and by Pa^thalion in his
Chronographia, In.C.xi. and by Eusebius, he entered in to his office, An.
C.xlii. The^ had ye missed of reckening, al though Higinus had ordened the
baptisyng of childer. But it is a false lie: that Higinus was he, that ordened
first the baptising of childer. If that ye can clear your self, I will recant,
and cry you mercy. Where is your sufficient, and ancient author, that writes
that Higinus ordened the baptim of childer first? I have read many hystories,
and cronicles: to se whyther Higinus ordened the baptisyng of children, or no:
but as yet I can not find it.

Panthalion, which called his book Chronographia, writes thus. Higinus a
Grecia^ borne, was in the year of our Lord.C.xli. and he ordened the chrysme,
and godfathers to baptyme. The book called epitome hystoriarum, reports thus
of Hyginus. Hyginus a grecian ordened chrisme, and godfathers, to the baptym of
christen men: and the book appoynteth to him the year of our Lord.C.xxix.
Carhanza the gatherer of the abrygement of the counsels, and decreees, has
these words of Hyginus. Hyginus the eight pope, put unto Baptym, and
confirmation, a godfather and a godmother. Mark that all these three
testimonies witness not, that Hyginvs did ordene the Baptyme of infantes: but
that he ordened to Baptyme, or put unto Baptym Godfathers, and Godmothers.

I ask you, to what baptim did Hyginus orden or put to godfathers, and
godmothers? ye will not say: that de ordened godfathers, and godmothers to
oldmen: for that were nothing for your purpose. If ye say: that he ordened
them, and put them to the baptyme of lpechelesse chyider: then was the
baptysinge of chylder, before Hyginussis time Then do ye wrong to say, that
Hyginus that pope ordened the chrystenynge of specheles chylder: who only added
and put to the Baptising of childer, chrisme, and godfather, and godmother. Now
will I com unto the witnesses of two great clerks, the former, who is called
Volaterrane, says. Hyginus instituit, ut Baptismo seu confirmationi unus
saltem quem compatrem uocant, interesset. Hyginus ordened that one at the lest,
that they call godfather, shude be presented at ye baptime. The latter is named
Platina, who wrote a propre book, of the bishop of Rome. His words of Higinus
are these. Voluit item unum salte^ patrimum, unam ue matrimam Baptismo inter
esse. Sic enim eos appellant qui infantes tenent, dum baptizantur. He ordened
or would also, that at the lest, one godfather or godmother, should be
present at baptyme. For so do they call them, which hold specheles chylder,
whiles they are baptized. It is a great wonder, that Hyginus should have
ordened the baptim of infates: and none of al these learned men would make
mention of that matter, as they have done clearly of other matters. Doutles
they have made no me^tio^ at al, in the declaringe of the deeds of Hyginus,
that he ordened baptyme. Then must I press you with your own mannet of
arguing, which is this.

We read not that Christ, nothet the Apostles ordened the baptyme of chylder.
Ergo, another Christ ordened, another the Apostles ordened the baptym of
childer. If this be a suer argument, then this that I will make of the same
fashion must also be suer. We read not in their books that wrote the acts of
Hyginus: that Higinus ordened baptym: therefore Hyginus ordened not Baptym. But
perchance ye will reason thus: he ordened godfathers, and godmothers to the
baptyme of chylder. This argume^te wants strength for the hole church, or the
farer and mother may present and offer up an infant unto Christ: and require
straight way of thelders of the church the Sacrament of baptyme, though the
chrysme were in his belly that ordened it, and the godfathers were never
ordened. Wherefore ye were to bold (nay to unshame faced) to say, that pope
Hyginus ordened the baptyme of infantes: because all men should hate it, that
hate the pope.

Ye allege in the end of your book, Erasmus, among a great sort of
heretics, which wrote against the baptim of infants: and ye alleged Erasmus,
that chylder was not baptized in the Apostels time; and it is true, that
Erasmus said: that baptime of children was not received in ye apostels time.
for his words are these. Nec ea quaestio tum mouebatur, quum nondum esset
receptu^ pueros baptizari. Then will ye say peradventure: here is one learned
man's opinion against you, that the baptime of childer was taken up after the
apostels times. I answer you that S. Cyprian, which lived and florysshed,
within.cc.lvij. of Christ's birth: and Saint Austen, which lived but.CCCC.xlij.
after Christ's natiuite, affirmed both, that the baptisyng of chylder came unto
us from the apostels hands: and Erasmus says that the baptime of childer was
nod received in the Apostels times. Whether is it more mete to believe? Cypryan,
and Austen which were so nere the Apostles time: or Erasmus, which lived and
dyed in our days? What will ye answer? Answer what ye will, I will make
Erasmus by his own sentence and reason pronounce, that Auste^ and Cyprian are
rather to be believed in such like matter, then he is. Erasmus being sumthing
offended with Chrysostom, which denied Paul had a wife, wrote these words.
Chrysostomus fatetur fuisse, qui putarent hic Paulu^ appellare suam uxorem: sed
dissentit: nec causam reddit, cur dissentiat. Sed utris potius aequu^ est
accedere Clementi, and Ignatio, quoru^ ille Petri comes fuit, hic Marci
Euangelistae discipulus: and Chrysostomo, qui tanto interuallo semotus fuit a
temporibus apostolorum.

Chrysostom grants: that there were some, that thought that Paul in this
place, spoke spoke unto his wife: but he thinks otherwise, and yet shows no
cause why. But whether of these is it meter, that we should believe, Clement, and
Ignatyus, of the which, the one was Peter's companyon, and the other the
dyscyple of Mark the Evangelist: or Chrysostom, which was so long a time
from the time of the Apostles? This may be gathered of these words: he is more
worthy credence in bearyng of wytnes, that is nerer the deed, when it is done:
or nerer the time, when it was done. Whereupon I conclude thus. Austen,
Cypriane, and Orygen, were nerer the apostles times, then Erasmus was, therefore
Austen, and Cypryane, are more to he believed, which wrote, that baptyme came
from the Apostles: then Erasmus, which said, that baptysyng of children was not
received in the Apostles times. Here are ye dysapoynted of one of your posts,
that ye lened to in your opinion, that the baptyme of children was not received
in the Apostles times. But lest ye should think, that Austen, and Cyprian,
were not of that mind, whereof I report them to be: I will rehearse you Saint
Austens words in the fourth book against the Donatistes of the baptising of
children, in the fourth chapter. Et si quisquam in hacre autoritatem diuinam
quaerat: quanquam quod uniuersa tenet ecclesia, nec conciliis institutum, sed
semper retentum est: non nisi autoritate apostolica traditum rectissime
creditur.

That is, If any man look for the autorite of God in this matter. Howbeit, that
which ye hole church holds, and is not ordened of any counsel, but is
always holden still: it is most ryghtlye believed, that it was given out and
ordened by the Apostles. The same Austen in a sermonde of the baptysme of
infantyng against the Pelagyaus, says these words: Cypriane being axed,
whether an infant might be baptized, before the viij. day: because in ye old
law, the child might not be cyrcumcysed, but on the eyghte day: Saint Cyprian
said: that no man should be hyndred from grace, and that the spirytual
cyrcumcysyon ought not to be hyndred by carnal cyrcumcysyon. Cypriane writes
also in the viij. epistel of ye third book, these words, concerning the
baptyme of infantes. Porro autem si etiam grauissimis delictoribus, and in deum
multum ante peccatibus, cu^ postea crediderunt, remissio peccatorum datur: and
ae baptismo, atque gratia nemo prohibetur: quanto magis prohiberi non debet
infans, qui recens natus, peccauit: nisi quod secundum Adam car naliter natus,
contagium mortis antiqua prima natiuitate contraxit?

Furthermore, but if that forgeuenes of sins, be given unto the greatest
sinners, and to them, that did greatly offend before, after that they did
believe: and no man is forbidden from baptyme and grace: How much more ought not
a spechles child to be forbidden, which being lately borne, has committed no
offense: but that it being borne carnally after Adam has caught the infeccyon
of the old death, by his first birth? This is the mind of Cypryane,
concerning baptysyng of chylder, and of original sin. And the same doctor
writes in an other place. Nos iure damnamus omnia, quae Christus non docuit.

We condemn by good right all things, which Christ has not taught. But
Cypryane allowed the baptyme of chyldern, therefore he reckened, that the
baptysyng of children was taught of Christ. That Origin is of that judgment,
that ye baptyme of chylder came from the Apostels, his words upon the epistle
to the Romans, and upon Johan, do clearly testyfy: as hereafter I shall prove,
when I shall come to the place, where as ye allege Orygen your own self.

Now seeing that these noble learned men, which were so nere hand the times of
the Apostles, hold in their works with the baptyme of infantes, and say that
it came unto us from the Apostles: what wise man will rather believe you, being
so long after the Apostles times, then them, which were so long ago, and so
nere the times of the Apostels? Ye have therefore long and besely babled in
vain, holding without any autorytye, and against learning, and authority, that
the Pope ordened first the baptyme of infantes. And so ye have won nothing,
saving that ye have found and made a rod for your own tail. I mean that I
have gotten and gathered of your assertyon and opinion, a good coniectural
argument, that the baptyme of infantes came from thapostles times. For ye
showed me first, that Hyginus ordened the baptyme of infantes: which Hyginus
(as I shall declare hereafter) was but.xxxviij. years from some of thapostles.
For Volaterane writes in his book, called Anthropologia: that Saint Ihon the
Euangelyst lived unto the.lxviii. year after the passion of Christ, his words
are these. Ioannes longa senectute confectus, 68. anno post Christi supplicium
extinctus est. And Christ was.xxxiiij. years old, when he suffered, therefore
Johan being alive.lxviij. after his passion, was alive in ye 102. year after
Christ's birth.

And Hyginus was 140. years after Christ's birth. therefore Higinus, and some
of the apostles, namely saint John the Evangelist, were no more one from
another, then xxxviij. years. Whereby, through your help. I have now proved,
that ye baptisynge of young children was used within.xxxviij. years of some of
the Apostles times. I have also proved by good auctorytye, that Hyginus did not
orden the baptysynge of children: and that he only put and added to ye baptyme
of children, chrisme, and godfather, and godmother, wherefore the baptysyng of
children being before Higinusses times: and seeing he seeing he was with
in.xxxviij. years of some of the Apostelles times: it is a probable, and very
lykelye thing: that the baptysyng of childer came unto us, even from ye
apostels: who were but a very short time before. Ye are disapoynted of your
purpose, which thought to have brought ye baptysynge of spechles chylder, into
a great co^te^pt, and an utter despysyng: because it had been, as ye thought, of
ye Popes ordenyng, and making: if ye had not be^ proved an arra^t lier. but ye
are proved a liar, where ye said, that Hygynus ordened the baptim of infants,
and an argument of antiquite is gathered of the long contynuaunce of chylders
baptyme, and of the long approbatyon of the same, through out all hole Christ's
church: which is more worthy to be admitted, then your supersticious opinion,
whose author was that perilous heritike Pelagius: whom in the end of your book,
ye bring in right honorably for a wytnes, to maintain your devilish opinion.

But although Hyginus had ordened first, that childer should be baptized, yet
should not their baptyme have been Popyshe, for in the time of Hyginius, the
bishops of Rome, had not yet usurped any supremacy over other Bishops: much
less over Kings, and Emperors. Neither had the bishops of Rome brought in
the dyuelyshe doctrine, wherefore their doctrine was hated and called popyshe
and dyuelyshe. In the time of Hyginus every bishop was called Papa, as every
pressed in high Almony is called pfaff: and in low Germany pape, eue^ unto this
day. Wherefore the doing of Hyginus, should have no more ben called popysh,
then the ordinance of any other bishop, that dwelt out of Rome, either in
Asia, or Aphrica. How be it, thanks be unto God, I have had wytnes enough, to
prove that the baptyme of young children was not ordened of Higinus: and lo, can
the baptyme of children, in no wise be called popysh, as we call such as you
Popysh: which, at the last ester, right Popishly knelyng, took ye sacrament,
geuyng occasyon unto all men to think, yt ye were a sterke ydolater, and
believed, that bread was turned into a God. For your doing was the ordinance of
a lofty, and a right Antichristian bishop of Rome: which usurped power, both
over all bishops, and also over al Kings and Emperors. Although I have, with
the rehearsal of.vii. places of scripture, sufficiently reproved your folyshe,
and monkish manner, in dilaying of baptime: your tyrannical tying it up unto
certain times: and that your Cathechumeni, with their years of probation, are
contrary to the use of Christ's primative church, yet for to prove that your
dylaying of baptime: whereupon ye would ground your error, that childer
ought not to be baptized, is against the scripture, and only the ordinance of
men: I will show, what men, and what councils, have ordened all your delays:
that al men may perceive easily: that ye build not upon Christ, but upon Popes
men, and councels. Who would have thought before this, that catabaptistry would
have leaned upon any such foundacions? Ye had wont to rattel, and crake
nothing but scripture, scripture but now, for lack of scriptur, ye make these
councels, and laws of man, your foundation. It is written in the Laodicen
council, in the.xlv. Chapter of them that come to be baptized about the
mydweke. Non oportet, post duas hebdomadas quadrage simae, quenquam ad
baptismum suscipi.

After two weakes of lent, must none be received unto baptyme: In the same
counsel, it is written, of the rendrynge of the belief of them that shall be
baptized in the.xxv. Chapter. They that shall be baptized, must learn the
Creed: and upon the thursdaye of the last weke, to ad or present them to the
Bishop or elder. The Latin words are these. Baptizandos oportet fidei symbolum
discere: and quinta feria ultimae septimanae, uel Episcopo uel presbytero
addere. This counsel was holden in the time of Liberius the Bishop of Rome,
about the year of our lord.CCC ixiiij. In the Gerunden cuncell, in the third
statute, it was ordened, Vt cathechumeni baptizentur, die uel uigilia Paschae
and Pentecostes: caeteris solemnitatibus tantum infirmi, that is: that the
disciples, or learners, called Cathechumeni, should be baptized, on easter day,
or easter even or witso^day, or witson eue^: Upon other solemn days, let only
them that are sick be baptized This counsel was holden in the time of
Hormisda, Bishop of Rome, in the year of our Lord D.xiij. Siritius bishop of
Rome: which lived in the year of our Lord.CCC.lxxxix. ordened in his second
decree, that baptim should not be ministered, but at Easter and Witsondaye. The
latin is this, Statuit Siritius, preterquam in Pascha, and Pentecoste baptismus
non celebretur. This was also ordened in the fourth council of Cartage: that
they, that were to be baptized, should show their name, and absteyne a long
time from wine, and flesh: that they should have hands laid upon their
heads: and be often examined: and then receive baptime. The latin is thus in
the.lxxxv chapter of the foresaid counsel Baptizandi nomen suum dent, and diu
sub abstinentia uini and carninm, ac manus impositione, crebra examinatione
baptismum precipiant. Here is the foundation: where upon ye build your
delaying denial, ye rather the blaspheming of the baptim of infantes. Upon
these counsels, and men's decrees, are builded your unchristened Cathechumeni
your deuelisshe delaying of baptime: your tyinge up of it to certain times, as
to Easter, and Wytsondaye. Here is grounded the custom of dylayinge, and
dryuynge of, of baptime: which ye very lyinglye, like a man past al shame,
said, was in our most holy religion used, seven score years: when as al
these autours and councellers, which ordened these dylays, were many years
after the time of Hyginius who was about seven score years after Christ's
natiuite. How vnshamefacedly then have ye assygned that custom of dylayinge of
baptime, unto the time, that went between Christ's natiuite and Hyginus: seeing
that these dylayes was ordened.CC. years and more, after Christ's birth? Why do
ye refuse to fight with me, with such weapons, as I brought into the field? I
brought in the sword of Gods word, to defend the baptyme of childer
withal: for I defended it only with the word of GOD. But ye now, writing
against me, fight against the baptime of chylder, with no scripture: but with
customs, with decrees, councels, ordynaunces of men, the authority of the
Donatistes, Anabaptists, and Pelagians, all open heretics, and worthelye
condemned of Christ's hole church. As for these wepons, I fet not one strawby:
for all these can not prevail against the word of GOD. Think you, that when
I have defended my doctrine with scripture, that your unsavory reasons,
grounded upon councels, and men, can confute my reasons, grounded upon the holy
scripture? Whosoever goes about to confute scripture with councels and men's
decrees, and his own arguments: prefers counsels, and decrees before GOD,
and his word, and reckeneth him self better then GOD. In my sermon at
Thystelworth, I resoned thus strongly armed with the authority of saint Peter,
in the.x. of the Acts of the Apostels. There is nothing that can hinder them
to be baptized, which have the holy ghost chylder have received the holy ghost
as well as old men: therefore there is nothing to hinder them, but they may be
baptized, as well as old folk: ye, to confute that chylder should be baptized,
bring in against my alleged scripture, the long custom in your most holy
church, councels and decrees of Priests and bishops: wherefore ye prefer them
before GOD and his open scripture: and reeken man's custom stronger, then
Gods word, and man stronger then GOD, for that does every man reeken
stronger, which can overcome another. Then ye confutynge my alleged
scripture, man's doctrine, have a very evil opinion against GOD, and his word,
much like unto the papists which destitute of scripture, fought after this
manner ar ye do now. Whereas ye hold that. Where men and women of perfyt age
are baptized, all the three sorts of scolares take profit of the opening,
and declaryng of baptyme: but when as childer are baptized, none of them all,
for ye say, when men and women are baptized, all receive admonisheme^t: by
which the good amend and their lives, and are saved: the other knowing, that
they stand bound still to amend or to be condemned.

Ye answer me very fryarly, lewdlye, unlearnedly, and lyingly. First it is
plainly against al scripture, and reason that he that lives noughtely, and
never intends to amend his life, after that he is baptized (for of such
spoke I) shall be any thing the better by the seeing of the baptyme of men
and weme^: namely, the case put before, that the third sort, nether was
christian in living, nether intended to live any christian life. Can the
syghte of a Sacrament alone, be it never so well minystred, profit him that
never intends to profit? Will the work of seeing baptyme wrought make him
that intends no Godlynes be godly? Is not this to say, that wheat sown
upon a stone shall ryue the stoone, and make it bring furthe fruit, whether it
will or no, against the nature of the stone? So that ye say wyttely, and
wyselye that it profits all the three sorts: the is, them of the perfitest
sort, them that are imperfect, and desire perfection: and them that another are
perfyt, nor yet intend to come to any perfection. Of the like foolyshnes is
your saying: that where as chyldern ar baptized, no man takes profyt: whereof?
of the chyldes baptyme, or of the openyng and declarynge of our baptime, which
are baptized already? If that ye mean, that in that congregation, where as
children are baptized, the declarynge of the mystery, and secrets of our
baptyme profyteth nothing unto such men, as the scripture calls little ones,
that is lowlye in sprete, and have the conditions of yo^ge chylder: ye hold
plainly against this open text of scripture. Declaratio sermonum tuorum
illuminat, and intellectum dat paruulis. The declaration of thy words
lyghteneth, and gives understanding to the little ones, whereupon we may gather
that those, that are not little ones, but stubborn withstanders, can have no
profyt by the declaration of Gods word, much less by the seeing of men and
wymen baptized. If ye mean that where as chylder are baptized, that another the
child has any profyt by the baptym and offering up of it unto Christ: another
they that offer it up, another they that see the baptime ministered, take any
profyt thereby: ye speak against the scripture. For the chylder get Christ's
blyssynge: if he love chylder yet, as well as he had wont to do: and the
offerers and bryngers of childer unto christ, in doing of a good deed, profyt,
for he that helps a man to receive a good turn, in helpyng, does profit in
godlynes: and namely they that pray to the lord, either for the bodily or
gostly health of their neighbor? Did not both the bringers of the children
unto Christ, and the chylder profyt also before Christ's passion? Is he wexed
vngentler after his passion, then he was before? The church at the baptisinge
of chylder, prays unto God for the child, that it may have forgiuenisse of
sins, and receive the holy ghost, will God break his promysse, that he made
unto his church, Quicquid peticritis patrem in nomine meo, dabit uobis. What
soever ye shall are my father in my name, he will give it. The father and
mother, with the hole church, prays for the young child, at the baptisyng
of it: other they profyt, or God is false: but he is true, therefore ye ar a
liar, which say, that where as chylder are baptized, that another the child,
nor any that, ar there at the baptim, and offer the child unto Christ, with
their prayers, profyt any thing at al. What more profyt shall the seers of the
baptym of men and women, take thereby then the seers of the baptime of
chyldern? Seeing that all that is done to old folk, is also done unto
chylder: and the word of GOD as well al red, and preched at childers baptim, as
at old folks baptime: they that are at the baptisyng of chylder, profyt as
much, as they that are at old folks baptym. Where as the signs and
Sacraments are al one: and the word of GOD is alyke preached: there comes
unto the herers, and seers like profyt: except GOD be a regarder of persons,
and be better unto old men, then unto chyldern: whiles he grants profyt,
and grace to the seers of old folks baptyme: and none at all to the seers of
chylders baptyme: but God regards no persons, therefore there is like profyt,
in seeing of other of both. Of like things ought to be like judgment, then when
as baptym is all one in signification with cyrcumcysion: and they that see
chylder cyrcumcised, have as much profyt by the seeing thereof, as of the seeing
of old folk circumcised: so the seers of the baptyme of chylder have as much
profyt thereby, as the seers of the baptyme of old folk. In the beginning of
your book, ye said that I rehearsed the.iiij. times redyng of statutes in
colleges, to prove that yoing specheles childer might and ought to be
baptized: which saying, how false and lying it was, I have sufficientlye
proved. And now like a devil, that for his purpose turnethe him self into
all colors and figures: here ye say, that I apply the costom of readyng of
the scolars statutes, that infa^tes should have the declaration of baptym
preached unto them. These are your words. Therefore to read the statutes to
infantes is of no exemple nor value, but to them that be grown it is an
occasion to get scolers.

Couche, of thy conscience (if thou haste any at all) tell me whether thou
knoweste in thy conscience, or no: that I rehearsed, and applied the reading of
scolares statutes: unto the baptysyng of young chyldern: or that specheles
chylder should have baptyme opened unto the^ by preaching: or else that I
brought that custom forth in very deed: to show them, that were my hearers
(among the which was not one specheles child) that it were as necessary for
them, to have their baptime opened, and declared by preaching: as it was
necessary for scolars, to have their statutes at certain times to be read
among them? If thou knouwest not this in thy conscience: either the devil has
blinded the with malice, or thou art so unlearned, and folysh: that thou art
more worthy to have a muk forke in thy hand, then a pen to write against any
man: seeing the matter is so clearly set out, without any rydles, or parables.
If thou do know in thy conscience: that I rehearsed this example, nether to
prove the baptyme of chylder with all, nether that children should have baptyme
declared unto them: and that only they, that can understand, and the opening
of baptyme, should have it declared to them: what devil art thou possessed
withal which to defend thy folysh opinyon, writest utterly against thy
conscience? But this minisheth my meruelynge, that I call now to remembrance:
which chanced unto me at Anwarpe. I reasoned with one of your sect, at
Anwarpe: who was learned in the Latin tongue, a doctor of physic, and a
great Alchimiste, when as we wete both chafed, and heted with the long
disputation: he defending heresye, and I confutynge the same: at lenght, I took
him with a shamfull lie, and with such a contradiction in his tale: that he
could not deny, but that it was so. But how did he excuse him self? verelye
thus. It is written, says he, in the xviij. of the Apocalypse: that we should
handle the, and such as thou art, the whors chylder of Babylon, with lies,
co^tradictions, and all other such like, for the reue^gynge of the lies, that
ye have made unto us in times past, the words of Ihon, says he, are these.
Reddidit illi, sicut and ipsa reddidit uobis, and duplicate ei duplicia
secundum opera eius. That is, Render, or give again unto her, as she has
rendered to you: and duble the duble unto her, according unto her works. And
when I alleged the scripture unto him, that the lying might killed the soul:
he answered, that it was true in such, as me that had no faith: but that it was
not so in him, that had the true faith, and was of the true religion: alleging
this place of scripture for him. Si quid lethale biberint, non nocebit eis. if
they drink any dedly poyso^, it shall not hurt them, and expoundyng it thus:
there can no lyinge, nether any other sin, which is poison, unto your souls,
hurt us, which believe as we bo. Terfore seeing that ye call me, and al other,
that defend the baptym of chylder, papists, that is the chylder of the hoore
of Babylon: and separate your self both in the supper of our Lord, and also
in baptyme, and in the understanding of original sin, from us: and make your
self of an other religion: it is no meruel, that ye handle me even so here in
England, as your brother catabaptist handled me in Anwerp. And whete as men
have such conscience, that they care not what they do, so that it be done
secretly unto any man of another religion: whether it be yeoperdous for me, and
expediente for the rulers of this realm, to have such nere hand or no the^: I
report me unto all wise, and godly me^. Much vain babbling, and unprofitable
communication, as unworthy any answer, do I pasouer: and come unto the place,
where as ye say: that baptym is to my infantes (for so do ye call them) and
unbelievers, a vayn and bare sign, unfruitful and unprofitable: except I will
give, and assygne virtue unto the work wrought. Where as ye make all infantes
mine, because I take in hand tho defend their baptym: I may a great deal be
less ashamed of my poor, and innocente infantes, then ye may be, to defend
the doctrine of your sedytions, and mourderynge Anabaptists: which destroyed
the noble city of Munster, in Wesphali: and rose up against the Magistrates,
in Amsterdam: and wan Swol, not far from Dauenter: and were about to have
destroyed Gronynge, in West Freselande. Let the innocents be mine still, and
let the factious catabaptistes be yours. Let se, who shall be more ashamed in
the great day of them, that they defend. But seeing ye will needs make the
infantes mine, I will defend them as well as I can: for as much as every man
is bound to defend it, that is his. My infantes are not utterly without all
faith, as ye mean, calling them unbelievers.

This will I prove by your own manner of alledginge the scripture, in the
mids of your book against me. What soever is not of faith, is sin,
nothing that the infant does, or thinks: wheter it sukketh milk, or
drynketh bear, or ale, or choweth flesh, as ye hold, is of faith, for faith is
of heatynge, and heatynge co^methe by that word of GOD, then they the hear
not the word of GOD, as chylder do not, can do nothing, of faith, wherefore by
your own alleging of the scripture, the child does nothing: but it synneth
in doing, what so ever it does, for lack of faith. But that they sin not in
all thing, and that they are not without all faith, I prove it thus. They please
GOD: therefore they at not without al faith, for Paul says: without faith it
is impossible tho please GOD. That spechelesse chylder, have pleased GOD:
Jacob, Hieremy the Prophet, and Johan the Baptist are witnesses. So ar also
the chylder, that Christ took in his arms, witnesses of the love, that Christ
bare unto chylder. Mark witnesses, that Christ took the chylder in to his
arms, and blyssed them. If that he blyssed the^, they pleased him, If they
pleased him, they were not without faith, ye do therefore the poor innocents
great wrong, in calling them unbelievers. At the chylder unbelieving? Ye say,
yea, then have they that vnbeleeuinge, and want of faith: either of their first
creation, or by Ada^s fall. if that they have it by their first creation: it is
not true, that God said, that all thing which he had made, was very good. Is
an unbelieving man very good? Is that good, which can not please God? If that
children be unbelieving by Adams fall, then have we found again orygynall
sin, which ye with your master Pellagius do utterly deny. Ye say that they
are unbelieving, and without faith: but how prove ye that? If ye say: I se no
works yet in children: therefore, they have no faith: I axe you, whether ye are
a beleuer, or unbeliever, when ye are a sleep, and at al times, when ye do no
good works? if ye do believe, when ye are a sleep, and at other times, when ye
do no good works: so may children have faith, although they be not yet come
unto the time of declaryng of faith by their works. Is there any man so
folish, or so cruel, that will call a young gryfte of the first years gryftynge
fruytles, and barro^: when as it can not for lack of time and age, bring as
yet forth any fruit? If that we can not call a tree vnfruytefull, until the
time come of bringing forth of fruit: so ought ye not to call a child
unbelieving, and faithles: until he come unto the time of declaryng his faith.
I axe you. Estne puer animal rationale, an non?

Whether is a child a reasonable living thing, or no? If ye grant, that he is
an unreasonable creature: then ye make a child, a brute beast, if that a
child be a reasonable creature, and yet can not for lack of time and age, use
reason: so may a child have faith, and be called faithful: though for lack
of time and age, it can show as yet no good works: which are the tokens, and
fruytes of faith. If ye reason that they know not, that they have faith,
therefore they have no faith: I reason with you again chylder know not, yt they
are redeemed with Christ's blood: shall we say therefore, that children are not
redeemed with Christ's blood? Children know not, that ye promys of saluatyon
belongs unto them: shall we say therefore that the promys of saluatyo^
perteyneth not unto children? Is not ye heir of lands heir, before he know,
that he is heir? So may a child have faith, and yet for lack of age know
not, that it has it. Because ye allege the scripture hereafter, generallye,
and deliver it from all cyrcumstances: ye must suffer me to reason with you
after ye same manner, at this time. Answer me to this argument. Children are not
already condemned: therefore they do believe. for the scripture says, he that
believes not, is condemned already. Therefore ye must either grant, that chylder
do believe, or else, that they are already condemned. Chylder also have the
holy ghost. Is ye holy ghost without faith? They have all things, that Christ
has: for they are Christ's. and he that spared not his only son, as Paul
says, but delivered him up for us, (and for chylder as well, as for old men)
it is impossyble, but yt he gave all thing unto chylder with Christ. how can
children be faythlesse, which have all, that Christ has? Was Christ without
faith? Now, whether your (I say) or my arguments are worthy more credence, let
them that are faithful men, judge indifferently. But what if I granted you,
that children had no faith: yet it did not follow, that ye infantes should have
no fruit of their baptyme. For our infantes are in as good a case, as the
infantes of the Jews were in the same age, that our infantes are of. But
though they had been without faith, yet had they received their cyrcumcysyon
with fruit and profit, even so though our children were without faith, they
should receive their baptyme with as great fruit, as the Hebrews chylder
received their circumcisyon. for that is baptim unto us, that was cyrcumcision
unto ye Jews. Our baptyme, and the cyrcumcysyon are all one spirytually, and
in signyfycatyon, and only do differ in the elements. Al they that were
received into the co^naunt, made to the fathers of ye old testament, were
cyrcumcysed, and thereby were received into the fellowship of the common promys:
so all they that are received into the couenante made to us of the new
testament, are by baptyme received into our church and feloship: and have it
among us as a seal of Gods promys unto us, as the Jews had cyrcumcysyon as
a sign of their covenant among them. Cyrcumcysyon requires a cyrcumcysed
heart, and a new life: and that all they that are cyrcumcysed, should mortifye
all carnal affectyons, noughty lusts, and fleshlye desires. Therefore the
prophets laying to the Jews charges, yt they answered not unto their
profession, call them vncyrcu^cysed in ye heart. Therefore does the lord speak
thus of the Jews. Leuit. 26. I shall bring them into their enemies land: that
then at the length, their vncyrcumcysed heart may submit it self, and humble
it. Hieremy writes thus unto ye Jews. Be ye circumcised unto ye Lord: and
take away the vncyrcumcisyon of your heart. And almlghty God in Moses spoke
after the same manner. Deuteronomy. 10. Circumcyse and cut away the skin, or
vncyrcu^cision of your heart: and harden your neck no more. In all these
places is mortifycatyon required of the cyrcumcysed: as Paul in the syxte to
ye Romans requires mortifycation, where he says. Do ye not know, that all we
yt are baptized into Christ Jesus, ar baptized into his death? Therefore we are
buried with him through baptime into his death: that as Christ was raised up
from the ded, by the glory of the father, we should walk in newenes of life.
Then as circumcisyon laid upon the spechles chyldern of the Jews is a
professyon of mortificatyon, and profits the chyldern: not for ye work
wrought, but for the commandments sake, and promise of God: So is the
sacrament of baptyme laid upon our young children, a professyon of
mortifycatyon, and profyteth them not through the wrought work it self, but
through the promysse of GOD and his word: and the promysse that he made to his
holy church: and the prayers made by the church. ye say that. When as men and
wymen are baptized, all men take admonyshme^t, by which the good amend their
lives and are saved.

When as men, and wymen are baptized, I axe you: whether they that are baptized
are saved through the promys of God made unto them, or through their worthynes
of receyuynge of baptym: or by ye work wrought in hearing or seeing of the
admouyshement, that comes of baptysynge of men, and wymen: If ye say: that
your men, and wymen have remissyon of sins by receiving of baptyme at such an
age: then do not they receive forgyuenesse of sins, and the heritage by the
promys, but through a work wrought so worthily in such an age. If they have the
heritage, and forgyuenesse of sins by the promys: then chylder having the
promys as well, as men, and wymen, may have remissyon of sin, when as they
are baptized, as well as old folk. For GOD has no respect of persons, and
regards not one age more then an other. Do not ye give virtue to the work
wrought. when ye say that men are saved by the admonyshment, of seeing men and
wymen baptized? Where did God promise that ye seers of men and wymens baptyme,
should be saved thereby? Where did God orden, that the only seeing of baptim
should cause men amend their living, and thereby be saved? if God made no such
promys: why do you give virtue of salvation, unto the work wroughte: which God
never ordened any saluatyon to come by? Who is now the iusticyari? Who is he
now, that gives not only virtue, but also the virtue of amendme^t of life, and
salvation, to the work wrought of an onloker, and only a sear of baptim? What
deserves an old man, by his cyrcumcysion in his age, more then a child
deserves by his circumcision received in the viij. day after his natiuite? If
neither of both deserves more then another: the old man deserves by his
baptisyng in his age no more then a child deserves by his baptime received in
his infancy. Furthermore: when as the promise of salvation perteyneth as well
unto childeren, as to men, and women: it must needs follow, that the sign of
the promys belongs as well unto childer, as to old folk.

But baptime is the sign, or sacrament of the promise, that GOD made to us of
the new Testament: therefore baptyme belongs as well unto chylderen, as unto
old folk. If that ye deny, that the promysse of salvation perteyneth as well
unto chylder, as to old folk (as ye did ones in my chamber, reasonynge with
me) I will prove it thus: salvation belongs as well unto chylder, as to men,
and women: and no man comes unto the heritage of salvation, but through the
promys: as Paul witnesses. Gala. ij. Si ex lege est hereditas, non iam
expromissione. Atqui Abrahae per promissionem donauit deus. If that the
heritage, that is the kingdom of heaven comes through the law, then it
comes not of the promys. But GOD gave it unto Abraham by the promys. And so
all other both Abraham's posterytye, and they that are of the Heathen receive
the heritage, as Abraham did. Then when as the heritage comes by the promys:
none can have the heretage, that has not the promys: but the specheles
childer have the heretage, therefore they have also the promys of the heretage.
If that chylder have the promys, and the covenant, and the thing promised by
the covenant: why may not they have the sign, or seal of the covenant as
well as the infantes of the Jews had the sign and seal of their covenant:
Is the Baptyme of water greater, then the thing which is sygnifyed by the
Baptyme: is the garland of Iuy better, then the Wine, which is signified by
the garlande? When as children receive the holy ghost the heretage of the
kingdom of heaven, forgeuenes of origenal sin by Christ's blood, and are made
members of Christ's body: why may they not receive the Sacrament of baptim,
which is an holy sign and seal of these things? may we not receive the
less, when we have received the greater? if that ye deny the kingdom of
heaven, and the heretage thereof to perteine unto childer (as for to confirm
your opinion ye would not stik to do) for ye deny as great a'thynge as that: I
will prove that the heretage does perteyne unto them. Jacob, Hieremi, and Johan
the Baptist, being chylder had the heretage of the kingdom of heaven: and
the chylder both of the Jews and also of the chylder of the Christianes have
the promys of the heretage, as these places following do testyfie. I will make
strong my cumnant, between me and the, and thy sede after the, in their
generacions, in a continual comnant: that is to wit, that I will be a GOD unto
the and to thy sede after the. And again in the.xxij. of Genesis. In thy sede
shall all the nations of the earth be blissed. In the.xliiij. of Esaye is this
prymis. I will pour out my Spirit upon thy sede, and my blessyng upon thy
buddes. And Peter in the second of the Acts speaks of a plain promis in these
words The promys was made unto you, and to your chylder, and to all that are
far of, whom soever the Lord our GOD shall call. Lo, here is plain mention
made, of the promys made unto chylder. Then when as GOD perfourmeth all that he
promyseth: and he promised salvation unto childer, it follows, that they have
ye heretage that GOD promised them, then does the heretage and kingdom of GOD
perteyne unto them. Why do you so uncharitably with hold the sign and seal of
salvation from chylderen, to whom the heretage belongs? Who gave you any
such authority, ye proud and presumptuous tyrannes: as to make wards of the
chylder of GOD, and to with hold from them the sign and seal of their fathers
heretage. Now where is all your scripture: which ye boost that ye defend
your error wythall? answer unto these scriptures, and confute them, if ye
can. Where as ye say afterward, that another the sign of Christ's Supper,
another the raynbowe sygnyfyeth any thing to chylder: ye are far out of the
way. The breaking of the bread in the supper, and deliuerynge of it unto the
congregation be tokeneth: that Christ's body was broken for all them that shall
be saved: and that the virtue of his passion should be dealt to all them that
are elect, and chosen to be saved. The^ when as childer are elect and chosen to
be saved, is the misterye of Christ's supper, no sign of salvation unto
childer. Does not the rain bow signify to all the world, that the world shall
no more be drowned with water. Does not that promis, that the world should be
no more destroyed with water, perteyne unto chylder? If that the promys
perteyne unto childeren: how happens, that the sign of the promys signifies
nothing unto them? It must needs signify unto young childer, as well as to old
men, that they shall not be drowned with an universal sloude, as the world
was ones destroyed. So does the baptysynge of chylderen sygnifie, as well unto
chylder: that Christ dyed for them, and rose for them, as it sygnifyeth the
same to old men. For all although they see not the sign and know not of
the sign: yet may they have it as surely, as they have the thing sygnyfyed by
the sign.

Almyghtie GOD made a covenant and promysse, not only unto men, but also
unto birds and bestes: that they should not be drowned with the universal
fould. Genesis.ix. Behold (says the Lord) I make my covenant with you and
with yoursede after you, and with every living soul that is with you, as well
foul, as cattle and beestes. This shall be the sign, which I give between
you and me and every living soul which is with you. I have set my bow in
the cloud: and it shall be a sign a sign of the covenant between me and the
yearthe. So, that when I bring clouds upon the earth the bow shall appear
in the clouds: and then will I thynk upon the comnant between me and you, and
all living creatures.

First I gather of this place that the comnant of GOD is profitable, not only
unto them that have the use of reason, but also unto birds and unreasonable
bestes, although they know, nothing at all of the promys. I gather also, that
the signs of Gods comnaunte, are signs unto birds and beestes: and not
only signs, but profitable signs unto them: although they never see them,
nor understand them. Whereupon I gather that the holy sign of Baptyme, is
not only a sign unto childer of remission of sins, and of Gods favor
toward them, but also a fruitful and profitable sign. For how can the sign of
the raynbow be more profitable unto unreasonable beasts, and birds, then the
Sacramte of baptyme is profitable unto yo^g chylder? seeing that GOD promised as
well salvation to chylder, from hell, death, and damnation, and made baptyme
the sign thereof, as he promised unto beasts and birds safegarde from
general drowning, and made the raynbow the token sign or seal of the same.
Here is your saying, that the raynebowe is no sign unto chyldern, proved
plain false, and contrary unto the open text of Gods holy word.

Where is the great clerk that, said, that I should not have Winchester in
hand, when I had him in hand? as though he had passed Wynchester so far in
wit and learning, that there were no comparison to be made between them. Here
might ye be ashamed, if ye had anyo^ shame at all. Here might your disciples
be ashamed of such an unlearned and dotynge scolemaster. Is the seal of a
childs lands no seal unto him: because he has no knowledge of the seal, and
knows nothing thereof? What soever ye answer, the seal is even a seal unto
chylder: and when they come to age, they claim their lands thereby. Even so is
baptyme a seal of remission of sins unto chyldern, although they know it not.
And when they cum to age, it shall be an assurance unto them, to claim the
promiss of God by: ye have been therefore to bold to babble of these matters:
where in ye have very lyttelle skill, And pronounce as boldelye, as though ye
were sitting upon Apolloes trestell. Let your I says, have autorite among
your bewitched scholars, as much as ye will: but they shall have none with me,
except ye can prove your saying true by the scripture. Ye axe me, why is
baptym not differred, as well as the supper of the Lord? A man might answer
you, yt they were like to be lurched at your gluttenous supper, if that they
were with you: for ye would have at the supper of the gluttenous catabaptistes
(which ye call the supper of our Lord) befe, mutton, vele, capons and such
hard meats, as the pore sucking childer can not eat: and therefore it were no
wisdom that they should suppe with you, until their teeth were grown. If that I
had bylded my opynion upon doctores, and stories, as ye do yours. I could have
brought many places both out of the doctors, and stories: which prove that
it was the custom a.M.CC. years ago, to give the Sacrament of CHRIST'S body
and blud, only in bred and wine, unto the yo^g chylder straight way after
baptyme. But because I ground my opinion only upon scripture, I will answer
you by scripture. The supper of the Lord requires a doer, and it is an active
Sacrament, For Christ says. Accipite, edite, bibite, facite in mei
recordationem. Take ye, eat ye, drink ye, and do ye this in the remembrance
of me. Then when as the chylder can not receive the Sacrament, and can not eat,
drynk, nor do that in the supper that God requires, that is to eat, and drink
in the remembrance of him: it is mete that chylder be dyfferred from the
supper until they may, and can eat and drynk and receive the supper, as Christ
ordened it to be received. And because baptim is a passive Sacrament, and no
man can baptize him self, but is baptize do^ an other: and childer may be as
well dipped in to the water in ye name of Christ (which is the outward baptym
and as myche as one man can give an other) even as old folk: and when as they
have the promise of salvation, as well as old folk, and can receive the sign
of the same as well: there is no cause why that the baptyme of chylder should be
differed. CHRIST did not baptyse himself, but Johan the baptist baptized him.
In the second of the acts and the.x. where as many were baptized, no man
baptized him felf: another do we read in any place of the new Testament: that
any man baptized him self, then when as baptym is given by other: and the
supper of the Lord is taken of a man by him self: it foloeth not that baptym
ought to be differred so long, as the supper ought to be differed, We read
in the acts of he Apostels, that all they that came into the felowshyppe of
Christ's church, entered in by baptym, and did not communicate streighte way
after they were baptized. Allthough I grant with in a short time after, they
received the supper of the Lord, as many as were able to receuer it. Then when
as chylder perteyne unto christ's church, it is mete that they enter in by the
same door, that old folk enter in by: then ought they not to be holden out
from the church, until they may also receive CHRIST'S supper. Baptym is the
putting on of CHRIST, as Paul says. Quotquot baptizati estis, Christum
induistis. As many of you as ar baptized, have CHRIST put upon you, Is it
conuentent that the pore infantes shall be naked, and want CHRIST vnput upon
them, until that they come to the.xiiij. year of their age? How shall they
come worthylye to Christ's supper, and have not CHRIST for they garment?
Therefore they must first put on Christ by baptyme, and then afterward at
convenient time, receive the Lords supper, I showed that water presupposed
uncleanness in all that are baptized: and I set the sign of the water, as an
argument against the^ of your sect, which deny original syn. But ye say,
that I have proved nether of both, unless I prove that Christ ordeded that
chylder should be baptized. To prove that the water in baptyme, signifies the
impurite of them that are Baptized. Ananias said vnde Peter, Exurge, and
baptizare, and ablue peccata tua. Rise up and be baptized and wash away thy
sins, saint Paul calls baptym the bathe of regeneration and the bath of
water, whereby the church is made clean. In all these places ye hear mention of
washing and water, and of scouryng by the water, wherefore that water of
baptysme signifies that they that are baptized, have need of washing, and are
unclean, if they be chyldern, and have committed no actual syn, then it
folowethe, that they are defiled with original syn if they be commede unto
perfyt age, that then they are spotted both with original and actual sin. The
former part is proved. The other part I prove thus. Baptym signifies in all
them that are baptized, that they are unclean, and have original syn, but
chyldern are baptized, therefore the water signified in their baptym, that they
are gyltye of original syn, seeing that they have committed no actual as yet.
If ye say that chyldern are vnworthlly baptized, therefore the water of their
Baptyme, condemns them not of original sin, and wants the sygnyfication,
I answer that the unworthiness of the receyuynge of the Sacrament, hyndereth
not the sygnification of it, allthought it be both unprofitable, and also
damnable to the receauer, of unworthily. When as a noughtye mane receives the
Sacrament of CHRIST'S body unworthily, does the brekinge of the bread leave
of sygnifying that CHRIST'S body was broken for that sinful and unworthy
receyuer? Therefore baptym in all that are baptized, betokens that they are
gyltyl of original syn at the least. Where as ye say, that for lack of
scripture I am feign to fly unto rryginall syn to prove the baptym of
chyldern: I pray you what scripture have ye brought, sense the beginning of
your book, to prove the contrary? Whether I have brought any scripture for the
probation of my opynion, or no I report me unto the readers of my sermon, and
of this book also. Where as the commandment is general, and perteyneth unto
an hole special kind it perteyneth to every one, contained under the special
kind, although the particular be not expressedly named as in this example, if
that all men be reasonable living creatures, then chylder are also reasonable
creatures: because they are contained under the name of a man, though they are
not expressed by name in the general. Or else if that were not true, how
should ye prove, that women, should be saved: that wives, wydowes, and
maidens should receive the Lords supper and be baptized: seeing that the
apostels have no expressed commandment of GOD, neither the women should be
baptized another be received unto the supper of the Lord. Wherefore except ye
will exclude and shyt out women from the supper of the Lord, and from baptim,
because there is no expressed word to command them to be baptized, and to
receive Christus supper: ye ca^ not shyt out ceylder from baptime. For chylder
are as well contained under this word nations: as women be, in this general
precepte, teach all nations, and baptyse them into the name of the father and
the son, and the holy ghost. If that ye answer, that preaching and
Baptysynge be tied together, and they ought always to be done together. I
read that Christ said unto his Apostels. Mar. xvi. preach ye the Gospel
unto every creature. If this word creature do signify here man: then are the
Apostels (when as baptime is unseperably joined with preaching) bound to
baptize all that they preach to: and they are bound to preach to all men,
therefore by your reason they are bound to baptize all men. Chylder are men,
therefore the Apostels are bound to baptize chylder and to preach unto
chylder. If that ye say that preach the Gospel, unto all men, is to be
thus understand: preach the Gospel unto all men that can receive the
preaching: then is the like general precept, baptize all men so to be
understand: that they are to be baptized, which can receive baptime. But the
childer of the Christians can as well receive the over baptime which is the
dippyng into the water in the name of Christ. as the infantes of the Jews
could receive the sacrament of circumcision: Then are childer as well to be
baptized, as old folk are to be preached unto, and to be baptized. Ar we now
so destitute of scripture, to prove that infantes may be baptized, that we are
feign to fly for help to original sin? When as I prove by that, that chylder
have original sin, that they had need of the bath of water and
regeneration: do I fly from scripture? is the matter of origynall sin no
part of scripture? you do hold that there is none at all, and therefore that
the childer need not, another ought to be baptized, until they be.xiiij. year
old: before which time, they have done many actual sins, which had need
to be washed away, with the bath of baptime. Therefore it is no meruell that
ye exclude original sin from scripture, as a thing which can not be found
in scripture.

In your next question, ye make as wise a reason, against me: as ye did in
the beginning of your book, diverse times. This is my reason, that ye go
about to confute and overthrow.

As for the use of water is, to clenge and scour things that are unclean,
and sygnifyeth where it is brought that there is some thing, which needs to
be made clean, so in our baptyme the water does signifye unto us, that there
is some uncleanness and fylthynes in our nature, that had need to be washed. For
this cause I may set the water in our baptym for an argument against them,
that say that men as soon as they be borne, have no original sin. But let
us se your argument against this my saying. Is that a suffycyent cause to prove
orygynall synn to be in infantes, because ye offer them water?

I answer, ye baptim of infantes being lawful, and godly, as I do presuppose
it: the^ ye water of baptim (which vnfaithfullye ye call only water, leuing out
of baptim) must needs signifi unto childer that they are unclean. But when as
they have committed no actual sin, and are yet sins: it follows, that
they have origynall sin: except there be mo sins, then actual, and
original. But now let us hear your hole argument, wherewith ye intend to
box me. Is that a sufficient cause, to prove original sin to be in infantes
because ye offer them water? Then is it as sufficient to prove that the Turks
and Jews, with all the rest of the people of the world have it not, nor are
infected therewyth because ye offer it not unto them.

I answer unto this argument, by showing the like: how strong, and mighty
this of yours is. Preaching of Gods word presupposes, that there, where it is
preached, men are infected with original and actual sin. but ye offer no
preaching of Gods word, unto ye Jews, Turks, and unto the rest of ye
infydeles in the world: therefore ye reckon, that nether Turk, nor Jew, nether
any other infydele has, either original, or actual sin. If that ye think,
that all the above rehearsed infideles have both original, and actual sin.
for all that ye offer them no preaching: so I think, that the foresaid
infydeles have orygynall sin, not withstandyng, that I offer the^ no water.
In your next reason, ye presuppose it, that I did never believe, sense I had
any knowledge in ye scripture: that is, that the water of baptyme takes away
the uncleanness of ye soul: but well wot I, that ye holy ghost works only
that work, and no creature in the world, I know, that Christ's hole baptyme,
that is, both the outward, and the inner together, purges both body, and
soul. And I do find in diverse places of the new Testament: that it has
pleased GOD, to grant forgyuenesse of sins, by the inward baptyme, when the
outward baptyme was ministered, that the thing signyfyed should agree with the
outward sign, and sygnyfycatyon.

Peter said in the second chap. of the acts. Let every one of you be baptized
in the name of Jesus Christ, to the forgyuenes of sin: and ye shall receive
the gift of the holy ghost. Peter also says. Acto. x.

What let is there, that these be not baptized in water, which have received
the holy ghost, as well as we? And Luke tells, that the meany of Cornelius
received the holy ghost, and were contynentie baptized with water. Ananias
also, in the.ix. of the acts, says unto Paul. Brother Saul, the lord,
whom thou saw, in the way, has sent me: that thou should receive thy
sight again, and be filled with the holy ghost, and immediatelye, there fell
from his eyes, as they had been scales: and he received his syghte, and rose,
and was baptized, ye se now, how that God joins in his word the two baptymes
together: so that the outward baptyme is not a vain sign, and to be
dispysed: as ye seem to do: where as ye axe: how can water hele the wounds of
the soul. But least ye say, yt I allege your mind falsely, I will rehearse
your words, as ye wrote the^. But now I say, that all the world has
sinned, and is defiled in Ada^. How now, will water scour away the fylthe
of thps corruptyon? No. It is a wound, received in the soul, and is washed
away, but with the only faith in the blood of Christ.

Ye say here, that all ye world has sinned, and is defiled in Adam. and if ye
mean no subtylte, and understand by the world, both the elect and the other
likewise: ye grant openly orygynalle sin, which in other places ye have
denied, and do deny: as hereafter we shall prove, both by your saying and
doing. If that all ye world has sinned in Adam: the^ have also young children
sinned in ye same. and ye say, that the corruption of Adam can not be scoured
away with any thing, saving only with the faith in the blood of Christ. Ye
say also, that no child has faith: and therefore call all infantes,
unbelievers. It follows of your saying: that ye are of that opinion, that all
the children which dyed, sense the beginning of the world, unto this day,
dyed unpurged from the fylth of the soul, and without forgyuenes of origynall
sin. Whose reward, seeing that it is the death of the soul, and
everlasting dampnatyo^: hereupon it may be gathered, that ye are of this
opinion, that all chylderen are in the state of da^natyon: and that, if they
dye, they are all dampened. For this argument may be clearelye, and truly
gathered of your own saying.

None shall be scoured from the corruption of orygynall sin, but such as
have faith in the blood of Christ. But all chylderne want faith in the
blood of Christ: as ye teach both openly, and pryuelye. Therefore by you, no
chylderne are scoured from the corruption of orygynall sin.

Whereupon it follows: if these sayings of Paul be true: Evil was brought
by lynage into all men, by the trespass of one man, unto condemnatyon: The
reward of sin, is death: By Adam all men do dye, and by one manne, sin
entered into the world, and thorough sin, death, as far forth as we have
all sinned: that all chyldern (which as ye hold, are unbelievers, and therefore
can not be purged for lack of faith in Christ's blood) must needs be damned.
Which opinion, how wicked it is, and how contrary unto the holy scripture:
let the church of CHRIST give sentence. Have ye not taught wholesome lessons in
your book, whereof such a damnable conclusyon follows? Are ye not worthy to
be dubbed a doctor of heresye? If ye be not I can not tell, who is. Where as ye
say: that water ca^ not scour the soul. because orygynall syn is a wound
received of the soul: ye seem to mean, that the body shall not be damned for
orygynall sin, as a thing that never received it.

Is it not against justice, that they should be condemned together, which were
not conjoined in the deed doing, that deserved damnation?

Ye hold in your next sentence a marvelous opinion: which is this. It is to
be understand, that though sin be common to all, yet baptyme is not common
to all.

Which sentence seems not to be true. For to whomsoever preaching is common,
to ye same is also baptyme common.

For preaching, and baptysyng are joined, and commanded together, in these
words. Euntes docete omnes gentes, baptizantes eas.

Go, and teach all natyons, baptysyng them. Then is baptyme, as common as
preaching is: hut preaching is common to all* therefore is also baptyme common
to all: though all will not receive it. For a man having several ground
enough of his own, often times puts no cattle into the common: allthough his
part is as common unto him, as unto any other man. Are the feldes no more
common unto a man, after that he enjoys no longer the profit of the common
feldes? Answer me with scripture, as I do confute you with scripture: and let
your arrogant, I says, (which ye have within three leaves of the beginning of
your book in the stead of scripture boldly brought in three times) goo, shake
their ears. For though ye have inchaunted your wretched scholars, so that
they believe, that it is the gospel, whatsoever ye say: yet are ye in no such
autoryte, master doctor with me, yt I will believe your, I say: when as ye
bring never one text of scripture, to bylde your I say, upon. Well I deny the
doctor, say what he will: and set these textes of the scripture against him:
Paul writes unto the Romans thus. As by the trespass of one man, euel was
brought by lynage into all men to comdemnation: so by the righteousness of one,
good came unto all men, to the iustifycation of life? Then is iustifycation as
common, as condemnation: And baptym is as common as iustifycatyon is: then is
baptyme common unto as many as sin is common to. Saint Ihon says, that
Christ obtained mercy for our sins. and not only for our sins, but for the
sins of the hole world. Lo here is mercy and remyssyon of sins, as
general, and as common, as sin is. And baptyme is common to all, to whom
remissyon of sin is common: for baptym: is the seal of forgyuenes of sins:
and so he that makes the one common, makes also the other common. your
marvelous sentence therefore, will not stand with scripture. Of like folyshnes
is your conclusyon, that follows: that is, that baptyme is to be offered to
all men: yet is it not to be given to all men, nor to be taken of all men.
Whosoever offers any thing to any creature, and intends not to give the
same, mocketh the creature: as when the Popish priest, says unto his
parishoners, Accipite, and comedite, take ye, and eat ye: and gives them
nothing, but eats all him self: mocketh his parishoners. And ye captains of
catabaptistrye, offer baptyme unto all children, and intend not to give it unto
them.

Therefore ye mock all chylderne: like as boys mock young birds, and young
choughes: whiles ye offer unto the^ baptyme, which ye never intend to give
them.

For the confutacyon of the last part of your saying: that is, that baptyme
is not to be taken of all men: I ask you, whether mortification, and
regeneracyon ought to be taken of all men, or no? If that mortificatyon, and
regeneratyon ought to be received of all men: and true baptym is true
mortifycation and perfyt regeneracyon: then ought all men to receive baptym.
That baptim is mortyfycacyon, and regeneracion: Paul bears witness to ye
Romans in the sixth Chapter: and unto Titus, the third chapter: and in other
places, which I might here rehearse, if I thought not these sufficient. And so
is your sayng false, that all men ought not to the baptized. But what if all
men ought not to be baptized? What hinders that baptisyng of yo^g children?
What if many wicked persons be not worthy, to receive ye seal of salvation: I
mean ye outward baptime: because they wilfulli, and willingly refuse
mortification, and wtstand ye word of God: shall their unworthiness make ye
innocent childer, who^ Christ has washed with his blood, vnmet and unworthy, to
receive ye sacrament of salvation, and regeneration, and ye seal of the promis
which god made unto the^? The^ this sayng of yours, yt al me^ ought not to
receive bapti^, proves nothing yt chylder ought not to be baptized. here may
al me^ se: yt your ground yt ye would make, is but sand, and falls, when it
is but lightly touched, and that ye work, yt ye would bylde upon your fundacio^
can find no fast ground, to rest upon. Wherefore ye are not like to prosper in
your purpose.

baptim, say ye, is only dew to the elect church, chosen in Christ Jesus,
before al worlds: What makes this against the christening of yo^g childer? I
tha^k you for ye help me with arguments, against your false doctrine. For if
baptim be only dew unto ye elect church, chosen in Christ Jesus before al
worlds: then is baptim dew unto all the me^bres, and sparks of ye same
church: but chylder ar members, and a part of the elect church. Therefore
baptim is dew unto the^. What need us now to dispute any longer in this matter,
seeing that by your own saye^g, baptim is dew unto childer, as the members of
Christ's elect church, chosen before ye worlds? Is baptim only dew to the
elect and chosen? if that be so: your brether anabaptists of munster did
wrong, when they baptized so many deuilishe and reprobat persons of your sect:
that they by their might and strenght, put down all lawful magistrates, and
rulers there, and set up a King among them selves: which had.xvi. wives, were
these murderers and dispisers of goddis ministers, of ye elect church? was
this king ryghtly regenerate, and a mortifyer of his members upon earth, which
had so many wymen, to exercise his fleshly lust upon? were not your rebaptysing
brethern, which were slaye^ in Amsterda^, when they thought to have murdered
the magistrates and gouernores of the cyti reprobate and of a falsely pretended,
and feigned repentance? And yet ye say: that baptyme ought only to be given
unto such, as unfeignedly will amend their lives, whereby ye make a conclusion,
that chylder ought not to be baptized: because ye cannot perceive, whether
chylder entend unfeignedly to amend their lives, or no: and know not by their
living, whether they be chosen, or vnchosen. This is one of the chief
arguments, where with ye go about to over throw the baptysyng of chylder:
which is after such a manner formed: that it takes as well away the baptim of
old folk as of chylder, for if that ye will baptyse none but such as, ye know
whether they be elected, and unfeignedly repent or no: ye shall as well hold al
old folk from baptym as young chylder, for no man can know the heart, nether of
old man, nor child, saving only God, as it is wryte^ ij. Pararipo. vi. Tu
solus nosti cor filiorum hominum. Thou know only the heart of the sons of
men then may all they that are baptized feyn and counterfeit repentance and
amendment of life before the elders which baptize, and intend nothing less as
Simon Magus and Judas Did in the Apostelles times, and in our times such
swarms of Anabaptists of your sect, which were baptized after the.xiiij.
year of there age, and afterward committed hordom robry and shameful murder
in the above rehearsed cities: and yet was noman able, saving only god, to judge
whether they were chosen or vnchosen: whether they intended to amend their
living or no, at ye time of their Baptime. Ye say that infantes ought not to be
baptized because we ca^ not tell whether they be of the elect church or no, and
whether they are fully amynded to amend their living or no. Take you.iiij. men
of.xl. years of age to baptize, and let me take.iiij. infantes of.iiij. days
old: tell me how that ye know that your iiij. men of.xl. years, ar more elect
and chosen then I know yt the.iiij. children ar elect and chosen: seeing that
the scripture is plain, that no man can tell, what an other man inte^deth or
what is in his heart. Then when as acordyng unto the sayng of S. Paul.i.
Corint. ij. No man knows the things which perteyn unto man saving the
spirit of man which is in him: no man can tell whether an oldeman be more elect
then a child, then if old men ought to be baptized, not with standing that
noman knows whether they be worthy love or hatred, and be chosen or vnchosen,
it shall not hyndre but that chyldern may be as well baptized as old folk, ye
say in your next assertion that, Remission of sin is offered to all: but al
receive it not.

I will now try your spirit whether it is steadfast or unsteadfast and wavering
or no, ye said a little before that. Baptym is offered even to as many, as will
vnfayneoly amend their lives: even as is remission of sins.

In which place ye make baptym and remission of sins all alyke common: but
remission of sins is common to all men, both to and old meton chylder: and
that I prove by your own sayng, which is that remission of syn is offered to
all. For it that is offered to all, is common to all: therefore by your own sayng
it follows that baptime is common to all. And if it be common to all, then is it
common unto children. How does now your spirit agree with it self, that said a
little before: that baptim was not common to al: and now says it the contrary
whereupon it follows necessarily, that baptim is common to al. How do these
saynges of yours agree together: remission of finnes is offered only unto them
that will unfeignedly amend their lives, as baptim is offered: and remission of
sins is offered to all, but all receive it not. In the one place ye offer
remission of sin only unto them theat baptim is to be offered to, that is to
the^ that will repent: and in the other unto all, Is not here a pretty argument?
this is the spirit which ye received in the wood, where as ye told me that ye
learned without any doctor your divinity.

I gather also of this your sayng, where ye say, that remission of syn is
offered to all, that remission of sin is also offered unto childer: and to whom
soever remissyon of syn pertains, baptime also perteyneth, as it may be
plainly gathered of your own words above rehearsed: but remission of syn is
common to all: therefore is also baytym common unto al: why should not he have the
sign which has the thing. Now is your saing that baptim is not common unto al,
onis confuted again. This do I ask you because ye say that remission of syn
is offered unto al: whether remission of sin is offered unto any, saving unto
them that believe: and whether beleese cummeth only of the hearing of gods
word or no. If that forgyuenes of syns only be to be offered to them that have
faith, and says be only offered unto them that hear the word: how have the
Turks and the other infideles remission of sins offered unto them, when as
they want the word of God where of cummeth faith, which only as ye grant, the
promys of remission of sins? Then must ye show in your answer, how that
remission of sins is offered to the faythles and unbelieving Turks, which
wane the instrument whereby faith is offered and engendered. This do I only write
to put you to your prove: ye are so full of your general conclusyones, if
that ye church sanctified in the word of Christ by faith only receive remission
of sins (as ye write here in this place) and if it be true that ye did hold
before that childer are faythles and unbelieving: it follows yt chylder receive
no remission of sins, by your saing: is not this to condemn all childer, or
else to say, that childer have no original syn? whether this be holsu^ doctrine
or no, let Christ's church be judge. As for your argument that ye bring next
here after I deny the antecede^t, if ye mean of such faith as ca^ declare it
self by good works: for the childer obtein remission of sins by the blood of
Christ: althouge they have no such faith as you do require in them: your
argument is this. This I say (where is now) Hec dicit dominus) the remission of
sins is offered to all: but all receive it not the: church sanctisyed by
faith in the blood of Christ only receives it: and unto the^ only baptime
belongs: therefore none ought to receive it but such as have not only heard
the good promises of God: but have also thereby received a syngular consolation
in their hearts through remission of sin which they by faith have received:
For if any receive baptim without these persuasion, it profits him nothing.

I have proved suffyciently before that the Jews circumcision was the same, and
of the same effect and strength with the^: that baptime is to us. But the
childer of the Jews having, no more faith then our children, and being no
more sanctified by faith in the blood of Christ then ours be, and have received
no more consolation of Gods promises then our children have done: obtained
forgyuenes of sins and have taken with fruit the sign and seal of the
same, I mean their circumcision. Whereupon I gather if: that the Jews childer,
were without faith, and were only sanctified by the promis and mercy of god,
and not by their own faith or any thing of their owndoing and were not
withstanding law fully received in to ye felouship of the faithful church by
circumcision, and obtained forgiveness of sins: then when as God regards
no more a Jew then a gentil, and has promised as well to be a god to the childer
of the beleuyng Gentiles, as of the beleuyng Jews: the childer of the faithful
Christians receive remission of sins by the promis and mercy of god, before
the use and exercise of faith, and are as lawfully received by baptim in to the
fellowship and the chuche of the saithful christians, and to the partaking of
forgyuenes of sins, as the Jews chylder were received in to the Jews
church, and were made parteners by circumcision of the promys and forgiveness
of sins. Now must ye either deny yt god is so good unto the chrystyans childer
as he was unto the Jews childer, or else that our childer have remission of
sins, and ar as lawfully baptized, as ye jews childer were circumcised: not
withstanding that our childer be not as yet for lack of age, cu^men to the use
and exercise of faith. Ye hold and repete in this your reason an opinion and a
false heresy against the open scriptur. That Sacraments do not profit them
which hear not the promys, and know not what it means.

For the confutacion of this I ask you whether the Jews childer, which nether
heard the promis made unto Abraham, nether received any consolation by it,
should have been saved from hell and damnation if they had departed two days
after their circu^cisio^, or they should have not ben damned: and if that any of
the^ had died upon the.x. day with out circumcision: whether they should have been damned or saved? If ye answer with the scriptur yt not withstanding that
they knew not the promis nether heard any time of it, that (God which said, I
will be thy god and the god of thy sede after ye) was for his promises sake a
God, that is a savior unto the^ that had the sacrament of circumcision, and
was a judge unto the^ that died uncircumcised, as to the breakers of his
covenant, and therefore to be cast out and rooted forth from their people: then
have ye written against scripture, where ye hold that none can have any profit
of sacraments, except they understand them, hear the^ and have consolation
thereby. I need not here rehearse the story of the raynbow, which ye call your
self a sacrament, where by I proved that even the birds and unreasonable
beasts had profyt all though they never heard the promiss, nor knew that it
was a Sacrament: for I have entreated of that matter largely here before. your
argument, I trust, now is confuted and all the false doctrine that ye intended
to byld upon the same. now will I let the reder se your next argument, and
answer to it as well as I can. Christ had his disciples to preach the
confortable tidings to every creature of mankind: but he never had baptize
other then such as at their preachiryg would believe.

Christ said unto his disciples preach the gospel to every creature, but he
said not preach the gospel to every creature of mankind, as ye do say sin
doing where of ye committ I dolatry, or at the least a graet offense against
GOD, after your own judgment your argument: childer ought not to be baptized
because Christ never commanded in the scripture expressedly the^ to be
baptized: and so because Christ said not expressedly preach the gospel to
every creature of mankind but said as saint mark writes. (...) that is
preach the gospel unto every creature, ye do wrong to say which is not
expressed in the scripture in the stead of every creature of mankind. If that
ye answer to be understand, every creature of mankind, and take unto you
autorite to understand ye scripture as ye thynk best: why may not I in this
text. Euntes, docete omnes gentes baptizantes eas. Under the name of al
nationes understand young specheles childer, as ye under the name of every
creature understand every creature of man kind, seeing that a child may as
well be understood, under the name of nationes, as man kind may be
understood under the name of al creatures? If that Christ bad his disciples
preach the gospel unto every creature of mankind, what kind are young
chylder the creatures of? of horse, bulls, or hogs, or of mankind, if they
be creatures of mankind: then must they have the word preached unto them by
your interpretation: is not this interpretation a pretty one that it had also
need of an other interpretation? Might ye not as well have said to all kinds
of men of every nation that can understand prechyng? Because ye shall not thynk
that your argument is sure and strong where ye reason that Christ bad not his
Apostelles by expressed words baptize chyldern: there for they ought not to
baptyse chylder: I make such like negative arguments of scripture: which if
they be not sure but false and folishe: then seeing that of like things like
judgment is to begyuen, your negative arargument is both vnsuer false and
foolish.

Christ never commanded you, to were a ryng on your finger, and be cause it
should not be smothered under your glove, to make a wyndow to let the air cum
in to it, I dare not say that it might be seen, nether co^mande he you to sing
in his church any pypyng Christ never commanded prycksong or any besy
discant: therefore ye offend to be a curious musician.

GOD bad his disciples never expressedly in his scripture preach that wymen
should cum to te communion: therefore ought no woman cum to the communion.

GOD never in his word expressedly commanded his Apostelles to suffer such
tal men as you be to live syngle: therefore your curate does wrong to suffer
you to live syngle.

Christ never commanded any Christen men to differ the baptym of their
children unto the.xiiij. year of their age you do therefore wrong to differ the
baptisyng of children unto the xiiij. year of their age.

If these be not good arguments made even after the same manner of yours, that
is negative: then is yours, a noughty argument to say, Christ never bad
Baptyse infantes expressedly: therefore chylderen ought not the baptized.

If they be good arguments: then all the conclusiones that I gather, are true,
and so ar ye a falls man and a perillons heretic.

When as ye say that, By baptym alone is no salvation but by baptyme and
preaching:

I ask you, whether ye mean hole baptyme, that is both the inward, and the
outward baptym togyter or the outward baptyme a love.

If ye mean of the inward baptym and outward both conjoined together: ye
hold an open heresi against the scripture, for thus wrytethe the Apostell of
CHRIST saint Pet. j. Pet. iij. few sowles that is to wit, eight, were saved in
the arc throw the water: to the figure where of, baptyme at this time
answering, does now likewise save us. Paul also the elect vessel of GOD, gives
unto the right and holy baptym clengyng, and the hole man, and also salvation,
Ephesians. v. husbands love your wives as Christ has loved his church and gave
him self for it, that he might hallow, and cle^ge it by the bath of water
through the word, and Tit. iij. But after that ye goodness and love of GOD our
savior toward us appeared, not of the works that are in the righteousness
which we did, but according unto his mercy saved us, throw the bath of the
new birth, and the renewyng of the sprite. Paul also grants that baptime
is of such effect, that the receyuyng of it, is the receiving and putting on
of Christ: is not Christ salvation? and does not baptim bring Christ? Paul's
words ar these. As many of you as are baptized, have put Christ upon you Then
when as Peter does expressedly gives salvation unto baptim, and Paul like
wise, your error is open and seen of all that have any eyes to se withal.
The perfect baptim has Christ, it has the holy gooste likewise: for they that are rightly baptized have the holy ghost and Christ put upon the^. Is not this
baptim able to save alone: wherein is Christ with his holy spirit? if ye mean
by this word baptim, only the outward baptime: I grant you that by it comes
no salvation alone, ye moreover that, it is no part of salvation: but that it
is only a sign and a certification of our salvation. But then ye shall in to
right popistry, for ye fall that of preaching, and baptyme meaning of outward
baptime comes salvation: preaching is a work of man, in opening of gods
word, and the outward baptim is an outward work, then if these two together
bring salvation: then works bring salvation. How far are ye sir, now from
popistry which call other men papists farther from papistry then ye are nere
unto the verite? Christ says Mar. xvi He that believes and is baptized shall
be saved: but he says not he that hears the word of god and has only the
outward baptime laid upon him, shall be saved: ye have be like authorite of
your wood spirit to make new textes of scripture, and to bylde thereupon
what ye list. Other have ye none. If preaching and baptim be the means to save
and damn the hole world by? how prove you that baptime is ordened to damn
men wythall? let us hear one word of scripture of you to prove this strange
opinion withal. But least any man should think that I rehearse yt ye never wrote
I will write your awn words By baptime alone is no salvation, but by preaching
baptim, and certain it is, that God is able to save his chosen Church without
these means: But this is his ordynary way, to save and damn the whole world,
by namely by offering remyssion of sins and baptime to all the world, that
thereby the beleuers may be absolved from all conscience of sin, and the
disobedient and unbelievers bound still other to amend or to be damned for he
that believes not is all ready damned.

The offering of remission of sins and of baptim is, not the law, whose
office is to condemn, but it is the glad tidinges which we call the Gospel: ye
are so unlearned and so foolyshe in your reasonyng, that ye are utterly
unworthy to be reasoned wythall, so that it has repented me often sense, that I
began to write: yt I troubled my self with such a bungler. But lest your
bablyng and boosting, should bring any simple people out of the way, I will not
disdain to open your folishnes, and to bewray your abominable heresies. Saint
Paul unto ye Romans iij. says: by the law cummeth the knowledge of syn. In
the.iiij Capter he says that the law works wrath, and in the seventh
chapter. I have not known sin but throw the law, so that it is the office of
the law to show syn and to condemn the world, wherefore ye do against al
scriptur to translate and remove the office of the law unto the most
comfortable offeringe of remission of syn, and to the most sure seal and sign
of our salvation, baptim: is the end or office of offering of remission of
sin is to save and make blessed, for they are blessed said David whose
sins ar forgiven. What is the Gospel or glad tidinges, else but the offering
of remission of sins? Did not Christ commaun- his disciples to preach
repentance and that the kingdom of heaven was at hand? did not the angel
bring in the tydinges of peace? was not remission of sin offered where peace
was offered? What other thing did the Apostels else then offer remission of
sin unto their auditores? Christ commanded them to preach the Gospel, and
this Gospel or gald tydinges, was remission of sins. How can then the
offering of the Gospel which was ordened to save the world, be a mean to
damn the world? How can baptime which was ordened to be an instrument of
salmation: be an instrument of damnation? The offering of remission of sins
is the offering of an holsum medecin: Baptime is, as it were a confortatiue,
used to be given unto the syk after purgations. Who is he, that has the common
wit, that will say, if a foolyshe syke man refuse an holsum medicine, with a
confortatiue: and he die for lack of medicine: that the offering of the
medicine, with the confortatiue was the means, whereby this man came unto his
death? Yet do ye this: while ye make the offering of remyssyon of sins, to
be the means, whereby GOD dampneth and saves all the world by. If faith do
justify (as often times ye grant with open mouth) then does infidelite
condemn: and it is the mean, where by the world is condemned, as Christ
witnesses: he that believes not is condemned already Lo here is condemnation
assigned unto unbelieve: and another to the offering of remission of sin,
another of baptime. Then may it easily be spyed how, unlearnedly ye alleged this
text: he that believes not, is condemned already: to prove that the offering
of remyssyon of sins and baptime, is means both unto salvation and
condemnation: namely when as Christ, immediately before showed the means of
salvation in these words. He that will believe and be baptized, shall be saved.
What wood spret taught you this folish philosophy: that one cause should bring
lurth two diverse and contrary effects, as ar salvation and condemnation? It
is a great marvel, to se such great arrogantie as ye have, to be joined with
so little knowledge. But so are they al, that are blasted with the Anabaptistical
sprit, as you be. If that I could have made no other shyft, when ye argued with
me that al Turks and Jews were without origynall sin: because they had no
water offered unto the^: I might here by your help in this place have
answered thus: ye say that remission of syn and baptim is offered unto all:
then when as baptim is not without water: water is offered unto al, the^ by your
own grant, all have original sin: which ye denied stoutly before: because
sum wanted the offering of water. To that ye say the Gospel has no power upon
infantes, and much less sacraments, and that therefore another preaching nor
administration of sacraments ar dew to infantes, by the word of god: I meruel
what ye mean by having power. If ye mean by having power over, to belong and
to be profitable: your sayng is twice false: for both, the word of God
belongs unto infantes: presently, by the reason of the promys which is made
unto the^ in the word, and it is dew unto the^ against they come to age, as a
chylder lands are dew unto him, though he can not inioye them before he come
to age: that the administration of Sacraments ar dew unto children: the
Sacrament of circumcisyon, and the rayn bow are witnesses against you, and
prove you ar a falls and a shameless liar: therefore who will believe you
hereafter? no man, but such as have delight in lies and abominable heresies.

Your conclusion, agrees as well with your antecede^t, as this argument does:
follow a staff stands in the corner: ergo a man rinneth: and it is of such a
fasshon made, that I dowt whether it be more folyshe unlearned, or more
malicious: for it presupposes, that I brought in to prove that childer had
original sin a brushe: when as made mention of a brush, not to prove that
children had origynall sin, but for a similitude, after this manner. Even as,
when one brings a man a brushe that is commed home from his journey, it is a
sign that his clothes ar dusty so, when as water is offered unto the^ that are
baptized, it is a token, that they had need of scouryng and clengyng and ar
vncleue. Nether did I hold, that water did scour the soul: but I showed,
that the water betokened, that the sowl of the^, that were baptized, had need
of scowryng. Then let all christian, and learned men judge, how learned and
charitable is this your conclusion. So that your brushe proves the contagion
of infantes, as ruyche as your water: and helps alyke to scour the same.

After this your unlearned and malicious conclusion, ye begin a new matter, and
feyn a sayng of your own brain, as though I had sproken it, and them ye
scourge me for your foolish, dawishe and unlearned lyinge: for after these my
words.

Well it is good to remede a diseas in the beghinnyng, and to stay his course:
lest at lenght it grow ford far, that it be past remedy or help. It is spoken
like a Physician: and that makes you, to lay a plaster of cold water to the
synn of infantes, so tymely: But suerly out of dew time, and other to parley or
to late, for they are wors afterward.

Is not this a pretty fashion of confutyng: for lack of scripture, reason and
learning, to feyn, lie and scof, after this manerye ar, like to win but a few
scolares, that are honest men, after this manner. All mighty God, in the old
Testament, knowinge that the infa^tes of his people were sike in original syn,
gave them the medicine of remissyon of sins: commanded that they should have
circumcision laid upon them, as a seal, and token of goddis promised and
favor unto them.

That all mighty GOD promised the chylderen of the Jews remission of sins,
these words do testifi Genes. xvij. I will streynge then my cumnant between
me, and the, and between they sede after the, in their generationes, with an
everlasting co^nant: that I may be a GOD unto the, and to thy sede. Then to be
a God is to be a savior: but he said he would be a GOD unto the children of
the Jews: therefore he promised that he would be a savior unto them. So that
the promyss of salvation belongs as well unto the children, as it perteyneth
unto their fathers. It is expressedly declared in the same chapter, that the
love of GOD was so great unto chylderen, that he not only granted unto
chylderen salvation: but also the seal and sign of salvation the Sacracrament
of circumcision: as these words bear witness. This is my comnant which ye shall
keep, between you and me, and also between thy sede after the: let every male be
circumcysed among you.

But ye shall circuncyse the flesh of your forskynne which shall be the sign
of the covenant between you and me, and they ought to be circuncysed: that my
covenant might be in your flesh.

If GOD be true (as he can not befalls) there the young chylderen obtained it,
That GOD promised: and that was remissyone of sins, which was the promised
blissyng, and that GOD commands the sign and seal of remission of sin to
be laid upon chyldern, this is also certain. Then when ay all mighty GOD the
archephisiccon, and heler of both body and soul began, so tymely and erly to
heal young chyldern: no godly man will mock Christ's ministres, while they lay
upon the infantes of the christianes the sign of salvation, of remission of
sins, after that almighty God has heled the^ from original syn as well as
he heled the childer of the Israelites. If that ye deny that ye childer of the
Israelites were healed, ye must deny that God promised to be a God, unto them.
If they were healed, the^ ar our children also healed by the same physician, as
erly and tymely as the Jews children were healed, seeing God loves the
Christianes children as well as he did the Jews children, and his promis of
health and salvation was as well made unto our children, as to the Jews
chylder. All chylder ar infected with original sin, which if it were not
taken away, should turn them to damnacion: then to offer up chylder unto
Christ, that they may receive at the co^templacion of the prayers of ye church,
and for the promis that God made unto them, remission of their original
vnclenenes, is that to tymely don when as they are conceived in wykkednes and
borne in sin? But I know your meaning well. ye ar of that mind that ye
think that chylder have no sin, and that therefore ye reken that they nether
need goddis physik, nor any seal of his promis, which mygh^ comfort them when
they cum to age. And for this cause it is like that ye will have none baptized
until they be of fourtene years of age, that then your brether poisoned, with
many a damnable sin, might be heled by baptyme and by preaching as though
before that time, that they neded no Physik of GOD our principal Phisician.
Chylder of one day have need of the Physician Christ or no: If they need none
of Christ, he dyed not for them. If they need Christ the Physiciane, when as
they be but one day old: It is not to erly nor to tymely to carry the chylder
by the prayers of the church unto Christ, that he may hele them. And when as
the offerers up of the chylder, trustyng unto the promys of GOD, that the
chylder have granted unto them remission of their original sin, do lay upon
them the sacrament of bapti^, do they any otherwise unto their childer the^ ye
Jews sumtyme the people of God, did unto their chylder after the commandment
of God: Then we need not greatly care for your unlearned, and hethenish mocking
of Christ's holy sacrament, calling it in mockage a plaster of cold water.
Who did orden this cold water? did not Christ orden it? If ye be a christian
and not a Lucia^, why do ye mok it? shall yt excuse you when ye shall say that
I grant that it is Christis plaster, but that it is to tymely laid to? ought
Christis sacrament to be mocked and lawghed to scorn, because a fool lays it
to, out of time? Take heed what ye do, for Iuliane ye apostata, as proud a
mocker as you be, paid derely for his mockyng when he cast his blood in to the
air, and said unto Christ uicisti Galilaee thou have won thou man of Galile.
If that an Hethen man should have said unto a priest of mosis law when he
circuncised a child: what need ye sir surgean, to cut this child before he be
sik. I befoole such surgeanes, as leave ye chylder worse then they found them:
think ye that GOD would not punish this profane mocker? ye suerly: then
thynk you to escape fre, which would: be rekened a christen man, and yet mok
baptim the ordinance of Christ? I think no. And where as ye say that ye
chylder ar worse, after their baptim then ever they were before: it appears
that ye mean that ye sacrament of baptim is an euel thing. for if ye meant that
it were not evil, why should ye say that chylder baptized ar worse after their
baptim then they were before? After this your Poetical feyning ye bring in a
clerkly conclusion which ye bylde upon your own communication, and therewith a
reason as wytty, and wise as ye former was, and as well it agrees with it that
goes before. give ear unto this new orator For I hear of a poke that is now
beginning to spryng up, not of a romysh pok, but of an other deuelysh pok, as
evil as it. Medice cura te ipsum. The deuelysh pok which is syn is not healed
but through faith.

Now sir I pray you tell me by your rhetorik and logike how follows this sai^g
with it yt goes before? for me think it follows not. It is spoken like a
physician and that makes you to ley a plaster of cold water to the sin of
the infantes so tymely, but suerly out of dew time, and other to yearly or to
late, for they are worse afterward then ever they were before. For I hear of of
a pok that is now beginning to spryng up. etce. This gear is scarce clerkly
couched together, and yet ye will be rekened a great clerk. But I will pas over
your art which I can not find in you, and I will try your sentences, whether
they be any better then your compositiones ar or no. ye say yt ye hear of a
pok, yt is now beginni^g to spring up, and ye say immediately afterward yt the
poke ye mean of is sin. That is in begi^ning to spring, yt was never before:
the^ if ^yn be now beginning to spring, as your words suppose it to do, it is
like yt ye ar of yt opinion yt before this time there was never any syn. If
this do not follow of your saye^g: I am far deceived and appele unto ye
judgment of all me^ which have but ye common sense, whether this follows of
your sai^g or no

Where as ye say, medice curate ipsum, that is to say Phisicia^ heal thy
self, ye reken ye have don a clerkly worck in speaking so much latin
vnenglisshed, and in applying of a proverb so properly. But how little it
perteyneth unto this present purpose every wise man may easily perceive. As for
me although I am a Physician, called to hele mennis bodies, which thing by the
help of my Lord God, I have often do^, I never presumed to be an heler of ma^nis
soul with my phisik but with Chrstis phisik. and although it pleases sumtimes
almighty god to hele diverse dedly siknes in men's souls by me and such like
and to call them unto faith, to true repentance, and so consequently to ye
health of ye soul, yet do we not take our selves to be Physicianes and healers
of the souls, but only the chief physicians servants, and only giuyners unto
the sik souls such medicines as our master has commanded us, not being so
bold as to deuyse any Physik at all of our own brains. Then to say unto me,
Physicia^ heal thy self is as much to say as thou which art a physician of
the body, go and play Goddis part and hele thy own soul. This is the
counsel, not of the spirit of God: but of the wood sprete, who taught you
yowr divinity. If that ye had been well advised, ye would not have made your
self a co^panio^ with the murderi^g scribes, and pharisees, in using their
churlish cheke against one of Christis me^bres: which they threw out against
Christ him self. But what win you by your chek? have ye proved any thing
thereby? nothing at al saui^g yt men may know yt ye ar well seen in doggishe
eloquence. Ye have, sense ye beginning of your book unto this place, said more
the^ iij times, yt faith alone takes away sins in which places ye have
erred shamefully, if ye mean by only faith ye only work of believing. For if yt
ye give justification unto yt work, of beleui^g not meaning ye when ye say
faith justifies ye mercy of god promised unto us, by Christis blood justifies
us, and have a respect only unto ye deed of beleui^g: ye ar a iusticiari with ye
pope, and ye old pharisees: whose proverbs ye gladly exercise. If that ye mean
by this sentence: faith justifies: that faith takes hold of the mercy of God,
which is granted unto us by Christ's blood: then does the mercy of God
iustifi, and take syn away: and faith does nothyngellis but takes hold of the
promised, and offered mercy. Then, when as the mercy of God is as well promised
unto chylderen as to old folk: childer may be as well be saved thereby, as old
folk: and have their vnclenenes as well taken away by it, as old folk have
their offenses taken away by it, allthoughe they be not as yet cu^med unto the
use of faith. I bring for an example the infantes of the Jews, whose natural
vnclenenes other God, through his mercy, took away before they came unto the use
of faith: or else they were all damned, for they were both gotten and born in
original syn. Then your general proposicio^ is not true, without a true
understanding and nothing against me, another serves it for your purpose with a
true understanding: for ye bring it into prove, yt chylder have no syn: and
thus would ye have resoned, and ye had had learning to your mind. Where as
there is no faith, there is no remission of sins: but no child has faith:
therefore no child has remission of sins. If that chylder had sins, they
should have had remission of them by faith: but when as they have no faith:
then have they nether sin, nor remission of sin, I have twice al ready
a^swered unto this your argument before: wherefore I shall not need at this
time to confite it any more.

Where as ye thynk, that I am not healed from sin my self because I would have
young children baptized: I ca^ not let you to thynk of me, what ye list: but if
ye judge falsely, there is a judge will ponishe you for your falls judgment. And to
say that I am not heled from the romisshe pok, is such a like wepo^ as.ij.
wives scoldyng upon.ij. dong hills te use to feygh whyh, one against an other.
The on says thou art a drab: the other asks, why she is a drab: the former
answers, for thou art a drab, showing no cause why yt her neybor should be a
drab, Eue^ so ye have said sense the beginning of your bok diverse times, that
the baptym of chylder is a popish ordinance, and here ye say that the romish
pok is to baptize infantes: but ye have not as yet showed one word, to prove
that, the baptyme of chylderen was popish: except that your often rehersall of
it be a sufficient proof, to prove it with all, thynk you: because ye have with
your importune bablyng bewiched certain vnlnearned simple me^, that they believe
to be true what soever ye say ons unto the^: that your thryse sayng of a lie
shall purches credence, because ye do so often repete the same: Can it that is by
nature false, by often rehersyng, be cu^ true: what other proof have ye hither to
brought that the baptym of chylder is popish, sayng only your own often rehearsal
of it: which has as much autoryte with me, and all that cleue to the written
word of GOD, as the gospel of Munster has.

Hitherto have ye been about to confute my opinion, that yo^g children may be
baptized: but ye have brought in for you nothing, saving one text of
scripture, and that negative: Which I trust, I have so taken from you, that it
did not serve your purpose.

Now does my opynion abide still unmoved: and unreproved: and yet have ye donn
that ye can: ye may se what it awayleth your wood sprete to fight against the
scripture.

Then ye, being weary in wadyng in this matter, with small honesty begin a new
matter: that is, that chylderen have no original sin: and in the first
saying, ye ar as clear against your self afterward, as here is to cold, and
light unto darkness: for thus do ye begin. But your deuelishe pok is this to
clear infantes from synn which ye call original.

If this he a deuelishe pok: then have ye the deuelles pok for ye go ernestly
about to prove, that chyldern have no original sin. And as for me it is as
manifest as the clear day light, that I do not clear chylder from original
synn: for that is one of the matters that I go most earnestly about in my
sermon, to prove that chylder have original synn: not wichstandyng, that I do
grant, that all mighty GOD purges and scoureth them from it in their infancy,
by his mercy, according unto his promise, which he made unto them. By this
contradiction, with it that follows here after, ye may bether learn this
great clerk is wit, and the agreement of his spirit with it self. Then after
this monstrous co^tradictio^, ye brust into a sterklye, which is contained in
these words following. This is the pok ye take in hand to cure, either with
water or fire. I never went about to take original syn away by water: but I
went about to prove, that chylder had original sin, and that Christ takes
the same sin from chylder, by his promised mercy: and that therefore the
sacrament of baptim should be offered unto them, as a sign, and seal of
salvation, which they have received by the merits of Christis passion. It is
therefore both maliciously, and lyingly said of you, that I take in hand to
cure original syn with water. And of like truth is it that ye write in the
margen, that I go about to cure you with fire. For if I would have gone about
that: I knew and know means enough to bring that to pas. For as much as ye ar
an open felon against the kyngis laws, and have committed such felony, as ye
ar excepted out of the pardon, where of thieves and robbers ar partakers.
Almighty GOD amend you, and bring you in to the high way again, and save you
from it, that ye have justly deserved.

The first argument that ye make to prove, that chylder have no original
sin, is this. If Christ had counted infantes so defiled with Adames sin,
as ye do: he would never have sent his Apostelles and us unto childer to be
defiled of them. But now he sends us thither for clennes, to becum such as
they are, if we would enter into the kingdom of God: washed to the vnwasshed,
Christened to the unchristened, beleuers to unbelievers. Not to becum pocky or
leprose, but that we should be full of innoce^cie and simplicite. For it is
written: except ye convert and becum as these infantes ye shall not enter in to
the kingdom of heuenes.

I am glad that ye ar now content, to allege scripture for your purpose.
Hitherto ye have foughten against me only with, I say, and certain scoldynges,
and unreasonable resones which ye feyned of your own brain.

But now let us se how ryghtly ye have alleged the Scripture and whether, it
that ye intend, does follow of the place alleged or no.

Christ seeing the disputacion of the hearts of his disciples among them selves,
who should be greatest among them, as Matthew and Luke do testify: set a child
amongst them and seyde: except that ye be turned, and be made like unto little
chylder, ye shall never enter in to the kingdom of heaven. Christ byddeth his
disciples here to learn of chylder humilite, and to fly ambition, where with
he saw them entangled. Christ byddeth not us learn al virtues of childer, but
only hmmilite, and fliyng of ambition. Now I pray you how follow these
arguments chylder are not desierous of honor: ergo they have no original sin,
Christ sends us to learn humilite of childer: ergo they are not defiled with
the sin of Adame. If these be good arguments, the^ ar also they that follow
good arguments.

Peter was no thief: ergo Peter was no fyghter. Mary magdaleyn was no
murderer: therefore she was no unclean woman of her body. If these arguments do
not follow: the^ does not this your argument follow. childer are not proud and
desirous of honor: therefore they are not defiled with original sin. and
because your argument seems to lene upon this pyller: Christ sends his
Apostelles and us to learn of none that is defiled, with any sin: I will
examine it, and (I trust) overthrow it with open examples of ye scripture. Christ
in the is of Luke exhorts us to follow the wykked steward, and brings him
for an example to be followed in wisdom. Was this wykked steward with out
original sin, and undefiled by Adame, because Christ sends us unto him, to
learn wisdom in one point? Christ sends us also unto serpents to learn
wisdom: be ye wise says he, as serpents, and simple as doves. Have
serpents no poison, because Christ sends us unto them, to learn wisdom?
Paul exhorts them that he writes unto, to follow hi^: was Paul without syn,
because he exhorted his Disciples to follow him? No. for he grants in diverse
places in the Epistel to ye Romans both generally and particularely, that he
is a sinner: and yet not withstanding he exhorts his disciples to follow him
sayng: be you the folowers of me, as I follow Christ. So may we follow childer
as they follow Christ in humilite and lowlines, and yet their humilite does
not, prove they are clear from original ^ynne. What if I granted you, that
the childer, that Christ set forth for us to follow, where at that time clear
from origynall sin, as I reckon they were in deed (for it is like they were
chylder of the Jews, and had the promys, and had received the seal of the
promys: cyrcumcisyon, and therefore was cleared from their original sin that
it should not be imputed unto them) shall it follow, that they had no original
sin before? No. For God purges chylder as well as men from original syn.
Therefore this text of scripture, which ye have alleged out of Matthew, proves
nothing, that childer ar fre from original sin and so, where as ye thought
that by the strength of your invincible argument, it should have been easy to
have answered to my arguments made, to prove that chylder were borne in
original sin, your wepon taken from you, it is as hard to solute my
arguments as it was before.

Diverse other absurdites and inconveniences follow upon your foolish assertion,
and saying namely this. Christ, say ye, the prince of physiciones, sends,
his chief surgeones and physiciones to be cum such as the babes were, but ye
say a little after that ye childer were vnwasshed, unchristened, vnleuers. Then
sent Christ his apostels, by your sayng, to young chylder, to learn of them to
be unwashed, unchristened and to be faythles. Ye set in your marge^, over
against this your argument, with many other words uirgines enim sunt. and
dealbauerunt uestimenta sua in sanguine agui. For they are pure virgins and
they have made white their garments in the blood of ye lamb. If that this
text perteyn unto chylder, as you do allege it, ye have brought me.ij.
serpe^tines to shoot against you. with the first I will overthrow your opinion,
that chylder are not borne in original sin: and with the secund your false
lie, where as ye said that chylder were vnwasshed. If that chylder had their
garments made white, then was their garments once not white: then if whitnes
betokens clennes, and other colores uncleanness: it follows that they were
once unclean, for all that they were afterward come unto such whitnes and
clenenes, by the blood of the lamb. If that they made white their clothes in
the blood of the la^be, then were they well washed. Who can be better washed
then they be, yt are washed with Christ's blood? then are the childer washed,
and ye sklander the^ of uncleanness, and if they be washed, then were they
before unclean: but they had no other uncleanness saving original syn: thefore by
this text of scriptur childer have had original sin and by the blood of the
lamb are scoured and purged from the same.

To the Reader.
MEruell not good reader that I have not answered unto the rest of this ma^s
book: for I would as gladly have answered unto the rest as to it which I
answered to before, but that I have so much ado with the setting out of my
Herball, that I can not do that at this time. But here after God willing I
shall make an end of it, that I have begone, if it shall be thought expedient
to the church to do so. Almighty God keep the from al fantastical and
strange spretes and their learning. also. Amen.

Randol Hurlst unto the Reader.
If that the Scotts, or foren folk our country should assail,
With courage, ferce, and weapons strong, from us it for to take,
A man might find ynow, that would not have them to prevail,
But would most stoutly strive, and stand, their fercenes for to slake.
And yet almost there none is found, that in a greater wight,
Will take in hand the faith of Christ, from such for to defend,
As teach false doctrine every where, and therewyth would us freyght,
Denieng Baptyme to our Babes, and what so it does send.
Whose doctrine, such as Godly are do know, is very naught,
And that it is more poysonfull, and hurts far more sore,
Then if our contreyshold from us, by force be ever caught,
And we in thraldom should be the throne, to serve for ever more.
Wherewith this author being moved, took pen in hand to write,
Against all fuche, as the, and thyue of treuth would have berest:
Whom thank dear reader for his pain, that he thus would endite,
For the defense, of the and thine, in that that Christ has lest.
THOMAS SOMVS ECCLEsiastes Lectori.
Mystica baptismi, libris quae clausa teguntur
Nuncia nonnullis, hic manifesta patent.
Huc igitur studiosa cohors properare iuuabit
Caelica si uerba and dogmata sacra placent.
Quam dabit hic claui hac reserabis claustra daturam
Quae tenet area intus conspicienda palam.
Impiger, ut nu^mos cumulet, mercator ad Indos
Currit, at incertertae pendet ab ore Deae:
Huc properes and tutus eris, sapientia ditat
Fortuna nunquam deficiente suos.
THOMAS BECONVS Ecclesiastes Lectori.
Quando ita diuini fert immutanda uoluntas
Numinis, assiduo cunctorum mart suorum
Explorare fidem, constantia pectora, morum
Inuictum robur: confirmaturus in illis
Hac ratione sui, simul and pietatis amorem:
Implorari sui docturus cord fideli
Spiritus auxilium: nos quorum cura suorum
Commissa est fidei, uigilesque ducesque tuendis.
Praeficimur castris, te nunc tibi quanta monemus
Immineant, miles Christi, discrimina uitam
Si sapis and saluam cupis in statione manner
Tuta praecipimus, summo uitare maligni
Insidias hostis studio, fraudemque cauere,
Sed ne tela tibi desint, queis fortiter illi
Occurras, uires diuino robore frangas,
Et quae parta suo precioso sanguine Christus
Tradidit, and partam bello tueare quietem:
Scripturae armabit te plena panoplia sacrae,
Ex qua cuique malo liceat depromere quicquid
Seruiat arcendo. Quod si liuore maligno
Commotus pueris baptismi munera paruis
Extorquere uelit, iam partae signa salutis,
Atque tibi curare tuam solatia prolem
Aeternum reru^ Dominum patremque bonorum:
Ecce parata adsunt tibi munimenta tuisque
Et tela inuictis fundentia uiribus hostem,
Turneri hoc opera factum, cui saepe Papistae
Insignem uicti palmam, laudemque dedere,
Cui Deus aeternam transactae praemia uitae
Donabit uitam: Tu grates pectore grato
Tantis pro meritis age gratus, teque tuere
Fortiter atque tuos, and uires frange malorum.
Militiae tandem finis continget, ouansque
Cum Christo duce tum caelum tua uota subibis.
Vale,
Robert Thomlynson to the reder.
As wede destroyed the corn, and made it often decay:
And dreadful damp dokill the fish, that in the water play:
And the serpents in the grass often times men do grieve,
That think on them none ill, but very well believe:
So have these Catabaptistes a very long space
Encombred Gods word, in many asundry place,
Till a Physician by Gods might and power
With triacle of Gods word that poison does scower.
Wherefore praise we God, that sits on hye,
Which for such sores such salues never does deny.
Imprinted at London, for Androw Hester dwelling in Powles Churchyard, at the
wytt horse next to Powles scole. An. 1551. the 30 of Ianuarij.

Cum Priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


