THE Garland of a green Wit. Discovering the constancy of Calipolis. A
precious spectacle for wanton Wives, fit to be read of all sorts, if
opportunity serve. Profitable to some, and pleasant to all save the envious. By
R. Turnar.

Tout ce qui luict ne pas ore. AT LONDON, Printed for William Kirkham, and are
to be sold at the little North door of S. Paul's Church, at the sign of the
black Boy.

To his approved good friend Master John Short, R. Turnar wishes health.
THinking my work as safe under your Patronage from carping, as Ulysses under
the shield of Ajax, I have entered my barraine Garden, and there gathered such
green flowers as so small a plotte affoordes: and because of the Springtime I
have made them in a Graland, according to my promise to present you withal.
Pardon my branches that buds but in Summer with the Mulberie, for I am one of
those Poets that came to Homers basin, to lap up that he does cast up. It
suffices me to be a water bough, not a top bud, so I may be of the same root:
to be iron, not steel, so I be of the same blade: Vinegar, not Wine, so I be
of the same caske: to grind colors for Apelles, though I can not garnish. I
have adventured with the young VVrestler at the games of Olimpus to receive a
fall, or at least a foil; if I be pricked with a bramble, I Will thrust my hand
into the whole bush. When Bucephalus was painted, Apelles craved but the
judgment of Alexander, when Jupiter was carved, Prissius asked the censure of
none but Lisippus; neither greatly crave I any but one, the Patroner of my
pamphlet. Momus must mock, the Serpent Porphirius is full of poison, yet
hurts he none but himself: the Herb Moly has a flower as white as Snow,
but a root as black as Ink: the Palme-persian Fig Tree, bears as well
Apples as Figs: the Easterly wind makes the blossoms to blast, and the
buddes to blow, the Be carries honey in her mouth, and a sting in her tail:
some disclose subtle secrets, that are the Authors of the same, and in
touching others take themselves by the elboe. But the saying is, (Little said
is soon amended,) I Will keep a mean, and meddle with no man, and though I be
kissed with Hiparchion, or forbidden to sell wine with the Vintner in Venice, I
will adventure to put forth a Garland, and those that love wines will commend
my good will. Thus resting at his liking to whom I present my Garland, I end,
resting at his command.

R. T.

To the courteous Readers.
GEntle Readers, misconster not my writing, as the Scholars did Theodorus,
father censure aright then rashly, it is but a Garland, and though some flowers
be sweet, look not that all should have the like savor: weeds are glorious,
and perhaps ouer-sight has tied them in my Garland, crop where you like, and
carpe not at those you leave, for the least in value will comprehend the
Gardinaries labor. Account not cheese chaulk, because both are white, nor the
full Moon, a mess of curds, least I think of you, as those cursed curres that
bark at all but their friends, snatching up bones in open streets, and eating
them madly in secret corners. The sharp winds pierce subtiller in narrow Lanes,
then in open Fields, but since I have no authority to bridle their tongues, nor
reason in them to rule their own talk, I am contented to suffer their taunts:
requesting those my favorites, to take my Garland friendly, and when my Garden
is full of sweet flowers, i will pluck out the weeds, and place them in my
Garland.

Yours R. T.

I In chiefest time of Summers spring, O Our Gardens then we make, H Hearing
how cherping Birds do sing, N No pleasure else we take. S So having set but
sundry sprinks, H Herbs flowers in their kind, O Of friendship had my Muse
still thinks, R Reason drive it in my mind. T This Garland then I made with
flowers, E Each branch sprung up with April showers.

FINIS.
Constant Calipolis of FRANCE. ()
IN the days when Lewis swayed the Scepter of France, ruled in great pomp
and dignity, a man ingenious, full of valencie, wearing with Pallas both the
Lance and the Bay. Which Lewis continued long time in mortal wars with
Frederick King of Denmark, which envy continued the space of twenty years,
in which time, many bloody stratagems were performed: so time that tryes all
things so weakened their forces, and impaired their furniture, the want of
which, drove them to conclude a league for certain years, with which I Will
rest, and come somewhat breefer to the matter.

In those days, in the City of Paris dwelt a rich Merchant, named
Mountgramet, who had to wife Calipolis, a woman for beauty surpassing all,
because none so beautiful, and not so highly adorned with Natures works, as
richly graced with Venus amorites: so beautified with the gifts of both, that
Nature her self blushed at the beauty of her own works, hair like the
golden wier, Iuory brows, cheeks stained with Vermilion tinckture, eyes like
the Lamps yt guides the heavenly Sphere, or lightens Luna to her siluerd
Couch: lips like the Cherrie in his chiefest prime, a neck like the Lillies on
the banks of Po, or icie hair that grows on Boreas chinne: her pretty paps
resemble Christ all knobs, or Egypts fountains that ouer-flowes with milk, a
body were it framed of Virgins wax, by all the cunningst Artists of the world:
a belly white and soft, much like the Down upon those Swans that on Meander
swims, her leg and foot with Venus might compare: and to be brief, for
beauty such a one, as would force Troyalus to be trothlesse. Therefore marvel
not, for love respects no difference of state so beauty serve to stir
affection, Cupid shootes as well at a rag as a robe, the mightiest Potentates
vailes their colors where Cupid comes in place, and yields at his command
without control. But setting a side these vain ambages, it fortuned one
Solinar a young Gentleman walking in the street, chanced to glaunce his eyes
upon Calipolis, and in such sort, that Cupid lying in ambush catched him in his
claws, and made him not only pensive but passionate, and so perplexed with a
sudden self conceit, that he had much ado to quail the extreme heat that
loves flames had kindled in his breast, so with the Salamander (bathing in
Aetnas flames) he hasted to his Chamber, and there solitarily having none but
the walls to witness, his woe, he broke forth, fetching a heavy sigh in this
manner. Unfortunate Solinar because unfortunate in thy love, hadest thou
perrished at thy birth, or been stifled in thy swaddling clothes, (the Fates
had domed thee with desert,) for now grown to ripe years, thou feel more
miseries then thou have lived moments. A love, the laborinth that leads men
to worser danger then the Minator in Greece, or news of death unto a damned
man, infortuned love that kindles desire, yet affoordeth no reward, inconstant
Venus, whose laws are tyrranies, whose favors misfortunes, strumpet as thou
art, I disdain to call thee Goddess, thou and the bastard brat thy son, now
show your power, your deity, and take revenge on me, for how ere your colors
be, my calamities cannot be more: and merciles women, whose faces are lures,
whose beauties are baytes, whose looks are nets, whose words are charms, and
all to bring men unto ruin, and last yet most, Calipolis, borne of a Tigar,
nursed of the Wolfes in Siria, beautiful yet over base, fair, but unfit,
lovely yet not to be loved of Solinar. Thus rowing in the tempestious seas of
his appetites, guided by a Mariner, that delights in the shipwreck of those
he carries, perplexed with a thousand cogitations, so extreme was the force
of love, and the sparks so cruel, that patience could not extinguish the
vaparous heat, nor salt tears quench the fiery flames, that wanton love had
kindled in his breast.

So on the sudden he betook him to his couch, in hope that sleep would have
qualified his new come passions. So laying his head upon the careful pyllow,
intending to nod, his head fell to hammering another matter, plotting a secret
means to obtain his new come love: so restless, turning from side to side,
though his bones aked not, his head was bruised, and his wits were a wool
gathering. Thus tumbling no long space on the restless pillow, but up he got,
and taking his Lute, first framed out some doleful tune, and having fitted his
purpose, he fingered his pen, and in a perplexed humor he writ this ditty.

Solinars Dittie.
LIngering in love and like to die,
hey ho, hey ho, my poor heart,
I freeze amain, and yet I fry,
Now fie upon this extreme smart.
What pleasing pains is paltry love,
hey ho, hey ho, that's my grief,
I still condemn but never prove,
a froward way to find relief.
Delight prognosticates my death,
hey ho, hey ho, woe is me,
Pangs do stop my vital breath,
comfort is fled, no joy I see.
Accursed were mine eyes to gaze,
hey ho, hey ho, worse luck mine,
Her beauty made me stand amaze,
so gay did glaunce her glorious eyne.
Upon her brows did Venus play,
hey ho, hey ho, Mars did cry,
If poult foot Vulcan were away,
then Mars in love would make a try.
But Vulcan lay slumbring on her lap,
hey ho, hey ho, black is he,
Could I but catch her in a trap,
full sure tormented Vulcan should be,
For he is black, and would become,
hey ho, hey ho, the Cuckolds horn,
It Is quickly said, but were it done,
Venus would the Blacksmith scorn.
Having finished this Ditty, and finding opportunity as the saying is, The Cat
being away, the Mouse will play, he settled himself under her Chamber window,
and so warbled forth this Ditty. The silver strings of the Lute was so
heavenly, that the echo of the sweet sound, awaked the Saint from her sleep,
and mounting from her night couch, opened the casement, and uttered these
words. What sweet melodious tunes are these, that echoes sweet harmony to my
dying soul? Ah say sweet hapless friend, what is cause of all your doleful
tunes? Me thinks they increase a second heaven in my heart, then blush not
man, take courage and comfort your self, and if your help be in mine hands,
assure your self to obtain salve for your sore, be it no impeach to my honest
name.

Solinar ouercloyed with joys at the favorable words uttered by Calipolis,
fetching a heavy sigh from the center of his heart, curtained his face with a
sudden blush, and replied in this sort. Far be it from my heart to think of
such base vilanies, as might in question Lady call your name, yet is the matter
of such consequent, standing upon the credit of my state, too affected with
zeal and secrecy, as should I speak and fail in my expectation, it would
redownd greatly to my prejudice.

Calipolis, knew by the shoe, where the foot was pinched, for love cannot be
hidden, day appears at little holes, and the least spark of wild fire,
sets a house on flame. The sting of love, wounds deadly to the heart,
therefore she encouraged him in this manner, fayning as though she perceived
nothing. Sweet friend, if the cause of your complaints be according to the
tennor of your protestations, assure your self to receive comfort to your own
content, and to pacify your passions with pleasant joy: therefore frolike in
thine attempt, speak thy fill, and if thou fail in thy desire, imagine I am
either too coy, or thy self too curious.

She, having uttered these words, Solinar in brief began to breathe out his
passions, but Fortune (who is constant in nothing but inconstancy, always
inclined to cross men's courses,) did break them from their chat in this
manner. Baltegar one that had been of long continuance a friendly favorite to
Calipolis, Fortune so spightfully thwarted his endeavors, that he could never
obtain personally to speak to her, til the Fates had plotted this time and
place of opportunity: and finding Solinar so conversant with her, he so highly
favored, (Love that Tyrant so stirred his stomach, that hardly could he
hold his hands from murder,) yet at last he began in this manner.

Presumptious Solinar, whose peremtory attempts deserves the gurdon of death,
dare thou presume to court that Saint in whom I have shrined my heart, the
Goddess whom I adore, accounting of her as my second self, therefore hands
of, or else behold thy death, drawing his poniard. These hard events amazed
Solinar greatly, yet putting on good courage, he replied to this effect. Good
sir (quoth he) are you privileged in love, or so tied to the beauty of a
woman, that no man may look upon her but your self: had the Gods favored me
with such a privilege I durst adventure without request to show it.

To this replied Baltegar, suffiseth beauty is my privilege, if that suffice
not inquisitiue Solinar here is my weapon to authorize it. With that Calipolis
as one amazed at these hard events, being a woman so constant, as no Circes
with all her charines, nor Calipsoes enchantments, could once prevail a jot
to blemish her affection, she was constant Silera, and not a dissembling
Helin, she esteemed more of an ounce of honesty then a pound of paltry
stuff: so wrincking her brows, beautifying her face with an angry blush,
began in this manner. What means these vain ambages? it is not unknown to
the better of you both, that Calipolis is trothed Spouse to Mountgramet, and
such a one, as scorns to stain her marriage rites with such base reproach, or
the virtue of an honest name, with the infamous slander of a naughty Pack, or
a wonder to the worlds sole eye. Baltager impatient to hear her prattle,
enforced by love, broke forth into these speeches. Mistress (quoth he) fair
Helens nuptials of Greece were solemnized, yet proved she unconstant to
Menelaus, and forsook the delicates of Sparta, and what enforced that but
love. Admit she did, said Calipolis, yet have I vowed my self to the contrary,
as constant to my Mountgramet, as ever that fair Dido was to her Ulysses, and
rather shall the running streams of Exanthoes recoyle, or the world turn to a
Chaos, whence it came, then will Calipolis once falcifie her faith to
Mountgramet.

Solinar frying in love, like the Salamander in Aetnas flames, taking her by
the hand, began as follows. By your leave Mistress, give me leave to reply,
Winds often vary, and who resembles them but women? Baltager breathing it out
like a Braggart, thus said, Sir, who gave you authority to make comparisons?
twere not amiss to make thee eat thy words, or with my poniard thrust them
down thy throat.

Whilst thus they were at controversy trying each others title in love,
Frederick King of Denmark, being lately come to the Court of France,
accompanied with King Lewis, fortuned to behold this heavy aspect, wondering
what it should prognesticate, insomuch that entering somewhat nearer, King Lewis
began in this manner. Base pesants, avoid our presence, and get you packing.
With that they both departed with mickle sorrow, fetching many a heavy sight,
but mark what after happened. Love that respects no difference of state,
kinled such flames in Fredericks breast, that hanging down his head toward
the earth, not a merry word for a million, he stood all a mort. Then Lewis,
whose love did balance Fredericks affection, plucking up a small courage from
a conquered heart, taking Frederick by the hand, fell to these words.

It seems (my Lord) the blinded boy has played the wagge with you, in love at
the first look, if he have escaped Lewis, thou art stung. Can beauty bring
you to such a bane, that is but a bauin blast? Hebay blossoms, that open with
the dew, and shut with the sun, Roses guarded with prickles, flowers subject
to the Northern blasts, the beautiful blossoms in Parthia, that perish in
their prime, or the apples of Tantalus, that touched turn to ashes: the comely
skin, that clothes the hateful Snake, the Box tree, whose leafes are always
green, and the seeds poison: abollish this fond determination, extend the
Tyrant out by force, for entering at the eye, it harbors at the heart, love is
more perrilous then precious, affording delight with desire, but death with
denial. Lewis being wringed with the same shoe, was presently struck with a
contrary object, in this manner, In amor il ny ade fauta, why rage I beyond
reason, she is beautiful and therefore worthy to be loved, she is comely, and
deserves to be accounted on. How now Lewis, has love turned thy lance to a
Poets pen, to paynt out thy passions, is Armor turned to amor? What? is Mars
able to resist Jupiter, and not to with stand beauty? is it Venus must were the
Target, and Mars the distaffe? Omphale handle the Club, and Hercules the
Spindell? must Alexander crouch, and Campaspe look coy? this verifies the old
proverb to be true, women will rule in love, how ever men are lusty in
courage, no dignity is able to resist Cupids deity. Love enters by seeing
women, and works not by hearing their words: therefore seeing Cupid must be
obeyed, I am content to bow: Nullis herbis amor est medicabilis. So fetching a
sigh, began to say, my Lord, there is one thing on the sudden greatly
troubles me, which is this, that both you and I should join our hearts in such
unlooked for passions. Not so my Lord said Frederick, I hope you do but
jest. Jest (said he) nay would I did, then were my griefs the less. Nere
grieve my Lord, (quoth Frederick,) for since the cause is such to join our
hearts in such a simpathy, all envy set aside, let us agree to yield to each
others fortune in our choice. Content said Lewis and wh^ so ere befall, shake
hands my Lord, and Fortune thrive a^ all.

Thus after much prattle, they concluded that Lewis should give her the first
onset, who taking her by the hand, began as follows: Mistres of my hearts
sole affection, brighter then siluered Luna or Sol, amidst his Horizon, she
whom the Gods has appointed to ransack my entralls and robed me of my heart, it
were enlesse to rehearse the inward grief I have sustained, since I fixed mine
eyes on that admirable Comet, whose beautiful rays, staineth stately Juno in
Samos, or Diana in Delos, Minerua in Athens. It were vain to boast of Sibillas
beauty, or Egipts fair Isius, Cassandra Troyans pride, bright Penelope, or
Romish Cornelia. Sabo shun to show thy face, Lucrecia lurk, Hebe blush,
Sephronia stoop, Sapho kneel, and Laura yield the pride of beauty to this
blazing lamp, whose rays has kinled fire in my breast.

Calipolis having listened to the Sirens song, and cloyed her ears with the
praises of her beauty, armouring herself with the plated coat of constancy,
in this manner broke him from his vain similitudes. I beseech your Majesty, if
the earnest entreatie of a poor Merchants wife, may molifie your heart, or the
tears of a constant Spouse, may desire your favor, (upon my knees) grant me
liberty to speak, for a woman's tongue is her best defense (quoth she.) Lewis
that was so stung with love, that had she asked his Diadem, it could not have
been denied, granted her liberty, who framed her speech in this sort. Dread
Sovereign, the scandalist reproach that can befall a woman, is to be stained
with the infamous blotte of disloyalty, and more welcome to me is the news of
death, then the name of Concubine to a King, were it the Monarch of the world,
and more (quoth she) what might Mountgramet think of me, how would the
Queen your bedde-mate look on me, to see a Pesant borne, possess the place
of a Princes. Pardon dread King, your request extends to such defamation, that
I rather desire death, then life if it stand not with your liking, unless you
extinguish this laciuious love, and set me at liberty.

King Lewis being impatient, because perplexed in mind, to hear such a
cooling card, began as follows. Heavenly Juno (quoth he) Dianas branch,
fed with Pallas paps, it forces not what Isabella says, what Mountgramet
conjectures, Lewis is a King and may command, and more to requite thy love, if
Isabella die, I Will gyrt thy temples with a Diadem, brighter the^ the morning
star, more precious then the Carcanet, the Emerald, Rubie, or the Carbuncle,
the Onix, Saphir, and the Christolet, the Topace, Jasper, and the Adamant.

Calipolis not respecting these large proffers, cut him of in this manner:
quoth she who lives to wear a dead man's shoes, (I have heard it said) may
gaul his feet with going bare-foote. Lewis replied, admit (said he) I make
thee Queen, and banish Isabella. I, said she, so to gain a Crown, might
heap a thousand cares upon my head, therefore sweet Prince, quoth she, were
it to bear Atlas burden on my back, to roll the restless stone with
Siciphus, I would rest at your command, rather then to impeach my honest name
with any title of defamation. Lewis seeing neither speech nor proffers would
prevail, gave over with a kind salute, hoping in time to attain the top of
his desire. With that Calipolis doing her duty, departed. All this while
stood Frederick in a passionate dumpe, not able to utter a word for a world
of wealth. After her depart he began as follows: How far has nature
wrought beyond her skill, in framing such a Saint, as all the Artists in the
world cannot proportion? Apelles nere pictured the like in Greece, though
Alexander did him so commend. Timantes counterfeits are counterfeite to this.
Lisippus skill cannot prevail a jot, Pigmalion would have loved the shadow of
this Saint. Perillis adored the ground she goes upon, and Alexander honored,
far above the counterfeit of Campaspe. After he had thus warbled forth a
multitude of praises, they both consented to return to the Court, Lewis being
passionate, entered his Chamber of Presence, but Frederick frying in loves
unquenchable flame, made return to find out the Merchant, and meeting him
where time and place gave opportunity, he broke forth into these speeches:
Mountgramet, quoth he, what is the greatest scandal belonging unto a married
man? Mountgramet amazed wherefore the King should utter such speeches, replied
in this manner: since your grace does permit me liberty to speak, (may it stand
with your gracious liking) in my conceit, the greatest scandal can befall a
man, is to have his wife play false. True, said the King, and it greeueth me,
thy self art tainted with the same, and to show thee further testis, look in
this glass, in which thou may behold Calipolis, and two contending who first
shall graffe the horn.

After King Lewis had showed this same by Magic spells, he departed, leaving
Mountgramet murmuring at his wives disloyalty, who fell to these speeches. Ah
Mountgramet, stab thy self to end thy grief, grief new begun, now gins
my heart to faint. Ah Calipolis, unconstant Calipolis, I always thought thee
true, till now the proof too apparently is made. Who might for beauty once
have bragged with me? Calipolis exceeded all in beauties brightness, til now
that Lamp is darkened with inconstancy. Phoebus beams are eclipsed with
winter storms, siluered Luna is curtained with an obscure cloud, the prickles
has ouer-sprung the Rose, the Iuory Lilly turned from rarest white to Ravens
black. And to be brief, Dianas chastity, is stained with disloialtie. Ah how
I prove the saying true, The hollow Tree is a hiue for the Hornet, Bees have
stings, Fountains have Toades, and on the greenest trees are Caterpillars
found: the Siren sweetly sings ye Sailors wrack, (...) Crocodile the Fishers
woe, the Hienna when she mournes,(...) ^hen most guilefull, the Tygar is
cruel, although he hides his claws.

Unconstant Calipolis, the glory of whose face decked with a vermillion blush,
did first trans-forme mine adamant eyes to amorous love, in conceit stayning
Venus for beauty, being much fayrer, and Pallas for wisdom, being more
witty, but now she has proved herself as near Pallas in wit, as Vulcan
Mars in property, and as far from Venus in beauty, as Baucis Juno in
majesty. And to conclude, in quantity she ^esembled the Camelion: herein
the old Proverb is am^lified, Every Venus has her temple, and well may Vulcan
mock, but Mars shall enter in.

Mountgramet impatient at this hard aspect, could not paci^^^ himself, but
protested that death should guerdon her misdeedes. So calling out one Anthony,
after many tears he uttered these words: Anthony, knowing thee to be a
faithful servant, and such a one as within whose breast I may shroude my
secrets, I will the bolder participate the sum of all, which tends to this
effect. Anthony (quoth he) the Scaraba flies over many a sweet flower, and
lights on a Cowshard: it is the custom of the fly, to leave the sound place
of the horse, and pick at the botch, the manner of Coloquintida to draw the
worst humors to it self, the order of Swine to forsake the fair fields and
wallowe in the mire: even so did I in my youth, forsake many constant Silerias,
and made choice of a dissembling Demaphon, who has playde with me as the
deceitful Physician does, in giving sweet sirrops to make his poison go down
the smoother. The Iuglar casts a mist before men's eyes, to do his sleights
the closer, the Sirens song is the Sailors wrack, the Fowlers whistle the
birds death, the wholesome bayte the Fishes bane, the Harpies have virgins
faces, the Vultures talents, Hienna speaks like a friend, and deuoures like a
foe, the calmest seas hides dangerous rocks, the Woolfe iets in Weathers fells,
who would have thought Epius horse, should have harbored the destruction of
Troy? the Sepulcher Simiramis whose title promises wealth to the Kings of
Persia, and is nothing but rotten bones, the golden ball that Nero did
consecrate to Jupiter, Captolinus stuffed with the shauings of his beard.
Imagine with thy self Anthony, is not this Circes cup, able to turn a
reasonable creature to a brute beast: the fact is odious, and therefore
unpardonable, and to be brief, death shall quittance her misdeeds. And thus to
have it brought closely to pass, thou shall accompany her thy self, to Silia
my Minor house, there when thou have her, in those craggy Woods where heaps of
trees may hide so foul a deed, there cut her short from life. From life, nay
let her live, perhaps she may recant, recant, no, often have I heard it said,
Bred in the bone, will never out of the flesh. Therefore resolve thy self, she
shall dye. With that Anthony hearing his Masters resolution, began in this
manner.

Good Master (quoth he) there is no stone so hard, but rain in time does
pierce, therefore pardon the first fault, perrish not the branch in his pryme,
blast not the bud being ready to blossom, no doubt but good counsel may
cause such a recantation, as no Northeren blash whatsoever, can once blemish
the beauty of that branch: the Camelion will turn to the Diamond, so shall you
not only live in content, but receive such extraordinary comfort, as your
self can wish, or in any wise desire to have.

This friendly saying of Anthony, could nothing allay the rancor settled in his
breast, but he brake forth in this manner. The common people often times, are
more afraid of the serpent that is hidden in the grass, then the wild beast
that openly feeds upon the Mountains: the Mariner is more endangered by
privy she lives, then known rocks, the Soldier sooner killed with a small
bullet, then a long sword, there is more perrill in close Fistulaes then
outward sores, in secret ambushes, then maine battles, in undermining then in
plain assaulting, in friends then foes, in civil discord then foreign
wars. But tush, tall Cedars from little grains shall shut high, great
Oaks from slender roots spread wide, large streams from narrow springs run
far. One little spark fires a whole City, one dram of Eliborus, does
ransack every vain, the fish Remora, has a small body and great force to stay
ships against wind or tide. Ichnemon, a little worm, ouer-comes the Elephant:
the Viper slayes the Bull, the Weasell the Cockatrice, and the weakest Waspe
stingeth the stoutest man of war. The height of heaven is taken by the staff,
the bottom of the Sea, sounded with lead, the farthest Coast discovered by
Compass, the secrets of Nature searched by wit, the Anatomy of man, set out by
experience, and the abuses of women discovered by their dissembling: therefore
resolve thy self, Calipolis shall dye, i will (...) the Author, to devise her
death, and thou the factour to perform the deed.

Master, quoth Anthony, I know women in qualities re^^mble an arrow, which
getting liberty, with wings is carried beyond our reach, kept in the Quiver, it
is still at command, or a dog, let him slip, and he is straight out of sight,
but hold him in a lease, and he never stirs, or a Colt, give him the bridle,
and he flings at liberty, but rane him hard, and you may rule him, or a ship,
hoyse the sails and it runs on head, let fall the Anchor and all is well. He
runs far that never turns, and a fault pardoned, procures the offender
from working displeasure. All these similitudes, mixed with sighs and salt
tears, could not in any case alter Mountgramets intent: so the one resolved
she should die, and the other constrained to commit the deed, I will rest, and
come to the point.

Calipolis accompanied with Anthony, had not gone past a mile out of the City,
but Anthony hammering a thousand dispaires in his head, (procured by her
intended death,) burst forth into tears. Calipolis turning aside her head,
espied the tears trickling down his cheeks. Who amazed at the sight, desired
to know the cause. Who fething a heavy sigh, and wiping away those streams of
tears, began as follows.

Mistress (quoth he) I am forced by nature and love, to disclose to you the sum
of my Masters secrets, which are to this effect. He, either suspecting, or
told some tatling tale touching disloyalty, a blemish to marriage rites, has
solemnly sworn, that nothing should serve, nor pardon pass, but the loss of
your life pay ransom for so foul a deed. And none but I, the unhappiest of
all creatures, am commanded to be the instrument of your death, therefore good
Mistress, quoth he, forgive me, though I commit the fact, that am giltlesse of
the fault, Calipolis could no longer abide, but burst forth into these
speeches. Unfortunate Calipolis, on whom the sun of Fortune never shone, but
Plannets ruled by retrogard aspects. Dissembling Ianus, did thou betray me
with a Judas kiss, to mount me to thy chair of state, and now displayes
displeasure with the world^ sole hate? Wherein did I offend Mountgramet, in my
constancy, which he has wrested to disloyalty? Heavens will witness my
giltlesse heart. I thought that no man living equalled Mountgramet, in my hearts
affection, so did I love him well and faithfully, for which I am rewarded most
unthankfully. Cruel Destinies, that determines the end of days with such
reproach. Let any living creature, but once object, and say I did commit, the
least title of defamation to my nuptial rites, and then I rather wish death to
pay the ransom of that misdeed, then pardon in hope of after mends.

But is it Mountgramets mind Calipolis should dye? Perhaps it was, yet now it
may be turned. Hard-harted man, wherein have I offended thee? in resembling the
constant Diamond, though thou accountest me a dissembling Demaphou, or a
Wether-cock, that turns with every wind. Unnatural man, do thou weigh
down my good will with untimely death, or present me with a poniard that
perfumes thee with Roses? Whence springs these frantic seats of bedlam
jealousy? Why should he menace death to her that well deserves? What needs
these vain ambages, it is the Fates decree, and they have swore my death, the
cruel Destinies have cut my twisted thread, and brought my former bliss to
fatal bale. Dissembling fortune, that smilest at my fall.

After she had uttered these playnts, she desired him to finish the end of her
days. Who hearing the sweet soul willing to receive the stroke of death,
began as follows. Mistress, quoth he, should I commit so foul a deed, it
were death to my self, the flying fowls will disclose my villainy, yea, my
guilty conscience will bewray my self. Therefore good Mistres, quoth he, of
two evils the least is to be chosen, alter your attire, change your state, and
try your fortune in some foreign Land. Perhaps the Fates being thwarted in
their deeds, may turn their frowns to a friendly smile, and grace you
unexpected favors. Such is the rigor of my Masters settled malice, that to
crave mercy were bootelesse, and to seek for life, were labor lost in vain.
Therefore to escape the heavy stroke of your untimely ^eath, and my discharge
of promise, and also displeasure of the Almighty, change your attire, alter
your state, become like a Page, to get safe passage over the Sea, shroud your
life under the wings of Fortune, and though it be distress, yet account of it
above an undeserved death.

After he had uttered these speeches, the tears distilling like Nilus down
her cheeks, and after a thousand thanks, she gave him a kindly salute, and
committed her fortune to the Fates. She had not gone a mile after her departure
from Anthony, but she framed this woeful farewell.

Calipolis farewell to France.
France with tears adue,
Mountgramet is unkind,
I was to him so true,
as man could wish in mind,
But now I prove, in vain I did love,
for nothing I am regarded,
Woe is me alas, how comes it to pass,
my love should be so rewarded.
Fond jealous man, whence springs this same?
Thou seeks my discredit, and staineth my name.
Heavens will witness aright,
I loved Mountgramet so,
That nothing could content my sight,
but that which he would do.
But all was in vain though I did remain,
so jealous a head had he,
That had I been fleeting, it seems by his greeting
he could not more suspected me,
Unnatural man why did thou so
Mistrust without cause, and nothing did know?
Fie on thee false in heart.
I loved thee ouer-well,
Though thou do cause my smart,
and makes my heart to swell,
Fie on thee froward crabed and untoward,
that condemns without crime,
She needs not to mend, that nere did offend,
in all her days and time.
Unkind in thy love I breath thee adieu,
This hard-harted dealing will cause thee rue,
Yield Phoebus tears amain,
come groan ye Graces three,
The loving wight is slain,
in heart the more pity,
Some obscure cloud, fair Phoebe shroud,
whilst I depart from France,
Be dark the day, that unseen I may be,
bewail my haples chance.
All pleasures past I must forsake,
All the glories once I did in pleasure take.
She having ended this Dittie, committed her fortunes to Neptune, ship and wind
serving for the purpose, with which i will rest, and come to King Lewis, who being
passionate fell to these speeches. Ah Lewis, ouer-cloyed griefs will cause thy
heart to burst, hadest thou first dyed when first thou gazedst on the Bassalisk,
then had thou perished before desire begun, but now begun I here expect
but death: nay worse then death. Denial of that Saint in whom I have shrouded
my affection, that Goddess whom I in heart adore. Could I but gain her love,
then Lewis were thrice blessed above all, yea, but I fear she will not love,
why Lewis is a King, and therefore may command. Foolish man abollish this fond
determination, trampell loves branches under thy feet, least they sproute up
to thy heart, bridell thy affection, for entering at the eye, it harbors at the
heart, and having ^^oke good hand-fast, it indangers the whole body. That
Cice^^es tongue cannot prevail, nor Circes charms, Calipsoes inchauntments,
Archimedas circles, Rhombus rifraffe, be a medicine for that malady. Fond man,
whilst thou sits drawing of Mathematical fictions, the enemy stands with a
sword at thy breast, and he that talks much, and does little, is like to him
that sails with a side wind, and is borne with the tide to a wrong shore.

After he had bewailed his passions, and could not abollish that fond
determination, he pulled out a letter, charging his Page to post with it unto
Calipolis, where now i will rest and come to King Frederick, who had kindled
such hot coals, as all the water in the world could not quench, who uttered
these speeches wrapped in a world of woes, consumed in a Laborinth of cares.

Poor soul, I toss, I tumble, too and fro, one while I think on this,
another while I pause on that, and so twixt hope and dread I live, though
living die, and love is the cause of this calamity. Fickle Fortune, still
froward unto me, desembling favors with so kind a friend, fancy is
entertained at my heart, affection lodges in this tender breast, delays
deludeth me from my dear delight, and love is cause of all this cruel spite.
Imps of revenge, ye fatal sisters three, come Atropos untwist my thread in
twain, and by your Destinies come work me this despite, robbed of the sweet
that ravished my soul, I starve with Mydas, and thirst with Tantalus, burning
like the unquenchable flames of Aetna, ouerflowing like Nilus in thy love, I
search, I seek, and yet I cannot gain, and love alas has wrought me all
this pain.

Whilst he was thus breathing out his passions, came the Page with the Letter,
who questioning with the boy, after certain communication had, showed King
Frederick the Letter, who looking on the superscription, opened the same, and
ouerlooked the secrets therein, which tended to this effect.

The Letter.
SWeet Goddess of my hearts sole affection, brighter in beauty then Auroraes
blush that beautifies the siluered skies fayrer in glory, then the turkish
Carbuncle, or the rar shyning Christolit, from whose inchaunting face a
thousand charms, descends through the imperial Orb, and makes men live a
subject unto love: no sooner had my eyes beheld Dame Natures works, and with
the Eagle gazed against the sun, but love had given such a brauado to my
breast, as naught but death can alter my affection. Therefore know (sweet
Saint) that the sting of a Hornet is to be healed, a prick with the bone of a
Dolphyn, is healed by music, but he that is wounded with the Scorpion, must be
healed by the same. Therefore sweet, deem not of my love otherwise then I
deserve, for I have heard it said, there is more content in a Country Cottage,
then a Kings Palace. Solinus the Turkish Emperor, made more account of a poor
milke-mayde, then the King of Hungaries Daughter. Diogenes commended one in a
home-spunne gray gown, more then one that shyned in silken robes, alluding to
the Lapidarians, that choose not stones for beauty, but virtue, the Diamond is
bright, yet a deadly poison, the glorious coat hides the venomous Snake, the
greenest trees, the fuller of Caterpillars, the Bassaliske lurketh in the
clearest fountain, the sweetest wine the most filthy dregs, the fuller of
beauty, the flower is, the emptier of virtue, resembling the beautiful Roses
in Barbary, that perrish in the prime, or the herb Soli, that being croped,
loses both color and virtue, the apples of Tantalus, that touched turn to
ashes.

But to be brief, sweet love, you know my estate to be restless, (such is
lovers content) and if thou have reason to deem of snow by the whitenes, or
trees by the blossoms, thou may easily perceive by the furrows in my face,
which deciphers the sorrows of my soul, that thou art she, yea thou art only
she, is mistress and commander of my heart, my Diadem, and all I have. Were
it to win thy love and make thee Empress of the world, I would undertake the
task with Alexander. Thus restless flowing in the tempestious seas of my
love, I rest at your friendly liking, the procurer of my life, or your denial
the finisher of days.

Yours for ever, though never, Lewis King of France.


Frederick having read the Letter, understood the lines, and marking the
meaning of every minnom, began in this manner, (delivering the Letter back to
the Page, and commanding him to make speed.)

Amorous man, this kind writing shows thy interior affection, the painting of
these fine phrases, deciphers an inward dissembling. What, Kings are to gaze at
stars, and not to stumble on stones. Stay Frederick, therein thou pinchest
thy self by the elbow, Medium tenere tuissimum est, the mean is sweet
melody, strings high stretched, either soon crack, or quickly grow out of
tune. Attempt not with Phaeton, least thou drown with Icarus, a homely place
harbors more content then a Kings Court, Virtue is not shrouded under beauties
wings, it is often shadowed with the home-spunne coat. Fond Frederick, what
have thou done? eaten with the Dear against the wind, or yielded with the
Hearts in Calabria, that knowing Dictanum poison, still bruise it with greedines,
or grazed against the bow till thou art stricken with the boult? Have thou
sored with the Eagle against the Sun, till thou art dazeled? Foolish man, thy
rash doing is more prejudicial then thy forward affection. Thou have made thy
friend thy foe, encurred Lewis his displeasure, by ouer-looking his secrets.

Whilst he was thus solitary, vnloding his secrets, came the Page back, who
brought word of Calipolis death, which heavy tyding was such a corrosiue to
Fredericks heart, that taking his pen in hand, after he had uttered these lines
following, he framed a mournful Dittie of her death, and so being wardly
grieved, he departed from France.

Here Is heaps of news unto a wounded heart,
Calipolis, in whom I ioyed most is dead:
Dead is that joy wherein I took delight,
Fled is delight, and sorrow takes the place,
Sorrow gins to harbor at my heart,
Heart swells, with unexpected greefes,
Grief is begun, all pleasure bids adieu.
Adieu to worlds content on earth,
Earth, all earthly joys are fled my heart,
And care has compast every little part.
And more, to add grief upon grief
Unto a woeful heart that groans,
Thou have incurred displeasure of thy friend,
Lewis I mean, will sure revenge the same.
Fond man, I did presume a note too hie.
And if I did, yet Lewis do thou impute
This freendles fault to loves blinded folly.
That may not be, for Frederick did amiss,
And therefore shame does bid me fly.
Farewell Lewis, though I be forced to shun,
Fredrick repents, who first the fact begun.

A mournful Dittie for the Death of Calipolis.
C Come mournful Muses shed your tears, Come groan you Graces three, A And
courtly Dames hang down your heads, to mourn amain with me. L Lend Driades
boughs, bring pleasant sproutes, to deck this Tomb withal. I In heavenly
sort come Satyrs sing, since death this wight did call. P Paint forth her
shrine Dianas Nymphs, embaulme her with the sweetest flowers, O On every
corner let Poets write these words, Both Prince and Pesant death deuours. L
Like to the glorious flower that grows all creatures are on earth. I In
cropping it the flower dies, thus do we lose our breath. S So all things
living soon decays, But the grace of God does last always.

Here will I leave Frederick, and return to Lewis, who having heard news of
the death of that sweet Calipolis, entered into these speeches. Unfortunate
Lewis, the most unfortunate of all men, because more distressed then any,
strain floodes of tears, distill them down thy cheeks, let scalding sighs
be portion of sad lament, thou louedst her well, and therefore may lament,
thou heldest her dear, and therefore may thou grieve. Griefs, sobs, and
sighs compound in one, bewail her death that now is dead and gone: gone, yea
she is gone, and with her goes my joy, life lingers but a space. Why leytereth
death, since I desire to die, for life is irksome, and I loath it I. Ah now I see
that I have often heard, a dog has his day, tides observe time, and all living
creatures are tied to a decorum. The Cedar tree is shaken with the Northen
blasts, as well as the smallest willow shrubs. The more beautiful flower,
soonest either parched with Summers heat, or infected with Caterpillars. The
Heban blossoms, open with the dew, and shut with the Sun, the leaves of
Licoris, when it is most wettest without, is then most dryest within, the
smoother stream, the deeper water, a hot sunshine, fore-tells a shower.
The playing of the Porpos, prognosticates a fatal disparagement, the purest
die, the most subject to staynes, the brightest blossom, the soonest blasted,
the ripest fruit, the quickliest rotten. Every plant has his spring, and
every Tree is subject to his fall. The Cherry is first green, but coming to a
more gay color, is suffered to grow no longer, the smallest hair has his
shadow, and the mean shrub bears a shade. All trees flourish not that are
grafted in February, some perrish with the frost in May, and blast before they
bud, every thing of what nature soever, keeps observation of times. Time past
cannot be recalled back, she is dead, quoth he, and therewith gave a sigh,
with the water stealing down his cheeks. The pride of all that ever Nature
made, the beauty of which bright shining Antiphofix, is shadowed, not with
obscure night, but dismal death.

Might acts of Chivalry (quoth he) attain to recall her to life, or a world
of farre-fetched wealth, might prevail to procure the same, I would advance
my shield, plume my Crest, comfort my never daunted heart, with Alexander,
either to be Monarch, or turn the world to a ruinated Chaos: otherwise,
attempt with Pellecretio to rippe the bowels of the sole world, from
Archypelligon right under Capricorn, to Causaro fire, burning Tropica. Or else,
if physic might but be a means, I would with Aesculapius seek out the
sense, although seauentie seven years I studied for the same.

But all in vain I breathe these sad laments, not all the tongues in the
world can call the dead to life again, therefore Lewis resolve thy self,
aswage those follies love has bredde in thy breast, and since the Fates
determined her death, send for Mountgramet, the actor of so foul a deed,
comfort thy self, and cut off his days.

Now will I leave Lewis resolved to revenge her death upon Mountgramet, and
return to Mountgramet, who hearing it muttered about (as such a tale will fly
about a town, and ring in every ones ear like a saint bell) that the King
took great displeasure at the death of Calipolis, and meant with all speed to
seize upon his goods, and deprive him of his life, which bred such a terror in
his heart, that it was no boot to bid him fly, fell into these speeches.

Ah Mountgramet, quoth he, wiping away the tears that gushed from his eyes,
Asses biey danse aqui fortune chante, happy is that man on whom Fortune
smiles, and better unborn then always to live in care, ouer-cloyed with
grief. The ^ath of Calipolis flies like winged Pegasus, or Swallows in (...)
sunshine day, and Lewis has vowed my death, whether shall I fly? nay if I
fl^e, I loose my goods, a guilty conscience does bewray it self: but life is
dear, therefore farewell all my wealth, and welcome woe begun, so farewell
France and Paris thrice adieu. Adue those heaps of gold in which I ioyed most,
and last sweet friends with whom I used to feast, adue those floods of tears,
I breathe my last farewell. Heart swells, and swelling bursts, and bursting
breaths you all a sad lamenting adue. France in thee I gladly would stay, and
stayed might, had I not been forlorn, had Calipolis lived, then might I have
lived in France, but she is dead, and therefore all adieu.

Mountgramet (knowing that tide stays no man, and the Mariner that hoyses
not sails at a good wind, may be forced to cast anchor ere he be aware, then
comes an after wish,) presently committed the sequel of his fortune to the
sea, where I Will leave him, and return to Calipolis, who being in the Dezart
woods within the Province of Denmark, began as follows.

Ah Calipolis, far from thy friends now breath thy plaints.
Ye constant wives that love your husbands well,
And dote upon the favor of so sweet a man,
Bedew your cheeks with tears from Crystal eyes,
And let them drop as Nilus Egypt ouer-flowes,
Ye pretty Birds that pleasure in your mates,
Let me entreat ye mourn amain with me,
Heeres multitudes of silly chattering Fowls,
Do hang their heads, and echo doleful tunes,
Cease of ye Compartners of my discontent,
Calipolis has cause, and none but she must mourn.
Shall I rehearse my pleasure past in France?
Or think upon the gold I harbored in my chest?
No, no, Calipolis that adds sorrow to a dying soul,
And heaps more grief upon a heart that groans,
What shall I speak of pleasures that enjoys pain?
Or talk of gold that wants to buy me food?
Ah no, let sorrow be the sequill of my tale,
And mournful sighing daily be my song,
Come cruel Fates and cut me short,
Life is loathsome, and I live too long.

Calipolis had not rested a while, but Fortune began to smile on her to this
effect. Frederick King of Denmark, being come out of France, passing through
the wood, was espied on Calipolis, attired like a Page, who amazed at the
beauty of ye youth, stood for a space in a dumpe, but at last began as
follows.

Frederick. What woeful wight is that forlorn
Does fill my heart with echoes of his plaints?

Calipolis. Randall a haples youth of France.

Frederick. It greeues my heart to see so sweet a youth.
Of age so tender, yet ouer-growne with grief,
Speak Randall whether do thou travel?

Calipolis. Even whether my Fortune wills I should.

Fred. The more I gaze, the more I grieve to see,
The sweetest face that ere my eyes beheld,
Much questioning adds grief unto his heart,
Come Randall, thou shall hence with me.
Thy beauty binds my heart to favor thee.
Randall, thou shall be bed-made with my self.
Randall turning his head aside in this manner,

Ah that same news is worse then all the rest,
Now Randall look above it is best.
Pardon dread King, I am a poor man's son,
Therefore unfit to be your Highness bed-mate.

Frederick. I force not of thy birth, beauty makes thee loved, for were thou a
woman, I would make thee a Queen.


Calipolis. Ah now I doubt I am betrayed, dread Sovereign (quoth she upon her
knees) grant me one request, tending to this effect. Randall has vowed till
his return to France never to sleep but on his mother earth, then grant this
favor ^^acious Prince.


Frede. The many favors in thy lovely face, has graft af^ection in my tender
heart, that diddst thou ask my Diadem, it could not be denied.


Calipolis. Then Randall is bound to pray for Fredericks life.


After much more prattle had, (which I have shortened, for brevity sake) they
both departed toward the Danish Court, the joy Frederick conceived, in finding
so gallant a Youth, I omit to the Readers censure, and how Fortune having
wrapped Calipolis in the fouldes of her deity, did highly favor her, shall
after follow.

Now let us come to Mountgramet, who having escaped the frowns of Aeolus, and
the dangers of Neptune, the raging blasts of Boreas, the Destenies so plotted
his course, that intending to have landed in Spain, he was set ashore in
Denmark. Then he suspected the Fates had decreed the fall of his fortune, and
the end of his days, yielded himself to the remnant of Fortunes pleasure,
beginning in this manner. I know (quoth he) the Gods are offended with me,
for so foul a fact, and therefore has charactered some fatal disparagement,
in the furrows of my face, for when I think on that harmless Calipolis, a
certain grieuing of ye flesh (betwraying a guilty conscience) ouer-cleies my
feeble heart. I look like a condemned man at the place of execution, my culler
changes to a blood red, for telling the murder I consented to, nay,
commanded, or chiefest committed. Therefore Mountgramet, content thee with
what calamities soever the Gods cross thee withal, for their cruellest doom,
is thy due desert, thou have done to death, (with that the tears gushed out
so fast, that he could hardly speak a word) the pride of all Dianas sprouts.
Was she not fair, as are the Swans that on Meander swim? was she not lovely
as fair Dido, the Carthage Queen? was she not constant, as Silera was? chaste
as fair Diana was? is she a Polip in change? no a Diamond in all her deeds. No
reason then that she should dye. But foolish jealousy enforced me to the fact,
a fact most heinous to the world: unpardonable of Gods, and men, the death of
her who always loved thee well, too passing well, but that was quite forgot.
Injurious man, me thinks these silly chattering birds, cries for revenge, each
bush that shakes does make me step aside, and since the dismal hour of her
untimely death, Phoebus is shrouded under a cloud, Sol denies her evening
shine, Aurora in obscure darkness shows his face, and all things reuersant
turns to an obscurity.

After he had thus bewailed his present misery a space, he shifted his wearied
steps toward the Danish Court, and having neither company, nor hope of good
comfort, to drive away bitter conceits, he framed this sorrowful Sonnet.

The Sonnet.
YE woeful wights that swimmes in restless pain,
Ye hapless men that sorrow do sustain,
Shed forth your tears, and mourn a while with me,
Whom spightfull Fates has crossed with cruelty.
Sometimes in France I lived in great joy,
Nere tasted grief, nor felt such hard anoy,
All things I had that heart could once request,
My credit sprung and flourished with the best:
Till Fortune, Goddess of each secret thought,
Within few years thus hatefully has wrought.
For which fact, with bleeding heart I groan.
The death of her who now is dead and gone.
Fond conceited Jealousy, an enemy to delight,
Was cause that wrought on me this cruel spite.
I was her death, that loved me more then life,
Constant Calipolis, my dear and faithful wife.
Hard was my hap to seek her woeful end,
That was to me so sweet approved friend.
Ye cruel Fates the causers of this ill,
Come spet your spite my silly heart to kill.
If hateful hell affords more cruel smart,
Then Death possess my inward troubled heart,
For better it is that I forthwith should die,
Then live on earth, and want her company.
Unhappy was the time, the day, the hour,
That turned my sweet to such a loathsome sour.
Well may I wish the man to live in pain
Of ceaselesse torments, never ease to gain,
That first by Art presented to my sight,
The view of that which still afflicts my sprite.
But more accursed be that caitiue slave,
Which has performed the charge I rashly gave.
And if the Gods have any plague in store,
Never yet heard of, or made known before,
Wherewith they mean, to men shall be expressed,
How much the fact of murder they detest,
Let it for vengeance fall upon his head,
That others may by his example dread.
Cease, cease Mountgramet, for thy wish is vain,
He was thy servant, thou did him constrain,
And causeless curse, like arrowe shot upright
Returning down, on thine own head will light:
Therefore since I my self have done the wrong,
I wish revenge on my commanding tongue.
I wish the fiends to vomit up their fill,
And at their pleasure work on me their will,
Both Fates and fiends full sore I did offend,
In cruel sort her guiltless life to end.
I know twere vain a pardon for to crave
Of all the Gods, which no remorse will have.
Whilst here I live, I look for naught but pain,
And after life in hell for to remain.
Where multitudes of wicked murdering wights,
Tormented are in damned woeful plights.
All pleasures pack, and welcome woe begun,
Sighing shall be my song, all merry notes are done,
And still in tears lament my foul offense,
Till Death do strike, and I must needs go hence.
Having ended this Sonnet, Fortune having displayed her ensigns, and got the
triumph to her own content, began with a friendly smile to cheer a sorrowful
heart in this sort. Calipolis being sent in her Page attire with certain
Letters concerning the Kings affairs, to one of his Nobility, in making her
return, chanced to fix her eyes upon this distressed man Mountgramet, whose
Atlas burden of cares, had altered so much his countenance, and on the
contrary part, the supposed death and change of attire, so far altered
Calipolis, that one knew not another.

Calipolis recalling to mind her own former calamities, in friendly courtesy
gave him the time of the day, and questioned with him somewhat merrily of his
Country and travel. Whether he knew the murdering husband of Calipolis? at
which words, Mountgramet suspecting he had been betrayed, thinking life was
sweet, began to check Calipolis, calling her an inquisitiue boy, wishing if she
would avoid his displeasure, to be packing, least he furred his Mandilion with
a few Lamb-skinnes. Then Calipolis suspecting him to be some spy, and calling
to mind the credit got if she could conquer him, the feeblenes of the man
hartned her to these speeches.

Calip. Sir you must with me to the King, suspicion says thou art a spy,
and if thou be not such a man, draw thy weapon for I mean to try thee.


Mount. Youngstar I defy thee.


Calip. First try me, then after defy me.


Mount. There lie my weapons, thou have conquered me.


Calip. Then let me joy in thy captivity.


Mount. (...) and let me joy with gazing on thy beauty, thou so re^ (...) whom
whilom I loved dear, that were I Alcides, (...) ^^dst conquer me.


Calipo. He does so nearly resemble him whom late I loved, (...) ^ere I hard
hearted Scipio, I must favor him. Captive I (...) ^y heart is ouer-cloyed with
grief, step aside, and unload them (...) ^hy self. Mountgramet stepping
aside, leaning himself unto (...) ^hady bough, began as follows.

Unfortunate man, I see the Destinies determines a final end of thy days. For
when I drew my sword with intent to strike, a sudden conceit present, forced
me to throw down my weapons, my feeble heart was fully persuaded it was the
very goast of Calipolis, with that a certain flood of tears gushed forth, and
finished his tale for a space.

Then fell Calipolis to these sudden passions. Fond Calipolis, what foolish
imaginations have thou bred in thy breast? may not one man be like another.
Mountgramet lives safe and secure in France, and let Fortune show all the
authority her deity affords, and she cannot bring her triumph to such effect.
It Is but a thought bred in a suspicious heart, unlikely to be true, because
unlike to be brought to such a purpose. But what should one say, the Fates are
frowning, and their deity is of great force, therefore persuade thy self it may
be. With that she hung down her head, and said no more. Mountgramet having
wiped away the tears, began again to this effect.

Many trees bear blossoms, all beautiful, but yet several fruits. Many hear
us be green that are of sundry natures. If all things that be of one color,
have no contrary effect, we should imagine Chalk were Chief, but fond in
thine opinion, Calipolis is murdered, and thou art plagued for the martyrdom.
The ravening Fowls have fed their fill on her harmeles flesh, therefore it
cannot be, unless the angry Fates has decreed her thirsting goast, should in
the habit of a Page prognosticate my present fall: resembling a glorious
sunshine, that fore-tels a storm, the promise of a pardon to a condemned
man that is sure to dye: otherwise it cannot be, with that, wringing his hands
together, he was silent for a space.

Calipolis, who all this while had stood in a dump^ (...) Mountgramet in a
maze as though he had no more to say, (...) in this wise: it seems (quoth
she) that either your griefs began extreme, that you cannot breathe them from
the center of y be so heart without breaking, or else you keep a certain show
of vour sembling, thinking to delude the time till dark night. Therefore or no
if thou hopest to attain favor a my hands, or liberty for thy life, pluck up
your wearied feet, and travel away with me as fast as you can.

Mountgramet was so bewitched with the beauty of Calipolis, which bred such
fond determination in his head, that if she had run before, he would have
followed, so fast as he might possible.

Yet before he stirred his foot, desired her of all favors not to interrupt
his amazed melancholy humor with questioning. Calipolis, who was pricked with
the same thorn, being both bit with one dog, was so busy, hamering her own
late conjectures, that without further entreaty, willingly granted his desire.
Now are they both wandering toward the Danish Court, both of them as busy as a
Be, tempring a thousand conjectures in their brains. Not long traueling
together, but still they viewed each others countenance, without any
interrupting of each others gazing, but in fine, they entered the Court, and
being come to the King, Calipolis falling on her knees, after the delivery of
her former message, began in this manner. Dread King, quoth she, meeting this
stranger by the way, all amort, in pensive passion, after certain
communication had, I enquired of his Country, suspecting him a Frenchman, and
some secret spiing foe to your excellency, who presently offered violent words,
and to be brief, we buckled together, before any foil was given, he
perceauing the first attempt of so tender a youth, yielded himself captive.
Thus without ere about I conquered him, whom here I offer to your royal
Majesty for further examination.

May it like your Majesty, quoth Mountgramet, to give me liberty ^uncle,
c^^ke. The gracious favors that Nature framed (...) at the twice fayrer then
the Sapher or bright shining Car^ ^th ^eeking fair Luna in her silver shine,
or Auroraes blush (...) mornings break, Phoebus beams in a Sun-shyne day,
(...) Lamps that glorifies the heavens, so near resembled my ^^^^polis, that
to conclude naught but beauty conquered me, and were she alive, none but she
had conquered me. Therefore I persuade my self none but her thirsty wandering
goast has conquered me.

Calipolis perceauing it was her Mountgramet, was stricken in such a sudden
dumpe, as amazed all the beholders, yet at last plucking up courage replied in
this sort, (vnbutning her Dublet showing her pretty paps.) Behold, quoth she,
none but thy Calipolis has conquered thee. Pardon dread King, I am Calipolis,
whom Fortune now has highly favored. Thus will I leave the friendly Reader to
imagine the sudden joy and communication had betwixt them, and come to
Fredrick, that fostered so fair a woman almost a fortnight, and caught not so
much as a kiss, who raged against his ouer-sight in this sort.

Fredrick (quoth he) herein, thou have resembled the foolish Lapidarian, that
beholding a precious stone, neglects time to try the virtue, and so casting
it aside loses a great value. But marvel not, for I have heard it said,
Love is blind, and therefore can judge no colors, else might outward beauty,
discover inward virtue. Foolish man that having caught a Foul feathered to thy
own affection, and could not lay salt on her tail as the saying is, but
marvel not, for doubtless she is favored of the Gods, to be a miracle to all
the women in the world. Large promises, great protestations, could not impeache
her constancy, a mean woman, fostered simple, not Princess like, as her
friends were able, and not to be tempted with a Diadem, deserves to be
canonized in Tables of perpetuity, ever to be read, and never to be rased out,
till all things reuersant, dye in endless oblivion. So turning himself toward
the two joyful persons, thy constancy Calipolis quoth he, has purchased many
favors at my hand, therefore frolic with thy husband, and Mountgramet
comfort thy supposed dead wife (...) of Fortune be a means of more fervent
aff^ (...) the Gods ordained it for good, and since all things (...) content,
though the loss of your goods, and the pu^ (...) grief for the present time,
to be plain, I was the A^ (...) this ill, being enamored of this constant
Dame, shew^ (...) in a glass by Magic spell, which deciphered nothing (...)
pretended lies, because I could not obtain of her my pu^ The defamation of her
marriage rytes, I can never quitta^ with amends, your griefs sustained, I
cannot recall, the well you lost, shall be valued and repayed to you both
trebble fold, a^ look what you lost in France, shall be trebble rewarded he
in Denmark.

After these large promises, they yielded thanks to his excellency, and rested
at Fredricks dispose, where leaving them at their expectation, I end my Garland
of a green Wit, garnished with such flowers, as my barren Garden affords.


FINIS.

