A new Dialogue WHEREIN IS Contained the examination of the Mess, and of that
kind of Preisthode, which is ordained to say mess: and to offer up for
remyssyon of sin, the body and blood of Christ again.

Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they be of God or no:
for many false prophets are gone into the world.

The names of the speakers in this Dialogue.
Mastres Missa Master Knowledge Master Fremouthe Master justice of Peace Peter
preco the ^ry Palemon the Judge Doctor Prophyri Sir Phillyp Philargyry
VVYLLYAM TVRNER UNTO THE READER.
ALTHOVGHE IT BE not belo^gyng unto my professyo^ to dispute of matters of
divinity, which am a Physician: yet extreme necessite requiri^g I am compelled
to do in this kind of war, as cobblers, shomakers, masons, carpe^ters, and al
other me^ of handy occupations are compelled to do, when their city is
beseged, to take wepens in their hands and become warriers, which have had
little or no experience of war before, when as their city is beseged. Which: if
that (when a cyty is beseged) every man that is a faithful citizen ought to
do the best that he can, to defend his city, and to ouercu^ the enemies of
the same: who will blame me, which am no professor of divinity, when as the
cyty of God, whereof I am a sworn Citizen, is beseged, with so great hosts of
popyshe warriers: if I play in this time of need, the divine warryer, to
defend the foresaid cyty, and endeuore my self to overcome the enemies of the
same. The enemies of our city, ar they, which take by violence away ye godly
and necessary ordinances of our cyty and would by force thurst into our cyty,
laws of their awn maki^g, co^ttary unto the laws of our lawmaker which
builded our city, and dyed for ye liberty of the same. Such enemies, ar the
Bishop of Rome, and all Popyshe Prelates and preistes, which mangle and
mynishe, yea, rob and many ways deface the most comfortable common seal of
our salvation and redemption: the holy Sacrament of Christ's body and blood,
and in ye stead of the same, set in a mere man's invention, a certain Popish
play, which they call the meritorius Mess, bearyng us in hand that, that
they can do with it as much as our redemer Christ could do with his most
blessed passion, which thing I judge to be greatly to the dishonor of Christ,
that is that our most comfortable common seal of our liberty, and redemption,
should be ma^gled and robbed, and for the most part of the hole year, taken
from us, and that the work of a man should be made equal with the work of
our Lord and lawmaker which is both God and man: I could do no less, but
write this book, to defend the blessed ordinance of our Lord and redemer,
and wrestle a little with the wicked man's ordynau^ces, to help to drive them
out of the church our city, and to restore the ordinance of our savior
into the church again. I know that many will be offended, and take it very
grievously, that I should wryts of this matter, and I look for none other, but
some shall call me knave and heretyke for my labor taken in this matter. Some
will there be also of Satan's side, which never can be satiate with blood,
which will desire to have my blood, as diverse in England, at this day, yet
living have done, God forgive them. And the same, if that their crueltyes were
not repressed and holden down with the hyer powers, which ar manteyners of al
truth and honesty, would not leave alive in this realm one of my judgment: ye
use either to write or to preach against such man's inuencions, as at this
time, I do write against: but I care not for these horsleches, trusting that
he that has so often delivered me from the hands of mine enemies, will either
save me from them at this time also, or else, if it be his pleasure that I
shall lose my life for his names sake, I shall be sure to find it again. But if
there be any man that of a conscience had against me and think that I hold
any false opinions in this book or any other book and would have the
amendment of me and not my destruction if they be learned, let them write
against me, and I shall answer them or else if I can not, recante it that I
have written. In the mean season I would desire the unlearned which err by
reason of ignorance and not of malice, that they would cease from raylynge
against me, till that their chief champions have confuted my book, and have
perceived that I will not recante. This would I also require of learned me^ if
it could be obtained. I answered within these seven years a certain learned
man of England and confuted as well as I could, his book but he contrary unto
all honesty and learning, perceiving that he was not able to answer to my
book, in every book that he wrote afterward against other men rayled and
scoffed against me by name. Should learned me^ play such parts in a christen
kingdom? I think that it were mete that he that is learned and openly in
wryti^g or in pulpit speaks against any man should either be compelled to
confute his opinions that he rayleth against, or else should be compelled
openly to cry him mercy, whom he has sklaundered. If this were brought to
pass, we should have fewer raylers in England then we have.

Therefore have I set my name unto this book that if thou think that I have
written herein, any thing against God or his word, thou may know to whom
thou shouldeste write. Almighty God grant to the ignorante, knowledge, and to
them that have knowledge, to live thereafter. Amen.

Mastres Missa. I Am credible informed by the report of my faithful and
unfeigned fre^des, that there are nowadayes many rash and ungodly me^, which
utterly despice me, and set me at naught. saiynge, that I am not she that I am
taken for, and that I am ye Popis daughter, and have driven out of the church,
the supper of our Lord, and have set up my self, in the stead of it: and
that I am ye greatest blasphemy, that ever was unto Christ's death and passion,
with many other spiteful lies and slanders, wherwyth they would kill me, if
they could. But, ye good catholyke and Christen people, know well enoughe,
what I am and from whence I came? Ye wot that I came from Christ and his
Apostles, and that I am allowed and approved with mo, then an hundredth holy
fathers Bishops of Rome, and I have been more, then these.CCCCC. years
approved by the hole church. And because many new fangled fellows, would
that I should be removed out of the way, that Christ's supper, (as they call
it) might have place in the Church, as an holosmmer thing and more profitable
for man's soul then I am: I will at this time (compelled by necessytie,)
compare my self with their supper, and prove my self more worthy of place in
Christ's church, then it is.

The Supper that these fellows speak af, even after their own co^fessyon, is
but a memoryall of Christ's death, of a gyuyng of thanks, for the benefit of
man's salvation whereby ma^s faith is strengthened, and their love is in creased.
These are the chefest properties, that these new gospellers do give unto their
so greatly commended supper. But hark now what I both do and ca^ do. I deliver
the sely souls that have been long pituossly punished in purgatory, from their
pains and torments. Where find you in all the hole Scripture, that the supper
of our Lord, can do so much? I can make fair wether, and rain: I can
heal all Sycknesses, and bring dampened souls out of Hell: I can purchasse
remyssyon of sins, by the offering up again, of Christ's body and blood. I
can with five words, make both God and man. Which thing, seeing that God
can not do: can not I do more, then God can do? Now let these new
fellows tell, whether the supper of our Lords, can do so much or no. Yet for
all this, if need require, I say, that I am the supper of our Lord: and my
great fre^des, Prophiry my patro^ doctor of the Cano^ law, and sir Phillip
Philargiry, doctor of divinity, have taught me to call my self so: if that my
other name, should be at any time to odyous. Ite missa est: fare ye well, till
ye next time yt we mete again.


Knouule. here ye not, as this woman speaks so blasphemoussly against God and
his word? Mark ye not, as she prefers her self before the supper of our
lord Jesus christ and yet she is the Popis daughter?


Fremouth. I hear her talk very well howbeit I perceive not the haynousnes of
the matter, as ye do: therefore, show me it plainly and I shall not spare to
lay it to her charge.


Knouulege. first when she is but ye creature of man, she says, that she can
take sin away, by the offering up of Christ's body and blood: wherein,
she makes her self equal with our savior Christ. And where as she says yt
she ca^ make rayn and fair wether, and heal all manner of dyseases, she
makethe her self god: Where as she says, that she ca^ make with.v. words,
both God and man, she makes her self myghtyer the^ god for seeing that god is
everlasting, and has no beginning, he can not make him self then where as she
says, that she makes God she makethe her self myghtier the^ god. If this be
not blasphemy, what shall we call blasphemy?


Fremouth. Sir, these are intolerable blasphemies in deed, therefore, she ^hal
not escape with them thus, How Gentelwoman tarry a little, and hear what shallbe
said unto you. Here master Justice before al this worshypful company, in God
and the Kings name I charge you with this woman, that she may be furthcu^myng,
to answer unto such crimes of heresy and blasphemy, as shallbe laid unto her
charge.


Master Justice. Wotest thou, ye lewed fellow what thou say and do? wylt
thou rail against the holy and blessed mess, and accuse her of heresy and
blasphemy? lay hands on this fellow, for he speaks against the six articles,
and against the Sacrament of the altar. I take wytnes of you neighbors, what
this fellow says.


knouulege. Soft sir and be not so hasty, if that ye put this man in prison,
and refuse to execute it, that he has charged you with all say not but ye be
warned ye will be throw your self. Ye ar begiled master Justice, the world is
not now as ye think it is. The time of persecuting the professors of the truth
(thanks be unto God) begins now to wear away, ye have persecuted long
enough already in time past, and a little to long. The kings intent and
purpos, is now at the beginning of his reygne to purge and cleanse the church
of al abuses and enormites, and to examine and try with the touch stone of
gods word, all sacrifices and ceremonies, which are in the church: whether
they ar agreing with the word of God or no: that they that do agree, may be
allowed and holden still, and yt they, that are disagreing, may be taken away.
Then seeing that this is the Kings most godly purpose, when as ye will not
suffer men to cite abuses and such things, as at thought to be abuses, to come
to examination, me^ may gather plainly, that ye ente^de to resyst ye kings
most godly purpos. Which if ye do, ye are not his friend. If the mess, after
dew examination be found to be good and godly she shall have no harm, but if
she be sound to be of anticstrih and but a fained thing, to win money wc, to
the idle prestes tht ca^ not preach: why may not ye kingaes hyghnes as well put
her down, and drive her out of the church, as the popes wilines set her up, and
brought her into the church? Therefore I will advise you, to leave of your
troblynge of this honest man, and be contet, to execute his reasonable request.


Master Justice. Sir, at your instau^ce, I will let this man go, and will also
se, that this woman shall be furthcu^ming, to answer unto such things as shall
be laid unto her charge.


knouuleg. Farewell master Justice.


M. Just. farewell sir.


Palemon the Judge. Inquere Peter, if there be any man that has any actyon,
or matter, to be entreated of this day in this Court, let him bring it in,
and enter it and he shall be heard.


Peter Preco. If there be any, that has any matter in this court, let him
enter his actio^: for my Lord judge is ready to heat it.


M. Fremouth. Here is a woman (my Lord) which defends open heresy, and
commytteth blasphemy against God and his holy word.


Palemon. What say thou woman, is it so, as this man has reported of thee?


Missa. I deny, that I spoke any heresy, or committed any blasphemy in all my
life.


Fremouth Dyddest thou not say, that you cameste from Christ and the Apostles:
that thou could deliver souls out of purgatory, yea, and dampened souls
out of hell, and could purchesse forgiveness of sins, with the offering up
of Christ's body and blood again, and that thou could do more the^ Christ
can do? are not these sayings full of heresy and blasphemy?


Missa I grant I said all the sayings which ye have rehearsed sauinge the
last which I utterly deny that I ever said or though in all my life time.


Fremouth. I shall prove my Lord) er I go hence, by her awn hand writing,
that she takes in hand to do, that God never took in hand, that is, to make
God, which if I ca^ show, I shall prove, that she holds, that she can do more
then Christ can do.


Palemon. The^ ye deny not, but that ye tayde all the rest, whereof ye are
accused.


Missa. I said them, and will say them again.


knouulege. And those sayings shall I, by the help of God prove false,
Heretical and blasphemous.


Porphirus and Philargirus. We desire you (my Lord) that ye will admyt us to
be defenders and advocates unto this innocent woman.


Palemon. I am well content, defend her as well as ye can.


Prophiry. Even as it is neither semynge nor godly that the holy scripture
should be called to examination and trial, whether it be scripture or no, and
they that hold that scripture is no scripture ought straight ways to be taken
for Heretics and infideles: so the blessed and holy Mess which is as true as
the scripture is and came from God, as well as the scripture came, ought not to
be suffered to com^ unto any examination or trial: and a they yt doubt or hold
against it, ough by and by to be taken for Heretics and infideles. The blessed
mess is such a^ high and inscrutable mystery, that n^ lay man ought to reason
or dispute of i^ And though there were any abuse crep^ into the Miss (as no man
is hable to prove that there is any at all) it should belong only unto the
Bishops and unto the clergy, to meddle with such matters, and not to such
lay and unlearned fellows, as these be. Which as it does appear by their
apparel have neither taken any degree in divinity, neither in the Cannon law.
Cat^ the wise man says to such. Mitte archana dei: let the secrets of God
alon^ And Solomon says: He that is the sercher of Gods majesty, shall be
overthrown with his glory. Therefore it is not lawful that these fello^uee
should mydle with any such matters, as the mess is. Moreover, if these ^ne^s
accus^tio^ should be allowed, there is no such holy ceremony in the hole
church, which should not come into great ieoperdy of destruction sone after.
Let al me^ beware, that they break not a good order. Now is the church in a
^ight good order, which if it were ones broken, the church should come in great
^eoperdy. Take but one staff out of a bu^del, are not all the rest loose and
ready to ^all out? the ceremonies of the church, ar knyt in such an order, yt
if ye take one away, that all the rest shall be in ieoperdy of falling into
destruction. Furthermore, ye know also that the multitude of this realm, has
the mess in such reverence, and takes it for such a godly thing (as they
are bound to do no less) if they should ones perceive that the Mess
should be handeled as a thief and a robber, that is, if she should be openly
accused before the face of the Court, the rude people would make an
insurrectyon, and so should all this realm come in great ieoperdy, by the
breakyng of the inward peace, of our foren enemies. Therefore it were best to
refuse these men's accusation, and not to admyt it, but to punysh them for
their bold interpryse: But if ye will needs admyt their accusation, by your
patience, my lord, seeing that this is a spiritual matter: it should be heard
before a spiritual judge: for as aristotel says every man can judge well in
that thing that he knows: then he that knows not the matter, can never
judge well in it. Wherefore is were best that either ye should (my Lord)
reject these men's accusation or else suffer the matter to be deuolued unto
some spiritual judge


Palemon the sayings alleged out of Cato and Solomon forbid not Christen men
to search the secrets of thyr fathers testament and will, which he has left
in writing, that they should know but only such secrets, as god has not
opened in his holy word and testamente, and are not necessary for man to know:
then these me^ may read and search out all the secrets, that are contained in
the scripture, and for the understanding of it, may with sobrenes and
discretion reso^ and confer of any place of scripture. And if any thing be
taken for a part of gods will or commandment, which they doubt of, whether
it be contained in their fathers will or no: why may not they have a recourse
thither, to se whither it is contained there, or no? If that only Preistes
should be suffered to come unto the readyng of our fathers testament, if they
said that the Pope were heed of Christ's church, and all our gooddes yt are
layme^ were theyres at their pleasure: if we might not be suffered, to search
our fathers will and testament, whether it were so or no: we should have shortly
many ra^ke and rich papists in this realm, as we have all ready a great deal
to many. And if they would have our wives and daughters also, and said, that it
were gods will, that we should let them have them, if we might not search
the testament, whether it were so or no, in what case were we in then? As for
these men, whme ye judge by their apparel to be unlearned, because they seem
not too be doctors of divinity, and of the Cano^ law, and therefore not worthy
to accuse any abuse, that it may be put away, ye follow very little the
scripture, which ye either know or ought to know: Nolite iudicare secundum
aspectum. etc. Judge not according unto the outward apperance, but judge after
right judgment. The one of these me^ is a master of art of Cambrige, and the
other is a master of art of Oxforde, and have in their youth studied divinity.
Must they now be unlearned, because they are no preistes? we shall have a
trial of their learning hereafter. And though they were as unlearned as a man
is possible: no man can hyndre them to accuse the^ of heresy and blasphemy,
who^ they hear speaking plain blasphemy and heresy. Therefore I will allow their
accusation, and judge as I shall se euydence given. As for yt ye feate, yt if
the mess should be suffered to be ones accused, yt all the ceremonies of the
church should sone after decay and come to naught, it is but a folysh fear.
If the mess be found fauty and the ceremonies be found to be of the same
sort, that the mess is, why should they not be al taken away together? for
they that are joined together in ye myscheous deed, ought not to be separated
in ye punishmentent. Your thondre boltes of vprotes of the people, whereby ye
mean that great blood should be shede wtin this realm, if ye mess should be
accused of heresy and blasphemy, ar but vain for ye kings most loving
subjects, ar more godly and wyser, then they will disturb the common wealth
for the examination of a man or a woman. What say you: if Baals image were here
in Enlande, which god commanded expressedly to be destroyed, and ye know
certainly that there should arise an uproar and the puttyng down of this
Idol: whether were it better to suffer the Idol to stand still with the high
displeasure and indygnation of God which threatened subversion unto the land,
where Baal were worshypped, or to burn Baal with an uproar, and so to avoid
the indignation of God? I trust to almighty god, that we shall have no vprores
at all. Where as ye would have the matter deuolued unto some spiritual judge,
thinking that I am not able to judge of this matter, for lack of knowledge and
learning in matters of religion, I would not that ye should reken me to be
unlearned in Gods law, because I am no Bishop: as though only bishops and
prelates were spiritual men, and none else. Qui non habet spiritum dei, hic
non est eius: He that has not the spirit of God, he is not his: But all true
Christen men have the spirit of God, then are al Christen men spiritual me^.
The^ must ye either take me for no Christen man, or else grant, that I am a
spiritual judge. As for my knowelege in the holy scripture, though many of my
predecessors have been to their great shame shamefully ignorant in ye
scripture: I would ye should know, that I have been brought up in humanity,
Logike, and divinity. ^n the university of Cambryge, till I was.xxii. years
old, and that se^ce that time, though the common law has been my chief study,
I have diligently read the scriptures from the beginning to the end, whereby,
thanks be unto the Lord, thus much knowledge have I gotten, that I can
discern true religi^n from superstytyon, and know my ^hepherdes voice, from a
strangers. This saying of David: Et nunc reges intelligite, and crudimini
iudices terre: Get you understanding ye kings and be you learned ye judges of
ye earth. This sentence made me read the scriptures, sense I was a judge, more
hedefully and attentely, then ever I did before, Therefore ye shall not need to
have the matter deuolued unto an other judge. Now if ye have any thing
against this woman, speak, and ye shall have audience.


Knouuleg. hold ye your opinion still that ye are ordained of allmyghty god,
and I pray you in what place of the Bible did God order you mastres missa?


Porphir. Christ ordined the blessed mess in the.xxvi. of Math. the.xiiii: of
Mark ye.xxii. of Luke and in ye.xi. of the former epistel to the Corinthians,.


knouulege. there is no mention of the mess in any of these places


Porphiry. What makes matter, whether the name be there or no, if the thing be
there. We ought rather to seek for the thing it self always more, then for
the name of it.


knouulege. How do men discern and know things, but by their names? then
seeing that there is no me^tio^ made of the mess, in these places rehearsed,
how shall we know that Christ ordained the mess there*


Porphiry. ye shall know, that Christ^ ordained the Mess by Christ's words,
wherwyth he ordained that thing, that we call the mess.


knowledge. Rehearse the words I pray you, wherwyth Christ institued the mess.


Porphyry. these they be: Dominus Jesus in ^a nocte, qua traditus est. etc. The
Lord Jesus in ye ntght, that he was betrayed took bread and after that he had
given thanks he brake it and said: Take, eat, this is my body which is
broken for you: do this in the remembrance of me. After the same manner, to
^ehe the cup, after the supper was don, and said, This cup is ye new testament
in my blood, do ye this as often as ye shall drink, in the remembrance of me.
By these words, did Christ instytute and ordeyne the Mess.


knouulege. And with the same words he instituted the Lords suppe, then is
the Mess and the Lords supper all one thing.


Porphyry. They are all one thing in very deed, therefore, they that rail
against the blessed Mess, rayll also against the supper of our Lord.


Knouuleg. If the Mess and the supper of the Lord be all one thing, the
ryghtes, the housell, the sacrament of Christ's body and blood, and the supper
of the Lord are al one thing: then the mess, the housell, the rightes, the
sacrament of Christ's body and blood, and the supper of the Lord, ar all one
thing. Whereof it follows, that whosoever may celebrate or do any of these: may
also celebrate or do all the rest: But all the lay men in England may
celebrate the supper of the Lord, and may receive their ryghtes or housell, as
well as preistes, therefore they may all celebrate or do mess as well as
preistes may. If the supper of the Lord or houstyng and the mess be all one
thing: whatsoever then belongs unto the one, belongethe also unto the other:
and what soever is required to the celebratynge of the one, is also required to
the celebratyng of the other: But a shaven croune, a prei^^es goun, an albe, a
stole, a vestiment, confiteor, misereatur, collectes, seque^ces, secrets,
canon, memento, eleuatio^ of the sacrament, remembrance of ^ayntes departed,
offering up of christ for remissyon of sins, breaking of bread in.iii,
parts: one for them that are in Purgatory, an other for the^ that are in
heaven, the third for them that are alive, washing of a man's fyngers,
myxynge of water and wine together, ar necessarily required of him that shall
say mess, then if it be true that ye say, that the mess and Christ's supper,
which the common people call, their housell or ryghtes, are all one ^hyng, then
is it required, that all me^ which shall celebrate the Lords supper or receive
their howsel, must have shaue^ crounes, prestes gowns, albes, stoles and
vestimentes upon their backs: they must say secrets, and seque^ces, collectes
and cano^: they must break the hooste in.iii. parts, and offer up of freashe,
Christ's body for remissyo^ of sin, with all the other superstitions toys
and bables above rehearsed: But these are not required of him that shall celebrate
the supper of the Lord, and yet are required of him that shall celebrate
mess: it follows therefore that the supper of Christ and the mess^ are not all
one. More over if the supper of the Lord and the mess were al one: when as a
lay man may as wel^ receive the supper of the Lord for (...) priest as a
priest can do for a lay man then might a layman as well say mess^ for a preiste,
as a priest can do for a la^ man. But I do not doubt, but ye think^ that to be
an inconvenience, and co^trar^ to your often commended order, then ^ it not
conueniente, that the supper o^ Christ and the mess, should be rek^ned all
one.


Philargyrus. Me thynk that ye spoke of late wondrous v^ discretly and
irreverently, and other wise the^ it becommed a Christen man to do: where as
ye called the holy v^ stimentes which the preiste weare^ (...) the honor of
Christ, who is present at the mess, superstitious toys and bables, seeing
that they were consecrated to holy uses by holy prayers, and by the invocation
of gods name. When ye go to speak with a great man ^^o ye not well to put on
the best clothes that ye have? shall a preiste then do ^^misse when he puts
on better clo^hes the^ ye common people wereth when he ^ot only speaks with,
but also touches ^he king of heaue^^ye must not therefore (...) rashly despise
the hallowed vestime^ ^es and other such like outward semely ^eremonies, which
serve for a good or^^r.


knouulege. I perceive well, when ^^s ye can not answerere to the reso^es,
which I have made unto your ^llowe, ye would draw me craftelye ^^te of the
matter in to an other new matter. But least I should seem to be unable to
answer unto your resones, I say, the vestymentes for all the Bysshoppes
babbling are no holyer, then Tom^ Tynkers taberd is, and ye name of God is
abused, when it is called upon, to sanctify things that God never commanded
to be sanctified or hallowed. Christ's natural body is not now honored with
outward garments, and he will not be honored otherwise, then he has
commanded: for he has given no co^maundemunte so to be honored. And as for
his godhede, because it is a spyrite, i^ must be spyrytually worshypped in
sprite and in truth, and not in outward vestime^tes. If ye will worship
Christ's body, as ye ought to do, give good new clothes unto the naked or
to the poor, that have need of clothes and then do ye honor Christ as ye
should do. But to return unto our purpose again, I axe of you, whether a
lay man when he takes his rygtes at Easter in love and charity with a
christian faith, celebrateth the hole supper or no?


Philargy. I grant that h^ celebrateth the hose supper.


knouulege but the same celebrateth not the hol^nesse and the supper of the
Lord are not all one.


Porphiry. As a naked man now within this hour clothed, dyffereth not in
substance from him self because he is clothed: so the mess, dyffereth not
from the supper of the Lord, because it has decent apparel now, semely for
such a mystery, which percha^ce it had not in ye primative church or else
there is no difference at al, between the Mess and the supper of our Lord:
for there is in the mess before the consecration, bread and wine, and after
the consecration, the body and blood of Christ, and these are in the supper of
our Lord, and also in the mess, therefore the mess and the Supper of our
Lord are al one.


knouulege. Ye say because there is bread and wine in the mess before the
consecration, and the body and blood of Christ after the consecration, and
these ar both in the sup^er, and also in the mess, therefore, that the supper
of the Lord and the mess are all one. First ye do suppose to be true which
is plain false, that is where soever breaed and wine is, and the body and
blood of Christ is, that there is Christ's supper. At the marriage in the Cane
of Galile, was bread and wine, and the body and blood of Christ more truly,
then they are now in your mess: yet was not Christ's supper there. In the
Supper also of the Corynthyans, which they eat before the Lords supper, was
bread and wine, and (if it be true, that the sacrame^taries hold, that
Christ's body is in every place,) there was Christ's body and blood, but for
all that, that supper was not Christ's supper, because it was not done in the
remembrance of Christ's death, but only to fill the belly, and not to feed
the soul.


Porphiry. this is not a like case, for neither in the Cane of Galile, neither
in the Corynthyans Supper was, the words of consecration said and therefore was
there no supper of our Lord.


knowelege. Then if the wo^des of consecration had been said in the Corynthyans
supper, though the Corynthyans had not intended to have remembered Christ's
death, their former supper should have been christ's supper, and now by your
reso^, when and where soever a preiste says the words of consecratyon, as ye
call them, over bread and wine, there is Christ's supper, as though in these
it. things alone to have bread wine and certain words said over the same,
should consyste Christ's supper: which opynion I will take in hand to prove
false by the autorite of gods word. Luke in the.xxii. chap. describing the
Lords supper and al such things as belo^ge unto it, in these words: do this
in ye remembrance of me, teaches us plai^ly, ye one of the chief points that
belongs unto ye lords supper is to call to remembrance ye passion of
christ. And paul in ye.xi. chap. of the former epistle to the cori^thia^s
writes of christ's supper thus Take ye eat ye this is my body which is broken
for you: do this in ye remembrance of me. After the same manner also, he took
the cup, when supper was done and said: this cup is the new testament in my
blood, do this (as often as ye shall drink it) in the remembrance of me, for
as often as ye shall eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, ye shall declare
the death of the lord until he come. These are the words of saint Paul and
the undoubted scripture: whereupon I gather, that it belongs as much to
Christ's supper to receive the bread and wine in the remembrance of Christ,
and to declare and show his death, as it belongethe to rehearse these words,
this is my body, yea and more to: for saint Paul says, as often as ye shall
eat this bread and drink this cup, ye shall declare and set forth the death
of the Lord until he come. He says not. as often as ye shall eat this bread
and drink this cup, ye shall say these words over the bread and wine, this
is my body and this is my blood.

Then does not only bread and wym and the words of consecration said by a
pressed, make the supper of the lord, except the remembrance of Christ's death,
and the presence of Christ's church be annexed also thereunto. Then do I gather
this argument, the mess is not done in the remembrance of Christ, as often as
it is done therefore: the mess is not the supper of the lord. Furthermore, that
the mess and the supper of the Lord, dyffer no more one from an other, then a
naked man and a clothed man do: this argument shall sufficiently declare.
Whose operationes and ends do differ, and are diverse, they are also diverse
things, and dyffer, and can not be all one: But the operatio^s and ends of
Christ's supper and the mess are diverse, and dyffer one from an other:
therefore the supper of Christ and the mess do dyffer, and are diverse things,
and can not be al one. The operation and end of the Mess are these to
purchasse remission of syn by offering up of Christ again to make fair
wether and rain, to heal sick horses, meseld swyne, and the french pox, to
bring souls to rest that are in tormente and pain, to deliver souls out of
hell. The mess is said and done in the remembrance and honor of men. This is
also an operation at the mess, to purge sins, and to take the^ away, and to
bring the kingdom of heaven, by the receyuyng of bread and wine. The first
end or intent of ye mess whereof I made mention, is declared in this secret.
Satisfaciat tibi domine etc. We beseech thee Lord tha^ the offering up of this
present sacrifyce, may be a satisfaction for the soul of thy servant. It is
also declared in this prayer which is said at the end of every mess. Placeat
tibi sancta Trinitas. etc. O holy Trinite, let this obedyente service of my
seruytude please thee, that this sacrifice which I unworthy have offered unto
the eyes of thy majesty, may be unto thee acceptable, and thou having pytie,
may be propiciable and purcheser of mercy. The same intent is declared in this
secret which is contained in the mess, which is said on the.xv. Sunday after
Trinite sunday: Concede nobis domine quesumus, ut hec oblatio salutaris, et
nostrorum fiat purgatio peccatorum, et tuae propitiatio pietatis. Lord grant
us we beseech thee, that this holsom oblation may be the purgation and clensyng
of our sins. etc. Also in the secret of saint Richard, the intent and end
of the mess is uttered plainly in these words. Co^cede que sumus misericors
deus. etc. Grant us merciful god, that by the intercessyon of saint
Richard thy confessor and Bishop, this reward offered to the eyes of thy
majesty, may both purchase us grace to live well, and get us everlasting glory.
Also that the purpose and inter of the mess is to save both ye body and the
soul: The secret in S. Romans mess does evidently testifi in these words:
Sacrifitiu^ deuotio^is ^ie. we beseech ye almighty god, look mekeky to, and
regard the sacrifice of our devotion, and of thy benygnite at the intercessyon
of thy confessor and bishop Roman grant through this, health of both body and
soul. Now by these words of ye mess here rehearsed, it is evident, that the
end and intent of the mess is to make satisfaction for man's soul, to
purches mercy, to purge sin away by offering up of sacryfyce, and to
obtain everlasting glory. Has the supper of the Lord I pray you any such
operation, intent, purpose and end, as these be? Never one Another end and
opetion of the mess, is to make fair wether and rain. These titles in the
messal: Missa pro serenitate aeris. Missa pro pluuia, do sufficiently testify.
This does also testify the secret of the mess said for rain. O blat is
domine placare muneribus. etc. Lord, be thou swaged by the rewards offered
up: and give us the help of sufficient rain in dew season. Has the lords
supper any such operation or intent? That an other operation and end of the
Mess is to heal sick horses, meseled swyne, and al other diseases, both of
men and beasts, these titles bear sufficiently witness: Missa pro peste an
imaliu^: A mess for the morte^ or pestiferous syknesses of bestes. Missa
Raphaelis archa^geli pro omnibus infirmit atibus, A mess or Raphaell the
archangel, for all sycknesses. Is Christ's supper commanded to be received for
any such purpose? that the mess is also said to deliver souls out of pain
and torment, the mess of, Requiem, in these words bears record Pro quorum
memoria. etc. Lord, give them everlasting rest, for whose memory, the body of
Christ is received. And in this, Post communionem, after their communion.
Annue nobis domine per hoc sacrificium quod sumpsimus etc. grant us Lord by
this sacrifice, which we have received yt the souls of thy servants may
deserve to rece^^ forgiveness of their sins. Where did Christ ordene that his
supper should be taken to deliver souls out of tormente? That an other
operation and end of the mess is to deliver souls out of hell, this place
red in the mess of, Requiem. does beaer sufficient wytnes. Hostias and preces
tibi domine offerimus. etc. Lord we offer up unto the oblatyons and prayers,
receive thou them Lord, for those souls, whom we remember this day, make
them Lord to passover from death to life. And in this prayer: Domine Jesus
Christ rex gloriae. etc. is plain mention maid of delyueraunce from hell,
without any figure or trope. Lord Jesus Christ king of glory deliver the souls
of al faithful deed men from the hand of Hell and from the deep lake. And in
the prayer of Gregory's Trentalle this is the end of the Mess to deliver
souls out of the hands of deuelles.

Iustorum animae in man^ dei sunt nec noc^^^t eis tormentum malitiae. The
ryghteouse men's souls are in Gods hands neither shall any tormente of
malice vex them. Then it does appear, that the Mess goes about to deliver
evil and dampened men's souls from the place, where they are, that is, from
Hell and from the hands of the deuell. Where tormentethe any Deuell any souls
departed, saving only in hell? therefore the intent of the Mess is to deliver
fowls out of hall. The words of the Trentall mess are these. Deus summa
spes nostrae redemptionis qui in terra promissionis. et cetera. God the chief
hope of pure redemptyon which haste chosen before all other lands to be borne
in the land of Promise, and sufferedest death in the same place: Deliver
mercyfully the Soul of thy servant, from the hands of Deuelles. Loo, here
may ye se, that the operation of the Mess, is too deliver Souls from the
hands of Deuylles. Did Christ ordeyne his Supper to deliver souls from the
hands of deuelles? suerly their is no me^tio^ made of any such matter in the
institution of Christ's supper. That the mess is a memorial of ded me^, and yt
it is done in the honor of saints, the words of the mess, hereafter
following, do manifestlye declare. Pro quorum memoria corpus Christi sumitur.
etc. Lord give them everlasting rest, in whose remembrance the body of Christ
is received. This is said in an other mess Assume quesumus omnipotens deus in
honor. etc. We beseech the Lord almighty, take these oblatio^s offered up unto
thee, in the honor of saint Eustach, and his fellows. And it is said in an
other mess. Hostias tibi domine pro commemoratione sancti Lamberti. Lord, we
offer up unto thee, oblatio^s for the remembrance of saint La^bert thy martyr
and bishop. Was Christ's supper ordained for the remembrance only of christ's
passion? Or is was also ordained for the remembrance of me^, which at but his
servants? That ye mess intends to take sins away by the offering of
bread and wine unconsecrated, this secret with an. C. ^no does testify. Feria
quarta post letare Supplices te rogamus omnipotens deus ut his sacrificiis
peccata nostra mundentur quia tunc. etc. Almyghtye God we humbly beseech thee,
that our sins may be cleansed by these sacrifices: for then thou gyueste the
true health both of body and soul. These words says the priest before the
sacring only, holding unconsecrated wine in the chalyce, and unconsecrated
bread liynge upon the chalice. Now have I proved by the very words of the
mess, that the end of the mess is to purchase remission, by offering of
bread and wine, to deserve everlasting life by receyuynge and offering of
Christ's body, to make fair wether and rain to heal all sycknesses to bring
souls from hell, and to deliver them from torments, to honor saints, and to
make a memorial of saints deaths, and natiuites, of the receyuyng of
Christ's body and blood, and otherwhyles to make the same of the offering of
bread and wine. These are the operations, intentes, and ends of the mess,
and the same are not the ends and operations of the supper of the Lord, for
the end of christis supper is to remember christ's death, to give thanks for
our rede^ptio^ and to remember, that we all are me^bres of one body, and ought
therefore one to love an other. Therefore the ends of the mess and the
operations of the same, and the end and intent of Christ's supper are diverse,
and differ much one from another: whereupon it follows, that the mess and
Christ's supper do dyffer, and are not al one. Then can ye not say, that the
mess was ordained of God, in the xxvi. of Matthew and that the mess is the
supper of ye lord decked and semely appointed with dece^t apparel for such a
mystery.


Palemon. If ye have no other places of scripture, to prove hat the mess was
ordained of god, the^ ye have hither to brought, furthe she must be dryue^ out
of Christ's church, as a mere inue^tio^ of man. Therefore if ye have any mo
places, bring them forth.


Philargy. The mess is good, and all goodness is of god, as S. James says:
every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, descendynge from the
father of light: ergo the mess is of god. Moreover Christ says in the.xiiii.
of John That co^forter, which is the holy ghost, whom the father shall send in
my name, he shall teach you all things what soever I shall speak unto you.
Loo, here Christ promyseth that the holy Ghost shall teach the Apostles and the
church all things, that he shall speak after his Ascension. Then did Christ
doubtless tell the Church many things after his Ascensyon, which the holy
Ghost taught a great while after, and emonge those things, that were only
taught after the ascension, was the mess. Also John. xvi. Chap: Christ
says, I have many things to say unto you, which ye ca^ not bear now, but
when he shall come which is the spirit of truth, he shall led you into all
truth: Behold here, how that Christ dyfferred to show the Apostles certain
verites, till that he was ascended up into heaven. They was there some truths
told to the church after that Christ was ascended, which was not told of
Christ, before his ascencion: of and the^ is no mention made in the.iiii.
Evangelists. And surely, as I have said, the mess is one of them which was
not iaught before the ascension, but aftet it, as our mother the holy church
believes, whose doctrine I will rather follow then all the Lutherans in
Germany, though therwer CCCCC. times as many mo, then now are. Magis enim
credendu^ est Marie veracique iudeorum turbae fallaci. Say not now but that
ye have now scripture alleged you, to prove yt the mess is of God.


Knouuleg. Ye make a reason, and bring furthe scripture, to prove that the
Mess is of God: But how strong your reason is, and how rightly ye have
alleged the scripture, I shall shortly declare. Where as ye reason the mess is
good, and al goodness is of God, ergo the mess is of God: ye commyt a fallacy
or a deceytful dryft of sophistry which is called of the Logicia^s, which hate
such sophistical deceytes, Petitio principii, that is when a man will prove a
thing to be true, by the same thing, or with an other, that is as doubtful
as that is, which is called into question. The chief matter that we go about
in this accusation, is too prove that the mess is ungodly and full of
blasphemy, and therefore ought to be put out of the church. And yet ye very
wyttely allege this for a prynciple, and out of al controversy, that the mess
is good, and conclude that therefore it is of God. No no sir, ye ca^ not bleare
my eyes so. Prove ye first that the mess is good and then shall I grant you
your conclusion, that it is of God. To the place which ye allege out of
the.xiiii. of John: wherewith ye would prove that Christ taught the Apostles and
the church certain doctrine that he taught not before his ascentio^, whereof ye
say that the mess is one: I answer, that ye allege the scripture false: for
it is not in the text as yon allege it, he shall teach you what soever I shall
say unto you, but what soever I have said unto you. I take to witness both
Erasmus translation and the Greek text which is thus. Ekinosymas didaxi panta
kai ypomnesi ymas panta osa eipon ymin: that is to say, he shall teach you all
things and put you in remembrance of al things whatsoever I have said unto
you. And here may all me^ se, how craft ye and unfaithfully ye cite the
scripture, allegynge one tence for an other, and leaving out the pryncipall
part of the sentence. As touching the place which ye allege out of the.xvi.
of John: in these words: I have many hinges to, say unto you, but ye ca^ not
bear the^ now. But when he shall come which is the spriet of truth, he shall
led you into all truth. I answer, that ye ca^ not prove by this place, yt the
holy ghost taught the church any doctrine, which the Apostles and Evangelists
have not left behind the^ en their wrytinges. If ye say that they could not
abide diverse things before Christ's ascentio^: I say that they could abide ye
same after his ascentio^. If ye would apply in this se^te^ce this (word) you,
only unto ye church after ye apostles time, and not to the apostles, ye do the
apostles plain wrong, for Christ said these words unto the^. The^ what can ye
gather of this place? Christ promised the apostles yt the holy ghost should
lead the^ into all truth, did he so or no? if he performed his promise, the
knew the apostles all truth and no part of ye truth was unknown unto the^.
The apostles also was either unfaithful and disobedient servants unto
christ, or they were faithful and obedient. If they were faithful and
obedient, they kept these his co^ma^deme^tes Speak that in the light, which I
spoke in darkness, and speak ye that openly, that ye have heard pryuely. But
Christ taught by the holy ghost the Apostles, all truth, then were they
either disobedient servants or else they taught in their wryttynges all
truth. If they taught al truth in their wryttinges, and yet taught not the
mess there in, it follows that it is no partt of the truth, and so not of
god. Because that ye think, that Christ taught the church some wholesome
doctrine, that he taught not the Apostles: I pray you whether showed god the
father, his son Christ, al truth and all doctrine necessary for a Christian man
to know or no? if he did: then the Apostles learned of Christ all truth, and
every necessary doctrine for a christen man, For Christ says John. xv. I have
showed you al things which I have heard of my father. If that Christ has
not taught them al things necessary for a Christi man to know, then were they
imperfect Christen men, and in an evil case: If Christ have taught the^ all
truth, and they would not teach us that again in their Epistles and Gosples,
they were both unkind unto us, and disobedient persons to Christ, which
commanded them to teach us all such things as he taught the^ before: but
they were both kind unto us, and obedient unto their master Christ:
Therefore, they taught in their wryttynges, that ^s, in the Epistles and
Gospels, al holsom doctrine and necessary, for a Christen man to know. Therefore
the.ii. places which ye have alleged out of John make nothing for the mess,
and such other unwritten vanytes, but declare the weakness and imperfytnes of
the Apostles which with out the help of the holy ghost, could neither
remember, nor understand, after Christ's resurrection, such things as he had
taught them before his passion. But for a further trial of the matter, put the
case that christ had taught the church after the apostles deaths, certain
holsu^ doctrines, which he had not taught the apostles in their time: (which
thing no christen man will grant) yet it follows not, yt the mess should be
that holsom and necessary doctrine, for it is contrary unto the nature of God,
in who^ falls no inconstancy, to teach a contrary doctrine, after his
ascension unto that, which he taught before his passion. But the mess is clean
contrary unto the doctrine, which he taught before his passion and specially
unto this. Nemo uenit ad patrem nisi per me. Noma^ comes unto the father but
throw me, therefore Christ never taught the mess, neither before his asce^sio^,
nor after. And where as ye allege, that the church believes, that the holy
ghost reveled unto ye holy fathers, ye mess after the apostles time, what
church mean ye of: the Popes church, or of Christ's true church? If ye mean
of the Popes church we, wot how much credence ought to be given unto the
Popes lemman. If ye mean of Christ's true church, when ye: say that the true
church of Christ believes, that the holy ghost reveled the mess unto the
fathers, and not to the Apostles, either ye take violently away the Apostles
from Christ's true church, or else lie shamfully, in saiynge that Christ's
church believes a thing, when as the pryncipall members of Christ's church
neither do, nor did at any time believe it. Now have I sufficiently proved,
that all that ye could hitherto bring forth, could not prove that the mess had
any fou^datio^ or ground of gods word. Now my lord judge, I report me unto
you, whether the places, which this man has rehearsed, be sufficient, or no, to
prove that the mess is of god.


Palemon. your places alleged out of John, make as much for the mess as they
do for the popes supremecy, pilgrimage, pardons, purgatory, and any other such
thing, whereof is no mention made in holy scriptur. Therefore ye must either bring
forth someother scripture, for your purpose, or else grant that the mess is
not of God.


Porphiry. We are not so sklenderly provided but that we have yet both
scripture, and also reason, wherewyth we shall be able to prove, that the mess
is of God. First unto you masters, which accuse the mess, I axe of you,
whether almighty God requires in this commandment, honor thy father and
mother, as well obedience of subjects, unto magistrates and ruelers, as he
requires obedience of children, to their fathers and mothers?


knoweleg. yes al a like.


Porphyry. Then ar subjects as well bound to obey the rulers commandments,
as children are bound too obey their fathers and mothers commandments.


knouueleg. That do I grant also.


Porphyry. But the rulers have commanded all us, that be their subjects, to
believe that the Mess is of God, and therefore to come unto it: therefore all me^
are bound in pain of dampnatio^, to believe that the mess is gods
ordinance, and to come to it. But least ye should doubt, that any magistrate
has commanded the mess to be taken as the ordinance of God, ye have seen
the day your self, with in these.viii. years, that he that would have
spoken against the blessed mess, should have been burned, as a traitor to god,
bafelon to the king: which they would not have done, if that they would not
haue^ had the mess to be taken, for the very ordinance of God. And I am sure,
that there are in England, many inferior magistrates, which are of that same
mind still, and command at this hour their inferiors, to come to mess and
command them to believe that it is of God. How many Bishops and justices of
Peace are there now in England, which are not such, as I have rehearsed?
Therefore if we be bound to obey our polytike fathers, we must believe that the
mess is of god.


knouulege Within these.xx. years there have been some magistrates, which have
commanded their subyectes in pain of death to believe that the bishop of rome,
was heed of the church. Is not this the commandment even now of the
Emperor and also of the French king command not these.ii. magistrates in
pain of burning, all me^ to believe, that pilgrimag is good, worshyppi^g of
images is an godly, mo^kery is holy kind of life? Now I pray you, ar al
these.ii. magistrates subjects bound in pain of dampnatio^, to believe yt the
bishop of Rome is heed of the church? are they bound to believe ye pilgrimage
and worshpping of images ar good and gudli? ar they bound to believe ye mo^kery
is a kind of life ye pleases god: are these subjects bound to believe any
more the^ is contained in ye creed, and in the expressed word of god? answer I
pray you, ar all the Emperors subjects, and the French kings subjects
bound to believe, yt the pope is the heed of the church, and that pardones
pilgrimage, and mo^kery be of god?


Phil. They are not bound to believe yt the pope is head of ye church, neither ye
pilgrimag is of god.


Kno. The^ are not al subjects, by the virtue of the first commandment,
bound to believe, what soever the rulers command the^ to believe except it, yt
they command, be contained in the expressed word of god: But there is no
me^tio^ made in the scripture of the mess, therefore though ye magistrate
should co^mau^deme^ to believe, yt the mess were of god, yet they are not bound
to obey the^ in that case. Thus much have we gotten of you by your awn
confession. Now let us se what we ca^ wyn of you by the scriptur. We grant
unto you, yt we must obey the commandment of the politic father, so far as
he keeps him self with in his bounds, yt is, in all things, that are for the
glory of God, or are profitable for the common welthe, and not contrary unto
the word of God. But if he would goo beyond his bounds, that is, if he
would command men to believe, that thing to be a worshyppynge of god, which
is either vnspoke^ of in the written word of god, or contrary unto he same
word, or if he should forbid this word, or any part of it, we are not
bound to obey him in this case. My auctoris saint Paul, which, in the
Epistle to the Galathians, says, If that I, or an angel of heaven do show
any Gospel beside it, that I have showed you, accursed be he, and
excu^municated from God. And the same he says unto the Corinthia^s: that that
I have received of the Lord, that I have delivered unto you. And in the
Epistle to the Galathia^s, he says, that he received the Gospel which he had
preached, not of any man, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ. Then the
meaning of saint Paul is, that he would that even his awn self, or an Angel
of heaven should be accursed, if either of the^ should teach or command to
believe any doctrine, that he has not received of Christ: whereof I gather, that
al magistrates, which command to be taught and believed any doctrine of
gladtydynges, which they have not received of Christ, that they are accursed by
the doctrine of saint Paul. Daniell obeyed his king, so long as he
commanded him, not to do any thing, against Gods commandment: but when
his master would have had him to have worshipped Bell and the dragon, he would
not obey him. The.iii. Israelites obeyed king Nabuchodonosor in all things,
that perteyned unto a king to require: but when the king went beyond his
bounds, and would have had the^ to have worshypped his image, they would no
longer obey their polytike father. The Aopstles also in civil matters, obeyed
the magistrates, and paid tribute, but when the rulers forbad the apostles to
preach any more in Christ's name, they would not obey thyr commandment: but
said. Melius est obedire deo quod hominibus: It is better to obey God, then
men. By these places ye may se plainly, that we are not bound to obey the
magistrates, if they command us to believe any thing, or do any thing, that
is contrary unto scripture: but the Mess is contrary unto the scriptur,
therefore, though the magistrate should command us to believe, yt it were of
god, we are not bound to in this case obey the^. Howbeit, in other cases we are
bound to obey the^, in pain of dampnation: for he that resists the^ in any
such matters, as they have auctorite of commandment over, resysteth god and
so purchasseth him self the wrath of god.


Porphi. He that is not against me, is with me, says Christ: but the mess,
for all your saiynge, is not against Christ and his word, ergo it is with
Christ, and of christ.


knoweleg. That the mess is contrary to Christ and his holy word, I shall be
able too prove it with witnesses enough brought out of the scripture, and the
Mess it self also. This is said in the Mess, for auoydyng of the Pestylence
in these words in a prayer, called a secret. Subueniat nobis domine. etc.
Lord, we beseech thee, that the workynge of this present sacrifice, may help
us, which also may myghtely deliver us from al erroures, and save us from
runnynge into all perdition. Lo, here the working of a sacrifice offered up by
a preiste, is rekened and taken to have as much pour, as Christ has, to
help us by his sacrifice: for Christ with his sacrifyce did no more but
deliver us from al errores, and saved us from all perdition or destruition. Now
I pray you, how does this agree with Paul, that an other sacrifice then Christ
offered, should save us which sayethe. Hebre.x. With one oblatyon he has made
perfyte for evermore, all them, which are sanctified. This is said in the
Canon of the Mess. Hec sacro sancta commixtio corporis et sanguinis domini.
etc. Let this mynglynge together of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ be unto me and to all the^ that receive it, salvation of both body and
soul to deserve everlasting life, and a preparing to health to receive it
Behold as the mess teaches men to believe that they may purchase everlasting
life by the work, both ordained and done by a man, that is, by the mynglyng
together of the consecrated bread and wine in the chalyce. Where did God
command any priest or minister to mingle the consecrated bread and wine
together? in no place of the written ^orde of God. Is it not contrary unto the
scripture I report me to you, that the work of a sinful man, shall deserve
everlasting life? I suppose (says saint Paul) Romano.iii. that a man is
Iustyfyed by faith, without ye works of the law: if that a man be not
justified by the works, commanded even expressedly in Gods law, shall a man
be justified and saved by a work, never ones commanded by god but inverted by
a superstitious man? Se now, how prately the scripture and the mess do agree.
The mess has an other Prayer like unto this former, which begins thus.
Domine sancte pater omnipote^s deus. etc. Holy Lord almighty father
everlasting God, grant me, that I may so worthily receive the body and blood
of thy son our lord Jesus Christ, that I may deserve thereby to receive
forgyuenes of al my sins, and to be filled with thy holy sprite and to have thy
peace. Mark here, how that it which is only given throw the merit of christ's
passion and is only wrought by Christ, is craved blasphemously of ye work
wroght and done of a synful man. Is there not here a sweet agreyng with this
prayer of the mess, and these textes of scripture? Domini est salus. Nec est
in alio quoquod salus: Salvation is the Lords, neither is there salvation in
any other. When ye have done al things which ar commanded you, say that ye
were unprofitable servants. The mess in another place, contrary unto the
holy scripture, teaches us, that the offering up of bread and wine, may do
the same, that Christ did on the cross, that is, may take away all our
sins and may bring health to the lyuinge, and rest to the departed.


Porphiry. Your talk does testify, that ye are a Sacramentary, and that ye do
not believe, that after the consecration, the bread and wine are turned into
the flesh and blood of Christ. When as the bread and wine ar turned in to
Christ's flesh and blood, and of these two commethe furthe hole Christ, what
sin is it, to crave forgyuenes of sins by the offering up of our savior
Christ, which never cessethe from taking of the sins of the world away?


kno^uueleg. But what if a man crave and axe the same thing of the Offering
up of dread and wine, two poor creatures, as yet unconsecrated.


Porphyry. He should make a God of bread and wine and so commytte Idolatry:
For that is to every man a god, of whom he looks to have salvation.


knouuelege. than is the mess an idolatresse, for she axeth the benefit of sa
uation, of the offering up bare bread and wine vnco^secrated.


Porphiry. how can ye prove me^ this that the mess axeth salvation of the
offering of bread and wine unconsecrated and not of Christ?


knonuelege. I pray you in what place of the mess is the bread and wine
turned into Christ's body and blou^d?


Porphiry. When these words ar spoken over the bread and wine, this is my
body, and this is the cup of my blood and of the new and everlasting testament.


knouelge. And is the bread, bread still, and the wine, wine still till these
words be said over ye bread and the wine*


Por. ye verily.


knouu. But the words which I shall rehearse, are said straight way after ye
creed, a great while before the words of co^secratio^ be said and the ordinary
rubrik gives ye prestes this commandment, before they say the words yt I
spoke of. Let ye priest take the chalice in his hand, and set diligently in a
dew upon the mids of the altar, and douke a little down, and lift up the
chalice with both his hands, offering the sacrifice unto ye lord, saying this
prayer: Receive holy trinite this offering, which I an unworthy sinner offer
in the honor of the, of the blessed virgyn Mary, and of all saints, for my
sins and offenses, for the health of the living and for the rest of the^, that are departed. This prayer is said in every mess, but now will I bring you
diverse secrets, peculiar and proper unto diverse messes, of like wickedness
and impiete, wc it that I rehearsed here before. This prayer is said in the
mess of sayyte Grisgony. Lord, we beseech the, receive our rewards with a
pleasant cu^tenaunce, that by the intercession of thy martyr blessed Grisgoni,
they may purge away all contagius infections of our sins. This is said in
the Mess of the inueutio^ of saint Steue^, Lord, look pleasauntly upon this
sacrifice offered with the vows of thy faithful, that it, which has brought
unto thy beloved martyr Steven and his companions this days glory of their
invention, may profit us to redemption and grace. This is said in the mess of
Mark and Marcelliane. Lord, we beseech the, that thy grace may go before us,
and also come after, and take gentilly these oblatio^s, which we offer up for
our sins, to be consecrated unto thy name, that by the intercession of thy
martyrs Mark and Marcelliane, they may be profitable to salvation for all
men. This is said in the mess of Nichomed is: Lord make holy the sacrifices
and by the intercession of thy blessed martyr Nichomedis, cle^se and purge us
by the^, from the spots of our sins. This is red in the mess of S. Richrad
Grant us mercyful god by the intercession of saint Richard thy confessor and
bishop, yt the reward offered unto the eyes of thy majesty, may get grace to
live well, and purchasse everlasting glory. The sacrifices, oblations, and
rewards, which are spoken of here in these prayers, ar nothing else but bare
bread and bare wine: for ye prayers wherein they ar offered, are said long
before the sacrynge and co^secratio^. But the preiste at mess axeth of god,
that the offering up of the same bare bread and wine may take away sins,
purge the contagins infection of sins away, may profit to our redemption and
to obtain grace, may be profitable to salvation for all me^, may purge from
spots of sins, and may get grace and purches everlasting glory. Every man
believes yt he may obtain that thing which he ernestly does ask and crave,
but the mess or the pressed at mess axeth ernestly purgation and clensyng of
sins, and everlasting glory, to be given of god by the offering up of bread
and wine: ergo the mess believes, that sins may be purged and everlasting
glory may be obtained by the offering up of bread and wine. But bread and wine
are not god, neither is the offering up of bread and wine any ordinance of god
but only the ordinance of man: Then they that believe to be saved and purged
from sin by bread and wine, or by the offering up of bread and wine, think
that they may be saved by a thing that is not God, and by a work, that god
never commanded. But as ye said of late, that is to every man his god, by whom
he looks to be saved and redeemed from sin: but the mess with her chaplaynes
trust to be saved by the offering up of bread and wine, therefore the mess
with her chaplaynes makes a god of the offering up of bread and wine. But all
they that do so, are Idolaters: but the mess and her chaplaynes do so, ergo
they are Idolaters. Now seeing that the mess is an Idolatres, what Christen
man will from hence take her for Gods service? Who darre for the displeasure
of God, come unto her, or have any company or co^uersatio^ with her?


Porphy. it is not such an hainus matter, as ye make it, to offer up bread and
wine Did not the preistes of Moses law, offer up bread and wine? Did not
also Melchisedech a preiste before Moses law, of whose order we are of offer up
al so bred and wine? and yet were nether Moses Idolaters, nor yet Melchisedech.


knoweleg. if that the Preistes of Moses law and Melchisedech had, without
any commandment of God, offered up bread and wine, trusting by the
offering thereof, to purchasse redempcign and salvation, they had been
Idolaters in deed. But they neither offered up bread and wine without
commau^demente, neither trusted they to be saved through the offering up of
bread and wine: therefore their examples will not excuse you from Idolatry. Where
as ye say, that ye are Preistes of the order of Melchisedech, and seem thereby
to have auctorite to offer up bread and wine, as he did I shall brefely prove,
that ye are not of his order. Whosoever is a Preiste of the order of
Melchisedech, is a preiste for ever and neither has beginning nor ending of
his presthode: and therefore was Christ called a Priest after the order of
Melchisedech, because he was an everlasting preiste, and his preisthode had
effect and streyngth from the beginning of the world, and shall have unto
the end of the world, not because he offered bread and wine, for he offered
up neither of both, but his body and blood, which was sygnyfied by the bread
and the wine: ye have a beginning of your preisthode, at xxiiii. years of
your age, and an end of it when ye dye, therefore ye are not Preistes of the
order of Melchisedech. Are ye preistes of Moses law?


P phylargy. no.


knouule. If that ye be neither preistes of the order of Melchisedech, neither
of Aarons order, by what auctorite take ye in hand, to stand at altares,
offering up of outward sacrifices, when as in the new Testamente, it is
neither laufull to bylde altar, neither to offer upon it any outward
sacrfeice, seeing, that by the sacryfyce, that Christ offered on the cross,
all altares and outward sacryfyces were abrogated, and laufully put down.


Porphyry. We have altares in the new testamente, and outward Sacrifyces
allowed also, even of Christ in the.v. of Matthew in these words: When thou
shalt offer up thy reward at the altar, and shall there remember that thy
brother has somethynge against thee, leave thy reward there before the altar,
and go and be first brought in favor with thy brother, and then come and
offer thy reward. Lo, here our master Christ makes mention both of a
reward and also of an altar. Therefore in the new Testament we may both
have altares, and also outward offerynges.


knouuelege. All they that have any right understanding in scriptur ca^ tell
that Christ said these words, which ye have rehearsed, unto ye Ieues: which as
yet, were under the law and used outward sacrifices. The sacrifices and
ceremonies of Moses law, did so long endure, till yt Christ's sacrifice, which
was perfigured and sygnified before by the Jews outward sacrifice which was
ones fynished and offered. But as soon as Christ had offered up his sacryfyce
on the Cross, which was to him, as a certain altar all outward sacryfyces,
altares, and oblations was abrogated and put down Nevertheless unto that time
he forbad no Sacrifice or oblation ordened by Moses to be offered. Christ a
mynister of the new testament before his passion, was circumcised, he came to
the temple or Jerusalem and cate the Jews Pascal la^be after the order of
Moses law: shall we therefore be circumcised? shall we come to the temple of
Jerusalem? shall we be bound also to eat ye Ieues paschal lamb after the order
of Moses law? Therefore, ye place which ye have reher? sed here before, makes
nothing for altares and oblatio^s, to be had among christen me^, after ye
Christ has suffered his passion: which was so perfyt a sacrifyce or oblation,
yt there neded never mo after yt, to be offered to take sines away. There fore
your mestres missa and ye that will have still both altares and outward
sacrifices for sins, are enemies unto Christ's most holy word, which does
in many places testify, that at a certain time, all outward acryfyces should
have an end, and that the time was, when Christ offered him self a
sufficient sacrifice for the redemption of the whole world. To prove this
that I have said to be true, first I will show by the scripture, that the
offering up of sacryfyces, was no moral precepte, and therefore not everlasting
but a temporal and ceremonyall, too serve the infancy and weakness, of the
Jews a while, that is, to the time of perfection. Esaye in the first chapter
of his prophecy writes thus: What shall I do with your manyfolde sacryfyces
says the Lord? The burnte sacrifyces of rams, and the fat of the beasts
do I loathe. I love not the blood if oxen, lambs and gotes. When ye shall come
to appear before me, who requires it of your hand, that ye should tread on
my courutes? Bring your reward nomo^re in vain. Jeremy also writes thus in
the first Chapter: Wherefore bryngeste thou me Frankincense out of Stba, and
calamus and ambre out of a far land. Your burned offerynges please me not,
and your Sacrifyces are not sweet unto me. God sayethe also in the.v. of Amos
these words: I defye your holy days, neither will I smell in your
Congregations, and when ye shall sacryfyce unto me burnt offerynges and
sacryfyces of meat, they shall not be acceptable unto me, and I will not look
upon the offerynges of fattes. O house of Israel, have ye offered in the
wyldernes for the space of.xl. years offerynges and sacrifyces unto me? The
same sentence is wryte^ in the.xl. Pslame The same matter is contained in the
Li. Psalm in these words: Thou art not delyted in hosts or offerynges, or
else I would have offered. Thou wylt have no burnt sacryfyce and hosts to be
offered, but these sacrifices wylt thou not despise, a sorofull spyrite, a low
brought heart and a contritt. David makes mention of the same matter in the.xl
psalm: Thou love not a sacrifice and an offering of meat, but you have bored
through mine ears: thou have not requirey burnt sacrifice and hosts, to be
offered up for syn, Paul also in the.x. chap. of the epistle to the Hebrews
writes thus, of the abrogation of ceremonies, sacrifices, and oblatio^s of the
old law: The law having a shadow of good things of to come: and not being
ye patro^ it self, can never make the^ that are under it, perfect with thy
oblations, which it offerethe the very same contynually every year, or else
should offering have be^ left of because they which had offered up sacryfyce,
and had thereby cleansed and purifyed, should have had from the^cefurth no more
grudge of syn in their conscience. But in these is a remembrance of sins
yearly. For the blood of bulls and gotes ca^ not take away syn. Wherefore, when
he was obout to come in to the world he said. Thou would not have sacryfyce
and oblation, but thou haste made fyt a body to me, and thou haste not allowed
burnte Sacryfyces for sin: Then said I, here come I, it is written in the
beginning of the book of me, that I should do thy will (O God) When he
says before. thou would not have sacrifyce, oblation, and burnte
offerynges for synnis, neither dyddest thou allow them that are offered after
the manner of the Law: then said he, here am I (O god) to do thy will. He
takes away the former, that he may stablishe and set up the latter, by the
which will, we are made holy and sanctyfyed, by the offering up of the body
of Jesus Christ ones fynysshed and done.

Now out of these places of scripture which I have rehearsed, I gather, that
all outward oblations, burnt offeringes, sacryfyces and oblations both of
beasts and of meat, as of bread and such like was quiet abrogated and put down
at that time, when our savior Jesus Christ offered up on the Cross his
most blessed and perfyte sacryfyce, which was prefygured and signified before
long time, by the oblacions and sacryfices now put down and abrogated. If
that all kinds of sacrifices of vestes and meats be abrogated by Christ's
Sacryfyce, we ought to have no more outward sacrifyces. Then ye mestres Missa
with your Chaplaynes, do amiss to set v^ that, which Christ put down: yea
and though Christ had not abrogated the offering up of beasts and of bread,
yet ye do grievously offend God in setting up a new kind of sacryfyce or
worcester wtyppynge of God which he never commanded. Says not almighty God by
Esaias the prophet and co^ptayneth, that he is falsely worshypped by the
commayndementes of men? And God gives a plain commandment (...).xii. of
Deuteronomy saiynge.

Do ^hou only that, which I command the: neither shalt thou put any thing
to the commandment, neither take any thing from it. That God is sore
displeased with offeringes invented by man, the death of Nadab and Abiu
Leuitici the.x. does testifye, where as they both were burnte to death, for
offering up of strange fire which was not commanded them. Where have ye any
commandment of God that ye should offer up bread in the new Testament?
surely, nowher in the new Testamente. Furthermore, mastres Missa ye and your
Chaplaynes do noughtlye, and contrary unto the scriptures, to set up outward
altares, when as all outward sacryfyces ar abrogated. What should Christ's
temple do with an outward altar where there is no outward sacrifyce to be
offered upon it? The sacryfices that are allowed only for Christen men to be
offered, are these: The calves of our lyppes prayers thanks praysyng of god,
charitablenes, and mercy and alms to the poor, our own bodies mortifyed, a
contrite heart and a troubled spyrit. I pray you now, what shall we need an
outward and a stony altar to offer these sacrifices on? The^ when as we need
no such altares it is evil done of you to hold still altares in the church,
where as Christ's table should be. Now your altares do none other good, but
bear false wytnes against Christ, that he has not made perfyt all, that are
sanctified, with his blessed sacrifice: for an outward altar presupposes an
outward Sacryfyce but another outward sacrifyce for syn, after Christ's
sacrifyce, presupposes, that Christ's sacrifyce was not sufficient and perfyt
inoughe: For Paul to the Hebrwes proves, that the sacrifice that has another
succeding, is vnperfyt. But all such false wytnes and signifycations, which
sygnify any thing against Christ, ought to be put down and destroyed: but
it is now proved, that the altars which are in the church, presuppose and
sygnyfy against Christ, therefore they ought to be broken down and taken
away. Then shall ye my masters that are missaryes, say mess without altares:
if ye will needs say Mess. I wonder oftymes, where is now the zeal emonge
Christen men, which was emonge the carnal and stubburne Jews. If we, which
would be rekened perfyte Christianes, had been so ^elous for the keeping of
the new law as they were for the old, as soon as we had seen any altar set up
in the church, we would have said unto them that set it up. What
unfaithfulness is this, that ye can not be content with Christ, and the law
of the Gospel, but ye will needs set up Altares and outward Sacryfyces after
the manner of Moses law? Why set ye up again Altares and Sacryfyces, which
our redemer and Savior Christ has put down and abrogated? how ca^ ye for
shame set up altars, when as the children of Israel. Iosue.xxii. could not
abide, that the tribe of Ruben, Gad and the half tribe of Manasses, should set
up an altar any where, to do sacrifice on, saving only by the tabernacle?
and yet they were bound to offer up sacrifyces, and to have altares by the
tabernacle. Now have I proved sufficiently that contrary unto the scripture, ye
offer up bread, for syn and build altars in the temples of Christian men.


Fremouth. this do I also lay unto this woman's charge, that she with her
chaplaynes, takes in hand to offere up Christ again, and to take sin
away, with the offering up of Christ, eue^ as he took sin a^ay when he
offered his blessed body upon the cross, which thing I shall prove to be
injurious to Christ's passion and presthode and contrary unto the word of God.


Porphiry. Almighty god said unto the Ieues: In cathedra Mosi scribe and
pharisae^ sederunt, that is, in the teaching stool of Moses, have sytten the
scribes and the pharisees: do what soever they bid ye do, but according unto
their works, do ye not, for they say, and do not. If that the Ieues were bound
to do that which the Scribes and pharisees bad them do, we are now bound to do
in the new testament those things, that our bisshoppes and ordinaries bid us
do: But our ordinaries have commanded us and the mess to offer up Christ
again daily for the taking away of sin, therefore we are bound to offer up
Christ again to take sins away. And in doing of our superiors
commandment, we please God: who bad us obey our superiors. Therefore in
offering up Christ again to release sins, both of the quycke and the
dead, is not contrary unto the will of God, but pleasant and acceptable unto
him.


knouulege. The Jews were bound, I grant you, so long to obey the Scribes
and pharisees, as they sat in Moses chayr, or teaching stool, but no longer.
So So long sat they in Moses teaching stool or chair, as they taught only
Moses law and nothing of their own: But when as the Scribes and Pharisees
taught their awn traditions, and commandments, they sat in their own chair
or teaching stool, and the^ were the Jews so little bound to obey them, that
Christ gave them a plain commandment, that they should not obey the^, but
avoid and shun their doctrine, and therefore said he Matthew. xvi. Beware of
the leuyn of the Pharisees, in the which place, leuyn, (as the scripture
expounds it self) betokens the doctrine of the Pharisees. If that all the
Jews were bound to do what soever the Scribes and Pharisees did command
without any exception, whether it were contained in the scripture or no, then
brake the Apostles Christ's commau^deme^t, when as they would not wasshe their
hands, when they went to meat, for the Pharisees and the Scribes said unto
Christ. Why do thy dysciples break the ordinao^ces of the elders? for they
wash not their hands, when they eat bread: but Christ in defendyng of his
disciples, declares, that they brake not his commandment in breakyng of the
Pharisees commandment: therefore by these places of scripture, it is evident
that a man is sometime bound to obey the Pharisees commandment, that is, when
they teach nothing but the scripture, and some time men ar bound to disobey
and resist their commandment, that is, when they sit in their awn chayres,
and teach traditions, which are notin ye scripture. The pharisees taught that al
me^ should wasshe their hands before meat. They taught, ye me^ should not
honor their father and mother, but put money in the box, and yt thereby they
should be excused from honoryng of their father and mother. No man is so mad to
believe that by this saiynge of Christ: in the chair of Moses have sytte the
scribes and pharisees, do whatsoever they did you do: men ar bound to keep the
pharisees commandment, when they either teach men to wasshe hands before
meat, or to dishonor their father and mother. Then can ye not gather of the
text, that we are bound to obey our Bysshoppes and pastores in all
tradytions and commandments, whatsoever they command us to keep without
any exception, but only in such commandments, as they have out of the new
Testament. If that we were bound to believe and obey what soever the
preachers, or ordinaries, or Bishops did preach or commau^de, Certain Ieues
of the sect of the pharisees, which had believed and professed Christ, stert
up and teached the brethren. Act.xv. that they could not be saved, except
they were circumcised, and kept the law with the Gospel: was the Christian
me^ of that time bound to believe and to obey these preachers commandments?
Bishop Fyssher laid that the Bishop of Rome was heed of the church. Bishop
Reps a little before the Idol of Walsyngam was put down, said, that men should
go on pilgrimage. Bishop Gardener said, that Images should be worshipped with
outward worship, and that men were justified by their works.

These.iii. were ordinaries: were al they that were under them at that time,
when they preached such doctrine, bound to do as these men said, or they
were not? If they were not, I pray you tell me, why were they not bound to
obey their doctrine and commandment?


Philargy. because they commanded both, that it was not in the scripture and
also contrary doctrine unto the scripture.


Fremouth. Then when as your ordinary commands you, and your mestres Missa,
any thing concerning reli, gion that is not in the scripture, or contrary unto
the scripture, ye are not bound to obey him, and keep his commandment: But
this commandment of your ordinary, where as he commands you to offer up
christ again is not commanded of god in his scripture, yea it is clean
contrary unto the scripture, wherefore ye should have no more in this case have
followed the counsel and commandment of your ordinary then the good Jews,
kept the commandment of the Pharisees, where they taught men to dishonor
their father and mother.


knouuelege. And I for my part shall prove, that both your kind of presthode
that offer up Christ again, and also your mastres, whom ye have taken in hand
to defend, ar contrary unto the word of God. They that go about to make
Christ's sacrifyce vnperfyt, ar enemies unto the scriptur and contrary unto the
word of god: but your preisthode with the mess, do so: therefore they both ar
contrary unto the scripture. Saint Paul in the epystel to the Hebrwes proves
by these reasons, that the sacrifyces and preisthod of Moses law, are
vnperfyt, because they could never make perfyt them, which were under the
law. And in the seventh chapter, he says thus, speking of the law and
sacrifices of Moses The commandment which went before is taken away for the
weakness and inprofytablenes of it, for the law has brought nothing unto
perfection, but it was a leadynge unto a better hope. The preistes of the old
law were many because they were not suffered by death to continue. But christ,
because he endures for ever, has an everlasting presthode: wherefore he
living for ever, can perfitly save the^, which through him, go unto god. Mark
these words well, for they are not mine but Paul's. Paul also in the.x. of the
epistle to the Hebr. proves that the law is imperfect, because it could not,
with the sacrifices and hosts which, ye prestes offered up every year of fresh
make the^ yt came to the law perfect: or else (says paul) they would have left of
offeri^g. Of the words I make these reso^s. If ye sacrifices of moses law were
imperfect, because they could not make the^ perfyte, for whom they were
offered, then if that Christ's sacryfyce make not all them perfyt, for whom it
was offered, it was vnperfyt also: But ye offer up again for them, for whom
Christ ones before has offered, ergo ye reken, that the sacrifyce of Christ
made not them perfyt, and so ye reken Christ no perfyter a priest, then Moses
preistes were, and his sacryfyce no perfiter, then their Sacrifices were.

Mark well the words of Paul. Lex his hostiis, quas singulis annis
continenter offerunt, nunquam potest acced entes perfectos reddere, alioqui
nonne desiissent offerre? The law can never make them that come unto it
perfyte, with these sacrifyces, which they offer contynually every year ye
same: Or else I pray you, had not they ceased from offering Ye may se by
Paul here, that where as there is no ceasynge from offering, that there, is
no perfection of sacrifice: but ye offer up Christ again and cease never one
day in the year, saving one, (if that ye cease then) from offering him
again, therefore, ye make as much as lies in you, Christ's Sacrifyce imperfyt.
Whosoever makes Christ's sacrifyce vnperfyt, is blasphemous to Christ, and is
a membre of Antichryst: but it it proved, mastres Missa, that you with your
chaplaynes do so: ergo ye with your Chaplaynes are Blasphemous unto Christ,
and members of Antichryste. That in offering up Christ again, ye be proud,
arrogante, and take more auctorite, then ever God gave you, I will prove it
thus. What soever the high preiste may not do, which is both God and man,
that can not a simple preiste laufully do, which is but a mere man: But
Christ our high priest can not offer him self up again then can no simple
Preistes, that are but mere men, offer up laufully Christ again: but ye take
in hand to do so, therefore it, that ye take in hand, is unlawful, and ye
are in doing of your fact, presu^ptuous and arroga^t, taking unto you more
auctorite, then yt have given unto you. That Christ can not offer up him self
again, these words of Paul to the Hebrwes.ix. do testify. In ipsum coelum
ingressus est ut appareat nunc in conspectu dei pro nobis, non ut soepius offer
at semetipsum, quemadmodum pontifex ingreditur in sancta singulis annis, per
sanguinem alienum: Alioqui oportuisset saepius passum fuisse a condito mundo.
etc. He entered into heaven it self, to appear in the syghte of God for us, not
to offer him self often times up: as the high priest enters into the temple
every year by strange blood. For then from the beginning of the world,
should he have often suffered. Mark ye not here that Paul says, that Christ
should have often suffered, if he had done a certain thing often? that same thing
was offering of him self, as the text does expressedly declare.

Then seeing that Paul joins inseparably together, often offering, and
sufferynge: it folowethe well, that so often as Christ is offered: so often does
he suffer, and they that make him to be often offered, makes him to be slain.
But ye mastres Missa with your chaplaynes, offer Christ a thousand times in one
year, then do ye kill Christ a thousand times in one year. Now my Lord
judge, what this woman deserves for killing of Christ so often, I refer it unto
your judgment.

Ye say also mastres Missa, that ye take sins away with the offering up of
Christ, and Paul says: Absque sanguinis effusione non fit remissio.
without sheddynge of blood, there is no forgyuenes: then it folowethe also by
this place, that ye and your chaplaynes ar bloody sacrificers. Now to you my
masters ye be prestes what christian bishop will command you to offer up Christ
again to take syn away, seeing yt as often as he is offered up so often must he
suffer, and have his blood shed. None surely, for they yt do so, are of the
right lynage of that Bishop, which said: Necesse est, ut unus moriatur pro
populo, ne tota gens pereat: and of theyrs also that said Nos habemus legem,
and secundum hanc debet mori. There must one dye for the people, least the
hole multitude should peryshe. We have a law and according to that, he must
dye.

David and Paul say, that Christ is an everlasting Preiste, and his
preisthode has no end. No man can succeed him, that lasts for ever, christ
dureth for ever, then can no man succeed him: then are ye not Christ's
successors as ye would be taken. Furthermore, seeing that Christ's preisthode
is everlasting there can no other Preistehode laufully succeed, then is your
Preistehode, which ye would bring in after Christ's preistode, unlawful. If
ye say, that ye are of Christ's order, Paul showing the dyfference between
Christ's preisthode and the preisthode of Moses law, declares that none
such as ye be, can be of Christ's order. These.iii. properties. whereby
Christ's preisthode dyfferethe from all other preisthodes. The first property
that longs unto a Preiste of Christ's order, is to be but one, and without
sin: The second is, to endure for ever in his preisthode. The third is to
offer but ones, and with that offering to make perfyt all them, for whom he
offers. All these properties are plainly set out in the.vii. and.x. chapters
of the epistle to the Hebrews, in these words. They were made many preistes,
because they were not suffered by death to continue. But this preiste, because
he abides still, the same for ever, has an everlasting preisthode, wherefore
he can save fully them, that through him goo unto God, ever living for that
intent, that he might make interce^syon for them.

Yt was mete that we had such a high Bishop, that should be, godly and devout,
innocent, undefiled, set a side from sinners, and higher then the heavens,
which should not have need euerydaye to offer up Sacryfyces as those high
preistes had: first for their awn sins, and then after, for the sins of the
people: For that he did ones, when he offered up him self, and with one
oblation he made perfyte for ever, them that are sanctified: But ye are many
preistes, and live not ever and are not without sin, and make not them
perfyte, for whom ye offer with one oblation: Therefore ar ye not preistes of
Christ's order, yea neither of his order, nor ordinance, for he never ordyned
any kind of preistes whereof he has made no mention in his scripture.

A preiste which is ordened of God, to offer up alone without any fellows in
office, an everlasting offering for the takyngt away of sin, and does his
deuty perfytly, has great wrong done unto him, if any man take his office in
hand or will join him self in office with him, without his leave or
commandment: Christ was ordained of God to offer alone without any fellows
in office, an everlasting oblation, for the relesyng of sin, and that office
does he perfytly, yet ye unsent for, and without license, thruste your selves
into Christ's office, to offer with him, for the taking away of sins.
Therefore ye do Christ plain wrong, and not only him, but also his father, who
sent him. Now, how can this preisthode of youres be of god which is iniurius
and does wrong, both to the Father of heaven, and to Christ his son, and
our redemer? Then if the Mess lean upon your preisthode, they must both
fall together. Here have I proved also that this Mess is not ordened of God,
and that she is contrary to the scripture, and a blasphemous member of
Antichryst, and injurious unto the preisthod of Christ and to his passion also,
and a foul idolatres, and a causer of Idolatry. Whether such an Idolatres
ought to be holde^ still in Christ's church for gods service or no, I refer
all the matter unto you, my Lord Judge, which have auctorite in this matter to
determyn as ye have se euydence.


Palemon. These men thy accusers, have brought forth sufficyent evidence and
wytnes, that thou art not of God, that thou art contrary and enemy unto the
holy scripture, and and Idolatres, making a god of unconsecrated bread and
wine, and that to the great injury of Christ's passion thou offerest up
Christ again, and as much as lies in the, kyllest him a thousand times in
one year. Wherefore, thou have deserved death, and art worthy to be burned.

But least thy fathers generation the Papists should say, that we are as
desirous of blood sheddyng, as they were, when they bare the swing, I
command the in pain of burning to pack the out of this realm, with all thy
bags and baggage wtin these. viii. days, and go to thy father the pope, with all the speed, that thou can, and say, that her is in England no more place
for him neither for any of his generation.


knouu. Sir, if it please you, if there be no man appointed to se this woman
shypped, and conveyed out of the land, the Preistes, will keep her still in
their chambers and will abuse her, as they have done before: Therefore, if your
Lordshyp will let me have her in my custody, I shall se her conveyed ones unto
the sea, let her choose her, whether she will come again or no.


Palemon. I am content, say not woman but thou art warned: if that thou ever
come into this realm again, afther these.viii. days look none other but to be
served eue^ as thy father has served our brethren in time past.


The Mess speaks
Help and defend my good brethren all
Which love doctrine Cathedral
And do believe unwritten verity
To be as good as scriptures sincerite
Because in the Bible I ca^ not be found
The Heretics would burye me under the ground
I pray you heartily if it be possible
To get my a place in ye great Bible
Or else as I do understand
I shall be banished out of this land
And shall be compelled with sorrow and pain
To return to Rome to my father again

