THE OPINION OF PETER TVRNER DOCT: IN PHYSIC, CONCERNING AMVLETS OR PLAGVE
CAKES, WHEREOF PERHAPS some hold too much, and some too little.



AT LONDON Printed for Edward Blount. 1603. being the year of the great plague

The opinion of Peter Turner Docter in Physic, concerning Amulets or Plague
cakes; whereof perhaps some hold too much, and some too little.
IT is very true gentle Reader, that Arsenicke, Orpiment, Sublimate
praecipitate, Quicksilver, Todes and Adders, are in some sort rank and
deadlye poisons in the highest degree. For daily experience might teach it,
though no learned writer had once mentioned it. But it follows not therefore
that there is no use of them in Physic or curing of diseases. For, to omit all
the probable arguments taken from sweet Kirnels in bitter shells, precious
Diamonds in the midst of course stones, and Pearls in base Oysters, alleged
both by Philosophers and Physicians, to prove that in most poisoned subjects
may be the noblest remedies, it is evident by the practice both of learned and
unlearned, that they are often used both inwardly and outwardly. My self I
have diverse times and yet not without the warrant of good Authors both old and
new, cured sundry extreme coughes and impostumated lungs with the fume of
Orpiment administered by the mouth. My self also had the rebellious roots of a
Wen (after I had used Sublimate and Praecipitate, in vain) well taken away
with Arsenick. The place of the Wen being close by the ridge bone ouer-against
the heart. I have also many times both given, and seen given Crude Mercury,
that is Quicksiluer unto children for the worms, and that with good success.
As for Sublimate and Praecipitate, I refer me to any man of any reading or
experience, whether they be not daily and usually administered both within and
without, and that with good success, especially being brought as chymicall
writers call it into Turbittes: Toades dried and given in powder inwardly
prouoake urine exceedingly, and outwardly applied they stay bleeding most
miraculously, and draw forth the matter of the plague into themselves, without
breaking of the parties skin, or any other harm. Concerning Adders, who
knows not that from them the Triacles have their names in Greek, because
they are the Basis or most principal ingredient whereof they are compounded.
Now if the fume of Orpiment may be taken inwardly, and the substance of
Arsenick applied to Ulcers and raw wounds, wherein is as much danger of
poisoning as by swallowing of it, as may appear by the speedy death of wild
beasts upon the least raising of their skins with Arrow-heads dipped in
Toxicum and such like poisons: I know no cause why a man should be afraid to
wear them (especially enclosed in silk) upon the whole skin. Neither how they
can be perpetually opposite to man's nature. Nay if that be a true and
sufficient definition of poison At no time to agree with nature. I see not how
these things may simply be called poisons, that sometimes and in some cases as
has bin showed agree with nature as well as a man would wish. As for that
point that sometimes they blister the skin, and cause angry wheales or pumples
to arise, seeing that inconvenience may be both easily prevented and as easily
cured, and comes only but by the wearers default it needs not to terrisie
any man from the using of them. For if the wearer of these Amulets or plague
cakes, as soon as they begin to sweat, either take away the Cake, or put linen
enough between it and the skin, or sew it in thicker stuff, or anoint the
place with oil or any vnctuose thing, they may be free enough from that
inconvenience.

And if as soon as it begins to breed any itching, or raise any pimple,
they remove the cake for a day or two, and anoint the place with a little
cream or Vnguentum album Camphoratum, they shall not need to complain of any
deep or foul holes or vlcerations. And yet it may be a question worth the
considering, whether to have such things arise, be not rather a benefit where
they appear, then a harm. For seeing the same effect or accident happens not
to all that wear them, nor to all that sweat, it may seem that only they are
subject to such blisterings in whom there is some venomous matter, which
nature by the help of the medicine labors to expel. And as worthy the
consideration it is, now we talk of blistering and corroding, to call to
remembrance, how Garleeke, Mustart, and Rosa solis, the herb, being
greatblisterers of the skin, are not for that condemned for poisons, nor
refused to be taken into the stomach. The joyce of a Limon will grave upon a
knife as well as Aqua fortis or strong water, and yet who ever had any harm by
taking of it inwardly. To blister therefore or corrode the skin, is not a
sufficient argument to prove a thing a poison. It is also very evident both by
experience and reason, that things outwardly applied have action, and work
into the body by communicating their spiritual qualities (as I may call them)
to the spirits of our bodies, by the means of the warmth that opens our
pores, and rarefying the subtle parts of the medicine, is the cause of a
reciprocate action and passion, as may appear by purging simples and
plasters. And hereupon, notwithstanding what has been above said, and
perhaps not sufficiently wayed, it may seem strange to some how Arsenick and
such like strong poisons, having so strong poisoning spirits, should not also
poison our spirits wheresoever they meet. For the better satisfaction of such
as are not carried away with former praeiudice, and are capeable of these
matters, this is in brief my answer.

Arsenick and Orpiment are no ways poysonus or hurtful to nature, but by
their corrosiuenes or fretting qualities: otherwise they are as good, if not
better, both preservatives and curers as any other most in use: and therefore
so long as they are kept from corroding or fretting, they can do no harm, but
may do much good in that kind, which they respect: That is to say, in all
Arsenicall diseases, as the Plague, the Plurisie, Noli me tangere, Canckers and
Fistulas, and all of that kind. If thou desire this to be confirmed unto thee
by example or experience, to wit, that they may be kept from corroding: Behold
the Mounte-bankes or Quacksaluers of Germany and Italy, who before they play
their parts before the people, drink first in their lodgings for that purpose
half a pint or more of Sallat-oyle, and then coming to their stage, take
inwardly in all men's sight incredible quantities of these poisons, and then
taking nothing after them but their Triacles which they have to sell, make
their beholders believe that by them they be preserved from all harm. (Of this
thou may see more at large in Mathiolus in his Commentaries upon
Dioscorides) whereby it appears as I said before, that they may be kept from
fretting or corroding of the inward parts, which granted, it follows that
the like may be done outwardly, and so be worn safely upon the bare skin,
notwithstanding their corrosiue qualities be no ways taken away. But if they
may be clean taken away, as all that are well practiced in chimicall
praeparations do affirm, I see no reason why they should be so feared,
especially to be applied outwardly. And why should it not be as possible to
remove the corrosiue qualities of minerals from their bodies, as well as to
remove the burning quality of Aron roots, called in English Starch-worte, or
Wake-Robin from them, which I have seen done, and then as pleasant bread made
of them as of any other grain: or as well as to remove the bitterness of the
gall of an Ox, which my self have done, and brought it to be as sweet as the
joyce of Liquorice, and then administered it with good success in the yellow
Iaundisse. But suppose that this were impossible: why may there not be as sure
a way to correct that quality by mineral means as there is to correct the
offending qualities of Scammony, Agarick, Helleborus, Euphorbium and such like
by their like, that is by Vegitables? Is it absurd, nay is there not great
probability to think that God has in nature appointed mineral Alexipharmaca
praeseruatiues or remedies against the greatest poisons in that kind, when we
see that in vegitables he has in his great mercy and providence created an
Antithora for a Thora, and an Antieuphorbium for Euphorbium, I think not. And
if need were I can name some, but that such secrets ought always to remain
with them that know them. Now if any man not satisfied with that which has
been said, object yet farther, that I have proved but the half of that which
they expected. That is, that these Amulets may be safly worn without any
harm, not showing the other more necessary part, that they may do any good.
For satisfying all such, (although there is enough said to those that hold them
dangerous, which is the question now in controversy,) I will farther yet
briefly tell you my opinion of that point also, upon that small knowledge (yet
dearly bought) which I imagine I have in chimicall matters, partly by my own
experience, and partly by reading of the professors of that art: I assure my
self that there is in these minerals which the Alchimists call their spirits
good store of gold, or to speak a little plainer of the spirits of gold: and
from thence in my opinion it has that incredible and admirable operation in
preserving of our spirits from infection. For the better confirmation of this
my supposition, to wit, that mineral spirits are not without part of the
metals from which they come; If you will demand of the refiners or meltars
down of metals, what the reason is why many times they cannot get the gold
or other metals which they know to be in their Ores or Owres, they will answer
you that the abundance of the wild spirits that are in them when they bring
them to the blast, carry away all the metal with them, which they do by
eating of them up as strong waters use to do. But if thou had rather hear
what the learneder sort that deal with such things hold of these matters.
Then read what is written in a treatise of Arsenick by Theoprastus Paracelsus,
who was absolutely the most learned chimicall writer and worker that ever
wrote: And if thou have any insight in this kind of Philosophy, whereby to
understand him, he will satisfy thee of the natures of these things to the
full. As for the authorities of such Physicians or Philosophers which are not
acquainted neither with the chymicall theory nor practice, I hold their
censures as insufficient, for want of knowledge of those things which they
dislike: and therefore how many soever they be in number, so long as they
understand not what they reprehend, it makes no great matter: and yet if this
controversy were to be debated by authorities, my opinion should not be less
assisted then any others. But seeing it would be both tedious and needless for
the readers to be troubled with such allegations, I will not take that course at
this time, in which my intent is only to let them know what my opinion and
practice is of these things. Yet least it might be thought that I have none but
poor Paracelsus on my side, I will translate for them that understand no
Lattin, a few lines concerning these Amulets and Plague cakes, out of a little
Treatise of the Plague of Iohannis Pistorius a learned Physician of Germany;
his words are these. Many Italian Physicians are of that opinion, that there
was never a more excellent thing (speaking of these Amulets) granted to
mortal men by God, to preserve them from the Plague, and therefore call it a
divine medicine invented by God, and take it upon their oaths that never any
fell sick that wore them, and so much the more and the better I like of them,
says Pistorius, because their notable profit or virtue is confirmed by
experience and made manifest to the senses, and a few lines after he says
further. And so much the more am I moved to like of them, because in the year
64. in Zurick, I never knew any amongst a great many that wore them to get any
harm by them, or dye of the Plague, notwithstanding the great conversation
that the sound had with the sick, according to the custom of that place. And
at Basil the like was observed. As these things (gentle reader) moved the
foresaid Pistorius to allow and prescribe these Amulets to his patients, so
have the same (together with my own long observations) done the like with me,
and so having as I promised briefly, set down my opinion, I commit thee to
the head Physician, who send thee health both of soul and body.

Maledictus qui ponit carnem brachium suum: that is in effect; Accursed be he
that puts his whole confidence in secondary means, for it is neither herb
nor salve, nor any thing else that heals, but only the blessing of the head
Physician. And hereupon it may fall out sometimes that they who commit
superstition or Idolatry (as I may call it) in wearing of these Amulets, may
now and then notwithstanding miscarry, but it were pity for that cause to
derogate from the credit of so noble and general a medicine, for a few
particular instances.

FINIS.

