THE NOBLE ART OF VENERIE OR HVNTING.

Wherein is handled and set out the Virtues, Nature, and Properties of
fiuetene sundry Chaces together, with the order and manner how to Hunte and
kill every one of them.

Translated and collected for the pleasure of all Noblemen and Gentlemen, out
of the best approved Authors, which have written any thing concerning the same:
And reduced into such order and proper terms as are used here, in this noble
Realm of England.



The Contents whereof shall more plainly appear in the Page next followyng.

The contents of this Book.
First the Antiquity of hounds together with the sundry sorts of hounds,
and their several natures and properties. The best order how to breed,
enter, and make perfect every one of the same. The virtues, nature, and
properties of an Heart, together with the perfect order how to hunte him in
his season. The nature and hunting of the Bucke. The nature and hunting of the
Raynedeare. The nature and hunting of the Row. The nature and hunting of the
vvilde Goat The nature and hunting of the vvilde Bore. The nature and hunting
of the Hare. The nature and hunting of Conies. The nature and hunting of the
Fox The nature and hunting of the Badgerd. The nature and hunting of the
Marterne and vvildcat. The nature and hunting of the Otter The nature and
hunting of the Wolf. The nature and hunting of the Bear. The cures and
medicines for all diseases in Hounds. The proper terms of Venerie. A treatise
of coursing with Greyhoundes. The measures of Blowing.
To the right noble Sir Henry Clinton Knight Lord Clinton and Say, Master of
the Heart Hounds to the Queens most excellent Majesty, long life, with
increase of honor to the pleasure of the Almighty
RIght Noble, mine especial trust is that your honor will pardon my boldness
in dedicating this Book to your honorable name. For when I had with some
charge ca^sed the same to be collected and translated out of sundry good
authorities, and thought that it could not but generally delight all Noblemen
and Gentlemen of this Realm. I made also diligent search to know what
particular personage were meetest to be presented with the same: and being
informed by my friend (the Translator) that the office of the Heart Hou^ds
perteyned unto your Lordship, I thought it my duty, and was glad that I
should thereby have just occasion to dedicate so noble an Art unto your
honorable name, most humbly beseeching your honor to accept it in good part,
and to be assured that whatsoever I could procure to be written of this
excellent Art of Venerie or Hunting, either out of strange Authors, or by
conference of our country Huntsmen, is here in this Book diligently and
sensibly declared. I ca^ no more but present it with humble intent, and
beseech the father of Heaven evermore to bless your good Lordship with the
spirit of his grace.

Amen.
Your honors most humble. C. B.

THE TRANSLATOR to the Reader.
I Might well have taken occasion (gentle Reader) to commend unto thee, both
mine own pains in tra^slating and gathering this work, the Printers charge
and diligence in procuring and publishing the same, and the perfection of the
thing it self, according to the subject and theme whereupon it treats. But
as touching mine own travail, I will nothing speak: sithence I did undertake
the same at request of my friend (the Printer) who has so thoroughly deserved
my pains, as I stand fully contented: his diligence, and charge, I think not
meet to be ouerpassed with silence: who to his great costs has sought out
as much as is written and extant in any language, concerning the noble Arts of
Venerie and Falconrie: and to gratify the Nobility and Gentlemen of this
land, has disbursed great sums for the Copies, translations, pictures, and
impressions of the same. I will not say that he has spared neither English,
French, Latin, Italian, nor 'Dutche Author to search (as it were in the
bowels of the same) an exquisite tradition and method of those two Arts. But
to conclude mine opinion in few words, he has showed himself more desirous
(a rare example) to pleasure others, tha^ to profit himself by this enterprise.
And therwithal in his behalf, I must allege, that as the studies of Divinity,
and grave discourses are (without all comparison) most co^me^dable, even so yet
could he have trauayled in no one Art or Science (them excepted) which might
have been more commendable or necessary for all Noblemen and Gentlemen: not only
for the delightfulnes thereof, but also because it is both profitable and godly.
For if (as Solomon says) all earthly things be vanities, then are those most
to be esteemed which may continue the life of Man in most comfort and godly
quiet of mind, with honest recreatio^. And if it be true (as it is doutlesse)
that pride (which is root of al vices,) does increase by idleness, the^ is that
exercise highly to be commended, which does maintain the body in health, the
mind in honest meditatio^s, and yet the substance not greatly decayed. For
these causes I have always allowed and confirmed their opinions, which do more
esteem Hu^ting tha^ Hawking. Since we do plainly The Falconer says no.
perceive, that Hu^ting is maintained with much lesser charge. And to return to
my first begone purpose, I commend to thy courteous consider atio^ (gentle
reader) both my travel, and the Printers charge: assuring thee, that as much as
could conveniently be found out either in authority, or conference, is here
expressed, for thy better knowledge in Venerie. Take it in gree, and be as
thankeful unto the Printer for his good will and honest mening, as he has bin
unto me for my study and travel herein. And so farewell:

George Gascoigne, in the commendation of the noble Art of Venerie.
AS God himself declares, the life of man was lent,
Because it should (with fear of him) in gladsome wise be spent.
And Solomon does say, that all the rest is vain,
Unless that mirth and merry cheer, may follow toil and pain.
If that be so in deed, what booteth then to build,
High towers and halles of stately port, to leave an unknown child?
Or wherefore hoord we heaps of coin and worldly wealth,
VVhiles therwithall that caytif care, co^mes creeping in by stelth?
The needy neighbors grudge to see the rychman thr^,
Such malice worldly mucke does breed in every man alive.
Contention commes by coin, and care does contecke sew,
And sodeine death by care is caught, all this you know is true.
Since death is then the end, which all men seek to fly,
And yet are all men well aware, that Man is borne to dye,
Why lead not men such lives, in quiet comely wise,
As might with honest sport and game, their worldly minds suffice?
Amongst the rest, that game, which in this book is taught,
Does seem to yield as much content, as may on earth be sought.
And but my simple Muze, both mirth and mean mistake,
It is a mean of as much mirth, as any sport can make.
It occupies the mind, which else might chance to muse
On mischief, malice, filth, and frauds, that mortal men do use.
And as for exercise, it seems to bear the bell,
Since by the same, men's bodies be, in health mainteyned well.
It exercyseth strength, it exercyseth wit,
And all the poars and sprites of Man, are exercisde by it.
It shakes off all sloth, it presses down all pride,
It cheres the heart, it glads the eye, and through the ears does glyde.
I might at large express how early huntsmen rise,
And leave the sluggish sleep for such, as leachers lust deuyse.
How true they tread their steps, in exercises train,
Which frisking flings and lightbraind leaps, may seem always to stain.
How appetite is bred (with health) in homely cates,
While Surfeit sits in vain excess, and Banquet breeds debates.
How cries of well mouthd hounds, do counteruaile the cost,
Which many a man (beyond his reach) on instruments ^ath lost.
How setting of Relayes, may represent the skyll,
Which soldiers use in Embushes, their furious foes to kill.
How Fox and Badgerd both, make patterns (in their den)
Of Plotformes, Loopes, and Casamats, deuisde by warlike men.
How fighting out at Bay, of Heart, Bucke, Goat, or Bore,
Declares the valiant Romans death, when might may do no more.
How sight of such delights, does scorn all common shows,
Of Enterludes, of Tumblers tricks, of antikes, mocks, and mowes.
And how the nimble Hare, by turning in her course,
Does plainly prove that Policy, sometime surpasses force.
The Venson not forgot, most meet for Princes dyshe:
All these with more could I rehearse, as much as wit could wyshe.
But let these few suffice, it is a Noble sport,
To recreate the minds of Men, in good and godly sort.
A sport for Noble peers, a sport for gentle bloods,
The pain I leave for servants such, as beat the bushie woods,
To make their master sport. Then let the Lords rejoice,
Let gentlemen behold the glee, and take thereof the choice.
For my part (being one) I must needs say my mind,
That Hunting was ordained first, for Men of Noble kind.
And unto them therefore, I recommend the same,
As exercise that best beco^mes, their worthy noble name.
Tam Marti quam Mercurio.
T. M. Q. in praise of this book.
WHo list to learn, the properties of hounds,
To breed them first, and then to make them good,
To teach them know, both voice and horn, by sounds,
To cure them eke, from all that hurts their blood:
Let him but buy this book: So shall he find,
As much as may, (for hounds) content his mind.
Who list to view, what virtues do remain,
In every beast, which Man does hunt and chase,
What cures they bear, for many an ache and pain,
What seasons serve, to find them best in case:
Within this book he may the same find out,
And so be well resolvde of every doubt.
And to be short, as much as Latin, Greek,
Italyans, Frencb, High Dutch, or English skill,
Can teach, to Hunt, to Herbor, lodge, or seek,
To force, to take, to conquer, or to kill,
All games of chase: So much this book descries,
In proper terms, as wit can (well) devise.
Wherefore my Muse, must recommend the same,
As worthy praise, and better worth the price,
A pleasant book, for peers of noble name,
An honest book to recreate the wise:
A Book well bought, God grant it so be sold,
For sure such Books, are better worth than gold.
L^tet, quod non patet.
Of the race and Antiquity of Hovvnds, and who first brought them into
France. Chapt. 1.
I Have thought good diligently to look (as well in the works of antiquity,
as also in those of our time) from whence the first Race of hownds did come
into France, and I never found Chronicle nor History that seems to speak of
greater continuance, than one which I saw in Bryttaine, written by one whose
name was john of Monmouth an english man, the which does treat, how after ye
piteous and dreadefull destruction of Troy, Aeneas arrived in Italy with his
son Ascanius, (which was afterward king ^f the Latins) and begatte a son
named Siluius, of whom Brutus descended, which loved hunting exceedingly.

Now it came to pass, that Siluius and Brutus being one day in a Forest
hunting a Heart, they were overtaken with night, and seeing the Heart pass
before them almost spente by the Howndes, they went toward him to kill him.
But fortune was such to Brutus, (as God would) that whilst he meant to kill
the Heart, by glauncing of his arrowe he killed his father Siluius. Which
thing caused the people to be moved, and to mutine against him, thinking that
he had done it of malice and desire to reygne, and to have the government of
the Realm. In such sort, that to avoid their great fury and indignation,
Brutus was constrained to go out of the country, and undertook a voyage into
Greece, to deliver certain Troyans, his companions and allies, which were yet
there deteyned in captivity since the destruction of Troy. Which voyage he
accomplished by force of arms, and when he had delivered them, he assembled a
great number of the same Troyans, whom he caused to take an oath, that as well
for the dishonor which they had received, as also for the irrecuparable loss
and damage of their goods, and for the lamentations and dole which they had
cause to make for their kinsfolks and friends, which had bin slain in the
cruel wars of Troy, they should never return into their country. Then did
he cause to be rygged and trimmed a great number of ships, wherein he
embarked himself and all his men, and took with him a great number of Hounds
and Greyhoundes. Afterward he sailed so long till he passed ye streyghts of
Gibraltare, entering into the Ocean Seas, and descended in the Isles of Armorie,
which at this present is called Bretaigne in France, by reason of his name
which was Brutus. Which Islands he conquered without resistaunce, and was
therein, peasably by the space of four years, and afterward took ship
again, and landed at Totneys, in ye west of this noble realm, whereupon after
his co^quests made here over certain gian^es, one of his captains called
Corineus, did buyld the chief town of Cornwall. But to return unto his deeds
in Armory, when they were settled, and had inhabited the said country, Brutus
and his son Turnus, (which had as before fayde brought great store of
hounds with them) went daily on hunting in the great Forest, which
contained then in length from Tyffauge unto Poytiers; whereupon one part of
the country is called to this present Gastine. Now at that same time there
reigned in Poyctou and Aquitaine, a king named Groffarius Pictus, who made his
continual residence in Poyctiers, and was one day advertised that the Troyans
did greatly exercise themselves in hu^ting, and that they hunted in his
Forrestes with such a kind of dogs, as after they had once found a Heart,
they never left him till they brought him to death. Whereupon King Groffarius,
having heard such news, was moved and exceeding angry, in such sort, that
he determined to make wars with them, and assembled all his forces. The
Troyans being advertised of such an assembly, marched all along the river of
Loyre with all their puyssaunce, and met their ^nimies at a place where the
city of Tours is presently situate, and there they gave battle, in the
which Turmis Cosine to Brutus, or as some Chronicles say, Turnus the eldest
son of Brutus was slain, and in remembrance of him the said City was
buylte, and by the name of Turnus was called Tours.

I have thought good to recoumpte this history, that men may thereby
understand, that it is long since hounds have bin used in Bretaigne, and I
think certainly, that these Trojans were the first which brought the race of
hounds into this country. For I find no history which makes mention of
longer continuance than that does, and it is a thing most certain, that the
greatest part of the races of hounds which are in France, and other
cuntries adjoining, did come from the country of Bretaigne, excepting the race
of white hounds, the which I think to be come from Barbary. For being
sometimes at Rochell, I have enquired of many Pylottes and mariners, and
amongst others I enquired of an old man named Alfonce, who had oftentimes
been in the Court of a Barbarian King called the Doncherib, which used much
hunting, and principally in hunting the Raynedeare at force: and this old man
told me, that all the hounds of his kennell were white, and that all the
dogs of that country were such also. And surely I think in deed that ye
white dogs are comme out of the whotte countries, forasmuch as they give not
over their chase how hot so ever it be, whereas other dogs do not hold
out so in heat. Phoebus does also agree with this opinion, saying, that he
has been in Mauritanye, otherwise called Barbary, whereas he has seen the
Raynede^re killed at force with dogs which they call Baux, which give not
over their chase for any heat that is. Whereupon mine opinion is, that the
Race of white dogs is come of those dogs called Baux of Barbary, of the
which Phoebus does speak, I will set down none other thing of the
Antiquity of hounds, but I will write hereafter of the nature and
complexions, as well of white hounds, as of Fallowe, dunne, and black, whid^
sorts are most commodious for Princes and Gentlemen.

Of the nature and complexions of white dogs, called Baux, and surnamed
Greffiers. Chap. 2.


THe white Howndes have been brought in estimation in France, by the Lord
great Seneschal of Normandy that was, and before him they were in small
estimation, principally amongst Gentlemen, for as much as they serve not
generally for all chaces, but only for the Heart. The first of the race was
called Souyllard, the which was given by a pore Gentleman to the King Jews
deceassed, who made no great accoumpt of him, because he loved the Dnune
hounds above all other, of the which all his kennell was, and he made none
accoumpt of others, unless it were to make Bloodhoundes. The Seneschall Gaston
being present with the Gentleman, which offered this Dog, knowing well that
the King lou^d not the hounde, did beg him of the King to make a present unto
the wisest Lady of his Realm, and the King asked him who that was, that is
(quod he) Anne of Bourbon your daughter, I agree not with you (quoth the King)
in that you have named her the wyfest, but you may say less foolish than
others, whereas there is few wise women in the world. Then the King gave the
Dog unto the Seneschall Gaston, who led him not far before he was begged
of him, for the Lord great Seneschall of Normandy did so importunately crave
him, that he was constrained to grant him, afterward the Lord great
Seneschall gave the Hounde in keeping to a hunter called James of Brese, and
from that time forwards they began to have bitches lined by that dog, and
so to have a race of them: the next year following, the Lady Anne of Bourbon
which loved hunting exceedingly, understanding of the beauty and goodness of
this dog, sent a bitche to be lyned by him two or three times, whervppon they
engendered fiftene or sixtene dogs, and amongst the rest six that were
excellent, called Clerault, Ioubard, Miraud, Meigrett, Marteau, and Hoyse the
good bitche. Since the race did daily increase, as it is at this present,
although at the beginning the dogs of that race were not so strong as they be
at this present time. For the mighty King Frances did renforce them by a
fallow dog called Myrauld, the which Monsieur Anybauld the Admyrall did give
him, and afterward the Queen of Scotts gave the King a white dog called
Barraude, from the which Marconnay Lieutenant of the Chase, did get his race of
dogs, which are excellent, and much stronger than the rest were, and to
speak truly, such dogs are most propre for Princes, and with such they ought
to be served, for as much as they are fair, gallant hunters, lusty rangers,
and good of sent, which give not over their chase for any hea^e that is, and
are not easily ouerlaide or broken with throng of the riders, nor with the
noise and cry of many men which daily attend Princes on Hunting. and keep
their chase better without change than any other kind of Dogs, and are
better to trust unto, nevertheless they must be accompanied with the
horsemen, and do fear the water a little, especially in the winter when it is
cold. I will not forget to set down what dogs of that race are best, for
as much as in every litter that one half does not prove good, understand then
that those which are all of one color, (as all white) are the best hounds,
in like manner those which are spotted with read, the others which are marked
or spotted with black or dunne, or a color like unto fryse, are of small
valor, of the which some of them are subject to have their feet great,
fat and tender: sometimes nature does so work that it makes some to come
out all black, the which happens not often, but when it does happen they
are commonly seen to be good: and you must note that the Dogs of that sorts,
are not in their chief goodness until they be three years old or
thereabouts, and they are much inclined to run at tame beasts.

Of Fallow hounds and their nature. Chap. 3.


I Have read none other thing of the antiquity of Fallow hounds, but only
that I have seen in an old written Book made by an Hunter, the which makes
mention of a Lord of Brytayne called Huett of Nantes, and the ^uthour of that
book did much esteem hunting, the which amongst other things gave this blason
to the hounds of that Lords kennelt.

Hues, thy Fallow hounds in forrestes hunte apace,
And kill at force, heart, hind, buck, do^, fox, gray, and every chase,
As thou thy self have eke, above all others praise,
To h^llow well in hollow woods, unto thy hounds always.
^so I have seen in a Chronicle in the town of Lambale, a chapter which
makes mention that a Lord of the said place with a kennel of fallow and read
howndes, did rowse a stagge in a forest of the county of Poiucti^ur, and did
hunte and pursue him by the space of four days, in such sort that the fourth
day he took him near to the city of Paris. And it is to be presumed that the
fallow howndes are the ancient howndes of the Dukes and Lords of Brytaine, of
the which the lord Admiral d'Anybauld and his predecessors have always kept
and mainteyned the race, the which came first to be common in the time of the
great King Frances father of Hu^ters. These fallow hounds be hardy and of
good sent, keeping very well their chase without change, and are almost of the
same complexion that the white hounds are, saving that they endure not heat so
well, nor yet the prease or throng of the prickers and galloppers, but they are
swifter, more universal for all chaces, and hotter in hu^ting: and if it
chance that a beast do stray out in the champaigne or the fields, they yet do
never lightly forsake the chase, their complexion is strong, for they fear
neither the cold nor the waters, and they run surely, and are very hardy,
they are fair hunters, loving commonly the Heart better than any other kind of
chase, and they are more opinionate and harder to be taught than the white
howndes, and so are they able to endure greater pain and travail. The best
that you shall find of the race of these Fallow hounds, are those which have
their hear most lively read, and such as have a white spotte in their
forehead, or a ring about their neck, and likewise those which are all
altogether fallow: but those that be lighter yellow, being marked or spotted
with black or dunne, are not greatly to be esteemed: those which are well
ioynted and dewclawed are best to make bloudhoundes, and there are some which
have their tails shagged like ears of Corn, and those are commonly good and
swift: and since Princes at these days have mingled the races of Fallow
howndes one with an other, therefore they are become much stronger and better for
the heart, the which is the right chase to yield pleasure unto Kings and
Princes. But such hounds are not meet for mean Gentlemen, because they are
commonly but for one chase: and they pass not greatly for the Hare and other
small chaces: and again, they are much enclyned to run at tame beasts.

Of the complexion and nature of dunne Hounds. Chap. 4.


OUr dunne hounds are such as aunciently our Kings of France, and Dukes of
Alencon did most esteem. They be common, because they are fit for most
chaces, and therefore they are fittest for Gentlemen, for their nature and
complexion is such, that they hunt all kind of chaces which you would have
them to hunt. The best of the race are such as be dunne on the back, having
their four quarters read or tanned, and the legs of the ^ame color, as it
were the-coloure of a Hares legs. Sometimes you shall see some that have their
hair on the top of their backs, dunne or almost black, and their legs
streaked and flecked with read and black, the which do commonly prove
excellent, and although there are not many badde dunne hounds to be seen, yet
nevertheless, the light dunne, having their legs fallowe after a whytishe
color, are seldom so stron^g nor so swifte as the other are, and Princes can
not so much delight in them for sundry eauses. One cause is, for that they do
much fear the throng of the huntesmen on horseback, and they are troubled
with their noise, for as much as they are hot and of a great courage, and put
them selves quickly out of breath hearing the Cry and noise of the hunters.
Another cause is, that they fear heat, and do not greatly esteem a chase
which doubleth or turns before them, but if the chase hold endlong, you
shall hardely find better or swyfter hounds, although they be very opinionate
hard to believe their huntesman, and very easily inclyned to change, because
of they^ heat and follye, and because of the great compasses which they cast
when they are at defaulte. And above all things, they stick much upon
knowledge of their master, and especially his voice and his horn, and will do
for him more than for any other huntesman. They have such emulation amongst
them selves, that they know the voice of their fellows, and whether they be
sure or not, for if they be babbler^ and liars, they will not lightly follow
them. They are hounds of great travel, fearing neither cold nor water, and
if they feel a chase to synke once before them, and that it begin to be
spent once, then will they never for^ (...) (...) they have killed it. They
which will take pleasure in them, must use them (...) this sort. At the first
vncoupling of them, they must follow and encourage them as temperately as may
be, and with very little noise, for that they are hot, and do quickly
ouershoote the tracke or path of the chase which they undertake, and therefore
the huntesmen on horseba^ke ought not over hastily to follow them until they
undertake it endlong: nor likewise ought they not to come over hastily unto
them at a defaulte, and they must likewise beware that they cross them not,
for fear least they make them turn back upon them, and so in this manner they
may take pleasure in the^.

Of black hounds aunciently come from Saint Huberts abbay in Ardene. Chap. 5.


THe hounds which we call Saint Huberts hounds, are commonly all black, yet
nevertheless, their race is so mingled at these days, that we find them of
all colors. These are the hounds which the Abbots of Saint Hubert have
always kept some of their race or kind, in honor and remembrance of the
Saint which was a hunter with Saint Eustace. Whereupon we may conjecture that
(by the grace of God) all good huntsmen shall follow them into Paradise. To
return unto my former purpose, this kind of Dogs has bin dispersed thorough
the Countries of Hennault, Lorayne, Flanders, and Burgonye, they are mighty of
body, nevertheless, their legs are low and short, likewise they are not
swift, although they be very good of sent, hunting chaces which are far
straggled, fearing neither water nor cold, and do more covet the chaces that
smell, as Foxes, Bore, and such like, than other, because they ^ince
themselves neither of swiftness nor courage to hunte and kill the chaces that
are lighter and swifter. The Bloudhoundes of this color prove good,
especially those that are cole black, but I make no great account to breed
on them, or to keep the kind, and yet I found once a Book which a Hunter
did dedicate to a Prince of Lorayne, which seemed to love Hunting much,
wherein was a blasone which the same Hunter gave to his Bloudhound called
Soygllard, which was white.

My name came first from holy Huberts Race,
Soygllard my Sire, a hound of singilar grace.
Whereupon we may presume that some of the kind prove white sometimes, but they
are not of the kind of the Greffyers or Bauxes which we have at these days.

The tokens whereby a man may know a good and fair Hounde. Chapt. 6.


AHound which should be good and fair ought to have these marks following.
First I will begin at the head, the which ought to be of a mean proportion,
and is more to be esteemed when it is long, than when it is short snowted, the
nostrelles ought to be great and wide opened, the cares large, side, and of a
mean thickness, the chine of the back compass bowed like a Roch, the
fillettes great, also the haunches great and large, the thigh well trussed, and
the hamme straight and well compassed, the tail big near the reins, and
the rest slender unto the very end, the hear underneath the belly hard, the
leg big, the soale of the foot dry and formed like a Foxes foot, the
claws great: and you shall note, that seldom shall you see such dogs as
are short trussed, (having their hinder parts higher than their foreparts) to
prove swift. Now to declare unto you the signification of these marks, you
shall understand yt the open nostrells do betoken a dog of perfect sent, the
ridge or chine of the back rochbent, and the hamme straight, betoken
swiftness, the tail great near the reins and long and loose toward the
end, betokens good and great force in the reins, and that the dog is
long breathed, the hard hear underneath the belly does signify that he is
paynefull, and fears neither water nor cold, the big leg, the Foxes
foot and the great claws, do betoken that the foot of such an hound is not
fat, and that he is strong in all his members, and able to endure long
without surbaiting of himself.

How a man may choose a fair Bitche to bear whelps: and the mean to make
her go proud: also the signs under the which she may best be lined to bring
forth dog whelps which shall not be subject unto diseases. Chap. 7.


If you would have fair hounds, you must first have a fair Bitch, which is of
a good kind, strong and well proportioned in all parts, having her ribs and
her flancks great and large, the which you may make to go proud in this
wise. Take two heads of Garlike, half ye stone of a beast which is called
Castor, with the juice of Cresseys, and a dozen of the flies called
Cantharides, boil all these together (in a pot holding a pynte) with Mutton,
and give the pottage two or three times unto the bytche to drink, and she will
not fail to go proud. And in like manner shall you make your dogs desirous
of the bytche. etc.

Afterward, when you see that your bytche goes proud, attend the full of
the Moon until it be passed, and then cause her to be lyned (if it may be,
under the Signs of Gemini and Aquarius) for the dogs which shall be
engendered under those signs, shall not be subject unto madness, and shall
commonly be more dogs than bytches.

Also some say that there is a Star named Arcture, and that such dogs as
are whelped or engendered under that Star, shall be much subject unto
madness. In like manner you must understand diverse secrets, whereof the first
is: that of what dog so ever a bytche shall be lyned, the first time that
she goes proud, and at her first litter, whether it be by Mastiffe,
Greyhounde, or Hounde, in all her other lytters which she shall have
afterward, she will always have one whelpe which shall resemble the dog
that first lyned her: And for that cause you ought to have good regard that
the first time she goes proud, you cause her to be lyned with some fair
dog of a good kind, for in all the lytters which she shall have afterward,
there will be some one which will resemble the first. And although now adays
men make small account of the first litter, seeing they are of opinion, that the
first lytter is much given to become mad, and are commonly weak and small,
yet must you not fail to line your bitche at the first with a fair hounde,
and of a good kind, for if she should be lyned with a Mastiffe or a curre, the
other litters will hold the same race, and yet if you should suffer her to slyp
without lyning, she will pyne away, and with great pain shall you recover her
or make her fat again.

An other secret is, that if ye will have light and hot hounds, then line
your bytch with a young dog: for if she be linedned with an old dog, the
whelps will become more heavy, and less gallant. And herewithall understand
that it is not good to cool a bytch when she is proud in the water, for the
water does congeale the blood within the veins and Arteries, which may cause
her to become maungie, or else that she shall have worms, torments, and
grypcs in her bellye, and infinite other diseases which follow thereupon. When
the bytches are lyned, and that they begin to be sydebellyed, you must not
lead them on hunting for diverse causes. One is, because the forces which they
shall use in hunting, do mar and keep fro prospering the little whelps
which are in their bellyes. Also that in leaping over the hedges, and running
through the woods, every least rush or knock may make them cast their
whelps, whereupon might ensue diverse other evil happes which should be long
to recyte. Then the best is to let them only pass up and down the house or
court, and never lock them up in their kennell, because they be importunate
and longing, and therefore you must make them pottage once a day at the least.
Furthermore, if you would spaye a bitch, it must be done before she have ever
had litter of whelps: and in spaying of her, it shall not be good to take away
all the roots or strings of the veins, for it is hard to take them away
without hurting of the reins, and so shall you hinder her sooyftnesse ever
after: but when some roots of those veins remain, the bytche shall be much
the stronger, and more hardy, and shall the better endure pain and travel.
Also you must take good heed that ye spay her not when she is proud, for then
shall you put her in great danger of death, but fyftene days after she has
left going proud. And when the little whelps begin to take shape within
her bellye, then is best spaying of a bytche.

Of the seasons in which it is best to have young whelps, and how you may best
govern them. Chap. 8.


THere are certain seasons in the which little whelps are hard to escape, or
to be brought up, especially if they be whelped in the end of October,
because of the Winter and coldes which then begin to reygne, and for that
milk and other nouritures which are most meet for them, do then begin to
fail, and therefore it is then very hard (if they be whelped in such season)
that they should escape death, for as much as the Winter has overtaken them
before they have force to endure the cold, and though they do escape, yet
will they be small and weak. Another unmeet season for whelps is in July and
August, because of the vehement heates, and the flies, fleas, and other vermyne
which then will torment them. But the best season to have whelps is in March,
Apryll, and May, when the time is temperate and the heat not over great.
Also it is the right time which nature has appointed for the breeding of all
living creatures, as Kyne, Goats, Sheep, and such like, for that is the
season most fytte for their nouriture. And seeing that whelps may be bredde
in all seasons, and that many delyght to breed their kind, and to nourishe
them in what season to ever they come, I have therefore thought good according
to my fantasy, to give understanding of means how to preserve them.

First if they be whelped in Winter, you shall take a Barrel or a Pype well
dried, and knock out the head at the one end thereof, afterward put straw
therein, and set it by a place where there is ordinarily a good fire, then
turn the open end toward the fire, to the end the whelps may have the
air thereof, and you shall feed the damme with good pottage or broth made
with Beef or Mutton.

Then when the whelps begin to lap, you shall accustom them also unto
pottage, but such as have no salt therein, because salt does make them dry,
and causes them to become maungie, unto the which disease they are subject
when they are whelped in winter.

Also you shall put in their pottage much Sage and other hot, herbs: And if
peradventure you see that their hair do fall, you shall then annoint the^ with
oil of Walnuts and honny mingled together, and keep them in their tun or which
as clean as you can, and change their straw every day: and when you perceive
that they begin to go, you shall have a net made of strong thread, laced
with a thong, and fasmed about the Tun or Pype, even as they cover a Swyssers
dru^me, so that you may keep them from going out, and that other dogs do not
byte them, or that they be trodden upon or marred with men's feet. And you must
make this pype or tun in such sort that it may be opened when you will. And
as touching other whelps which are bred in Summer, they must be put in some
fresh place whether other dogs come not ordinarily, and you should lay under
them some hardle or watlyng with straw thereupon, least the cold or
moystnesse of the earth do annoy them, and that straw must also be often
changed. They ought also to be in some dark place, because the Flies shall so
least annoy them, and therewithal it shall be also good to annoynte them twyce
a week with oil of Nuttes myngled and beaten with Saffron bruzed to powder,
for that ointment does kyil all sorts of worms, and recomfortes the skin
and the synewes of dogs, and keeps them from biting of Flies and Punayses.
And sometime you must also annoynte the Bytch in like manner, and put there to
the iupce of Berue or wild Cresseys, for fear least she fill her whelps full
of Fleas: and forget not to nourishe her with pottage as is before rehearsed.
When the whelps shall be fyfteene days old, you must worm them, and eight
days after you may cut off one ioynte of their tails, in such form and
manner as I will prescribe hereafter in the treaty of Receiptes. Afterward
when they shall begin to see and to rate, you must give them good milk
always hot, whether it be Cowes milk, Gotes milk, or Ewes milk: and note,
that it shall not be good to wayne them, and put them to keeping abroad,
until they be two months old, and that for diverse causes. One: because the
longer they taste of their dammes teate, the more they shall take of her
complexion and nature, the which we may see by experience. For when a Bytch
has whelps, let a mastyffe bytch give suck to that one halft, and you shall
find that they will never be so good as those which the damme did bring up.
Another cause is: that if you separate them one from another before they be two
months old at the least, they will be chyll and tender, and it will be
strange unto them by want of their damme which was wont to keep them warm.

The signs and tokens which a man ought to regard, in judging whether the
whelps will be good or not. Chap. 9.


THE ancient Authors would say, that a man may know the best whelps by the
dammes teates, and that such as commonly sucked the teates which are nearer the
heart of the damme, are the best and the strongest, because the blood about
that place is most lively and delicate. Others have said, that they might be
known by a token which they have under the throat, whereas there are certain
hairs like unto Hogs brystles, and that if there be odd hairs, it is a
token of goodness, and that if there be even, it is an evil token. Some other
have taken mark by the hinder legs, by the dewclawes, for if there be none
(say they) it is a good token, and if there be but one, it is also good, but
if there be two, it is an evil likelyhoode.

Some again will look within the mouth of the whelpe, thinking that such as
have the roof of their mouth black should be good, and such as are read
there, should not be much worth. And if they have their nostrelles wide and
open, it is a sign that they shall be of perfect sent. As to the consideration
of other parts of the body, there is no great judgment, until they be three
or four months old. Nevertheless, I take them which have long, large, and
thick ears, and the hair under their belly hard and great, to be the best,
and those marks I have proved and found true. Now because I have thereof
spoken a little before, I will speak none other thing thereupon at this
present.

That it is best bringing up of whelps in villages in the country, and not in
shambles. Chap. 10.
WHen your whelps be brought up two months under the damme, and that you see
they can feed well, then shall it be good to feed them abroad into the
Uyllages to keep in some fair place which is near unto some water, and
far from any Warren of Coneys, for as much as if they have scarcetie of
water, and when they come to be of force, they may chance to be subject unto
madness, because their blood will become hot and dry, whereas the water
would have made it colder and moyster, and yet would also nourishe them
better: also if they should be near unto warennes, they might break out and
be drawn to hunting amysse after Coneys.

Therefore it shall be best to bring them up abroad with milk, bread, and
all sorts of pottages, and you shall understand that to bring them up in
Uillages of the country, is much better than to bring them up in a
Butcherie, for as much as they are not closed up, and that they may go out
when they will to seed, and to learn the tracke of a chase. Also because they
are accustomed unto the cold, the rain, and all evil weather, and are not so
soon subject to runnyng after tame beasts, when they are ordinarily bred
amongst them, on that otherside, if they be bred in butcheries or shambles,
the flesh and blood they should eat, would heat their bodies in such sort,
that when they should become great, and that they should run in chase two or
three raynye days, they would marfounder them selves, and would not fail to
become maungie, and to be subject unto madness, and to run after tame
beasts, because in the Shambles they feed ordinarily on blood, and neither
learn to questnor to hunte any thing at all. To conclude, I never saw dog
come to good perfection (especially to become a good haryer) which was fed and
brought up in the Shambles.

In what time men ought to withdraw their VVhelpes from their Nursse, and
what kind of bread and flesh is best to give unto them. Chap. 11.
IT shall be good to withdraw the whelpe from his nource when he is ten months
old, and to keep them all together in kennell, to the end they may understand
and know one an other. There is great difference to see a kennell of hounds
nourished together, and all of one age: and another of hounds gathered here
and there: because those which are brought up together, do better understand
each other, and keep closer together in Cry, than those which are gathered
from sundry places. When you have brought your whelps to kennell, you must
hang clogges or billets of woodde about their necks, to teach them to go
coupled, the bread which should be given them, should be a third part of
wheat, a third of Barley or Otes, and a third of Rye, because being so mixed,
it keeps them fresh and fat, and heals or preserves them from sundry
diseases, whereas if it were all Rye it might make them skoure too much, and if
it were all wheat, it would bind them too much, the which would cause many
diseases, and therefore it is best so to mire one with an other. Men must give
flesh to their hounds in winter, especially those which are lean, and hunte
the Heart: but you should not feed haryers with flesh for diverse
considerations: for if you do, they will become fleshly, and given to hunte
great beasts of chase, and will make none account of the Hare and the Hare
also does often conueye her self amongst the heardes of tame beasts, to be
thereby rid of the dogs, and by that means the hounds might chance to
leave their chase, and to run after the tamer beasts. But Buckhoundes and
such as hunt the Heart will not so easily do it, because the Bucke or Heart is
of greater sent than the Hare, in such sort that his flesh is unto them more
delicate and more greedely desired tha^ any other. The best flesh that you can
give Hounds, and that will best set up a weak hounde, are horseflesh, ass
and mules flesh, as for beef (either ox or cowes flesh) and such like, the
flesh is unto them of a more sour substance. You should never suffer your
hounds to feed upon any flesh until it be fleyed, to the end they may have
no knowledge neither of the beast, nor of his hear. I allow and praise pottage
made of Mutton, Goats flesh, and the heads of beeues, for such lean hounds
as are variers. And it shall not be amiss sometime to mingle therewith some
brimstone, the which may warm them. Hereof I will more amply devise in the
treaty of receyntes.

How a Kennell ought to be situate and trimmed for Hounds. Chap. 12.


A Kennell ought to be placed in some oriental part of a house, where there
may be a large court well playned, being fourscore paces square, according to
the commodity and ability of the Lord which owes it, but the greater and
larger that it is, the better it will be for the Hounds, because they shall
have the greater pleasure to play themselves, and to sko^mer, through the
midst of it, were meet and good to have a little channel of good fountain
water, near unto the which you shall lay a great trough of stone to receive
the course of the said water, the which trough shall be a foot and a half
high, to the end the hounds may drink thereat the more easily, and that
trough musfe be pierced at the one end, to let out the water, and to make it
clean when you would. In the highest place of the Court it shall be good to
build the kennell or lodging for the Hounds, in the which you must have two
chambers, whereof the one shall be larger than the other, and in the same should
be a chimney, great and large, to make a fire when need shall require. The
gates and windows of the chamber, must be set and situate against the rising
of the Sun and the South: the chamber should be raised three foot higher
than the level of the ground, and in the floor you should make two gutters
and holes to the end the filthiness and vryne of the Hounds may thereby
avoid, the walls ought to be well whited, and the plankes well mortised and
joined, and so shall spyders, fleas, punayses and such like, the less breed
and remain therein. You must always leave them some little door or wicket to
go out into the court when they would skommer or ease themselves, then must
you have in the chamber little bodsteades which shall be raised a good foot from
the ground, and therwithal let every bedsteade have under it a roller to remove
it where you will when you would make the place clean: and again that when
they come from the chase, and that it were needful to warm them, you may
roll the^ as near ye fire as you will: also those bedsteads must be covered with
hurdels or plankes pierced, to the end yt when the hounds do piss, the urine
may drayne to the ground. You must also have another chamber wherein the Hu^te
may withdraw himself and keep his horns, cowples, and other things
necessary. I thought not needful to speak of sumptuous cha^bres yt which
Princes cause to be made for their hou^ds, wherein there be closets, stoues, and
other magnificences, for as much as yt has seemed unto me, to be more anoyance
than profitable for the hounds, for when they are accustomed to such heates,
being so tenderly and delicately handled, and after shall be brought to some
place where they shall be evil lodged, or if they hunte in the raynie weather,
then should they be ready to marfounder themselves, and so to become maungie:
wherefore I have always been of opinion, that when they come from the field,
and that they be moyled, it is sufficient if they be well chaffed and laid
dry, without accustoming them to such magnificence. And because sometimes men
have not commodity to have fountaynes or brooks in every place, it is
requisite to make little tubbes of woodde or some troughes to put their water
in. You must take heed that you give the^ no drink in a vessel of copper or
brass, for those two kinds of metals are venomous of their nature, and cause
the water which comes in them to turn and to stink, which would greatly
anoy the hounds. You must also have pretty little binges or baskettes of
woodde to put their bread in, the which must be broken and cut by small
gobbets in the same, because some Dogs are sometimes sick and of evil
appetite. Also there are certain hours and times that hounds will not feed,
and therefore the baskets should not be empty at any time, as we have set in
portrayture before.

Of the Hunte, and how he ought to dress, govern, and attend his dogs.
Chap. 13.


A Good keeper of Hounds should be gracious, courteous, and gentle, loving his
dogs of a natural disposition, and he ought to be both well footed and well
winded, as well to fill his horn as his bottell: the first thing which he
ought to do when he rises, is to go see his Hounds, to make their lodging
clean, and to dress them as the case shall require: after he has so clen^
them, he ought to take his horn and found three or four times the call, to
the end he may comfort them and call them to him: and when he shall see them
all about him, then shall he couple them, and in couplyng them he must take
good heed that he couple not the Dogs together, for fear least they fight
one with another, and if there be any young hounds, it shall be good to couple
them with the old bitches, to teach them to follow: when they are all well
coupled, the keeper must fill two great bags or pockets with small bones,
and other good morsels, as fish, or horse feet fried, fat roste meats, and
such like, then he shall break all into small gobbets into his bags, and
hang one bag about his own neck, and give another unto one of his
companions, that done, he must take two wispes of clean straw and put them
under his gyrdell, with a little brush or duster to rub and duste his hounds
when they shall come into the field: the other Huntesmen or varlettes which
shall be with him ought to do as much. Afterward every man shall take a fair
wande in his hand, and let one go before to call the hounds unto him, another
shall come behind which shall ierke them forwards, and if there be two others,
they shall go on each side, and so all four together shall go lead the
hounds through the green Corn fields and through the meadows, as well to
feed them, as for to teach them to know their voice, making them to pass
through the heardes of sheep and other such like beasts, to accustom them,
and to make them to know the^: and if there be any dog that is so il taught
as he would run at a sheep or any such tame beast, you must couple him with
a ra^me A Ram.
or a stout Sheep, and with your wande you must all to pay him and beat him
a good while, crying and threatening to the end that another time he may know
the rate of such as use it. So must you also use to lead your hounds
through the warens, and if they covet to run after the Conies, you must
threaten and chastise them, because young hounds do naturally love them. When
you have thus walked them in the morning, and that the Sun begins now to
be high, the Hunte must go into some fair meadow, and call all his dogs about
him, and then must they take their wispes and brushes, to brushe and duste
their hounds as softely as may be: for sometimes the hounds which hunte in
the woods and forests do prick themselves, and catch thorns or have some
scabbes or blisters, so that the keepers of Hounds having a beauy hand in
rubbing and trimming them, might galde of the skin, and rather do hurt than
good. And furdermore it were very evil for the hounde to leese his hair or
his locks, for as much as he is incessantly trauayled in Woods and Forrestes,
whereas the ryndes the water drops, and other coldness does fall upon him
continually, and therefore it may suffize to rub and courrie the hounde three
times in a week, but Greyhoundes ought to be rubbed ones every day. After all
these things done, their keepers and Huntsmen must teach them to know the
Hallowe as well by the horn, as by the mouth, in this wise.

First one of the Huntesmen must take one of the budgettes full of delicates
as before said, and go a crosbow shoot or further, according as the hounds
are young or well entered: for if they be young, and have yet never been entered,
then the Hallowe must be made the nearer, and they must not be uncoupled
because the old hounds may lead them to the Hallow, but if they have been
begone to be entered, then may they go further off and uncouple them, and then
when the Hunte shall be two good Crosbow shot from his Hounds (the which his
compaignions must in mean while hold together) he shall begin to Hallowe,
and to sound his Horn, and he shall otherwhyles cry: How, How, How, that's
he, that's he, How, to a Dear. And How, How, that that, or there, there, to an
Hare, and he shall never cease to cry, to hallowe, and to blow, until his
hounds be come unto him: when his co^paignions shall hear him begin to
hallowe, they shall uncouple their hounds and cry, list hallow, hyke hallow,
list, list, list, then when they are come to the hallow, the Hunte must take
his bag of vi^ualles, and cast unto them all the delicates, crying and
comforting them as the Art requires: then when he shall see that they have
almost done eating of their reward, he shall give sign or token to his
companions that they begin to hallowe, the which (having not stirred from
the place where they uncoupled their dogs, and (having another budget or
pocket full of delicates and dogs deynties) shall begin to hallow on their
side, and to blow their horns to make the dogs come unto them: then he which
made the first hallow shall threaten them, and a little beat them with a wande
crying again, list hallow, hyke hallow, list, list, list. And when the hounds
shall be come unto them, they must reward them with their delicates as the
other did, and then after let them couple them up again fair and gently: for
if one do roughly handle a young hound at the first couplyng, he will not
easily come again to the couplyng another time. When they are coupled up
again, they must lead them to their Kennell, and give them meat, leaving
always some bread in their baskettes, for such as shall be of faint appetite,
their straw must be changed three or four times in a week at the least, and
the Hunte must wreath wispes upon little sticks, and prick them in the
ground to make them piss. It is a thing certain, that if you rub over a
wispe or such like thing with Galbanum, all To make a hound to piss at one
certain place.
your hounds will not fail to come and piss against it: and if perchance
there be no fountain nor brook within the court of your Kennell, then must
you put their water in troughes of stone or of woodde as I have rehearsed
before, the which must be changed and refreshed every day twyce. Also in
extreme heat, Hounds are oftentimes combred with lice, fleas, and other
vermin and filthy things, and for remedy thereof you must wash them once a
week in a bath made with herbs, as follows.

First you must have a great kettle holding ten great pots or small buckettes
full of water, then take ten good stalks of an herb called Veruyne, and
wild Cresseyes, and as much of the leaves of Sorell, Marioram, Sage, Rosemarie,
and Rewe, and let them boil well altogethers, casting amongst them two
handful of Salt: then when all is well boiled togithers, and that the herbs
be well consumed therein, you shall take them from the fire, and let them cool
until the water be no more than luke warm, and therewith wash and bathe your
dogs one after another rubbyng them softely with your wispes. And all these
things are best to be done in great heates, thryse in a week at the least also
sometimes when whelps are lately brought from their nources out of the
villages, they will dread the waters and dare not adventure to pass through
ryuers, pooles, etc. To help this the Hunte must choose out warm and hot
days, in the which about noone, he shall couple up all his hounds, and
lead them to the side of some river or poole, and put of all his clothes: then
shall he take them one after another, and carry them a good way into the river
to learn them to swim and abide the water: when he has done this two or
three times, he shall see that his hounds will not fear the water, nor will
make any difficulty to pass or swim through the rivers and pondes. And in
this manner good Huntes shall use their hounds, for if they observe all these
things above rehearsed, it is not possible but that their hou^des shall be well
entered and ordered. And oftentimes it happeueth that hounds do hunte and chase
in the rain and frost and other grievous weather, or else do enforce themselves
to pass and swim through rivers and pooles, when they do so, the Hunt ought
to make them a good fire, and to rub and dry them, and when they be dry he
should frotte and rub their bellies, to take of the dyrte and claye which
may hang thereupon, for if they go to kene^ wette and moyled with dyrt, they
should be in danger to marfounder and to become mangie: oftentimes also in
running through the hard champayne, or stony ground, they surbate and
beblister their feet, and to help that, the Hunt must first wash their feet
with water and Salt, then take the yolks of eggs and heat them well with
vinegre and the juice of an herb growyng upon the rocks, and called
Mouseare, then take pitch bruised to powder and mingle it with twice as much
soote, and after put your said powder amongst the eggs and ^yce of herbs
before said, making them all hot together and always styrring them, and you
must take good heed that you ouerheate it not, because the moisture might so
be consumed and the substance of the eggs would wax hard, which would
mar all, but (...) shall be sufficient to heat it until it be somewhat more
than luke warm, and herewithall shall you rabbe every night the feet and
foldes between the claws of your hounds with a linen cloute. I will stand no
longer upon this point, hoping to speak thereof more amply in the treaty of
receiptes.

How a man should enter his young hounds to hunte the Heart, and of the quaries
and rewards that he shall give them. Chap. 14.


WHen the Hunte has taught his hounds to know and believe the hallow, and the
sound of his horn, then the galloppers, prickers, and huntsme^ on horseback
seeing their hounds strong enough and about seuentene or eightene months
old, shall then begin to enter and to teach them, and they shall have them a
field but once a week at the most, for fear least they should mar them,
for hounds are never sufficiently knit in their joints and members until
they be two years old at the least: and above all things whosoever would hunte
the Heart at force, must understand three secrets. The first is that he never
accustom his houdes to run a Hind, nor give them any quarrie or reward
thereof, because there is difference between the sent of a Heart and a Hynde,
as you may see by experience that hounds do oftentimes single that one from
that other and yet hounds are of such nature that the first beast which a man
does enter them at, and that they first take pleasure in, and have been
therewith rewarded, they do always remember it most, and thereby you may be
sure that if you give them rewards or bring them to the quarrie of a Hynde,
they would desire it more than the Heart. The second secret is, that it is not
good to enter young hounds within a toil, for there a Heart does nothing but
turn and cast about, since he cannot run endlong, when the hou^des are in
manner always in sight of him, and if afterward you should run a Heart
(with dogs so entered) at force, and out of a toil, and that the Heart took
endlong, eloygning him self from the hounds, they would quickly give him
over: and yet there is another thing which does more hurt unto such hou^des
as are entered into a toil, for if a Heart do turn two or three times before
them, they take as well the country, as the right tracke, breakyng their
course, and putting themselves out of breath, and neither learn to hunte nor
to quest, nor to do any other thing but raise up their heads still to see ye
Heart. The third secret is that you enter not your hounds, nor begin to
teach them in the morn^ng if you can choose, for if a man do first accustom
them to the fresh of the morning, if afterward they chance to Hunte in the
heat of the day, they will quickly give over, but you may enter them and
reward them in this manner. First you ought to have regard that the Heart be
in pryme of grease, because then he cannot so easily convey himself nor eloygne
himself before the hounds, as he would do in May or in April, because they
are heavier then, and cannot stand up so long, then may you choose out a Forest
wherein the Relaies be of equal proportion, and for your purpose, after place
al your young hounds together with four or five old hounds to enter them. And
then lead them to the furdest and last Relaye, and cause the Heart to be
hunted unto them, with some good kenell of hounds which may keep him from
resting or staying by the way, to the end that when he shall be arrived and come
unto them, and waxes now weary and almost spent, you may then uncouple your
old Hounds first, and when they have well beaten and found the tracke or
sent of the Heart, being well entered in cry, you may also uncouple your yo^g
hounds, and hallow them in to the old hounds, and you must have three good
prickers, or Huntesinen on horseback at the least, to the end that if there
be any young hounde which would carry or hang behind, being opinionate or
musing and ploddyng by himself, the Horsemen may beat him well and make him
come in to the rest: and you shall understand that in what place soever you
kill the Heart, you ought to flea his neck, and to reward your hounds
therewith upon the grass all hot as it is, for so it shall be much better and
more delicate and profitable for your hounds, than when it is cold: you may
also reward them in another manner. Take a Heart in nets or stalles, and
cleave or split one of his forefeete from the twiste of the cleas, unto the
ioynte of the foot, or else cut off one of his feet or cleas altogether,
afterward vntangle him out of the net or stall and let him go, a quarter of an
hour after, you may bring all your young hounds and assemble them together,
then take your Bloudhoundes and with them find out the view or Slotte of the
Heart or Bucke, and follow them wi^h your young Hounds, and when you have
followed them a Crossebowe shoot, you may then hallowe and blow for your
young (...) that done you may uncouple your young hounds from the old, that the
old hounds may first lead them: and you must have good prickers and
huntesmen on horseback in the tail of them to make them hold in and close.
Yet another way to bring your hounds to quarrie and to reward them, you must
have four or six huntsmen that be good and swifte of foot, for else they may
rather hinder than further the hounds, and to every one of these you may give
two couple of hounds to lead in liames, and when the hounds have vnlodged
the Heart, they may go fair and softely, and not weary their young hounds
before the cry: then when they shall perceive that the Heart has run two
good hours, and that he begins to sink before the hounds, they may cast
of their young hounds, but they ought to have good regard that they cast them
not of when he is at Baye: especially when his head is full sommed, for in that
fury he would endanger them or kill them. Mine opinion is that the best
entryng of hounds is at the Hare, for that is their very best beginning, for
as much as thereby they shall learn all doubles, and turns, as likewise to
know and to come to the hallowe, and also they become very tender nosed and
perfect of sent by accustoming the beaten ways and champaygne Countries, and
afterward when a man would enter or teach them to the Heart, they will
quickly forget and abandone the Hare. Here must be noted that all hounds
ought to be well acquaynted with their prickers or Huntesmen on Horseback
which shall follow them, and therefore it is requisite that when the Huntesmen
shall give them reward, and that they make the Ouarrie, the prickers and
Huntesmen on horseback be there present to make much of them, and to speak to
them, to the end that they may the better understand and know them.

The Preface pronounced by the Heart.
I Am the Heart, by Greeks surnamed so,
Because my head, does with their terms agree,
For stately shape, few such on earth do go,
So that by right, they have so termed me.
For. Kings delight, it seems I was ordained
Whose Huntsmen yet, pursu eme day by day^,
In Forest, chase, and Park, I am constrained
Before their Hounds, to wander many away.
Wherefore who list, to learn the perfect trade,
Of Venerie: and therewithal would know,
What properties, and virtues nature made,
In one (poor Heart, oh harmless Heart) to grow,
Let him give ear, to skillful Try strams lore,
To Phoebus, Fowylloux and many more.
Of the virtue and properties of the Heart. Chap. 15.
THere is a bone found in the heart of an Heart, the which is very medecinable
against the trembling of the heart, and especially for women great with child.

2 Again take the pissell of an Heart and temper it in vinaygre the space of
four and twenty hours, and afterward dry it, then beat it into powder,
and drink the weight of a French crown thereof in Plantine water, and it
shall heal either man or woman of the bloody flux.

3 Likewise take a Hearts head when it is half shot out, and is yet bloody,
and cut it in small morselles, and put it in a great violl or glass, then take
the juice of an herb called Tutsome, and the juice of another herb called
Spanyshe peper or otherwise Cassis, afterward you shall put the juice of all
these herbs to the gobbets of the Hearts head, and lute and stop very close
your violl or glass, suffering all these drugges to stand together the space of
two days: that done, you shall distill them in a Lymbecke of glass, and the
water that comes thereof will be excellent against all venimes or poisons,
as well of the bitings of Serpents as others.

4 Also the Hearts horn burnte and beaten into powder will kill worms both
within the body and without, and will drive Serpents out of their holes and
dens: the gatherbagge, or mugwet of a young Heart when it is in the Hyndes
belly, is very medicinable also against the biting of Serpents.

5 The marowe or grease of an Heart is very good for the Gout proceeding of a
cold cause, melting it and rubbyng the place (where the pain is) therewith.
Also the Heart first taught us to find the herb called Dyctamus, for when he
is stricke^ with an arrow or darte, he seeks out that herb and eats
thereof, the which makes the darte or arrowe to fall out, and heals him
immediately.

Of the Nature and Subtilties of Hearts. Chap. 16.


ISodore says that the Heart is right contrary to the Serpent, and that when
he is old, decrepyte, and sick, that he goes to the dens and caves of
Serpents, and with his nostrels he puffs and forces his breath into their
holes, in such fort, that by virtue and force thereof he constreyneth the
Serpents to come forth, and being come forth, he kylleth them with his foot,
and afterward eats and deuoureth them. Afterward he goes to drink, and so
the venyme spreads through all the veins of his body, and when he feels
the venyme work, he runs to chafe and heat him self, immediately he
begins to void and purge himself, in such sort that nothing remains in
his belly, coming forth by all the conduites and pores that nature has made
in him. And by this mean he renueth his force, and heals him self, casting
his hair.

When the Hearts pass the great ryuers or some arm of the Sea, to go to Rut
in some I Will or Forest, they assemble them selves in great heardes, and knowing
which of them is strongest and best swimmer, they make him go foremost: and then
he which comes next him, stays up his head upon the back of the first, and
the third upon the back of the second, and consequently all the rest do in
like manner, even unto the last, to the end that the one may relieve the other,
and when the first is weary, another takes his place.

Plynie says, that they can endure to swymme thirty miles endwayes, and that
he has seen experience thereof in the I Will of Cypres, from whence they go
commonly unto the I Will of Cylice, the which is thirty miles distant. Yea and he
says, that they have the vent and sent of the Rut from the one I Will to the
other. To speak a truth, I have seen some hunted in Forestes adjoining to the
Sea, which have been so sore hunted, that they launched into the Sea, and have
been killed by fyshermen ten miles from the shore.

The Heart does marvel and is astonyed when he hears one call or whistle in
his fist. And for proof, when you see an Heart (...) before you in the day
time, and that he be in the plain, call after hint saying, ware ware, or, take
heed, and you shall see him turn back for doubt of the voice which he heard.
He louet^ to hear Instruments, and assures him self when he hears a
Flute or any other sweet noise. He hears very perfectly when his head and
his ears are set upright, but when he holds them down, he hears not so
well. When he is on foot and is not afraid, he maruelleth at all things which
he sees, and takes pleasure to gaze at them, as a Carter and his Carte, or
any beast laden with any thing. Plynie says, that an Hearts age is known by
his teeth, by his feet, and by his head, as I will declare hereafter in the
treatise of Judgment of the Heart. Furthermore he says, that the Antlier and
croches of a Heart do multiply from the first head that he bears, until he
be seven years old, and that afterward they multiply not but only in
greatness, and that also according to the rest and good feeding, or the
styrring that they shall have. They bear sometimes more and sometimes fewer
croches, and that is the reason that men have judged a Heart of ten, as
sometimes have been seen. Furthermore he says that the first head which an
Heart bears, is dedicated and given to Nature, and that the four Elements do
every of them take therein a portion. Isodore is of an other opinion saying,
that the Heart does bury and hyde his first head in the earth, in such sort
that a man shall hardly find it. And to speak a truth, I could never find
any that were mewed or cast by their own accord, nevertheless I have seen
one that said he had seen them, but therein I report me to that which may be
thought. The Heart has a property, that if he go to feed in a young spring or
Coppes, he goes first to seek the wind, that he may find if there be any
person in the Coppes which may interrupt him. And if any man take a little
bough, branch, or leaf, and pysse or spitte upon it, if he leave it in the
spring or Coppes where the Heart should feed, he will not fail to find it
out, and then he will feed no more in that place. Plynie says, that when the
Heart is forced with hounds, his last refuge is to come about houses unto a
man, unto whom he had rather yield him self than unto the hounds, having
knowledge and understanding what things be most contrary and hateful unto
him, the which I have seen by experience, that an Hynd being ready to calue,
has rather avoided and eschued the way and place where dogs did resort, tha^
whereas me^ were accustomed to be, as also when she would conceive, she
attends until the Star called Arcture be raised, and caryeth her calfe
eight or nine months, the which are calued in May commonly, although I have
seen some fall later, according to the nouriture and age of the Hind. There
are some Hyndes which have two Calves at once, and before she calueth, she
purges her with the herb called Tragonce, and after that she has calued,
she eats up the skin wherein the Calfe did lie. Plynie says moreover, that
if a man take the Hynde immediately after she have calued, he should find a
stone in her body the which she has eaten or swallowed to make her calue with
more ease, the which stone should be very requisite and profitable for women
that are with child. When the Hyndes calfe is great, she teaches it to run,
and to leap, and the coast that it must keep to defend it self from the
hounds. The Hearts and Hyndes may live an hundredth years, according to Phoebus
saying. And we find in ancient hystoriographers, that an Heart was taken, a
having collar about his neck full three hundredth years after the death of
Caesar, in which collar Caesar's arms were engraued, and a mot written, saying,
(...) me fecit. Whereupon the Latin Proverb came, which says, Ceruin^s annos
viuere.

Of the Rut and vault of Hearts. Chap. 17.


Hearts do commonly begin to Uault about the midst of September, and their
Rut does continue about two months, and the older that they be, the hotter
they are, and the better beloved of the Hyndes. The old Hearts go sooner to
Uault than the young, and they are so fierce and so proud, that until they have
accomplyshed their lust, the young Hearts dare not come near them, for if they
do, they beat them and drive them away. The young Dear have a marvelous craft
and malice, for when they perceive that the old Hearts are weary of the Rut
and weakened in force, they run upon them, and either hurt or kill them,
causing them to abandon the Rut, and then they remain masters in their
places. Hearts do much sooner kill each other when there is scarcity of
Hyndes, for if there be Hyndes plenty, then they separate them selves one from
another, and hyde them selves in one place or other. It is a pleasure, to
behold them when they go to Rutte and make their vaute. For when they smell
the Hynde, they raise their nose up into the air, and look aloft, as though
they gave thanks to nature which gave them so great delight. And if it be a
great Heart, he will turn his head, and will look if there be none other
near to anoy or interrupt him. Then the young dear being not able to abide
them, and seeing them make such countenances, will withdraw themselves from them
and run away. But if there be any of equal bygnesse, they begin then both
of them to vault, and to scrape the ground with their fecte, shocking and
butting one against another, in such sort, that you shall hear their blows of
their heads a good half mile of, so long, til he which is master do chase
away the other. The Hind beholding this pastime, does never remove from her
place, then he which has the mastrie, will begin to vault, and to bellow,
casting him self with a full leap upon the Hynde to cover her, and that
quickly. They are very easy to be killed at such times, for they follow the
paths and ways where the Hyndes have gone, putting their nose to the ground
to follow by the sent, and never look nor vent whether any man be there
aboutes which may annoye them or not. During the time of their Rut they live
with small sustenance, for they feed only of such things as they see before
them, and rather regard the tracke of the Hindes. Their chief meat is the red
Mushrome or Todestoole which helps well to make them pysse their grease, they
are then in so vehement heat, that every where as they pass and find
waters, they tumble and lie therein, and sometimes for dispight, they thrust
their heads into the earth, a man may easily know the old Heart from the young,
by hearing him when he belloweth. For the elder they be, the greater and more
roaring their voice is. Also thereby you may know if they have been chased and
hunted or not, for if they have been hunted or be afraid of any thing, they
put their mouth against the ground and bellow softly, and yet with a great
voice, the which the Hearts which are at rest neu^r do. For they raise up their
heads bellowing and braying aloude and without dread.

In what season the Hearts mewe and take them to the thickets. Chap. 18.
IN February and March, the Heart meweth and casts his head, and commonly
the old Heart much sooner than the young. But if there be any which have been
hurt at Rut or by any other mean, then nature is not so strong in him to help
him. For all his substance and nouriture can not suffice to heal him, and to
drive out his head, by reason of the hurt which he has. So are there some
which leesing their stones or pyssels at Rut or otherwise, do never mewe. For
you must understand that if you geld an Heart before he have an head, he will
never bear head. And on that other side, if you geld him when he has his
head or antlier, he will never cast or mewe it: In like manner, if you gelde him
when he has a velvet head, for it will remain so always, and neither fraye
nor burnishe. This gives us to understand, that there is great virtue in the
stones, for through their occasion oftentimes many men which bear heads of a
goodly beam, do yet never mew nor cast them. When the Hearts have mewed or cast
their heads, they begin then to withdraw themselves, and to betake them to
the thicket, hyding them selves in some fair place where there is some good
feed and water, upon the border of some field, to the end they may go to
some piece of wheat, pease, or such like lusty feed. And you shall note,
that young Hearts do never betake them selves unto the thickets, until they
have borne their third head, which is in their fourth year, and then they
may be judged Hearts of ten, but very yongly. As also the Bores do never
forsake their routes, until their third year, because they have not the
courage, nor their tushes and arms are not yet sufficient to defend them.

After the Hearts have mewed, they begin in the months of March and Apryll
to thrust out their buttones, and as the Sun does rise in his circle or
course, and that their feed does increase and wax hard, their heads in like
manner and their venysone do grow and augment, and by the midst of June,
their heads will be somed of as much as they will bear all that year, at
least if they be in a good corn country or where good feed is, and have no
hinderance nor disquiet, and accordingly as the season of the year does
increase the croppe of the earth, even ^o will their heads increase in all
respects.

What is the cause that Hearts do hyde themselves when they have mewed. Chap.
19.
Hearts do hyde them selves when they have mewed for diverse reasons. First
because they are lean and wcake, by reason of the winter past, having no force
to defend them selves. And also because they begin then to find feeding,
and the^ they take their ease to restore their flesh and force. Another reason
is, that they have lost their weapons of defense, the which be their heads,
and dare not show them selves as well for fear of other beasts, as also for
shame that they have, to have lost their strength and beauty. And also you
shall see by experience, yt if (in a corn field or pasture where an Heart
feeds after he have mewed) there be any Pyes or Iayes, or such birds which
chatter at them and discover them, they will straight way return unto their
thicket, to hyde themselves for the shaine and fear that they have. And you
shall understand they will not leave their thicket (unless men do stir and
remove them) until the end of August, when they begin to wax hot, and to
hunt after the Hynds. When the Hearts that are in covert, do perceive that their
heads do begin to dry, (which is about the. xxii. of July) then they discover
themselves, going unto the trees to fray their heads, and to (...) of the
velnet.



And when they have frayed their heads, they then do burnish their heads, some
against cole heaps, some other against metal places, some in clay and other
commodious things and places to do it in. Some bear red heads, some black,
and some white, all which colorings proceed of nature and of none other
thing: for it should be very hard for the dust or powder of coals, or any such
like thing to give them color. The red heads are commonly greater and fayrer
than the rest, for they are commonly fuller of marrowe and lighter: the black
heads are heavier, and have not so much marowe in them: the white are the very
worst and the worst nourished. All this I have known by experience of
Crossebowe makers and makers of Harquebushes, which put it often in their
work, who have told me that the least black heads which come from the
Scotts or wild Irishe (whereof men bring great number to Rochell to sell) are
much heavier than those which we have here in France, for they have not so
much marowe in them, although there is a Forest in Poictou called the Forest of
Mereuant, in which the Hearts bear small black heads, which have but little
marowe in them, and are almost like to them of Irelande. There is another
Forest about four leagues from thence called Chyssay, in the which the Hearts
bear heads clean contrary, for they are great, red, and full of marow, and
are very light when they are dry. All these things I have thought good here
to allege, to let you know that Hearts bear their heads according to the
pasture and feed of the country where they are bred, for the Forest of
Mereuant is altogether in Mountains, vales and Caves, whereas their feed is
dry, lean, and of small substance. On that other side, the Forest of Chyssay,
is in a plain country, enuyroned with all good pasture and corn grounds, as
wheat, peason, and such, whereupon they take good nouriture: which is the
cause that their heads become so fair and well spread.

Of the coats and color of Hearts. Chap. 20.


Hearts are of three sundry sorts of co^, that is to say, brown, fallowe,
and red. And of enerie of these coats there proceed two sorts of Hearts. The
one are great, and the other little. First of the brown Hearts there be some
great, long, and side haired, which bear a very high head, read of color,
fair, and well beamed, which stand up long before hounds. For all long shaped
Hearts have longer breath, and are swyfter of body, than the short proportioned
are. The other kind of brown Hearts are little, thick set, and short. Which
bear commonly a black main, and become fatter venison and more delicate than
the others, because they do more commonly keep in young springs and Coppises,
than in the high woods. These kinds of Hearts are crafty, hyding them selves,
because when they are in grease, they doubt to be found. For as much as their
body will not endure to stand long before the hounds: So make they their
feed very short, and bear their heads low and wide in sunder. And if they
be old and feed in good ground, then are their heads black, fair, and well
braunched, and commonly paumed at the top. The other Hearts which are of a
fallowe coat, do bear their heads high, and white of color: Whereof the
beams are very small, and the Antliers long, slender, and ill grown,
principally of that sort of fallow which draw upon the whytish dunne hair. So
also have they neither heart, courage, nor forte. But those which are of a
lively read fallowe, which have lightly a little black or brown list upon
the rydge of their back, and their legs of the same color, being long, and
side, those be very strong, bearing fair and high heads, well furnished and
beamed, having all the other marks or tokens which I will hereafter declare.
Then the Hearts which are of a lively read hair, are commonly young Hearts.
That sort of coated Hearts, should not greatly rejoice the huntsmen on
horseback, because they stand up long, and are of very good breath.

Of the heads and branches of Hearts, and of their diversities. Chap. 21.


Hearts bear their heads in diverse sorts and manners, some well grown, some
other ill grown and worsse spread, some other again counterfeit, and all this
according to the age, country, feed and rest that they have, and you must
note, that they bear not their first head which we call broches (in a fallow
Dear pricks) until they enter the second year of their age. In the third year
of their age, they ought to bear four, six, or eight small branches, at
their fourth year they bear eight or ten, at five, ten or twelve, at
six, twelve, fourtene, or sixtene: and at their seventh year, they bear
their heads beamed, branched, and somed with as much as ever they will bear,
and do never multiplye therein but only in greatness, and according to the
feed and rest that they shall have. After they have once accomplished their
seventh year, they will bear marks on their heads, sometimes more, and
sometimes less, although men shall always know the old Hearts by these
tokens which follow.

1 First when the compass of the Burre is large and great, well pearled, and
near unto the moisture of the head. 2 Secondly, when the beam is great,
burnished, and well pearled, being straight and not made crooked by the
Antlyers. 3 Thirdly, when the gutters therein are great and deep. 4 Also if
the first Antlier (which Phoebus calls and terms Antoiller) is great,
long, and near to the Burre, the Surantlier near unto the Antlier the which
ought a little to enlarge it self some what more from the beam than the
first, and yet it should not be to long, and they ought to be both well
pearled, all these things betoken an old Heart. 5 Also the rest of the
branches or horns which are higher, being well ordered and set, and well grown
according to the bigness and proportion of the head, and the croches, palm,
or crown being great and large according to the bygnesse of the beam, are
tokens of an old Heart: and if the croches which are somed aloft, do double
together in the crown or palm, it is a sign of a great old Heart. 6 Also
when Hearts have their heads large and open, it signifies that they are old,
rather than when they are crooked and close bowed. And because many men can not
understand the names and diversities of heads according to the terms of
hunting, I have thought good here to cause them to be portrayed and set forth
with little explycations, to specify the name of every branch or part, as
here under is declared.
The thing that bears the Antliers, Royals, and tops, ought to be called
the beam, and the little clyffes or streakes therein are called gutters.

That which is about the crust of the beam is termed pearls, and that which
is about the burre it self in form of little pearls, is called pearls
bigger than the rest.

A. This is called the Burre, and that which is about the Burre, is called
pearls. B. This first is called Antlier. C. The second Surantlier. D. All the
rest which grow afterward, until you come to the crown, palm, or croche,
are called Royals and Surroyals. E. These little buddes or broches which are
about the top, are called croches.


This head should be called a Crowned top, because the croches which are
placed and grown about the height thereof, are ranged in form of a Crown,
although there are but few such seen now adays, unless it be in high
Almaine, or in Moscouie.


This head should be called a palmed top, because the croches which grow in
the top, are formed like unto a man's hand, and therefore it is to be called
a palm top.


ALl heads which bear not above three or four, the croches being placed
alofte all of one heyght in form of a cluster of pears or of nuttes, are to
be called heads of so many croches.


ALl heads which bear (...) in the top, or having their croches doubling
in manner as these are here portrayed, are to be called forked heads, because
the croches are planted on the top of the beams like unto forkes.


ALl heads which have double Burres, or the Antlyers, Royals, and croches
tumed downewardes contrary to the fashion of other heads, as you may see by
this present portrature, or such like other fashions, are to be called heads
only.


The Blazon pronounced by the Huntsman.


I Am the Hunte, which rathe and early rise,
(My bottell filde, with wine in any wise)
Two draughts I drink, to stay my steps withal,
For each foot one, because I would not fall.
Then take my Hownde, in liam me behind,
The stately Heart, in fryth or fell to find.
And whiles I seek his slotte where he has fed,
The sweet birds sing, to cheer my drowsy hedde.
And when my Hounde, does streyne upon good vent,
I must confess, the same does me content.
But when I have, my couerts walked about,
And harbred fast, the Heart for coming out:
Then I return, to make a grave report,
Whereas I find, the assembly does resort.
And low I crouche, before the Lordings all,
Out of my Horn, the fewmets let I fall,
And other signs, and tokens do I tell,
To make them hope, the Heart may like them well.
Then they command, that I the wine should taste,
So biddes mine Art: and so my throat I baste.
The dinner done, I go streightwayes again,
Unto my marks, and show my Master plain.
Then put my Hounde, upon the view to draw,
And rowse the Heart, out of his layre by law.
O gamsters all, a little by your leave,
Can you such joys in triflyng games conceive?
Of the knowledge and judgment which the Huntesman may take, to know an old
Heart.
The judgment of the Slot. The judgment of the ports and entryes. The
judgment of the Abatures and foylles. The judgment by ye fewmets. The
judgment by his gate and walks. The judgment by an Hearts frayingstocks.
The which I will declare in Chapiters followyng, beginning first with the
judgment of the Slot or view.

The judgment and knowledge by the Slot of an Heart. Chap. 22.


OLd Hearts leave commonly the blemishes and tokens which follow. First you
must look upon the treading of his foot which must be great and long, and
mark that if you find together the footing^ of two (...), of the which that
one has (...) long Slot, and that other a round, and that they be both in
judgment of one bigness, yet the long Slot shall be judged for the greater
Heart than the round, for without all doubt his body will show it self
bigger than the other: then must you look to (...) heel which must be great
and large, and the little cliffe or slit which is in themidst thereof and
separateth the two claws, must be large and wide open, the leg great, the
bones short, thick, and not sharp, the toes round and great: commonly the
great old Hearts (...) low ioynted, and do never tread double or (...),
because the Sinews which hold the joints of their feet and claws, are
(...) renforced, and do better hold tacke with the weight of their body, than
the young Hearts do, for their (...) and joints are weak, and are not yet come
to their force: and therefore they are not able to sustain the weight of their
bodies, in such sort that sometimes the foot and the claws are forced to
tread awry and to double, and thereby you may judge them young Hearts.
Furthermore the old Hearts when they walk, do never ouerreache the forefoote
with the hinderfoote, but tread short of it by four fingers breadth at the
least, the which the young Hearts do not, for in their gate the hinder foot
ouerreacheth the forefoote, like unto a Mule or Hackney which ambleth: hollow
footed Hearts (if (...) (...) be not contrary) may be judged old Hearts: they
which have an high and soft pace, in places where there are not many stones,
are judged thereby to be strong, and that they have not been much run nor
chased. And here you must understand, that there is great difference between
the iudgementes^ of an hearts Slot, and of an Hynde: Nevertheless when the
Hyndes be with Calfe, a young hunter might soon be beguyled, because they open
their claws wide like unto an Heart, by reason of the weightinesse of their
bodies, and yet the differences are apparent. For if you mark the heel of an
Hynde you shall per^ that there is no Heart of the second head so young, which
leaves not a greater and wyder slotte than she does, and therewithal the
bones will appear greater also: herewithall, Hyndes (...) commonly their foot
long, straight, and hollow, with little sharp cuttyng bones, otherwise also
you may judge the Hynde by her feed, because she croppeth the springs round
like an (...) and feeds greedily: and contrarily the Heart of ten does
take it delicately, breaking it of endwayes to have the liquor as sweetly and
tenderly as he may. And here let the Hunter mark one secret point, which is:
when he is in the wood and shall find the Slotte of an Heart, let him first
mark what manner of Slotte or footing it is, whether it be a worn footing or
a sharp cuttyng foot, then let him mark the Country and Forest wherein he
is, for he may judge in himself whether it be by occasion of the Country or
not, for as much as commonly the Hearts bredde in the mountains and stony
places, have their toes and edges or sides of their feet much worn: the
reason is, because in clyming of the Mountains, they stay only upon their
toes and edges or sides of their feet, and not upon the heel, the which toes
the Rocks and stones do wear continually: and so peradventure the Slotte
might make it seem an older Heart than it is. Now in sandy countries it is
contrary, for there the Hearts do stay more upon their heel than upon the
toes, the reason is, that leaning or staying their feet upon the sand, it
flies and slippeth away from under the toes because of the weight: for the
clawe which is hard, makes it slide, and then the Heart is constrained to
stay himself upon his heel, which makes it sometimes to grow the brother
and greater. All these tokens are the true significations and marks whereby
the Huntsman may know and perceive the age of the Heart. I would also have
declared willingly to such as are but learners, what the heel, the toe, the
bone, and other things do mean. But I see now adays so many which understand
all those things, that I hold my peace for brevity.

Of the judgment and knowledge by the fewmishing of a dear, and of the ten
in the top, and of old hearts. Cap. 23.
IN the months of May and April, men may begin to judge an old heart by the
fumishing, the which they make in broad croteys: and if they be great, large,
and thick, it is a sign that they are hearts of ten.


In the month of June, and July they will commonly make their fumishyng in
great croteys very soft, and yet nevertheless there are some will make them
broad until it be midde June.

And from midde July until the end of August they make their fewmishing
altogether formie, great, long, knottie, well knodde, anointed, and gilded,
letting fall but few of them, the which they should let fall scattered without
cleauyng one to another, and without little pricks at the one end, and you
must mark whether they be very fat and whether the Heart have been in the
corn or not.

And these be the marks or tokens by the fewmishing of an Heart of ten, and
of old Hearts, although men may be deceived oftentimes: for if the Hearts have
had any disturbaunce, or hau^ been hurt, then they make their fewmet
oftentimes dry, burned and sharp at that one end, especially at such time as
they fray their heads: but after they have frayed and burnished, their fewmet
will lightly return to the natural course: in such case the Huntesman ought
well to mark because the marks to sudge by are doubtful. In September and
October there is no longer judgment to be had because of the Rut, and you
must understand that there is difference between the fewmet of the morning
and that of the euenyng, because the fewmishings which an Heart makes when he
goes to relief at night, are better disgested and moyster, than those which he
makes in the morning, because the Heart has taken his rest all the day, and
has had time and ease to make perfect disgestion and fewmet, whereas
contrarily it is seen in the fewmishyng which is made in the morning, because
of the exercise without rest which he made in the night to go seek his feed.

Of the judgment of the breach or bearing down of the Spring or Boughs.
Chap. 24.
THe Huntesman may take knowledge and judge of the head of the Heart by the
breach or bearyng down of the boughs and branches, all the year long,
excepting four months, which are March, April, May, and June, in which
time they mewe their heads, and bear their velvet and bloody heads: and
therefore in that season there is no great judgment to be had: but when their
heads begin to harden, you may judge by the bearing down or breaking of the
branches and boughs, until they have mewed again, for as much as when they
enter into the thickets, they lift up their heads and fear not to break and
bear down the branches, and thereby the huntesman may take knowledge: but
when the Ha^tes have soft heads or in blood, you can take small judgment
because they couche their heads low and flat upon their back for fear least
they should knock them against the boughs, and so hurt them. When the
Huntesman shall see that the Heart has his head hard and soomed, and that
judgment may be given by the entries where they go into the thickets, let him
then look well thereunto, and especially in great springs, which have not
been felled in eight or ten years before, and he shall see therein by the
paths which the Hearts do make, that the branches and boughs are bowed and
broken or borne down on both sides, and by marking the breadth of the said
entry, he may judge whether it were a broad open head or not: and if there be
any place of thick where the Heart has raised his head upright altogether, or
that he stayed to harken (for lightly when they harken, they raise their heads
and set up their ears) then may the Huntesman find percase some broken
branches, or some bruised boughs, whereby he may judge the length and height of
the beam, and the height of the Hearts head.

Of the judgment of the gate and going of an Heart. Chap. 25.
BY the gate and going of an Heart the Huntesman may know if he be great and
long and whether he will stand long up before his hounds or not: for all
Hearts which have a long step or pace, will longer stand up than they which
have a short step, and also they are swifter, lighter, and better breathed:
also y^ Heart which leaves a great Slotte of his forefoote, does never stand
long up when he is chased. By these tokens the Huntesman may know the force of
the Heart, and take the advantage for his hounds: and again a Heart which
has a long foot has a greater body than they which are round footed.

Of the judgment of the Abatures and beating down of the low twigges and the
foyles. Chap. 26.
IF you will know whether an Heart be high or not, and likewise the greatness
and thickness of his body, you must look where he enters into a thicket
amongst the fearnes and small twigges the which he has ouerstridden, and
mark thereby the height of his belly from the ground, which you shall
perceive by the height of the brakes or twigges which he has borne down. His
greatness is known by the sides of the brakes or twigges where his body has
passed for it is hard if you find not some dry broken sticks or such like
whereby you may measure his greatenesse.

The judgment to be taken by the places where he frayeth. Cap. 27.


Commonly the old Hearts do fray their heads upon the young trees which me^ leave
growing in springs: and the elder that an Heart is, the sooner he goes to fray,
and the greater tree he seeks to fray upon, and such as he may not bend
with his head: and when the Huntsman has fonnde his frayingstocke, he must
mark the heyght where the end of his croches or paulme has reached, and
where the branches shall be broken or bruised: and thereby he shall know and
judge the height of the Hearts head, and if he do perceive that at the highest
of his fraying there be four marks bruised at ones and of one height, it is
likely that the same Heart bears a crowned top, or croched at the least. In
like manner if you see that three antliers have touched three branches of one
height, and two other that have left their marks somewhat lower, it is a token
that he bears a paulmed head. Although these tokens be very obscure and a man
must have a good eye that will take judgment by the little small twigges and
leaves, nevertheless you shall see sometimes that the old Hearts do fray upon
small trees, as black Sallowe and such like, as well as the young Hearts, but
young Hearts do never fraye upon great trees, unless they be Hearts of ten. I
will stand no longer hereupon because there be other more certain tokens and
judgments herevnder mentioned.

How the Huntesman ought to seek the Heart in his feeding places according to
the months and seasons. Chap. 28.


HEre will I give precepts to all Huntesmen leadyng their bloudhoundes with
them in the Forests, how they shall govern themselves according to the months
and seasons, for Hearts do change their manner of feeding every month, and as
the Sun rises in altitude, and that thereby good pasturage and feed
increases, so make they change of their feed. I will first begin at the end
of their Rutte which is in the end of October, following orderly from month to
month until I return about ye month of September.

And therefore in the month of November you shall ^eke the heart in heaths and
broomie places, whereof they then delight to crop the flowers and tops because
those are hot and of great substance, the which does restore their nature
and recomfort their members, which are sore ouerwearyed with Rutte, and
sometimes also they remain and lie in such heathe and brom, especially when
the sun is hot.



In december they he^ together and withdraw themselves to the strongthe of the
forests to have harbor from the cold winds, snowes, and frostes, and do
feed on the Holme tres, Elder trees, brambles, and briars, and such other
things as they can then find green: and if it snow, they feed on the tops of
the moss, and pill the trees even as a Goat will do.

In January they leave hearding with rascal, and accompany themselves three or
four hearts together, withdrawing themselves into the corners of the forests,
and go to the good winter pasture and fogge, or to the corn then sproong, as
wheat, rye, and such other like.

In February and March they go to the plumpes and tuftes of Coleworts, or of
Hasill nuts or grene corn, and in medows to pigwort, woodbynd, birche, and
such like, whereof they croppe the tops. And in those two months they mewe
and cast their heads, beginning to mark what coast may be most commodious for
them to take hold, and to harbor in, until their heads be grown again, and
then they part each from other.

In April and May they rest in their thickets and holds, in the which they
remayn all that season, and stir not much until the beginning of rutte,
unless they be stirred against their wills, taking their harbor near unto
some pretty springs and couerts, wherein there is much young frytes, and therein
they will feed, as likewise also in pease, beans, tares, thetches, lyntelles,
and such other Summer corn as they can find near hand: for they will not
straye far if they find any feed nere to their layre. Some Hearts there be
which will venture far to such feed, and will go out therefore but once in
two days. And note you well, that some Hearts be so crafty, that they have two
layres wherein they harbor: and when they have been three days on that one
side of the forest, they will take an other harborough as long on that other
side of the forest. And these be old hearts which have been sore stirred and
put from their feed, which change their ^aire, as the wynd changes to have
perfect vent as they come out of their thickets what fault may perhaps be in
their feed.

And you shall also note, that in these Months of April and May, they go not
to the soil, by reason of the moisture of the spring, and of the deaw which
gives liquor sufficient.

In June, July, and August they go to the springs and coppises, asbefore, and
unto corn, as wheat, otes, rye, barley, and such like as they may find (but
seldom to rye or barley) and the^ are they in their pride of grease. And let me^
say what they will, they go to the water, and I have seen them drink, but that
is more commonly at this time than at any other time of the year, because of
their disposition, and also by reason of the great vehement heates which take
the dew from the spryngs, when they now begin also to grow hard. In
September and October they leave their thickets and go to Rut, and at that
time they have neither certain feed, nor layre, as I have before declared in
the chapter of Rut.

How the huntesman should go drawing with his hound in the Springs. Chap. 29.


Immediately after Supper the Huntsman should go to his masters chamber, and if
he serve a king, then let him go to the master of the games chamber, to know
his pleasure in what quarter he determines to hunt the day following, that he
may know his own quarter: that done, he may go to bed, to the end he may
rise the earlyer in the morning, according to the time and season, and
according to the place where he must hunt: then when he is up and ready, let
him drink a good draughte, and fetch his hound to make him break his fast a
little: And let him not forget to fill his bottel with good wine, that done,
let him take a little vineyger in the palm of his hand, and put it in the
nost^lls of his hounde, for to make him snuff, to the end his sent may be the
perfecter, then let him go to the wood. And if he chance by the way to find
any hare, partriche, or any other beast or bird that is fearful, living upon
seeds or pasturage, it is an evil sign or presage that he shall haueb ut
evil pastime that day. But if he find any beast of rauine, living upon
pray, as Wolf, Fox, Raven, and such like, that is a token of good luck. He
must take good heed that he come not too early into the springs and hewtes
where he thinks that the Heart does feed and is at relief. For Hearts do go
to their layre commonly in the Springs, yea, and though they were drawn into
some strong hold or thicket, yet if they be old crafty Dearc, they will
return sometimes to the bordure of the Coppes, to hearken or spy if there be
any thing to annoy them. And if they chance once to vent the huntesman or his
hounde, they will straight way dislodge from thence and go some other where,
especially in the heat of the year. But when the huntesman perceyueth that it
is time to begin to beat, let him put his hounde before him, and beat the
out sides of the Springs or thickets: and if he find of an Heart or Dear that
like him, let him mark well whether it be fresh or not, and he may know as
well by the manner of his hounds drawyng, as also by the eye. For if he mark
the paths and trackes where the Heart has gone, he shall see oftentimes the
deawe beaten of, or the foil fresh, or else the ground somewhat broken or
printed a fresh, and such other tokens, as he may judge that the Heart has
gone that way lately, and let him never mark the sayings of a meany of
dreamers, which say, that when a man fyndeth copwebbes within the printe of
the Slotte, it is a sign that the Heart is gone long before. Such people
shall soon be deceived: for many times the cobwebbes fall from the say, and
are not such as Spyders make, but a kind of kell, which as I have seen of
experience of an Heart passing by me within one hundredth paces, and I have gone
to see the slotte straight ways, and before I could come at it the copwebbes
or kelles were fallen upon it. So is there also another kind of men which
mark when the slotte is full of clear water in soft grounds, where an Heart
has passed, and say that he is gone long before: but they never mark whether
the ground be subject unto moisture or not, and yet they may well know, that
being subject unto moisture, then the little sources which pass by channels
unseen in the earth will soon fill the Slotte with clear water: which may
cause a Huntesman to be deceived, and therefore let him look well to it: and
also let him not altogether trust unto his hounde. For some hounds will also
beguyle their master, and especially those hounds that are quickest of sent:
which are not best for the mornings, because of the ryndes and dewes, and then
they draw but slowly, making small account on their quest, as though the game
were gone far before them: but when the Sun is well up, and that the deaw
is cleared, and the sent of the earth is perfect, then have they good sent, and
do their duty well. Then to return to our purpose, if the Huntesman find of
an Heart which likes him, that has passed that way lately, and if his hound
stick well upon it, then let him hold his hound short, for fear least he
lapyst: and again, in a morning, a hounde shall draw better being held
short, than if he were let at length of the Lyam: And yet some Hunters will
give them all the Lyam, but they do not well. When he has well considered what
manner of Heart it may be, and has marked every thing to judge by, then let him
draw till he come to the covert where he is gone to: and let him harbor him
if he can, still marking all his tokens as well by the Slot, as by the entries,
foyelles, and such like. That done let him plashe or bruise down small twigges,
some alofte, and some bylowe as the art requires, and therewithal whilst
his hounde is hot, let him beat the outsides, and make his ryngwalkes twyce
or thrice about the wood, one while by the great and open ways, that he may
help him self by his eye: another while through the thick and covert, for
fear least his hounde should ouershoote it, for he shall have better sent
always in the covert, than abroad in the high ways. And if he find that the
Heart be not gone out of the ryngwalke, or do doubt that he have drawn amysse,
then let him go to his marks which he plashed or shred, and draw counter
till he may take up the fewmet, as well made in the euenings relief as in the
morning: and let him mark the place where he has fed, and whereon also to
mark his subtleties and crafts, for thereby the huntesmen shall know what he
will do when he is before the hounds. For if in the morning he have made any
doublings toward the water, or else in his way, then when he begins to be
spent before the hounds, all the faults, doublings, or subtleties that he
will use, shall be in the same places, and like unto those which he has used
in the morning, and thereby the huntesman may take advantage both for his
hounds, and for the huntesmen on horseback.

And if it chance that the huntesmen find two or three places where the Dear
has entered, and as many where he has comen out, then must he mark well which
entry seems to be freshest, and whether the places where he came forth
again, were not beaten the same night. For an Heart does oftentimes go in and
out of his harbrough in the night, especially if it be a crafty old Dear, he
will use great subtleties, beating one place diverse times to and fro. Then if
the huntesman can not find all his goyngs out, and commings in, nor can well
tell which of them he were best to trust unto, he must then take his compass
and ryngwalke the greater about the covert, so as he may therein enclose all
his subtleties, entries, and commings out. And when he sees that all is
compassed within his ryngwalke, excepting only one coming in, whereby he
might be come from the springs or feeds, then must he let his hounds draw
hardly, and if it be possible, let him draw even to the Hearts layre or
harbor, for he may well think that those paths or trackes will bring him to
it. And in this manner huntesmen should harbor their Dear, but not as many
huntesmen do now adays. For if they can not quickly come to the harbor of an
Heart, they then will foil the gappes, so to make him harbor, which is
oftentimes a cause that they find nothing in their circuites or walks. And
some again do trust altogether in their hound. And when they find the Slotte
of an Heart, they will only plashe or brust some bought at entry of the
thicket, and then go under the wind, and if their hounds do wind any thing,
then they never cast about, but trust so unto their hounds winding of it. Such
men trust more in their hounde, than to their own eyes. And me thinks a good
huntesman should never greatly esteem a hounde which hangs altogether upon
windnig aloft: for he never puts his nose to the ground, and therefore does
oftentimes begile his master.

How the huntsman should seek in the springs, or feed, to find an heart by
the eye. Chap. 30.


THe Huntesman ought to look over night in what coaste the Dear go to feed:
and if it be in a spring, then let him mark which way he may best come in the
morning upon a clear wind. And also let him chose some standing in some tree
on the border of the spring, from the which he may behold eassly all things
that feed therein. In the morning let him rise two hours before day, and go to
the covert, and when he is come near to the Deares harbroughes, he should
leave his hound in some house, or if he have a boy with him, he may leave his
hounde with the boy, and place him somewhere that he may quickly find him
again if he have need of him: then let him go to his tree which he marked
over night, and let him get up into it, lookyng into the spring, and if he
epsy an Heart which like him, then let him mark what head he bears, and
let him not stir from thence until he see him go to herbrough. Afterward
when he sees that he is in the thick, he must mark the place whereaboutes he
entered, by some little pretty tree or such like thing, that being done he
shall come down and go fetch his hounde: but here he shall mark one secret:
that he go not about to herbor an Heart an hour at least after he see him go
to layre, because sometimes an Heart goes to layre, at the bordure of the
thicket, or else will come back thither to harken or see it any thing there be
which might anoy them, as I have said before: and therefore the Huntesman
should not go so soon. And furdermore if in casting about the covert, he
hear either Pies, Iayes, or such birds wondering, then let him withdraw him
and stand close, for that is a token that the Heart is yet on foot, and then
let him stay half an hour longer before he make his ringwalke. And when he
has well and surely herbored him, he may go back to the assembly and make
report thereof, and descyfer the Hearts head which he has seen, with all
other good marks and tokens. And if he have taken up any of the fewmet, he
should put them in his horn and bring them also to the assembly.

How the Huntsman should go to seek an Heart in small groves or hewts, being
privily enclosed within the greater springs in the Forests and strong couerts.
Cha. 31.


Oftentimes the crafty Dear which have been in times past run and chased
with hounds, do keep long time close and come not out of the strong holds
and thickettes, and feed in small privy groves and hewts, which have brne
lately felled within the greater couerts: and thus they do most commonly in May
and June rather than in any other season of the year: for as much as in those
months they go not much to the water, but content themselves with the
moisture of the dew and the earth, the which suffizeth them: but in July and
August when the wood hardens, and the heat is vehement, then they must
needs discover themselves and come out of their holds to go unto the water.
Nevertheless, in what season soever it be, they cannot hide themselves about
four days, but that they must come out of the thickets, and that for sundry
causes: whereof one is, that they will go to see where other Dear do lie, by
whom they hope to find safegarde: for if they should be hunted they would
f^ee among them for change, that so the hounds might be deceived: or else
sometimes they come forth to go to their feed. Nevertheless when they do so,
they retire into their holds two or three hours before day. To prevent such
crafty and subtle Dear, the Huntsman must use this manner: First when he is
in a fair thick or covert at the end of a Forest, and chances to find the
slotte of an Heart, being old trodden, as a day or two before, and that the
ground is much broken with such old trackes, then he must cast and beat all
the outsides: and if perchance he neither find him to have gone out nor in,
either lately, or of old, then may he well think that he goes not out, and
that he hides and concealeth himself within the thickes: then let him get him
under ye wind, and let him go into the thickes, holding his hounde short,
creeping as secretly as he can: and if he perceive that ^is hounde have any
thing in wind, and that by his countenance and gesture it should be like that
he is not far^e from the Heart, then let him withdraw and retire himself for
fear least he rowze him, and let him go in at some other side of the woodde
where it is not so thick: then if he chance to find any little ^ewtes or
springes privily copsed within the thick, where the Heart may feed by night,
he may search it fair and well, and take up the fewmishyngs which he finds.
But here must you note one thing, that is, that he may not go into such
places, until it be nine of the clock in the morning, because such Hearts do
sometimes take herbrough or layre within those little Copisses, to enjoy the
comfort of the Sun, and about nine of the clock they withdraw themselves to
the shadow for two principal reasons, whereof that one is for fear of the
Flies and Horseflies, which would torment him, if he were abroad: the other,
for to avoid the vehement heat of the Sun which would be at none days.
And the Huntesman must take good heed that he enter not over fast into the
thick, for that such Hearts do sometimes take layre very near those privy
coppyses, because they are neither feared nor styrred. But it suffiseth for
the^ if they be only in covert. And also in such springs, they come out to
feed immediately after six of the clock in the evening: and therefore let
the Huntesman be content to have seen the Slotte fresh and to have taken up
the fewmishing: and afterward let him retire himself as secretly as he can,
and never tarry to see or mark the entries, but carry his hounde in his arms
with him. And when he is far enough from thence, let him counterfayte the
Shepherd, or whistle in some pipe, least the Heart have gotten him in the wind
and so rowze, for if he sing or whistle, he shall enbolden him again.
Afterward he may rest half an hour or more in some place by, to the end that
the Heart may be the better assured, and then let him cast about and make his
ring. And if perchance he cannot find any fewmishing, and that the place be so
thick of grass that he cannot well see the Slotte, then let him kneel down,
having his hounde behind him, lookyng upon the foyles and trackes in the
leaves and grass, and if they be well streyned let him clappe his hand upon
the Slotte, and if he find that it be four fingers broad, then may he judge
him an Heart of ten by the foyles: but if it be but three fingers broad, he
shall judge it a young Heart.

How the Huntesman should seek an Heart in his feeds. Chap. 32.


HEre you must understand that there is difference between springs or
coppises, and other feeding places, for we call all pastures, fields, or
gardens wh^rein all sorts of corn and pothcarbes do grow, feedings: and when
an Heart does go to feed in such, we say that he has been at his feed: then
the Huntesman must be styrring carely to go seek the Heart in such places,
for as much as the good people of the villages which are about such places do
rise by the break of day, to turn their cattle on field. And therefore the
Hearts withdraw themselves betimes into their thickes: and also the Kine, Gotes,
Sheep, and such beasts will break the slotte or view where the Heart shall
have passed: the which would be an occasion that the Huntesman could not
perceive it, neither yet his hounde could have sent thereof: and therefore let
him in such place be stirryng very early.

How a huntesman shall go to find out an Heart again, when he has been
hunted and lost the night before. Chap. 33.


IT happens very often that men fail of killyng the Heart at force diverse
kinds of ways: sometimes by occasion of ye great heat, or that they be
overtaken with night, and many other kinds of ways which should be tedious to
rehearse: when such chance happens, you shall thus do. First they which
follow the hounds shall cast a mark at the last pathe or way where they
shall fortune to leave the chase: that they may thither return to seek him on
the morrow by the break of the day with the blondhounde and the hounds of the
kenell behind them: for when there is occasion to seek an Heart again, you
must not tarry for report nor assembly: because it is uncertain if the
chase will long continue, nor into what coast he should be gone: and
therewithal that Hearts which have been hunted, do most commonly run end
ways as far as they have force: and then if they find any water or soil,
they do stay long time therein: and do so stiffen their joints there with that
at their coming out, they cannot go far nor stand up long, and then also
they are constrained to take harbor in any place that they may find, so as
they may be in covert, and feed as they lie, of such things as they may find
about them. When the Huntesmen shall be come unto the place where they left
marks over night, they should part in sunder: and he which has the best
hounde and most tender nosed, should undertake to draw with him endwayes in
the trackes and ways where he sees most lykelyhoode, holding his hounde
short, and yet never fearyng to make him lappise or call on: the other
Huntesmen ought to take them to the outsides of the couertes along by the
most commodious places for them to mark, and for their hounds to vent in:
and if any of them chance to find where he has lept or gone, he shall put his
hounde to it whoupyng twyce, or blowyng two motts with his horn, to call in
his fellows and to cause the rest of the kenell to approach. The rest having
heard him, shall straight ways go to him, and look altogether whether it be
the Heart which they seek: and if it be, then shall they put thereunto the
hounde which best desires to draw or to stick there, and the rest shall
part every man a sundry way to the outsides and skirtes of the covert: and
if they find where he has gone in to some likely covert or grove, then shall
they draw their hounds near unto them, and beat cross through it: And if
there they renew their Slotte or view, let them first well consider it whether
it be the right or not: but if he which draws do perceive that it is right,
let him blow two motes to call his companions, and to advertise the horsemen
that they take heed, because his hounde does make it out better and better:
and if he chance to rowze him, or that he find five or six layres together
one after another, let him not think it strange: for Hearts which have been
run and spent, do oftentimes make many layres together: because they cannot
well stand on foot to feed, but feed lying: and many young Hunters which
understand not the cause are oftentimes beguyled: for when they find so many
layres, they think it should be some heard of dear, that have lain there:
and therefore they ought to look well about them.

How a Huntesman may seek in the high vvoods. Chap. 34.


When a Huntesman shall seek for a Heart in an high wood, let him first
have respect to two things, that is, the season and the thickes or other
couerts of the Forest. For if it be in the heat of the y^are, these
horseflies, gnattes, and such like, will drive the Dear out of the high
wood: and then they disper^e themselves into little thickets or groves which
are near unto good feed. There are Forrestes of sundry sorts: some be
strong of holfs of Holme trees. Some other have thick tuft^ of white thorn.
And some are enuyroned with springs and coppyses. Wherefore the huntesman must
be governed according to the couerts which he finds. For somewhiles Hearts
do lie in the tuftes of white Thorn, under some little tree in manner wide
open. Sometimes under the great trees in the high woods. And sometimes in the
borders or skyrtes of the Forest, in some little groves or Coppyses. And
therefore in such great couertes or high woods, a huntesman must make his ring
walk great or little, according to the holds. For if a man drive an Heart
into the high wood, it will be hard to harbor him or to come near him. And
therefore if the huntesman do well, he shall never make report of a Stagge or
Heart harbored in such places. But I will speak no more of high woods, for me
thinks men take such order for high woods now adays, that before many years
pass, a huntesman shall not be combered with seeking or harboring an Heart in
high woods.

Of the place where and how an assembly should be made, in the presence of a
Prince, or some honorable person.


Who list (by me) to learn, Assembly for to make,
For Keysar, King, or comely Queen, for Lord or Ladies sake:
Or where, and in what sort it should prepared be,
Mark well my words, and thank me then, for thanks I crave in fee.
The place should first be pight, on pleasant gladsome green,
Yet under shade of stately trees, where little sun is seen:
And near some fountain spring, whose crystal running streams,
May help to cool the parching heat, ycaught by Phoebus beams.
The place appointed thus, it neither shall be clad,
With Arras nor with Tapystry, such paltrie were too bad:
Ne yet those hot perfumes, whereof proud Courts do smell,
May once presume in such a place, or Paradise to dwell.
Away with feigned fresh, as broken boughs or leaves,
Away, away, with forced flowers, ygathred from their greaues:
This place must of it self, afforde such sweet delight,
And eke such show, as better may content the greedy sight:
Where sundry sorts of hewes, which grow upon the ground,
May seem (indeed) such Tapystry, as we (by art) have found.
Where fresh and fragrant flowers, may skorne the courtiers cost,
Which daubes himself with Syuet, Musk, and many an ointment lost.
Where sweetest singing birds, may make such melodye,
As Pan, noryet Apollos art, can sound such harmonye.
Where breath of western winds, may calmely yield content,
Where cafements need not opened be, where air is never pent.
Where shade may serve for shryne, and yet the Sun at hand,
Where beauty need not quake for cold, ne yet with Sun be tande.
In fine and to conclude, where pleasure dwells at large,
Which Princes seek in Palaces, with pain and costly charge.
Then such a place once found, the Butler first appears,
He shall be foremost doctor there, and stand before his pears:
And with him shall he bring, (if company be great)
Some wagons, carts, some Mules or iades yladen till they sweat,
With many a medcine made for common queynt diseases,
As thirsty throats, and typpling tongs, whom Bacchus pype appeas^s.
These little pinching pots, which Pothecaries use,
Are all too fine, fie fie on such, they make men but to muse.
My Doctor brings his drugs, to counterpaise all quarrels,
In Kilderkins and Fyrkins full, in Bottles and in Barrels.
And yet therein he brings, (I would you wist it well,)
No rotten drammes, but noble wine, which makes men's hearts to swell.
And down he does dismount, his things for to address,
His flagons in the fountain fair, are placed more and less.
Or if such fountains fail, my Doctor has the skyll,
With sand and Campher for to cool, his potions at his will.
That done: he spreades his cloth, upon the grassye bank,
And sets to she^ his deintie drinks, to win his Princes thank.
Then co^mes the captain Cook, with many a warlike wight,
Which armor bring and weapons both, with hunger for to fight.
Yea some also set forth, upon a manly mind,
To make some means, a quarrel with, my Doctor for to find.
For whiles cold loins of Ueale, cold Capon, Beef and Goose,
With Pygeon pyes, and Mutton cold, are set on hunger loose,
And make the forlorn hope, in doubt to escape full hard,
Then come to give a charge in flank (else all the mart were marde,)
First Neates tongs poudred well, and Gambones of the Hog,
Then Saulsages and sauery knackes, to set men's minds on gogge.
And whiles they skyrmish thus, with fierce and furious fight,
My Doctor clearkly turns the Tappe, and goes beyond them quite.
For when they be so trapt, enclosed round about,
No boot preuayles, but drink like men, for that must help them out.
Then King or comely Queen, then Lord and Lady look,
To see which side will bear the bell, the Butler or the Cook.
At last the Cook takes flight, but Butlers still abide,
And sound their Drums and make retreat, with bottles by their side.
Herewith to stint all strife, the huntsmen come in have,
They license crave of King or Queen, to see their battle plast.
Which granted and obtaynde, they set on such as lyu^,
And fiercely fight, till both be forced, all armor up to give.
And home they go dispoylde, like simple sakelesse men,
No remedy but trudge apace, they have no weapons then.
The ^ield thus fought and done, the huntsmen come again,
Of whom some one upon his knee, shall tell the Prince full plain,
This little lesson here, which follows next in place,
Forgive me (Queen) which am to bold, to speak unto yo grace.
MY Liege forgive the boldness of your man,
Which comes to speak before your grace him call:
My skyll is small, yet must I as I can,
Presume to preach, before these Barons all,
And tell a tale, which may such mynds appall
As pass their days in slothful idleness,
The first foul nourse to worldly wickedness.
Since golden time, (my liege) does never stay,
But flees still about with restless wyngs,
Why does your grace, let time then steal away,
Which is more worth, than all your worldly things?
Believe me (liege) believe me Queens and Kings,
One only hour (once lost) yeldes more anoy,
Than twenty days can cure with mirth and joy.
And since your grace determinde by decree,
To hunt this day, and recreate your mind,
Why sit you thus and lose the game and glee
Which you might hear? why ringeth not the wind,
With horns and hounds, according to their kind?
Why sit you thus (my liege) and never call,
Our hounds nor us, to make you sport withal?
Perchance the fight, which suddenly you saw,
Erewhyles between, these ouerbragging bluddes,
Amasde your mind, and for a while did draw
Your noble eyes, to settle on such suddes.
But peerless Prince, the moisture of such muddes,
Is much too gross and homely for your grace,
Behold them not, their pleasures be but base.
Behold us here, your true and trusty men,
Your huntes, your hyndes, your swaynes at all assayes,
Which overthrow them, (being three to ten)
And now are pressed, with bloudhounds and relayes,
With hounds of cry, and hounds well worthy praise,
To rowze, to run, to hunt and hale to death,
As great a Heart as ever yet bare breath.
This may be seen, (a Princes sport in deed)
And this your grace, shall see when pleases you:
So that voutsafe, (O noble Queen) with speed,
To mount on horse, that others may ensue,
Until this Heart be rowzde and brought to view.
Then if you find, that I have spoke amysse,
Correct me Queen: (till then) forgive me this.
Afterward when all the huntsmen be come together, the^ shall make their
sundry reports, and present their few^y things unto the Prince or master of the
game in field, one after another, every man rehearsing what he has seen. And
when the Prince or other chief has hard them and seen their ^ewmishings, he
or she may then chose which of the Hearts he will hunt, and which he or she
thinks most likely to make him or her best sport. And telling his or her mind
to him that harbored the Heart, the same huntsman shall go back to his
blemishes immediately. But for the better declaration and lively exmessing of
all these things, I have here set in portrayture as well an assembly, as also
the peesenting of a report made by a huntsman to a Prince upon sight of Slot,
view, entry, ports, abatures, fewmishings, and such other tokens. For the
better encouraging of such huntesmen as painefully do rise easily and late, to
make their Lord and Master pastime, I have set it down in such terms as I
can, desiring all Masters of ^enerie and old huntesmen, to bear with my
boldness in uttering of my simple knowledge.

The report of a Huntesman upon the sight of an Heart, in pride of grease. Chap.
36.


BEfore the Queen, I come report to make
Then hushed and peace, for noble Trystrams sake.
From out my horn, my fewmets first I draw,
And them present, on leaves, by hunters law:
And thus I say: my liege, behold and see
An Heart of ten, I hope he harbord be.
For if you mark, his fewmets every point,
You shall them find, long, round, and well annoint,
Knottie and great, withouten pricks or ears,
The moystnesse shows, what venysone he bears.
Then if my Prince, demand what head he bear,
I answer thus, with sober words and cheer:
My liege I went, this morning on my quest,
My hound did stick, and seemde to vent some beast.
I held him short, and drawing after him,
I might behold, the Heart was feeding trym.
His head was high, and large in each degree,
Well palmed eke, and seemd full sound to be.
Of color broune, he bears eight and ten,
Of stately height, and long he seemed then.
His beam seemd great, in good proportion led,
Well burrde and round, well pearled, near his head.
He seemed fair, tweene black and berrie brounde
He seems well fed, by all the signs I found.
For when I had, well marked him with eye,
I stepped aside, to watch where he would lie.
And when I so had waited full an hour,
That he might be, at layre and in his bo^re,
I cast about, to harbor him full sure.
My hound (by sent) did me thereof assure.
Entering the thick, these fewmets did I spy,
Which I took up, and laid my marks thereby.
In privy paths I walked, and (creeping throw)
I found the Slot, of other Hearts ynow.
Both young and old, I found of every syse,
But as for him, I hope that still he lies:
So that your grace (by likelyhoode) may him find,
He harbord is, according to my mind.
Then if she ask, what Slot or view I found,
I say, the Slot, or view, was long on ground,
The toes were great, the ioyntbones round and short,
The shinne bones large, the dewclawes close in port:
Short ioynted was he, hollow footed eke,
An Heart to hunt, as any man can seek.
Of the words and terms of hunting, which the huntsman ought to understand
when he shall make his reports, and when he shall speak before good masters of
Venerie. Chap. 37.
I Have thought good here to declare the terms and words of Uenerie, and how
a young huntsman should speak before the masters of the game. First it is
convenient that an huntesman be well stayed and temperate in his speech: for all
hunters which have regard to the pleasure of their Uenerie, ought to be sober
and modest in talk. But at these days they take more delight in emptying of
the bottles, than they have regard to their tongs. But if a young huntsman
chance to light in company with elder masters, and that they ask him how he
calls the ordure of an Heart, Rayndeare, Got, or fallow Dear, he shall
answer that they are to be called the fewmet or fewmyshings, and that all
beasts which live of browse, shall have the same term in that respect. But in
beasts of rauyne or pray, as the Bore, the Bear, and such like, they shall be
called the Lesses. And of Hares and Coneys, they are called Croteys. Of other
vermyne or stinking chases, as Foxes, Badgers and such like, they are called
the feance, of the Otter they are called the Sprayntes. Afterward if one ask
him how he will term the feeding of an Heart or such like, in terms of
Uenerie, he shall say that it is called the feed of a Dear. As to say: Lo
here you may see where a Dear has taken his feed. Of Bores and such like,
you shall say the feeding, as to say, lo, here he has fed. etc. So is there
great difference between the feet of praying beasts, and the feet of a Dear.
For in beasts of pray and rauine, as Bear, and Bore. etc. they are called
traces. But the footing or tracke of a Dear, as Heart, Bucke, Rayndeare, and
Goat, they are called the view, and the Slot. Also there is difference
between the Fryth and the Fell. The Felles are understood the Mountains,
Ualleys, and pastures with corn, and such like. The Frythes betoken the
Springs and Coppyses. And if a Dear do feed abroad out of the woods, you
shall say that he fed in the Felles, otherwise in the Frythes. A young hunter
has also to consider the difference between these words. Ways and Trenches.
For by the first is meant the high and beaten ways on the outside of a wood or
forest, and such also as lie through such woods being commonly beaten and
traveled. And by this word Trench, is understood every small way, not so
commonly used. And therefore if the huntsmen do say, the Heart is gone down the
way, it is to be understood that he meant the high beaten way: But when he
has taken some other by path or way into the wood or Forest, then a huntsmau
will say he is gone down that trench. etc. So is there also difference
between a Trench and a path. For trenches as I say, be ways and walks in a
wood or Forest. But paths are any place where a Dear has gone and left
view or Slot either long before or fresh and new. As touching blemishes, they
are the marks which are left to know where a Dear has gone in or out. And
they are little bows plashed or broken, so that they hang downward. For any
thing that is hung up, is called a Sewel. And those are used most commonly to
amaze a Dear, and to make him refuse to pass where they are hanged up. When a
huntsman goes to rowze a dear, as to vnharbor a Heart or so, he shall say to
his hound when he casts him off, There boy there, to him, to him, to him. But
if it were to a Bore or such like, he shall speak in the plural number and say,
To them, to them. etc. When a Heart has fed in the Fels, he is commonly wet with
dew, and will not go to ^is la^re, until he be dried in the Sun or otherwise,
and then commonly he lies down upon his belly in some open place, and rowzeth
him when he ryseth. That place has with us no proper name, but only to say:
here ye Heart has dried and rowzed himself. The places where an Heart or any
other Dear lies by day, are called layres. But the lying places of Bores and
such like, are called dens, and of a Fox the kennell. Afterward, when a
huntesman comes to make his report, he shall say altogether what he has seen
and found. And if he found nothing but view or slot, and be demanded what
manner of view or slot it was, he shall by rehearsal tell and describe wh^t
manner of Slot or view it was, as to say, a short or a long foot, with such and
such marks. The like report shall he make of his ports and entries: but if his
hap were to have seen the Heart or Dear, and had leisure to mark him, then
if he be demanded what manner of Dear it was, and what head he bears, he may
answer first: He was of such, or such a coat, as fallow, brown, black, or
dunne, and consequently of such and such a body, bearing a high or low head,
according as he has seen. And if the Dear be false marked, as bearing sire
Antliers or croches on the one side, and seven on the other, then shall the
huntsman say: he bears fourtene false marked, for the more does always
include the less. And if he perceiu that the Dear baere a fair high head big
beamed, the Antliers near and close to his head, and well spread according to
the height, then may he say, that he bears a fair head, well spread, and well
marked in all points, and palmed, crowned, or cro^d according as he saw it.
And likewise he may name how many it was in the top, as an Heart of ten,
fourtene, sixtene, or so forth. And if any demand him if he judged by the
head whether the Heart were an old Heart or not, and how he knows, he may
answer, that he judges by the burre which was great and well pearled, set
close to the head of the Dear. And also by the Antliers which were great,
long, and near to the burre, and accordingly by the tokens heretofore
rehearsed.

The claws which hang behind of a Dear or of a Goat, and such like, are
called dew claws. As to say when you find the slot or view deep, so as the
print of them may be seen, behold here he has left view of his dewclawes. Of
a Bore they are called the gardes. If a huntsman find view or Slot whereby he
judges not yt it is a great or an old dear, he may say it is likely to be of
an Heart of ten or an Heart of ye first head. But if he find Slot that seem of a
great Dear, he may say, a Heart of ten, with out any addition of words. And if
he judge him to be a very old dear, he may then say an Heart of ten, and so he
was long since. And the greatest praise that he can give a Dear, shall be to
say, A great old Heart or Dear.

And of a Bore, when he forsakes the Sounder and feeds alone, he shall be
called a Sanglier going into the third year. The next year he shall be called a
Sanglier of three years old. The next year after that, he is called a Sanglier
chaseable: the greatest praise that can be given him, is to say, A great Bore
not to be refused. Of fallow beasts the company is called an heard, and of
black beasts it is called a rout, or a Sounder.

A Heart belloweth, a Bucke groneth, and a Robucke belleth when they go to Rut.
A Heart goes to the steep at noone in the heat of the day to keep him from
the fly. An Heart breaks where he leaves Slot or view. When he leapeth into
the water and comes out again the same way, then he proffereth. If he pass
through the water, he takes soil, and where he comes out, you shall say that
he breaks water. And after that you may call him an Heart defowlant the water.

An Heart or a Bucke is flayed, a Hare strypped, and a For or such like vermyne
are raised. An Heart and a Bucke likewise reared, rowzed, and vnharbored. An
Heart started, and a Fox vnkennelled.

How to set Relayes. Chap. 38.
RElayes must be set according to the seasons and growth of springs. For in
winter when the Hearts head is hard, they keep the strong couerts and
thickets. And in spring time when their heads are tender, they keep in young
frythes and coppises, and in the weakest couerts that they can find, for fear
least they should knock and hurt their heads against the boughs. And
therefore it is requisite to set men abroad which are brought up in hunting,
and understand well their aduauntages, and with them a good pricker or
huntsman on horseback, mounted upon a good curtall, which should be lightly
clad, having good boots and high, with an horn about his neck. Phoebus
says, that they ought to be clad in green when they hunt the Heart or Bucke,
and in russet when they hunt the Bore, but that is of no great importance, for
I remitte the colors to the fantasies of men. These horsemen should go over
night to their masters chamber, or if they serve a Prince, to the masters of
the games or his Lieuetenantes, to know which of them shall follow the
kennell, and which shall be for the Relayes, and in which Relayes and where
they shall bestow them selves, and what hounds they shall lead with them,
what helps and varlets shall go with them. And those of the relayes shall do
well to have every man a little byllet to remember the names of their Relayes:
and then let them go to their lodging, and get them a guide which may conduct
them in the morning. Afterward they must look that their horses be well
^hod and in good plight, giving them otes sufficient: That done, they shall go
to bed, that they may rise in the morning two hours before day. If it be in
Summer, they must water their horses, but not in Winter, and then they shall
bayte them well until the varlets shall bring the hounds for their relayes.
Their guide being come, they shall break their fasts altogether. And in steed
of Pystolets, they shall have each of them a bottle full of good wine at the
pomell of their saddles. And when day shall begin to peep, then must they
get on horseback, having with them their guide, their relayes, and all their
equipage. If they would send a curtall to another of the relayes, then shall
they say to one of their varlets, that he go with one of their companions to
such a Relay. When they are come to the place appointed for their Relaye, they
shall place their hounds in some fair place at the foot of some tree,
forbidding the varlet that he uncouple them not without their knowledge and
commandment, and that he stir not from thence nor make any noise. Then shall
they go three or four hundredth paces from thence, on that side that the
hunting is ordained, and shall hearke^ if they hear any thing, or can discover
the Heart, for seeing him a far of, they shall better judge whether he be spent
or not, then if they mark him when he is hallowed or cried at. For an Heart
when he is spent, does bear his head low if he see no man, showing thereby
how weary he is. But when he sees a man, he rayseth up his head, and makes
great bounds, as though he would have men think that he is strong and stout.
As also the horseman shall withdraw him self aside for another reason. And
that is, because the pages and they which hold the horses do commonly make
such a noise, that he can not hear the cry. And also when the Heart does hear
noise, or has the dogs in the wind, they will either tume back again, or
wheel aside from the relaye: for which cause the horsman shall hold himself
aside to chose and mark the Heart at leisure. And if he pass by his relaye, he
shall mark dilligently whether he sink or be spent, and also whether he hear
the hounds in chase coming after him or not. And me thinks that in hunting an
Heart at force, it were not best to cast off your relayes, until you see the
hounds of the kennell which began the cry. So should you see who hunteth
best, and also the swiftness of your hounds. But now adays I see few hunt
the Heart as he ought to be hunted: for men give not their hounds leisure to
hunt, neither is there passing two or three that can hunt: for there are so
many hunters on horseback which can neither blow, hallow, nor prick perfectly,
which mingle themselves amongst the hounds, crossing them, and breaking their
course, in such sort, that it is not possible they should hunt truly: and
therefore I say, that it is the horses which hunt, and not the hounds. I will
now therefore teach the Uarlet how to forslow the Relaye when the Heart is past
by. First he must lead his hounds coupled or tied unto the tracke, and let them
follow so three or four paces right, then let him cast of one, and if he take
it right, then may he uncouple the rest, and blow to them. For if he should
cast off his Relay a far off, the hounds might hunt counter, which would be a
great fault. And also if the Ha^t be accompanied with any other Dear, then the
pricker on horseback must ride full in the face of him, to try if he can part
them or not, and if he can part them, then may he uncouple the hounds upon
the view. And if a pricker on horseback chance to be at relaye on the side
of a poole or water, and see the Heart make toward it, he should suffer him
to go to soil therein his fill, and never blow nor make noise: then when he
comes out, he may let the Uarlet go^ with the hounds unto the place where he
came out, and uncouple the hounds upon the view as before said. And he must
never abandon them, blowing after them to call in aid, and brusyng the ground
or making marks all the way as he goes, because if the hounds should hunte
channge, or scatter and stray from the right ways, then may they return to
the laft mark, and so seek again the first chase.

Ph^bus says, that you must rate the hounds which come far behind when
the Heart is past the Relaye. But for my part, I am of a contrary mind. For
as much as the hounds of the Cry which have alredie hunted long time, do
better keep their true tracke and do not so soo^e cha^nge, as the fresh hounds
which are newly cast off at the Relayes. True it is, that if there be any old
hounds which come behind plodding after the Cry, then the prickers on
horseback, or the Uarlets which tarry behind, may call them after them, and
lead them before the cry again. Or else if you have need of more Relayes,
and that you perceive the Heart bends toward a coast where there is not
much change, and that he should be forced to turn back again the same way:
and also that there be good hounds ynow before to maintain the chase, then
may you take up the hindermost hounds and keep them fresh for his return:
and if peradventure it happen that the pricker on horseback being at his
relaye, should see an Heart of ten pass by him, and yet hear not the other
huntsmen, nor their horns, then let him look well whether the Heart be embost
or not, and what hounds they were that came with him. And if he perceive that
they were choice hounds and such as will not hunt change, then ought he to
blow as loud as he can for other hounds, and to call in help. And if one
come in, then let him follow the hounds which maintained the chase, and
uncouple his hounds of relay, blowing and hallowing all the way as he goes,
and blemishing against or over the Slot or view of the Dear.

A huntesman on horseback should be circumspecte in these things, for
sometimes some fresh Dear may rowze before the hounds upon a sodeine, by
reason of the noise of the hounds and huntsmen, the which may be a great hurt:
and peradventure shall seem to be embost also, especially when Dear are in
pride of grease: But if he perceive that the sure hounds of the kennell hunt
it not, and that he hear not them come after in full cry, then ought he not to
cast of his relayes, but only to mark which way he flees, and to blemish at
the last thicket where he saw him enter, or at the last place where he had him
in view, to the end that if he hear the hounds at default, he may go and
tell them that the Heart which passed by his relay, was fallowe, brown, or
according as he saw him, and that he bare such and such a head. etc. And
thereby they may judge and guess, whether it were the cafft Dear or not, and
may go to seek him again, beginning then at the blemishes which he made upon
his last view.

How a huntesman should rowze an Heart, and cast off his hounds to him. Chap.
39.


When the Prince or Lord which hunteth shall have heard all reports, and that
the relayes are well set and placed, and that the huntsmen and hounds have
broken their fast or refreshed them selves, then he which seemed to have
harbored the greatest and oldest Dear, and him which lies in the fairest
covert, upon whose report the Prince or Lord would go to hunte, shall take
his bloudhounde and go before to the blemi^ings with his companions, and with
all the prickers or hunters on Horseback which hunte with the kennell, who
should have every one of them a good cudgel in his hand, which is called a
Hunting coodgell or a Troncheon to turn the boughs and bear them from his
face as he follows the hounds in the woods or thickes: and this coodgell
should not be beached or pilled until such season as the Heart have frayed
his head: but when the Heart has frayed, then may a Huntesman bear a coodgell
beached or pilled lawfully: being come to the blemishes, let them alight to
behold the Slot and such other marks as may be taken by the view or foot of
a Dear, to the end they may the better know whether their hounds hunte change
or not. Then when the Prince or Master of the game is come, and the hounds for
the cry, all the horsemen must quickly cast abroad about the covert, to
discover ye Heart when he rowzeth and goes out of his hold, yt they may the
better know him afterward by the cote, and by his h^ad. And when the huntesma^
which harbored him, shall see all the rest of his co^panio^s about him with the
hounds for the cry, he shall then go before them and rowze the Dear, for the
honor is due to him: and then the rest shall cast of their hou^des, he and al
they crying, To him, To him, that's he, that's he, and such other words of
encourageme^t. And here I will teach you two secrets: the one is that the
huntesmen should not be to hasty with their hounds at the first rowzing or
vnharboring of the dear, for as much as their heat may perchance make them
ouershoote and hunt amiss: the other is, that the hounds of the cry should
always come behi^de the huntesman which has harbored, and behind his hounde
by threescore paces at the least, until he have vnharbored, for fear least
the Heart have crossed and doubled within the thicket, and they might foil or
break the Slot, so that the bloudhound should not be able to draw and hunte
so truly as else he would: for oftentimes old beaten Dear, when they go to
layre, do use all policies and subtilties in crossing, doubling and such like.
And therefore if the hounds of the cry come over near after ye bloudhound,
they shall break the Slot and view, so that he which harbored shall scarce make
his ho^de to hunte it: and if the bloudhounde as he draws do chance to
ouershoote and draw wrong or counter, then must the huntesman draw him back
and say, Back, back, soft, soft, until he have set him right again. And
if he perceive that the hounde do amend his fault and hunte right again, let
him kne^le down upon one knee to mark ye Slot or the ports well and
advisedly: and if he perceive that his hounde draw right, let him clappe him on
the side and cherish him, saying. That's my boy, that's he, that's he, To him
knave, and let him blemish there as well for the^ that come after him, as also
to show them that come with the kennell that the Heart passed there, and if the
kennell be to far from him, he should cry, Come near, come near with the
hounds, or else let him blow two motes, leaving blemishes both alofte and by
low, all the way as he goes, that if his hounde ouershoote or draw amiss,
he may yet come back to his last blemish. Then if he perceive yt his hounde do
renew his drawing, and that he draw stiff, so that it seems he be near the
Heart, he must hold him then shorter and shorter, least if the Heart should
rowze for fear a far of, his hounde (hunting upon the wind) might ^arie him
amiss, so that he should not find the layre. Whereby (and by the foyles about
it) he might have certain judgment: and if he rowze or vnharbor the Dear and
find the layre, let him not blow over hastily for ye hounds, but only cry,
Look ware, look ware, ware, ware, and let him draw on with his hou^de until
y^ Dear be descried, and rightly marked before he hallow. And if he find any
fewmets as he draws, let him mark well whether they be like to those which
he found before or not, I mean those which he brought to the assembly: and yet
sometimes he might so be deceived, but that is not often, but only when the
dear has changed his fee^e. True it is yt the fewmishing which a Dear
makes over night, be not like those which he makes in the morning, when he
draws into ye thicket to go to his layre: for those which he makes at his
f^ede in ye night or evening, be flatter, softer, and better disgested, than
those which he makes in a morning: and ye reason is because he has slept and
rested al day, which makes perfect digestion: and co^trarily those which he
ma^eth in the running, are neither so well disgested nor so soft. For as much
as al ye night a Dear goes and trauelleth to seek his feed, and has
neither had rest nor leisure to digest his feed so well. And yet they will be
like of form and proportion, unless the change of feeding be the cause of
it. Or if the huntesman find the layre of the Dear, he shall lay his cheek
or his back of his hand upon it, to feel if it be warm or not. Or he may
know by his hound, for he will streyne and lappyse, or whymper, or sometime
call on plainly. All these tokens give a huntesman to understand, that the
Heart is rowzed and on foot. Some Hearts be so subtle and crafty, that when
they rowze and go from their layre, they coast round about, to seek some other
Dear whereby the hounds which follo we them, might find change to hunt. Or
else perchance they have some young Brocket with them in company always,
whereby the hunte man may be beguyled. And therefore he shall not blow to cast
off more hounds when he rowzeth him, but only cry, ware, ware, ware, come
near with the hounds. And let him draw after him still that way that he went
fyftie or threescore paces: And when he shall perceive that the Heart prepares
to flee, if he seem to be sure thereof, let him blow for the hounds, and
cry to them, that's he, that's he, to him, to him. And let him draw still upon
the Slot or view, blowing and hallowing, until the hounds be come in and
begin to take it right, and therewithal he must go amongst them, with his
hounde in the lyam to encourage them, and to make them take it the more hotely.
Afterward when he sees that they are in full cry, and take it right, he may
go out of the thick, and give his hounde to his boy or servant, and get up on
horseback, keeping still under the wind, and coasting to cross the hounds
which are in chase, to help them at default if need require. But if it
should happen that the Heart turning counter upon the hounds in the thicket,
had come amongst change, then let all the huntesmen menace and rate their
hounds, and couple them up again, until they have gone back either to the
layre, or to last blemish made upon any Slotte or view, and so hunt on again
until they may find the Heart. For some beaten Dear will fall flat upon his
belly, and never move until the hounds be even upon him.

Certain observations and suttleties to be used by Huntesmen in hunting an
Heart at force. Chap. 40.


NOw that I have treated of such judgments and marks as the huntesmen may
take of an Heart, and how they should behave themselves in harboring of a
Dear, I think meet likewise to instruct (according to my simple skill) the
huntesmen on horseback how to chase and hunte an Heart at force: and that
as well by authority of good and ancient hunters, as also by experience of
mine own hunting. And because at these days there are many men which bear
horns and bewgles, and yet cannot tell how to use them, neither how to
encourage and help their hounds therewith, but rather do hinder than further
them, having neither skill nor delight to use true measure in blowyng: and
therewithal seeing that Princes and Noble men take no delight in hu^tyng, having
their eyes muftled with the Scarf of worldly wealth, and thinking thereby to
make their names immortal, which in deed does often lead them to destruction
both of body and soul, and oftener is cause of the shortening of their life
(which is their principal treasure here on earth) since a man shall hardly see
any of them reygne or live so long as they did in those days that every Forest
rong with hou^es and horns, and when plenty of flagon bottels were carried in
every quarter to refreshe them temperately. Therefore I should think it
labor lost to set down these things in any perfect order, were it not that I
have good hope to see the nobility and youth of England exercise themselves
as well in that as also in sundry other noble pastimes of recreation, according
to the steps of their Honorable Iuncestors and Progenitors. And therefore I
adventure this travail, to set down in articles and particularities, the
secrets and precepts of Uenerie as you see.

First then the prickers and Huntesmen on horseback, must understand, that
there is diversity between the terms and words which they shall use to
Buckhoundes, and the terms and words which they shall use in hunting of the
Bore. For an Heart fli^th and eloyneth himself when he is sore hunted,
trusting to nothing else but unto his heels, nor never stands in his defense
unless he be forced: and therefore you shall comfort such hounds with loud
and courageous cries and noyses, as well of your voice as of your horn also. But
when you hunte a wild Boar or any such beast, you shall do the contrary,
because they are beasts which are slower, and cannot flee nor eloyne themselves
from the hounds: but trust in their tuskes and defense: and therefore in such
chases, you shall comfort your hounds with furious terrible soundes and noise,
as well of the voice as also of your horn, to the end you may make the chase
flee endwayes. And you should always be near at hand, and hold in with your
hounds, and make great noise least the Bore should hurt or kill them. As
touching the Heart and such other light chases or beasts of Uenerie, the
huntesmen on horseback may follow their hounds always by ye same ways that
they saw him pass over, and never shall need to cross nor coast so much for
fear least they should rowze some change: and likewise because in hunting so,
they shall always be best able to help at defaultes: and let the^ never come
nearer the hou^des in cry, tha^ fifty or threescore paces, especially at ye
first vncoupling, or at casting of their relayes. For if an Heart do make
doublings, or wheel about, or cross before your hounds, if then you come in
to hastily, you shall foil and mar the Slot or view, in such sort as the
hounds should not be able to sent it so well, but should ouershoote the chase,
and that would mar the sport: but if the prickers and huntesmen on
horseback perceive that an Heart (being ru^ne an hour or more) make out
endwayes before the hounds in chase, and therewithal perceive that the
hounds follow in full cry taking it right, then they may come in nearer
toward the hounds, and blow a Rechate to their hou^des to comfort them.
You shall understand herewith that when a Heart feels that ye hounds hold in
after him, he flees and seeks to beguyle the^: with change in sundry
sorts, for he will seek other Hearts and Dear at layre, and rowzeth them
before the hounds to make them hunte change: therewithal he will lie flat
down upon his belly in some of their layres, and so let the hounds
ouershoote him: and because they should have no sent of him, nor vent him, he
will trusse al his. iii. feet under his belly and will blow and breath upon ye
ground in some moist place: in such forte y^ I have seen the hounds pass by
such an Heart within a yeard of him and never ve^t him: and this subtlety does
nature endow him with, yt he knows his breath and his feet to give greater
sent unto y^ hounds tha^ all the rest of his body. And therefore at such a time
he will abide ye horsemen to ride full upon him, before he will be reared, and this
is one especial reason wherefore the horsemen and huntsmen should blemish at
such places as they see the Heart enter into a thicket or covert to the end
that if the hounds fall to change, they may return to those blemishes, and
put their hounds to the right slot and view, until they have rowzed or found
him again with their bloudhounde, or with some other stanche old hounde of the
kenell, in the which they may affie themselves. For old staunche hounds which
will not hunte change, when they see an Heart rowzed and before them, they
never call on nor once open: but if they be young rash hounds they will run
with full cry and so take change. Wherefore in such respects the huntesmen on
horseback must have great consideration, and let the^ never affie themselves
in young hounds, unless they see some old stanche hounds amongst them: and if
there be two prickers or huntesmen on horseback together, that one shall run to
the hou^ds and rate them, that other shall hallow, and call them into the place
where they made the default, and there let the^ beat well with their hounds,
co^forting them until they may find the Heart again. And if he hear any old
sure hounde bay or open, let him make in to him and look on the slot whether
he hunt right or not: and if he find that it be right let him blow with
hishorne, and afterward halow unto that hounde naming him, as to say, Hyke a
Talbot, or Hyke a B^wmont Hyke Hyke, to him, to him, etc. The^ the other
huntesmen shall beat in their hounds to him, and by that means they shall
renew the chase and find him again. I gain a Heart brings the hounds to
change in an other manner: for as soon as he perceyueth that the hounds run
him, and that he cannot eschew them, he will break into one thicket after
another to find other Dear, and rowseth them, and heardeth himself with
them. So that he holds herd with the^ sometimes an hour or more before he
will part from them or break heard: then if he feel himself spent, he will
break heard, and fall a doubling and crossing in some hard high way that is
much beaten, or else in some river or brook the which he will keep as long as
his breath will suffer him: and when he perceyueth that he is far before the
hounds, he will use like subtilties as before to beguyle them, lying ^lat upon
his belly in some hard way or dry place, and crossing all his four feet
underneath him, breathing and blowing against the ground as before said, or
against the water if he have taken the soylein such sort, that of all his body
you shall see nothing but his nose: and I have seen diverse lie so, until the
hounds have been upon them before they would rise. In these cases the
huntesmen must have especial regard to their old sure hounds, when they
perceive a Dear to seek the heard so, for. the old sure hounds will hunt
leysurely and fearfully, when the rash young hounds will ouershoote it. And
therefore never regard the young hounds but the old stanche hounds: and
trust in the old hounds gyuing them leisure, and being near them to help
and comfort them, evermore blemyshing as you perceive and find any Slot or
view of the Dear that is hunted.

And if so chance that the hounds be at default, or that they disseuer and
hunt in two or three sundry companies, then may they (...) thereby that the
Heart has broken heard from the fresh dear, and that the said fresh Dear do
separate them selves al^o. And they must not then trust to a young hounde (as
before said) how good so ever he make it, but they must regard which way the
old stanch hounds make it, and make in to them loking upon the Slot, view, or
soil. And when they have found the right, and perceive that the Heart has
broken heard from the other Dear, let the^ blemish there, and blow, and cry,
There he goe^h, that's he, that's he, ^o him, to him, naming the hound that goth
away with the vautchace, and hallowing the rest unto him. You shall also have
regard that hounds can not so well make it good in the hard high ways, as in
other places, because they can not there have so perfect sent, and that for
diverse causes. For in those high ways there are the tracke and footing of
diverse sundry sorts of cattle which beat them continually, and break the
ground to dust with their feet in such sort, that when the hounds put their
noses to the ground to sent, the powder and dust snuffeth up into their noses,
and marres their sent. And again, the vehement heat of the Sun does dry up
the moisture of the earth, so that the dust covers the slot or view of the
Dear as he runs, and that is the sent whereby the hounds hunte principally,
whereas upon the green ground the Heart leaves sent upon the grass or
boughs where he passes or touches with his body. Many other reasons there
are to prove that in ye high ways a hounde cannot have so good sent as in
other places, the which I pass over for brevity. And in such place an Heart
will subtly make crosses and doublings, or hold the same long together to make
the hounds give it over: such is the benefit of nature to give the du^be
beast understanding which way to help himself, as it gives also understanding
to al living creatures to eschew and avoid their contrary, and their
adversary, and to save it self by all means possible. But when the huntesmen
shall find their hounds at default upon such an high way, then let them look
narowly whether the Heart have doubled, or crossed: and if they find that he
have, as to run right end ways, and come back again counter upon the same,
then let them cry to their hounds to encourage them, To him boys, counter,
To him, to him. And let them tread out the counter slottes in sight of their
hounds, helping and comforting the^ always, until they have brought them
where he entered into some thicket or covert, and there let them stay their
hounds until they make it good upon the sides of the high ways, or thickets,
and not within the couerts: for when they are once entered into the couerts,
they shall have much better sent, and shall not so soon ouershoote it, as they
should have done in the high ways. For there the grass, and the leaves and
such other things do keep the sent fresher, and also the ground being moyster,
an Heart cannot so (...) touch it with his feet or body, but he shall leave
sent for the hounds: and let the huntesinen inake blemishes all the way as
they pass, and beat the places well with their hounds, co^forting and helping
them ye best that they can: and if any one hounde call on alone, the huntesmen
must make in to him, and look by ye slot or other tokens what it should be
that he hunteth: and if they find that he (...) the chaffed Dear, they shall
rechate in for the rest of the hounds, and name that hounde to them, as to say
Talbot, a Talbot, a Talbot, as beforesayd. It happens oftentimes also yt an
Heart passes by some coleharthes or place where things have been buried: and
then the hounds cannot have so good sent, because the hot sent of the fire
smoothreth the hounds, and makes the^ forget the sent of the Heart. In such
case the huntsme^ may mark which way the Heart held head, and coast by the
coleharthes with their hou^des quickly, until they come on the farside thereof:
there let the^ beat well until their hounds make it good again by the slot
or other tokens, or by the sent which they must needs find in the fresh air
passing thus by and staying not. But if an Heart break out before the hounds
into the champaigne country, and that it be in the heat of the day, between
noone and three of the clock: then if the huntesmen perceive that their
hounds be out of breath, they must not force them much, but comfort them the
best yt they can, and though they hear not their best hounds call on upon the
Slot or view, yet if they wagge their tails it is enough: for peradventure the
hounds are so spent with the vehement heat, that it is painful to them to
call on, or that they be out of breath: and therefore in such case the
huntesme^ shall do well to follow afar off without ouerlaying or ouerriding of
the^ as I have beforesayd. And if yt hounds give over and be tired, then let
the huntesmen blemishe upon the last Slot or view, and go with their hounds
into the next village, where they shall give the^ bread and water, and keep
the^ about them under some tree or shade until the heat of ye day be over,
and let them sometimes blow to call in their boys or servants which follow on
foot, and their other companions, about three of the clock, they may go back
to their last blemishe, and put their hounds to the Slot or view: and if any
of their varlettes or Boys had a bloudhounde there, let him put his
bloudhounde to the Slot or view, and draw before the hounds with him,
cherishyng and comforting him, and never fearyng to make him open in the
string: for the other hounds hearing him open, will come in and take it right,
leauyng their defaultes. Thus should the Huntesmen hold on beating and
following until they have reared and found the Heart again. You shall
understand that when a Heart is spent and sore ru^ne, his last efuge is to the
water which hunters call the soil, and he will commonly therefore rather
descend down the stream, than (...) against it, especially if the hounds run
him well. And it seems he has naturally this understanding, that he knows
if he should not swim against the stream when he goes to the soil, the
hounds would have greater sent of him, than when he descended down the
stream. For the wind would always bear the sent upon them, and also it were
more painful and greater travel to him self, to swymme against the stream,
than to swymme down the stream. Understande then that if a Heart be sore
run, and come to a River or water, he will commonly take it, and swymme in
the very midst thereof, for he will take as good heed as he can, to touch
no boughs or twigs that grow upon the sides of the River, for fear least
the hounds should thereby take sent of him. And h^ will swymme along the river
long time before he come out, unless he light upon some block or other such
thing which stop him in the stream, and then he is forced to come out. In such
places the huntesmen must have good regard to blemish at the place where he
first took soil: and let them mark there well which way he makes head, the
which they may perceive either by their hounds, or by marking which way he
fled when he came thither. Let them make their hounds take the water and
swymme therein: for they may ^nde sent upon the bulrushes or weeds which grow
in the river. Or otherwise, the huntesmen them selves may seek to find where
the Heart has forsaken the soil (which huntesmen call breaking of the water)
and there they shall find by the grass or herbs which he has borne down
before him, which way he makes head. When they find assuredly which way he
makes head, then let them call their hounds out of the water, for fear
least they founder them with too much cold after their heat. And if there be
three huntesinen of them together, let two of the^ get one of the one side of
the river, and another on that other side, and let the third get him before
that way that the Heart has made head, to see if he can espy him swymming
or lying in the water: the two huntsmen which shall be on each side of the river,
shall beat with their hounds each of the^ upon his side, and far enough from
the banks. For they shall have better sent. xx. or. xxx. paces off, than they
should have at the very side or bank of the river. And the reason is, that
when the Heart comes out of the water he is al wet and moyled with water,
which pours down his legs in such abundance, that it drownes the Slot or
view. But commonly he rouseth and shakes the water off him at his coming out
thereof, so that by that time he have gone. xx. or. xxx. paces, the Slot is
better, and the hounds shall sent him much better. Nevertheless the huntsmen
them selves should keep always near to the river: for sometimes the Heart will
lie under the water all but his very nose, as I have before rehearsed: Or may
percase lie in some bed of bulrushes, or in some tuft of sallowes, so that they
might leave him behind them: and then as soon as they were past, he might go
counter back again the same way that he came. For commonly a Heart has that
crafty policy to suffer the hounds to ouershoot him, and the huntsmen to
pass by him. And as soon as they be past, he will steal back and go cou^ter
right backwards in ye same track or path yt he came. This happens not often,
unless the river be full of sallows or such bushes, and near unto some
forest. But let some one of ye Huntesmen have always an eye to the River, and
let the rest beat with their hou^des. xx. paces from the banks, and so let
them keep on altogether until they find where he brake water: and if they
find any block or beam, or such thing that lies cross ouerthwarte the
stream, let them look there whether he have broken water or not, for unless
it be at such a place, or at such a let, a Heart will keep the water long,
especially when he breaks from the hounds over a champaigne country: for at
such times they will hold the water as long as they can, and also at such
times they trust no longer neither in their thickets, nor in their swiftness,
but are constrained to seek the soil as their last refuge. And here I think
it not amiss to advertise you, that an Heart dreadeth the Northern winds,
and the Southern winds much more than he does the Easterly or Westerly
winds, in such sort that if at his breakyng out of a covert, when he seeks
to break from the hounds endwaies over the champaigne, he feel either a
Northwinde or a Southwinde blow, he will never run into it, but turns his
back and takes it in his tail, and this he does for diverse respects. The
first is because the Northwinde is cold and sharp, and dries exceedingly,
and the Southwinde is hot and corrupt, because it comes under the circle of
the Sun, the which overcomes him and settes him up quickly by the vehement
sweltrie heat thereof. And if he should run into any of those two winds, it
would quickly enter his throat when he is embost and begins to be spent, and
would dry his throat and his tongue sore, and would alter and chafe him much
with the vehement heat thereof. Also those winds are commonly great and
tempestuous, and if he should run against them, his head and horns would be
as a sail to hold him back, the which might much let him in his runnyng.
Again, he knows that if he run into the wind, the hounds shall have the
better sent of him, and need not so much to lay their noses to the ground but
may hunte upon the wind. Also he himself does covet always both to see and
hear the hounds which follow him. And although Phoebus says that all
Hearts do commonly run down the wind how so ever it sit, yet have I found
it otherwise by experience: and especially when it blows from the Seawardes,
which is a moist wind, and then a Heart will covet to ru^ne against the wind:
but doubtless a Heart does fear the Northerlywinde and the Southwinde, as I
have said before: and so do all other beasts, as Spaniels or hou^des, the
which will not hunte so well in those winds, as they do at other times. Also you
shall understand, that a Heart does foreloyne and break out before the hounds
for diverse reasons, especially in April or May, when his head is bloody and
soft: for then if he be hunted he dares not hold in the thickets or couerts
for hurtyng of his head: but is (...) to come forth of the strong holds, and
then he breaks over the champaigne Countries, and seeks to forloyne or to
break from the hounds, and then he doubleth, crosses, etc. Or it may be that
a heart forsakes the covert for an other reason: because in the thickets he
trauayleth more, and beats himself sorer in bearing down the boughs before
him: and cannot make way so well before the hounds: for they being much lesser
than he, do run with greater ease in the hollow of the woods below, and in
like manner h^ cannot cross nor double so well in the covert as he may do in
the plain champaigne. And for these causes he is constreyned (as it were) to
go out either into the hollow woods, or into the champaigne. And there let the
Huntesmen have good regard, for a hounde may much sooner be at default in the
hollow woods than in the strong couerts, having more scope to cast about and
to ra^g^ further out when they are hot and madbrayned, and so they may
ouershoote the slotte, if the Huntesmen be any thing hasty with them, and
ouerley them, or ouereyde them and hunte change: the which they cannot so
lightly do in ye strong couerts, for there they run directly upon the foot
of the Dear: and cannot cast out neither one way nor other so redily, for they
fear evermore to leese the right tracke where the Heart went. And therefore a
Huntsma^ shall take greater heed to change in the hollow high woods, than in
younger springs: for a hounde will sooner ouershoote and hunte out in the
hollowes, than in the strong holds. Also in hollow high woods a Heart does
foreloyne more and breaks further from the hounds, and has more leisure to
cross and double, and to seek the change amongst other Dear tha^ he has in
stronger couerts: also an Heart does forloyne or break out from the hounds for
an other cause: that is when he feels himself sore laid to by the hounds,
and sees yt no subtlety helps him, then becomes he amassed and loses his
courage, and knows not which way to take, but passes at al adventure over
the fields, and through the villages and such other places. Then should the
Huntesmen draw near to their hounds, and if they perceive them at any
default, they shall never go back to any Slot or view, but go on still, and
hunte forwards: for a Dear that is spent or sore hunted, and that seeks to
foreloyne or break from the hounds, will never tarry to cross or double, but
holds head onwardes still as long as breath serves him, unless he have some
soil in the wind, then he may chance go aside to take the Soil, but else
not. True it is that if he break out into the cha^paigne for any cause before
mentioned, and be not sore spent, nor begin to sink before the hounds, then
he may chance to double, cross, and use other subtleties: but if he be spent,
he will sildome use any subtletie, but only to lie flat upon his belly awhyle,
and that not long neither. Furthermore you shall now understand that there is
great difference in finding out the subtleties of a Dear in the Forestes or
strong holds, and those which he uses in the playina^ chpaigne. For in the
strong couerts you must cast about near unto the last Slot that you find, and
you must hold in as near as you can. For if the huntesmen cast wide out in
beating for it, they may chance to light upon change, which will carry out
your hounds to your great disadvantage. But in the champaigne you may cast
about at large without dread of change: and that in the freshest and most
commodious places, where they might soonest find view, and so make it out,
and whereas also the hounds may have best sent. For in the sandhils and dry
places, a hounde can not make it out so well, by reason of the dust and sand
which will strike up into his nose, and by reason that the Sun does sooner
dry up the moisture from the ground in those places. Again, because in such
heathy places, and barreyne grounds, there is neither grass nor any thing
whereon the Dear may leave sent so well: and that is the cause that Huntesmen
may cast about in the most convenient moist places, and in the fresh under
some bushe or shade where the earth is not so much dried and parched with the
Sun: and if they cannot make it out at the first casting about, they may
then cast about the second time a larger compass: and if by that means they
make it not out, then may they presume that he is within that compass and
precinct which they have so cast about, or else that the Heart has made some
crossyng or some doubling, or used some subtlety: then let them lead back
their hounds to the place where they first fell at default, and put their
hounds to it upon the Slotte, or where the earth is broken as they went
before, and let them beat it well with their hounds, speaking to them and
cherishyng them all that they ca^ devise, as well with their voice as with their
horns: and let them look well to the ground to help their hounds. And it
shall not be possible (thus doing) but that you shall rowze the Dear again
within the circuit and compass that you had erst cast about: and at the
least if you do not, you shall yet find where he is gone on, and so make it
out, unless the extremity of the heat do altogether mar your hou^des
Hunting. Furthermore you shall remember, that when an Heart breaks out from
the hounds, by the two first places where you stay upon any crossyng or
doubling that he has made, you shall perceive all the subtilties and policies
which he will use all that day after. For if his t^oo first doublings or other
subtilties be in an high way, or in a water, then all the rest that he will
use all the day after will be in the same manner. And then let the Huntesmen
mark well on which hand he turns when he parts: for on which hand soever
he turn the two first times, on the same hand he will turn (at his parting)
all the day after, whether it be on the right hand or on the left hand: And
therefore remember ever when you come at any default to beat first on that
hand which he took at the two first defaults. Also an Heart does oftentimes
use great policies in the paths within the great woods and strong couerts,
or else will follow such a pathe until he come to the outside of the wood, as
though he would come out into the plain, and will immediately fall to double
and cross, returnyng flat counter, sometimes two boweshot togethers: then the
Huntesmen to make it out at such a default must take good heed that their
hounds take not the counter, because the Heart is (...) backwardes therewith
so far: and also they shall find the Slotte or view, (or at least the foyles
of the view) fresher in the covert, than they should do abroad in the field,
the which may carry them far back upon the counter. Wherefore at such
defaults the Huntesmen shall not be to hasty with their hounds, but rather
give them leisure, and let them hunte in dread and doubt until they have made
it out perfectly. Also there be some Hearts, which when they rise out of their
layres will halte, or fall down upon their belly before the Huntesmen, and
seem to reele and royle before the hounds, as if they were spent and sore
hunted not long before: by such subtleties you may judge ^asily that they are
old beaten Dear, and well breathed, and will stand long up before your hounds,
trusting much in their force and swiftnese: for a huntsman may easily know when
a Heart is spent in deed, and when he begins to sink and will not long
hold up, by diverse tokens. First if he neither regard, hear nor see any man
or any thing before hin^ when the hounds run him: or if he bear his head
low, putting his nose down to the ground, and reele or folter with his
legs, showing how feeble he is in deed, or if he epsy a man before him, he
rayseth up his head, and makes great bounds and leapes on height as though he
were lusty and fresh (as I have said heretofore) but such friskes will not
last long: for when he is a little past by, he will stretche out his neck
again and hold down his head and will reele and wallow as before said. Or
else likewise you may know when a Dear is spent, if his mouth and throat be
black and dry without any froth or foam upon it, and his tongue hangyng out:
likewise by his Slot or view where you find it, for oftentimes he will close
his claws togethers as if he went at leisure, and straight way again will
open them and stray them wide, making great glydings, and hitting his dewclawes
upon the ground, or his shanke bones sometimes, and will commonly follow the
beaten paths and ways, and never double nor cross but very little. And if
he come to a hedge or a dytch, he will go all along to seek some brack or
beaten leap, because he has not force to leap it roundly of him self. By
all these tokens you may know when a dear is spent and ready to fall. Thus
will I end this chapter, praying all expert huntsmen and masters of Uenerie to
hold me excused, if I have ouerskipped, or left out any thing meet to be set
down, for as much as it is hard for any man to set down so well in writing, as
he might put it in execution. But always remember that the Art it self
requires great skyll, wit, and policy, in a huntsman: and that he govern
him self according to the variety of occasions, and according to the
presumptions that he shall see in the Deares wyles and subtleties: therewithal
that he have respect to the goodness or imperfection of the hounds, and to
the crossings and doublings of the Dear together with the places where the
same are made. And thereupon he may make his ring, and cast about little or
much, according to the commodity of the place, time, and season. For hounds
will moreover shoot in the heat, and in the time that there is most sent upon
the herbs, flowers, and grass, than at any other season of the year. And
therefore at such times and places, you shall do well to cast about a greater
compass or circuit, and oftener also, seeking moist and fresh places for the
better sent and advantage of the hounds. Thus doing, you have very evil
luck if you lose a Heart by default: so that you will take pains and give not
over for a little discomfort. Yea when you are overtaken with the night, or
that your hounds are surbayted and weary, yet a good huntesman should not
thereat be abashed, nor discomfited, but blemishe upon the last Slot or view,
and to him again in the morning.

How to kill an Heart when he is at bay, and what is then to be done. Chap. 41.


When a Heart is at Baye, it is dangerous to go in to him, and especially in
rutting time. For at that time their heads are venomous and most perilous, and
thereupon came this proverb. If thou be hurt with Heart, it brings thee to thy
Bear, But Barbers hand will Bores hurt heal, thereof thou needst not fear.

The which has not bin said for nothing, as has bin proved by many examples.
For we read of an Emperor named Basil, which had overcome his enemies in many
battles, and had done great deeds of Chivalry in his Country, and was yet
nevertheless slain with an Heart in breaking of a Bay. Behold gentle Reader
the inconstancy of variable fortune. A Prince which had done so many deeds
of prowess amongst men: which had both comforted his (...), and discomforted
his enemies: which had peaceably defended his people, and courageously
assaulted such as sought to subvert his dominion, was at the last in the pride
of his pleasure, in the pursuit of his pastime, and in the unexpected day of
his destenie, va^q^ished, slain, and gored with the horns of a brute Beast:
yea (that more is) by a fearful beast, and such an one as durst not many
days nor hours before have beheld the countenance of the weakest man in his
kingdom: A Beast that fled from him, and a beast whom he constreyned (in his
own defense) to do this detestable mu^der. This example may serve as a mirror
to al Princes and Potestates, yea and generally to all estates, that they
bridle their minds from proferyng of undeserved injuries, and do not
constrayne the simple sakelesse man to stand in his own defense, nor to do
(like the worm) turn again when it is trodden on. I would not have my words
wrested to this construction, that it were unlawful to kill a Dear or such
beasts of venerie: for so should I both speak against the purpose which I have
taken in hand, and again I should seem to argue against Gods ordinances,
since it seems that such beasts have been created to the use of man and for
his recreation: but as by all Fables some good morality may be gathered, so by
all Histories and examples, some good allegory and comparison may be made. And
to return to the matter, I might recite many other stories and examples, but
this may suffize to admonish all Huntesmen that they go wisely and warily to a
Heart when he is at Baye: as hereafter I will more largely declare. You shall
understand then, that there are Bays in the water and Bays on the land, and
if an Heart be in a deep water, where the Huntesman cannot come at him, the
best thing that he can do, shall be to couple up his hounds, and that for many
causes: for if they should long continue in the water, it would put them in
great danger to founder and mar them, or if the water be broad and deep,
they might chance (through eagerness of their game) to drown. For a Heart
which is spent, will not willingly leave a great water, when he sees the
hounds and the huntsmen come in to him, but will swim up and down in the
midst of the stream, and never come near the banks. And therefore I say
the huntesman shall do well to take up his hounds, and to stand close upon a
clear wind until the Heart may come out of his own free will, the which
peradventure he will quickly do, when he hears no longer noise after him. And
if the huntesman stand clo^e and upon a clear wind, he may chance to have a
blow at him with his sword^ as he comes out. But if he fail thereof, and
that the Heart be once past him, let him suffer him to pass far enough before
he uncouple his hounds, for if a Heart hear any sodeine noise coming after
him, he may chance to return unto the soil. But if he perceive that the Heart
will not come out of the water, then let him get a boat, or if he can swymme,
let him put off his clothes, and swymme to him with a Dagger ready drawn to
kill him, and yet let him well beware how he assail him, unless the water be
very deep. For if it be so shallowe that an Heart may stand upon the bottom,
he may chance to give the huntesman a shrewde blow, if he take not heed at
the ^rst encounter: marie where it is deep he has least force. It has been
my hap oftentimes to kill in this sort very great Hearts, and that in sight
and presence of diverse witnesses, and afterward I have guided their dead
bodies to the bank swymming. As touching the baye on the land, if the Heart
be frayed and burnished, then the huntsman ought well to regard and consider
the place. For if it be in a plain and open place, where there is no wood nor
covert, it is dangerous and hard to come in to him: but if it be by an hedge
side, or in a strong thirke or queadx, then whiles the Heart does stare and
look upon the hounds, the huntesman may come covertly amongst the bushes
behind him, and so may easily kill him: and if the Heart turn head upon
him, let him run behind some tree, or cover him self in the thycke quickly,
or shake some (...) rudely and boysterously before him. Or else when you see an
Heart at Baye, take up the hounds, and when the Heart turns head to flee,
galloppe roundely in, and before he have ley sure to turn upon you, it is a
thing easy enough to kill him with your sword.

How to break up an Heart after the French manner, and to reward the
hounds. Chap. 42.
When the Heart is killed, then all the huntesmen which be at fall of him,
shall blow a note, and whoupe also a dead note, to the end that the rest of
the companies with all the hounds may come in. Being assembled, and the Prince
or chief hunter come also, they shall bring the hounds to the Dear, and let
them all to byte and tear him about the neck, then couple them up until
their reward be prepared. Then the chief hunte shall take his knyfe, and cut
off the Deares right foot before, and present it to the King as you see it
here portayed. And before they proceed any further, they must cut down good
store of green branches and boughs, and strewe them upon the ground. Then
shall they lay the Heart thereupon, laying him upon his back, with his four
feet vpwardes, and his head under his two shoulders, as you may likewise see
here portrayed.

That being done, make a little forke with one tyne longer than any other (as
you may see also) upon the which forke you may hang all the dayntie morselles
which appertain to the Prince or chief personage on field. And before that
you go about to take off his skin, the first thing that must be taken from
him, are his stones which hunters call his doulcettes, and hang them on the
forke by a little of their skin: then let them begin to take of his skin in
this manner.

First you must begin to slyt it at the throat, and so all along his bellye,
unto the place where you took away his doulcets, then take him by the right
foot before, and cut the skin round about underneath the joint of the
dewclawes, and then slit it from thence unto the top of his breast, and do
as much to the other forelegge: then slit and cut the skin in like manner of
the hinder legs unto the top of the hanche, leaving at the place where you
took away the doulcets: then begin at every leg, one after another to take
of the skin: and when you come at his sides you must let cleave to the
skin, a thin kind of read flesh which hunters call the apparel of an
Heart, the which grows above the benison and between it and the skin on
both sides of his body. Thus when the skin is clean taken of saving only at
the head, ears, skut, and the Tewell (at all which places the skin must still
have hold,) before you go about to do any more, the chief Huntesman must call
for a bolle of wine, and drink a good hearty draught: for if he should break
up the Dear before he drink, the Uenison would stink and putrify. You shall
also present before the Prince or chief personage in field, some fine sauce
made with wine and spices in a fair dishe upon a chafyngdishe and coals, to
the end that as he or she does behold the huntesman breaking up of the Dear,
they may take their pleasure of the sweet deintie morsels, and dress some of
them on the coals, making them Carbonadies, and eating them with their sauce,
rejoicing and recreating their noble minds with rehersall which hounde hunted
best, and which huntesman hunted most like a woodman: calling their best
favored hound^s and huntesmen before them, and rewarding them favorably, as
has been the custom of all noble personages to do. Then shall the huntesman
take his knife in hand again and break up the Dear in this sort: spreadyng
the skin on both sides upon the green leaves strewed for that purpose.
First he shall take out the tongue, and put it upon the Forke, for it
appertains to the Prince or to the chief personage: likewise two knottes or
nuttes which are to be taken between the neck and the shoulders, and two
others which are in the flanks of the Dear, and are called flankardes, and
hang them upon the Forke: this being done, he shall first take out the right
shoulder with his shoulder knyfe, the which pertains to the huntsman which
harbored him. Then next that other shoulder pertayneth to the rest of the
huntesmen. Then must he take the Brysket bone and the flappes which hang with
it unto the neck, and that pertayneth also to him that harbored and rowzed
him. Then shall he make his arbor and take out the panch, and cut off the
Deares Pyssell, which is medicinable. Afterward he shall take the sweet
pudding (which is the fat gut that goes to the Deares tewell) and the
uppermost gut next the stomach, and turn and clenze them both whiles they be
hot, and put them on the forke, for they appertain to the best personage.

All these being done, you shall take the Hearts heart, and slyt it in sunder,
taking out a bone which is therein, and raise the Noombles from his fillets,
and between his hand^s, and so up to the mydryffe between the bloudboulke and
the sides, leaving the ravens morsel (which is the gryssell at the spoone of
the brisket) and give two gashes on ead^ side of the brysket, to show the
goodness of the flesh. And you shall take from the Noombles three knots or
nuts, which are between them and the sides, and are called cynq and quatre.
Those pertayne to the chief huntesman, ehe Noombles, hand^s and tenderlings
(which are the soft tops of his horns when they are in blood) do pertayne
to the Prince or chief personage. The neck and the chyne being taken from the
sides, reserve the sides for the Prince, the neck for the Uarlet of the
kennell, and the chyne for the Uarlet that keeps the blood hounde.

How to reward the hounds, and first the blood hound. Chap. 43.


THe hounds shall be rewarded in this manner. First let the blood hounds be
present when you break up the Dear, that they may see him broken up, and let
them be tied or made fast to some tree or bough, so far one from another that
they fight not. Then the huntsman which harbored the Heart, shall take the
cabaging of the head, and the heart of the Dear to reward his blood hound
first, for that honor pertains to him: when he has done, he shall deliver it
to the rest, that they may likewise reward theirs: that done they shall sit
down and drink, whiles the Uarlets of the kennell prepare the reward for
their hounds, and that may be made in two sorts. First some use immediately
as soon as the Heart is dead, (the huntsi^e^ having blown to assemble the rest
unto his fall) to alight from their horses, and take off the Dear skin from
his neck whilst it is hot, and when they have well skotd^d it with their
woodkniues, that the hounds may the more easily tear off the flesh, they
reward the hounds with that and the brains all hot and bleeding: and surely
those rewards are much better than others which are given afterward cold
when they come home, and will much better flesh and encourage the hounds. But
the rewards which are made at home (which are called cold rewards) are thus
given. The varlets of the ken^ell take bread, and cut it into gobbets into a
pan, cutting cheese likewise in gobbets with it: then take they the blud of y^
dear, and sprinkle it upon the bread and cheese, until the bread and cheese
be all bloody: and then they take a great bolle of milk warm, and mingle it
altogether. Afterward they shall spread the skin upon the ground in some
fair place, and put out this reward upon it. Remember that you let it not
abide long in the pan, for then the milk will turn and be sour. When it is
thus prepared, put the cabaging of the head in the midst amongst it, and have
a payle or tub of fresh water in a readiness near to the reward, to let your
hounds lap in when they are rewarded. Then you shall set the head upon a
staff (which must be smothe and clean for hurting of the hounds) and let one
of the Uarlets carry it an hunbreth paces from you. Then the Prince or chief
shall begin to blow and to hallow for the hounds, because that honor with all
others appertain unto ye Prince or chief personage. And if he or ^e ca not or
will not do it themselves, let the^ appoint who shall do it as for their honor.
Afterward all the huntsmen shall take their horns and blow, and hallowe to
the hounds to rejoice them. In this mean while the Uarlet of the kennell
shall stand (...) the reward with two wandes (in each hand one) ^o keep
the hounds back until they be all come about and when they are all baying
and calling on about him, l^ and from the reward, and suffer the hounds to
eat it. ^n they have almost eaten it up, let him which hold ^res head,
hallowe and cry, Here again boys, h^ ^haw, haw. etc. Then the Uarlets of
the kennel which stand ^he reward, must rate away the hounds, and make them ^m
that halloweth. Then he shall show them the head ^e Dear, lifting it up and
down before them to make (...) baye it: and when he has drawn them al about
him bayi^ shall cast down the head amongst them that they may^ their pleasure
thereon. Then shall he lead them back a^ to the skin, and turn the skin
upon them (being cold then kennell them up. Consider that it shall be best to
k^ them immediately, for else if they should run about an uell, it would make
them cast up their reward again. (...) ward being thus given and fynished,
the Uarlet and may go to drink.

An advertisement by the Translato^ of the English manner, in breakin^ up of
the Dear.
IN describing this order how to break up a Dear observed the duty of a
faithful translatour, nothi^ changing the words of mine Authoure, but
suffering (...) proceed in the French manner. But because I find it differe^
from our order in some points, therefore I have thought good here to set down
such observations of difference as I have noted therein, least the reader
might be drawn in opinion, that the error proceeded only in my default.

First where he appoynteth the Deares foot to be cut off, and to be
presented to the Prince or chief, our order is, that the Prince or chiete (it
^o plea^e them) do (...) and take assaye of the Dear with a sharp knyfe, the
which is done in this manner. The dear being laid upon his back, the Prince,
chief, or such as they shall appoint, co^mes to it: And the chief huntsman
(kneeling, if it be to a Prince) does hold the Dear by the forefoote, whiles
the Prince or chief, cut a slyt drawn along the brysket of the dear,
somewhat lower than the brysket toward the belly. This is done to see the
goodness of the flesh, and how thick it is.

This being done, we use to cut off the Deares head. And that is commonly done
also by the chief personage. For they take delight to cut off his head with
their woodknyues, skaynes, or swords, to try their edge, and the goodness or
strength of their arm. If it be cut off to reward the hounds withal, then
the whole neck (or very near) is cut off with it: otherwise it is cut off
near to the head. And then the head is cabaged (which is to say) it is cut
close by the horns through the brain pan, until you come underneath the
eyes, and there it is cut off. The piece which is cut from the horns (together
with the brains) are to reward the hounds. That other piece is to nail up
the horns by, for a memorial, if he were a great Dear of head.

As for the deintie morsels which mine Author speaks off for Princes, our use
(as far as ever I could see) is to take the caul^, the tongue, the ears, the
doulcets, the tenderlings (if his head be tender) and the sweet gut, which
some call the Inchpinne, in a fair handkercher altogether, for the Prince or
chief.

It must be remembered (which he leaves out) that the feet be all four left
on. The hinder feet must be to fasten (or hardle as some hunters call it) the
hanches to the sides, and the two forefeete are left to hang up the shoulders
by.

We use some ceremony in taking out the shoulder. For first he which takes it
out, cuts the thin skin of the flesh (when the Deares skin is taken off)
round about the leg, a little above the elbowe joint. And there he rayseth
out the synew or muskle with his knife, and puts his forefinger of his left
hand, through under the said muskle to hold the leg by. If afterward he
touch the shoulder or any part of the leg, with any other thing than his
knyfe, until he have taken it out, it is a forfayture, and he is thought to be
no handsome woodman. Then with his shoulder knyfe he cuts an hole ^etweene the
leg and the brysket, and there puts in his knife, and looseneth the shoulder
from the side, going about with his knyfe, near^ to the outside of the skin,
until he have quyte taken out the shoulder, and yet left the skin of the
side fair and whole. And if he do it not at three boutes, it is also a
forfeyture.

We use not to take away the brysket bone, as far as ever I could see, but
clyue the sides one from another, directly from the place of assay, unto the
throat. There is a little gristle which is upon the spoone of the brysket,
which we call the Ravens bone, because it is cast up to the Crows or Ravens
which attend hunters. And I have seen in some places, a Raven so wont and
accustomed to it, that she would never sail to croake and cry for it, all the
while you were in breaking up of the Dear, and would not depart until she had
it. Furthermore, we use not to take the heart from the noombles, but account it
a principal part thereof. And about the winding up of the noombles, there is
also some art to be showed: But by all likelyhoode, they use it not in France
as we do.

Also I can not perceive by mine Authors words that they make any Arboure,
which if they do not, they may chance to break up their Dear but homely
sometimes. But if they cut away the brisket bone, the^ it is the less
requisite, because they may come at the weasond, and convey it away easily. We
use to reward our hounds with the paunche, being emptied first. These things
of my self I have thought good to add, desiring the reader to take them in
good part.

The woeful words of the Heart to the Hunter.


SInce I in deepest dread, do yield my self to Man,
And stand full still between his legs, which erst full wildly ran:
Since I to him appeal, when hounds pursue me sore,
As who should say ( Now save me man, for else I may no more.)
Why do thou then ( o Man) ( o Hunter) me pursue,
With cry of hounds, with blast of horn, with hallow, and with hue?
Or why do thou devise, such nets and instruments,
Such toils and toys, as hunters use, to bring me to their bents?
Since I (as erst was say^) do so with humble cheer,
Hold down my head (as who should say, lo Man I yield me here.)
Why art thou not content, (o murdryng cruel mind)
Thy self alone to hunte me so, which art my foe by kind,
But that thou must enstruct, with words in skillful writ,
All other men to hunte me eke? O wicked wily wit.
Thou here have set to show, within this busy book,
A looking Glass of lessons lewd, wherein all Huntes may look:
And so whiles world does last, they may be taught to bring,
The harmless Heart unto his bane, with many a wilye thing.
Is it because thy mind, does seek thereby some gaynes?
Can thou in death take such delight? breeds pleasure so in pains?
Oh cruel, be content, to take in worth my tears,
Which grow to gum, and fall from me: content thee with my hears,
Content thee with my horns, which every year I mew,
Since all these three make medicines, some sickness to eschew.
My tears congeald to gum, by pieces from me fall,
And thee preserve from Pestilence, in Pomander or Ball.
Such wholesome tears shed I, when thou pursewest me so,
Thou (not content) do seek my death, and then thou getst no more.
My hear is medicine burnt, all venomous worms to kill,
The Snake hirselfe will yield thereto, such was my makers will.
My horns (which aye renew) as many medicines make
As there be Troches on their Tops, and all ( Man) for thy sake.
As first they heal the head, from turning of the brain,
A dram thereof in powder drunk, does quickly ease the pain:
They skin a kybed heel, they fret an anguayle off,
^o thus I skippe from top to toe, yet neither scorn nor skoffe.
They comfort Feeuers faynte, and lingryng long disease,
Distilld when they be tender buddes, they sundry greeues appease:
They master and correct, both humors, hot and cold,
Which strive to conquer blood: and breed, diseases manyfold.
They bring down women's terms, and stop them to, for need,
They keep the mean tweene both extreemes, and serve both turns in deed:
They clear the dimmie sight, they kill both web and pin,
They soon restore the milt or spleen, which putrifies within.
They ease an akyng Tooth, they break the rumblyng wind,
Which grypes the womb with colliq^es panges, such is their noble kind:
They (...) the skaldyng fire, which skorched with his heat,
And skin the skalt full (...) again, and heal it trim and neat.
They poison do expel, from Keysar, King, or Queen,
When it by chance or deep deceypt, is swallowed up unseen.
But wherefore spend I time in vain at large to praise,
The virtues of my harmless hor^tes, which heap my harm always?
And yet such horns, such hear, such tears as I have told,
I mew and cast for man's avail, more worth to him than gold.
But he to quyte the same, ( o Murdring Man therewhyles)
Pursewes me still and trappes me often, with sundry snares and guyles.
Alas lo now I feel cold fear within my bones,
Which hangs her wings upon my heels, to hasten for the nones
My swiftest starting steps, me thinks she biddes me bide,
In thickest Tuftes of couerts close, and so my self to hyde.
Ah rewfull remedy, so shall I (as it were)
Even tear my life out of the teeth of hounds which make me fear.
And from those cruel curres, and braynesicke bauling Tikes,
Which vow foot hot to follow me, both over hedge and dykes.
Me thinks I hear the Horn, which rendes the restless air,
With shryllest sound of bloody blast, and makes me to despair.
Me thinks I see the Toil, the tanglings and the stall,
Which are prepared and set full sure, to compass me withal:
Me thinks the Foster stands full close in bushe or Tree,
And takes his level straight and true, me thinks he shootes at me.
And hittes the harmless Heart, of me unhappy Heart,
Which must needs please him by my death, I may it not astarte.
^las and well away, me thinks I see the hunte,
Which takes the measure of my Slottes, where I to tread was wont:
Because I shall not miss, at last to please his mind,
Ahlas I see him where he seeks my latest layre to find.
He takes my fewmers up, and puts them in his horn,
Alas me thinks he leapes for joy, and laugheth me to scorn.
Hark, hark, alas give ear, This gear goes well (says he)
This Heart bears deyntie venison, in Princes dishe to be.
Lo now he blows his horn, even at the kennell door,
Alas, alas, he blows a seek, alas yet blows he more:
He ieopardes and rechates, ahlas he blows the Fall,
And foundes that deadly doleful Mote, which I must die withal.
What should the cruel mean? perhaps he hopes to find,
As many medicines me within to satisfy his mind.
May be) he seeks to have my Sewet for himself,
Which sooner heales a merrygald, then Pothecaries pelf.
(May be) his joints be numme, as Synewes shronke with cold,
And that he knows my Sewet will, the same full soon unfold.
(May be) his wife does fear to come before byr time,
And in my mawe he hopes to find, (amongst the slutte and slime)
A Stone to help his wife, that she may bring to light,
A bloody babe like bloody Sire, to put poor Hearts to flight:
Perchance with sickness he has troubled been of late,
And with my marow thinks to restore his former state.
(May be) his heart does quake, and therefore seeks the bone,
Which Huntesmen find within my heart, when I poor Heart) am gone.
(It may be) that he means my flesh for to present,
Unto his Prince for delicates, such may be his intent.
Yea more than this (may be), he thinks such nouriture,
Will still prolong men's days on earth, since mine so long endure.
But oh mischievous man, although I thee outliue,
By due degrees of age unseen, which Nature does me give:
Must thou therefore procure my death? for to prolong
Thy lingryng life in lusty wise? alas thou do me wrong.
Must I with mine own flesh, his hateful flesh so feed,
Which me disdaynes one bitte of grass, or corn in time of need?
Alas ( Man) do not so, some other beasts go kill,
Which work thy harm by sundry means: and so content thy will.
Which yield thee no such gaynes, (in life) as I renew,
When from my head my stately horns, (to thy bchoofe) I mew.
But since thou art unkind, ungracious and unjust,
Lo here I crave of mighty Gods, which are both good and just:
That Mars may reygne with Man, that strife and cruel war,
May set man's murdryng mind on work, with many a bloody (...).
That drums with deadly dub, may counteruayle the blast,
Which they with horns have blown full loud, to make my mind aghast.
That shot as thick as Hayle, may stand for Crossebowe shootes,
That Cuysses, Greues, and such may serve, in stead of Hunters boots.
That gyrte with slege full sure, they may their toils repent,
That Embuskadoes stand for nets, which they against me bent.
That when they see a spi^, which watches them to trappe,
They may remember ring walks made, in herbor me to hap.
That when their busy brains, are exercised so,
Hearts may lie safe within their layre, and never fear their foe.
But if so chance there be, some dastard dreadful mome,
Whom Trumpettes cannot well entyse, nor call him once from home:
And yet will play the man, in killyng harmless Dear,
I crave of God that such a ghost, and such a fearful pheare,
May see Dyana nakt: and she (to venge her skornes)
May soon transform his harmefull head, into my harmless horns:
Until his hounds may tear, that heart of his in twain,
Which thus torments us harmless Hearts, and puttes our hearts to pain.
THus have you an end of so much as I find meet to be translated out of mine
Author for the Hunting of an Heart: Wherein I have dealt faithfully for so much
as I translated, neither taking any thing from him, nor adding any thing but
that which I have plainly expressed, together with the reasons that moved me
thereunto. And that which I have left out is nothing else but certain
unseemly verses, which because they are more apt for lasciuions miudes, than
to be enterlaced amongst the noble terms of Uenerie, I thought meet to leave
them at large, for such as will read them in French.

An end of the Huntyng and Terms which are used in hunting the Heart.
Of the hunting of the Bucke. Chap. 44.
Although mine Aucthor were a Frenchman, and in France the hunting of the
Bucke is nothing so common as the hunting of the Heart is, yet somewhat he has
written thereof, the which (together with some experience of mine own) I have
thought good here to place next unto the hunting of the Heart.

It is needelesse to write what difference of hear, head, and other
proportions, there are between the Heart and the Bucke, since both kinds of
Uenerie are common enough in this our noble Country. The Bucke is fawned in
the end of May, and has all properties common with an Heart, but that the
Heart goes sooner to the Rut, and is sooner in grease, for when a Heart has
been. xiiij. days at Rut, then the Bucke does but scarcely begin: there is
not so much skill to be used in lodgyng of a Bucke, as in harboring of a
Heart, nor needs to use so much drawing after him: but only to judge by the
view and mark what grove or covert he goes into, for he will not wander nor
royle so far about as a Heart, nor change layre so often: and yet we use
here in England to lodge the Bucke as we use to harbor the Heart, for the
Bucke is much commoner with us than the Heart. He makes his fewmishing in
sundry manners and forms as the Heart does, according to the seazon of the
feed that he finds, but most commonly they are round: when they are hunted
they fly into ^rch strong couertes as they have been most accustomed unto, and
never flee so far before the hounds, nor double, cross, nor use such and
so many subtle policies as an Heart does. For he turns back upon the
hounds oftentimes, and escheweth the high ways as much as he may, especially
in the open playnes: he is sometimes killed at Soil as an Heart does, and will
beat a Brook or River, but not so craftily nor can so long endure therein,
nor dare take such great rivers and waters as the Heart will, he leapeth
lightlier at the Rut than an Heart, and groyneth as an Heart belloweth, but
with a baser boyce ratlyng in the throat: the Heart and he love not one
another, but do one of them eschew another layre: they are sweeter of Sent
unto the hounds than the Heart or the Rowdeare, and yet some think that the
Row is the sweetest chase that is, but at least their flesh is more delicate:
and therefore if a hounde have once fed thereon, he will love it above all
other chases. The venyson of a Bucke is very dayntie, good meat, and is to be
dressed (in manner) like to the venyson of an Heart: but the Hearts flesh
will be longer preserved: the Bucke will heard more than the Heart, and lies in
the dryest places: but if he be at large out of a Park, he will heard but
little from the month of May, until the end of August, or very near, because
the fly troubles him: they love the hilly places well, but they must have
dales and bottomes to feed in: we hunte the Bucke even as we hunte the
Heart: saving that it is not needful to lay so many relayes, nor to lay out
so far. Because he flees not so far out, but wheeleth and keeps the
covert as is before declared. The greatest subtlety that a huntesman has
need to beware of in huntyng the Bucke, is to keep his hounds from huntyng
counter or change, because we have plenty of Fallow dear, and they come
oftener directly back upon the hounds than a red dear does: the breakyng
up and reward are all one with the breakyng up and reward of an Heart.

Of the hunting of a Row. Chap. 45.
THe Row is a beast well known and easy to hunte, and yet few huntesmen
know his nature: he goes to Rut in October: and remains therein fiftene
days, he never co^panieth but with one make, and they never part until the
Rowdoe have fawned. Then the Do parts from the Buck and fawneth as far
from him as she can, for if he find it, he will kill the fawn: but when the
fawn is great that he can run and feed, then the Do returns to the bucke
and accompa^ieth with him again lovingly. Yea and they will make as much haste
to return togethers as may be, the cause whereof is yt a Row do does most
commonly fawn two at once: and they be commonly also h^cke and Do, so that
being accustomed togethers in youth, they do love to keep company ever after.
Some Row do has bin killed with five fawnes in her, body at once, which is a
strange thing in so small a beast. And here I thought good to note unto you that
a fawn of a Row, is called the first year a Kidde: the second a Gyrle: the
third year an Hemuse: the fourth a Row bucke of the first head: and the fifth
year a Rowebucke and no more. As Soon as a Rowebucke comes from Rut he
casts his horns, and few of them after they be paste two years old, do
fail to mew at Alhollantide: their heads grow out again very quickly for
they fray them commonly in March: you may hunt him at all times alike, for his
venyson is never fat, nor never out of season: they hide their heads in moss,
when they have cast and mewed them: all the favor that should be showed unto
the Row dear, is unto the Does when they are with fawn, and until their
fawnes be able to live without the^. They make marvelous good chase and stand
up long, and flee far endwayes, and their flesh is good meat: you shall
hardly know them either by their foot or fewmettes: they see not very
perfectly, nor bear any great venison: that is to say, they be not very fat,
unless it be inwards: their kidneyes will sometimes be hid with fat, and
then are they in great pride of grease. When they are hunted they turn much
and come often directly back upon the dogs, and when they may no more
endure, they flee to the water, and beat the water like an Heart, wherein they
will hang by some bough all under the water but their very snowte, and will
never stir until a man or a hounde come even upon them: he keeps in the
strong thickets, and commonly in the highest grounds: sometimes also in the
playnes but that very seldom. The Rut of a Row dear is properly (amongst
hunters) called his turn, as to say the Row goes in his Turn. His
crossings and doublings before the hounds are called Trasonings. He is not
called a great Rowebucke, but a fair Rowbucke: the heard of them is called a
Beauie: if he have Beauie grease upon his tail when you break him up, then is
he venison: otherwise he is meeter for to be given whole to the hou^des than to
be dressed for your dishe: the hounds must be rewarded with the bowels, the
blood, and the feet slit in sunder and boiled altogether, it is not called a
reward but a dole: of all other things necessary to be understood for the
huntyng of a Rowdeare, I have sufficiently spoken in the hunting of an Heart,
and the hunting of a Bucke.

Of the Raynedeare. Chap. 46.
THe Raynedeare is a beast like unto an Heart, but great diversity in their
heads: for a Raynedeares head, is fuller of antlyers and much bigger and wyder
in compass: he bears four and twenty branches or more, according to his
age: he has a great pawme on the Top like a Heart: and his antliers before
are paw^ed also: he flies endwayes when he is hunted by reason of the great
weight of his head: but when he has stood up a great while and has crossed,
doubled, and used all his policies, then he settes his back and haunches
against some Tree that nothing may assail him but only before, and holds his
head low to the ground: and then few dare come near him, and his head
covers all his body. If any man come in to help the hounds behind him,
then whereas a Heart will strike with his antlyer, he strikes with his feet,
but not so great a blow, yet he will be sure never to turn his head, for that
is his chief defense: He is terrible to see both for hounde and greyhounde by
reason of his great huge head, he is not much higher tha^ a bucke, but he is
greater and thicker: when he rayseth up his head, it is much wider and brother
then his body is: he feeds like a Heart, and makes his fewmets, sometimes
round and sometimes flat, he lives very long, and is killed with hounds,
bows, nets, and other such engines: he bears fatter venison when he is in
pride of grease then any other Dear does: he goes to Rut after the Heart like
a fallow Dear, and fawneth like as other dear fawn: he is seldom hunted at
force, nor with hounds, but only drawn after with a bloudhound and
forestalled with nets and engines, and that in the thick and greatest holds
if you can, for so shall you soonest overcome him by reason of his great head
which combreth him. I will treat no more of him, because I do not remember
that I ever heard of any in this ou^ Realm of England: it may be that there be
some in Ireland: And therefore I thought not a^isse thus to place him amongst
the beasts of Uenerie, although he be not here in use.

The hunting of the wild Goat. Chap. 47.
THere are two sorts of wild Goats, the one are called even so, wild Goats:
and that other sort is called ^arus or Saris. And although I have not heard or
read that there be any of them in England, or at least any that be hunted, yet
because it may be well enough that there are some in Wales or in other
Mountains, I have thought good to set down the nature of him, and the manner
of hunting of him, as I found it in mine Aucthor, placing him amongst the
beasts of Uenerie, since it appears by the holy Scriptures that his flesh is
Uenison. The wild Goat is as big as an Heart, but he is not so long, nor so
long legged, but they have as much flesh as the Heart has, they have wreathes
and wrinkles on their horns whereby their age is known: for so many years
old as he is, so many wreaths you shall find about his horn: and as a Heart
meweth and casts his head, so does the wild Goat mew his wreathes and renew
them, but he meweth not the beam, the which is as big as a man's leg if he
be an old Goat. They have a great long beard, and are brownish gray of color
like unto a Wolf, and very shaggie, having a black list all along the chyne
of their back, and down to their belly is fallow, their legs black, and
their ^ayle fallowe: their feet are like the feet of a tame Goat: the print
and tracke whereof is great broad and round, rather bigger than the Slot of an
Heart: their bones be according to the bigness of a tame Goat, but somewhat
greater: they are fawned in May, and fawn as a Hind or Do, but they have but
one fawn at once, the which they suckle and bring up as the tame Goat
brings up her kidde. Their feed is of corn and grass as other Dear feed:
but they will eat Iuie, moss and such like feed that is hard, better than
any other Dear. In spring they make their feromets round, but afterward
they make them brother and flat, as a Heart does when he comes to good feed.
There is judgment to be taken by their fe^mets, either round or ^latte, even
as there is of an Heart: they go to Rut about Alhallantide, and abide therein a
month: when their Rut is past they put the^ ^lues in herds and come down
from the mountains and rocks, where they abide all the So^mer: and that as well
to eschew the Snow, as also because they find no food on the mountains any
longer: and yet they come not very low into the playnes, but keep about the
foot of the mountains, and there seek foo^ until it be toward Easter: then
they return to the mountains, and every one of them takes him to his hold or
strongest covert upon the rocks and cragges, even as the Hearts keep the
thickes. Then the he Goats part from the female (which are called Geats, and
the buckes Goats) and the Geats draw near to some little brook or water to
fawn, and to abide there all the summer. When the Goats be so parted from the
Geats, attending until the time of their Rut return, they run upon either
man or beasts which pass by them, and fight one with another as Hearts do,
but not altogether a like: for these make an unpleasant noise, and they hurt
sore with their blows, not with the ends of their horns, but with the
midst and Butte of their head: in such sort that they do oftentimes brea^e a
ma^s leg or his arm at a blow: and though he wounds not with his blow,
yet if he bear a man against a tree or a bank, he will surely kill him: and
such force has he also in the chyne of his back, that though a man (how
strong soever he be) should strike him with a bar of iron ouerthwarte the
reins, he will go on and never shrink at it. When he goes to Rut, his throat
and neck is marvelous great: he has such a property that although he fall
ten poles length down from an high, he will take no hurt thereby: and he
goes as surely upon the top of a rock, as a Hor^e will go in an high way.
They clime maruelously for their feed, and sometimes they fall, then can they
not hold with their feet, but thrust out their heads against the rocks and
hang by their horns until they have recovered themselves up again. That
kind of the^ which is called (...) or Saras, is of like proportion to this
which I have already described, and is not much bigger than the tame Goat. His
nature and properties are (in manner) all one with the wild Goat. Sometimes he
would skrat his thyghes with his soote, and thrusts his hoofes in so far,
that he cannot draw the^ back agame, but falls and breaks his neck, for
his hoofes of his feet are crooked, and he thrusts them far into the
skin, and then they will not come out again. When they come from their
feed, they go to the rocks and lie upon the hardest places that they can
find. The Gawle both of this sort and that other, is very good for sinews
that be shrunk up, when they are great and old, they are but too too fat
venyson, especially within the body. The Geates have horns like the Goats in
all respects, but not so great: both sorts of them have their seazon and
grease time, like unto the Heart going to Rut at Alhallantide: then you may
hunte them until their Rutting time come, for in winter they are very lean,
feeding upon nothing but Pynes and Fyrretrees, or such other woods as are
always green, how little nouriture soever they yield. Their leather is
warm when it is carried in season, for neither cold nor rain will pearce it,
if the hearie side be outward: their flesh is not very wholesome, but breeds
the fever through the abundant heat that is in it: nevertheless when they are
in season, the venison of them is reasonable delicate to eat.

How to hunte the wild Goats. Chap. 48.
THe best time to hunt the wild Goat, is at Alhallontide, and the huntesman
must tic by night in the high mountains in some shepeheardes ^abane, or such
cottage: and it were good that he lay so seu^n or eight days before he mean
to hunte, to see the advantages of the coasts, the Rocks, and places where
the goats do lie, and all such other circumstances: and let him sct nets and
toylcs, or forestallings, toward the rivers and bottomes, even as he would do
for an Heart: for he may not look ye his hou^s will follow ye Goat down every
place of ye mountains. if he have not hewers nor Huntesmen ynow to set round
about: then let him place his copanions on the tops of the Rocks, that they
may throw down stones, and shoot with Crossebowes at the Goats: a Huntesman
shall seek the^ and draw after them with his bloudhounde, even as he does
after an Heart, and then cast off four or sieve couple of hounds to maynteyne
the cry, and shall make three or four relayes to refresh those hounds which
are first cast off: for when his hounds have once or twice climed up the
Mountains and cliffes, they will be so hot and so sore spent, that they can
hunte no longer: then the Goat goes down to the small brooks or waters in
the bottomes, and therefore at such places it shall be best setting of relayes,
and let the relayes never tarry until the hounds come in, which were first
cast off, for it will be long sometimes before they come in: and yet there are
some lusty young hounds which will never give over a Goat nor suffer him to
take Soil. This chase requires no great Art nor following, neither can a man
follow on foot nor on horseback. The best help is in the Relayes which shall be
set in the bottoms, and for the reward, it may be done at pleasure and devise
of the Huntesman, always provided that he reward not the hounds with the
best morselles.

Of the wild Bore, his properties, and the manner of hunting at him. Chap. 49.
Having described the hunting of an Heart, and al other dear according to my
simple skill, I have thought good to set down here a little treatise of the
huntyng at the wild Bore, and of his properties: although he ought not to be
coumpted amongst Yet our Trystram reckeneth the Bore for one of the four
beasts of Venerie.
the Beasts of Uenerie which are chasable with hou^des, for he is the proper
pray of a Mastif and such like dogs, for as much as he is a heavy beast, and
of great force, trusting and affying himself in his Tuskes and his strength,
and therefore will not so lightly flee nor make chase before hounds, so that
you cannot (by hunting of the Bore) know ye goodness or swiftness of the^,
and therewithal to confess a truth, I think it great pity to hunte (with a
good kenell of hounds) at such chas^ ^d that for such reasons and
considerations as follow.

First he is the only beast which can dispatch a hounde at one blow, for though
other beasts do bite, snatch, tear, or rende your hounds, yet there is hope
of remedy if they be well attended: but if a Bore do once strike your hounde
and light between the four quarters of him, you shall hardely see him escape:
and therewithal this subtlety he has, that if he be run with a good kenell
of hounds, which he perceyneth hold in round and follow him hard, he will
flee into the strongest thicket that he can find, to the end he may kill them
at leisure one after another, the which I have seen by experience oftentimes.
And amongst others I saw once a Bore chased and hunted with fifty good
hounds at the least, and when he saw that they were all in full cry, and
held in round togethers, he turned head upon them, and thrust amiddest the
thickest of them. In such sort that he slew sometimes fire or seven (in
manner) with twinklyng of an eye: and of the fifty hounds there went not
twelve sound and alive to their Masters houses. I gain if a kennell of
hounds be once used to hunte a Bore, they will become lyther, and will never
willingly hunte fleing chases again. For as much as they are (by him)
accustomed to hunte with more ease, and to find great Sent. For a Bore is a
beast of a very hot Sent, and that is contrary to light fleing chases, which
are hunted with more pain to the hounde, and yet therewith do not leave so
great Sent. And for these causes who so ever means to have good hou^des for
an Heart, Hare, or Rowdeare, let him not use them to hunte the Bore: but since
men are of sundry opinions, and love to hunte such chases as lie most
commodiously about their dwelling places, I will here describe the property
of the Bore, and how they may hunte him. And the manner of killing him either
with the sword or Borespeare, as you shall also see it set out in portrayture
hereafter in his place.

Of the nature and subtlety of the Bore. Chap. 50.
THe Bore is of this nature, that when his Dame does pigge him, he has as
many teeth, as ever he will have whiles he lives, neither will their teeth any
way multiply or increase but only in greatness and length. Amongst the rest
they have four, which (with the Frenchmen) are called Defenses: and we call
them Tuskes or Tusches, whereof the two highest do not hurt when he strikes,
but serve only to whet the other two lowest: but with those lower Tuskes, they
stryke marnelously and kill oftentimes: if a Bore happen to have his eyes
blemished, or to hurt them daungerously, he will heal again very soon. A
Bore may live five and twenty, or thirty years: it is easier to bring them
into a Soil in April or in May, than in any other season: and that is
because they sleep soundlyer in those two months than at any other time of
the year: for as much as they feed then upon strong herbs and buddes of
trees, which do so moisten their brains that they become very sleepy. Again
the spring time renews their blood, which makes them sleep the more
soundly. They go to Rut about the month of December, and their great heat
endures near about three weeks. And although their Sowes become cold again
and covet not the Bore, yet do not the Bores part from them until it be
January, then they withdraw themselves unto their holds, wherein they keep
close sometimes three or four days together and never come out, especially
when they have found^ the (...), and do find sweetness in the root of the
Fearne. Sometimes a Bore will wander far out of the Forrestes or thick
couerts to seek feedyng: especially in time of the vintage in such Countries
as wine is made: and wheresoever they become when day appears, there will
they abide without respect of the place. It suffiseth if they find but some
tuffte of thorns or brambles, and there will they lie until it be night
again: they harken earnestly and will hear a man very far off, especially
when they be under the wind, but if they be up the wind, hear not greatly.
They live and feed upon all kind of Corn and Fruits, as Apples, Pears,
Plummes, Akehornes, Chestnuttes, Beechmaste, and such like, and of all sorts
of root^s also, unless it be Rapes and Navy roots. Also in Apryll and May
they feed on the buddes of Plumtrees, and Chestnut trees, and all other sweet
buddes that they can find, especially upon the buddes of broom and Juniper,
they will feed on no carrion unless it be of a dead Horse: they never become
soul or mesled (as we term it) like unto our tame Swyne. When they are in
the marshes, they feed and live upon water Cresseys, wild Garlyke, and
such herbs as they can find. Being near to the Sea coaste, they will feed
upon all kind of shelfishes, as Cockles, Muskles, Oysters, and such like.
Their season begins in the midst of September, and ends about the
beginning of December when they go to the Rutte: commonly a Bore will abide the
baye before he go out of his den, and they lie most commonly in the
strongest holds of Thorns, and thick Bushes: and when they are hunted they
stick also in the strongest couertes, and will seldom leave them until it be
dark night. And if it chaunee that there be a Sownder of them together, then
if any one break Sownder, the rest will follow the same way. The Bore does
sooner forsake the hollow Forestes to seek strong couerts, than the Heart
does: thereupon it has been spoken in Proverb, that a Bore is but a gest:
and if a Bore be in a thick or strong covert, being come thither from a hollow
wood or Forest, then if you hunte him, he will not fail to go back by the
same way that he came thither: and when soever they are once reared, they flee
continually and never stay until they come to the place where they were
farrowed and brought up, for there they think themselves in sa^egarde. This
have I seen by experience by a Bore, which has come from his accustomed
den to seek feed, and being hunted he went immediately and directly back
(...) (...) close and rowteth not, then shall you say he graseth: these terms
you may use in making report of a Bore.

The judgment vvherby you may know a great Bore, and first by the foot.
Chap. 52.
COmmonly a man may know an old Bore or a great swyne, by the foot where he
has gone, whereof the print or form ought to be great and large, the toes
round and thick, the edge of his hoof worn and blunt, without cutting or
paring the ground, so much as a younger swyne does: the heel great, the
gardes (which are his hinder claws or dewclawes) should be great and open one
from another, upon the which he bears and stays him all the way when he
goes upon hard ground: his footing behind should be trodden sidewardes, and
more outwardes than his forefeete, to show the thickness between his
thyghes. The pleytes or wrincles which are between his heel and dewelawes,
should leave print or form on the ground, showing the stiffness and thickness
of his hair: his steps great and long, the treading of his foot should be
deep and great, to show the weightinesse of his body.

The judgment by his rowtings. Chap. 53.
When a Bore rowteth in a hedge, for a root (which some call the Park) then
may you perceive the greatness and length of his head, by the depthe and
largeness of his rowting. So may you also know in soft places where he
wormeth, or in such other places.

The judgment by the soil. Chap. 54.
When he soyleth and walloweth him in the mire, then is it easy to know his
gretnesse, by the length and largeness of the soil. Or else at his
departure-from the soil, you may perceive it where he has gone into some
thick, by the leaves and braundrs which he shall touch: for he goes out of
the soil all my^rie and dyrtie, the which will leave marks upon the leaves
and branches of his height, thickness. etc. Sometimes when he comes out of
the soil, he will rub him against a tree, by the which you may see his height:
and also he will commonly give two or three blows with his tuskes upon the
tree, as it were the staus of a dagger, whereby the huntesman may take
judgment and knowledge as well of his height, as also of the greatnes^e of his
tuskes. You may know and judge also by his den: for a great Bore when he is
at pryme of his grease, will make his d^ deep: and at his going out thereof,
will make hi^ lesses (which is his ordure) and by the greatness and length
thereof you may judge the Bore. These lesses shall never be brought to an
assembly, but let the huntsman content himself with the sight of them in
places where he finds them.

The difference between wild Svvyne, and our hogs. Chap. 55.
THe difference between wild swyne and our hogs is great, and that in sundry
respects. First they are commonly black, or grissed and streaked with black:
whereas ours are white, sanded, and of all colors. Therewithal the wild
swyne in their gate, do always set the hinderfoote within the forefoote, or
very near, and stay them selves more upon the toe than upon the heel,
shutting their claws before close: and commonly they strike their gardes
(which are their dewclawes) upon the ground, the which sway outward: and the
sides of their hoofs do cut and pare the ground, the which our swyne do not,
for they sprea^e and open their foreclawes, leaving ground between them: and
they be commonly round and worn, leaning and staying more upon the heel than
upon the toe. Again, they set not their hinderfoote within their forefoote,
and their gards fall straight upon the ground and never shoyle or lean
outward: and they do beat down and foil ye ground, and cut it not. Also the
soale of their feet is fleshy, and makes no plain print upon the ground as
the wild swine do. There is likewise great difference in their to w^ings: for
a wild swine does rowt deeper, because his snowt is longer: and when they come
into corn fields they follow a furrow, rowting and worming all along by
some balke, until they come to the end. But tame swyne rowte here and there
all about the field, and never follow their rowting as the wild swyne do.
Likewise you may know them by the difference of their feedings in corn grown:
for the wild swyne bear down the corn round about them in one certain
place, and tame swyne feed scattering here and there.

The difference between the male, and the female. Chap. 56.
ALthough some hunters hold opinion, that there is small judgment to be taken
of the difference between male and female, being young swyne that yet do keep
the sounder: Yet have I observed diverse differences in my time, whereby you may
know the male from the female, yea were they but pigges of a year old
following the dammes, whereof I will show mine opinion in this sort. The male
pigges following the damme, do commonly scatter further abroad than the
females do, and will nouzle and turn up the ground ten or twelve paces
further of from their dammes than the females do, and that (think I) is
because they are hardier than the females are, for they follow the damme as
close as they can, and dare not scatter abroad as the males do. You may judge
them also by their gate, for every male pigge or hog, goes brother with his
hinder legs than the female do: and commonly they set the tracke or print of
the hinder foot, upon the outer side of the print of the forefoote, by reason
of the thickness that he bears between the thyghes more than the female, for
the female is leaner between the legs, and goes closer in her gate. You may
also know them by their gardes, for the male has them commonly greater, and
nearer to his heel than the female, which bears them high, short, and
loose, one being near unto an other, and therefore she strikes not her gardes
on the ground so often as the male does, yea though she do, the print of them
is but small and slight, and spoyleth not outward like the male. Also
commonly the female has not so great an heel as the male, and has her claws
longer and sharper before, and openyng wyder than the male. Also the soales of
her hinder feet, are lesser and straighter than the males be.

How to hunt the Bore with hounds at force. Chap. 57.
YOu shall not by your will hunt a young Bore of three years at force. For he
will stand up as long or longer than a light young Dear, which bears but
three in the top. But when he is in his fourth year, then may you hunt him
at force, even as well as an Heart of ten: and yet he will stand up rather
loger. Wherefore if a hunts^an do go to rear a Bore of four years old, he
shall do well to mark well whether he went timely to his den or not. For
commonly these Bores which tarry till it be day light before they go into their
co^ches or dens, following their paths or ways long time, especially where
they find fern or beche, whereupon they feed, are great murderers of dogs,
and very hardy. The hunt^man shall not need to be afraid to come over near
unto such a Bore for rearing of him, for he will not likely be reared for him.
But if he find of a Bore which soyleth oftentimes, and which routeth now here,
and now there, never staying long upon one place, then is it a token that he
has been s^arred, and withdraws himself to some resting place at al
adventures. And such bores most commonly come to their dens, cou^hes, or holds,
two or three hours before day. Then let the huntsman beware for coming over
near to them, for if they once find him in the wind, or have the wind of
his hounde, they will be gone, and he shall hardely come near them again, nor
find them. If a Bore mean to tarry and abide in his den, couche, or fort,
then makes he some doubling, or crossing at the entry thereof upon some
high way or beaten pathe, and then goes into his hold, to lay him down in
his couche or den: and by such means a huntsman being early in the woods,
may judge the subtlet^e or craft of the Bore, and according to that which he
shall perceive, he may prepare to hunt with hounds which are hot or
temperate. For if it be a great Bore, and one that has line long at rest, he
shall do well to hunte him with hounds that will stick to him: and let the
huntsmen on horseback be ever amongst them, charging the Bore, and forcing
him as much as they may to discourage him: for if you hunte such a Bore with
four or five couple of hounds, he will make small account of them, and when
they have a little chafed him, he will take courage, and keep them still at
Bays, running upon any thing that he sees before him: but if he perceive him
self charged and hard laid unto with hounds and huntesmen, then he will
become astonyed, and lose courage, and then he is enforced to flee and to seek
the country abroad. You must set Relayes also, but that must be of the
staunchest and best old hounds of the kennell: for if you should make your
Relayes with young hounds, and such as are swyfte and rash, then when a Bore
is any thing before the rest of the hounds in chase, he might easily kill them
in their furic, at their first coming in to him. But if he be a Bore which is
accustomed to flee endwayes before the hounds, and to take the champayne
country, then you shall cast of but four or five couple of hounds at the
first, and set all the rest at Relayes, about the entry of the fields where
you think likely that he will flee. For such a Bore will ^ldome keep hounds
at a Baye, unless he be forced: and if he do stand at Baye, the huntesmen
must ride in unto him as secretly as they can without much noise, and when
they be near him, let them cast round about the place where he stands, and
run upon him all at once, and it shall be hard if they give him not one
skotch with a sword, or some wound with a Borespeare: and let them not stryke
low, for then they shall commonly hit him on the snoute, because he watches
to take all blows upon his Tuskes or there aboutes. But let them lift up their
hands high, and stryke right down: and let them beware that they stryke not
toward their horses, but that other way: For on that side that a Bore
feels him self hurt, he turns head straight ways, whereby he might the
sooner hurt or kill their horses, if they stroke toward them. And if they be
in the plain, then let ^ast a cloak about their horses, and they may the
better ride about the Bore, and stryke at him as they pass: but stay not long
in a place. It is a certain thing experimented and found true, that if you
hang belles upon collers about your hounds necks, a Bore will not so soon
stryke at them, but flee endwayes before them, and sildome stand at Bay.

An end of the Hunting of the Bore.
Of the hunting of an Hare.


I am an Hare, a beast of little strength,
Yet making sport, of love and gentle gestes,
For running swift, and holding out at length,
I bear the beil, above all other beasts.
Of the properties of an Hare, and how to know the male, from the female.
Chap. 58.
I Will begin with the virtues and properties of an Hare, the which be very
great and many, having consideration to the greatness and littleness of her.
First the blood of an Hare, is a sore dryer, and if you do annoint therewith
any ytching place, or a ringwor^e, it will dry it up and heal it. The Hare
has a little bone in a joint of her hinder leg called the styfling bone,
which is very good for the Collike and the Crampe. Her skin burnt to
powder, is a sovereign medicine to stenche blood. The Hare first taught us the
use of the herb called wild Succorye, which is very excellent for those
which are disposed to be melancholic: she her self is one of the most
melancholic beasts that is: and to heal her own infirmities, she goes
commonly to sit under that herb: whereupon it has been called in times past
Palatius leporis, that is to say, Hares pallayse. The Hare does naturally know
the change of weather from. xxiiij. hours, to. xxiiij. hours. When she goes
to her form, she will not let the dew or wet touch her as near^ as she can,
but follows the high ways and beaten paths, and breaks the high stalks
as she goes with her teeth. And because some Hares by haunting the low watrie
places, do become foul and messed, such Hares do never follow ye hard ways,
nor make such paths to their forms, but use all their subtleties and
pollecies by the sides of the Ry^ers, brooks, and other waters. And you shall
understand, that the females are not so commonly foul or r^esled, as the males
ar^, and therefore a huntesman may judge by the relief and feed of the Hare
what she is, and which way she forms. They go to Bucke commonly in Januarie,
February, and March. Sometimes they seek the Bucke seven or eight miles
distant from the place where ^hey use to sit; following the beaten high ways,
as be hereafter declared. A Bucke Hare will abide the hounds nearer him when he
sits, than the female will, because be feels him self quicker, and his
body better disposed and ha^ier. If when a Hare ryseth out of the form, she
set up her ears, and run not very fast at the first, and cast up her Skut
(...) her bac^e, it is a token that it is an old and crafty Hare. Although
some say that there is no iudgem^nt of difference between the male and the
female Hares, yet have I found the contrary. For the male Hare or bucke
makes his crole^s always smaller and dryer, and more sharpened toward the end.
The female makes them greater and rounder, and not so dry. And the cause is,
that the female relieueth not so far out a nights, and is gr^ater of body,
which causes her to make the greater Croteys also. You shall know a bucke as
you hunt him to the form^: for you shall find yt he has more beaten the hard
high ways, and feeds further out into the playnes, and makes his doublings
and crossings much wyder, and of greater compass than the female does. For she
will keep close by some couerts side, turning and winding in the bushes like a
Coney. And if she go to relief in the corn fields, she will not lightly
cross over the furrows, but follows them al along, and stays much upon the
thickest tufts of corn to feed: Neither is she satisfied b^ feeding her
bellye full, but shreds the corn, and scattreth it as she goes. Likewise you
may know a Bucke at rising out of the form, for he has his ^inder parts much
more whitely, as if he were gray or downy: Or you shall know him if you mark
his shoulders well before he rise, for they are redder than a female Hares be,
and will have some lose long hairs growing on them. Again, you may know him
by his head, the which is shorter and better trussed than the females is. The
hairs about his lips and cheeks, are longer, and commonly his ears shorter,
greater, and more whitely. The female ^ath a long and lean head, her ears
long, the hair upon ye chine of her back, blackish greye. And commonly when
hounds bunt a female Hare, she will use more crossing, doubling, and turning
before the^, passing seven or eight times one way, and never makes out
endwayes before the hounds. The male does contrary: for if she hounds run
him, and that he have once made a turn or two about his form, then farewell
hounds: for he will lead them sometimes three or four miles endwayes before
he turn the head, and that lightly into some coast where he has been in times
past, and from whence he has been chased and hu^ted. For an Hare will go seven
or eight miles end ways at once: and you may know when a Hare is so come from
far by this means.

When you see yt your hou^ds sind where an Hare has past at relief, upon y^
highwayes sides, and has much doubled and crossed upon dry places, and never
much broken out nor relieved in the corn, it is a token that she is but lately
come into those quarters: and then commonly she will stay upon some high place,
to look about her, and to choose out a place to form in, and also yt better
to save hirself, if she per^iue either hou^ds or any thing else that follows or
meets her. Or you may also know, because commonly Hares which stray so, do
make their form close, because they are in dout and dread. And when the hounds
find them and put them up, they break and double, turning back toward
their form: because it grieueth them to part from it, knowing not the
country. But when they perceive that the hounds hold in to them, then they
return by the same ways that they came. By these tokens you may know an Hare
that is a passenger, which may chance to lead your hounds a lusty dance
after her.

Of the subtilties of an Hare, when she is run and hunted. Chap. 59.
I Might well maintain that of all chases, the Hare makes greatest pastime
and pleasure, and she weth most running in hunting, and is meetest for
gentlemen of all other huntings, for that they may find them at all times, and
hunt them at most seasons of the year, and that with small charges. And
again, because their pastime shall be always in sight, whereby they may judge
the goodness of their hounds, without great pains or travel. Also it is
great pleasure to behold the subtlety of the little poor beast, and what
shift she can make for her ^lfe. Wherefore the hun^n must be wary and wise to
mark hit subtilties, the which I have predicted much, and therefore I am the
bolder to set down in writing such (...) as I have seen, known, and made.
First the hunte^man which shall be next the hounds, shall look and mark
^any things when the Hare rises out of ^ir form. As first what weather it
is. For if it be raynie weather, then the Hare will hold the high ways more
than at any other time. And if she come to the side of any young spring or
grove, she will not lightly go in, but will convey her self, and squat under
the side thereof, until the hounds have ouershot her: and then she will
return the self same way that she came, unto the place where she was start
or put up, for she will not willingly go into any covert, because of the
dew and wet that hangs upon the low twigges. In such a case, the huntesman
shall do well, to tarry and stay an hundredth paces before he come to the
woods sides, and then he shall see her if she come right back as before
said. Then may he hallowe in his hounds and call them back: for else it
would be hard to make it out. When a Hare does so as before said, because an
hound will scarcely believe that the Hare were gone directly backwardes,
therefore the Huntesman shall do well to hallowe them in before they go any
further: for else they will rather judge it to be the counter as she came first.

Next to this, a huntesman must mark in what place the Hare sits, and
upon what wind she made her form. For if she form either upon the North
wind, or upon the South wind, she will not willingly run into the wind,
but will run upon a side wind, or else down the wind. Also if an Hare do
form in the water, it is a token that she is foul and mesled. In hunting of
such an Hare, let the huntesmen take good heed all the day unto the
Brooks sides, for such an Hare will make all her crossings, doublings, etc.
upon Brooks sides and plashes. Again, a huntesman ^uste mark whether it be
a bucke Hare or a female, and whether she be wonted to the place where she sat,
or a passenger: The which he may know by such observations as I have before
rehearsed: for doubtless, a Hare which is bred and wonted to a certain
place, and especially a female Hare, (if a huntesman do mark the first way
that she bends, or the first compass that she bends when she parts
first from the form) will all the day long hold the same ways, and cast
about the same coasts, and pass through the same muses until her death or
escape: unless it be as I said, some Bucke which be come from some other
place, or that the hounds run him so hard, that he be enforced to make out
endwayes before the hounds, and so to go out of his haunt, the which they
will all do commonly, by that time that they be well run two hours without
default. But at the first they will do (in manner) nothing else bu^ turn,
cross, and double, passing five or sire times one way, and in one self same
path. And you must understand, that if you leese an Hare at any time, let the
huntesmen yet remember and mark which paths she bette, and what way she
coasted: for another time if you find the same Hare, she will doubtless keep
the same places, and make the like doublings, crossings. etc. And by that
means you shall prevent her subtletie, and much help the hounds in knowing
which way she will bend.

I have seen a Hare so crafty, that as soon as she heard the sound of an
horn, she would rise out of her form, yea, had she been formed a quarter of
a mile dystant from the huntesman that blewe, and would straight ways go
swymm^ in some poole, and abide in the midst thereof upon some rushbed,
before the hounds came at her, or hunted her at all. But at the last I
discovered her subtleties, for I went close alongest by the poole, to see what
might become of her, and uncoupled my hounds there aboutes where I suspected
she should be: and as soon as ever she heard the horn, she starte, and leapt
before my face into the poole, and (...) to another bed in the midst thereof,
and neither with stone nor clodde that I could throw at her, would she rise
nor stir: until I was feign to stryppe off my clothes, and swymme to her:
yea, and she tarried me almost, until I laid my hand upon her, before she
would stir. But at the last, she (...) out and came by the hounds, and
stood up afterward three hours before we could kill her, swymming and
using all her crossing and subtleties in the water. I have also seen an Hare
run and stand up two hours before a kennell of hounds, and then she has
started and raised an other fresh Hare out of her form, and set her self
down therein. I have seen other again, swymme over two or three waters, the
least whereof has been fourscore Taylers yardes over. I have seen some
again, which being run well by the space of two hours or more, has crepte
under the door of a Sheepecote, and hyd her self amongst the sheep. And I
have seen Hares oftentimes run into a flock of sheep in the field when
they were hunted, and would n^er leave the flock, until I was forced to
couple up my hounds, and fold up the sheep, or sometimes drive them to the
Cote: and then the Hare would forsake them, and I uncoupled my hounds at her
again and killed her.

I have seen that would take the ground like a Coney, (which is called
going to the vault) when they have been hunted. I have seen a Hare go up by
one side of an hedge, and come down by that other side, in such sort, that
there was no more but the thickness of the hedge between them. I have seen
an Hare being sore run, get up upon an old wall six foot height from the
ground, and squat or hyde her self in the hole that was made for a Scaffolde.
I have seen some swymme over a brook eight yardes broad, more than twenty
times within the length of an hundredth paces, and that in my sight. For these
causes the huntesman must be warye and circumspect in hunting of the Hare. For
a hounde which is a perfect good Haryer, may be bold to hunte any chase: for
the Hare is the very proper beast to enter hounds well, and to make them
tender nosed. But afterward when you would make your hounds to the Heart,
they will quickly forsake the Hare, because the venyson of an Heart is mu^ more
delicate and deyntie than the Hares is: and hounds do much^ more desire it,
because the Heart is also of greater sent than the Hare. An Hare lives not
above seven years at the most, especially the Bucke. They are of this
property, that if there be a Bucke and a female which keep one quarter
commonly together, they will never suffer any strange Hare to sit by them, nor
to abide near them, unless it be their own young ones. And therefore has it
been an old saying, that the more you hunt, the more Hares you shall have,
because when an Hare is killed, there will soon come other from some other
quarter.

How to enter young hounds to the Hare. Chap. 60.
FIrst in hunting of the Hare, I would not have you to have above two or three
huntesmen at the most, whereof one shall take charge to rate and beat on such
hounds as bide plodding behind: and the other shall make them seek and call
about. For if there be many huntesmen, they shall f^yle the traces and footing
of the Hare, or at the ^ast will amaze the hounds (with the variety of their
voices) when they are at default. For an Hare makes sometimes so many doubles,
crossings, etc. that an hounde can not well tell where he is, nor which way to
make it out, nor will do any thing else (in manner) but hold up their heads,
and look to the huntesmen for help and comfort. Then let the huntesman cast
about a compass, where they came first at defaulte, and encourage them, the
which he can not so well do, if the other huntsmen have beaten and foiled the
trace with their feet, or the feet of their horses. And he which hunteth
foremost, should carry with him a good big wallet of lynnen cloth full of
deyntie morsels, to give his hounds, to the end that they may knowehim. For
above all things it is meet, that an hound should know his master and
hun^sman, his voice, and his horn: and then when it comes to the hallowe,
they will sooner come in to his voice, than to an other man's, and will leau^
all others to come unto him: therefore he should never hallowe them amysse,
nor without good cause. And if he would have his hounds come in to him, to
make them go into some grove or covert, let him hallowe thus, crying, Here
have, here, haw, haw, And when the hounds are come in to him, let him seek
some fair muse or gappe to pass in at, and there let him cast a cruste of
bread, or somewhat to make them go in the more willingly, crying, Covert,
covert, hyke in hyke. etc.

Here I will discover unto you two secrets. Whereof that one is, that he which
has a kennell of young hounds to enter, he must mark well the country where
he will make them their first quarrey, and wher^of he will make it. For
according to the places where they shall be entered at the beginning, and
according to the quarrey which you shall give them, they will always afterward
prove. And therefore if at ye first when you enter young hounds, you accustom
them to be uncoupled in the plain champayne, and that they hunt there an Hare
to the form, and starte her, they will remember it all their life after. And
then when so ever you uncouple them in a covert, they will make no great have
to hunte there, but will seek to hunte out into the playnes, and such places
as they have been accustomed ^o in hunting of the Hare. Even so will they best
love the couertes, if they be first entered there, and have found gain
therein. And therefore it is requisite to enter your hounds in the country,
where you mean to abide and to hunt most commonly: for hounds once accustomed
to a place or kind of chase, will not willingly hunt otherwise. Another
secret is, that you never enter nor accustom your hounds at first to hunte
in the mornings, because of the dew and moisture of the earth. For if you once
enter and accustom them to hunt in the fresh mornings, if afterward you
bring them on field in the heat of the day, and that they once feel the
heat of the Sun, or some dry wynd which has drawn up the moist dew from the
ground, they will neither hunte, nor call on willingly, but will run to seek
the shadow, and there to rest them and sleep. Therefore I hold it best to
accustom your hounds to be entered and hunted withal, in the heigthe and heat
of the day, rather than in the morning. And the best season to begin to enter
your young hounds, is in October and November, for then the time is temperate,
and the heates are not vehement: and then also young Har^s which have not been
hunted, are foolish, and are neither of force nor capacity to use such
subtleties and policies, but hold on endways before the hounds most commonly:
and do squat and start again oftentimes, the which does much^ encourage the
hounds, and does much better enter them, than if they should flee into another
quarter far before them. True it is and a thing often proved, that an Hare has
greater sent, and is more eagerly hunted by the hounds, when she feeds and
relieueth upon green corn, than at any other time of the year. And yet also
you have some Hares, which naturally give some of them greater sent tha^ some
others, and are much more eagerly hunted and chased by ye hounds. As these
great wood Hares, and such as are foul and mesled and keep near to the
waters. But the little red Hare, which is (in manner) like a Coney of bigne sse,
is neither of so strong a sent nor yet are so eagerly hunted by the hounds as
other Hares be. Such as feed upon the small br^nches of wild time, or such
like herbs, are commonly very swift, and will stand long up before the hounds.
So have you some Hares more subtle and crafty, tha^ some others are, especially
the females, for they double and turn shorter than the Bucks do, and that
pleases the hounds but a little. For it is grievous to hounds which are lusty
and eager, to turn so often because they like better a chase which flees
before the^ endways, yt they may run with all their force. And for such Hares as
double and cross so often, it is requisite at default to cast the greater
compass about, when you beat to make it out. For so shall you find al her
subtleties, and yet need to stick upon none of them, but only where she went
onwardes: for so doing, you shall abate the Hares force, and co^strein her to
leave doubling and crossing. Some Hares will hold the high beaten ways only,
where the hounds can have no sent, because there is neither boughe, leaf,
nor any moist place wherewith ye Hare might leave sent of her body. The which
she must needs leave if it were in woods, corn, high grass, or such other
moist and cool places. And therefore when a huntsma^ shall find such an Hare,
and shall see his hounds at default upon an high way, let him hunt on with his
hounds still all along the way, until he find where the Hare has broken
from the way, or until he find some small dale, or fresh place by the way
where the hounds may find sent. And he himself also must look narowly upon
the ground, as he goes if he can find the footing of the Hare (which we call
pricking) the which he shall easily know: for the fashion of an Hares foot is
sharp, and made like a knives point, and her little nails do always fasten
upon the ground, so that he shall see the pricks of them in any moist place,
or where the ground is soft: for an Hare when she flees before the hounds,
does never open her foot nor nails in sunder, as stinkyng chases and vermin
do, but keeps her foot always close like the point of a knife. So is there
also certain places and seasons, in the which an hounde can have no sent of
an Hare, as in the winter season, in the plain champaigne countries, where the
ground is fat and rotten: and the Hare (having an hearie foot) when she
flees, the uppermost of the earth and ground sticks upon the sole of her
foot, so that she carries it away with her, and that covers and takes away
all the sent from the hounds: and again in such playnes there are commonly
no branches nor twigges which she might touch with her body and so leave sent
thereby. Again there are certain months in the which a hounde shall have no
sent (or very little) of an Hare: as in the Spring time by reason of the
vehement smell of the sweet flowers and herbs, which does exceed the sent
of an Hare. Likewise you must take heed that you hunte not in a hard froste,
for so your hounds shall surbayte their feet and loose their claws, and yet
at that season an Hare runs better than at any other, because ye soale of
her feet is hearie. You shall use in manner the same terms and words to
encourage your hariers, that you use to encourage your Buckehoundes, and such
as you hunte any Dear withal: Saving only at the hallowe to an Hare you say,
Haw, Haw, Haw, here, Haw, here, etc. Whereas in hallowing of a Dear you say
when the hou^ds come in, That's he, That's he, To him, to him, to him, etc.
Again remember that when soever you enter your young hou^des, you never help
them to kill the Hare with your Greyhoundes, for if you accustom to course the
Hare with your Greyhoundes before the hounds, then when soever you should
hallowe, the hounds would do nothing but lift up their heads, and look
always to see the Hare before the Greyhoundes, and will never put nose to the
ground, nor beat for it, nor hunte. But your best entryng of young hounds, is
by the help of old steynche hounds, which may best learn to cast for it at
a doubling or default.

At what time of the year it is best hunting of the Hare, and how to seek
her, starte her, and chase her. Chap. 61.
THe best season to hunte the Hare with hounds, is to begin in the midst
of September, and to leave at midde Apryll: and that, because of the flowers
and vehement heates which begin after Apryll, and take away the sent of the
Hare from the hounds. Then in September the Huntesman shall begin to give
rewards unto his Haryers, and to renew their huntyng of that chase. For (as I
have said) at that time, Hares be young and feeble, and as the season passes,
so their force increases: even so your hounds the more that they hunte, and
the more quareys that they have, the better, stronger, and perfecter they
become. And again when the winter approaches, the moystnesse and coolness of
the earth increases, the which hounds do delight in rather than in great
heat. When your hounds are two years old and vpwardes, you may hunte with
them thryse in a week, and they will be the better. When a Lord or Gentleman
will go on huntyng, the huntesman must regard the time and place where he
shall be, to the end he may go seek the Hare where most lykely huntyng is:
as in the Pastures, Meades, or Green fields, and such like: and there he
shall uncouple his hounds: and if there be any hounde which light upon the
trayle of an Hare, where she has relieved that night, let the Huntesman
stay and be not over hasty, until the hounds make it out of themselves, and
when he perceyueth that they begin to draw in together and to call on
freshly, then let him comfort them with words, and name that hounde which
hunteth best, as to say: Hyke a Fyndall, Hyke, etc. It is most certain that
hounds will have better sent of an Hare when she goes toward the relief,
than when she goes toward her Form, yea although she go sooner to the one
than to that other: and the reason is, that when a Hare is in the field and
relieueth, she coucheth low upon the ground with her body, and passes
oftentimes over one plotte of ground to seek good feed, whereby she leaves
great Sent of her upon the grass or blades, and cro^yeth also sometimes: and
therefore the hounds have greater sent of her, than they have when she goes
out of the field (or out of the corn or high grass at least) to go to her
Form: For when she goes to her Form, she does commonly beat the high ways
(as beforesaid) doubling, crossing, and leaping, as lightly as she ca^.
Therefore when a huntsma^ sees his hounds cross where a Hare has relieved,
and that they begin also to make it on unto her going out toward her Form,
let him suffer his hounds to hunt fair and softly, and hasten them not
overmuch for ouershooting of it: and if his hounds fall at default, then is it
a token that the Hare has made some double or some cross, or that she has
gone and come back again by one self same way: then shall he cry, Haw
again, again here, Haw, and shall not stir any further forwards, for if he
come too near the hounds, it would rather make them to ouershoote it: but
let him so stay them and make them beat for it, comforting and chearyng them
with words and with his voice, and beholding how they hunte and beat for it.
But if they cannot make it out upon the high ways, then let him cast round
about in the freshest and greenest places, and such as are most commodious for
the hounds to take sent upon, for by that means at last he shall make it ou^
which way the Hare is gone into some gro^e or sp^yng: and then his hounds may
also beat the groves, and he himself must likewise beat the tuffts and bushes
with his hunting stick, to help the hounds to starte her. And if he chance
to find an old Form, he must take some reward out of his wallet and cast
it in the said old form, and call in the hounds into it, crying: Here, Haw,
her^ she sat, here she sat, To her again. The Huntesman shall do well also to
have a piece of the fat of Bacon or such like thing in his wallet, wherewith
he may anoint the end of his hunting staff, and then when soever he would
point his hounds to a Muse, or to any place, he shall need to do no more but
stryke on the ground with the end of his staff, and his hounds will go
through the muse, or come into any place where he shall point them, and hunt it
much the better. But if the huntesman when he has cast about, do not find
that the Hare is gone out beyond the compass that he casts, then let him
call back hi^ hounds to the place where they first came at default, and let
him consider which way it seems that the Hare bent her head when she came
into that way or place, and if she held on head, then let him beat with his
hounds still onwardes on both sides of the way: for oftentimes the Hare
follows the high ways very far, to double, cross and use policies, and
will never step from the way in a mile together. And in such places the
hounds can have no sent, by reason of the duste and other such things as I
have before alleged, and yet they will squatte upon the outsides of the ways
or very near to them: and therefore let the huntesman beat the sides of the
high ways well. But if al these policies cannot help the hounds to make it
out, then may the Huntesman well judge that the Hare has turned backewardes
upon the hounds: and then let him take his compass greater and beat back
with his hounds, and it shall hardly be possible but at the last he must make
it out. And yet some Hares there be that will sit vntili you tread upon them
before they will rise, and some will be taken in the Form. Now although I have
so much spoken in praise of trayling of an Hare from the relief to the Form,
yet me thinks it is more pain than needs, and less pleasure than might be
desired: because the hounds while they trayle, do call on but coldly one after
another: and that it should be much shorter and better pastime to seek and
find her as follows.

When three good huntesmen are met, and perceive that their hounds do find
where an Hare has releued in some fair cornefielde or pasture. Then must they
consider the season of the year and what weather it is: for if it be in the
Springtime or in the Summer, then a Hare will not sit in the bushes, because
these Pissemyers, Tikes, and sometimes Snakes and Adders will drive them out:
then they are costreyned to sit in the cornesieldes, or fallow fields and open
places. In winter they love to sit near the towns sides in some tuffte of
brambles or thorns: especially when the wind is either Southerly or
Northerly, for they fear both those winds also exceedingly. Then according to
the season and place where the Hare shall wont to sit, they shall beat with
their hounds to starte her at the first: and using that means, they shall
sinde more Hares, and have shorter sport than in trayling after them as before
said: and they may so enter their hounds accustom and them, that as soon as
they begin to beat the busshes with their hunting sticks, the hounds will
in and strive who may first get in, like Spaniels at retrife of a Partriche.
And when the Hare is starte and on foot, then let the huntesman go where he
saw her pass, and hallowe in all the hounds until they have al undertaken
it, and go on with it in full cry: Then let him rechate to them with his
horn, and comfort them every way that he can best deui^e: and when he
perceyueth that they are in full cry, let him follow fair and easily, not
making over much haste at first, nor making to much noise either with horn or
voice: for at the first the hou^des will easily ouershoote a chase through too
much heat: and therefore if the huntesman ouerlay them, he should but chafe
them more, whieh might cause them both to ouershoote it and to leese it. But
when they have run the space of an hour, and that they are well in with it,
and stick well upon it, then may the huntesman come in nearer to his hounds,
because by that time their heat will be well cooled and they will hunte soberly.
Above all things let him mark the first doubling that the Hare makes as I
have before said, and thereby he may govern himself all the day: for all the
rest that she will make will be like unto it: and according to the policies
that he shall see her use, and the place where he hunteth, he must make his
compasses great or little, long or short, to help the defaults, always
seeking the moystest and most commodious places for the hounds to sent in.
There are two manner of huntings at the Hare, for some follow and never
hallowe before an Hare, nor after her, nor never help hounds at defaulte: and
me thinks that this is a noble kind of huntyng, and does best show and
prove the goodness of the hounds: other again do mark which way an Hare
bends at the first, and coast before her to meet ^yr, and there hallow
amayne, and help the hounds also at defaults as much as they can. When hounds
are hunted with in this sort, they become so light of belief that many times
they leave the right tracke to go in to the hallowe, and by that means the
Hares can stand up but a while before them. And surely he that would hunte to
kill many Hares, should do best to hunte this kind of way: but to try the
good hunting of hounds, I do more praise that other way, which hunteth only
upon the foot and sent: but this latter way is speedy, and best
counteruayleth the subtilties of an Hare. I could have stood longer in
descrybing the means how^ to breathe and enter haryers. But because I have
both spoken sufficiently in the hunting of an Heart, and also in these chapters
before, which treat of the policies and subtilties that Hares use, whereby a
huntesman may find precepts sufficient to govern himself, therefore I will
now say no more of that point.

How you shall reward your hounds when they have killed an Hare, which the
Frenchman calls the reward, and sometimes the quarey, but our old Tristram
calls it the hallow. Chap. 62.
When your hounds have killed the Hare, let the varlet of your kennell, cut
down some pretty bending wandes of an Hasell or some such tree, and then let
him take the Hare and lay her in some fair place upon the grass: then let the
huntesman alight from his horse, and blow the death to call in all the
hou^des: that done, the varlet of the kenell shall keep off y^ hou^tes with
those little wandes, and let them all baye about him. The huntesman shall
blow still a good while, and afterward shall clappe and stroke his best
hounds on the sides, and show them the Hare, saying: Dead boys, dead: Then
let him hulke her) (which is to open her and take out her garbage) and
afterward stryp off her skin before the hounds, taking away the Gall, the
lights, and the skin, the which he shall hang up in some tree, where the
hounds may not eat them, for they will make them sick. When the Hare is thus
hulked and stripte out of her skin, le^te the Huntesman take out of his
wallet some bread, cheese, and other small morsels, and put them into the bulk
of the Hare, to wet and moysten them with her blood: then shall he cut off
the foreparte of the Hare, head and all: and yet if he have any young hounde
which is fearful, let him give him the Hares head by himself for to
encourage him the better. Then must the varlet of the kennell ty^ a cord to
the forequarters of the Hare in five or six places, that one dog may not
tear away all at a mouthfull, and so beguyle all his fellows. Afterward let
him hide it, and take his staff and go an hundredth paces from the rest: in
mean while the huntesman shall power out the reward of bread and cheese upon
the cleanest place of grass that he can find, and shall yet keep off the
hounds with his hunting wande. This being done, he shall blow that all the
hounds may come in together, and shall suffer them to eat this reward,
clapping them upon the sides, comforting of them, and blowing with his horn.
In mean while when they have almost done, he shall make sign to the varlet of
the kennell which shall hallow and blow for the hounds: then the huntesman
shall rate them and beat them to him, saying: List Hallow, Hike Hallow, hike.
Then the varlet shall show them the Hare holding it as high as he can, and
holding his cord always fast by y^ end: and when all the hounds be about
him, he shall cast it amongst the^, and suffer the^ to ^eare it by peecemeale
out of the cord: and then carry them to the water before he cou^le them up
again: or rather let him carry them home uncoupled, that they may skoure at
large and skommer: for a hounde will be inclined to be sickly when he has
eaten of a Hares flesh. And therefore let him give them bread after they have
eaten the reward, to close up their stomachs withal, and least they should
cast it up again.

The Hare, to the Hunter.


ARe minds of men, become so void of sense,
That they can joy to hurt a harmless thing?
A silly beast, which cannot make defense?
I wretch? a worm that can not bite, nor sting?
If that be so, I thank my Ma^er than,
For making me, a Beast and not a Man.
The Lion lickes the sores of wounded Sheep,
He spares to pray, which yeeldes and craves grace:
The dead man's corpse has made some Serpents weep,
Such rewth may rise in beasts of bloody race:
And yet can man, (which bragges above the rest)
Use wrack for rewth? can murder like him best?
This song I sing, in moan and mourneful notes,
(Which feign would blase, the bloody mind of Man)
Who not content with Hearts, Hindes, Buckes, Rows, Gotes,
Bores, Bears, and all, that hunting conquer can,
Must yet seek out, me filly harmless Hare,
To hunte with hounds, and course sometimes with care.
The Heart does hurt (I must a truth confess)
He spoyleth Corn, and bears the hedge adowne:
So does the Bucke, and though the Row seem less,
Yet does he harm in many a field and Town:
The clyming Got does pill both plant and vine,
The pleasant meades are rowted up with Swine.
But I poor Beast, whose feeding is not seen,
Who break no hedge, who pill no pleasant plant:
Who stroye no fruit, who can turn up no green,
Who spoil no corn, to make the Plowman want:
Am yet pursewed with hounde, horse, might and main
By murdring men, until they have me slain.
Sa how says one, as soon as he me spies,
Another cries Now, Now, that sees me starte,
The hounds call on, with hydeous noise and cries,
The spurgalde Jade must gallop out his part:
The horn is blown, and many a voice full shryll,
Do whoup and cry, me wretched Beast to kill.
What meanest thou man, me so for to pursew?
For first my skin is scarcely worth a placke,
My flesh is dry, and hard for to endew,
My grease (God knows) not great upon my back,
My self, and all, that is within me found,
Is neither, good, great, ritche, fat, sweet, nor sound.
So that thou show thy va^tes to be but vain,
That bragst of wit, above all other beasts,
And yet by me, thou neither gettest gain
Nor find food, to serve thy gluttons feasts:
Some sport perhaps: yet Grievous is the glee
Which ends in Blood, that lesson learn of me.
Of the nature and property of the Conie. Chap. 63.
THe Conie is a common beast and well known unto all men. The Conie bears
her Rabettes. xxx. days, and then kinteleth, and then she must be bucked
again, for else she will eat up her Rabets. She will have five, six, and seven
at a litter. He that would have a warrayne well replenished with Conies,
should hunt them and beat them in twice or thrice in a week with some
Spanell or curre for the purpose: for otherwise they will stray and feed out
into the woods and cornefieldes near adjoining, and you shall never make the^
come in to their burrowes or clappers again. Some hold opinion that they will
follow a Hare to knot and ^nge^dre with her: but for the reason before
alleged, beat them i^ twice or thrice in a week. When a Buck^ Conie will go
to the Do, he will beat upon the ground with his forefoote maruelously, and
by that means he heateth himself: when he has buc^t, then falls he
backwards and lies in a trance as he were half dead: and then may a man
easily take him. The flesh of a Conie is much better than the flesh of an
Hare, for the Hares flesh is much drier and more m^lancholike: so is the skin
of a Conie (if it be black) a very good furre, where as the Hares skin is
little or nothing worth.

How to hunte and take Conies. Chap. 64.
HE that would take Conies must hunte with two or three Spanels or curres made
for the purpose, amongst the hedges and bushes where he knows that the Conies
do lie: he may also have small Greyhoundes for the purpose to course at them:
but in their default, the Spanels or curres will drive them into their
Burrowes: then set pursenettes upon all the holes, or as many of them as you can
find, and put in a Ferret close musseled, and she will make the Conies bolte
out again into your pursenets, and so you shall take them. Remember that your
Ferret be close musled, for else she will kill the Conie in the ground, and
peradventure will not come out again of three or four days after. For
default of a Ferret, you may make Conies come out of their Burrowes with the
powder of Orpyne and Brimstone, and make a smother with them, and it will make
the Conies bolte out of the earth, and so you shall take them in your
pursenets. Mine Aucthor tells furthermore of making small low hedgerowes al
along down by ye side of some hedge which is well replenished with Conies:
and that the said low hedges should be made overthwart contrary to the
standing of the quick hedge: and that sundry holes should be made in them, at
the which he would set pursenets or other nets, and so take the Conies,
hunting them up and down with a Spaniell or curre. But he seems not to have
seen our English Warreyns, nor our manner of taking of our Conies. For (thanked
be God) there are sundry Lords and Gentlemen in England, which have their
grounds so well replenished, as they would cunne a man but small thanks which
should so smother their burrowes with Brimstone or Orpin: for in deed that will
mar a Burrow, and drine the Conies clean from it. But we take them
principally with ^eyes: next with pursenets and Ferrets: thirdly with a drawing
Ferret when they be young: and again we have a kind of dogs called tumblers,
which will kill Conies abundantly, and after a marvelous fashion. Of all these
sorts of taking Conies, together with the order to keep a Warreyn from
vermin, I will hold no longer discourse: for in deed it is somewhat besides my
purpose, since I accoumpte ferrettyng one of the coldest and vnpleasantest
chaces that can be followed. Yet thus much I have thought meet to write of
it, following mine Aucthor: and because in d^ede it seems to be a kind of
Uenerie, at the least he that has a good warreyne of Conies, a good Douehouse,
and (...) fishepondes, shall need the less to go into the Forest or Chase for
Beef, or Bacon, for these three are good neighbors.

Of the hunting of the Fox and Badgerd. Chap. 65.


NOw to speak of For hounds and Terryers, and how you should enter them to
take the Fox, the Badgerd, and such like vermin: you must understand that
there are sundry sorts of Terriers, whereof we hold opinion that one sort
came out of Flaunders or the low Countries, as Irtoys and thereabouts, and they
have crooked legs, and are short heared most commonly. Another sort there
is which are shagged and straight legged: those with the crooked legs will
take earth better than the other, and are better for the Badgerd, because they
will lie longer at a vermin: but the others with straight legs do serve for
(...) purposes, for they will Hunte above the ground as well as other hounds,
and enter the earth with more fury than the others: but they will not abide
so long, because they are too too eagre in fight, and therefore are constreyned
to come out to take the air: there are both good and badde of both sorts.
And because it is good pastime, and brave fight, without great pain or
travail to the huntesman, therefore I have thought good to set down here some
precepts for the entryng of Terriers, and for the better fleshyng and
encouragyng of them.

You shall begin to enter them as soon as they be eight or ten Months old:
For if you enter not a Terrier before he be a year old, you shall hardly ever
make him take the earth. And you must take good heed that you encourage them,
and rebuke them not at the first: nor that the Fox or Badgerd do hurt them
within the earth, for then they will never love the earth again. And therefore
never enter a young Terryer in an earth where there is an old Fox or Badgerd:
But first let them be well entered, and be a year old full or more. You
shall do well also to put in an old Terryer before them which may abide and
endure the fury of the Fox or Badgerd. You may enter them and flesh them
sundry ways. First when Foxes and Badgerds have young cubbes, take all your
old Terryers and put them into the ground: and when they begin to baye,
(which in the earth is called Yearnyng) you must hold your young Terryers
every one of them at a sundry hole of some angle or mouth of the earth, that
they may harken and hear their fellows yearne. And when you have taken the
old Foxes or Badgerdes, and that there is nothing left in the earth but the
yo^g Cubbes, take out then all your old Terryers, and couple them up: then put
in your young Terryers and encourage them, crying, To him, To him, To him: and
if they take any young Cubbe, let them take their pleasure of him, and kill
him within the ground: and beware that the earth fall not down upon them and
smoother them. That done, take all the rest of the Cubbes and Badgerds pigges
home with you, and fry their livers and their blood with cheese, and some of
their own grease, and thereof make your Terryers a reward, showing them
always the heads and skins to encourage them. When they have been rewarded
or rather before, wash them with Soap and warm water to get out the clay
which shall be clodded in their hear: for else they will soon become mangie:
and that would be hard to be cured. You may enter them also thus: you must
take old Foxes and Badgerdes alive with your old Terryers and the help of
such clampes and holdfastes as you shall see here portrayed: Take them and cut
away their nether Iawe wherein there wang teeth be set, and never touch the
upper Iawe, but let it stand to show the fury of the Beast, although it can
do no hurt therewith: then make an earth in some of your closes, and make it
large enough, because that the Terryers may fight and turn therein the better,
and that they may go in two together: then cover the borowe or earth with
bordes and turues, and put the Fore or Badgerd therein: then put in all your
Terryers both young and old, and encourage them with words, as has been before
declared, and as the Art requires: and when they have yearned sufficiently,
then begin to dig with spades and mattockes to encorage them against such
time as you must use to dig over them: then take out the Fox or Badgerde
with the clampes or pinchers, killyng it before them, or let a Greyhounde
kill it in their sight, and make them reward thereof. It shall be well to cast
them some bread or cheese upon the vermin as soon as it is dead, for the
better boldnyng and encouraging of the^. If you will not cut the Iawe of the
Fox or Badgerd, then break out al his teeth that he bite not the Terryers,
and it shall suffyze as well.

Of the nature and properties of a Fox and a Badgerd. Chap. 66.


AS you have two kinds or more of every other chase by diversity of names: so
of these vermyne there are Foxes and their Cubbes, and Badgerdes and their
Pigges: the female of a Fox is called a Bitche, and he himself a Doggefoxe:
the Female of a Badgerde is called a Sow, and the male a Badgerde or a
Borepygge of a Badgerde. Yet some will not allow this difference: but I can
prove it by good reason and by the diversities of color, nature, and
proportion. the Badgerd pigges at coming out of the earth do commonly make and
cast their fyaunts: and they never do it until they have made a hole in the
earth with their snowte or with their foot: and then they fyaunt within it and
hide it: this the Fox cubbes do not. Also the Badgerd makes his hole commonly
in sand or light earth which is easy to dig, and in open places, to have
the comfort of the Sun: for they sleep incessantly, and are much fatter
than Foxcubbes be. As touching their hear, they have a gray coat, and are
somewhat whyter than the old, waxyng greyer and greyer the elder that they
be: some say that there is two sorts of these young Badgerdes (and I believe
it) whereof that other sort goes further out for their pray than these do: and
that they cast their fyants longer somewhat like a Fox, and keep commonly in
strong holds or in rocks, and make their earth or their Burrowe deeper than
these do. But yet there be not so many chambers nor angles in their Burrowes
as there are in these: for it were impossible for them to work so well in
Rocks or in hard earth, as those others do in Sand. These two sundry sorts
do not keep one another company: neither shall you lightly find one of them
where that other is. Terryers do fear the one more than the other, because
they are much curster, and again they stink much worse. For the better
understanding of the diversity, let us coin a word, and call the one
Badgerdpigges, and the other Badgerdwhelpes, and say that the Badgerdwhelpes
have their nose, their throat, and their ears yellowyshe, like unto a
Marternes throat, and are much blacker than the pigges, and higher legged:
Both sorts live upon all flesh, and will hunte after carrion: they do great
hurt in Warreynes and Connigrees, especially when they be full of little
rabbets, for they make a hole right above the neast, We think that the Fox
makes a hole above as well as a Badgerd.
and go straight to them: Whereas the Fox follows the holes mouth until he
come at the neast. I have seen a Badgerde take a suckyng Pigge in my presence,
and carried him clean away unto his earth. It is sure that they desire Hogs
flesh more than any other: For if you train a piece of Porke or Hogs flesh
upon their burrowe, they will sure come out unto it. They pray also upon all
Pullen, as Geese, Duckes, Hens, and such like. I can speak by experience,
for I have brought up some ^ame, until they were four years old, and being
so brought up, they are very gentle, and will play with young whelps, and
never hurt them, and the rest of the day that they neither feed nor play,
they bestow in sleeping. Those which I have brought up, would come to me at a
call, and follow me like whelps of hounds. They are very chyll o^ cold,
and if you let them lie in a chamber where there is any fire, they will
creep so near it, that they will burn their coats and their feet also many
times, and then are they very hard to be healed. They will be fed with any
thing, bread, cheese, fruits, birds, or any thing that you will give them.
When it snoweth or is hard weather, then they come not out of their holes
sometimes in two or three days togethers, the which I have observed at their
holes mouth, when it has snowed and lain there so thick, that they could not
have styrred out, but that I might have perceived them: As I have seen that
after three days they have come out for pure hunger, and gone to pray for
meat. It is a pleasure to behold them when they gather stuff for their nest
or for their couch, as straw, leaves, moss, and such other things: and with
their forefeete and their head, they will wrappe up as much together, as a
man would carry under one atme, and will make shifte to get it into their holes
and couches. This sub^letie they have, that when they perceive the Terryers
begin to yearne them, and to (...) at the^, they will stop the hole
between the Terryers and them, least the Terryers should follow them any
further: and then if the Terryers baye still, they will remove their baggage
with them, and go into another chamber or angle of their Burrowe. They (...)
long, and when they ware old, then some of them fall blind, and can not come
forth of their holes. Then if they be the Badgers, the Sowes feed them, and if
it be the Sow, the Badger feeds her likewise. They dye also of certain
worms, and (...), which they have all over their skin: even as you see that
hounds have the maunge and cankerwormes sometimes. And therefore it is that I
councelled to wash your Terryers, as soon as they came out of the earth. All
these things I have seen by experience: they are long lived, and hard to
kill. For I have seen a well biting Greyhounde, take a Badger and tear his
guts out of his bellye, and yet the Badgerd has fought still, and would not
yield to death. True it is that they are very tender upon the snowt, and you
can not give them so little a blow upon the snowte with a stick, but that
they will dye immediately.

As touching Foxes, I account small pastime in hunting of them, especially
within the ground. For as soon as they perceive the Terryers, if they yearne
hard, and lie near unto them, they will bolte and come out straight ways,
unless it be when the bytche has young Cubbes: then they will not forsake
their young ones to dye for it. They make their earthes and Burrowes as near
as they can, in ground that is hard to dygge, as in galte, clay, and stonye
ground, or amongst the roots of trees: and their earthes have commonly but
one hole, the which is very straight, and goes very far in, before it
come at their cou^. But sometimes they take a Badgers old Burrowe, which has
more chambers, holes, and angles. When a good Terryer does once reach a Fox,
they defend themselves shrewdly, but yet nothing like the Badgerd, neither is
their biting so dangerous. If you take a bytche Fox in the time that she
goes on clycketing, and cut out her gutte which holds her spreame or
nature, together with the kydneys which Gelders take away from a bytche
which when they spaye her, and then cut all into small gobbets, and put them
into a pot hot as they be, then take Goome of Masticke and mingle it
therewith, and cover the pot close, it will keep all the year, and will
serve to make a train for a Fox, when you would, on this wise: Take a skin
of Bacon, and lay it on a Grydyron, and when it is well broyled and hot, then
dippe it and puddle it in this sauce that is within the pot, and make a trayn
therewith, and you shall see that if there be a Fox near to any place where
the train is drawn, he will follow it. But he which makes the train, must
rub the soales of his shoes with Cowes dung, least the Fox vent his footing.
And thus you may train a Fox to a standing, and kill him in an evening with a
Crossebowe.

It is also a thing experimented, that if you rub a Terryer with Brymstone,
or with the oil of Cade, and then put the Terryer into an earth where Foxes
be, or Badgerdes, they will leave that earth, and come no more at it in two or
three months at least.

Of the nature and properties of a Fox, out of another Author. Chap. 67.


IT shall be needless to speak of his shape or proportion, since he is so
common a beast. His conditions are in many respects like unto y^ Wolf. For
first ye bitch Fox brings forth as many cubs at a lytter, as the she Wolf
does, sometimes more, and sometimes less, as the she Wolf does also. But indeed
she does lytter them deep under the ground, and so the Wolf does not. She
venometh with her biting when she is sault, as the Wolf does. The life of a
Fox and of a Wolf continue both like time. You shall hardly take a bytchfoxe
when she is bragged and with cubbe, for then she lies close about her burrowe,
and if she hear never so little noise, she whippeth in quickly before the
hounds or any thing can come near her: she is a false and crafty beast like
unto the Wolf. The hunting of the Fox is pleasant, for he makes an excellent
cry, because his sent is very hot, and he never flees far before the
hounds, but holds the strongest couerts, and flees from the field, as a
beast which trusts not in his legs, nor yet in his strength. And if the
Fox stand in his defense, it is by force, and yet always he will as near as
he can keep the covert: yea though he find none other covert but a bushe, yet
he will flee to it. And when he perceives that he may no longer endure nor
stand up before the hounds, then will he take the earth, and will trust to
his Castles there, which he knows perfectly: yet there is he taken also, but
then must it be dug, and that in a soft or light ground. If Greyhoundes
course him, then his last remedy (if he be in the plain) is to bepysse or to
beshyte the Greyhounds, that they may give him over for the stink and
^thinesse thereof, yea, and Greyhoundes are more afraid of a Fox, than of a
greater beast. For I have seen Greyhounds which would run hardly at an Heart,
yea, would not refuse the wild Bore, nor the Wolf, and yet they would streyne
courtesy at a Fox. When a bytche Fox goes on clycqueting, and seeks a
dog, she cries with a hollow voice, like unto the howling of a mad dog:
and likewise if she mysse any of her cubbes, she makes ye self same noise: but
when they are killed, they will never cry, but defend themselves till the last
ga^pe. A Fox will pray upon any thing yt he can overcome, yea, were it a
vermin, and will feed upon all sorts of caryon: but the meat which they
most delight in, is poultrie, as Hens, Capons, Geese, Duckes, small birds,
or any thing that they find. And in default thereof, gentle master Raynard
will be content with butter, cheese, cream, flaunes, and custardes. They do
much hurt in Warrens and coney burrowes. And they kill Hares also by fraud,
but not by force of running. Some Foxes do pray abroad in the woods and
fields, like unto Wolves. And some there be which pray no where but in the
Uillages and country Towns: and therein they are so subtle and crafty, that
neither dog nor man can defend them. They lie lurking al day in ditches near
unto houses, to see ho^e dame Pertlot the husbandmans hen does, and to see
her chickens virtuously brought up. The skin of the Fox is a very good furre
and a warm, but it is not very fair, and it stinketh always, unless it be
very excedingly well dressed. The grease and marrowe of a Fox are very good to
rub synew^s that are shronke. Of the rest of his subtleties and properties I
will speak more at large in the hunting of him. He is taken with Hounds,
Greyhoundes, Terryers, Nets and ginnes. But if the Nets and ginnes be not
strong, he will soon dispatch them like a Wolf.

Of the nature of a Badger, out of the same Author. Chap. 68.
THe Badgerd (says he) makes but slow speed before the hounds, and cannot
long stand up. So that commonly she ^igh teth it out at the Baye, or else
takes the earth, and there is killed with Terryers. For if you find a
Badgerde abroad, it shall not be from her burrow lightly. A Badger prays upon
any vermin or other thing, and will feed upon any caryon or fruit like unto
the Fox. The Badgerd battles much with (...), and is a very fat beast. Once
in a year they enge^der as the Fox, and they litter them in their holes, even
as the fox does. Their biting is venomous, as the Foxes is, but they make
better defense for themselves, and fight more stoutly, and are much stronger.
The blood and grease of a Badgerd, is medicinable as the Foxes blood is also.
Some hold a blind opinion, that if a young child should wear his first shoes
of a Badgerdes leather. he should ever afterward heal a horse of the Farcine
if he did but once get up v^on him. The flesh of a Badger is as much worth as
that of a Fox, which is to reward the hounds withal, and yet that but of y^
grease, and certain parts of him neither. (...) (...) ^ounds will eat of a
Foxes flesh, but a Badgerdes is wallowish sweet and rammish. I my self have
eaten of it, and disgested it well, and without any manner of annoyance. The
skin of a Badgerd, is not so good as the Foxes, for it serves for no use,
unless it be to make myttens, or to dress horscollers withal.

The hunting of the Badgerd, out of the same Author. Chap. 69.


HE that would hunte a Badgerde, must seek the earthes and burrowes where they
lie, and in a fair mooneshine night, let him go unto them upon a clear wind,
and stop all the holes but one or two, and in those let him set sacks or
pokes fastened with some drawing string which may shut him in as ^one as ^e
str^ineth the bag. Some use no more but to set an Hoope in y^ mouth of the
sack or poke, and so put it into the hole: and (...) as the Badgerd is in the
poke and streyneth it, the poke slippeth off the hoope and follows him into
the earth, and so he lies tumbling therein until he be taken, and these men
are of opinion, that as soon as y^ Badgerds head is once within the Sack or
hole, he will lie still and will not turn back again for any thing. The
bags or Sacks being thus set, let your Huntsman cast off his Hounds, and
beat all the groves, hedges, and tufts, within a mile or half a mile about,
which are most likely: and when the Badgerd hears any hunting, he will
straightwayes home to his earth, and there is taken as beforesayd. Ever
remember that he which stands to watch the pokes, do stand close and upon a
clear wind, for else the Badgerd will soon find him and then will forsake that
earth to seek some other, or else to escape some other way: but if y^ hounds
chance to encounter him, or to undertake y^ chase before he be gotten into his
earth, or recovered near unto it, the^ will he stand at bay like a Bore, and
make you good pastime.

Of the hunting of a Fox above the ground out of the same Author. Chap. 70.
HE that would hunt a Fore above the ground, shall do well to beat with his
hownds in the thickest queaches, and tufts or groves near unto (...), and in
thick hedgerowes and such other places. For commonly a Fox will lurk in
such, to pray or epsy his advantage upon dame Pertelot, and such other damsels
that keep in those Courts, and to see young pigges well ringl^d when they are
young, for fear least they should learn to turn up Gentleme^s pastures, and
to mar their meadows with rowting, for surely M. Raynerd is a very well
disposed man, and would be loath to see youth fall into such folly in any common
wealth where he may strike a stroke. Also in ye countries where wine is made,
he will lie much in the Uineyards, and (as some hold opinion) will eat of ye
Grapes. Ones he lies always in covert and obscure places, like an honest
plainmening creature, which cares not greatly for to come at ye Court. Well, the
Huntsman which would have good pastime at this vermin, shall do well to stop
up his earthes if he can find them: and let him stop them up the night
before he means to hunte. About midnight when he may be sure that the Fox is
gone abroad to seek his pray, let the earthes then be stopped with boughs
and earth well and strongly rammed, that master Raynard get not in again over
hastily. Some use to set up bleinchers, or sewels (which are white papers) or
to lay two white sticks a cross before the hole, and hold opinion, that when
a Fox espyeth those sticks or sewels, he will mistrust that it is some engine
to take him, and will turn back again: but I think not that so sure as to
stop the earthes. If the huntsman know not where the earthes be, let him
seek them out two or three days before he means to hunt, and stop the^. But
because sometimes a huntsma^ can not find all the blind earthes yt are in
couerts and great woods: then if a Fox find out some of them, and so beguile
the huntesman, he may yet get him out either quick or dead, without
Terryers, in this manner. If there be any more holes than one in the earth, let
him set pursenets or bags in one of the holes under the wind, even as he
would set for a Badgerd, and let him stop up all the holes besides, but one,
and let that one be above the wind as near as he can. Then let him take a
piece of parchment or leather, and lay it in the hole, laying fire upon it,
and putting brymstone, Myrre, and such smothering grease upon the fire: there
withal let him stop up the hole, and suffer the smother to go into the
earth. This done, the Fox will not long abide in the earth, but will either
starte into the pursnet or bag, or else will sound dead the next day at some
other of the holes mouths which were stopped. The best hunting of the Fox
above the ground is in January, February, and March. Yet you may hunt him
from Alhollantide, until Easter. When ye leaves are fallen, you shall best see
your hounds hu^ting, and best find his earths. And also at yt time the Foxes
skyn (which is the best part of him) is best in season. Again, the hounds do
best hunt a Fox in the coldest weather, because he leaves a very strong sent
after him. Always set your Greyhounds on the outsides of the couertes
underneath the wind, and let them stand close, cast of at the first but the
third part of your kennell to find him: The rest you shall cause to be led up
and down the couerts, in paths and high ways, to cast off unto their
fellows when he is found. It is not good to cast off too many hou^ds at once,
because woods and couerts are full of sundry chases, and so you should have
your kennell undertake sundry beasts, and lose your pastime. Let those which
you cast off first, be old, stanch, and sure hounds. And if you hear such a
hounde call on merrily, you may cast off some other to him, and when they run it
with full cry, cast off the rest, and you shall hear good pastime. For a Fox
will not willingly depart out of the couerte, where he has bin accustomed to
ly, but will wheel about in the thicks, and thereby make you much the better
pastime. The words of comforting ye hounds, the hallowing, and all such like
ceremonies, are even the same which you use in hunting of other chases and
vermin. When he is dead, you shall hang him up on the end of a strong pyked
staff, and hallow in all your hounds to bay him, then make them reward with
such things as you can get, for the flesh of a Fox is not to reward the^ wtall,
for they will not eat it.

How to dig for a Fox or a Badgerde, and what instruments are meet for
the same. Chap. 71.
THey which will hear good pastime at a Fox, or a Badgerd within the ground,
must be furnished with such tools and appertinances as follow, and as are
here before this present chapter portrayed. First let there be in the company,
five or six strong fellows which can well endure to dyg They are but spades
and Mattockes which are not so needful to be portrayed.
and delue. Next you must have as many good and arrant Terriers, garnished with
collers full of belles, to make the Fox or Badgerd start the sooner, and also
their collers will be some defense to save them from hurting. But when your
Terriers are out of breath, or that the Belles are stopped and glutted up with
earth, or that you perceive the vermin is angled (which is to say, gone to
the furdest part of his chamber to stand at defense) then you may take off the
collers: but at the first they serve to great purpose, to make the vermin
either start or angle. Then to return unto my matter, a Lord or Gentleman
which will follow this pastune, should have half a dozen Mattes to lie upon
the ground on, as they hearken to the Terriers: some use to carry a windbed
which is made of leather strongly sowed on all the four sides, and having a
Pype at one of the corners, to blow it as you would blow a Baggepype, and
when it is blown full of wind, to stop it up and lie upon it on the ground:
but this were too great curiosity, and yet a Lord or Gentleman cannot take too
great heed of the cold and moisture of the earth, for he may thereby take
sundry diseases and infirmities. The instruments to dig withal must be
these, sharp poynted Spades, round hollowed Spades, and flat broad Spades,
Howes, or Mattocks, and Pickaxes, a Colerake and a pair of Clampes or
Holdfasts, Shouells both shodde and bare, an Axe and a sharp paring Spade, the
sharp pointed Spade serves to begin yt tre^ch first, where the ground is
hardest and broader tools would not so well enter: the round hollowed. Spade
serves to dig amongst Roots, and may be so made with such sharp edges,
that it will cut the roots also: the flat broad Spade, to dig withal when
the trenche is better opened and the ground softer: the Howes, Mattocks, and
Pickaxes to dig with in harder ground where a Spade will make no riddance of
the work: the Colerake to cleanse the hole and to keep it from stopping up:
the clampes or holdfasts to take a Fox or Bagerd out alive, wherewith you may
make pastime afterward, or to help the terriers when they are aferd to bite a
vermin: y^ Shouels both shod and bare, serve to cast out y^ earth which the
Spades or Mattocks have dug, according to y^ hardness or softness of y^
ground wherein you dig: the paring Spade to keep the trenche in fashion:
and the Axe to cut the roots or any other thing withal. You shall also have a
Payle to set water unto your Terriers at such times as they come out to take
breath. All these instruments I have caused to be portrayed yt you may the
better perceive them. And with these instruments and such like necessary
implements a Lord or Gentleman may fill a pretty little Cart or Wagon made for
yt purpose, yt which he may cause to be carried on field with him, alwais
provided that when the said carriage is loded, he forget not to cause his Cook
and Butler to hang good store of bags and bottels about the raues and pinnes
thereof: for it will be both comely and comfortable. In this order of battle,
a noble man or gentleman may march to besiege the Fox and Badgerd, in their
strongest holes and castles. And may break their Casmats, Plotformes,
Parapets, and work to them with Mines, and countermines, until they get their
skynnes, to make furs and myttens.

How to enter your Terriers according to the ground, and how to trench, and
dig. Cha. 72.
BEfore you put your Terriers into the ground, you must have consideration what
kind of mould it is, and mark well the situation thereof, and as near as you
can, judge where aboutes the chief angles or chambers should be, for else you
may work clean contrary, and rather hinder the Terriers than further the^.
Is if the earth or burrowe, be hanging on a side of a bank, you shall do best
to put in your Terriers bylowe, toward the vale, to the end that you may make
the vermin chamber on the top of the bank, where the earth is not deep, and
where you dig to him with most ease. Again, if the earth be on the top of a
bank, and the bank stands in a plain plot of ground, then you shall do
best to put in your Terriers, in those holes which are highest on the top of
the bank: and strike with a staff upon the bank, to make the vermin flee
down into the lowest parts, and there to chamber or angle themselves. It shall
not be amiss, to put in a Terrier or twain at the first without any noise, to
make the vermin disseuer, and to chamber themselves. Foxes and Badgerds which
have bin beaten, have this subtletie, to draw unto the largest part of the
burrow, where three or four angles meet togethers, and there to stand at bay
with the Terriers, to the end they may afterward shift, and go to which
chamber they list. In such a case strike hard upon the ground right over them:
and if you see that they will not remove so, then take your round hollowed
spade, and dig in to them right upon them. But when they are chambred, then
you shall not dig right upon them, but right upon the Terrier. For if you dig
right upon the vermyne, it might make them to bolt into some other angle, and
to enforce the Terryer to give them place. Therefore you shall dig right over the
Terryers with a round hollowed spade, the which will convey the earth with it,
and is made principally for such a purpose. And when you have dug so long
that you be come to the angle, then thrust your spade between the vermin and
the Terryer, so that the vermin can not by any means come out upon your
Terrier. For in some chamber you may chance to find five or six vermin
together, which might hurt your poor terrier, and discourage him. When you
have stopped them in thus, then work with your broad spades and other tools,
and make a large trench if you will have good sport, and put in your Terryers
to the vermin, and you shall see bold fight of all fashions. You must take
heed to the subtleties of the vermin, especially of Badgerds. For sometimes
they will stop up the trench between them and the Terriers, and work
themselves further in, so that your Terriers shall not be able to find them,
nor to know what is become of them. Sometimes when you have found their Casmat
and chief strength, you may take them out alive with your holdfasts or
clampes, and therein use this policy and foresight. Take them with your tongs
or clampes by the lower chappe, the one clampe in the mouth, and the other
under the throat, and so draw them out. For if you should take them out by the
body or neck, they should have liberty to byte and snatch at the Terryers,
which will be doing with them as you take them out. Being thus taken, put them
into a sack or poke, to hunt with your Terryers in your gardens or close
courts, at your pleasure. He that will be present at such pastimes, may do
well to be booted: For I have lent a Fox or a Badgerd ere now, a piece of my
hose, and the skyn and flesh for company, which he never restored again. Let
these few precepts suffice for the hunting of Foxes and Badgerds.

Of the Fox.


RAynerd the Fox am I, a crafty child well known,
Yea better known than credited, with more than is mine own:
A bastard kind of c^rte, mine ears declare the same,
And yet my wit and policy have purchased me great fame.
The Fox to the Huntesman.
IF dogs had tongue at will to talk in their defense,
If brutish beast might be so bold, to plead at bar for pence,
If poor Tom tooth might speak, of all that is amysse,
Then might would bear no right a down: then me^ would pardon this,
Which I must here declare. Then quickly would be known,
That he which deals with strangers faults, should first amend his own.
Thus much my self may say, thus much my self can prove,
Yet whiles I preach beware the (...), for so it shall behoue.
I sigh (yet smyle) to see, that man (yea master man)
Can play his part in policy, as well as Raynard can.
And yet forsooth the Fox is he that bea^es the blame,
But two leggd Foxes eat the ducks, when four legs bear the name.
A wonder is to see, how people shoute and cry,
With hallowes, whoupes, and spiteful words, when I poor Fox go by.
Lay on him cries the wife, down with him says the child,
Some strike, some chide, some throw a stone, some fall and be defilde:
As Maidens, when they spurn, with both their feet attones,
Fie on the Fox yt forced the^ so, such falls might bruise their bones.
But Raynard does such deeds, and therefore strike him down,
His case will serve to fur the cape of master huntsmans gown.
His Lungs full wholesome be, in poulder beaten fine,
For such as cough and draw their wind, with pain and mickle pine.
His pyssell serves to skoure, the gravel of the stone,
His grease is good for synews shronk, or (...) yt grieves the bone.
His tongue will draw a thorn, his teeth will burnish gold,
And by his death a huntsman may, have profits manyfolde.
The Hen shall roust at rest, which he was wont to rowze,
The duck and geese may bring good broods, yt pigs may (...) their
And all the Farmers wealth, may thrive and come to good,
Which crafty Raynard steals sometimes, to keep his brats in sowes.
Yea soft, but who says thus? who did yt Lion paint?
Forsooth a man: but if a Fox might tell his tale as queint, blood.
Then would he say again, that men as crafty be,
As ever Raynard was for theft: even men which fliese a fee,
From every widows flock: a capon or a chicke,
A pyg, a goose, a dunghill ducke, or ought that salt will lick:
Until the widow sterue, and can no longer give,
This was yt Fox, fie down with him, why should such foxes live?
Some Foxes lie in wait, and mark the Farmers croppe,
What loads of hay, what grass for bief, what store of wood for lopp^,
What quantity of grain he raises on his rent,
And fake a new lease ore his head, before the old be spent.
Fie on these Foxes fie, what Farmer can do welt,
Where such vite vermin lie in wait, their privy gains to smell?
Yea some can play their part, in slandring neighbors name,
To say y^ wolf did kill the Lamb, when Raynerds eat yt same.
These faults with many more, can wicked men commit,
And yet they say that Foxes pass, for subtletie and wit.
But shall I say my mind? I never yet saw day,
But every town had two or three, which Rainards parts (...) play.
So that men vaunt in vain, which say they hunt the Fox,
To keep their neighbors poultry free, and to defend their flocks,
When they them selves can spoil, more profit in an hour,
Than Raynard rifles in a year, when he does most devour.
No, no, the minds of men, which still be vainly bent,
Must have their change of (...), as first the Hare in Lent,
The Heart in Summers heat, and me poor Fox in cold:
But whereto serve these sundry sports, these chases manyfold?
Forsooth to ferde their thoughts, with drags of vain delight,
Whereon most men do muse by day, whereon they dream by night.
They must have costly clothes, they must have deintie fare,
They must have coudxs stuffed with down, they must have all in square.
They must have newfound games, to make the^ laugh their ^iill,
The must have fowls, they must have beasts, to bayt; to hunt, to kill.
And all (when all is done) is nothing else but vain,
So Solomon the wiseman said, and so says Raynerd plain.
An aduertisment of the Translator.
I (...) in mine Author nothing written either of the wild Cat or of the
Marterne, and yet both those are vermin which we use here in England commonly
to hunt, and in my judgment as necessary to be hunted as any vermin can be.
For the question may be doubtful, whether either Fox or Badgerd do more hurt
than the wild Cat does: Since there are few gentlemen in England but have
commodity by Conies, either great or small: and I am sure that there is no
vermin which does more hurt in a Warren of Conies, than a wild Cat does. And
therewithal I have heard some hunters say, that she l^aueth as great sent, and
makes as good a cry for the time, as any vermin that is hunted, especially the
Marterne passes all other (...) for sweetness of sent, and her case is a
noble ^urre. The wild Cats case is nothing so good furre, but it is very
warm, and medicinable for sundry a^s and pains in the bones and joints. Also
hi^ grease is very good for sinews that be shronke. These two chases are not
to be sought of purpose, unless the huntsman do see them where they pray, and
can go readily to him. But if a hound chance to cross them, he will hunt it
as soon as any chase, and they make a noble cry, for the time that they stand
up. At last when they may no more, they will take a tree, and therein seek to
begile the hounds. But if the hounds hold in to them, and will not so give it
over, then they will leap from one tree to another, and make great shifte for
their lives, with no less pastime to the huntsmen. When they are killed, you
must hold them up upon a pyked staff, and hallowe in all your hounds, and then
reward the^ with some meat. For the flesh of these (...) is not good for a
hou^d. Thus much I have thought good of my self, to write according to my
country hunting.

Of the hunting of the Otter. Chap. 75.
THe Otter is a beast well known. She feeds on fish, and lies near unto
Ryuers, Brooks, Pooles, and fishepondes, or Meares: her lying commonly is
under the roots of trees, and sometimes I have seen them lying in ^ hollow
tree, four or five foot above the ground: even as a Fox, Polcat, wildecat,
or Badgerd will destroy a Warren, so will the Otter destroy all the fish in
your pondes, if she once have found the way to them. She dyueth and hunteth
under the water, after a wonderful manner, so that no fish can escape her,
unless they be very great and swift. A litter of Otters, will destroy you all
the fish in a river (or at least, the greatest store of them) in two miles
length. They go sault at such times as firrets go sault, which time every man
may eassy know. And they kindle and bring forth their young Otters, even as
firrets do, sometimes more, and sometimes less. To speak a truth, they seem to
be a kind of water firrets. There is great cunning in the hunting of the^, as
shall be said in the next chapter, and also it is possible to take the^ under
the water, and by the ryuers side, both in traps and in snares, as you may take
a Hare with Harepypes, or such like gynnes. They byte sore and venomously, and
defend them selves stoutly. And if they be taken in snares, if they abide
long, they will sone sheare themselves out with their teeth. I will not speak
much more of their nature, but only that they are footed like a Goose: I mean
they have a web between their claws, and have no heel but only a round
ball under their soale of their foot: and their tracke is called the mark of
an Otter, as we say, the slot of an Heart: and their fewmets are called
spraynts, as has been said before. An Otter abides not much nor long in one
place, but if she be frayed or find any fault (as they are very perfectly of
smellyng and hearing) they will forsake their couche and shifte a mile or two
up or down a river: the like will she do if she have once destroyed the store
of fish, and find no plenty of feeding. From a pondgarden or good store of
fishpondes she will not lightly be removed, as long as there is store of fish in
them: for therein fishes are taken with more ease, than in the Rivers or
greater waters: but enough of their natures.

How to hunte and take an Otter. Chap. 74.
When a huntesman would hunte the Otter, he should first send four servants
or varlets with bloudhounds or such (...) as will draw in the lyame, and let
him send them, two up the River, and two down the river, the one couple of
the^ on that one side, and the other on that other side of the water. And so
you shall be sure to find if there be an Otter in yt quarter: for an Otter
cannot long abide in yt water, but must come forth in the night to make his
(...), and sometimes to feed on grass and heathes by the waters side. If any
of their lyamhounds find of an Otter, let yt huntesman look in the soft
grounds and moist places to see which way he bent the head, up or down the
river: or if he cannot perceive it by the marks, he may partly perceive it by
yt sprayntes and then he may follow his hounde, and lodge it even as you would
do a Dear, or a Bore. And if he find not the Otter quickly, he may then judge
that he is gone to couche somewhere further off from the water: for an Otter
will sometimes seek his feed a mile (or little less) from his couche and
place of rest: and commonly he will rather go up the River than downt: for
going up the stream, the stream brings him sent of the fishes that are
above him: and bearing his nose into the wind, he shall the sooner find any
fault that is above him. also you should make an assembly for the Otter as you
do for yt Heart, and it is a note to be observed that all such chaces as you
draw after before you (...) them, lodge them, or herbor them, you should make
a solemn assembly to hear all reports before you undertake to hunte them,
and then he which has found of an Otter, or so drawn toward his couche that
he can undertake to bring you unto him, shall cause his hounds to be uncoupled
a vowshotte or twain before he come at the place where he thinks that the
Otter lies: because they may skommer and cast about a while until they have
cooled their bawling and braynesicke toys, which all hounds do lightly use
at the first vncouplyng: then the varlets of the kennell shall secke by the
rivers side, and beat the banks with their bounds until some one of them
chance upon the Otter: remember always to set out some upwards and some down
the streams, and every man his Otter spear or forked staff in his hand, to
watch his ventes, for that is the chief advantage: and if they perceive where
the Otter comes under the water (as they may perceive if they (...) it well)
then shall they watch to see if they can get to stand before him at some place
where he would vent, and stryke him with their spear or staff: and if they
miss, then shall they run up or down the stream as they see the Otter
bend, until they may at last give him a Blow: for if the hounds be good Otter
hounds and perfectly entered, they will come chaunting and trayling along by
the rivers side, and will beat every tree root, every holme, every Osier
bed, and tufft of bulrushes: yea sometimes also they will take the river and
beat it like a water spaniell: so that it shall not be possible for the Otter
to escape, but that either the hounds shall light upon him, or else some of the
huntesmen shall strike him; and thus may you have excellent sport and pastime
in hunting of the Otter, if the hounds be good, and that the Rivers be not
over great: where the Rivers be great, some use to have a line thrown
overthwart the River, the which two of the huntesmen shall hold by each
end, one on the one side of the River, and the other on that ^her: and (...)
them hold the line so slack that it may always be underneath the water, and
so go on with it: and if ye Otter come diuing under yt water, he shall of
necessity touch their line, and so they shall feel and know which way he is
passed, the which shall make him be taken the sooner. An Otters skin is very
good furre, and his grease will make a medicine to make fishes turn up their
bellies as if they were dead. A good Otter hounde may prove an excellent good
buckhou^d, if he be not old before he be entered.

Thus have you now as much as I ca^ presently set down for yt hu^ting of such
chaces as I think likely or possible to be hu^ted in this our cu^try: yea some
also percase which you will say are not in use with us at these days. But because
I have sufficiently declared mine intent in mine Epistle in the beginning of
this book, therefore I will spe^de no more time in excusing of my self: but will
pass over unto yt Woulfe, and the Bear, which are as strange and stranger
than any other that I hitherto named.



The Otters oration
Why stand we beasts abasht, or spare to speak?
Why make we not a virtue of our need?
We know by proof, in wit we are too weak,
and weaker much, because all Adams seed,
(Which bear away the weight of wit in deed)
Do daily seek our names for to distayne,
With slandrous blotte, for which we Beasts be slain.
First of my self, before the rest to treat,
Most men cry out, that fish I do devour,
Yea some will say, that Lambs (with me) be meat:
I grant to both, and he that has the power,
To feed on fish that sweeter were than sour,
And had young flesh to banquet at his fill,
Were fond to fraunche on garbage, graynes, or ^wyll,
But master Man, which finds all this fault,
And streynes devise for many a dayntie dishe,
Which suffers not that hunger him assault,
But feeds his fill on every flesh and fish,
Which must have all, as much as wit can wish,
Us seely Beasts, devouring Beasts do call,
And he himself, most bloody beast of all.
Well yet me thinks, I hear him preach this Text,
How all that is, was made for use of man:
So was it sure, but therewith follows next,
This heavy place, expound it who so can:
The very Scourge and Plague of God his Ban,
Will light on such as queyntly can devise
To eat more meat, than may their mouths suffice.
Now master Man, stand forth and here declare,
Who ever yet could see an Otter eat
More meat at once, than served for his share?
Who sees us beasts sitte-bybbing in our seat,
With sundry wynes, and sundry kinds of meat?
Which breed disease, yfostred in such feasts,
If men do so, be they not worse than beasts?
The beastly man, must ^itte all day and quasse,
The Beast indeed, does drink but twice a day,
The beastly man, must stuff his monstrous mass
With secret cause of surfeiting always:
Where beasts be glad to feed when they get pray,
And never eat more than may do them good,
Where men be sick, and surfeit thorough food.
Who sees a Beast, for savrie Sawces long?
Who sees a Beast, or chicke or Capon cramme?
Who sees a Beast, once luld on sleep with song?
Who sees a Beast make vensone of a Ram?
Who sees a Beast destroy both whelpe and damme?
Who sees a Beast use beastly Gluttony?
Which man does use, for great Civility.
I know not I, if dyuing be my fault,
Me thinks most men can diue as well as I:
Some men can diue in Seller and in vault,
In Parlor, Hall, Kitchen and Buttery,
To smell the roste, whereof the fume does fl^e;
And as for gains, men diue in every stream,
All frawdes be fish, their stomachs never squeame.
So to conclude, when men their faults can mend,
And shun the shame, wherewith they beasts do blot,
When men their time and treasure not mispende,
But follow grace, which is with pains ygot,
When men can vice rebuke and use it not:
Then shall they shine, like men of worthy fame,
And else they be but Beasts well worthy blame.
Of the hunting of the Wolf: and first of their nature and properties. Chap.
75.
THe Wolf is a beast sufficiently known in France and other Countries where
he is bred: but here in England they be not to be found in any place. In
Ireland (as I have heard) there are great store of them: and because many Noble
men and Gentlemen, have a desire to bring that Country to be inhabited and
ciuilly governed (and would God there were more of the same mind) therefore I
have thought good to set down the nature and manner of hunting at the Wolf
according to mine Author. The Wolf (says he) goes on (...) in February, in
such sort as a Dog lineth a birth when she goet^ saulte, wherein they abide
ten or twelve days: many Wolves (where store be) do follow one she Wolf, eue^
as Dogs follow a Bitche: but she will never be lined but only with one. She
will suffer many to follow her, and will carry them after her sometimes eight
or ten days without meat, drink, or rest: and when they are ouerwearied,
then she suffers them all to take their ease, until they route and be fast on
sleep: and then will she awake ye Wolf which seems most to have followed
her, and that oftentimes is the foulest and worst favored, because he is
ouerwearied and lankest: him will she awake and tyce him away with her far
from the rest, and suffer him to line her. There is a common Proverb, which
says that: Never Wolf yet saw his Sire: for indeed it happens most
commonly that when all the rest of the Wolves do awake and miss the female,
they follow them by the sent, and finding them oftentimes together, they fall
upon that Wolf and kill him for despite. But if there be no greater store
than one Dog Wolf and one bitche in a place, then this Proverb fails: yea
or sometimes also the rest of the Wolves are so long ere they do awake and
follow, that they cannot so quickly dispatch or kill him according to their
desire, and then also it fails. Their whelps are able to enge^der within
twelve months: and when their whelps be a year old, then they part from their
Sire and from their Dam: yea sometimes sooner, but not before their teeth be
cast and shot out again, for they cast teeth first when they are half year
old, and when they are come up again, they never cast more al their life time.
The^ they depart from their dam when those teeth are come out again and grown
hard, and they seek their adventure, and pray for the^ self: and if they chance
to meet their sire or dam at any time after, they will fawn upon the^, and
lick them, and seem in their kind greatly to rejoice. A good example for
sundry evil disposed children, which become ungrateful to their parents, which
bring the^ up carefully: Since the brute beast ca^ teach the^ their duty, only
by y^ instinct and motions of nature. Also when a dog and a bitch of the^ do
company once togithers, they will not lightly part in su^der: for though they
pray in diverse places, yet at night they will meet again, or at the least once
in two days if it be possible: and they bear meat unto their whelps
togethers: but the dog will first eat his fill, and then carry the rest unto
his whelps: But the bytche bears the pray unto her whelps before she eat
any thereof her self, and if the dog like it, and have not satisfied his
hunger before, he will take it both from her and the whelps, and feed his
fill thereon first. After he will leave the rest for the^ to feed on, if there
be any, and if there be not, let them sterue for him if they will, so that he
makes not account of any thing, until his belly be full, but the bytch does
oftentimes beguile him. She leaves the pray far from their den, and if she
perceive that the dog be gone, then brings she it to her whelps: but if
the dog be there and perceive that she has brought nothing, he smells to
her mouth and her lips: if she have nothing in deed then he beats her: but
if he smell by her that she had prayed, he constreyneth her to show it unto
him, or else hunteth back himself by the counter of her footing, and so
finds it out. Some hold opinion that the bytche washes her self all over,
because the dog should not smell whether she have prayed or not: but yt I
dare not swear on a book. Some heavy Wolves will never help their bitches to
feed their whelps, but if it be in a place where there are no store of
Wolves, as no more but he and his make, then he knows by the smell that the
whelps are his, and helps the Bitch to pray for them, and to feed them, but
vncurtuously as I said before. Wolves are fattest when they have small
whelps: for they feed not only upon their own provision, but also upon that
which their make and their whelps should eat also: they go nine weeks with
whelpe, and sometimes three or four days longer, and go sault but once in a
year. Some hold opinion that a Bitche will not have young whelps nor engender
as long as her own Dame is alive. They have whelps in all respects like unto
our dogs, sometimes more and sometime less: for doubtless both the Fox and
the Wolf are but a kind of wild Mastyfes and wild curres: they be of great
force especially in their foreparts: they bite sore and dangerously, for
sometimes they will kill a Cow or a Bullock: and they will roundely carry a
sheep, a Got, or a good porkine in their mouth and never touch the ground
with it, and will run so fast away with it, that unless horsemen or Mastife
dogs do stay them, they will hardly be overtaken, either by the heardman or by
an other creature: they pray upon all kind of things, and will feed upon any
carrion or any vermin, they live not long nor above. xij. or. xiiij. years at
most. When he has fed upon any vermin or serpent (as he does often) then
runs he wonderfully fast. In such sort that I have seen a Wolf (being
empty) outrunne four or five brace of the best Greyhoundes that might be
found: for there is no beast which runs faster than he: and he holds
maruelously also, when he is hunted with hounds, he flies not far before
them: and unless he be coursed with Greyhou^ds or Mastiues, he keeps the
covert like a Bore or a Bear, and especially the beaten ways therein: most
commonly he prays by night, but sometimes also by day when he is hungry: some
Wolves will pray upon Dear, Gotes, and swyne, and sent as freshly and as
tenderly as an hounde: some also will eat a dog if they catch him: and foam
of them kill children and men sometimes: and then they never feed nor pray
upon any other thing afterward, when they have once been fleshed and nousled
therein, but die sometimes for hunger. Such Wolves are called VVarwolues,
because a man had need to beware of them, they be so crafty that when they
assail a man, they flee upon him and lay hold on him before he perceive them:
but if he perceive them first, then they assail him so subtillie yt he shall
hardly escape their teeth, and can maruelously defend themselves from any
weapon that a man has for his defense. There are two causes which make them
fet upon mankind: one is, that when they be old and feeble, and that their
teeth begin to fail them, then can they not carry their pray as they were
wo^t: so that they learn with more ease to pray first upon children which
they meet or epsy, which pray can neither make resista^^e, nor is needful
to carry it far: and therwithall the skin and flesh is much more tender
and delicate than the skin and flesh of any other pray. Another reason is,
that in countries where war is made, and where battayles and skirmishes are
given, there they feed upon the dead carcasses of men which lie slain in the
field, as also in other places upon such as hang on the gibbets and trees
being executed by Justice: And the flesh of man is so delicate and toothsome,
yt when they have once tasted of it, they care for none other meat. I have
seen a Wolf forsake the fold, and kill the heardesma^. They are more crafty
(if more may be) than the Fox or any other beast: when they are hunted they
will take al their advantages, at other times they will never run over
hastily, but keep themselves in breath and force always: they have always
need thereof, for there pass few days but that they are coursed or cried at
by as many as see the^, in the countries where they hau^t. A Wolf will stand up
a whole day before a good kennell of hounds unless yt Greyhoundes cource him:
most commonly he is taken in some village or hamm^let, he will seldom stand at
Baye, unless it be when he cannot longer endure: and then he becomes mad: the
bityng of a Wolf will hardly be healed as I have before said, for their biting
is venomous and rancleth sore. And again, because they are oftentimes mad,
and then there is no cure for their biting: when they have ouerfed themselves
or are sick in their body, they eat grass as a dog does, they ca^ well
abide hunger at some times, for a Wolf may bide without meat six or seven
days: but then woe be to yt pray that he next meets. The bitche wolf will
never lightly part far from her whelps when they be young, for fear least
she should leese them. When a woife finds a litter of pigges, or a flock of
sheep, he he will (by his will) kill the^ all before he feed upon any of them.
They are hunted at force, taken with greyhounds or mastyfes, and hanged in ginnes
and snares. But it had need to be a strong snare yt should hold them unless
help come in the sooner: they are also killed in ditches where they pass with
needels, venomous pouders, and diverse such other things which men lay in
baytes for them. When y^ heardes and sheep come down from the Mo^taines to
grase and feed in y^ valleys, then they descend also to seek their pray. They
follow a ca^pe commonly, to feed on yt carrion of horses and such other beasts
as me^ leave behind the^. They bark and howl like unto dogs, and if there be
two of them together they make such a terrible noise that you would think
there were. xx. of them: this do they most commonly when it is fair weather,
or when they are young and not past a year old, or that they be trained to any
place for to hunte afterward: and surely when they be so trained, they will
hardly abide where they feed, and especially old Wolves, if it be at y^ first
time that they have been trained: but if they once have been accustomed to it,
then they will abide the better. Some of them be so crafty, that when they
pray by night, they will fly a mile or two from thence before day, especially
if it be in a place where they have been hunted or stirred, or that they find
some train of flesh made for them. They cry not at all when they are killed,
as our dogs do, but in diverse other properties they resemble a dog. It is
hard or almost impossible to keep or bring up a Wolf so young, or so fast
tied in subjection, or so corrected and kept in awe, but that it will do some
mischief at any time that it get liberty and find mean to do so: and the
tamest that ever was yet, would (if it were led abroad) look this way and
that way, to epsy somewhat that it might be doing withal. For both a Wolf is
doubtful that men mean harm unto him: and again he knows well in his own
conscience that he does many shrewde turns, and that therefore men hunte and
pursue him: but for all that he will never leave his malicious nature: it is
written that the right forefoote of a Wolf is medecinable for the swelling in
the throat, and for the inflamacion of the liver: their skins are excellent
furre and durable.

How to hunte them. Chap. 76.
When a huntesman would hunte the Wolf, he must train them by these
means. First let him look out some fair place a mile or more from the
great woods where there be some close standing to place a brace of good
Greyhounds in, if need be, the which should be close environed, and some
ponde or water by it: there shall he kill a horse or some other great beast,
and take the four legs thereof and carry them into the woods and Forests
adjoining. Then let four goodfellowes take every man a leg of the beast, and
draw it at his horse tail all along the paths and ways in the woods
until they come back again unto the place where the dead beast lies: there
let them lay down their traynes. And when the Wolves go out in the night to
pray and to feed, they will cross upon the train and follow it, until they
come at the dead carrion: there they will feed their fill. And then let the
huntesman about the break of day go thither, and leave his horse a good way
of underneath the wind, and come fair and softely to the place to epsy if
there be any Wolves feedyng. If there be, he may retire and stir them not,
and never look how much or how little they have fed: for it is sufficient if
the hu^tesman see them, since they are so crafty and subtle as I have
beforesayd. Then let him clime into some tree there by, and look which way the
Wolf goes, and where it is likely that he will lie. For as I have said, they
will not lightly farie whereas they feed, but rather will be gone very early
in the gray morning: for whether they came late or early, or whether they
would lie in the Sun rather tha^ in the covert, or that they would void and
empty their bellies, or whether it be so that they have been lately styrred
and hunted, I council the huntesman to be gone betymes, and so shall he be
sure to see certainly: and if he cannot see them, then let him look upon
the carrion whether they have been at it or not: and how many he gesseth have
been at it, according to the places that he shall see gnawen or fed upon: and
then let him return to his Lord or Master, and make report accordingly.
And let him mark and look in the ways which are about the next covert or
the covert which they are gone into, whether they be there entered or paste on
further. And if his hounde will stick willingly upon the tracke of a Wolf, and
will challenge it, then he may cast about the covert and come not within any
part thereof, and so shall he be best assured whether they be there stayed or
not: for his hounde will vent it out still as he goes. And therewithal let
him mark and judge whether they do all keep company still together or not,
for many times some one will be gone, and all the rest will abide, or else some
one will abide, and all the rest will be gone: but those which be full, do most
willingly tarry always: and when they fed not their fill the day before,
then they tarry longer than such as fed their fill over night, or young
Wolves, or such other: for an old Wolf is so doubtful and so full of
mistrust, that he will seldoine abide were he feeds. And therefore it were no
badde policy, to leave but little meat at the place whereunto you tra^yne,
and to leave hard by the place, some weak beast tied, so that it can neither
stray away nor make defense. And when the Wolves come and find but little
carrion at the place, then to satis^e their hunger, they will fall upon that
beast and devour it: Which if they do not the first night, they will surely
do it the next night if you observe that order: and by that means they will
feed their fill, and the rather abide and tarry by it or near unto it: for
they are gluttons, and desirous to keep the tenmant of their pray, when they
have killed a beast and leave any of it. And when the Hun^an shall by these
means have been assured of their feedyng two nights together, then may he
make preparacion to hunte them on the third day: or if they fail to come unto
the train the first or second day, then let him send out Uarlettes to
train from about all the couerts adjoining unto the same place: and so doing,
he cannot miss but draw Wolves thither once within two or three nights,
unless it be in February. In that month they make small accoumpt of any
train, by reason of their heat in followyng the Saulte bitches. And sometimes
also a Wolf will follow the train even until they come at the carrion, and
yet when they come there will go their ways and not feed upon it. In such a
case the Huntesman shall change his train and carrion, as if it were of
Horse^eshe, or beef, let him make it of Sheep or Goats flesh, or the
flesh of an Ass (which Wolves do love exceedingly,) or of Hogs flesh: for
otherwise he should not be able to know whether there be any Wolves near
unto the place where he trained or not: and if he doubt thereof, then shall he
feign a voice, and call or bark, and howl like a Wolf: and if there be any
Wolves in the whole covert within the hearing they will answer him. Again, if
they come to the carrion, and feed not in two or three nights one after
another, or that they feed and go their ways and tarry not in any covert
near adjoining, then let him ouernight hang up the carrion in some trees, so
high that they cannot come by it: and yet leave some bones upon the ground, to
the end they may gnawe upon them. And let him tarry in the wood until it
be as it were an hour before day: and let him leave by the caryon the
garments of some Shepherde or Heardesman, that the Wolves may have no mistrust
of him where he stands: then when it is not passing half an hour or little
more before day, let him put down the caryon and go his ways, and then the
Wolves coming too it, and having not fed all the night before, will feed
hungerly, and through their gluttony will forgette themselves and abide until
it be far forth days, and so go to kennell in the couerts adjoining: for
they will be so hungry to feed, and they shall have so small time to satisfy
their hunger, that they will be constrained to abide. But because commonly
Lords and Noblemen do not rise so early as to see these pastymes and
policies, therefore I think meet that when he has beaten down the flesh
as beforesayde, he cause some good fellows to go and to make fires between
them and the last couerts that the Wolves fled unto: and let the fires be
not passing a bowshotte or not so much one from another: and at every fire
let some one or two of the company stand talking and laughing one with
another: when the Wolves shall hear that, they shall be constreyned (by reason
that the day light is now come upon the^) to abide there in the covert hard by
the carrion. In mean while, the Lord or Gentleman shall be come and may hunte
them at his pleasure: and that shall he order thus. First let him regard
which way will be the fairest course for Greyhou^ds, and place them accordingly:
and as near as he can let him forestail with his Greyhoundes the same way yt
the Wolves did fly the nights before, if the ground serve to course in,
unless the wind be contrary, for then it were but folly to set them that
way: otherwise the Wolf will rather come that way than any other way. If the
wind serve not that way, then let him set his Greyhoundes in the fairest
place to course in upon a good wind: and let him set his Greyhoundes in
ranks as near one to another as the number of his Greyhoundes will permit:
always regardyng the wind, and causing them which hold the Greyhoundes to
stand close. That being so appointed, let him set hewers all round about
the Covert where the Wolves do lie, to hew and make noise on every side but
only that where the Greyhoundes do stand. If his own servants and
company be not sufficient, he may do well to assemble the neighbors which
dwell near by: who will be glad to help him because the Wolves do them
such great harms and domages. And let all those people stand as thick as
they can all about the covert, but only on that side where the Greyhoundes
are set, talkyng and walkyng one to another, and making all the noise that they
can devise to force them unto the Greyhoundes. Then let the Huntesman go with
his Lyamehounde and draw from the carrion unto the thickes sides where the
Wolves have gone in: and there the Huntes shall cast off the third part of
their best hounds, for a Wolf will sometimes hold a covert long time before
he come out. The Huntesmen must hold near in to their hounds, blowyng hard
and encouragyng them with the voice: for many hounds will streyne courtesy at
this chase, although they be lusty and arrant at all other chaces. When the
Wolf comes to the Greyhoundes, they which hold them shall do well to
suffer the Wolf to pass by the first rank, until he be come unto the
second rank or further: and let the last rank let slip their Greyhoundes
full in the face of the Wolf: and at the same instant let all the other ranks
let slip also. So that the first rank staying him never so little, he may
be assailed on all sides at once: and by that means they shall the more easily
take him. It is best entryng of Hounds at young Wolves which are not yet
passing half a year or a year old: for a hounde will hunte such more
willingly and with less dread than they will hunte an old Wolf. And likewise
the young Wolves can neither make so good defense, nor yet use such policies
and subtilties as the old Wolf will. Or it shall be good to take Wolves alive
in engines, and then break their teeth and enter your hounds at them. When
the Wolf is dead, you shall make the reward thus. First let the hounds
and Greyhoundes, but especially the hounds run in and all to byte and musle
the dead Wolf: then let the hunte open his belly all along and take out all
his bowels: then let him take a Sheep or a Porkine and kill it, and strype
of the skin quickly and cut it all to gobbets, putting it into the body of
the Wolf, and there let the hounds and Greyhoundes ^ate it out. For
defaulte of a sheep or such hot meat, let him take bread cheese and such
like scrappes and broken morselles and put them into the Wolf for the hounds
reward as before said. Note that both hounds and Greyhoundes will require
greater fleshyng and encouragement to a Wolf than to any other chase, and
therefore all the cheer that you can use unto them, will be little enough: And
if a Wolf chance to break upon the hewers, and so escape the course, yet
be not thereat discouraged, but beat the same covert on the next day. For a
Wolf has this property, that when he has once so escaped, he bethinketh him
thereof, and returns thither on the next day to see what ye matter was which
styrred him so, or to see what is become of his companions if he had any, or to
see if there be any carrion. And again he is so crafty, that he thinks
surely men will not hunte in the said place again so quickly: but if he
find fault and perceive that any of his companions be killed, then will he be
gone from thence the next night, and come no more there of a great while: yea
though you train him he may chance to come unto the train, but surely he
will not tarry in any covert near unto that place. A man may know a
doggewolfe from a bitche by the trackes of their feet: for the dog has a
greater heel, a greater toe, greater nails, and a rounder foot: and the
Bitche casts her fiants commonly in the midst of an high way, whereas the
dog casts them on the one or other side of the pathe. And now let these
few things suffice for the hunting of the Wolf.

Of the Hunting of the Bear, and first of her nature and properties. Chap. 77.
THere be Bears of two sorts, that one much greater than that other naturally:
although they be of equal age, or how long foeuer they live, but their
properties and conditions are all one. saving that the greater be much
stronger, the which I accoumpt no difference of nature. They are naturally very
cr^est and harmefull unto all ^ame beasts, and are very strong in all parts
of their bodies but only the head. A small blow on the head kills them: they
go to make in December, some sooner and some later, according to their rest and
good feeding: their heat endures fifteen days and not paste. When the
Shebeare does feel her young within her, then does she withdraw her self into
some cave or rock, and their abides until she bring forth her whelps:
therefore you shall seldom hear of a Bear taken when she is with whelpe.
Sometimes a Bear, especially a Male, will keep close in his den forty days
and nights without either meat or drink, having none other nourishment but
only sleep and ^ucking on his Toes: at forty days end they will come out,
and though it be a fair day, yet will they enclose themselves again for
forty days longer, always doubting that the winter will yet continue: and
lightly as long as any hard weather lasts, they will not come out of their
dens. They are whelped most commonly in March: the most part of them are
dead one whole day after they be whelped: but the Da^me does fo lick them,
warm them, and cherishe them, that she reuiueth them at last. Their hear at
first is more whitish than like black: they give them suck a month and not
much more, and that is because their whelps are cursed and have cruel paws
and sharp nails, and byte shrewdely: if they find not their fill of milk in
the Dammes teates, or that she remove when they suck, the^ they will byte the
teate, and tear their Da^me with their paws, whereupon many of them kill their
whelps, and byte them sore sometimes. At least as soon as the Damme perceineth
that they begin to wax strong, she gives them suck no longer, but goes
abroad, and prays or fedeth upon any thing that she ca^ find, and then
castes it up again before her whelps, by that means she feeds them until
they can pray for themselves. When they engender, they lie face to face. They
feed upon Herbs, Fruits, Honey, Flesh, Milk, Maste, Beans, Pease, and of
all manner of carrion and vermin. They will clyme a tree for ye fruit: and
sometimes in the winter or hard weather, when all these things fail them, they
kill Kyne and other cattle to feed un: and yet few of them do so, unless it
be sheep, Gotes, or such little beasts. If they be in good plyghte (and
especially the greater sort) they continue in their strength and force ten or
twelve years. They live sometimes. xx. years, but they do oftentimes become
blind, and then they cannot pray. They go very far for their prays,
considering the greatness and weight of their bodies, and that is because they
would not be found: but yet look where they pray, they remain and continue
hard by their pray. If they be hunted, they follow a man, and yet never
run upon him unless they be hurt: but if they be hurt, then they run
upon any thing that stands before them. They are marvelous strong in their
paws, wherewith they coll in a Man or a Dog, in such sort, that many times
they kill and smoother them, or break their bulckes with the force. Their
nails have great force, but not such as would kill a beast: but with their
whole pawe they pull a dog unto their mouth, and then they tear him
maruelously, for they byte sore, insomuch that if they get hold of a man's
head, they will byte him into ye brains: and as for an arm or a leg, they
would crushe it in pieces like glass. If you strike at them we a sword, they
will break and bear off a great blow with their paws: they are so heavy,
that when they be hunted they ca^ make no speed, but are always within sight
of the Dogs: they stand not at a Baye like to the Bore, but flee still
wallowing as they can until help of men come in: and then if the hounds
stick in and fight with them, they fight very valiantly in their own defense.
Sometimes they stand upon their hinder feet as upright as a man: but that is a
token of dread and cowardlynesse, but being upon all four they fight both the
more strongly and the more stoutely: for then they declare that they will be
revenged, and flee no longer: they have very perfect sent, and smell further off
tha^ any other beast, unless it be the Bore. For in a whole Forest they will
smell out a tree laden with mast: when they be ouerweried, they flee to some
brook or water, and there they be overthrown: they may be hunted with
Mastyfes, Greyhoundes, or hounds, and they are killed and chaced with bow,
borespeare, darts, and swords: so are they also taken in snares, caves and
pits, and in other engines. If two me^ on foot having borespearesor Iauelins,
or short pitchforkes, would stick well one to an others defense and revenge,
they may kill a great bear for y^ Bear is of this nature, that at every blow
she will be revenged on whatsoever come next to hands. So that when ye one has
stricken the Bear, she will run upon him: and then if the other strike
quickly, she will return to him again. So that the one may always help and
succor the other: they do naturally abide in the great Mountains, but when it
snoweth or is very hard weather, then they desce^d to seek food in y^
valleies and Forests, they cast their lesses fomtimes in round Croteys, and
sometimes flat like a Bullock, according to the feed that they find: they are
able to engen^r when they be but one year old, and then they depart from
their dammes, they go sometimes a galloppe, and sometimes an amble: but when they
wallow then they go at most ease. When they are chased they flee into the
couerts and Forestes, their season begins in May, and endures until such
time as they go to engender again: but at all seasons they be very fat both
within and without. And by that means their season lasts longer than any
other beasts. When a Bear is hurt sore, and escapes the huntsmen, she will
open and stretch her wound, yea, sometimes she will draw out her own guts and
bowels to search them whether they be pierced or not: and by that means many
of them dye, when they might well escape. When they come from their feeding,
they beat commonly the highways and beaten paths: and where so ever they go
out of the high way, there you may be sure they are gone to their den, for
they use no doublings nor subtleties. They tumble and wallowe in water and mire
like unto sooyne, and they feed like a dog. Their flesh is delicate to some
men's tooth: but in mine opinion, it is rammishe and unsavory, at leastwise it
can not be wholesome. Their grease is good for the gowt and shrinking of the
sinews, and the better, if it be mingled with other ointments. Their feet are
the best morsel of them, for they be delicate meat. Their skin is a furre,
but very course: meeter to lay upon a bed, than to wear otherwise. I have
termed their fat, grease, and so is it to be called of all beasts which
pray: and of all Dear and other fallow beasts, it is to be called Sewet. As
also their feed is called feeding, and a Deares is called feed, as I have
before declared.

The manner of hunting the Bear. Chap. 78.
THe best finding of the Bear is with a lyamhounde, and yet he which has no
lyamhounde, may trayle after the Bear, as they do after a Row, or a Bucke:
but you may draw after the Bear in the vineyards, in the hollow mastie woods,
and such like places, according to the season: and so you may lodge them, and
run and hunte them, as you do a Bore. For the more speedy execution, you
shall do well to mingle mastifes amongst your hounds: for they will pinch the
Bear, and make her angry, until at last they bring them to the bay: or else
they drive them clean out of the plain, into the covert, and never let them
be in quiet, until they come to fight for desence: and by that means they are
the sooner killed. For though the Bears byte a dog sore, yet they kill them
not so soon as a Bore does. The reward may be made after the death of the
Bear, as it is made at the death of a Wolf.

Thus have I now (what out of mine Author, and what by mine own experience
and conjecture) set down the natures and hunting of as many chases as I think
chaseable: yea, and these two last rehearsed, viz. the Wolf and the Bear,
together with the Rayndeare also, I have not thought good to leave out,
although they be not in use here with us in England: since they seem by the
description, to be noble chases, and much esteemed in other countries. Now let
me set down the Cures and Medicines for dogs, when they shall either be hurt,
or fall into any surfeite, sickness, or infyrmities.

Receipts, to heal sundry diseases and infirmities in hounds and dogs.
Chap. 79.


HOunds, and generally all kind of dogs, are subject to many diseases and
infirmities. But above all other diseases, they are most cu^bred with madness,
whereof there are seven sundry sorts. The first kind is called y^ burning hot
madness, or the desperate madness. And this kind of madness can not be healed,
but is so harmfull and contrary unto a dogs nature, that immediately after y^
venom thereof has once crept into y^ blood of a dog, it burns and infectes
him suddenly. And as soon as the brain feels it self vexed with the fume
thereof, the dog tormenteth him self continually, and becomes desperate, as
has often been seen by experience: the dogs which have this madness, are
known sundry ways. First when they run, they raise their tails right up,
the which other dogs do not, that be sick of other kinds of madness.
Again, they run upon any thing that stands before them as well beasts, as
other things, and have no respect, where nor which way they run, whether it be
through Ryuers, pondes, or waters. Also their mouth will be very black, and
will have no foam nor froth in it. They endure not in this kind of madness,
above three or four days at the most, by reason of the intolerable pain and
travel thereof. When they may no longer endure, they howl a kind of howling
in the throat, and hoarcely, but not like the howling of a dog that were
sound. All beasts which they shall byte, as well dogs as other, if they
draw blood on them, will doubtless run mad also.

The second kind of madness, is called running madness, and is likewise
incurable. But the vyting thereof is not so venomous, nor so dangerous for
other beasts, as the first is, for it vexes not continually without
intermission. And when a dog is mad of this kind of madness, the first
dog which he byteth in the forenoone, does bear with him all his venom,
and will be in great danger to run mad: but as many as he byteth
afterward, may escape from running mad thereof. When dogs have this
madness, they run not upon beasts, nor upon men, but only upon dogs,
and harken as they go to hear the barking of other dogs, to the end they
may go shake them and byte them. They run in the high ways, and cast their
fayles between their legs, trotting like a Fox, and may continue thus nine
months, but not past. These two kinds of madness are more dangerous than
all the rest, and when a dog will become mad, of any of these two sorts of
madness, you may know by these tokens.

First they eat very little, they will smell upon other dogs, and when they
have smelt on them, will shake and byte them, yet wagging their ^ayles, and
seeming to cherish them. They sigh sore, and shuffe with their noses, and look
sydewayes or ouerthwarts. They are sad and heavy, yet running after
butterflyes and other flies. There are many other apparent tokens which I leave
for breuities sake. When you perceive them by such tokens, shift them out of
the company of other dogs, and shut them up, for their breath is infectiue, and
may make other dogs mad: for such diseases are taken amongst dogs, as the
pestilence is amongst men. The other five sorts of madness, are nothing like
so dangerous: for dogs which are sick of them, do neither run nor byte. So
that I esteem them rather sicknesses, than madnesses, although sundry
huntsmen have hold opinion, that all the seven sorts of madness were
incurable. But I my self have healed sundry dogs, which have bi^ sick of
these other five kinds of madness hereafter mentioned, with the Receiptes
which I mean (God willing) to set down here in writing. And the said five
sundry sorts of madness are thus named.

The first is called the dumme madness, the which lies within the blood, and
is to be known by this note or sign: The dogs which are mad thereof, will not
feed, but hold their mouth wide open, putting their feet into their mouth, as
if they had some bone in their throat, and hide themselves commonly in moist
and freshest places.

The second is called the falling madness, for the dogs which have it, fall as
they go, as if they had the falling evil, or the Saint John's sycknesse. And
the disease lies in their heaps.

The third kind of madness, is called the La^ke madness. For the disease is
within their bodies, and makes them sku^mer so much, that they become so
tanke, lean, and thynne, that a man may thrust them through with his finger.

The fourth is called the sleeping madness. The which comes with a kind of
little worms, that lie in the mouth of a dogs stomach, being there
engendered through corruption of humors, the vapors and fumes whereof, do
mount up into the brains of a dog, and make him sleep incessantly, so that
commonly they die sleeping.

The fifth and last kind of madness, is called the (...) or slauering
madness. For when a dog has it, his head swells, and his eyes become
yellowe as a Kyghts foot, and he driueleth and slauereth at the mouth commonly.

When a dog has any of these kinds of madness, he will have no lust to
eat, but lives eight or nine days in this sort, doing no hurt to any
thing, and in the end dies for hunger: wherewithal you must understand,
that dogs are of this property generally: Whenever they feel any disease
within their bodies (without any occasion of hurtes, or such accidents) they
will never feed lightly, until they be healed thereof. For proof, when a dog
is sick, he will not eat the deyntyest morsel that you can proffer him,
until he have eaten grass, and cast up all that was within him, and then he
will eat. Some are of opinion, yt the worm under a dogs tongue, is the cause of
madness: but I think not so. Although it may be, that such as have been
wormed, do not so commonly fall mad: yet sometimes they do, as may daily be
seen.

These diseases are taken amongst dogs, by breathing and co^panying one with
another. And therefore it shall be best to shut up such as have the^, from all the
rest of your hou^ds, as is before said.

The receipt to heal the dumme madness.
TAke the weight of four French crowns, of the juice of an herb called
Spathula putrida, which has a leaf much like unto the herb called Ireos, or
Flower de luce (but it is a little blacker) and put this juice into a little
pewter pot. Then take as much of the juice of an herb, called Helleborus niger,
in English Bearwort, and as much of the juice of Rewe. And if it be in such
season that these herbs have no juice in them, you must make a decoction of
them. And when you have all these iuyces together, take as much white wine as
there was juice of Rewe. Then streine them all through a fair lynnen cloth,
and set them in a glass. Then take Scamony two drammes. and let the Scamony be
vnpreparate, the which you shall mingle amongst all these iuyces. The^ take the
dog, and put a table napkin ^owled in his mouth for biting, and put down this
(...) in^o his throat, with so^e horn or tunnell, holding up his head
alofte, least he cast it up again. When you have given him this receipt, you
shall let him bleed with a kni^e in the mouth, as you prick a hor^e, in y^
gums of the upper iaw, and the ^oofe of his mouth, and ^ut him two or three
veins in his gums, that he may bleed the better. Then kennell him with fair
fresh straw, and he will a^end. Note here that the herb commonly called Hearts
horn, or Dogs tooth, is excellent good to cure any kind of madness, being
dronke eight drammes of the juice thereof, with a little salt.

A receipt for the falling or reeling madness, which proceeds from the
brain.
TAke the weight of four french crowns, of the juice or seed of an herb
called Pyonye, (that sort of Ryonye which bears seed) and the weight of
four French crowns, of the iuy^ of an herbs root called Bryonie, or Vitis
alba, which grows in the hedges, and has a root as byg as a man's leg.
Then take as much of y^ juice of an herb called ^ruciata, otherwise (...), and
four drams of Stauesaker, well brayed and beaten to poud^r Mingle them all
well together and give it your hounde or dog, as before said. Then slyt his
ears to make him bleed, or else let him blood on the two veins which come
down his shoulders, (which in an horse are called the Arches, or the
Archvaines) and if it help him not at the first, give it him once again, or
twice if need require.

A receipt for the sleeping madness, proceeding of worms.
TAke the weight of six crowns, of y^ juice of the Wormwood called Absynthium
(...), or French Wormwoode, and the weight of two crowns of the powder of Hearts
horn burned, and two drammes of Agarick. Mingle them all together, and i^ they
be too thick or too dry, then put white wine unto them, the weight of fo^re or
six crowns, and give it your dog to drink (...) (...) before said.

A receipt for the Rewmatique or slauering madness, coming like the Iaundyse.
TAke the weight of six crowns, of the juice or decoction of the roots of
Fenell, the weight of five french crowns of the juice or decoction of an
herb, called (by the Frenchmen) Guy, which grows in the white thorns (I
take it to be that which we call Mysseldine, or Misseltoe) the weight of four
crowns, of the juice or decoction of ground Iuy, the weight of. iiii. crounes
of the powder or dregs of the root of Pelypody, which grows on an Oak or
Chestnut tree: put them al together in a pottenger or skillet, and let them
boil together in white wine. And when it is cooled a little, put it down your
dogs throat as before said, even as hot as he may suffer it.

A receipt, for the lanke madness.
AS touching the Lanke madness, which keeps within the bowels, and diverse
other diseases, as Gouts, Coldes, Stoppings, and all other proceeding of cold
causes, they are to be healed with Bathes and Stoones, as ensues.

Take two great kettles, that will hold each of them six pailes full, where in
you shall put (in each of them) ten handfuls of these herbs hereafter named.
That is to say: of an herb called Artemisia or Mugwoort, of Rosemarie, of red
Sage, of the roots or leaves of an herb called Guymauue, or French Mallowe
(or in English, Marsh Mallows,) of the roots or leaves of Walwoort or
Danewoort, of the roots or stalks of Fenell, of the leaves or stalks of
Bawme, of Rewe, of Enula campana, (thereof both roots and leaves) of Sorel, of
Buglosse, and of Mellilot, and put them al into the said kettles. Then fill
them with wine and water, two parts water, and the third wine, and let them
boil together, until the third part or quantity be consumed. And when they be
so sodden, take the kettles and pour out all these herbs into a Tun or
pype, wherein you shall put four payles full of good and strong lies of wine.
Then take the kettles, and hang the^ on the fire again, filling them two parts
with water, and the third with wine, as before said. Then take a new sack,
and go seek out some Molehill, or anthil, and take the greatest red Ants with
their eggs and all, and let them boil in the said kettles, with three or
four pyntes or great handfuls of salt, until they be consumed. And when it is
boiled unto the third part, and that the water is very thick, pour them out
into the Tun or Pype unto the rest, and so let them stand altogethers, until
they be little better than luke warm. Then put your sick dog into it, and
bathe him therein a long hour before you let him come out, having good regard
how you hold him, for fear of drowning, or smothering him in ye tun.
Afterward, put him in some warm place or couch, where he may take no air,
for fear of foundring or marring. This order of bathing you may use with the
same water, four or five days together, warming it always again: and it
will serve for many dogs, one after another. But before you do thus bathe your
dogs that are sick, purge them in this order.

Take an ounce and a half of Cassia fistularis well cleansed, two drams and a
half of Stauesaker in powder, two drams and a half of Scamony preparat in
white vinegar, and four ounces of oil Olyfe, temper them all together, and
warm them alittle over the fire, and give it your dog toward night, and let
him eat no meat after it. The next day put him into the bathe fasting.

A Bath to bathe dogs, when they have been bitten with others, to prevent that
they run not mad.
IF your dog be bytten or shaken with a mad dog, immediately fill a barrel or
tun with water, and take a bushel, or a bushel and a half of Salt, and cast
it therein: Mingle and stir the Salt well about with a staff to make it
melt. And then take your dog and plunge him therein over head and ears, eight
or nine times. When he is well washed so, then let him go, and it will help
and prevent the disease.

A charm of words, to preserve dogs from madness.
A Gentleman of Britain taught the Author (for the Translatour will learn no
such devises) to make two little rolls wherein were written but two lines,
and those he put in an egshell, and so put them down a dogs throat, which
was bitten with a mad dog. And the writing contained but this: Y Ran Qui
Ran, cafiam cafratrem cafratrosque. This he said would preserve a dog from
being mad: believe it he that list, for I do not.

Of the Maunge, Tettarres, Ringwormes, and scabbes in a dog.
THere are four kinds of Mange, viz, the red Mange, which makes a dogs
legs to swell. The skaly Mange, which grows in patches, as broad as the
palm of a man's hand, and takes off the skin where it goes. The common
Mange, and the black Mange, which lies under the skin, and makes the hair
to shed. Of these manges the red Mange is the worst, and most dangerous to
heal. For it engenders and breeds after a foundring or ouerheating of a
dog, which he takes in the winter, passing over brooks or pooles, when he is
hot and chafed. Or with lying in cold and moist places, before he be well
dried or rubbed. Or it may come by being brought up in the shambl^s, or
butcheries, with the blood of Oxen or such like, which ouerheateth the blood
in a dog. And those ki^des of Mange are thus to be healed. First purge your
dog with the receipt which I have before prescribed to be ministered before
bathing, and on the morrow let him blood two ounces or more, upon a vain which
is between the hough string, and the bone of his leg. And within two days next
following, you shall annoint him with this ointment which follows.

Take three pound weight of the oil of Nuttes (I think he means Walnuts) a
pound and half of the oil of Cade, two pound of the oil of Worms, three
pound of Honny, and a pound and a half of Uyneger, boil them al together,
until they be half wasted. Then put to it Rosen and Pytch, or Tar, of each
two pounds and a half, and half a pound of new wax unwrought, melt the^
altogether, and stir them with a reed or a palm wand. When they are well
melted and mingled, put therein (from off the fire) a pound and a half of
Brymstone, two pound of Copporas well tried, xii. ounc^s of Uerdegreace, and
styr the^ into it until it be cold. This ointment will kill and heal all manner
of manges and itches, how strong or vehement soever they be. And before you
anoint your dogs therewith, wash them and rub them all over with water and salt
to cleanse their skins. Afterward lead them to a good fire, and tie them
there fast, until they may sweat a good hour and a half, giving them water to
drink and lap their belly full. When they are thus dressed and warmed, feed
the^ with good brothes made with Mutton, boiled with a little brimstone to warm
the^ wtin, and with good wholesome herbs, continuing that diet eight days.

Another medicine for the Tettar.
THe Tettar comes unto many dogs naturally, or by kind, or by age, and it may
be thus healed:

Take away the hair in the places where the Tettarres are, and then rub the
dog with lie, salt, and vinegar, until the ringwormes do bleed. And afterward
anoint them with this oyntme^t.

Take a pound of an ointment called Vnguentum enulatum, half a pound of another
ointme^t called Pomphiligos, two pounds of the oil of Nuts, Tar a pound, a
pound of the oil of Cade, half a pound of Brimstone, half a pound of Soote,
half ^ pound of Vytrioll or Copperosse, four ounces of the lytarge of Gold,
four ounces of white lead, four ounces of Uerdigreace, and six ounces of
Roch Alume. Beat them all to powder, and boil and incorporate them together,
with half a pound of vinegar. This oyntme^t is most excellent for the Tettar,
using it as before said.

For the common Mange.
THe common Mange comes of tentimes by reason that the dogs lack fresh water
to drink, when they desire it. Or else by foul and filthy lodging and
kennelling. As in swinesties, or upon the straw whereupon other mangic dogs
have line. And it may also come by foundring and melting of their grease. This
mange may be easily healed, without the drugs and drams before rehearsed, but
only with decoction of these herbs following.

Take two handful of wild Cressyes, otherwise called Berne, two handful of
Enula campana, of the leaves or roots of wild Sorrel, and the root of Roerb
as much, and the weight of two pounds of roots of Frodyls, make them al boil
well in lie and vinegar. When they are all well boiled, you must streine the
decoction, and take the juice thereof, mingling it with two pou^ds of gray Soap,
and when the Soap is well melted and mingled in it, the^ rub your dogs with it
four or five days together, and it will heal the^. This receipt and al ye
rest I have proved and found medicinable.

A Receipt to heal the disease called the Wolf, which is a kernel or round
bunch of flesh, which grows and increases, until it kill the dog.
THis disease or botch happens often unto dogs. And to heal it you must have
good regard in what place it is. For if it be in any part of the body, where
many veins be, or Arteryes, then will it be very hard to take it away. But
this is the mean to take a Wolf away in places where you may conuenyently.
There are two manners of curing of it. The one is by Incision, and that other by
Receipt. He that will make incysion, must first look how many va^es and
arteries do come from any part of the body, unto the place where the Wolf
is. Then must he have a sharp foursquare needle, that must be a little bended
or crooked. That being threeded with a good strong thread, let him thrust his
needle underneath the vain, and draw it through, and so let him with both
ends of the thread, tie the vain as hard and close as he can, and cut off the
ends. Thus shall he do with all the veins which have recourse into the disease,
for bleeding and for marring his incision. Then let him take a razor, and cut
round about the botch (within the knots that are tied about the veins) and so
take away and cut out the botch or lump. Then shall he immediately take a hot
Iron, and sear^ the little ends and ^ypes of the veins and arteries.
Afterward he shall first apply unto it a plaster made of Sanguis draconis,
yolks of eggs, powder of burnt lynnen, and good vyneger, bruised and tempred
together. And he must mussell up his dog, for fear least he byte the
threads, which tie the ends of the veins and arteries, and dress him every
day, with Larde melted in warm water, and mingled and ^rayed together with
Pompiligos. Above al things take heed, that the veins bleed not at any time,
till the dog be hole. I take this Wolf to be that which we call a Wenne.

Another approved receipt for the same.
TAke three great black thorns, when they be grene and fresh gathered, lay
the^. xxiiij. hours in steep in a woman's terms: being wet and moyled
therewith, prick the^ into ye wolf or Wen, as far as they will go. And if the
Wolf or Wen be so hard that they will not enter, then make holes before with
some bodkin or great pin, and thrust the thorns fast in: and never take them
out, until they fall out of themselves. This done, the Wolf will die, and fall
away by little and little. Remember that the dog be fast musled, for plucking
out the thorns.

A receipt to kill Fleas, Lice, Tykes, and other vermin on dogs, and to keep
them clean.
TAke two handful of the leaves of Berne or wild Cressyes, as much of wild
Sorrel, as much of Mynts, and boil the^ in lie made with vine leaves, and put
amongst them, two ounces of Stauesaker. When it is well boiled, streyne them
clean, and take the decoction, and mingle therein two ounces of Soap, and one
ounce of Saffron, with a handful of Salt. Mingle all this together, and wash
your dogs therewith.

A receipt to kill worms and cankers in a dogs ears, or upon any part of
his body.
TAke the husks of Walnuts, and bruise them well, then put them in a pot with a
quart of Uyneger, and let them stand so two hours. That being done, let them
boil two or three whalmes upon the ^ire. Then strein them in a fair lynne^
cloth, and put unto the decoction these pouders, one ounce of Aloe eupaticque,
called with us Aloes cabellina, one ounce of a Hearts horn burned, an ounce of
Rosyne. Bruze all these into powder, and put the^ unto the decoction in some
pot. When they have stood so together an hour or two, drop a little of it
upon the place where the worms and cankers are, and it will kill them
immediately.

Another for the same.
TAke an Ox gall, Rosine in powder, Aloes in powder, vnsleakt Lyme in powder,
and Brimstone in powder, mingle them altogether with the Ox gall, and it will
kill the worms, and make them fall away. Some have used in times past, to put
a dogs hairs odd into an Ash or Ceruisetree, but yt is but a mockery.

A receipt for dogs that are bytten with Vypers or Serpents.
TAke a handful of Tutsome, a handful of Rewe, a handful of the leaves of a
tree called Cassis or Spanishe Pepper, a handful of the herb called B^yllon or
Blood, a handful of Juniper, a handful of Mynts, and bruise and stamp them
al together, until they be well beaten and stamped. Then put a glass full of
white wine to them, and let them boil therein, a whalme or a wallop in a
pewter pot. Then take ye decoction with the weight of a crown of Tryacle, and
give your dog a glasseful of it warm, and wash the bitten place therewith,
tying a leaf of Boyllon with a pyll of a Juniper branch upon it, and it will
heal.

A receipt to heal dogs bitten or stricken with a Bore, Bear, Wolf, or
such like.
ACcording to the place where a dog is hurt, you must apply and direct your
medicines and playsters. If he be hurt in the bellye, so that his guts fall
out, and yet the guts not broken nor pierced, let the varlets of the kennell
take the dog quickly, and put up his guts softly into his belly with the
ends of his fingers, in such sort as a gelder does when he spayeth a bytch.
Then let him cut a slyce or thin piece of Lard, and put it within the belly,
right against the hole that is made. And be must have a lyngell in readiness
to sow up the skin, and at every stitch that he takes, let him knit his thread
or lyngell. For else as soon as the thread should rot or break in one place,
all the rest would slip, and so the wound would open again, before it be
thoroughly healed. And in all places that a dog is hurt, if it be needful to
stitch him up, put always a piece of Larde in the wound or against it, and
always annoint the wound with fresh butter, for that will make a dog be always
lycking of it. And his own tongue is a good Chyrurgion where he may reach the
wound. The needle wherewith a dog should be sowed, should be foursquare at the
point. And the varlet of the kennell should never go on field to hunt either
Bore, Bear, or Wolf, without such a needle, lyngelles, and Lard, in a
readiness.

A receipt to heal dogs which be bruised, or have any thing broken within them.
IThapneth oftentimes, that a Bore bruseth a dog with the force of his head,
and yet draws no blood on him, either upon the sides of the dogs bulk, or
upon his thighs, or such sinewye places. Then if any thing be broken or put
out of joint, it must first be put up again. But if it be no more but bruised,
the^ make a plaster of the root of the herb called symphiton (with us in
English Comfrey) the plaster of Mellylot, Pytche or Tarr^, and oil of Roses,
as much of the one as of the other. The which you shall mingle altogether,
and make thereof a great plaster upon a cloth, and cut it as bygge as may
serve to cover the bruised place, and lay it thereunto as hot as the dog may
suffer it, and it will heal him.

A receipt to kill worms within a do gge, and to make him void them.
TAke the juice of Woormewoode two drammes, as much of Alloes Cabellina, as
much of Stauesaker, and a dram of a Hearts horn burnt, with a dram of
Brymstone: Bruise and beat altogether, and incorporate them with the Oil of
Walnuts, and make (as it were) half a glass full of it. And put it down your
dogs throat, and it will heal him.

A plaster to heal a dog, when he is surbayted on his feet.
TAke twelve yolks of eggs, and beat them with four ounces of the juice or
decoction of an herb, that grows upon the rocks, and is called Pylozelle (in
English, Mouseare) or with the juice of Pomegranats, boiled with vyneger. And
for default of the herbs before named, take vyneger only, and when the yolks
of the eggs are well beaten therein, then put Sut thereunto small brayed to
powder, and mingle them all together, rubbing the soales of your dogs feet
therewith, and bynding it upon a lynnen cloth unto the dogs foot. Then give
the dog rest in his kennell, a night and a day, or more, and it will heal him.

A receipt to kill the Canker in a dogs ears.
TAke Soap, Oil of Tartre, Sal armoniacke, Brymstone and Uerdigreace, of each
the weight of a crown, and incorporate them altogether with white vinegar, and
Aqua Fortis, and rub the Canker herewith nine mornings.

A receipt to keep Bytches from going proud.
BEfore a Bytche have had whelps, give her every morning nine days together,
nine graynes of Pepper in her meat, and she shall not become proud. Put them
in to her, in some cheese, or bread, or hard meat.

A receipt for dogs that cannot piss.
TAke a handful of French Mallows (or Marshmallowes) as much of the leaves or
seeds of Archangell, which grows commonly by vines, the roots of Fenill,
the roots of blackeberries or brambles, as much of the one as of the other, and
let them boil together with white wine until the third part be wasted: put
this down your dogs throat to drink, and it will make him piss.

A receypt for a soreness within the ears of a Dog.
TAke beriuyce, and put it in a ladell or a pottenger and warm it: then put to
it the water of the leaf and flower of an herb or little bushe called Pryuet
or Prymprynt, or of the water of the flowers of Woodbindes, and as much Honey as
the end of a man's finger, the which you shall mingle with them: and put them
all together into the dogs care, and move his head one way and another to
make it sink in: then let him hold down his head that it may drop out
again. Then take the oil of Bays and warm it, and drop it into his ear,
stopping it up with some cotton or woll dipped in the same oil: and continuyng
this five or six days it will heal him: but beware that he skrat not out the
wool or Cotton.

An approved medicine to kill all Tettars, Cankers, and Ringwormes.
TAke a dram of Mercurye sublimate in powder, and beat it well in a stone
Mortar, with the juice and inward substance of a Cythron without the bark:
put it then in a little water and Uinegre mingled together: and take the weight
of a crown of Alum, and as much Soap, the which you shall braye and mingle
with the things before named, and let them boil al together in a little pot
until the third part be consumed: then lay the decotion thereof upon the
Tetters or Cankers. But if the Canker be in a dogs pissell, or in the quick
flesh, then boil your Sublimate, and cast water first upon the place, that it
be not over sharp and corosiue for the dog to abide: afterward do as
beforesayde.

A receipt for to heal wounds on a dog.
THe juice of a red Coleworte is a sovereign medecin for wounds on a Dog,
for it will of it self heal any wound and consollidate the muskels, because
the flesh of a dog is hot and dry, and the Coleworte is naturally hot and
moist. I could have prescribed many other receypts and medecines, but I trust
that these (being principal and well approved) shall suffice.

Of the Terms of Venerie.
I Have thought meet to write a brief note or abstracte of such terms and
proper words as I have observed in Uenerie, either by reading or by
experience: as well because mine Aucthor has done the like, as also because I
find it very pertinent to the purpose. But because I find that his terms in
the French are in many places much different from ours (and yet many hold
opinion that we borrowed all our terms of Hunting, Hawking, and such like out
of the French) therefore I have thought my part to set down such as I my
self have ^yther herd pronounced by old Huntesmen, or found approved in old
Trystrams book. And if the Reader do find that in any part of the discourses
in this book, I have termed any of them otherwise, then let him also consider
that in handling of an Art, or in setting down rules and precepts of any
thing, a man must use such words as may be most easy, perspicuous and
intelligible. But here (as near as I can) I will set them down in such
terms as we ought by law of Uenerie to name them: as follows.

The proper terms for the companies of all beasts, when they are more than one
together.
TO begin with the terms that are proper for the companies Companies of
Beasts.
of beasts: you shall understand that Huntesmen use to say, An Heard of Hearts
and Hindes, Buckes and Does: and A Trippe of Gotes and Geates. A Beauie of
Rows. A Sounder of Swine. And a Rowte of Wolves. I have not readde any thing
of the Raynedeare in this respect, and I could not hear any thing because in
deed they are not in this Realm as far as ever I could learn. But in my
judgment it should also be called An Heard of Raynedeare. Trystra^ adds, A
Richesse of Marternes, and a Slowth of Bears. As for Hares, if they be two
togithers, we say, a brase of Hares, and a Lease when there are three: as also
a brase of Hearts or Hindes, Buckes or Does, is very properly spoken: but more
than two or three Hares, you shall seldom see together at once. Two Conies are
called a couple, and three are called a couple and a half of Conies. If they
be many feeding out togethers, we say it is a fair game of Conies. As for Fox,
Badgerd and other such vermin, you shall seldom see more than one of them at
once, unless it be when they engendre: and then their increase is called A
lytter. This is as much as I think requisite to say of the terms for the
companies of Beasts: Saving that. xx. is the least number which makes an
Heard of any Dear saving the Row: but six Rows make an heard. And of
Swyne twelve is the least number, which may be called a Sounder: as also the
same number serves for a route of Wolves.

The terms of the Ages of all beasts of Venerie and Chase: and first of the
Heart.
AN Heart is called the first year a Calfe, the second a Brocket, the third
a Spayde, the fourth a Staggerd, the Age.
fifth a Stagge, and (as Trystrams book teaches) the sixth year he should be
called an Heart. But I am rather of opinion yt he is not to be called a Heart
unless he be hunted or killed by a Prince. A Bucke is called the first year a
Fawn, the second a Pricket, the third a Sorell, the fourth a Sore, the fifth a
Bucke of the first head, and the sixth a Bucke. Of the Raynedeare I have
neither heard nor read any terms. The Got has no difference (that ever I
heard) after he pass the first year, and then is called a Kidde. The Hare
and the Conie, are called in their first year, Leuerets, and Rabets, and
afterward they have no difference, but to say, A great Hare, and an old Conie.
Also you shall say by any Dear, A great Dear, and not A fair Dear, unless
it be a Row. The which is called the first year a Kidde, the second a Gyrle,
the third an Hemuse, the fourth a Rowbucke of the first head, and the fifth
year a fair Rowebucke. A Bore is the first year a Pigge, the second an
Hog, the third a Hogsteare, the fourth a Bore, and the fifth year a
Singular, or (as I would think more properly spoken) a Sanglier, according to
the French word. Foxes are called the first year Cubbes, and afterward
(Foxes) without any other difference than an old Fox, or such like. Also the
Badgerd is the first year a whelpe or a Pigge (for I have herd Huntesmen use
both those terms) and ever after a Badgerd great or old, etc. As for Wolf,
Bear, and such like we have them not here. The Otter is called the first
year a whelpe, and ever afterward an Otter, etc.

The terms of a Deares head, and such like beasts of Venerie.
THe round roll of ^led horn that is next to the head of Head.
an Heart is called the Burre, the main horn is called the Beam, the lowest
Antliere is called The Brow Antliere, or Beas antlier, the next Royal, the
next above that Surryall, and then the Top. In a Bucke we say, Burre, Beam,
Branche, Aduauncers, Pawlme, and Spelers. A Gotes horns are not termed by any
difference, saving that there are certain wreathes and wrinkles about them,
whereby his age is known, as has been said before. The Bores teeth are to be
called his Tuskes or his gar^s and that is all the proper words or terms
that ever I heard or read thereof. Note that when you speak of a Hearts
horns, you must term them the Head and not the Horns of a Heart. And
likewise of a Bucke: but a Rows Horns, and a Gotes Horns are tolerable
terms in Uenerie.

The terms of the treading or footing of all beasts of chase and Venerie.
THe footyng or printe of an Hearts foot is called the Slot. Footing.
Of a Bucke and all other Fallow Dear, it is to be called the View. Of a Got,
the Breaking (and that is also a good term for an Hearts footing). Of a Bore,
the Tracke, or the Treading. Of an Hare diversely, for when a Hare is in plain
fields, she Soreth: when she casts about to deceive the hounds, then she
Doubleth: and when she beats a hard high way, where you may yet find and
perceive her footing, there she Pricketh: also in time of Snow we say the
Trace of an Hare. Of a Fox and al such vermin I never heard any other word
but only the Footing or the foot, etc. Of an Otter it is to be called the
Marks, or the Marches. And we call it the foyling of a Dear if it be on grass
where the print of the foot cannot well be seen.

The terms proper for the ordure and natural excrements of chaces.
IT is a thing highly observed and not here to be omitted, that Ordure and
Excreme^ts.
the ordure of every beast of chase and Uenerie has his proper term. The
reason is, by cause their ordure and excrements are one principal mark
whereby we know the place of their feed, and their estate. So that a Huntesman
in talk or making of his reports shall be often constreyned to rehearse the
same. Of an Heart therefore, and of all Dear the ordure is called Fewmets or
Fewmishing: Of a Got, and of an Hare the Crotising or Crottels: Of a Bore the
Lesses: Of a Fox, and all other vermin, The Fyaunts: Of an Otter the
Spraynts. And I have neither readde nor heard what it is termed of a Wolf or a
Bear: neither is it greatly material.

The terms of the time that these chaces seek each other to engender.
When a Heart or Bucke seeks to engender with Hynde Rutte.
or Do, we say they go to the Rut: as also the Boat does. A Row Dear is
said to go in his Turn. A Bore goes to the Brime: An Hare and Conie to the
Bucke: a Fox goes on clicketing: a Badgerd as the Bore: A Wolf seeks his
Make or Match: And an Otter hunteth for his Kind.

The voices and noyses that every of them makes at such times.
AN Heart belloweth: a Bucke groyneth: a Row belleth: a Voice or Sownde.
Bote ratteleth: a Bore freameth: a Hare and a conie beats or tappeth: a Fox
barketh: a Badgerd shriketh: an Otter whineth: and a Wolf howleth, when they
seek or hunte after their makes.

The seasons of all Chaces.
THe Heart and Bucke (with the Boat) is in season from Midsomer Season.
until Holyroode day: The Row is in season between Easter and Mighelmas. The
Bore from Christmas till shrouetide: The Hare from Mighelmas till Midsomer: The
Fox and the Wolf from Holy roode day till the Annunciation: and the Otter from
Shrouetide until Midsomer. Conies are al ways in season, either young or old:
but their skins are in best season from Alhallontide unto Shrouetide. The
Hynde, Do, Rowdoe, Geate, and Swine, begins when the Male of every one of
the^ ceasseth, and lasts as long as they be fat or in good plight.

The Fat of every one of these beasts.
THe Fat of all kind of Dear is called Sewet: and it may Fat.
be also very well said, This Dear was an high Dear of Grease, or so forth.
But the Fat (of it self) is called Sewet, vt supra. The fat of a Bore,
Fox, and Badgerd, is called properly Grease. An Hare (by old Trystrams
opinion) bears both Grease and Tallowe, and the Row deares fat (only of all
Dear) is termed Beauie grease.

The flaying, striping, and casing of all manner Chaces.
THe Heart and all manner of Dear are flayne: and yet Flaying, striping, etc.
Huntesmen use more commonly to say, take off that Deares skin. The Hare is
stryped, and (as Trystram says) the Bore also: the Fox, Badgerd and all
other vermin are cased, that is to say, you must begin at the snowte or nose
of the beast, and so turn his skin over his ears all along the body,
until you come at the tail: and that hangs out to show what beast it was,
this is called casing: and yet a Badgerds skin is to be stretched with four
sticks on cross, to make it dry the better, because it is great and fat.

Terms used when you bring any Chase to his resting place, or raise him from
it.
WE Herbor and Unherbor a Heart, and he lies in his layre: Resting place.
we lodge and rowse a Bucke, and he lies also in his layre: we seek and find
the Row and he beddeth: we form and starte a Hare: we burrowe and bolt a
Conie, and both the Hare and Conie do sit and squat. We couch and rear a Bore:
we kennell and vnkenell a Fox: we earth and dig a Badgerd: we tree and baye
both Martern and wild catte: we watch and vent an Otter. And we train and
raise the Wolf, when we bring them to their restyng place and put them from
the same to be hunted. Of the Raynedeare, Bote, or Bear, I have neither read
nor herd the terms in this respect.

The sundry noyses of hounds, and the terms proper for the same.
AS you hear hounds make sundry different noyses, so do we Terms of Cries and
Noyses.
term them by sundry terms: For hounds do call on, bawle, babble, cry, yearne,
lapyse, plodde, baye, and such like other noyses, First when hounds are first
cast off and find of some game or chase, we say, They call on. If they be to
busy before they find the Sent good, we say They Bawle. If they be to busy
after they find good Sent, we say They Babble. If they run it endwayes orderly
and make it good, then when they hold in togethers merrily, we say They are in
cry. When they are earnest either in the chase or in the earth, we say They
yearne. When they open in the string (or a Greyhounde in his course) we say
They lapyse. When they hang behind and beat too much on one Sent or place,
we say They plodde. And when they have either earthed a vermin, or brought a
Dear, Bore, or such like, to turn head against them, then we say They Baye.

The difference between hounds and Greyhoundes for terms.
WE find some difference of terms between hounds, and Difference.
Greyhoundes. As of Greyhoundes two make a Brase, and of hounds a Couple. Of
Greyhoundes three make a Lease, and of hounds a Couple and a half. We let
slip a Greyhou^d, and we cast off a Hounde. The string wherewith we lead a
Greyhounde is called a Lease, and for a Hounde a Lyame. The Greyhounde has his
Col^er, and the Hounde has his Couples. Many other differences there be, but
these are most usual.

The different names of chaces, when they be young in the neast, or sucking the
Damme.
A Young red Dear is called a Calfe: a young fallow Dear, a Young.
Fawn: a young Row or Got, a Kidde: a young Bore, a Pigge: a young Hare a
Leueret: a young Conie, a Rabet: a young Fox is called a Cubbe: a young Badgerd
as the Bores young: a young Catte, a Kittling: a young Martern, a Martemecubbe: a
young Otter, a whelpe. And likewise of Bear and Wolf as far as ever I read.

The terms for the tails of all chases.
THe tail of Heart, Bucke, Row, or any other Dear, is to be called the
Syngle. The Tail of a Goat, is plainly called his Tail. The tail of a Bore,
is to be termed his wreath. The tail of an Hare and Conney, is called their
Skut. The tail of a Fox is called his Bush, or (as some use to say) his
hollywater sprinkle. The tail of a Wolf is to be called his Stearne. Of the
rest I have not read.

Terms to be used, when any chase goes to the water by force.
When an Heart or any Dear is forced to the water, we say he goes to the
Soil. But yet therein also there is difference. For when a Heart first takes
the water, we say he Proffereth. When he goes quite through a river or water,
we say he breaks Soil. And the Slot or view which is found of such a
Dear, on that other side of the water, is to be termed, as of a Dear
defoulant the Soil. The Heart, Bucke, Got, and Bore, do also take soil
oftentimes without enforcing. All other beasts are none otherwise termed, but
plainly to take the water, saving only the Otter, and he is said to beat
the Stream.

Other general terms of the Heart and his properties.
AN Heart when he is past his sixth year, is generally to be called an Heart of
ten, and afterward according to the increase of his Head, whether it be
Croched, Palmed or Crowned. When he breaks heard and draws to the
thickets, he is said to take his hold. When a huntesman draws after him
with his hounde, if he go into any grove or wood, he Covreth, and if he come
out again, he Discovreth him self. When he feeds in fields, closes, or
corn, he feeds: otherwise he Browseth. In the heat of the day he
withdraws him self for the flies, and then we say, he goes to the Step.
His head when it comes first out, has a russet pyll upon it, the which is
called Velvet, and his head is called then a velvet head, the tops thereof
(as long as they are in blood) are good meat, and are called Tenderlings.
When his head is grown out to the full bygnesse, then he rubbeth of that
pyll, and that is called fraying of his head. And afterward he Burnisheth
the same, and then his head is said to be full sommed. His stones are called
his doulcets, and the caul about his paunche is called his Kell. When he
stays to look at any thing, then he stands a^ gaze. When he bounceth by
upon all four, then he tryppeth, and when he runs very fast, then he
streyneth. When he smells or venteth any thing, then we say he has (this
or that) in the wind. When he is hunted and does first leave the heard, we
say that he is syngled or emprymed. When he is foamy at the mouth, we say that
he is embost. And when he holds out his neck, we say he is spent or done.
And when he is dead, we say that he is down. The reward to the hounds, is
called a Reward or quarrey.

Terms general of the huntesman, in hunting of any chase.
When huntesmen do beat any Couerte with kennell hounds for any chase, it
is called drawing of the Covert. When they cast about a grove or wood with
their Liamhound, then they make a ryng. When they find where a Dear has
passed, and break or plashe any boughe downewardes for a mark, then we say,
they blemishe, or make blemishes. When they hang up any paper, clout, or
other mark, then it is to be called Sewelling or setting of Sewels. When they
set hounds in a readynesse whereas they think a chase will pass, and cast
them off before the rest of the kennell come in, it is called a vaunt lay When
they tarry till the rest of the kennell come in, and then cast off, it is
called an Allay. But when they hold until the kennell be past them, then it is
called a Relay. When a hounde meets a chase, and goes away with it far
before the rest, then we say he forel^yneth. When a hounde hunteth backwardes
the same way that the chase is come, then we say he hunteth Counter. And if he
hunt any other chase than that which he first undertook, we say he hunteth
change. When either Hare or Dear, or any other chase uses subtleties to
deceive the hounds, we say they cross or double. The reward at death of any
beast of Uenerie, is called the quarry or reward. But of all other chases, it
is to be called the hallowe. And this is as much as I can presently call to
remembrance, either by reading or experience, touching the terms of Uenerie.
Wherein I desire all such as are skillful, to bear with my boldness:
promising that if any thing be amysse, it shall (God willing) be amended at the
next impression, if I live so long.

FINIS.
A short observation set down by the Translatour, concerning coursing with
Greyhoundes.
Because I find nothing in mine Author particularly written of coursing with
Greyhounds, it seems unto me, that they have not that kind of Uenerie so much
in estimation in France, as we do hold it here in England. But that they use
their Greyhounds only to set backsets, or receytes for Dear, Wolf, Fox, or
such like. Whereas we here in England do make great account of such pastime as
is to be seen in coursing with Greyhoundes at Dear, Hare, Fox, or such like,
even of them selves, when there are neither hounds hunting, nor other mean to
help them. So that I have thought it correspondent unto this mine enterprise,
to set down some brief rules which I my self have seen observed in coursing
with Greyhounds. You shall understand then, that we use three manner of courses
with Greyhounds here in England, that is at the Dear, at the Hare, and at Fox
or other vermin. First for the course at the Dear (especially if it be a red
Dear) you may divide your Greyhounds into three sundry parts. viz. Teasers,
Sidelayes, and Backsets, or Receytes. By this word Teasers is meant, the first
Greyhounde, or brase, or lease of Greyhoundes, which is let slip either at the
whole heard, to bring a Dear single to y^ course, or else at a low dear, to
make him streine before he come at the sidelayes and backsets. For a dear is
of this nature, that when be once has set his head forewarde any way, he will
hold on the same way, and never turns and wrencheth as a Hare will do
before the Greyhounds. Therefore a Greyhounde or a brase being let slip to
tease as before said, will make a dear streyne in his course before he come at
the sidelayes or backsets, and then they (being fresh) shall the better be able
to take him. It is como^ly (...) also in coursing of dear (specially red
dear, vt su.) to lay a brase of greyhounds or more by the midway, and those
are called sidelays, because they are to be let slip at y^ midside of a Dear.
And yt last sort of greyhou^ds toward yt latter end of yt cource is called
receipt or backset: These last Greyhounds are commonly let slip full in the face
of the Dear, to the end they may the more amase him: And so they with the help
of the other teasers and sidelayes may the better take hold on him all at once
and pull him down, whereas the sidelayes are to be let slip at yt side of a
Dear or after him, for fear least they make him swerve from the backsettes: A red Dear will bear sometimes four or five brase of Greyhoundes before they
can pull him down: such wonderful force he is of, and can so easily shake off
a Greyhounde when he pincheth him. The best observation that is to be taken in
making the course at a Dear, is that the Teasers do stand close and upon a
clear wind: For a Dear will quickly find them else: but being past the
Teasers how soever the rest lie, he will not lightly turn head. In coursing
at a Dear if one Greyhounde go endwayes by another, it is accoumpted a Cote,
so that he which does so go by his fellow do reach the Dear and pinche: and
in coursing of a red Dear that Greyhounde which does first pinche, shall
win the wager: but in coursing of a Fallow dear, your Greyhounde must pinche
and hold, or else he wins not the wager. It is also to be observed that when
you lay to course a Dear, you mark the place and Country where you be. For
in a padocke (which is a close course in a park paled or rayled in) it is
easy to see which way the cource is to be made: since the Dear is held in
with pales or rayles and cannot swerve: but in a plain heath or country, you
must mark which way it is most likely that he will bend, and there lay your
Greyhounds behind some bushe or tree: that the Dear find not fault at them
and so break back. This in effect is as much as it is needful to be
considered in the course at a Dear. But never let slip a young Greyhound at a
Dear without the company of some old flesht dog: for every dog will not byte
a Dear at the first course. And surely he that has a good Haregreyhounde,
shall do very evil to course a Dear with him, for it will both bruise him and
make him lyther: and the course at the Hare is much y^ nobler pastime. To
course y^ Hare you must send either Harefinders before you to find some Hare
sitting, or else your self with your company may range and beat over the
fields until you either find a Hare sittyng, or starte her. I have marked the
harefinders in their seeking of a Hare in Northampton ^hyre, and they will
never beat but one end of a furlong: and that shall be the end which is down
the wind or from the wind: for they hold opinion, that a Hare will not (by
her will) sit with her head into the wind. He that will seek a Hare must go
overthwart the lands. And cuery land that he passes over, let him begin
with his eye at his foot, and so look down the land to the furlongs end.
First on the one side and then on the other: and so he shall find y^ Hare
sitting in her form: as soon as he espieth her he must cry Sa How. Then they
which lead the Greyhoundes may come near: and you may appoint which
Greyhoundes shall course. Then let him which found the Hare go toward her and
say, up pusse up, until she rise out of her form. Some Hare will not rise out
of her form until she be touched: and some will abyd^ to be lifted out by the
ears, the which is a token of a Hare that will hold out and make a fair
course. If the Hare sit near unto any close or covert, and have her head
toward the same with a fair field behind her, you may ride with as much
company as you have between her and the covert before she be put up, and then
peradventure when she ryseth, she will take toward the champayne: but lightly
a Hare will make her course the same way that her head sta^des when she sits
in her form. When a Hare is put up, you must give her ground (which is
called law) xij. score yeardes or more, according to the ground and country
where she sits: and then let slip your Greyhoundes. It is a gallant sport
to see how the Hare will turn and wind to save her self out of the dogs
mouth. So that sometimes even when you think that your Greyhounde does (as it
were) gape to take her, she will turn and cast the^ a good way behind her: and
so saves her self by turnyng, wrenching, and winding, until she reach some
covert and so save her life. In coursing at the Hare it is not material which
dog kills her (which hunters call bearyng of an Hare) but he that gives
most Cotes, or most turns, wins the wager. A Cote is when a (...) goes
endways by his fellow and gives the Hare a turn (which is called setting a
Hare about) but if he coast and so come by his fellow, that is no Cote.
Likewise if one Greyhounde do go by another, and then be not able to reach the
Hare himself and turn her, this is but strippyng and no Cote. If there be no
Cotes given between a ^rase of Greyhounds, but the one of them serves the
other at turnyng, then he which gives the Hare most turns shall win the
wager: and if the one do give as many turns as the other, then he which
bears the Hare shall win the wager. A Cote serves for two turns, and two
strippyngs or Ierkinnes (as some call them) stand for a Cote: also many times
a Hare does but wrenche and not turn: for it is not called a turn unless the
Hare be set about, and do turn (as it were) round about: two such wrenches
stand for a turn. Also sometimes a Hare that is commonly coursed will know the
country: and because she coueteth the hard beaten ways, she will (of her
self) swerve at such a way, and that is neither to be accounted a turn nor a
wrench: but if neither of your Greyhoundes be able to turn the Hare until the
end of the course, then he which went foremost throughout the course must
win the wager. And for the better decidyng of all these questions, if it be
at a solemn assembly, they use to appoint Judges which are expert in
coursing, and shall stand on the hills sides whether they perceive the Hare
will ^ende, to mark which dog does best, and to give judgment thereof
accordingly: some use when their Greyhoundes be both of a color to bind a
handkerchef about one of their necks for a difference. But if he were my
Dog he should not wear the handkerchief, for I could never yet ^ee any
dog win the course which ware the handkerchief. And if stands to good
reason, that he which w^areth the handkerchef should be combred therewith,
both because it gathers wind, and also because it does partly stop a
Dogs breath: if the Greyhoundes be but young or slow, you may course with a
lease at one Hare, but that is seldom seen, and a brase of Dogs is ynow for
such a poor beast. When you go to course either Hare or Dear, or to Hunte
any chase, it is a forfayture (amongst us here in England) to name ^yther
(...), Ipe, Monkie, or Hedgehogge: and he which names any of these should be
paid with a slip upon the buttockes in the field before he go any further.
To course at a Fox requires none other Irte than to stand close and upon a
clear wind, on the outside of the covert by some bottom or place where it is
likely that he will come out: and to give him head enough, for else he will
turn back again, and there is no dan^ger in giving of him head where there
is plain ground, for the slowest dog yt ever ran will overtake a Fox if he
have field room. Some use to watch a Fox when he goes out to his feed, and
to stand in ye most likely places in a moon shine night and so to course him:
but that is but uncertain unless it be in clicketting time, when they go
proud: then you shall hear the^ bark and howl one after another. But
otherwise the surest coursing is when you hunte with hou^des, to set your
greyhounds underneath the wind very close in some bottom or little plain, and
there to course the For when he comes out. This course is short, but it is
dangerous, for oftentimes a good Greyhound is marred with a Fox: and therefore
few men will course a Fox unless it be with old Greyhou^ds which are bruised
dogs, and which they make small accou^pt of: and you shall see an old bitten
dog when he ouertaketh a Fox, thrust his forelegges ^ckwardes and fall upon
him with his chest: and so save his legs from bytyng when he takes the Fox:
and again as soon as ever he lays hold on him, he will shake him about his
ears continually, until he have broken his back or killed him: for by that
means he gives the Fox no leave nor time to byte him. There is another kind
of coursing which I have more used than any of these: and that is at a Dear
in the night: wherein there is more art to be used tha^ in any course else. But
because I have promised my betters to be a friend to al Parkes, Forests, and
Chaces, therefore I will not here express the experience which has been dearer
unto me, particularly, than it is meet to be published generally. But thus
much I have thought meet of my self to add concerning coursing with
Greyhou^des, the which is doubtless a noble pastime, and as meet for
Nobility and Gentlemen, as any of the other kinds of Uenerie before declared:
Especially the course at the Hare which is a sport continually in sight, and
made without any great travail: so that recreation is therein to be found
without unmeasurable toil and pain: Whereas in huntyng with hounds, although
the pastyme be great, yet many times the toil and pain is also exceedyng
great: And then it may well be called, either a paynefull pastyme, or a
pleasant pain.

FINIS.
Imprinted by Henry Bynneman, for Christopher Barker.

The measures of blowing set down in the notes for the more ease and ready
help of such as are desirous to learn the same: and they are set down
according to the order which is observed at these days in this Realm of
England as follows.
The Call for the Company in the morning. All to be blown with one wind.^

The S^rake to the Field. To be blown with two winds.^

The vncoupling of the Couerte side. To be blown with three winds.^

The Seek, With two winds.^

When the Hounds do hunte a Game or Chase unknown. All with one wind.^

The Rechate. With three winds.^

The Straking from Covert to Covert. With two winds.^

When the (...) does break Covert. With four winds.^ ^

The Earthing of a Fox, if he be couerable. With three winds.^

When the Fox is not couerable, to call away.^

The death of a Fox, either in field or covert. With three winds.^

And the Rechate upon it.

Four sundry calls for a Keeper, in Park, Chase, or for^est.^

The death of a Dear with Bow, or Greyhoundes.^

The death of a Bucke with hounds. With two winds.^

The pryse of an Heart Royal. With three winds. This to be blown thrice with
three several winds,^ and the Rechate upon it.

I Struck of nine, to draw home the company. With two winds.^ ^

To blow for the Terryers at an earth. With two winds.^


