THE TRAVEILER of Jerome Turler, divided into two Books.

The first containing a notable discourse of the manner, and order of traueiling
ouersea, or into strange and foreign Countries.

The second comprehending an excellent description of the most delicious Realm
of Naples in Italy.

A work very pleasant for all persons to read, and right profitable and
necessary unto all such as are minded to Traueyll.

Imprinted at London by William How, for Abraham Veale. 1575.

To the Right honorable and renowned Barons, the Lord George, Hugh and Vitus,
brethren, of the ancient house of the Schonburges. Lords of Glaucha, and
Waldenburge: Jerome Turler sends greeting.
Right honorable and renoumed Barons, it is nobly written by Isocrates, that
children ought too keep their fathers Friends as diligently: as they would
their own inheritance. And your father of worthy memory, loved my father
dearly, and he lived together with your Grandfather many years in the Court
of Duke George the noble Duke of Saxony, and he was borne in the days of your
Greatgrandfather of Austine Turler his father, who was then Consul of Lesnick,
which town is under your inrisdiction at this day, and whereof my Uncle is
now at this present Consul, one whom ye know ryghtwell. Wherefore, I have
often devised with my self, by what means I might likewise continue this
friendship, or rather testefie my duty toward you and your family, and if it
could be, how to enlarge the same, but hitherto I could find no good
opportunity, for that ye were of so small years that wanted rather
instruction in discretion, and good manners: then to be occupied in debating
of grave matters, and also ye had such instructers, and schoolemaisters, that
if ye followed their documentes there should redownd great honor to your
selves, and great commodity to your subjects. Albeit then it be so, that ye
have no need of mine admonicio^, either to the study of virtue and
godliness, or toward the attaining of good arts and learning: yet the
signification of a man's duty is wont to be acceptable to good natures, and
such especially such as are of Nobility, and descended of the greatest
parentage. Thus staying my self upon this ground: I se^d unto ye this book
which I have written in the behalf of such as are desierous to traueill, and to
see foreign Cuntries, and specially of students. For since Experience is the
greatest part of humane wisdom, and the same is increased by traueil: I
suppose there is no man will deney, but that a man may become the wiser by
traueiling. How beit if in any thing: surely in this most diligent
circumspection is very requisite, by reason of the dangers that offer
themselves unto traueilers, and the weakness of man's judgment, which unless
it be then confirmed by use and experience, and helped by the counsel of
others: it will soon be brought into error. Here is moreover to be added,
that the youth and flourishing years are most commonly employed in traueill,
which of their own course and condition are inclined unto vice, and much more
ernestly embrace the same if it be entised thereto, which manica time and often
chances in traueyling: wherefore, me thinks they do a good deed, and well
deserve of al me^: that give precepts of traueyling. Which thing, although I
perceive that some have done: yet have they done it here and there in
sundry Books, and not in any one certain place. And being a necessary thing
to have all such matter in a readiness as may well and profitably be said of
one thing: I have therefore handled that argument according to the definitive
Method, as they speak in the schools, and have comprehended also, as I
judge, in one Book, whatsoever is necessary for any to know concerning the
due taking in hand of traueill, and the prosperous perfourming of the same. I
have also adjoined unto this discourse another book, wherein I have applied
those precepts of mine, unto such things as seemed unto me worthy the seeing
and observing in the Realm of Naples, which beeinge none other thing then an
example of such documentes as we have set down in the first Book: I have
therefore made the title unto all the whole writing, Of Traueill, and of the
Realm of Naples, because no man shall think that I have coupled contrary
things together. For although in deed it be one thing to entreat of the
Realm of Naples, and another thing to give precepts unto such as mean to
traueill: yet since traueiling consists of viewing and diligent consideration
of things, and precepts are lightened by examples: there is no just impediment
to the contrary, but that I may join these twain together. And as I have
also admonished in the book: I trust that this my labor will be the more
acceptable unto some, for the same cause. For if they shall want precepts they
shall find them here in a readiness, and if they do require an example
agreeable to precepts, they have here such a one before their eyes which
may both instruct their minds and also inflame them unto the knowledge of most
bewtifull sightes, and Antiquity. Receive in good part, Right honorable and
renoumed Barons, this simple gift from me, and therein my duty and service
toward ye and your family. Which if it shall please you to do: I will do min
endeavor to omit nothing which I may think to tend unto the commendation and
ornament of your house: and that my good will may be known unto you hereafter,
by some traueill of more grave argument.

Fare ye well.
The Contents of the Chapters contained in this present work.
In the first Book.
OF the Definition of Traueill, with a proposition thereto annexed. Chap. 1
What Persons are meet or unmeet to traueil, and also of the causes of
traueill. Chapter. 2. How a man ought to Traueill, and of the effect and
commodity of Traueill. Chap. 3 Of the properties of the four principal
Nations of Europe, and how a man shall know, whether he have profited by
traueill, or not. Chap. 4 What things are to be considered in traueillinge.
Chap. 5. How we ought to make a choice of such things as we see, or learn
in traueillinge: and of the Traueillers Privileges. Chap. 6 Examples of
notable men that have traueilled. Chap. 7. Of such matter as is commonly
objected against traueillers, with a confutacion thereof. Chap 8 An answer to
the principal Question, with a notable commendacion of Traueill thereto
anexed. Chap. 9
In the second Book.
THe Argument and Contents of the second Book, with the intent, and devise
of the same breefly expressed. Chap. 1 Portus Baianus, commonly called La
Pescina mirabile, a wounderfull Fishponde. Chap. 2 Centum cellae, commonly
called Cento camerelle, an hundred Chambers. Chap. 3 Mons Canita, the Hill
Canita. Chap. 4 Lacus Auerni, the Lake Auernus. Chap. 5. Ciceroes Academie,
Villedge, and hot Bathes. Chap. 6 Cumae, the city Cuma. Chap. 7 Baines. Chap.
8. A Well or Fowntaine in the Sea, and the way called Attellana. Chap. 9 Forum
Vulcani, Vulcanes Merket place. Chap. 10 Puteolis, the City Puteolis. Chapt.
11 An Hill arisinge out of the ground. Chap. 12. The Hill Pausilypus. Chap.
13. The City of Naples Chap. 14 Gardeines. Chap. 15. Wells, and Streets.
Chap. 16 The Merket place, and Churches. Chap. 17. Storehouses, Castles and
Armories. Chap. 18. Antiquities, the University, and peculyar properties of
the City, and People of Naples. Chap. 19. The Kings Pittes or Pondes, and the
Hill Vesuuius called now Summi, and of others. Chap. 20.
FINIS.
Names of the Aucthours and Books, that are cited in this Work.
ANtonius de Rossis, a Lawier. Athenaeus. Berosus. Bible. Blondus. Brissionius,
a lawier. Cato de Originibus. Cicero. Ciriacus Anconitanus Claudianus. Clemens
Alexandrinus. Copernicus. Dion Cassius Nicaeus. Dionisius Halicarnasseus.
Erasmi adagia. Euripides. Festus Pomponius. Fort. quaestiones. Franciscus
Senensis Furius Coriolanus. Homerus. Horatius. Ius Canonicum. Ius Civil.
Iuuenalis. Landus Hortensius. Leander Bononiensis. Leges xii. tabularum.
Leuinus Lemnius. Liuius. Ouidius. Plato. Plautus. Plinius secundus. Plinius
not. hist. scriptor. Plutarchus. Polibius. Pomponius Laetus. Propertius.
Senecae. Seruius Sulpitius. Silius Italicus. Simon Portius. Strabo. Triumphus
Neapolitanus. Thucydides. Varro de ling. Latina. Vegetius. Virgilius.
Vorthusius. Vitruuius. Volaterranus. Xenophon.
At Bononie, the first Stone from the City, in the villedge of Mark Antonie
de L'auolta, a Senator, stands this Monument to be seen.
Alia Loelia Crispis, neither Man, nor Woman, nor Mungrell, neither Maid, nor
young Woman, nor old Wife, neither Chaste, nor a Harlot, nor Honest, But all.

Dyinge neither by Famine, nor Sword, nor Poison, But by all.

Lying neither in the open Air, nor in the Water, nor in the Earth, But every
where:

Lucius Agatho Priscius unto her neither Husband, nor Lover, nor Kinseman,
neither Sorrowful, nor Glad, nor Weeping: this Monument being neither Heap,
nor Pillar, nor Sepulcher, But all. He knows and yet he cannot tell, for
whom he has erected.

OF THE DEFInition of Travail, with a proposition thereto anex^^.
The first Chapter.
THis word Peregrinus which signifies a stranger or traueiler, in the Latin
tongue in sundry ages has had sundry significations. For as Varro, and Festus
Pomponius do report, ye ancient Romans called an enemy by the name of
Peregrinus a stranger: and an enemy whom they call now at this present Hostis,
they termed the^ Perduellis: in which signification it was thus written in the
laws of the xij tables: If you have appointed any day with a stranger you
must needs come. But that word grew out of the signification of a
stranger, and continued so long in signifying one that was our adversary, or
took arms against us, until it fell to a more gentle use, the Romans
calling all such only by the name of Strangers as were not free of the City
of Rome, as being perhaps Latins borne, or altogether Aliens: and in this
signification it is used at this present. So that this word Peregrinari to
traueile, descends from the word Peragrare to wander, which signifies to
traueyle in strange and foreign Cuntreyes, to wander in places as well
unknown as known out of a man's own Country, or City. Which may well be
perceived by the testimony of Plautus, Plautus.
where he says: I am a Stranger, that is to say, borne in a foreign land,
I know not Sauria. etc. And likewise it appears in Cicero: which Citizens,
(says he) are better then Strangers, and Cicero.
our own Countrymen, then aliens, that is to say, then those that come
hither to dwell, from other places. Herehence it comes, that we call strange
trees, and strange birds, which eysher were brought unto us from other
places, or else were never seen amongst us before. Likewise, strange serving
of God with unaccustomed rites and manners which either we have borrowed from
other places for religions ^ake, or else are by us likewise celebrated and
executed not after our own custom, but after some rare and strange order.
After this manner that we now speak of, the service and Sacrifice of the noble
and great mother of ye Gods (who was called Cybala, and Rhea, and by many
others names more) also of Ceres, and Aesculapius, might well be called of the
Romans, strange, either for that they were far set, namely out of Phrigia,
Greece, and Epidaurus: either for that, look how they were used in those
places, even so were they in Rome also. Moreover, there is mention made in the
Civil law of a strange Praetor, and likewise in ye Canon law of strange
judgments. In Justinians Code this The Code
word Peregrinus a stranger, is sometime taken for one that is brought away
to another place, sometime for one that wandre^^ abroad having no certain
place of abode, wherein I have noted this much, because I would gladly omit
nothing that might apperteyne to the signification of that word whereof we
presently entreat. All which matters being omitted, this is an ancient
question, whether traueyling do a man ^ common ^uestion.
more good or harm? which seeing that it lies more in the power of Fortune
then in our own good will and industry, it may seem that it is but a vain
matter to move any such question* But in very deed the truth of the thing
stands otherwise. For those that traueyl, all do not commit themselves to
strange and forreyne Cuntryes, to the intent E
to consume there their time in idleness, to be subject as a mocking stock
unto Fortune: but they have sometimes just causes that move them, and some
proposed C
end in respect whereof they take in hand their traueyll. Wherefore, we must
distinguishe this kind of traueyll which has some certain end proposed, from
that which is taken in hand only for Idleness sake: Howbeit this last kind
cannot justly be called by the name of Idleness, since it has some small
delight, yet not tending at all to any end, adjoining unto it. For true
delight and pleasure, is sought for in respect of some end, and whereas is no
end, there also can be no pleasure: for in all kind of travailing there is
certain pain and labor contained, which repugneth against idleness tending
unto virtue not to vice, insomuch that if we do uprightly weigh the thing: we
shall then find, that, Traueill is nothing else but a pain taking to see and
search foreign lands, not to be taken in hand by all sorts of persons, or
unadvisedly, but such as are meet thereto, either to the end that they may
attain to such arts and knowledge as they are desirous to learn or
exercise: or else to see, learn, and diligently to mark such things in
strange Countries, as they shall have need to use in the common trade of life,
whereby they may profit themselves, their friends, and Country if need
require. This definition who so marketh well, he shall easily make answer to
the question erewhile propounded. For he shall not only discern traueyll
from sluggish Idleness, whilst he places this word, Pain, for the general
signification which the Logicians do call Genus, but also comprehends many
other things, which the Rethoritians, and Logicians do usually handle by
Thesis and Hipothesis, definite and indefinite questions, whollye settinge
down before our eyes whatsoever apperteineth to this present question. And
whereas all kind of pains are not taken in traueilyng, therefore have I
called it, the pain to see and search, whereto I add these words, Foraine
Lands, that I may distinguishe it from small and short iourneis, which enie man
takes in hand for pleasures sake in his own country. But let us now proceed
in order to the rest.

What Persons are meet or unmeet to Traueil, and also of the causes of
Traueill.
Chapter. 2.
NAture teaches us, that Infants, Aged persons, and such as have weak bodies,
are of al others less meet to traueill. And although it oftentimes chances
through the iniquity of the time, or some common calamity thereto
constraining, that persons of such age and condition are enforced to traueill:
yet are they unmeet for it, not being able to abide those pains that
accustomablye befall to traueillers. Like as Jacob meetinge with his brother
Esau, excuses himself from traueylynge by reason of his young Children, who
if they were weryed but with one days traueill, would die wc the pains of so
long a journey. And as touching old folk by proof it is evident, that they
are nothing meet to traueill: since old age of it self is supposed to be an
heavy burden. Which the Poet Ovid has done us to vndeostand in the 4. Book De
Tristibus, the viii. Elege. And likewise the noble Poet Homer, has a notable
saying of one sore laden with years, which Verses may thus be englished.

Such one art thou, who having was he themselves, and fead their fill:
Strait couch them down to sleep* this is the use of Ouldmen still.
There is also some difference to be had in ye sex in respect of Decorum or
cumlynes, and public honesty: howbeit the same is not every where
accordinglye observed. For the Dutch Weemen, and Dutch weemen.
those that inhabit the Islands of Sealand, do not only occupy buying and
selling at home, more dilygently then yt men do: but they traueil also unto ye
furthermost parts of the world to trafacque and occupy Merchaindize. And for
so doing they are never a whit the more discommended, especially among their
own cuntrye folk. But in other regions of this our Europe, ye same custom is
not observed, as it was not also usual amongst our auntie^t fathers in
foretime: as it plainly appears by example of Medea, who when she ascended
into yt Castle and Temple of Corinthe, indeuoringe by all means to persuade
the Matrones and kepers of the same temple, that they should suspect no eeuell,
in that she had been so long absent from her own country, for so much as many
have co^mendably beehaued themselves being out of their own native soyles:
they gave her no answer at all, that she might understand, that the wide
wandering of Weemen cannot want suspicion, Weeme^ Traueil.
and brings some toke^ of dishonestie. Whereupon the Tragical and Comicall
Poets, when they bring in any far traueiling Woman, for the most part they
feine her to be incontinent. Semblably, frantique and furious Persons are unfit
to traueill. For seeinge that they are distracte of their right wits, they
are accounted also unmeet to deal in all civil affairs. There be likewise
many things more, that stay sundry from trauellinge, that whosoever shall be
free and void of them: then they are not forbidden to take ye labor in hand,
especially in their youth, or at man's state For these ages are not only fit to
endure Labors, but those things which we see, hear, and learn at those
days are soonest fired in memory and longest continue. Which being so: it may
then seem strange, that Plato, an excellent Mato.
Philosopher, and a most dyligent searcher out of all things, has
especially appointed that term of man's life unto traueill, which is between
fiftye and threescore. For since at ye time all the strength of man's body
begins to decreace, it seems very ridiculous for the age that then is
weakened, and drawing apace to death to be oppoynted unto youthly labors, and
as the common saying is, to heap one mischief upon another. But I like of
Platoes opinion well enough. For he forbids not but that younger men also
may traueill, being not otherwise possible but ye men will pas and repasse the
seas, and otherwise to, which he also affirms. Wherefore, such as have time
and leisure, and are desierous to see the trades and manners of other peoples,
be will not have prohibited by enie laws to the contrary: because that a
desolate City, and such an one as knows not what is good or bad in foreign
countries, is very far from perfection. And whereas he has appointed that
term of years to be emploid in traueill: the reason is this, for that he
would have that time especially to be beestowed in learning of manners and
searchinge other knowledge. For since at those years man's judgment is most
perfect: he is the better able to discern and judge of matters, then in his
youth, or old age, whereof the one is rather inclined to vice then virtue and is
ruled by affection, the other begins to fail in memory, and cannot well use
the judgment of the senses. And although he forbid not young men to
traueill, whereby they also may sumdeale profit in manners and knowledge:
notwithstanding forasmuch as that age is but of weak judgment, he commits
that care to men of ryper years, not so much for private, as for common
co^modytie. For he wills them at their return home, diligently to report
unto the Senate whatsoever notable thing and worthy of memory they have seen
in foreign cuntries, either concerning laws, or bringing up, or appertaininge
to knowledge, that if it might happen the same to be liked of, it might be
received into the common wealth. And like as there be many things that may
hinder a man from traueiling although he would never so feign: so may there
also be diverse and sundry causes why a man ought to traueill, and those
likewise sumtimes such whereof a man never thought before. For some men are
naturally enforced to traueill, or rather to wander abroad after the manner of
Cilenius, as those in whose natyuitie the moon is placed with Mercury in the
nineth house, especially in a moouable sign, or soome other like judgment in
this matter: and other some grow into that nature by custom. And others again
traueill for gains, and commodity, as Merchantes: some for virtues sake, as
those that apply the study of good Arts: howbeit these also reap gain and
commodity of traueill at their due time and season. For, Gain is two fold, the
one honest, which is joined unto virtue and honor, and that which the students
and professors of good arts do attain. Likewise souldyeurs which a^ content
with their pay, as S. John says: and Merchantes if they desire to wax rich
after no dishonest sort. The other kind of gain is dishonest, which repugneth
with nature and virtue, such as they do practice which give themselus wholly to
robbing and spoiling, who being unmindful of the law of arms, and of the Oath
which soldiers take: do not spare nor abstain from their friends goods.
That kind of gain also which is commonly hateful among men, as usurers, and
others that heap up wealth by right or wrong with such gredines and avarice,
that as the Poet says, they run to the furthest Indians, and all to eschew
poverty, leaving nothing unassayed whereof they may raise to themselves some
gain. Which occasion, as I suppose, moved Cicero, to distinguishe filthye arts
from other, and to judge nothing to be profitable, which was not also honest.

But principally we must weigh and examine unto what end we take our
traueill upon us. For since all thing is done for some end, it were taken in
hand in vain, unless it were also directed unto some certain scope. But as the
Philosophers do distinguishe, of ends and purposes: some be seemly and
lawful: other not seemly, or wandering. Moreover, of those that be seemly,
one is termed principal and last of all, to who^ when we have attained then
we at rest and seek for none farther: another is less principal or mean,
which again is distinguished into subordinate, and not subordinate, but by any
means happening. Let this variety of ends therefore be considered, and one of
them seuerallye examyned from another, because this consideration brings
great profit with it. For not only nature requires us so too do, but also
profit, and diligence, which are to be sought in all things that we do. For
the principal end is more profitable then the other, and there is more labor
required in attaining him, then the residue. So then it is a thing importing
more profit, and it requires also more traueill, to go into Italy, and to
return home again passing well furnished with the knowledge of Physic or
Law, then it does to understand how the Venetians govern their common
wealth, or what is done at Rome upon their Saturnalia feast days. Fridericus
Furius Coeriolanus whom I used familiarly during my continuance at Louane,
tells an excellent History in a certain Book of his, and because it teaches
ye same which we declare in this place: I will not Note.
spare to recite it. A certain gentleman of Naples requested of his kinsman
which was a noble man and had the tuition of him, that he might have license
to go see foreign Cuntries, unto whom his kinsman promised he should, if
first he would traueill to Rome which was not far of, and there abide a
certain time. The young gentleman obeying his commandment went thither, and
afterward returned home, still calling upon his kinsman that he might go a
greater journey. But when his kinsman perceived that he had taken no profit
by that traueill: said unto him, Son, The Sum of Traueilynge.
you have seen Meadows, Plains, Hills, Valleis, Earables, Woods, Forests,
Fields, Springs, Rivers, Trees, Thickets, Villages, Castles, Cities, Beasts,
Bathes, Galleries, Colosseis, Churches, Pallaices, Pillars, Images, Buildinges,
Downefalles, Towers, Amphitheatres, Triumphall Arches, Baines, Steeples,
Universities, Schools, Gardens, Conduites, Goodmen and Knaves, Ritche and
Poor, Learned and Ignorant, and whatsoever may else be found within the
compass of the whole world: abide therefore now henceforwarde at home, and
content your self. Thus that most prudente Prince, did briefly recite
whatsoever might be said in such a matter, and wittely set down the right
order and rule to traueill over the world, whereby he might reprove the abuse
of traueiling. Notwithstanding a man may by one labor attain to diverse
ends. As for example, by traueiling into Italy, he may get the knowledge of
Physic or Law, and understand also the government of the state of Venice.
Which when it happens in this wise, certain also it is yt the commodity which
insueth thereon must needs be the greater. We must also take heed that the
commodity be good and honest which we receive by our traueyll. For these two
points are not in vain knit together by wise men, and many times there is an
oversight eeuen in common wealths, under color of profit, and commodity.
And the virtue of honesty is such, that it preserves the beauty of profit.
So that they which separate honesty from profit: they always obtain not
their true end, nor yet reap that commodity which they ought to do. But for
as much as in all humane affairs, we must consider to what end, and for what
commodity they are taken in hand: then ought we most especially too be
myndefull thereof in traueill. For who so traueyleth in any other respect, he
spends his time in vain, consumes his goods to no purpose, endamageth the
health of his body, and daungereth his life, casting himself into a thousand
perilles, nothing profiting himself or others.

How a man ought to Traueill, and of the effect, and commodity of Traueill.
The. 3. Chapter.
THe end of our traueill being determined, and having in our mind the hope of
great profit which shall ensue to us thereby, a man must so provide for every
thing, that above all he have regard to his health, whether it be of body,
or soul. For he that does not so, but depends al upon Fortune, be shall make
God his enemy, hurt his conscience, and expose himself to a thousand dangers.
For immediately he has opened, as it were, a window unto infinite mischieues,
and has gotten a most large The fear of God.
field to offend in. But who so commits hymselselfe unto Gods keepyng,
shall be saved through his protection, as says the Psalmiste. And although
many eeuilles and dangers lie in his way: notwythstanding he shall not be
moved. He shall also bridle his affections: since the chiefest means to
avoid sin, is to avoid the occasion of sin, wherein he must employ great
diligence, and prevent many imminent dangers by his wisdom. So Tobias, when
he sent his sun forth into Rages, Tobias.
exhorted him above all thing to fear God, as the chiefest guide of his
journey, and all his affairs. Poets feygne, that Aeneas was covered in a
cloud by Venus, and diverse other men also by other Gods, thereby escapyng
not only the sight of men, and also sundry perilles that they might have
incurred, thereby to declare that they be safe from dangers, that are covered
with the might and power of God. Which thing likewise ye holy scripture
testifies in many places saying: They went forth and the Lord was with
them: and again, the Lord does know thy journey, and thy Lord thy God has
remained with thee, and thou have wanted nothing. The next care is, that he
have regard of his body, that (...) doely ^^^lth.
is to say, to keep it sound and in good health. How this may he done,
precepts of Phisitious do declare, and as far as I am able to say in the
matter: it consists in the due use of the six things not natural, as they
term them, that is to wit, the Aier, Meat and Drink, Fullness and
emptiness, Exercise and rest, Sleep and Watching, and finally, Accidents
and motions of the mind. For he that is of a weak constitution of body,
cannot well entende those things for which he has traueiled. And therefore he
ought to have a more diligent regard hereto, for that the change of Air, of
Diet, and custom, does easily bring with it some sickness, although the pain
and (...) of the journey do supply no cause thereto at all. There be also two
other things to he marked by a Traueiller, namelye to apply himself to the
manners of other, and also to look to his own business with diligence:
whereof the one is very hard for him to do that has no rule of himself, the
other requtreth rather judgment then will. Howbeit he must needs do them
both if he will do well. For who so means to live in a strange land after
his own fashion, makes himself a mocking-stocke unto other, and never
amendeth his own barbarous and corrupt manners, although he see daily
innumerable examples of virtues. He shall soon sustain loss of his
business that deals therein neclige^tly. It is after one manner that we live
at home, and another that we line abroad, and some nations are more given to
craste and deceit then others, which many have tried to their great pain.
Wherefore we must live warely among foreign nations, and take hi^de we
offend them in no case, being mindful of the Greek proverb, (...), meaning
that we must Note.
apply our selves to the Manner and Cuntrie, and yet have regard to our own
affairs, having always respect unto honesty. In Clemens Alexandrinus is
cited this verse of Heraclitus, thus to be Englished.

Many Cuntries it is good to see,
Preserving still our honesty.
In which, as the same Clemens says, is proposed an example of a
Philosophical life, where he says yt we should go see many foreign nations
for knowledge sake, but not to ensue ye vices of strange Cuntreyes, that is to
say, he admonishes us to undertake many iournies for intent to learn, still
retaynynge the integrity of our manners, and conditions. ^eware ^^rruption.
For although some cuntries carry a certain suspicion of lust and licentiousnes:
yet never to have beheld any part thereof, but always continently to have
lived in the same, is no small praise and glory. Let us not therefore leave any
token of our own fylthines in Forreyne Regions, nor let us learn there any
vile crime to bring home with us into our own country, but let us ensue virtue
and exercise godliness in all places wheresoever we beecome. Which who so
does, through the power of God shall not only escape the cruel Scylla and
Charybdis, and contemn the most sweet sower alluringe Songs of the Syrenes:
but like a most expert Pilot Syrenes Songs.
that passes under Sail in the midst of the sea, shall as much as may be
avoid all quicksandes and perilous Rocks, the sworn Enemies of them that
pass by the deep. This also a Traueiler must diligently provide for, that
he lack not his chief necessaryes, which the Logicians term, Destinata,
things apperteyning to his purpose, as unto study beelonge Books, and
Teachers: unto Warfare, Harneys, Weapons, Horses, Captains, wc such other
like. So then, like as a soldier cannot attain his end if he lack his
Weapons: neither can a student if he lack Books, and if other also lack
other things necessary for their use, according to the diversity of their
state, and calling. Finallye, thou must endeavor by all means possible, to
attain to thy purpose and end the right way and order, omitting all
unnecessary circumstaunces. For so shall thou take less pains, and all thing
shall be done with more ripeness and better judgment. For the The great force
of Order in all things.
same truly is of so great force in all worldly and humane affairs, that
unless a man use some good and commendable order in performyng them: he
labors in vain, or to little profit. Wherefore, some have written how a man
shall beehaue himself in Warfare, and of the whole order of warfare, as has
Vegetius: some have taught how we should beehaue our selves in the study of
Physic or Law, or in other arts and Sciences, whereby a man may in shorter
time attain unto them, and reap fruit and commodie out of them.

The commodity and profit of traueiling is dispersed throughout and in all
things of the world, and there is no humane action or trade to be found, but
it may be bettered and helped by traueil. And ye I may say nothing of vile
arts, are not all arts and trades according to the diversity of them, better
exercised in one place then another? is not this thing best handled in such a
place, and that in another? which if a man be desirous to learn, it were best
for him to traueill thither, rather then learn them at home of others which
have not perfectly learned them themselves. So in Germany, Italy, France and
Spain, the art of Printing is much used, but among the Getes it is not known.
And not only countries far distant hence, do practice other arts: but also
those that be near unto us. As the Art of Printing is as much frequented in
England as in Germany, and France: in Ireland it is nothing so, and yet
Ireland lies near unto England, and under obedience to ye same Queen. The
Englishmen ar excellent archers, but the Irishmen be better, and more expert
in swimming, excellinge all other nations of Europe in running and diuing under
water. How much good, traueill does to a Carpenter, Vitruuius teaches: how
much to a Soldier Vegetius shows: how much to a Paynter or Keruer, the
horses made by Fideas and Praxiteles, standing yet at this present in the
Church of Romulus at Rome do testify, with other Collossi, Statues, Images,
and Pictures, which there is no woorkeman beholds, but he wondreth at them,
and departs away more cunning the^ he came. I will speak nothing of
Merchandise, which is altogether, as it were nourished by traueill, and not
occupied so much for honesty sake: as for commodytie and lucre. Let us survey
the studies of humanyty which are comprehended under the name of Philosophy,
and we shall find that in ancient times they were partly invented and
derived from ye Egiptians unto other nations, and afterward brought into
Europe, continuing also along while in Greece, from whence they arrived in
Italy, and from thence were dispearsed abroad into other Regions of Europe, as
it were into Colonies, and places of lyberties wtin themselves. And who wyldeny
yt there is enie profit received by Philosophy, or that sumtime it flourished
in Greece in such sort: that from al places men traueilled into that cuntry to
be instructed therein, as it had been to some faier, or mercate? which Plutarch
well signified, saying, that there were no men at all, if there were not a sea
whereby they might pass into Greece. For that grave and wise Philosopher,
judged that none could be Philosophers are only men.
called by the name of men, unless they were instructed in Philosophye, for as
much as wit, and verteous furniture of the mind, makes men, not the form or
figure of the Body. But now this instruction of wits is quite taken away from
Greece together with the empire, and it is to be feared, lest shortly also it
be taken from other places whether as ye study of lyberall Arts are extended,
and in steed thereof ye old barbarousnes come in place after awhile. Touchi^g
historis, and yt woorks of Poets, what shall I need to give any admonicio^? In
whose books there be some suchthinge, which nether by eloquence of words, or
construction can be expressed, neithe by dilygence of interpretours expounded,
but that rather they require to be seen with the eye. As when in Virgill
mention is made of certain pictures, very lively expressinge the lineamentes
of nature, which Aeneas beeheld in Didos Temple seeming to contain in them
very motions of mind, affections, and true tears indeed: the Poet thereupon
saying:

Great grief bringes tears, and mortal haps, make mortal hearts to rue. That is
to say, a man would suppose, that those Images and Pictures had wept indeed, and
that those paincted and counterfeited bodies, were moved with compastion one
of them toward another. Histories report, that Zensis and Parrasius the
Painters, fell in contention for the excellency, at what time the one of them
painted Grapes so lively that he deceined Birds with them: the other painted
a Sheet so woorkemanly that be deceived him that had deceived the birds. So
likewise Prothogenes, and Apelles lines deserned to be looked upon, and Cicero
so highly commended the counterfeite of Ephigenia drawn by the Painter
Timantes yt he supposed that one example to be sufficient from which all
Orators and Poets might take a president and pattern to observe Decorum, and
cumlynesse in expressinge affections. The like is to be judged of Antiquity.
For what description of any place can be so evident, or what interpretacion so
plain and perspicuous, but ye beeholding of the thing it self does far exceed
it? And like as if we read enie thing that is obscure and intricate, we
understand it much better if we beeholde some tokens and remnauntes of it,
then we can conceive by the traueill of interpretours, or learn by any
semblable conjecture: so likewise the knowledge of the Antiquity thereof, is
no less pleasant and profitable, which of it self is able alone to stir up
honest wits, and nourishes the sludies of good learning. Tullie glories in
a certain place, that he found out ye Sepulcher of Archimedes the Geometrician,
by the engrauing of a Sphere an^ a Cylinder, which he says he showed unto
his cuntrimen of Arpinum, which sepulcher was ouergrowe^ with bushes and
briars, and much defaced, for that it was long since he died. And nothing
inferrior unto these, have bin found also not much before our age, at which a
man may no less wonder. Hereof a sufficient witness is Raphaell Volaterranus,
writing, that in his time in the way called Via Appia nigh Rome, there was A
noble burial.
dug up the body of a woman, embaulmed wc precious oyntme^ts, whole,
uncorrupted, laid up in a Coffin, and covered with a Marble Stone, having
beetweene her feet (as he says) a burning Candle whom the liquor of the
ointment nourished, but suddenly went out as soon as the Marble coueringe was
removed: adding moreover, that diverse supposed that it was the body of
Tulliola, Tullies Daughter whom he loved Culliola.
dearly. Witnesses also the lyberalitie of Pope Nicholas the fifth, at whose
time lived one Cyriacus Anconitanus, a wonderful searcher of Antiquities, not
only concerning his own country of Italy, but almost of all Europe, and of a
great part of Asia and Africa, whereby he took ye name of an Antiquarie,
leauinge an everlasting renown of his name unto posterity. Who upon a time,
when one demanded of him, why he bestowed so much labor in search of such
matters: answered, that he would gladly raise some dead man to life: rightly
weighing how that many things are decaid and forgotten through process of time,
which might be restored by dyligence of traueilynge, and by industry of
learned men, preserved from injury of oblivion. Yea, what shall we say more,
yt we should now have no Cosmography at all, which contains the description of
yt whole world, nor Topography, which co^prehendeth ye description of certain
private places: unless it were granted unto us through ye benefit of
trauelinge? The ancient Cosmographers were of opinion, yt the earth was
uninhabitable under the Equinoctial, as also that part of the world, which
stretches out beyond the polare circles toward ye Poles. Which two positio^^
of theirs to be false: partly ye Nauigacions The pro^^^e of Nauigations.
of the Portingales, do teach us: and partly also those Regions whom the
elevation of the North Pole argues to to lie without the arcticke circle, as
are Gronla^dia and Willappia, with other Islands lying near to the frosen Sea,
Wherein the Portingall Nauigacions have not alonely done much good, but in other
things also. For where as the ancient Writers by the difference of Noonetide
shadows, have called some men Periscij that is to say, tourninge shadowed,
some Amphiscij double shadowed, some Heteroscij single shadowed: this have they
found by their Nauigations to be true, and unto the three parts of the world,
have found out and adjoined a fourth, namelye America, ^merica.
which for the unknown bigness thereof, they think to be an other world,
beesides many more Islands unknown before. Whereby we are the less moved to
wounder at the Antipodes, or Antichthones, that is to say, those who, as Cicero
has interpreted, do tread step for step directly against us. For the
Geometrical reason, says Copernicus, proves that America lies directly on
the othersyde against India Gangetica: the like judgment is also to be given
of other regions of the World. Likewise, there is no man doubts but that
traueill was the first cause of the findinge out of Astronomy, since by it,
first of all the elevation of the Poles was found out, and by that variety of
Horizons, and by them both the differences of ye days and nights. But al
these things being omitted, let us return to nature, and unto grauer
studies. There is no man, I think that will deny, but that the searchinge out
of the nature of The study of Nature.
things is most profitable, the same is performed by no means more
effectually, then by traueill. As for example sake, Peaches which grow in that
country from which they took their name, are Poison: but in Germany they are
accoumpted among delicates and banqueting dishes, which are both found by
traueill. So likewise the Hemlocke that grows in Germany, has not the same
force which that has that grows in Italy. Our Cuntrye of Germany knows
not the Date Tree: The Date tree.
howbeit it grows in Italy, but for the most part without fruit: and in
Africa they abound in such sort: that they make both meat and drink of the
fruit. And to be short, other things grow in other places, which in one place
are of more force and virtue then in another, and they also of sundry and
diverse kinds, whose properties and qualyties who so is ignorant of: is not
worthy the name of a Philosopher, much less of a Physicion, who ought to be
unskillful of nothing appertayning to the nature and diversity of things,
places, and men. Yea, there be fruits of sundry Trees, who among the
ancient writters are called after the names of them that found them, that is
to say, of those that first brought them out of foreign lands and planted
them in their own. As ar Manlians of Manlius, Macians of Macius, Claudians of
Claudius, as Pliny has noted, and also Appians or Melapians in smell and
bigness like Quin^^s, because Appius of the House of Claudia. graffed the same
first upon a Quince. In like manner says Pliny, Decumian Pears and
Dobellian, and Pompeian called teat or Dugge Pears, have ennobeled their
founders and first planters, with many other fruits more well nigh
innum^rable. So Lucius vitellius being Censor, brought the Nut Pistick first
into Italy, and by the authority of Athenaeus and Pliny, we know that
Lucullus being general of the Roman Army, after that he had vanquished
Mithridates and obtained the vpperhande: was the firrst that ever brought The
Cherie tree.
the Cherietree out of Cerasus a certain place and liberty of Pontus called
now Zephano, into Italy, calling also the Fruit thereof Cerasus a Cherie,
although some be of another opinion. It is also euydent out of ye same
Athenaeus, that Citrions were never seen nor tasted of within the remembrance
of Plutarches Grandfathers. Neither yet were they commonly eat^ in Plinies and
Theophrastus time, but only esteemed and regarded for t^eir pleasant smell.

Traueill is also profitable unto the ^tudy of ^^e Law.
study of the Law, for that the law is more dilygently read in one place
then in another, wherein also are some things of such sort, that either for the
ouldnes of them, or for lack of using of them: are almost unknown how they
were used in foretimes, unless a man see them practiced before his face. For
so have I my self seen in Padua in the Praetors Palace, the handlinge of
these two points, Lapis turpitudinis, and Cessio bonorum, whereof mention is
made in the gloss upon the Ciuille Law: with sundry other of that kind,
which Brissionius has noted in his books which he wroate of antiquity of the
law. It is also a great part of wisdom, to know the nature and manners of
men, and how to live with with every body. Therefore whosoever traueilleth with
discretion, and conferreth strange kingdoms with his own native soil,
beesides the manyfolde commodities which I have hitherto recited: he shall
moreover bring away this with him, the better to be able to discern what is
good and bad in his own Country, he shall also know how to correct and amend
eeuel manners, and to furnish himself and others with better. He shall also
have more skyll how to entertain strangers, and understand the manners of men
more perfectly, and according to his affairs and dealinges with them, apply
himself unto them according as the circumstance of time and place shall require.
He shall know moreover the easines or hardness of oportunytie touching the
meetest times, and fittest places, wherein to say or to do anything, none
shall deceive him in misreporting of any thing, neither shall he depend upon
other men's judgment. For in that respect there be many very bold and
importunate, especially if there be none to controulle them: as there be
likewise some Aucthours to be found, who either for the great love they bare to
their cuntrye, or for goodwyll and affection of them to whom they write, either
do advance or extenuate some things, that they exceed the credit of an
history, and are altogether unmindful of their duty. So that none can better
reprehende such then they, which have seen the things whereof they entreat.
It is profitable also to traueill a broad into strange Regions, were it but to
save charges of Houshoulde at Charge of household.
home. For many there be which use sundry means and ways to increase their
wealth. And if there be any thing in the world that will bring a man into
consideration of his own state: surely traueill will do it, wherein he shall
s^e all chances that may happen to man, and the mutabilitye of fickle Fortune.

Of the Properties of the four principal Nations of Europe, and how a man
shall know whether he have profited by traueill or not.
The 4. Chapter.
But forasmuch as we are fallen into discourse of the variety of manners, and
diversity of natures in men: I suppose it were not done a mis, to declare the
properties of some nations. Not of all, for ye were a great labor and
peculyarly beelonginge unto them that have written of the situation of the
World: or of the life and manners of sundry nations, as Strabo, Bohemus with
others: but only of those ye are chief in Europe, that is to say, Germans,
Frenchmen, Italians, and Spaniardes. These nations differ sundry ways one
from another, as, in gesture, gate, voice, singinge, talk, meaning,
humanytie, conversation, love, hatred, affairs, warfare, and other things.
Wherefore, briefly to set down the effect of the matter, and to come to the
purpose: the Germane has ye gesture of a Cutter or The Germane.
Ruffian, the gate of ye cock, a firce look, a manlyvoyce, rude behavior,
variable apparel, and nothing hansome. The Frenchman has a soft gate, a
moderate The French man.
pace, a mild countenance, a pleasant voice, a ready toongue, modest
demeanure, immoderate apparel. The Italian has a slow gate, a grave gesture,
The Italian.
an inconstance countenance, a low voice, an hasty speech, magnificall
beehauiour, indecent and vnseemlye apparel. The Spaniard, a commendable The
Spa^iard.
gate, manners, and gesture, a proud look, a flexible voice, a fine speech,
exquisite apparel. The Germans howl in their singinge except the Dutchmen, who
of them all do singe ind^ede, the Frenchmen do record, the Spaniardes groan,
and the Italians bleat like sheep. The Germans are harshe and hard in their
speech, and simple. The Frenchmen, quick, and proud: the Spaniardes fine and
glorious, the Italians grave, and crafty: the Germans are coumpted good in
counsel, ye Frenchmen rash, Spaniardes crafty, and Italians clenly. Toward
strangers the Germans are roughe and inhospitable, the Frenchmen gentle, the
Spaniardes courteous, and the Italians diligent. In conversation the Germans
are imperious and intolerable, the Frenchmen mild, the Spaniardes wary, the
Italians prudent. In love the Germans be ambitious, the Frenchmen inconstant,
the Spaniardes impacient, the Italians ielous. In hatred the Germans are
reuengers, the Frenchmen threatners, the Spanyardes continuing in their
purpose, and the Italians secret. In affairs the Germans are painful, the
Frenchmen careful, the Spanyardes wakefull, the Italians circumspect. In
Religion and handicraftes the Germans are excellent above other, the Frenchmen
in civility, the Spaniardes in Navigations, and ye Italians in learning. And to
be short, and not to touch every particular point in these Nations, the
Italians and Spanyardes are wise before the deed, Frenchmen in the deed, and
Germans after the deed. There is also great difference beetweene these Nations
in the love of weemen, for:

The Frenchman loves the nimble wenche* that trippes and treades apace,
And aptly footes the measures fine, to dance with comely grace.
The Spaniarde does more his mind in beauty brave delight,
And joys withal to please his lust even with his ladies sight.
The Italian, with a fearful wenches love is best content,
That often shunnes the pleasant game of love, least she be shent.
But she that with a brazen face her master can provoke:
She is the love that in the Germans heart bears greatest stroke.
These properties, as they are by judgment of many ascribed unto the men of ^he
pro^ties of ^weeme^.
those nations, so are there also peculiar qualities in the weemen wherein they
differ one from another, whether you speak of their stature and form of
body, gesture, courage, gate, diverse studies, love, faith toward their
husbands, diligence toward their Children, humanity toward all men: or
whether you talk of their wits and understanding. For the Italian weemen for
the more part apply the study of good learning, especially if they be of any
noble family, which the Spanish weemen do not, and the Frenchweemen do more
study the knowledge of forreyne toongues, then of learning. The Germane weemen
do scarce know any other language then their own which they sucked from
their mothers breasts, much less any good learning. So the Spanish weemen are
proud in their apparel and going, the Italian weemen grave and neat, the
Frenchweemen light, the Germaneweeme^ variable and foolish. And understand,
that I speak here of the higher Germany, for the Dutche weemen are more
civil, more grave in going, and more given to learn strange tongues then of
any other nation, by reason of the traficque of Mercha^dize which much
flourishes among them, having England, Scotland, France, and the higher
Germany near neighbors unto them, and are governed by ye King of Spain. The
Italian weemen are passing wise, the Spanish weemen for the more part are dull
of wit and understanding, the Frenchweemen are simple rather by nature then
custom, the German weemen aplie all their wits rather upon household
affairs, then any thing else. The Spanishe weemen use painting to excessiuely
to commend their beauty with all, the Italian weemen use the same somewhat
less, the Frenchweemen very little, and the Germane weemen painte their faces
before they be married only, but not all of them, and that which they do is
the to the intent to deceive their lovers. But as touching their honesty:
that I commit to other men's judgment. There is moreover a certain difference
beetwene these Nations and all other, in those things which we have before
specified, whereby they are discerned from all other Nations, which profits
very much to the framing of a man's judgment, as the sundry nations of
Italians are: Ligurians, Tuscanes, Spoletanes, Latins, Campanians, Lucans,
Calabrians, Salentines Apulia^s, Samnites, Marca Anconitans, Flaminians,
Aemilians, Lumbards, Venetians, Forli, and Slauonians, and these differ al not
only in speech, propriety of language, and pronunciacion: but in manners also,
and many other ways. Which thing, how true it is: Fortian questions Fortian
questions.
do declare, whereunto whosoever joins the book that was written by one Landus
Horte^sius, set forth without any name, he may be conversant among the
Italians with great profit and honor.

Hitherto have I shown the causes and effects of Traueill, and noted the
diversity of the principal Nations of Europe. Hereafter I mean to declare
how to know whether a man have gotten any profit by his traueill or not. And
although it be hard to judge of every particular, since diverse traueill for
diverse causes, and some study one art some another: nevertheless who so
weighs diligently the means whereby every Art is learned, he may gather
it, by very plain and evident arguments. For as no man accoumpteth him to
be expert in Physic that has no knowledge in simples: or that he is a
good Carpenter or Caruer, that cannot discern a Doricke Picture or statue,
from a Corinthia^: so nether can it be thought that he has well employed his
time and labor in traueill which has not amended and increased by his
traueill, the knowledge and skill which he had before. As for example, if
there be Precepts to be observed.
one that is a politic person, and be a Counselor to any Prince, or in some
free state, and say that he has continued some space in France: and it be
demanded of him how many miles France, or Spain is in length or breadth?
what fortifications it has? At what side it is easy or hard to be
assaulted? How many great Rivers it has that cannot be waded? What is the
chief force and virtue of the Spanyardes, and what of the Frenchmen? what is
the greatest vice in both nations? wherein does the one or the other most
repast themselves, or take greatest delight? In what thing the nobility of
France does differ from the nobility of Spain? wherein also the commons do
differ of both nations, what are their studies, and manners? what diversity is
beetweene the buildinges of both those countries? which king of either cuntrie
is of greater power? After what manner the subjects in both cuntreies show
their obedience to their prince, or oppose themselves against him? How mutch
the bondage of France is unlike to the bondage of Spain? How in those regions
the scarcity of corn and vitaill may be eschued? what is the guise of Court
in does Realms? and what provision is made that in time of war the
Husbandmen sustain no injury? If therefore he can sufficiently answer these
demau^des, then it is well: if not, it is a great presumption that he has
bestowed his time in other matters rather then by his traueill to know these
things which it heehooueth a politic person, or a Counselor to understand,
although there withal he know also what kind of Dancing the Frenchmen, or
Spaniardes do use. For those things are chiefly to be observed which tend to
the principal end, not toys and trifles or such things as appertain not to
the direct end, although we may also have some use of them in other affairs.
In fine, to conclude much matter in few words, the most certain rule to
know whether a man have profited by traueiling, is, whether besides the things
that I have recited in this present Chapter, you diligently observe what he
judges in his familiar talk of the lands wherein he has traueiled. For he
that unadvisedly derogateth any thing from the dignity and excellency of
foreign regions, without just cause preferring his native Country before
those places: the same is either ruled by affection, or of himself rude and
foolish, not being able to judge of things accordingly. And where discretion
lacks there wants also choice: and where choice wants there wisdom is
forth a town, wherewith all other things faill, and wax worth nothing.

What things are to be considered in traueilinge.
The. 5. Chapter.
ALthough it may be sufficiently conceived by those things which we have set
down in the Chapters going before, what it beehooueth him to observe that
means to Traueyll with profit: notwithstanding I purpose to prosecute every
thing more exactlye, imitating the example of Moses, who most diligently
discerned the differences beetweene Mountains, Hills, Lands, Peoples,
Towns, fields and Forestes, adding moreover what is to be considered in them
all. For thus he said to them whom he sent to view the land of Chanaan.
When ye shall come unto the Hills, consider the land what manner one it is,
and consider the people that dwell therein, whether they be strong or weak:
many or few: the Land good or bad: what Cities there be? Walled or not
Walled: the soil fertile or barreine: wooddie or champion? So that there be
five principal points too Five poi^ts ^o be considered.
be considered in every Country: the Name, Figure, Bigness, Jurisdiction,
and situation. To the Name belongs The Nmae
how it was called of old, and how at this present, for oftentimes the names
of Regions ar changed according to variety of time, and inhabitauntes. So
Italy was first called Ianicula of Ianus, or of Noa who was called Oenotrius
whereof the same was also called Oenotria: after that it was named Camesena,
Saturnia, Appennina, Taurina, and Vitullia, Hesperia also, and Ausonia, until
at length it was termed by the name of Italia, Italy, which remains to this
present, the occasions of all which names are partlye noted by Cato, and
Berosus, and partly by such as have written the History, and described the
antiquityes of the same Country, as Polybius, Halicarnasseus, and others. By
the Figure I mean the form The Figure.
and fashion of the Cuntry. So Sicile, is said to be of a three square form
and Critias in Plato reports of a certain Egiptian Priest, of whom Solon
demanded certain questions concerning antiquity, to whom he answered, that
Country to be of a three square form, out of whose top the Streams of
Nilus are divided. etc. There is also another distinction of Cuntries, and
places. For every land, is either an Island, as Sicile: or Peninsula, that is
to say, almost an Island called also Chersonesus, as Taurica Chersonesus, now
called the less Tartaria or Isthmus, that is to say, a narow land beetweene
two Seas, as Isthmus Corinthiacus, Corinthe in Greece, or else a main and
continent land, ^s Saxony, Misnia, Thuring, as Cosmographers teach. By
Bigness I understand Signs.
the capacity and wideness, which is discerned in length and breadth of a
Country: likewise in the compass, bounds, and buttes, wherewith it is
environed in respect of the Coasts of the world, and Peoples, Rivers, or
Hills whereupon it bordereth. By Jurisdiction Iurisdic^ion.
understand, the rule, and manner of government which is in that Land which
being diverse among diverse peoples, and belonging rather to every private
province or peculiar city, then unto whole regions: I mean to entreat of the
differences of them hereafter in this Chapter. The situation of a Country is
either hilly or plain, and the same again either coasting, or inlande. Which
diversity took beginning even from very nature, and brings with it sundry
great commodities. For as the same Priest in Plato teaches: they that dwell
upon the tops of the hills are safe from fluddes, and drowning: and there
is also an ancient contention beetweene the Egyptians, and Scythians
concerning antiquity, for that the Scythians say they were first made, who
dwelling in the higher places: are best able to abide the Cold, and stand not
in fear that the Sun set them on fiere, nor dread the breakyng in of the
Sea upon them, being never able to rise up unto them to their anoyance. In
the former Books De Republica, a certain Athenian asked a man of Crete (who had
said that the greater part of the Cretens, had determined to make a Colonie
abroad, and had committed the charge thereof to the Gnosij) whether that
Colonie should lie upon the Sea side, or not. etc. There be also other
diuersyties beetweene Regions, or soil, and earth, all which Leuinus Lemnius
the Dutchman, Leuinus Lemnius
has lately vttred in his work which he has set forth of the secret
miracles of nature. And those things which we have hitherto admonished in
this Chapter to be observed by Traueilers, has Franciscus Patritius Senensis
also noted in his work, of the Institution of a King and a Kingdom. But we
must understand, that it is not sufficient to have marked the differences of
the letters, and words: unless we note also the ground or soil, Hills,
Rivers, Lakes, Ponds, woods, and the cities also in them. For some ground is
barrein some fruitful, which Moses willed his Surueiers to mark, which also
the Athenian in Plato teaches. So likewise some hills bring forth trees
and some do not, some ryuers abound with fish and some not. And most sure it
is, that the Genoans are much destitute of these two things. The like also is
to be judged of wooddes, Lakes, and standing Pondes, who for the diversity of
trees and fyshes that are in them: are accustomably praised or dispraysed of
Rhetricians. The viewing of Cities requires much more diligence, for in them
there are both public, and prinate works to be seen. Public works be
either holy, or profane. The holy works are Cathedral Churches, Minsters,
Abbeis, and other Churches, whereof although there be some found very fair
many times out of Cities: yet are they more commonly in Cities then in
Villagies. The profane works are pallaices, Market places, fields, Theaters,
Courts, Schools, Hospitals, Spittles for sick and diseased persons, Castles,
Armaries, bulwarks, turrets, and all kind of municion. Private works I call
such notable things as are seen in the houses of private men, and citizens,
as Pictures, Gardaines, Fountaynes, or whatsoever else is worth ye seeing,
whereunto also may Potecaties Shoppes be anexed, since for the most part they
are private men's goods, as lybraries are the common wealths, Howbeit it may
be, that they may both beelong to the Princes revenue, as bathes do, with
many other things more. And like as when we enter into consideration of any
Country, above althing it behooves us to know the name thereof, and the cause
of the name if it be possible to know it: so must we do also in the view
of any City. So at Ianua in a certain Citizens house, these verses following
are written upon the name, and founder of that City.

I Ianus, of religion, of peace, and God of right,
Am he of old that built this city brave that stands in sight.
These three shall keep the town and (nephues) keep these three in hand,
Believe me where these three shall be exild, no town can stand.
And immediately after: Phetiton nephue to Ianus, father to Ligurius, who
brought ye Egiptia^ Colonies from Attica to ye city of Ianua, in the year
after the fludde 450. Thus when we have understood the name and founder of ye
City, we must next have regard to the manner of government. For there is one
manner of living under a Monarchy, as Diversity of government.
in Spain, and in France: another in Aristocratie, as now in Venice, and in
old time in Sparta: another in Democratie, wherewith ye Switchers preserve their
liberty and country at this day. And although all Philosophers and studients
of pollice, suppose that al kinds of government may be comprehended under one
of these three, if the abuse as well as the right use of them be weighed: yet
experience teaches it to be otherwise. For there be certain cuntries, Realms,
and Cities at this present, which are governed by the King and the Nobillitie
together, as Denmark: and as it was likewise at Rome in the time of the Kings
unto the Tarquines: some by the King and commonaltie, as Persia: some by the
Nobility and commonalty, as Florence, Siene, and diverse other Cities of
Italy, the like whereof was practiced at Rome after the expulsion of the
Kings, at Lacedaemon, and Athens: finally, some are governed by the King,
Nobylitie, and co^monaltye, as Germany, and Polande. Which being known: we
must mark how in every kind of government, the Empire is either continued, or
increased, or lost: and with what new laws, officers, and Maiestrates, they
use to furnishe themselves when they perceive their state to be in peril.
Which poyncte how full of difficulty it is: every one knows, seeing as
Cicero says, it is the part of a stranger not to be inquisitiue in a strange
place, and not to be curious in a foreign common wealth. But truly he that
studieth to do his Country good, must needs do so. Last of all he must be
very well acquainted with the manners The manners.
and conditions of the men with whom he lives: not to the intent only to
aplye himself unto them in that respect: but also in diet and apparel, and
all their manner of living, or whatsoever particular thing there be that may
instruct him in language, or behavior, or help his judgment, or serve him enie
way yt may be profitable unto mankind.

I know there be some that will say that these things which I give in
precept, are for the more part frivolous, since there is no one man that can
observe all things, muchlesse he that gives himself wholly to some
profession, or studieth some other thing, for which he has traueiled. I
grant it is true, nether writ I this to the end that I would have all men
to observe all of them, for a man must spend more time in one thing then in
another, which I have noted also before: notwithstanding, whosoever has
traueiled for studies sake or for any other cause, may sometime be so much at
leisure, as to observe some other things that are profitable, and commodius
for the society of men. And albeit diverse things may be necessary for diverse
persons, according to ye end which every one proposes to him self, and ye
fruit which he hops to reap of his traueil: notwtstanding I think this our
writing will be unto some right profitable. For why? our precepts ar general, and
may be applied unto al travel, when thersoeuer, but chefly to ye which is taken
in hand for matter of state and policy, and which makes men meet and fit
to give counsel, and to govern the common wealth. Who so has proposed
himself any other end, as a Physician, a Soldier, or Merchant: he may omit
certain of these, and place other in their steed. And it shall be more
profitable, that every one weigh with himself the knowledge of what things will
most farther him toward the attaynment of that for which he traueileth. For
he that so does, shall receive largest commodity thereof, and soonest hit the
mark whereat he shoots, what ever trade of life he follows.

How we ought to make a Choice of such things as we see or learn in
traueilling: and of the Traueillers Privileges.
The 6. Chapter.
YOungemen that traueill, must be admonished of this one thing, that whilst
they be viewing althing, searchinge, and learning, they be also mindful of
their retourninge into their own Cuntreye. For they that do not so, they live
but for one day, as the Proverb says, and are but little provident for their
own welfare. For since in all places of the World there are found both good
and eeuell men, and there is no Nation so relygious and civil but has some
vices also adjoined unto the virtues wherewith it is endued: so are the
greatest and most heinous ^ownde amongst them that abound with most
commendable virtues. For seeinge that good and eeuell stand in opposition and
contrariety one to the other: it follows yt one of them hold up and
sustain another, and that the one cannot be without the other, as what place
were there for Justice if there were no injuries? for Magnanimity if there
were no fainthartinesse? for continency if there were no lustinge nor
intemperauncie? for health, if there were no sickly persons? for truth if there
were no lies? for felicytie if there were no misery? That Socrates in Plato
said very well, how he much marueiled that Esope devised never a fable,
wherein God joined the extremities of these contraries together in such manner
that one touched the other, and the end of one were the beginning of another.
Wherefore, it behooves a traueiller to be circumspect that he embrace not
vices in steed of virtues, not only in that we be all more prone by Nature
to vice then virtue: but because vices are often covered with names of the
nearest virtues, and virtues also stained with title of next vices. As for
example, when we call a man that uses his liberty arregant: a modest man
simple, one of few words ignorant: a good man wicked: a wise man craftye:
the like whereof happens also in other things. And manytimes pleasures make
a man not think on his return, wherewith mannie are tought as Fishes with a
hook, unto which effect those Meremaides are of much force, by whose sweet
songs sundry are intrapped unless they stop their ears well against their
hermonie: there be also infinite other allurementes according to the
diversity of the Country. To these also this often happneth, that there are
some foreign People so crafty and subtle, that when they perceive a man to
be enamoured with their pleasures, they leave no means vnassaid to detain
him longer with them: chaunginge themselves into all fourmes and figures after
the manner of Protheus, both to cousin him of his money, and as Circe did to
Ulysses mates, transform him from a man to a beast. Wherefore, if therebe
need of wisdom in any thing: surely it needs in this, which Homere also
signysieth in many places in the Odissea under the person of Ulysses. For such
is the ignorance of man's understanding, the untowardness of his corrupt nature
so great: that he cannot discern good from eeuel, virtue from vice, with out
difficulty. And although we grant, that some offend wittingly, and deceive
themselves with the couloure of true pleasure or pain, as those do that be
incontinent, whose mind and reason Incontine^t persons.
while it strives with desire judges that to be eeuell, which in truth is
eeuell: howbeit they want the perfect knowledge, not iudginge so exquisitely
as they ought, and indeed are carried away rather with opinion then judgment,
so sufferinge their reasons to be ruled by affection. For doubtless if they
knew the truth as it is: they should not err. Thus desire ouercummeth reason
with ignorance, and true knowledge is never ouercum by affection. But
howsoever the case stands, there is nothing better for a Traueiler then to
bridle his lusts and affection himself, if he be able. If not, the next is
to use the means and help of others, followinge the precepte of Hesiodus.
Which Homere likewise expresses in the example of Ulysses, feininge that he
stopped his mates ears with wax, that they should not be entised with singing
of the Sirenes. But he that will do nether of these twain, he voluntarely
seeks his own harm, and casts himself headlong into all kind of lewdnes.
And as touching repressinge his affections: he shall do it more easily and
willingly, if he think often of returning into his country: as Homere writes
Ulysses did, and by this means through his own discretion he may withstand
the allurements of sundry pleasures, and get the victory over all kind of
naughtiues. There is an ancient complaint made by many that our cuntreymen
usually bring three things with them out of Italye: a naughty conscience, an
empty Three ^hinges out ^f Italy.
Purse, and a weak stomach: and many times it chances so indeed. But what
is the cause thereof? for in those places of Italy where the study of good
Arts does most flourishe, the Air is not unwholesome, the diet such as every
man does require, the men godly and ungodly, good and bad. There are seen also
daily many examples of virtues and vices, in all sorts of men. It remains
therefore, that the same happens by our own voluntarye will and mere motion,
that we live so yt beeinge snared in ye toils of vices we sustain los of
godliness, health, and money, that it is grown into a proverb among the
Italians, Thedesco Italionato, Diabolo incarnato: that is to say, a Dutchman
become in manners like an Italian puts on the nature of the Devil, and is
apt unto all kind of wickedness. Every Nation has his peculiare vices which
it beehooueth us to know, but not to follow. To conclude we must so line among
foreign Nations that when we return home we may frequent our own Country
guise if it be good, not bring home with us vices for virtues, ignorance for
knowledge, naughtines for goodness, opinion for certentie, sickness for health,
or whatsoever else is wicked and execrable, both with loss of time, and expense
of money, and so to return home with shame, and shame enough.

And forasmuch as there be many and diverse anoia^ces, whereat traueilers must
make small courtesy: therefore are there many benefits and privileges by both
laws granted unto them. For strangers and traueilers a^compted in the number
of the Church and spiratualtie, and whosoever hurts them or their goods: are
excomunicated, unless when they be admonished thereof they make satisfaction.
Likewise they that traueill Priuiledg^^ for Tr^ueilers.
for religions sake are free from payinge skot or lot. And all traueilers and
strangers have free lybertye to beequeath their goods at their pleasure: and
if any chance to die intestate, their goods which they have brought with them
shall not appertain to him in whose house they lie, but they come to the
Bishop of the same diocese, either to be delivered unto the next heirs, or
to be employed to godly purposes. But if it chance that the Host detayne any
of these goods ^ertune of ^^ods pro^ibited.
in his hands fraudulentlye, he is compelled to restore threefold so much to
the Bishop, enie custom to the contrary notwithstanding, or else he ^^eseth
the liberty to make a testament, yea, who soever keeps away any part of the
strangers goods that die, he sins mortally, unless he do it to the
intent to deliver them to the true heir, and is not to be excused by any
statute, custom, or commandment, as Hostiensis proves at large. Moreover,
such as traueil for relligio^s sake, ought not to be troubled or st^^d for det
in any place through which they traueil, nor to be taken by occasion or means
of yt which Lawiers call stoppinge or re^^rai^^h. Likewise, along iourny, taken
in hand for matter of ^cessitie, may defer marriage. Last of all, ye law has
also provided for those ye traueil for study sake. There is extant also a
constitution made by Frederick the Emperor, in Justinians Code, wherein he
grants unto all that traueill to study: safecondit to traueill, and free
liberty to tarry in any place, forbiddinge that in no wise they be troubled for
the offense or det of another: permittinge them to choose before what judge
they wilbee conuented, showing also the causes why it ought to be so. We must
also Friendly Privileges.
understand that Scholars goods are exempted from payments and exactions.
Which point although it be not expressed in this constitution: yet by these
words (Let them freely come and dwell) and by many other arguments more
interpretours do gather the same. And this whole constitution is to be
understood of such Scholars as study, and not of those whose skill and mind
is more on their dishes then their Books, although their names be written in
the Matricular books of studients, as they term it, by the testimony of
public Notaries, and Apparitours. But this constitution is not written
concerning all Schools, but only of such as are approved by thaucthoritie of
great Princes, or long continuance, as Ba^olus has noted. There are extant
also many titles of privileges belonging to Scollars in ye Code written in the
time of the ancient Lawiers, as of the Privileges of Schools in the x.
Book. Likewise, of the professors of the City of Constantinople: in the xii.
Book. And at this present there be sundry noble Universities of students,
endued with many goodly Privileges given by the Bishops of Rome, Emperors
and other Princes, with Franciscus Bologninus has gathered together.

Examples of Notable men that have traueilled.
The 7. Chapter.
Hitherto we have sufficientlye entreated of such things as apperteine to the
declaration of ye definition of Traueill: let us now therefore recite some
examples of such men, as have gotten themselves great commendacion and glory
by traueill. And although this place be more copious then that it may be
comprised in few words, for who is able to examine all men of all states and
condition whatsoever? not withstanding I will bring forth the most notable
examples of the most excellent men in sundry kinds of life. And Philosos^hers.
to begin with Philosophers, it is well known, ye Pythagoras went first into
Egypt, there to learn of the priests of that cuntry the virtue of numbers, and
the most exquisite figures of Geometry. From thence to Babylon, where of the
Chaldes he learned the course of the Planets, their stations, circuit, and
effects, over these inferior bodies. Then going back into Crete how he came
to Lacedaemon, to understand the most famous laws which flourished at that
time, made by Lycurgus and Minos. Lastly, arriuinge in Italy: how he
remained at the city of Croton the space of twenty years, where by his
aucthoryty he reclaymed the people that were wont to live in all
dissolutnesse, bringing them to a frugale trade of life the Matrones to
chastity, the youth to modesty, insomuch ye the weemen being moved with his
holiness and virtue: left of their golden Garments, and other excess of
furniture and Ornaments which they were wont to were consecrating the^ unto
Juno. At the length how he sailed to Metapentu^, and there died where he was
had in such admiration: that they made a Church of his house, and offered
Divine Sacrifice unto him. And whether traueiled not also Apollonius his
Scholar? Being a Magicia^, and a Philosopher? he passed over Caucasus, he went
through the Albani, Scythians, Massagetes the most wealthiest Realms of India,
and passing over the broad river Phison, came to the Brachmannj to hear
Hiarchas sitting in his throne of Gold, and drinking of Tantalus well, among
a few^ Scholars, dispute of the Nature and motions of the Planetes, and of the
inequality of the days. From thence how he traueiling by the Elamites,
Babilonians, Chaldees, Medes, Assyrians, Parthians, Syrians, Phoenicians,
Arabians, Jews, returning to Alexandria: departed into Aethiopia to hear the
Gymnosophistes, and to beehold yt most renoumed table of the Sun, standing
The tab^^ of ye Su^^^
upon the Sea beache rightly being of opinion, yt a man may learn somewhat in
every place, and better himself whersoeuer he becomes. So likewise, Plato
heard Architas Tarentinus in the same part of Italy which once was called
Crateres Aetnae, now commonly termed Mongibello, notwithstanding that among
the Athenians it was forbidden by law upon pain of death, that no Grecian
should go into that Island. Moreover he traueilled into Egypt, to learn
antiquities of the wise men of that land: from whence there is no doubt, but
he brought all the wisdom and knowledge which he left to posterity, and in
which he excelled in such fort, that in respect thereof he was called Divine,
and Prince of Philosophers. It is not necessary to recyte many more of this
sort, either more ancient the^ these or of latter years, being evident that
all they have done the like whosoever are commended for renown, and learning.
And unless they had done so: they could not have drawn unto themselves such
flocks of scholars, nor have raised so many S^ctes, as Socrates the
Socraticke, Plato the Academick, Aristotle the Peripateticke, Zeno the Stoicke,
Pythagoras the Pythagorick, Antistenes the Cynicke, Aristippus the Cyrenaicke,
and other likewise others. The like is also in Physicians, whether we speak
of Greeks or Arabicks. For that I may say nothing of Aesculapius, whom in the
old time they feygned to be God of Physic: it is certain that Hyppocrates
did not only Hypocrates.
practyze his art at home: but also in forreyne Cuntryes For he dwelt many
years in Thessalia, being borne in Coos, and being sent for to Abdera, drove
away the pestilence from that city. And although for y^ great love he bare to
his own Country he would not go visit Artexerxes, being thereto provoked with great
rewards: yet was he naturally delighted to traueill, and therefore it is
written that he woare evermore a cloak. Gale^ Galen.
the best learned of all Physicians, heard Pelops and Satyrus teach at Smyrna,
and Numesianus at Corinthe, and afterward traueiled through other parts of the
world. And first he went to Alexandria, where when he had stayed some space,
and wandered over all the land of Egypt lying round about: he departed unto
Palaestina in Syria. He sailed to Lemnos and Cyprus, to the intent to bring
sundry things from thence serving to the use of Physic, to do his
Cuntreymen of Pergamum pleasure withal. Notwithstanding he stayed not long at
home, but upon occasion of a sedition rising: he departed to Rome. From whence
be returned home again after that ye sedicion was quieted, where he continued
so long: until after a long time he was sent for to Rome again by Marcus
Aurelius, and Lucius, Emperors of Rome. But at the last he returned again
into his Country, and there ended his life. The Arabian Physicians also were no
less given to traueile, as Auicen witnesses of himself, that he had welnigh
traueiled over all ye world. What shall I speak of Orators and Poets? whose
nature is properly, to traueill as Plato bears record: and their duty
requires them to do so, to maintain common tranquillity, or for any other
cause, which poinct is also co^man unto all civil and politic persons with
Orators. For while they traueil abroad, and look diligently to their duty,
other Citizens may tarry at home, and the common wealth be in quietness: which
innumerable examples both of Greek, and Latin Histories do teach, both in
Thucidides, and Liuie.

Howbeit now at the last, let us examine the ancient law makers and first
founders of ceremonies, as Moses that brought laws unto the Jews written in
tables of stone with Gods own finger: likewise Orpheus which did the like unto
the Thracians: Minos, and Rhadamantus to the Cretens: Zamolx is to the
Scythians: Lycurgus to the Lacedaemonians: and Draco, with Solon, who
prescribed laws and order of living to the people of Athens. Surely we shall
find that they had all traueiled. But if we will weigh the Lawgiuers of one
common wealth only, as namely of the City of Rome, they will bring us forth
example enoughe who have described their lives at large: wherein the president
of one only shall suffice us in the steed of many, and that is of P.
Seruilius Sulpitius Ruffus. For it is well known, Ser. Sulpitius.
how he accompanied Cicero into Rhodes there to apply the study of Eloquence
and Philosophy, and afterward lived at Rome to the great commodity of the
commonwealth, so long, until Caesar ouerthrewe Pompei in the Pharsalicall
batteil, and obtained the superiority. For in those troublesome days he abode
some space at Samos, and in other places, disputing in the Schools, of the
Pontificial law. But when Caesar returned into Italy, he was not only
restored into ye City, but also made Liuetenaunt of Greece as long as Caesar
lived: but when he was slain, he returned to Rome. Finally, if we peruse ye
lives of interpretours of the Law, both new and old, we shall find that
there have bin many more strangers have taught, and professed the Civil Law
in any place, the^ of them that were borne there in the same Country. The
truth whereof is yet to be seen in Italy, Germany, and France, where the
Civil law is in price. For there be many Realms that use their own
Municipall or Country laws only, not the Roman, as England, Scotland,
Polande, and Sueueland: which laws, none can interpret better then he that
is borne and bred under them.

Yea, noble me^ likewise, and such as have done worthy and valient deeds, have
also bin addicted to travel. For it is written, that Jupiter Cretaeus traueiled
over Iup. Cretaeus.
the whole world fiuetimes. Which although it may happily seem fabulous unto
some: yet it imports thus much, whereby we may understand that at his time he
left no part of ye world unsought The like whereof also was done by his two
Suns, that is to wit, Dionisius surnamed Bacchus, and yt most valient
Hercules, the one of them profiring the whole world by his invention, teaching
men how to plant vines: ye other delivering the earth from all kind of wicked
men, and tyranny. For what other were Procustes, Scyron, Cacus, Diomedes,
Antaeus, and Geryo^: but cruel and wicked tyrants, who evermore in all places
were encountered by Hercules, Theseus, and other valiant personages? It is no
unknown how Jason, with other maies of that famous expedition, called
Argonautae, sailed into Colchos, of purpose to fetch from thence the Golden
fleese: which in deed he atchiued, getting unto himself thereby immortal
glory. Like as Ulysses, when he had bin twenty years away from his Realm of
Ithaca, it is no merueill if Homere term him (...) that is to say, one that
knows many men's manners, and extol him with wounderfull commendation.
Virgill likewise very much praises his traueiling Aeneas: who both, might
well have lived in rest and quietness, Ulysses with his lovers Calypso and
Circes, and Aeneas with his Dido: if they had bin contented always to have
lived obscurely. Howbeit the excellency of their courage, and the desire of
greater glory, pricked them for the to forsake no pains nor dangers so that
they might obtain that which they sought for.

Let us moreover consider all the Monarchies of the world, and we shall perceive
that the Princes that ruled in them, achieved most excellent exployts by
traueilling, as Ninus and Nabucadnezer in the first Monarchy: Cyrus, Darius
and xerxes in the second: and Alexander the great in the third, with whom also
that Monarchy began and ended. For after his death, the kingdoms which he
left were governed by many, howbeit they also maintained great wars in sundry
places. In the fouerth, Julius Caesar, Octauianus Augustus, Constantines,
Charleses, Othoes, Conrades, Henry's, Fredericks and other more, unto whom all,
Lord Charles the fifth was inferior in no respect, either for trauellynge, or
glory in chiuaulrie. For how often has he gone to visit the Realms that
came to him by descent from his auncetours, lying wide among many Nations, and
as it were dispersed? How often has he returned conqueror out of France, and
gone to his own realms? Did not he, leaving the most flourishinge realms
Praise of Charles the fyfth.
of Spain, appeace all Italy with his presence, that had bin many years
vexed with civil war, and also preserved Germany being sick almost of the
same disease? when he came toward Pannonia, did not Solomon emperor of the
Turks, immediately run away? Did not he, being present in person, recover the
kingdom of Tunetz, a realm in Africa, which Ariadenus Barbarossa had invaded
by commandment, and with the power of Solomon? went not he to Aphrodisium in
hope to succor yt Christian commonwealth. To be short, to what kingdoms or
places went not he? what dangers, what labors sustained he not? whereby as I
have showed, he might purchase peace and tranquilytie to the Empire yt was
committed to his charge, a most excellent prince, and as Voerthusius says, in all points like to Charles the maine. Histories much commend of Mithridates
King of Pontus, for that he could speak fifty several toongues: but who
supposes that he learned so many for any other intent, but that he might be
able himself to talk with the nations with who^ he had dealings, as also to be
conversant among strangers with less envy? So likewise Antiochus the great,
was well traueiled, and Hannibal, Pompeius, the Scipios, the Marij, Lentuli,
with other Kings, Princes, and noble men innumerable of al cuntries: whose
virtues and most valient deeds, shall never any oblivion put out of memory:
like as there is no age ye will commend of those that lie sleaping at home,
given to sloth and idleness, never doing any thing at home or abroad, worthy of
praise or speech of posterity, according to the example of Ninias, sun to
Ninus and Semiramis, Sardanapalus with others.

But let us now peruse the holy Scriptures, and in them we shall find
infinite examples of godly men that have traueilled, partly of their own
accord, partly at yt commandment of God. For in the xii. of Genesis, God
expressly commands Abraham, that leauyng the Country where he dwelt, he
should go to an other place: and shortly after, he promyseth to the same
Abraham, the land of his traueill, and to give him all the land of Chanaan for
an everlasting inheritance. Likewise Isaac, after the death of his father
departed into Palestine and dwelt there, being commanded by God so to do.
Jacob, his father being a live: traueiled into Mesopotamia, and after many
years returned thence into his native country. And being well stricken in
years, he traueiled into Aegipt to see his sun Joseph: and in sundry places
of the Scripture we read, how the holy Patriarchs, Prophets, and other
godly men, took long viogies in hand, namely, Moses, Aaron and Joshua. Yea,
our savior Christ himself, traueilled abroad very often, appearyng many
times in semblant of a Pilgrim and Traueiller, to the intent he might gather
his Church from every place. The like whereof he wrought also by his
Apostles, whom he sent over the whole world to preach the Gospel. To which
purpose it is written, that Thomas traueilled into Parthia and preached unto the
inhabytants there, also to the Medes, Persians, Hircanes, Bactrianes, and other
nations of the inner India Matthew, to the Macedonians, and Thracians.
Bartelmew, to the Lycaonians and those that inhabit the farther India. Andrew,
to the Achaians, and Scythians. John after the death of Mary, to the people of
Asia. James the elder, to the Spaniards. Phillip to the Frenchmen. Simon
Zelotes to the Egiptians. Peter into Pontus, Gallicia, Bythinia, Cappadocia,
Italye, and at length preached Christ at Rome. Saint Paul's peregrinacions are
known out of the Acts of the Apostles, and out of his own writings. He
declares how after that he was converted unto the faith, he traueiled into
Arabia, and from thence returned to Damascus, and went to Jerusalem to see
Peter. After that, he departed into Syria, and Cilicia, and when fourteen
years were expyred: went again to Jerusalem to preach the Gospel. It is
well known moreover that he was in Spain, and in Hispania Narbonensis
converted many souls to the faith of Christ, as he also did in other places,
until at last he was beheaded at Rome under the Emperor Nero. Duringe all
this time of traueill, the Evangelist S. Luke, was companion to Paul, a Syrian
borne, in the City of Antioche, and wrat his Gospel in Achaia, and died in
the same cuntry. Likewise S. Mark the Evangelist was borne in the city of
Antioch sailed to Rome, from whence traueillyng to Alexandria to teach the
gospel there: he converted the inhabitants of Aquileia now called Algar
near borderers, unto the faith of Christ, and was enstauled their Bishop.
Touching the other two Evangelists, the matter is evident enough to be seen
in the lives of the Apostles. No les also the fathers, that is to say, the
interpretours of the holy Scripture, were affectioned to traueill as well as
other men, which is also apparent by their lives, as in ye lives of Jerome, and
Augustine. For Jerome being borne at Stridon a City in Pannonia, learned
strange toongues at Rome: and went afterward into Syria, and from thence to
Bethlaem, where he died in the 91. year of his age, as some have written. To
conclude, it is most certenlye known, that all that ever were of any great
authority, knowledge, learning, or wisdom since the beginning of the world
unto this present: have given themselves to traueill, and that there was never
man that performed any great thing, or achieved any notable exploit, unless
he had traueilled.

Of such matter as is commonly objected against Traueilers, with a confutation
thereof.
The. 8. Chapter.
BUt there are some yt much embase traueilling, deterring men from it many
ways. These hold opinion that the name of Traueillyng is not only infamous,
but also the thing it self: which they prove out of certain places of Tully,
and of Vlpian the Lawyer. For in the Thusculane Questions, Tullie compares
banishment with Traueill, and in an Epistle to Caelius, he embaseth Traueill,
terminge it reproachful, and filthy. And Vlpain calls it Deportation, a
term of the law, being a punishment, wherein a man both loses his goods, is
disfrauched his city, and is appointed certain limits within which he shall
dwell and abide. After this manner the Poet Ovid, was exiled unto the city of
Tomos in Pontus, leesing the benefit of the city, and all his goods being
excheated. Quer this, they object that Traueillers are in hatred among good
men, reguarded none otherwise but as Rogues and Vacaboundes that can tarry in
no place, although indeed they have very just cause to go abroad. And
therefore they call them wandering Planets and Vacaboundes, as if they were
forced thereto for some punishment, or were in such wise by God punished. And
yt by ye example of Cain who^ God cursed, saying that he should be a Vacabounde
upon the earth: beeinge also an accustomable manner of cursing among the ancient
people in foretime, as Odeipus did among the Tragidies writers. Whereupon has
grown the Proverb Oedipus curse, and Laertius writes that Diogenis the
Ethnic was wont to say that he had met with some tragical curse. For he (said
he) was without house, without City, deprived of his country, having no
certentie of his life.

Thirdly, they cry out against traueilers as injurious to their Parents,
friends, wives, and children, whylst they separate themselves after a manner,
voluntarely from them. Like as Propertius inueieth against one Posthumus, that
through an insatiable desire of warfare: suffered himself to be carried away
from the most pleasant company of his wife, whose curse is this.

If I may wish: would God ye greedy wretches all were dead,
Or who so else loves wars above his faithful spouses bed.
And no less they wish unto him commonly, who has more delight to wa^der
abrood, and never bide in one place, the^ tariyng in their own native country,
enjoy the most acceptable company and conversation of their friends and
kinsfolks, whereupon it was written by the Poet.

Him I accuse, and much account unwise,
Abandoning his native Country soil:
Who so the same so lightly does despise,
And loves abrod in foreine land to toil.
Fourthly, they complain that Traueilers must endure infinite labors and
troubles, and not only stand in danger of their goods: but often of their life
also. Which thing surely cannot be denied, as it is proved by the examples of
Ulysses, and Aeneas.

Fifthly, this saying is usually objected against them, that is to say: They
which run ouersea, change the air and not their mind, and reprochfully they
allege those verses which are written against such, who, traueiling abroad to
study: return home again never a whit better learned then when they went
forth.

Whosoever to Paris to his book does send a foolish Ass:
Shall there be made no horse, but bide as erst before he was.
By these and such like proverbs, and sayings, they seem to avouch three
things. First yt the exchange of place does not change the persons nature.
Secondly, yt virtues and vices, are borne with us, and not first grow in us.
Thirdly, that virtues cannot be learned, nor vices forgotten. Al which
allegacio^s of theirs are false, as hereafter we mean to declare.

Sixthly, the cite Lycurgus law out of Plato, wherein he forbad his Citizens
the Lacedaemonians to traueill, alledginge for a cause, that then they shall
not bring strange orders and fashions into the Commonwealth, which is a reason
very plausible, and alleged also by Plato.

Seventhly, they bring forth Claudianus verses against them.

O happy he that spent his days in native Soyles delight,
Whom one self house has seen a child, and eke an aged wight.
Who limping with his staff where once he played the little Mouse:
Can count the many years which he has past in one poor house.
And also the verses of Horace written in the ij Ode, with Ovid likewise where he
says.

Who least has lived in light: believe me best his days has spent,
And each man ought to live within his bounds, and be content.
Al which testimonies i^inctly confirm, that the happy life consists in
Idleness. But Traueilers may not live idly if they be careful of their
affairs, and mean to look well to their business: whereby they cannot be
thought to lead the happy life, since they mete with so many mischeifes, and
dangers, with sundry casualities of Fortune that beefall in traueillinge. Let
us therefore examine these arguments, and answer to these objections, being
mindful of ye same definition which we have set down at the beeginning, and
of such matter as we have declared in the former chapter touching ye
declaracio^ of it.

And as touching the first two arguments. For that which they call Deportation
or exile is one thing, and traueill an other, and that by consent of all
Gramarianes. And although the antique Writers have frequented one of these
words for an other: notwithstanding each of them have begone now to have their
proper and distinct signification which the custume of such as speak properly
has obtained. And therefore, although Cicero do compare exile wc traueill: yet
is exile one thing, and traueill another. Again, it is one thing perpetually
to traueill, of which kind of travel Cicero speaks in ye place alleged:
another thing to traueill for a time, whereof we entreat in this place: and
therefore it is no merueill if Cicero term the first, filthy, and much
embaseth it. For he that traueyleth perpetually, and never returns into his
country from which he has been long absent, or seeks not some other place
where to abide there to enjoy the commodities which he has gathered by his
long traueill: nothing differs from a banished man. And in yt he shows
himself injurious to his Country and kinsfolks, who^ he might help with his
counsel and advise, or otherwise: he is worthily accoumpted an infamous
person. So Vlpian likewise speaks of perpetual traueil, which is rese^bled
to death. For he that is punished with Deportation, loses the benefit of
the City, and his freedom, as is accoumpted a dead person. And truly the word
Traueiler or Stranger, signified by the Latin Peregrinus in many places in
the law is taken in the better part, and used in the proper signification, as I
have before declared where I spoke of traueillers Privileges, highly
commending yt traueiling of Cicero, Plato, and Pythagoras.

And by this distinction also we may shape an answer to ye third argument. For
like as we speak not of perpetual traueiling: so do we not excuse them that
traueill for intent to be free from such burdens and charges, as they should
bear at home: or yt they might loose the reins unto al licentiousnes which
they might not be suffered to do at home: or else by right or wrong by false
mercha^dize, or other sinister means: purloyne money from the strange nations,
being ignorant of their deceitful dealing. And like as the laws have provided
y^ there shall none such be suffered in any place, yea, if there be any that
sells unlawful Wares for lawful is not put to his fine nor amersed, but
either is banished or put to death: so they that do altogether mislyke of
traueill agree with us in this poynct: that we wish such dissemblers and
vacabundes should not only not be suffered in any place, but also utterly be
rooted out, and expelled from every place.

Unto the third argument it may be answered out of the second, and third
chapters. For there we have put a distinction beetweene those that are meet
to traueill, and those yt are not meet. Likewise beetweene them that traueill
with fruit and such as take that labor upon them for pleasure only, if so it
be, that labor may be called a pleasure. But perhaps some man will demand,
whether such as be married be meet to traueill? For over that, that weemen are
forbidden, as it were of honesty and womanhoode, not to take long or often
iourneis in hand: it is the law of matrimony that those which be coupled
therein shall dwell evermore together, and the one to be a comfort unto the
other. Howbeeit this matter, as apperteyning to ye weeme^, depends upon the
custom of the Country, as I have touched before, in respect whereof Matrimony
is not hindered. Yea, what if a man take such a viage in hand which would be
profitable to the^ both, y^ wife and all the household affairs, such as are the
iourneis of Merchants, and other that traueil for virtue sake? Moreover, there
may be mutual frindship and affection showed eue^ in traueiling, and one
mind, and one soul remain in two bodies, although the two bodies be distant
far a sunder. And the Civil laws also permit men to traueill after they
have contracted marriage, if they have a lawful cause: wherefore it suffers
them likewise that are married, since agreeing together, not lying together,
makes the Marriage. And so far of are traueylers from hurting their parents,
and friends: that if they had stayde at home oftentimes they help them but
little, but having traueyled, do advantage them very much.

Fourthly, that which they allege cannot be denied, as I have showed. But
there hence it follows not that traueill is to be neglected, since there be
other means also whereby a man may come to casualtie and loss of goods, or be
in danger of his life. And pain which is annexed unto traueill, is likewise
common unto all other affairs that are of any accoumpt, and whereof we seek
praise and renoume, that I may speak nothing of the commodity that ensues
thereon.

To think on this may pleasure be perhaps another day. As Aeneas said in
Virgill: and many more such moral sentences Ulysses recites in Homere, for
that ye remembrance of pains past, is wont to be pleasant unto us. Wherefore,
how much the more praise, commodity, or honor grows to a man by his
traueill: so much y^ more is ye same pleasant and acceptable, and yt which is
attained without sweat, labor, or danger, is not so much esteemed of us, as
y^ which we obtain with great labor, and danger, whereupon sprange the
proverb among the Greeks: (...): that is to say: Every notable thing, is hard
and painful to be attained.

The fifth argument is plausible, bearing experience with it for witness. For we
see many return home, no less given to vice then they were before they
traueiled, in so much as it is grown into a proverb among Dutch folk, No man
was ever the better after a long sickness, or a long traueill. And although it
fall out so: yet is not traueill in ye fault, but the men themselves. For
beesides that man's nature is corrupt through yt offense of our first
gra^dfather Adam, and some ar so prone unto al kind of vice, as though they
were borne to exercise the^: notwithstanding evil bringing up, and conversation
with evil men, augmenteth this naughty disposition in them, and of me^ makes
the^ beasts. Hereunto also come the snares and temptacions of the Devil, enemy
unto al virtue, evil nurture of the mind, and negligence of devotion and
godliness, which ought above althing to be frequented. Wherefore, it is no
merueill at all, if such men continue always like themselves, nothing amending
their manners: for they never settled themselves thereto. But if they would
diligently observe those things which we have noted before in ye third Chapter
they should become the better, and have a more ernest care to furnish, and deck
their mind. This discommoditie also ensues, yt returning from strange lands:
they join themselves to the same or like companions as they were delighted with
all before, or else forgetting al dangers, give themselves over unto all
lewdness, and sensuality. For so then:

Kind once corrupt, to wonted manners vile does run and raunge,
Though much misliked, and deeply fixed in flesh: will never change.
As says ye Satirical Poet. Otherwise their saying is false, ye affirm how
the cha^ging of ye place, changes not a ma^s nature. Since experience upon
which they reason, teaches the contrary, and therefore many are sent into
foreign cuntrys, yt by their conversation and training there, they might
confirm their manners neglecting vices: and learn to apply themselves to
other men's manners, which no man will deny but that they may do. For if fields
by dilligent husbanding may be amended: what impediment is there, but a rude
person and prone to vice may be made better by daily conversation with good men?
For: Wrath may be aswaged by persuasio^, says Plutarch: so great is the force
of company, and daily conversation. And like as herbs and fruits planted in
one ground, if they be removed into another or that is of some other quality,
they grow out of kind, in so much that they leese either their color, or
taste, and natural quality, by reason of the nature of the soil, influence
of the heavens, and goodness of the air, and yt diverse manner of nourishment:
so happens also yt like in men according to yt condition of nourishment, and
the air that compasses them changing them into another constitution and
temperature of body, and enclining them to ensue other manners, and studies. By
this means a Dane is transformed into a Spaniard a Germane into a frenchman or
Italian, namely by daily conversation, use of life, and custom. Wherefore, we
must diligently take heed that we imitate the virtues and not ye vices of
other, of which point I have admonished before. For this which they affirm,
that virtues cannot be learned nor vices forgotten: is false, for there is
left unto man a free will in such external matters, and there are seen
every day examples of virtues and vices, which a man, if he list, may no
less imitate then he may the work of some cunning woorkman, so yt he have
some natural inclination to that art and know the principles of it, as of
Painting, or grauing. Nether is that absolutely true which they think to be,
that virtues and vices are borne with us, not grow in us: but of virtues, some
be natural, some moral. And these last may be learned, which the laws do
declare, which punish not offenders for faults that are already done and
past, being a thing impossible y^ that which is done, should be undone
again: but they have respect to the time to come, and that he that has once
offended, offend no more, nor give others occasion to offend by his example.
And truly men were very unfortunate and in evil case, if having found a means
whereby to tame wild beasts, and so to instruct the sauadge disposition of
Bears, Lions, Wolfes, and to teach the little birds to fly at their
pleasure, to return home from the woods, and from their natural liberty to
come into their prison and bondage, to hoppe into the cage, of their own
accord: they could not likewise deuyse some art whereby to better themselves,
and through labor and diligence to furnishe, and adorn their own minds.

Concerning that which they allege out of Plato, of Lycurgus laws: it may
be answered by a rule of the lawiers, which says, that the abuse of a thing
ought not to take away ye use of the same. And Plato teaches in that place,
that diligent heed must be taken in a common wealth, that there be no evil
tatches nor vices brought into it, he disputes not whether a man ought to
traueill or not. For what if a man profit the common wealth by his traueyling
as Timaeus did in Plato, and Plato himself with other innumerable of whom I
have made mention before? Moreover, who so peruseth the histories of Thucydides
and xenophon, shall perceive that the Lacedaemonians were very civil men of
beehauiour, better liking of simple then subtle virtue, for the more part
borowing all their laws of the Cretens by means of Lycurgus. The Athenians,
were very famous for variety of doctrine and learning, by means whereof were
very more diligent in search of such things as were apperteining to the
weal publiques commodity, and not leaving them upon any abuse. And most sure
it is, that as well the Lacedaemonians as Athenians, borrowed their laws of ye
Egiptians. For Lycurgus had been in Aegipt: and the Egiptians took their laws
of the Hebrews if we credit Eusebius, and it is well known, that they
received their laws from God himself. And God likewise has bin cause unto
many that they should take far iournies in hand, which we have declared in
the chapter going next before: and Poets feign, that A^neas was moved to
traueill by Mercury. Ulysses by Somnus, and other noble and valyent men by
other Gods also, And Plato also does the like. For in his book De vniuersitate
translated (as I suppose) by Tully, under the person of of the Egiptian
Priest, he sharply reproouethe the Greeks for neglectinge antiquity, and
for lingringe idly at home, and calls them Children, castinge them in the
teeth with their ignorance. For to be ignorant of such things as are done
before our time, whereof there are marks and tokens to this day remaining:
what is it other (as the same Cicero says) then always to be a child.

Last of all, the assertions which are alleged out of the Poets of the
happy life, ought to be no impediment or hindrance to traueillers, or what
soever like thing there is that may deter a man from traueillynge, if he
be otherwise disposed thereto of himself. For Ovid had just cause to
complain of Fortune, which he abused, so that he was against his will
constrained to go into banishment among the Getes, and not to traueill. And as
for Claudianus, he spoke in the person of another, as it appears by the
title of that Epigramme, which was an old man and wealthy, and (as the
frugalytie of the ancient time required) content with his own estate,
mistykyng superfluity and variety in all things. Moreover both of them in
those their verses, commend the rural and Country life, preferringe it before
all affairs and dealings in the city, and cases of judgment and business in
many matters. Howbeit, it appears also by their writings, that the same men
do not condemn traueill and experience gotten that way, but in sundry places
deteste sluggish idleness, especially being evident that they themselves
have traueilled. For Horace being an Apulian by birth, studied Philosophye at
Athens: and Claudianus lived under the Emperor Theodosius, being borne in
Alexandria a City in Egypt. And if we should grant that they had an eeuell
opinion of traueillinge, which indeed is otherwise: truly they had erred in
this respect, since most evident it is, yt there was yet never any man that
atchiued any singular and notable thing unless he had traueilled, as we have
proved by example of sundry in the former Chapter. For great and notable
deeds, are not performed but through wisdom and skyll of things and men:
which being not shut up in some one corner of the World, but dispersed over
the whole earth, it is no marueill, if to the attaynmente thereof, it be
necessary to traueill into sundry Lands, and over many parts of the World.

The last Argument, and quite beeside the matter, is alle^dged by some man of
his own experience or opinion against Traueile. For such pr^f^^ are seldom
commended, and many times it engenders Para^^res, and strange positions,
from whence spring Schisms and Heresies in religion, dissentions in
Commonwealthes, opinions in Philosophy and Physic, with other mischeiues and
discommodities in other Arts and things, nourishyng a certain self love in
all men, and sometime bringinge destruction unto whole Commonwealthes.

An Answer to the principal question, with a notable commendation of Traueill
thereto annexed.
The. 9. Chapter
NOw therefore it is no hard matter, to answer unto the question which we
moved at the beginning, and to determine, whether Traueill do a man more good
or eeuell. For who so dilygently weighs what so ever we have said hitherto:
shall perceive that in time of peace or War, it is most profitable unto all
that are desirous to attain unto virtue, or take any great matter in hand.
Neither is their opinion and judgment to be liked of, which desire rather to
live obscurelye at home then with commendacion, as the Clown in Claudianus and
Polyphemus in Homere. And what other do the Poets mean by the Goddesses
Calipso and Circe, whom I have me^^irned, then to reprehende the desire of
filthy lusts and obscure Idleness, and to show how Ulysses, and whosoever
else is desirous of praise and glory: is nothing delighted in idleness and
pleasures, but by all means endeavors to attain to virtue, although he must
endure ^ M. dangers. So have Christophorus Columbarius, and Vespusius, assaid
infinite perilles, who were the finders out of that part of the World which
they call America. Howbeit they have thereby purchased to themselves
everlasting memory, leaving behind them to posterity the truth of such
matter, whereof there was never thought to be any such. These Philosophers,
Phisicions, Lawiers, Iuristes, Kings, warriors, and Divines, what praise have
they not gotten by traueillyng? That whosoever is not contented with these: let him
add moreover unto them sundry other excellent me^, who^ Franciscus Senensis
reports to have taken often and long traueilles in hand, which they
accomplished for virtue, and glory sake. There have been some also, whom not so
much their own as others virtue, power, and wisdom, has moved to traueill.
Like as the holy Scripture witnesses, yt the power, and wisdom of Solomon was
so great: that the kings of Tharsus, and Queens of Arabia, came thither to
see and hear him, and we read also, how certain noble men came from ye
furthermost parts of France and Spain, to Titus Liuius yt fownteine of
eloquence, not moved so much with the power and same of the City of Rome: as
with the report of that one man. I my self have seen a Moonke in Bononie, who
in traueilling over his own country of Italy spent 9. whole years: so
surueyinge and discribing it, that no man could set it forth more lively with
pen, or express it wc pensill, insomuch that there is not the least thing left
out untouched And yet he was but a Monk, whose life ought to be solitary, and
as Gratian says, none unless it be in Cloister, as nether the Fishes out of
the Water.

Wherefore, neither hypocrisy, nor any holiness of life, forbids a man to
Traueill, so that he do it to any honest use, or commodity, redoundinge to
himself or others. Neither are they to be lyked of, who if they would: might
traueill, but had rather live at home leadinge an obscure life, then to win
praise by traueilyng. For such not only, offend against their friends, and the
whole commonwealth: but also against themselves. For it is the peculier nature
of mankind to be evermore desirous of knowledge, and never to be contented with
one thing only, whether that knowledge come by hearing or seeinge, for man
has these senses whereby he attayneth skill, as says Aristotle. But as Horace
witnesses:

The things we hear, les cause the mind and senses to arise:
Then do the things in presence which are subject to the eyes.
Yea they are of greater force and efficacy, and are more firmly retained in
memory which we se before our eyes: then the report or only hearesay of any
thing, although there come of it no profit, no pleasure, nor honestye. And I
have showed that by traueilynge there ensues very great commodity in every
kind of life, and as for the honesty thereof: no man can doubt, being informed
by many examples. And if we measure honesty by pains, not rashly but upon
just cause taken in hand: then truly traueill, of which we entreat in this
place, shall yield to none. For traueillers are enforced to abide all labors
and sustain al troubles. Moreover, like as these men which may and ought to
traueill and yet do not traueill, commit a shameful deed: so they that are
given to traueilling, perform a most honest exployt. For these do rightly
use their feet, the other abuse them. For nature and God the maker of all
thing, has not given us feet for ^^tent we should walk up and down in
our own City or Country only, but that if occasion serve we should also go
see and frequent foreign nations also: for else doubtless God and Nature
would have shut up the ways and forbidden the passedge to strange Cuntries.
And what can be more delectable, then to beeholde the things whereof thou have
read sumthing or heard of other, and again to beeholde in mind and
contemplatio^ those things which thou have sometime seen, and to apply them to
thy use. Wherein I will speak nothing of the profit or commodity? For it
much aueileth unto the getting of perfect and sownd knowledge, or learning of
any Art, to travel unto such places where such Arts do most flourish, and
are faithfully taught. So yt they deserve none excuse, whose life is only to
think, as Cicero writes of certain Philosophers, and such as get all their
wisdom at home, being much affeard lest if they traueilled: the sky would
fall on their heads, or the earth sink under them: when as they might learn
that which they seek for, better and with greater profit of strangers, and
alliens, especially if they have money to bear their charges abroad as well
as at home. And it happens many times, that they that keep themselves at home
upon this persuasion, that there is no life pleasant out of a man's own
Country, or else do fear that by change of place they should also change
their manners: let them then be wife only in their own conceits, and contempne
others in respect of themselves, being puffed up with an opinion of
knowledge, a thing so eeuell, that a more worse or more dangerous in all the
World can be none devised.

Each Land unto a valient man his country is, right so
As is each sea unto the sellie fish where ere she go.
A man shall every where find sumthinge that he may learn, and that another
time may do him good. Surely the knowledge and search of foreign Realms, has
always bin accounted so pleasant profitable and glorious that certain it is,
that many for none other ^^^se then a love and desire thereof, and that they
might see experience of things have forsaken their native Countries, dear
Parents, Wives, Children, Freindes, and that more is, leaving the reguarde of
their own health, have sumtimes vndertake^ very far ^^^^^ies with great
difficulty, peril, care, and anguishe.

Since therefore, traueill is honest, pleasant, profitable, and commodious:
what man withee ashamed to take it in hand, that is provided, and meet thereto
and that by example of so many Emperors, kings, wisemen, warriors, and other
worthy personages that have traueilled, to see strange and far Countries, and
to wander wide abroad? whereby are known the peculyar behauiors of every
country, their disposition, diet, appareill, manner of buildinge, situation of
places, tillage, moreover Laws, all doctrines and opinious, holy and profane,
and finally the nature of all things. But ^^ I (...) before admonished: it
beh^^ueth him that shall dose, to be wary, and to express the person of Ulysses
or Aneas: or if he cannot so do, have Achates and Nestors with him, that is
to say, faithful and loving companions, whose counsel he may follow, live well
and return safe into his country: unto which we all are bound, and borne, and
which we may and ought also to govern and that with praise, after the
knowledge and experience of so many things: so that we follow godliness,
ensue vert^ and never wax weerie, whatsoever pains or difficulty of perils
affault us.

Thus ends the first Book.
The second Book o^ the Traueiller of Jerome Turler, of compre hending an
excellent description of the most delicious Realm of Naples.
The. 1. Chapter.
IN the first Book I have answered to the question which was propounded in
the beginning by such precepts as I have thought sufficient toward the
attayninge of a well ordered, happy, and prosperous traueill. Which if they
be dilligently observed and in such order as we have delivered them do show
that what soever strange or dangerous accide^ts befall us in traueillynge, it
chances not so much by humane negligence, as it is to be ascribed unto to
the providence of eternal God For the condition of our life is such, that it
is exposed, and lies open unto infinite miseries, and there was yet never man
blessed in all respects, or that could escape death. Whereby all changes and
chances of Fortune, are more indifferently to be borne, and we must suppose
that nothing can befall unto us, that has not also happened unto others. And
for as much as examples bring light to precepts, making ye matter more euide.
it, as the Lawier says: I think it worth the traueill, to declare that by
some example, which I admonished generally to be considered in all traueill.
Which thing that I should more wyllyngly accomplish, partlye the
remembrance of such things as either I my self have seen in sundry places,
or have heard of others, has moved me partly the very majesty of Antiquity
and knowledge, which is wont of it self to delight, and is exceptable unto
all men. Beesides the profit which it brings unto the exposition of good
Aucthours, whether we speak of Poetry, or of Histories. Wherefore I mean to
touch in this second B^^ke such things as are in the Realm of Naples worthy
to be seen, since there is scarce no other place in all Christendom, in my
opinion, lying within the compass of Europe, for holsomnesse of air,
situation, pleasantness, abundance, or civility, match unto it. Moreover it
is very famous by the writings of excellent Aucthours, Virgill, and Liuie:
besides that, perhaps I think I may do pleasure ^^ereby unto them that mean
heareafter themseues to traueill in that part of Italy. For when they shall
have read this discourse being put in mind they may more exquisitely, and
dylygently search every thing, and they shall find them to be so. Howbeit
I purpose not by this demonstration, as it were by ^ most certain description of
the place, to set forth at full the whole Country of Naples, which by ye
proper name is termed Happy Campania, for that belongs to the duty of a
Cosmographer: but such things will I note only, as taste of Antiquity, and
are worthy admyration above the rest. Wherefore I will not divide them into
any precyse order of recytall, but for the pleasant renuyng of the aunciente
remembrance of them, I will declare them in such order as I saw them,
without all gloss of words, or falsefying the truth in any thing: both for
that it behooves the disputation of verity and truth to be simple, and also
the manner of telling requires the same, and truth is the foundation of an
History.

Portus Baianus, commonly called La Pescina Mirabile, A wonderful Fisheponde.
The. 2. Chapter.
WHen therefore we had taken our journey, coming out of ye frontirs and
liberty of Rome, and were approached unto the fixte stone from the City of
Naples: we saw a place which the Italians term La Pescina Mirabile, we
passed through an hugie and waste place into a great buildyng, long,
fouresquare, and as a man should say made vault wise, resemblyng the show of
a Church. Longewyse it contained four courses of square Pillars, whereby the
Archeis were borne up, every course containing. xij. Pillars, so that in all
there were in number. xlviii. of diverse bygnesse, and form. Which when it
seemed strange unto those that beeheelde these antiquities with me: this is
no strange thing, quod I, since most grave authors have written, that the
Temple of Diana at Ephesus had in it Cxxiii. Pyllers, whereof every one was lx.
foot long. Then we stepte down three steps on every side. But there were
no wyndowes nor tooken of any, howbeit the Sun shyned in in sundry places by
chinkes and riftes, otherwise the buildyng was whole and sound enoughe. So
that a man cannot well guess, to what purpose it was in old time builded,
muchlesse pronounce any certentie thereof. Some are of opinion that it was a
fisheponde, which they gather both by the lykelyhoode of the place, and also
out of Pliny, who writes, that Hortensius the Orator had a Ponde for
Lampreis among the Bauli in the coast of Baie, of which his Lampreis, he loved
one so entirely: that as it is reported, hi^ wept for her when ^hee was dead,
Blondus judges that this place was Lucullus house. Others affirm that Antonia
wise to Drusus builded that place to keep Lampreis in. And in what price
fishepondes, and chiefly of Lampreis were had in old time: may well be
gathered out of appr^ued writers, wherein this increased my conjecture, that
upon that mountain or rather hill, those things are yet to be seen which
are read in Pliny where he says: that the people in old time as Lucullus
and Hortensius, bestowed much (...) to (...) channelles through Hills and
Mountains, to bring in the Sea.

Centum Cellae, commonly called Cento Camerelle, an hundred Chambers.
The. 3. Chapter.
WHen we were departed forth of this hugie and waste mole and building: we
came to All Cento camerelle, lying directly oueragainst the other, being so
called for that it contains nothing but Chambers and Celles, leadyng one to
another. At this present it is situate upon a Hill, but whether it were so in
old time or not. I doubt, by reason of downefalles and valtes, whereof some
and divided from the residew of the buildyng, whereby it should seem that it
had bin sumtime ^yder and trimmer. When we were entered into these ruins, we
came again unto a great building foursquare, standing upon fouresquare pillars,
and being of a fouresquare form: nears unto one of which pillars there was a
hole, into which our host that conducted us to the sight of th^se
antiquities, descended to receive us, and help us as we went down. Then came
we into a great wide place full of Celles and little rowmes, every one
fouresquare, but some bygger then other. From thence there lay open a way to
other wide places and Celles, for the whole buildyng was divided by sundry
crookes and turnynges. And it was so intricate and diffuse, by reason of the
likeness of the Celles, that some not without cause judged that it had been
sometime a Labyrinthe, among whom is Antonius de Russis a Calabrian, whom I
suppose rather to have thought so in respect of the form, then for any
other circumstances. Leander of Bononie, thinks that it was a Cesterne, or
place wherein water was kept in the old time. But I could see no tooken or
argument whereby I might conjecture the use thereof, no signs of hooks or
i^mes in the Celle doors, which are narowe and low, there were no windows
any where, nor any thing in steed of them. Within every place glistered
white with plaster of Paris, and in sundry places the earth lay together in
heaps the hight of half a cubit, as in Sibylles den, whereof we will speak
hereafter.

Mons Canita, the Hill Canita.
The. 4. Chapter.
THus leauyng the forenamed place, we entered into a boat which we had there
in a readiness for y^ purpose and we shared alonge by an hill which the
Italians term Canita, near unto which upon a rock lying not far of as big as
the Hill, which notwythstandynge was divided from it: stood a castle
wonderful strangely builded, of a rare kind of situation, at the foot
whereof were seen very ample and large buildinges, but for the more part
fallen down with age. The report goes that Tullia sometime dwelte in the
same place.

Lacus Auerni, the lake Auernus.
The. 5. Chapter.
FRom thence we arrived at the Baian shore, and going out of ye boat, we
walked along the ruins and downfalles of houses, which were there thick to be
seen, ouergrowne with brambles and briars, unto the Laque Auernus. The same
lies, as it were, in a blind corner out of the way, environed round with
certain ridges and banks rather then hills, being in form perfect
roun^e as any circles, wherein Maryners say, can be found no bottom. It was
so called by reason of a most strong and loathsome smell of exhalations,
risinge out of it, and is most pernicious unto birds, as Virgill has noted,
saying:

Then when against Auerna mouth they came, that stinking lake,
They lift themselves aloft. etc. And shortly after he adds,
A Dungeon dark there is that evermore wide open gapes,
Full rough of rockie stones, and loathsome lake there flows about:
Therouer dare no bird attempt to fly, for deadly doubt,
Such poiso^ breath out breaks, and through the throat with stifling stink,
Such smolthring vapor smokes, and up to skies is borne from brinke.
Whereby the Greeks by name Auerna mouth that place do call.
Upon the hills lying thereby, stand certain buildinges almost of our time
fair, and pleasant, but they are almost hot Bathes. Pliny has noted that ye
town of Cimmerij stood near to this Laque, whose labor was to dig Metal
out of caves and mines in the earth and never to be seen of the Sun, as
witnesses Homer: I dare not precisely anouch that the ruins which are seen
to remain upon this shore are any part of that, although no man doubts,
but that sometime there stood a town in that place. There is near to Auernus,
and as Virgill says, at the left hand of those ruins near unto the Lake:

A ^^ue there is cut out in rock, even through the Temple walles'
Both huge and broad at mouth, a hundred vautes, a hundred doors,
A hundred roarings sound, when Sibyls answers beats the floores.
We must go down to the foot of ye hill, whereas there is a dark entrance
into the cave, into which we went with Torchelight, following our guide. The
entrance at the first was broad and high enough, waxing afterward narower and
narower, and at length opens it self into a plain in length almost lx.
paces, and. x. in breadth. From thence there was a way which lead into certain
cha^bers, strange to behold, and altogether unlike to those hundred above
me^cioned. For they be larger, and higher. Moreover they stand in another
order, and they differ in y^ inequality of ye floores one from another, the
goings in are sometime vphill sometime down, ye walls are foul and defaced
with age, so ye all the place is lothsom, to behold. Among these celles or
chambers, there is one wherein they say, Sibilla dwelt, in form foursquare
sometime adorned with point devise and checker work like to ye temple of
Bacchus nigh Rome. And although the carved pieces of the stories be al taken
away for the more part, by such as have traueyled thither upon desire to know
and see antiquities: notwythstandyng are seen there in sundry places certain
tookens and monumentes of the ancient furniture, which argument has moved
some to think, yt Sibilla dwelt there, for yt it is ye hansomst of all the
other and nearest unto Auernus joining to ye other Celles, having but one door
only. Directly over against the door is an Arch in the wall like unto a
chimney, and yet there could be none in that place. Moreover, forth of this
chamber we go into another parlour, or as it were into some hall, in breadth
viij. paces, and in length about. xxij. In which finding such a number of
flindermise or Rattelmise that they stuck in heaps upon the walls, and by
reason of the torchlight much troubled us: we were enforced to retire, and to
go forth through the same Celles or chambers that we came in at. It is
strange to hear, how much those Celles do confound the judgment of the
beholders, yt a man is not able to conceive or imagine any form or
representatio^ of this building in his mind. In some places you shall find in
them, middle walls, open above and not closed to the rough, and within some of
them somewhere, there is found earth cast up on a heap, like as in ye Hundred
Celles whereof I spoke before. I noted also, how this way where as we entered in
into these celles, and chambers, was but lately found out, yet could I see none
other yt had bin used before, and al these Celles were builded in the midst of
the hill, and have no light from heaven. Wherefore we could not guess by any
conjecture, or by any arguments, what all yt building had bin heretofore, or to
what purpose it was first devised.

Ciceroes Academie, Village, and hot Bathes.
The. 6. Chapter.
WIthout the compass of these hills, which enuiron the place called Auernus
round about, toward Puteoli, there stands Tullies Academie, which was
sometime his village, a place for yt galleries and thicknes of shadowed walks
very famous, where now are certain hot Bathes, called by name of Ciceroes
Bathes. These Bathes beegan first tospring up after his death, in the days of
one Antistius which was his successor in ye same vilage: which Laurea, one
who^ Tullie had made free has celebrated in verses in the honor of his
master, as Pliny writes. The Italians call that place Ibagni di Tritoli. The
situation of them is most pleasant and at the foot of the hill stand certain
houses, some faierer then other, builded but low and after a simple manner, and
for the more part forlorn. Howbeit in the month of May they be all
inhabited, because at ye time of the year there resort great multitudes of
peoples unto the Baines, some to preserve, some to recover health, being very
wholesome and aueilable thereto by reason of the variety of Metalles in them, as
Brimstone, Nitre, Salt, and Bitumen, in which respect Pliny commends them,
adding moreover that some of them do much good only by their vapor.

Cumae, The City Cumae.
The. 7. Chapter.
CVmae stands welnigh at ye third stone from these Bathes, of which City
the proverb is truly verified, Cuma has bin. For of so great and renowned a
City as this has bin, there remains now almost nothing, besides a few
ruins and downfalles, wherein a few poor fisherme^ are now dwelling, with
certain Monumentes very ancient, and worthy to be considered, especially in
ye place which they term Locauallo. There is also yet remaining there, a
Triumphant Ark, whole and sound, and the Temple of Apollo, whereof Virgill
writes in this manner.

But good Aeneas to Apollos Church, and temple towers,
He went to seek the secret cave of sibyls dread full hours etc.
Liuius writes yt this city was builded by the Cumaei, a people of Eu^o^^,
and by the Chalcidenses. Strabo commends it not so much for the time wherein
it was builded, or for those that built it as he does for the monuments and
antiquities. For he writes, how that for their sumptuousnes and store thereof,
they surpassed all the other Cities of Italy So yt it is less false which
Blo^dus reports, yt in no place in all Europe are so many downfals and ruins
of most sumptuous buildings to be seen (Rome only excepted) as are between
Cuma and Baias: being no doubt thereof, but that this City has bin in
foretimes most wealthy and populous. For it is certain, yt the city of Naples
called in old time Parthenope, The old ame of ^aples, was arthenope.
took beginning of that: the inhabitants being sent from Cuma thither. Which
afterward was ouerthrown by ye sam people of Cuma, because they saw ye wealth
thereof daily increase. Which being done, some write yt there befell a fore
plague of pestilence throughout ye whole territory and confines of Cuma, whereof
when there was no end neither could ye inhabitants find any remedy to drive
away that mischief: report goes that they asked counsel of the Oriacle, which
answered, that Naples was the cause of that plague, and that it should never
cease unless they builded that city again, and restored it to the former
state. Which when they had done: the plague immediately ceased, but the City
afterward being troubled with sedition of the people, and many Earthquakes,
lost the natural strength like an old mother, leaving behind her a daughter,
to wit, the City of Naples, which indeed lives and flourishe that this day.

Now were we come to the Haven Baianum, which was made by Agrippa, as Dion
Cassius writes, where we forsook our Boat, and prepared to sail to Puteoli.
And as we were saylyng, we beheelde alonge in our course sundry high Hills
and Mountains, at the feet of which were continual ranks of down fallen
Houses, whereby we might easly conjecture that there stood some great Town in
old time, but that it was cast down by Earthquaks that often times are seen
there, and for that cause were forsaken of the inhabitants. For there appear ye
expres tokens of a wasted city or town now all over grown with bushes and
briers, and a few houses are inhabited by pore Mariners and Fishermen, because
the harbor is indifferent safe. Which when I beeheld: it came into my mind
what Seruius Sulpitius wrate unto Cicero in a certain place, how when he
returned upon a time out of Asia, and was saylynge from Aegina toward
Megara, he was encompassed round about (as he said) with carcases of towns.
For before us there lay the remnauntes of the City whereof we spoke even now,
behind us Cuma, on ye one side Baiae, and on the other Puteoli was not far
of, which towns having bin in old times most flourishing, now they lie
aground flat before our eyes. Wherefore I fell into wondering at the state and
fortune of all worldly things, and thus I thought within my self, good Lord,
what shall on day become of our cuntreis which are neither so pleasant, nether
so well tilled, nether so wealthy, nether so famous as these have bin in times
past? and therefore doubtless they shall yt sooner decay. I called to mind also
that I had seen before among the Hollenders in the German Ocean, and in the
Islands of Selande, that there are certain whole villages and towns drowned,
whereof the sleeples, towers, and highest buildings, stand up and are seen in
the Sea, like as they were certain wachtowers and spying places, an evident
argument of the frailty of earthly things, and yt there is nothing stable or
permanent in this life. In like sort the Sea carried away the cities of Pyrrha
and Antissa about Meotis, and likewise Elice and Buris in the Corinthian
bosom, called Sinus Corinthiacus, yt tokens whereof apeare above the water at
this day as Pliny writes: and the verses of Ovid are well known, where he
writes of them saying.

If ye go to seek for Helicee
And Bury which were cities of Achaia you shall see
Them hidden under water, and the Shipmen yet do show:
The walls and Steeples of the to w^es drowned under as they row.
Baines.
The 8 Chapter
THus forsakinge these downefalles, followinge the Coast alonge in the Shore
of those hills, continually keepyng on our course: we came to a hill where
again were Baynes. The same being doubtless burninge heat within, yet it
resembles no such things in appearance. At the first entrance we came into a
large and high chamber, whose walls and vault of the gate were sumtime finely
trimmed with checkered poynct devise, which the re^^^^tes that yet remain do
sufficiently witness. The entrance into this chamber is indifferent wide, and
within by the side of each wall stand bedstedes made of stone walled about,
whereon are Beds and Pyllowes cast, where they that have washed themselves
may lie down and take their rest. Moreover, at the first coming in, stand
two Lauers fouresquare, two foot deep, directlye over against the Baynes,
which are very temperate, retayning no strong smell at all, neither of Brimstone
or any thing else, but consisting only of Niter and Alume. But the hole where
out the water issues is wide and large, and so hansomely hollowed: that many
may wash themselves in it together, but the farther that a man goes into it,
the hotter is the water. They say that these Baynes are very healthsome,
beesids yt they be also passing pleasant, by reason of the Sea which is nigh at
hand, whose waves in tossinge and woorkynge, do engender a delectable noise
and murmuringe. Without the Cave there stands Ladder conteininge about twenty
stales, by which we ascend s^opewise into Heathouse, commonly termed a
sweating House. The way which lies open into, it is high enough for any man,
made like the entrance of a Den, but scarce wide enough receiuinge into it the
light at certain Chinkes and cre^eses, so that a man may go in a pretty way
without Torch or fire light. Then come we unto two ways, whereof that which
lies on the left hand leads to a great many of Bedsteedes stonewalled about
serving to the purpose of the above named, stretchinge over all the side of the
hill, and endinge at certain broken and cragged places of the same. The other
inclines toward the heart of ye Hill, and it is like enough that it ends in
the most hottest and burninge hollow caves thereof. Into which we entered with
Torche light, and went so far until we could abide to goo no farther for
heat. And at our first entrance we felt only a little warmth, and proceedinge
a little farther we felt a great heat, which always striking upward: did
wounderfully annoy our heads, and ye more, the farther we went, so that we
were su^times enforced for a while to creep on the ground. Thus being almost
milted with sweat, although we had put of all our clothes before, and our
Torche being dissolved with heat: we were constrained to turn back again,
and coming forth the same way that we went in, we washed our selves in the
bathes which were in the lowermost part of the Hill, whereof we spoke a little
before.

A Well or Fowntaine in the Sea, and the way called Attellana.
The 9. Chapter.
Moreover, between this place and ye citi Puteoli (now called Pozolo) we saw
two other things worth the noting. The one is a fowntaine or well in yt sea, ye
other, ye way which they commonly call Attellana. There arises out of the Sea a
passing running clear, and sweet Fowntayne of fresh water, pleasant in taste
two foot deep, as big as a man's head. I suppose the causes thereof are certain
secret passages under the ground, which conueie the water thither from the
shore adioining, where it breaks forth. Of the same opinion is Leander
Bononiensis a Moonke very well learned, who has described Italy, no man more
dilligently in my judgment. Howbeit it may be, that when this place was the
maine land: the Inhabitants had conveyed the fresh water by conduit pipes
through the ruins and Ashes of the city Puteoli, which they used in steed of
a Well or Fowntayne, and that afterward the sea brake in and ouerflowed all
that land, whereas yt spring yet remains. It yields forth water so
abundantly, that a man may discern the stream thereof agreat way runninge
along, from the sea water, being cleerer and more like to well water. But I
remember that I have seen the like of this before at Dordracu^ a Town in
Holland, where the river Mosa called the Maze (unless I be deceived) flows
with no less force into the Germane Oceane in a stream almost three Pearches
or Poles broad. Pliny has noted that in the shore Baian, in some places
there rises hot runninge water out of the Sea, whereof I am able to say
nothing.

And as touching the way called Attellana, you must understand, that the same
on both sides lies thick of Cottages and small houses fallen down, the form
of which are some round, some fouresquare: and in these little tabernes, are
certain vautes and arches, in which are seen Coffins and Pottes with the bones
and ashes of dead men in them, whereby we coniectured that the same was
appointed in old time for a place of burial. Howbeit, they which dwell near
unto it, say that it was builded for a place to keep wares in to be soulde,
and upon that persuasion they call it in the vulgar toongue, Il mercato di
Sabato. Sure it is, that in the old time the bodies of dead men were w^nte to
be brent, and the ashes laid up in p^ts. This is moreover to be wondered at
that one of our companions took out of one of ye pots a piece of ye skull of a
man's head of a wonderful thicknes. For this is an argument, y^ not only the
ashes of dead men were enclosed in these pottes: but also the bones after that
the flesh was consumed away in the Co^fines. This piece of skull, at the first
was hard to feel to, but so soon as it had lien awhile in the open aier it
waxed ^o^te, and at length fell to ponder. But let us now lean the dead, and
not fight with bones.

Before we came to Puteoli, we chanced to light upon them that make Alume.
These he winge little stones out of the hills hard by, burn them in a Kill,
then layinge them on heaps the space of certain days: cast water upon them
whith they draw out of Pittes, that they may sake in it after the mai^er of
lime, and fall the more easily into ponder. Then make they lie of these ashes,
which they power into tubbes and vessels of wood, and there gathers to an
hardiness in the top about the brimme of the vessel, sticking fast and
congeling to the sides after the manner of yse: then gather they it out with
certain instruments made for the nonce, and keep it to their use. Not far from
that place are certain hot Baines, which the Italians term Ibagni di agnano,
which although they have very simple and low cottagies: notwithstanding they
are much commended for holsomnesse: and sure it is, that the Vicere of Naples,
with all the residue of the nobility of that Realm, do use customably once
every year at the Spring time, to go thither. In the same hills and shore
nere unto these baines, is a place which the Italians call La grotta del can,
we may very well turn it Dogs Den, a Cave replenished with filthye deadlye
air, wherein no lyuinge thing may abide alive. The deapth thereof is eight or
nine foot, the breadeth about six and reaches into the Hill not paste four
paces long, and bends down sumwhat s^opewise, breathinge forth an hot and
moiste breath, which a man may soon perceive by puttinge in his hand. It
took the name hereof in that such as come thither for trials sake are wont to
thrust in some Dog: whom when they draw forth, immediatelye for dead:
presently they cast some of the water of the lake there by upon him, and so
restore him to his former courage and life again. We, besides a dog, threw in
many very great frogs, which because they leaped not forth presently again,
were killed with that pestilent breath. Pliny says, that the territory of
Suessum and Puteoli, are certain Caves and hollow places under ground, which
they call Spiracula, breathing places, others term them Cheroneae pits,
exhalynge forth a mortal and deadly spirit, whereof this may be one.

Forum Vulcani. Vulcanes Market place.
The. 10. Chapter.
NOt far from this place is seen a great plain, of figure round, al yelowe
with Brimstone, having also a peculier lake belonging unto it which is not
great. And for as much as the substance of that ground consists of mere
Sulfur or Brimsto^, which being set on fire, boyleth up, therefore Strabo
calls that place Vulcanes Court: others have termed it the feeld of
Phlegrus, as does Virgill. Near to the lake are seen a few little Cottages
made of boughs, and near to them are Killes wherein they boil Brimston. From
these whosoever walks alonge by the small guts, (for they deserve scarce to be
called by the name of Lakes) he shall perceive that they send forth a very
thick smoke, and yt the water boileth very hot. The report goes, and it is
like enough to be true, that if a man cast any living thing into them, and
after a little while pluck it forth again, he shall find nothing left but
bare bones: the like they report also of eggs, I wot not what. About these
small guts, whereof we now speak, are found little wodden crosses
innuerable, which some bold and ventrous fellows have stuck into the brinks,
as it were, for certain bowndes and tokens, after the manner of Hercules pillars,
for as much as the passedge unto them is very dangerous. For which way soever
you go, you may perceive by the sownd that the ground is hollow underneath, out
of which sometimes suddenly break up flames of Brimstone, and pay home these
venterous fellows with deserved punishment for their folly. For why, the
uppermost part of the ground is light, and dry, neither may a man walk over
eueri part of it. I know it well that Pliny ye writer of the natural history,
is suspected of many to have intermedled lies with truth, after the manner of
the Grecians. Howbeit we our selves have seen these things also, and therefore
credit him the rather when he writes of these things, or of such other like.
For it is most true which he says very woorthely in some place, that nature
which is diffused throughout all earthlye things, breaks forth often
shewinge it self diversely, as it were some God, or celestial power.

Puteoli, the City of Pozolo.
The 11. Chapter.
WHen from this large and low plain we return unto the Hill, you shall see
at the foot thereof a most pleasant place, at the shore of ye Puteola^ sea.
It is thought, yt the name Puteolis was derived of this word Puteus, which
signifies a Well or sole, because in oulde time there was woonte to be great
store in that place, if ye list therein to follow the deriuacion of the
Latin or of ye Italyan, wherein the Italians call a pit or Sole by the name of
Poreo: or else that it is so called of the horible savor and stench which
breaths out of the nigh Mines, to wit, of Brimstone and Alume. The ancient
writers do call this Town Dicaearchium. And although there be many that
cannot agree about the situation thereof, supposinge that it stood sometime in
the place where those ruins and downefalles are seen, namely at the Hills
Foot or somewhat farther of: notwithstanding the description which is set
down by the old writers, declares yt to be false: and more credible it is,
that it stood upon the little Hill in which place at this time there stand
certain principal Buildinges: how be it, it may be also, that all those
other ruins might be part thereof, as the Suburbs, or some other place
adioyninge to the Suburbs. In the Town it self is nothing almost woorthe
the sight, beesides the Church which is very ancient, and builded after such
manner and fashion, that a man may easily perceive that it was sometime an
Heathenish or Ethnic Temple. Moreover, there are engraven upon it the names of
the workmen that builded it, and his name also, in honor of whom it was
builded. There are also to be seen the bones of a man's bodies of monstrous
bygnesse, upon which Pomponius Laetus a most diligent searcher out of
Antiquities, wrote this inscription:

Who so thou art that here amazd do stand,
To see the hugie bones of Giantes fell:
Come understand why in Hetrurie land
They do abide. This does the story tell,
When in this place Alcides once did dwell,
And from th'Iberi, conqueror came away,
His beasts he drove along these fields, they say.
Then from this hill that Dicarcheum hight,
With bended Bow and weighty Club in hand:
These Typhons tall, and Giants maine of might
He drove away, and quite expulst the la^d,
This wicked brood could not the God withstand.
But part anon to Hydrus forth them sped,
And part for succor to the Tuskans fled.
Howbeit yet this cause of woeful dread,
That might unto each place by them ensue:
Was sone extinct when all these sends were dead,
Whose blood the ground in each place did imbrue.
Posterity, to show that this was true:
Their bodies keep of mighty ^im and bones.
To show the world such me^ there lived ones.
The inhabitants of this town are all for the more part Fishermen, and they
raise a great gain yearly, of such as traueyll thither of purpose to see
these Antiquities. For they employ their traueyll and diligence in giuyng their
att^^dance upon them, and in showing them the Antiquities all alonge that
Seacaoste. Without the Town are certain Monasteries and houses of Religion,
and many sumptuous Pallaices beelongyng unto noble men. There are also seen
the Monumentes and Fowndacions of very ancient Roman buildyngs, being a
thing most certain, that the Senators and Noblemen of Rome, had all their
delyght and places of pleasure there, and in the borders there to near
adjoining, whereof I have hitherto entreated, which may be gathered as well
out of Tullies Epystles, as out of Polybius, Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, and
Liuie. In the Garden of the Freears Franciscanes, there is a lymite or bound*
worthy to be viewed: and hard by the Town are certain Vaultes, and
Chambers standing together, which men think were sometime Bathes. In going
up to the Monastery you shall see three very beawtyfull Pyllers: and in going
down from it you shall see a passing large and wide Amphiteater, builded wide
in the myddle and narrower toward each end, to the representacion of an Egg,
on the outsyde more decayed and defaced then the Amphiteater of Rome is, but
wythinsyde more tyghte and whole. For it is full of Seats, and all benched
about, although in some places the seats be covered with earth and
ouergrowne with bushes, and ye compass of the wall is whole and sound which
reaches up a great height. In my judgment this Amphithetre is one of the most
ancient Roman Antiquities that remain at this day. Not far from this
stands another building full of chambers, of a wounderful and strange Art and
Workmanship, divided into many Celles, the one leadyng unto the other. Every
Cell has four doors to pass through to the next adjoining, whereby I
suspecte that it was sometime a Labyrinth, the Italians call it, Le Camerelle.
Moreover in the haven and Bosom, wherein Puteoli stands are seen hugie Pyles
and Peers in the maine Sea, builded a long cross the Sea from the shore of
Puteoli, unto the land on the other side, by Caligula the Emperor, as
Suetonius, and Dion Cassius do write. Likewise there lies the Island Crape, or
rather as Dion terms it Caprea, into which, Tiberius the Emperor withdrewe
himself, when he sought a solitary place, avoiding the sight of the people.

An hill arising out of the ground.
The. 12. Chapter.
THis thing moreover is not to be ouerpassed with silence, that in the same
place of the Realm of Naples, which they call Tripergula, and near unto the
village which we showed before was sometime Ciceroes Academie: not many years
ago, that is to say, in the year of our Lord. M. D. xxxviij. there suddeinly
arose an hill out of the ground, which remains unto this day, containing in
compass about four miles. Before this Hill arose, there were continually
Earthquakes in that place the space of certain days without intermission, and
fires of Brimstonie substance, and of that liquour which commonly is called
Oleum Petrae, Oil of the Rock. But anon, when this fire beegan to grow to a
great flame, and when the matter of the fire was some deal spent, there insued
such tumbling out of stones, and such flying up of Ashes, fierce winds, and
horrible perturbacion of the air: that it was feared that all the whole frame
of the world would fall. All which accidents Leander Bononiensis has
diligently noted, and before him a certain Salernitane writing in the Italian
tongue, one that beehelde that woeful and terrible Tragedy. Simon Portius
likewise wroate of the same matter, in a Book entitled, Of the burning of the
Realm of Naples. And although this wonderful and strange spectacle, was the
handye work of God, who rules the inferior course of Nature: yet are the
causes thereof to be weighed, if there be any to be found to depend upon
natural reason. It is like, that the causes thereof proceeded from spirits,
and exhalacions of quality fierce and sharp, and very mighty, included in
the Earth, so that it was able to lift it up, and when the Earth by reason of
the weight thereof stoutely resisted ^he exhalacions: it was by yt great force
thereof mightily driven out of ye place where it was before. For the flying out
of so great abundance of stones and ashes: declares that there was great
abundance of such exhalacions, showing that the earth was for the more part
consumed, and resolved into air. After this manner, and by eruption of spirits
out of the earth, the Poet Ovid witnesses that there rise an Hillocke out of
a plain field, near to the City Troizena, in these words:

Not far from Pythei Troizene is a certain high ground found
All void of trees, which heretofore was plain and level ground,
But now a mountain.
It is possible also, yt there may be new Islands found in waters, howbeit not
ensuing upon yt same cause which Seuera allegeth to have happened in his time,
when the Islands Thereon and Therea grew in the Sea, not by any allunion or
breaking in, as in times past the Islands Echinades came, of whom Pliny has
noted somewhat, or else as Egypt, which Herodotus terms the gift of the
River: but by abreaking forth and rising up of the Earth, whilst many men
looked upon it. For the exhalations and winds are many times so vehement and
sharp: that they lift up the Earth quight above the water. Semblably Ovid
writes, that by casting of twigges and boughs into the water, there grew an
Island in the river Tyber. And verily all this change and alteration is not
deuoyd of natural reason, howbeit no man has ever declared the causes of them
more substancially then has Strabo, where he says: Forasmuch as all things
do continually move and are changed, we must suppose that the earth remains
not always one, so that nothing is put to it, or taken from it: nor yet the
water: whose transmutacion and alteration is natural and well known. This
much Strabo. But let us now come to the City of Naples.

The hill Pausilypus.
The. 13. Chapter.
THus traueiling from the Country and Territoryes of Puteolis toward the
City of Naples, at the last stone from the City we pass over an hill which
they call Pausilypus. The same being hollowed through at y^ foot, has a plain
and a direct passage through it: in length being half an Italian mile or
somewhat more, and so wide: that two Carts lade^ may easily pass one by an
other, but in height it is altogether uneven. For at the entrance at both ends
(which are like two great gates) it is so wide that a man on horsbacke holdyng
up a spear in his hand may enter into it, and not touch yt top: but within,
the height diminishes by little ^ little, and in no place exceeds ye height of
three men. This Hill was in this sort by great industry made hollow, and
leuelled, and made smoothe on both sides, meeting together va^twise in the top.
At each entrance at both sides are holes, at each hand one, whereby there
comes in the Sun light, but in the mydle it has no light at al. By reason
whereof it comes to pass, that when two horses, or Carts, or mo, do meet
in that place: then they cry aloude alla Montagna, or, alla Marina, that is to
say, hold of to the hilward, or to the seaward, that thereby each of the^ may
know on which side he shall go. And it is thought among the common people, yt
if any kill a man in this cave: he can by no means get out of it, and this
they say, is found to be true by experience. Now when you pass forth of this
cave toward the City of Naples: there offer themselves to be seen two
Churches dedicated unto our Lady, whereof the one, yt is new and lately built,
begins to be inritched and largely endowed, by reason of Notable miracles
which, they say, the Virgin Mary, has done there: the other is almost
desolate and forlorn, which in times past was very famous. Which thing, as I
was informed, came to pass upon this occasion, because the stairs whereby
folks used to go up to the hill near by, are at this present broken away
beneath, which in foretime were wont to be commodious unto many Matrones and
ancient Dames, in this respect, that by means of them they might step aside
into the thickets and bushes which grow upon the hill, where under color of
religion they worshipped Venus rather, then the Virgin Marie. Near unto the
first Chapel or Church, whereof we now speak, is seen the grave of Virgill
Maro, but some say that it lies in the Gardein of the Monastery upon the
hill, having this superscription:

Me Mantua bred, Calabres took, Parthenop now does hold,
Of pastures I have sung, of fields, likewise of captains bold.
Howbeit it is credible enough, ye Virgill was buried there in a certain
Chapel which is yet remaining, but ye verses are so defaced: y^ here and
there a man can scarce discern one whole letter, and there is no Monument to be
seen whereby a man may understand the truth. The Munks y^ are there, say, that
there was an I mage of Brass upon the Tumbe, which ye citizens of Mantua took
away by stealth, and diligently keep it to this present day. Which thing
whether it be true or no, I know not. But I my self among many things mo, saw
in ye same City a very ancient statu or Image, under which ye above write
verses were ingraue^: but whether ye same were brought from any other place
thither or not: y^ could we not understand. Likewise some do write that the
Poet Ennius had a picture or Image laid upon his tumbe by the Scipioes. And not
far from this place where is said to be Maroes grave, lies also the Tumbe of
Iacobus Sannazarius, whose learned works are abroad in the world, upon which
these verses following are engraven, made, as it is judged, by Bembus.

Cast flowers on this sacred dust, as next to Maroes schrine:
So next this Poet comes in golden gift, and vein divine.
The City of Naples.
The. 14. Chapter.
ANd now when we have passed from the hill Pausilypus, the noble city of
Naples aduaunceth it self to sight, yt kings Sea, and the Metropolitan city
of all that Realm. The same was first named Parthenope when the Citizens of
Cumae builded it, after the accidents which befell there, whereof we have
discoursed more at large in convenient place before. Of the beginning and
foundation of this City, Silius the Poet has thus written:

One of the Sirenes first did give to thee thy noble name,
And to thy walls, that Acheloia hight, of worthy fame,
O Naples brave, whose dulcet songs wont on the seas to ring,
And long ere that her hearers to their fatal end to bring.
While on the waves she sat, and charmd her tunes of woeful lay:
And to the haples Seamen sange their grievous great decay.
Gardeines.
The. 15. Chapter.
FRom the hill toward the City, are fermes and country houses belonging unto
Noble men, whose Gardens are surpassing and most excellent. First and
foremost, they abound with plenty of water, devised to run by such
workmanship, industry and cunning: that in many places you shall see water run
out of a tree, and to fall down into certain vessels of Marble. In which
vessels, you may perceive by cunning wrought, how Neptune swimmeth upon the
water beating the water with his threeforked scepter, as it were the waves of
the Sea. In another place you shall see the Naiades and Nymphs of the Sea, or
Aeolus King of the wyndes. There may you also beeholde the Faunes, and
Satyrs, made of certain shelles that are gathered in the Sea, framed so
feately: that they seem rather to be graven or painted, then to be set
together of little small pieces, they do so lively resemble a natural and
living color. There be moreover Labirinthes, through which there runs
water wc sundry crokes and windings, turning sometime this way, sometime that.
There be also Springes and Wells in these Gardeines, fashioned like caves
hellow under the ground, builded with stones y^ are eaten and fretten by
sal^nesse of the Sea water, so that the water droppeth through them, which is
very pleasant to behold. For the stones resemble the color of (...) or Ye,
then are they also (...) with other fine carved and Checkered pieces set in, as
Corrall, Moother of Pearl, and certain Herbs whose seeds being prycked in,
and nourished by the moisture: do spryng and burgein up in the midst of the
stones. The water also runs out of the Wells into the Gardeines, by certain
pypes and gutters in yt pauement, which pauement for the most part, is made
of Marble, or else of fair pauynge tiles, and never hurts the pauement.
These pypes and gutters are large and wide, seruyng as well to keep fish in,
as to ^^le their drink being set into them. Near unto these wells or
fountain bri^^^es, stand Cagies of Birds, into which out of the pypes there
leapeth water very arteficially, and the birds receive it very
commodiouslye. In the Cagies are merueilous fair and goodly singing birds,
brought out of strange Countries. Next unto these we pass into very
pleasant and delectable walks, wherein these ar, Arbours, ships, Houses,
Centaures, with many other likenesses of sundry strange beasts, and living
creatures. And when ye go out of these: there be diverse sorts of herbs set many
times after the manner of Labrinth or Maze, with thickets of Bay-trees, of
Cipres trees, and of Vines. And many times there are seen Labirinthes and
Mazes of Box tree, Iui^, and Mirtles, moreover there grow in these Gardens
Palm trees, the fruit whereof are Dates, with other straung and rare Trees And
to be short, (for I will now speak nothing of Images, and Monuments) there is
such plenty of most delicate and choice fruits, such sweet smelles, and such
pleasure: that it is not possible there should be any greater or more delectable
in the Gardens of Hesperides, that are termed the Gardens of all delight.

Thus from the Monastery of Munks whereof I spoke a little before, unto the
City all the way alonge, are nothing else but Noble men's Fermes, and
gardeiues. The City (...) in a reach or crook of the Sea called Mare
Tyrrhenum, being builded in three square form, whereof two corners look
toward the Sea, and the third toward the Hills which are not very far
of from it. It stands upon a ground or foundation not equal or level, but
as it were forked, and risinge up on both sides. The Merchantes and common
multitude for the most part, inhabit the lower part of the City, and the
Noble men the higher. Wherefore, there are seen most sumptious and bewtifull
Palaces, among which as chief is the Palace of Vrsine prince of Salerne,
of the Prince of Sulmo, and Thomas Cambius, adorned and set forth with many
pictures and Statues, (...) Lioness standinge over the gate with this
inscription. To Iubiter xenius.

Wells and Streets.
The 16. Chapter.
Moreover, I suppose y^ this is to be reckned among the principal commodities
of this City, that every house, almost, has a Well or twain abundantly
flowing with most wholesome water, nether is there any other city in all Italy
(as concerning store of water) that may be compared with this. The strets of
the city are narow, except three only, which as they are sufficient broad
enough: so are they of a merueilous length. The higher Street of these is
called La vicaria, another Capuana, the third lies right against the Castle,
and stretches open alonge to the Merket place. The Street Capuana leads
toward Capua, which City is very famous and renowned for ye Civil law,
especially in matter of contracte. For the first Prator or Maiour thereof was a
stranger, and in oulde time it much flourished with trade of Merchandise.
Whereby returns of paymentes upon bills, and exchaunges, were woonte to be
discharged either there or at Rome, or at Bithynia, a city of Asia. Upon the
Gate of this Street are many Monuments to be seen. which was made at what
time Charles the fifth Emperors of Rome, and King of Naples, first of a^
creatures entered in at the same, the like whereof also the Citizens of Andwarpe
did imitate in a gate of theirs afterward Before the Gate (...) the Images of
Oceanus, and Tethis, and also in the ^treete in convenient places, were
errected the Statues of Hercules, Athlas, Perpetuity, Religion, (...) other
(...), which ^re set (...) in ^he Triumph of Naples.

The Merket place, and Churches.
The 17. Chapter.
THe chiefest Merket place of the City is foursquare, and very broad, and
large, but not paued, in the midste whereof stand a pair of Gallows, and a
scaffold set up for the nonce to put trespassers to death upon: also a
Chapel, rightouer against which, is a Well with a very large Cesterne or
Lauer. In the Merket place are many Innes, but they be of the mean and common
sort, and the greatest want in Naples, is of clenly and soote lodgings,
although that be an infinite number of Tauerns and vittling houses in it.

It has not many Churches, but those which it has are very faier, amongst
which the Cathedral Church of Saint Clare is passing bewtyfull, and so is yt
also which is dedicated unto Saint Luio, saving that it is over dark. Saint
Mary's of the Preachinge Friars, is a very proper Church, for it stands
upon one of the most pleasant and loftyest places of the City, and within, it
is almost made al of Marble without any periettinge or plastering: but it is
sumwhat of the narowest. Saint Marie Church Di Carbona, is very mutch
frequented for devotion sake, which is a House of Religion not far from the
Merket place, by reason whereof it has in it a number of vowed Tables, and two
Chapels all of Marble fast beeside the higher Altar. Within the Altar is a
Tumbe, wherein rest the bodies of Robert King of Naples and his Wife, very
sumptuous: insomutch that the report goes, that there is never a piece of
work to be found in all Europe, of greater majesty then that is. Howbeit, if
not faierer then this, yet in my opinion, match unto it is that, wherein lies
the body of William Croius and his Wife in Belgicum or Dutchlande, not far
from Louane; at the Castle of Heffria. Likewise the Tumbe of Mauritius of
Saxony one of the Dukes Electours, at Friburge in Hermonduris, and that also
wherein his Wife lies at Vimaria, in Thuringe, and moreover the same which is
builded at Heidelburge, in the memory of Duke Palatine, Duke Electour. Truly
these 4. Tu^bes which I have now named, are the most principal of all that
ever I saw, either in Italye, or France, or Germany, or in England, for, as
for Spain: I was never there. But amongst all that are seen in any of these
above named Regions, made of Brass or Copper, in my judgment, the Tumbe of
King Henry the seventh King of England, surpasses the residew, which
stands in the Abbey of Westminster nigh to the City of London, with an
inscription in Latin verses, which may thus be Englished.

King Henry the seventh here lies in this place,
The glory of all Kings that lived at his age
In wit, and wealth, and deeds of noble grace.
To whom befell the gifts of nature for vauntage.
A princely countenance, a favor grave and sage
A comely personage, and beauty heroical:
And each poinct of venustie joined therwithall.
Unto him was coupled in wedlocks pleasant band
An amiable Spouse in beauty right divine,
Bashful and verteous, and like a fruitful land
Plentiful of children, sprung forth of princely line.
Right happy parents their issue so does shine.
To who^, o England, these thanks thou owe of right
That ever Henry the 8. was borne into thy sight.
All the whole Toumbe is gilten over, and it shines fair, being round beset
with precious Stones but of the meanest sort, it has in it also many turned
and carved pillars, and very like unto this: are the mounmentes of the Kings
of France in Saint Denise Church.

Granetes and Stoare Houses, Castles, and Armaries.
The 18. Chapter.
Moreover, there are at Naples four Storehouses, and as the Grecians term them
(...), every one foursquare benched round about mutch like the place at
Andwarp which they call the Burse, or at London the Royal Exchange, and at
Venice la piazza del riuo alto. In these Store houses at certain times of the
year are general assemblies, and counselles holden. And Merchauntes also
meet daily in them, to bargein and deal in Merchandise.

There are three Castles, whereof twain stand fast by the Sea side, to wit:
the new and the old, the third is situate upon the high Hill that lies over
the Town. And it is so strong, and so well fortified: that he that have
possession of that Castle may easily master the Citi^, yea although it were
surprised by the enemy. A little beneth this castle is a house of Carthusians,
whereof the Church is dedicated to Saint Martine, from whence there is a
merueillous pleasant prospect, both over the City, and the sea. But in the
old Castle which stands by the way Capuana are very ancient buildinges and
Imagerie to be seen, and there is also an Armarie wherein is kept the
complete armor of Fraunces King of France, which he woare upon him when he
was taken prisoner at the City Ticinum now termed Pauia in Lumbardie very
fair, made of pure steel, and without any furniture of Gold. Forth of the
Castle you may go into exceedinge large, and goodly Gardeines: and within the
Castle is an hanging Gardeine, but the same, besides a pleasant prospect, has
nothing else in it.

The new Castle is builded at the entrance into ye city of Tiburtine stone
fouresquare. In the same place in old time stood a Religious House of
preaching Friars, which is now converted to another use. It is fortified on
that side which lies to the City with a very deep ditch, like as it were
double trenched. For when you be past the first Ditch: anon you shall see the
Castle, which likewise is fenced with a trench, Walls, and Turretes, and it
stands upon a steep downfall of an hill. It has a very fair gate in the
innersyde made all of Marble, openinge upon a large Court fouresquare,
sumewhat long. At the left hand when you enter in, there is is a little Hal
likewise fouresquare, wherein the meetinges and assemblies of the Estates of
the whole Realm, are kept every year: and the Vicere of the country uses to
keep court, and sit in judgment there every week. But not far from this Hall
in a very great Tower, ar kept these ornaments of the kings. A Scepter of gold
beset with veryie great Pearls at the top. A Sword with the Hilt and scabbarde
of Gold very ritchly garnished with precious Stones. A Crown or Diadem for a
King, glittringe with precious and orient Stones of incredible bigness. A
Cross of clean Gold, one spanne long. A mighty Pot of Gold round about
adorned with precious Stones of great value, mighty big Pearls called
Unions, and principal sorts of most precious Stones, in great number. To be
short, there is a Treasure whose estimation and price is inestimable.

Antiquities, the University, and peculiar properties of the City and People
of Naples.
The 19. Chapter.
IT is wounderfull to see, what plenty of most ancient Images are to be
seen in the City of Naples, yea in private men's houses, namely of Bacchus,
Mercury, Hercules, Brutus, and the whole pattern of the ancient manner of
warfare. There be also Statues made wearinge on them gowns, and a mighty
horsehead made of Bras very cunningly wrought, the like whereof is seen at Rome
in the palace of the Cardinal De valle. Howbeit one Cyriacus Anconitanus,
has written very dillygentlye of all these matters, for that which Apianus and
Amantius have set forth in this argument touching antiquities: is for the
more part taken out of him.

Fredirick the second Emperor of Rome, founded the University in this
City, which flourishes at this day. While I abode there, Simon Portus, a
famous Philosopher and Physician, departed this life. The same, beesides the
Book which he wroat of the burninge of the cuntrie of, Puteolis, whereof I
made mention before, wroat a Book of the Soul, of the Senses, of Colors, of
the Germain Maiden, and many other more. One Mercellus of Siene was of great
renown among the Icti, a man very well learned and eloquent: as for Divinity
that was in those days sent to the Monasteries and Abbeies, as it was likewise
in the more part of all Italy. Naples feels winter scarselye the space of
two Months, to wit, January and February. They have rain often, but without
snow, and in Summer season extreme heat, by reason whereof they seldom have
any steep couerings and rouffes upon their Housen as are in other Cuntries,
that in the night time they may walk upon the top of the Houses in the Leads,
to cool their bodies. In the vulgar toonge this City is termed by the name
of Gentiles, which is to say Noble, like as Rome is called Great, Venice Rich,
Florence Fair, as I conjecture to the imitation of the Greeks, which used
also to commend their chief Cities by some notable Title. For Athenaeus
comparinge certain Cities together: calls it Golden Alexandria, Bewtifull
Antiochia, very bewtifull Nicomedia, and the City of Athens most glorious, the
mighty City, and Breuiarie, as it were, of all the whole World. And I think,
that Naples was called Noble by reason of the great number of Noble men that
dwell in it, and the e^cesse which is used there. And a man shall not find in
any other place of all Italy, so great plenty of most excellent and courageous
Horses, as he shall there: But if a man would bring a Horse of that Country
out of the Realm: he must pay some custom or tolledge for him, and they sell
there not only Horses, and all other kinds of Merchandise: but also slaves, as
well men as women. There are many Thieves, and in sundry places the
Neapolitanes are evil spoken of, not so mutch for that themselves be of an
evil Nature: but because they harbor mane naughty persons, and have naughty
neighbors. Those are the Apulians, and Calabrians, and Sicilians, of whom,
that is to say, the last, that may truly be said which Cicero wroat of
them: All Island dwellers are naught, but the Sicilians are woorst of all.

But now, as concerning the properties of the the People of Naples: they are
not so mutche delighted with the Greek: and Latin: as with the Hetruscan
tongue, and they mock the Calabrians with their language, and likewise the
Calabrians scorn at the Apulians. Their talk is full of bragginge and
boastinge, insomutche that they despise the counsel of othermen, and prefer
their own wits before al others. It suffices their merchantes if you give
them your word, but if you break promise, they be very sharp reuengers of
the injury done unto them, like as they be very mindful of a good turn
received. They fare passing su^ptuously, and sometime they spend more Sugar at
a meal then they do bread, imitating therein the Sicilians. In appairell they
be proud, and therein they bestow over much cost both in time of War, and
Peace. They assault their enemy with notable courage and opportunity, and they
have horses very meet for the wars, whereon they be erpert in riding, and
guide the^ with merueylous dexterity of body. They are too too much given to
love and over amarous, but especially of such weemen as are painted in face,
and proud of heart, unto which two things their weemen do principally apply
themselves. Otherwise they be very good huswyues, and be most precise, and as
it were, religious in honoring their lovers. To conclude, the people of Naples
are very courteous and friendly to strangers, and love them in whom they see
any notable or singular quality, but if they see no such thing: they little
esteem the^. And this much of the City of Naples.

The Kings Pittes or Pondes, and the hill Vesuuius called now Summi, and of
others.
The. 20. Chapter.
WIthout the City, on ye side which is contrary or oueragainst yt hill
Pausilipus: are seen the kings Pittes or Pondes commonly called Pozzi reali,
truly very fair, and worthy to be thoroughly viewed. And unless I be
deceived, there is the like place at Rome, and at Ferraria Ilbel Veder, which
is to say, as I interpret it, A place for Summer consisting of houses,
Gardeines, and Rivers: likewise most excellent for prospecte, and pleasant
situation. This goodly building or rather Pallaice, was erected by Ferdinand of
Arrago^ yt first, king of Naples in form fouresquare, but somewhat long, in
whose walls stand very ancient Pictures to be seen. The middle court was
made to wash in, without covert in the open air, from whence we mount up
three steps into a place like a Lauer or Cesterne, into which you may let in
the water at your pleasure, and that great Court is round about compassed
with a beautiful, and very gorgeous gallerie. But in ye last siege of the
City of Naples, yt Frenchmen spoiled not only this Gallerie: but welnighe all
the whole Pallaice. While this washing place was whole, I suppose there was
none more magnificall or pleasaunter in all Italy. Over against this Pallaice,
stands another Princely buildynge, or Pallaice, and a place also from whence
Water is conueid in pypes unto the city. From thence we pass into Gardens
in which there is another gallerie, before whom lies a large and wide plot,
but waste and forlorn, alouergrowne wc reeds, bushes, and briars. From hence
again we go into other gardeines: at length we come unto a fountain or
conduite head passing fair and clear, and full of wholesome sweet water. Hard
by this conduite head stood certain Cagies and Couppes, wherein were kept
sundry kinds of beasts, and living things, but they were also broken by the
Frenchmen. The^ from this place we may return again to the first, through
offices and places apperteining to ye household, where are many spoutes and
Wells, and many pleasant murmurings caused by falling and flowing of the
water, likewise groves, and the pleasant fight of varitie of fruits.

From this place we may goo too see the remainder and monumentes of the city
Palaeopolis, whereof Liuius makes mention. There is also another place not far
from Naples of nolesse delight then any of the above recited, at the fourth
stone from the City, at the foot of the hill Vesuuius or Summi, in which hill
Plinius the writer of the natural history, and Lieutenant over the fleet to
Augustus: perished among the ashes, which Plinius the second testifies in an
Epistle, and the same hill not long before had burned like the hill of Aetna in
Sicil. At the foot of this Hill there grows Greekish wine or Sack, which some
call Vinum Pompeianum or Pompeius wine, which is very good and perfect, and
much commended of by the writings of sundry men. The Palace which stands
there takes name of the village which is near unto it, and is called Pietra
biancha, we may call it in English White stone, or whiterocke, builded all
within of white Marble, and bewtified in the lodgings with checkred work of
point devise. In this Palace is made the Image of a Nymphe sleeping, and
leaning upon a water vessel, out of which there runs abundance of pure
cristall water, which afterward passes along in troughes or gutters of Marble
stone, and hurts no part of the pauement, the same gutters serving also to
keep fish in, like as it were little fishpondes. Surely, I am of opinion,
that as well the ancient Romans as Greeks, termed in oulde time such
buildinges Nymphaea, howbeeit this is but new, and builded by one that was a
counceller unto ye Emperor Charles the fifte, about the year of our Lord, as
some say, 1530. It has on the one side the sea hard by, round about on the
othersides a goodly plain and open country, the plentifulnesse whereof is
wounderfull both of Corn, Oil, Wine, and all manner other good fruits. This
which I will speak is hard to be credited, and yet it is true, that there be
some Vines found there the grapes whereof being pressed do yield x. or xij.
measures of wine, every measure containing iiij. gallons and a half or rather
more of our Measures. And this thing also may seem strange, which one has
reported in writing for a truth, yt when the Northeast wind blows, there are
brought into the Country of Naples out of Africa such abundance of Quails,
that they fall by heaps upon houses that be near to the Sea side, that men
may easily take them in their hands. Yea, while they be in their course of
flying, and be weeryed either with contrary wyndes, or tempeste, or length
of the journey, they light many times upon some ship, or gally. And last of
all to conclude, such is the deliciousnes of the Realm of Naples, such the
magnificencie of ye buildings, such the holsomenesse of the wells and water,
such plenty of all things which nature brings forth into the world
myraculous and strange, such Monuments of Antiquities, and finally such
store of fruits, and other things wherewith man's life is sustained: it is that
not only truly named to be aa part of the happy Campania, but is indeed the
Womb, as they say, of fertility, and the fat of Italy and the very horn
of plenty, as is in the proverb. All which things when we had viewed very
diligently, being not so much weeried with our labor and traueyll, as that
we judged it time to return to our studies: (for the desire which we had
to see these things, and the most delectable beholding of them took away all
weerisomnesse) we departed from Naples, and passing along by the most ancient
City Caieta: we came to Rome, and from thence we traueiled by the Tuskans to
Padua. And when I had there arrived, I soiourned there a season, and afterward
departed into my native Country.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by William How, for Abraham Veale dwelling in Paul's
Church-yarde at the sign of the La^^.


