THE PRACTICE of the faithful: Containing many godly Prayers both for Morning:
and Evening and other necessary occasions. Whereunto are added diverse
profitable and comfortable meditations necessary to be remembered and practiced
of every Christian.

Coloss. 4. 2. Continue in Prayer and watch in the same with thanksgiving.
LONDON, Printed by Io. Beale for Samuel Man and are to be sold in Paul's Church
yard at the sign of the Ball. 1613.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, and virtuous Lady, the Lady Joan Leuenthorpe.
GOod Madame, this Book of private prayer being brought unto me by a Friend
to peruse, and being withal requested by him to write the Preamble to the
book with three or four Prayers for certain particular uses, I yielded to
him, and have made choice of your Ladyship, on whom I might bestow it, being
assured of your devout affection, and kind acceptance of these my labors, and
endeauours, I go not about to teach you that, you know not; but rather put you
in mind of what you know already, desiring nothing more then that your pious
disposition might increase unto the period of our time. Prayer (says S.
Augustine) is a Speech to God: when you read, God speaks to you: when you pray
you speak with God; a service it is of no small commodity. For by it we
obtain good things, and the remotion of euilles, by it our faith is exercised
and increased, our love is proved, our zeal is inflamed, Gods graces are
augmented, his creatures sanctified, tentations vanquished, and the tempter
banished. To this GOD has given us his precept, and made us a promise: Christ
has also given us a pattern, and his own ensample: his Saints has made it
their practice, and we are daily called unto it, and now more then heretofore
the judgments of GOD having been within these few years very strangely
inflicted upon us, by grievous and long lasting pestilence, by inundation of
waters, extremity of cold and heat, of drought and moisture, unusual
diseases, and outrageous winds, so as it may be feared he has some farther
punishments yet remaining, except by our devout and instant prayers, and
sincere repentance he may be pacified. I suppose it therefore not unmeet for
every one to stir up himself, and one to excite another to this duty, so
needful and commodious. Accept therefore I pray you of these things, as
written to this end; so shall I count my labors (if any) well rewarded, and my
self contented. The God of Grace vouchsafe you his grace, whiles you live on
earth, and make you shine in immortal glory with him in the heaven.

Your Ladyships in all duty THOMAS TVKE

AN INTRODVCTION TO PRAYER.
HE that would pray well, must know that he desires, and with What mind. To pray
s^ruently for things unlawful, is a thing unlawful: and to pray col^ly for
things lawful will prove but a cold suite, and the colder the Suitor, the
greater the sinner. One man prays going and kneeles not, another prays
^neeling and goes not: Yet both are heard, if their souls do bend, if their
minds attend, and if they burn their incense upon the right Altar.

One prays and speaks not, another speaks and prays not. This man's voice
though loud is not heard, because his praying is all in voice, and nothing in
virtue, in outward sound, and not with inward sense: the former is heard, yet
speaks not: for though his mouth be shut, yet his heart is open: his heart
talks, though his tongue be tied up, that is loud, though this below.

One prays but keeps no good order, yet gets his suit: another keeps time
and measure, and yet gains nothing. This had the art, but the other had the
heart. The bent mind is the best method: and he prays orderly, that prays
honestly.

One justified himself in his prayer, and yet went away condemned: another
condemned himself, and went away absolved. I will condemn my self, that I may
be justified: I will not justify my self, lea^^ I be condemned. And though I
did build an hundred free^chooles, a thousand hospitals, ten thousand
colleges, and all this for the love of my Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, and in
love of christianity and christians for Christ his sake, yet would I write in
the foundation of all those Buildings, God be merciful unto me a sinner. And
though I will condemn my self, least I should be condemned of my Judge, yet
will I not think I deserve to be justified, because I will not justify my
self, but I will still pray for favor, least the opinion of merit should
hinder me from mercy, and least whiles I look to be justified for condemning
mine own justice, I meet with the sharpness of Gods justice, forgetting the
justice of Christ, and idolizing with a justice of mine own conceived for
condemning my self of injustice.

One prays for God, an other for goods, he obtains, for God is his goods: this
is still poor and having: because goods are his God.

One prays for God, and another for goods, and it may be neither are heard:
because the former wants his heart, and the latter his head. He that would
find God, let him seek God for God, and other things under God.

God is found of one that sought him not, and an other seeks and craves him,
but cannot find him at the first. Why? God will have the former serve and
praise him, and the other to seek him still. Sometimes he shows us the
liberty of his grace, and sometimes he tries the strength of our faith, and
the truth of our love.

One man prays long, an other is but brief, and both obtain alike: for God
measures his gifts by his love and not by the length of our prayers, by his
own benignity, and not by our brevity.

One prays at length and loses for lack of devotion: another is but short,
and yet receives: because his affection is ^arge and fervent.

One being long in his prayers is counted brief, while another being brief is
counted tedious: the former is long, but vehement: the latter is short and
shallow, as cold, as brief, tedious and too-long, because his prayer is
too-short for devotion, without sense and soul.

One is very violent and importunate, and another is not so earnest in
appearance, and yet this second only is heard. Either for that the former
knows not Christ, or because his violence is rather from his strong sides,
then true sense, or a labor of lip rather, than of love; or else perhaps caused
by some horrid apprehension of hell, and not of love to God, or godliness for
God.

Two men pray for the kingdom of God, one importunatly, the other remisly: the
violent caries it away: the cold suitor goes away empty. For God loves the
laborious, and contemnes the lazy: if men pray, as if they prayed not: he also
will hear, as if he heard not: pray feelingly if thou would be heard
favorably: and if thou woullest taste of Gods beneuofence, be thou sure to
press him with all violence.

One prays chiefly for grace, and God gives him both grace and peace: another
prays only for peace, and God gives him neither grace, nor peace: not peace,
because he wants grace to use it: not grace, because peace is all the grace,
he cares for: not peace because he will punish him for not begging or
esteeming grace: and not grace, because he seeks not for it.

One prays for Gods blessing upon his meat, drink, physic and labor, and
God hears him not: another prospers in these things without prayer. What is
the reason? Is it in vain to pray? No, pray for a blessing, and leave the
event to God. It is sometimes a blessing to want such a blessing. By this
dealing God shows he is tied to no man by desert, he shows he will do with
his own what he list himself, he will exercise thy faith and fortitude,
perhaps he means to hasten thee to better favors: and for the other, that
respects not prayer, and yet prospers, God does it to allure him to him, or
else (it may be) to fatten him up for the slaughter: in which case that
prosperity is very adversity, and that seeming blessing a true curse.

One prays conceiving, an other reading: the one frames words to his mind,
which is more easy: the other frames his mind to words, which is not so
easy: yet both the one and the other prays and obtains, if they pray with
good understanding, and godly affections.

A man may pray without book and miss, he may pray by a book, and get: for
he, that prays by heart without heart, does nothing, but talk: whereas he
that prays by book with his heart, does both read and pray with devotion.

He reads a prayer but prays not, who reads without understanding, or
affection ^ and ^^ likewise speaks* but prays not, that vtters words, and
yet weies not, nor heartely wishes not the things, he speaks of.

Two desire grace: one of them obtaines, the other gets it not. Is God
partial? or respects he persons? No, but one desires grace, and uses the
means and ordinances of grace, as the word and Sacraments. and obtains:
another would have grace, but cares not for these means, and is rejected.

Some condemn the saying of one prayer often at one time: and so it may, if
the heart repeat not as well, as the tongue. But if there be an ingemination of
affection, as well as of the supplication, it is not to be reproved. We can
double our sins, why can we not, why should we not double our suites for
the pardon of them?

One prays weeping, another cannot shedds a tear: yet both may be heard: for
the sobbes and sighs of the soul are as sensible to Gods ear, as tears are
to the eye: and the soul can shed tears, though the eyes be dry. As also the
eye can water, when the soul is not wet. The best tears are the throbs of a
broken and bleeding heart.

Some imagine that they can make Powerful prayers, thinking with their words
and arguments to prevail with God Almighty: whereas in truth, if any man be
heard, it is not for the sweetness of words, the variety of matter, the
multiplicity of reasons, but through the intercession of Christ, who does make
God propitious to us, and to accept our poor and humble prayers.

If my prayers be heard, I will ascribe it to Gods dignation, and not to nay
dignity, to Gods benig^^ty, and not to my prayers excellency, to his ear,
and not to my tongue.

Praying and wishing is not all one. He that wishes does not always express
or define a person, from or of whom he wishes some good unto himself: but
he, that prays, prays to some body.

But whether men wish, or pray for any grace, it is no sign of saving grace,
except the means of grace be loved: neither shall that grace be granted,
whiles these means are neglected. Those means can do nothing without God: and
God, to wit, ordinarily will do nothing without them.

Some are wide -- mouth ed, but close-fisted: they will promise much but
perform little, part with nothing: but God is open handed and open hearted:
his promises are performances, and his words works. He is Verity, and cannot
lie: he is Virtue, and cannot fail: his power is able to make good his
promise. Amongst men promises are often as weightlesse as the wind: some would
perform, and cannot: some could, but will not: but God both can, and will: his
will is not larger then his power: but what God does will, that God does work:
and whatsoever he is able to will, he is able to work. It is pity then but
that he should want, that may have for asking.

Hautinesse is abominable in a Suitor, but humility pleases: yet all that
talk of humility are not truly humble. Some are humble-proud, proud of
humbleness: but indeed he, that is proud of humility, does want humility,
and swells with insolency. I would have all men pray humbly: yet let no man
think he deserves to be heard for his humility: the opinion of such a merits
will stop the passage of mercy.

Others forsooth will needs be so humble, as that they will not go only and
always to God directly, but with the craved aid of Saints departed. Truly I
desire to be humble: but I would not be humbler then my God requires: such
humility is either pride of heart, or ignorance of head. I confess I am not
worthy of my self to present my self and my suites unto so high a Majesty:
but his precept and promise does embolden me: and what I want in my self, it
is supplied in my Savior: his merits does co^er all my denierites.

Some imagine they need not pray for that, which they know they have: yet our
Savior bids us pray daily for our Bread. Thou have bread now: thou may be
deprived of it by and by: or what if God deny it his word of blessing? If he
do, thy bread may be thy bane, it may rot, it may hurt, and not help. I will
pray for bread, as though I wanted bread. Though I were very rich, yet would I
pray as poor. Though I knew I had God, yet would I still seek him, as if I had
not found him. Though I were holy, and knew my self to be in the state of
grace, yet would I pray that God would accept and sanctify me, as though I
were un holy, and felt my self most miserable.

There are some, that, because they have been grievous and long sinners, do
think it is too late so^ them, and that they are not worthy n^w to pray f^^
mercy. Surely they think not wrong, if they respect their own desert: yet
would I have them pray for ^arden, because Gods mercy is greater then their
misery, and ^e will remit, if they will repent. I will not ^e ^eter^d from
craving mercy, though my merits are worthy nothing, but endless misery: I will
pray for grace, though I have been too too graceless, because God is gracious
and bids me pray, because Christ is pit^full and bids me Come, and because the
Scripture says, He that confesses his sin sand forsakes Pro. 28. ^ 4.
them, shall find mercy.

Some pray for remission, but care not for repentance: they desire a blessing,
but yet absteuie not from that, which p^^ureth cursing. These pray in vain,
because their practice is vain. For God hears Saints, not Sinners, and
granted his pardon to the penitent only, and not to such, as persevere
impenitent. He therefore, that would obtain pardon, let him abstain from
ssnne, which might deteine his pardon. He that would not that sin should
damn him, must not endure sin to dominere with in him. Though this be true
that no man is pardoned, because he is penitent, yet this is true that No man
is pardoned but he, that is penitent. If thou will not mortify sin, sin
shall mortify thee: if thou will not dye to it, thou shall dye for it. If thou will not that it should dye in thee, thou shall dye in it.

Some seem to covet nothing more then a joyful resurrection after death: yet
shall they not attain to a joyful resurrection of their bodies after death,
because they labor not the resurrection of the soul before death. There are
two resurrections: the first of the ssoule from the sleep of sin in this
life: the second of the body from the sleep of death, in the life to Reu. 20
come. Woe be unto him, that rises not t^ise: for if he rise but once, he shall
rise but from death to death* from sleep to sorrow; his body shall rise from
the earth, and fall into hell. But he, that rises from the death of sin in
this world, shall be raised up to the life of happiness in the world to come.
I will therefore pray for a joyful resurrection of my body to glory, and will
not forget (whiles I live) the resurrection of my soul to grace, as knowing
that if I will not study to be gracious, I shall not attain to be glorious.

I have heard some desire to dye, and some desire to live: neither durst I
condemn the desires of either. I will desire to l^ue, till I have learned to
dye: I will desire to die when I have learned to live. For a bad death cannot
follow a good life: and he has learned to dye, that has learned well to
live. If I can gain Christ in my life, Christ will not loose me at my death.
If the love of Christ live in me, whiles I live, I cannot but live in the love
of Christ, when I dye.

There are many, that often pray they were in heaued, which yet I dare not say
they shall go to heaven. For he, y^ prays for heaven and goes in the way to
hell, shall not ascend whether he wishes, but descend whether he walks: he
shall gee, whether his feet does lead him, and not whether his fooilsh fancy
slatters him.

There are some pray for death, yet cannot dye: others dye; and would not. And
God by crossing both does punish both: For to the one nothing seems sweeter
then death, and to the other nothing seems sweeter then life: to the one it
seems death to live, to the other the very thought of death is a very death,
accounting it the only heaven to live always upon the earth.

Some pray they may dye, and may dye to their cost, if they pray without care,
and live without conscience. If the heaviness of crosses, and not the hope of
a crown, if the loss of liberty, and not the lothing of lust, if the
sustaining of sorrows, and not the wearisomenesse of sin, if the feeling of
pains, and not the fellowship of Christ does make a man desire to dye, his
desire is naught, and his death not good. For those only desire well, and dye
well, that are moved more with sin then sickness, with heavenly comforts,
then earthly crosses, with Christ, then with all calamities. Before thou pray
to dye, first pray for the death of sin, which is the sting of death: and
when thou do desire to die, let it be rather to be dis^nede^ed of thy sins,
then of thy sorrows, and to live with Christ rather, then to be delivered of
thy crosses.

I see much hardness of heart amongst men, and but a little mercy. I suppose
such persons impl^re not, pray not much for Gods mercy. For it cannot be that
any man should be without mercy to his neighbor, who does truly pray for
Gods mercy to himself.

There are in the world, which pray God to pardon them, yet will they not
forgive their neighbors. These are not men, but monsters, which would receive
mercy of God, but will show no mercy to men for God, which would have God
forgive them, but will not forgive others. Such cannot say the Lords Prayer,
but they pray to the Lord against themselves, and make their truest friend
their greatest for. For wrath without pardon belongs to them, that will not
pardon. I will forgive, and I will pray to be forgiven. I would not that any
man should need my pardon: but if he do desire it, God grant I may not deny
it.

The rich and the poor pray together, and both do obtain; the rich being poor
in spirit, and the poor being rich in faith. Thus would I be poor, that I
way be rich: thus would I be rich, least I should be poor.

The rich and the poor both pray, and neither are heard; the rich, because he
is poor in humility; the poor, because he is rich in pride; the rich because
he has no pity; the poor, because he has no patience; the rich, because he
contemnes the poor, the poor because he enuies the rich. I will labor
therefore to be rich in humility and poor in hautinesse: I would be pitiful
and patient, courteous and contented.

There are many, that cry Lord help, whom the Lord will not help. He that would
have help of God, let him not deny his help to Man: he that would have God
help him, let him not forget to help himself. For God helps the helpefull,
such as are ready to help themselves, and others to. It Is pity but that thou
should lie and die in the ditch, that say Lord help, but will use no
means (if thou may) to help thy self. I will therefore pray for help,
and yet use the means of help, and pray that God would help me in those
means of help, and bless them to me.

There are many, which desire Christ might be their Savior, which yet shall
not be saved: because they would be saved, but will not serve their Savior:
they like his salvation, but they love not his service: he may suffer, or do
what he will for them, but they will neither suffer nor do ought for him. His
merits they pray for, but his laws they care not for. Now he will not be
their Savior, because they will not be his servants: for he will save none
but such, as will serve him.

I will therefore suffer him to be my Lord, as I do desire him to be my
Savior. Two graces I desire of him, grace to serve him, and grace to be saved
by him.

Some neither fast nor pray, some fast and pray, some fast and pray not, some
pray and fast not: but I would both fast and pray.

Some think that the place does sanctify prayer: others think that prayer
does sanctify the place: I think that Christ does sanctify both, and that any
place may serve to pray in, if the heart be prepaired: yet of the twain, I do
think that the place is sanctified by prayer rather, the^ the prayer by the
place. I love the Temple, yet in case my study, mine house, the field, the
highways shall be my Temple, and my chiefest care shall be to carry a Temple
always with me, in me.

Some pray saying, some singing* whether a man sing or say, it skils not, if he
truly pray, and cross not order.

Some ask their parents blessing, but seriously think not of Gods blessing:
others ask God blessing, but care not for their parents. But I will ask my
father blessing, that I may have Gods: and I will ask God blessing, that I may
have my fathers. I will ask my father blessing, that he may commend me to God:
I will ask God blessing, that he may commend me to my father. I will ask them
both, because I would not be condemned of undutifulness to either; but
especially God, because he is mine especial father, and is able to bless both
me and my father, me to my father, and my father to me, and us both to
himself.

Some are common and importunate beggars to Princes: but if they were as
instant with god, I suppose they would not be so great as good: and I think
Princes would have more gold in their coffers, and they also more grace in
their hearts, though perhaps less goods in their houses.

Some are devoted to prayer, and some to preaching: I love them both well: I
will preach for praying, and pray for preaching. He that can not find in his
heart to come to the church to hear nothing but prayer, by my consent he
should not be suffered to come into the Church to hear nothing but preaching.
Gods house is the house of preaching, and of praying to. There may we speak
to God, and hear him speak to us. And as occasion serves, I will go thither
either for both, or for either. And I hold him unworthy to receive a blessing
with the people of God, that refuses to go with them thither, though it be
not to hear a Sermon, but only to pray for his blessing.

Some pray and work not, and some work and pray not: the one would seem to
be all for heaven, and the other is set wholly on the earth. But I will both
work and pray: for God has made Monday as well, as Sunday, and has given me
an earthly body as well, as an heavenly soul. But yet this is not all; I will
sometimes pray, when I will not work: but I would never work, but I will also
pray, pray before my work, and in my work, and when I have done my work.

I have heard some extol preaching, and others magnific praying. I do
magnify them both, but am loath to compare them: I see not how the one can well
stand without the other. This will say; he that is not fit to pray, is not fit
to preach: and he that has not a good care to here, can not have a good heart
to pray: and he that has no devotion to pray, he cannot have a devout
affection to hear: for surely he, that with a good will can speak unto God,
will also with a good will hear God speak unto him: and he, that has an
attentive and obedient care for the voice of God, cannot want an honest and
humble heart to pour out his prayers unto God. In like manner also he, that is
fit to be Gods mouth to his people, is not unfit to be the peoples mouth unto
God: and he that is unfit for this, cannot but be unfit, for that.

Some pray being half a sleep, but Christ says, Watch and pray. I think a
man may do well to pray, when others sleep, and that a man in case may sleep,
when others pray. But certainly, he that prays sleepily, shall be heard
sleepily. If thy heart be dead, Gods ear is deaf: his ear is much after our
heart. I will therefore watch, when I pray, and pray when I watch.

One, when he prays, cries a loud, another speaks very low. But both are
loud enough, if their hearts be loud: but if their hearts open not, both are
too low.

Some pray for this, and some for that, but I will pray for God. For he that
has God, wants nothing: but he, that wants God, has nothing.

A man may give so much, as that he may leave himself nothing: but God, though
he give never so much, is nothing the poorer. A man may perhaps turn away
beggars, lest he should beg himself: but God delights in the number of
beggars, if their behavior be good, and can give content to all without
detriment unto himself. I will therefore go with my pitcher to this well,
that can never be drawn dry: I will borrow my light at this sun, that
cannot but continue: I will beg of this King, whose Exchequer is never but
full, and whose gates are always open for any of his Subjects, that ^ue unto
him.

There are some, that hearing the fourth commandment read upon the Sabbath
day, *do pray that God would have mercy upon them, and incline their hearts to
keep that law, which yet do commonly transgress that commandment, and
profane the Sabbath day by glouzing and gaming, or by buying and selling
(themselves, or their Servants) even in those few hours, that are appointed
for the solemn and public service of Almighty God. Of whom it may be said,
they love their own gain more, then Gods glory, their own pleasures more,
then his precepts, and that they are more fearful of their own loss, then
trustfull to his providence. But I will pray and practice to keep the Sabbath,
because God does bid me keep it, and as knowing that he, that sets light by the
Lords Sabbath on earth, shall not celebrate a Sabbath with the Lord in heaven,
and that they, that make so small account of the assembiies of his Saints in
this life, are unworthy to live in the assemblies of ^is Saints in the life to
come. I would not have men forget the Market Day for their bodies: and I would
have them likewise remember the Market Day for their Souls.

Being sick we pray for the health of our bodies: seeing then we be sinful,
why should we not pray for the health of our souls. Because God has given me
a Soul and a Body, my prayer and and labor shall be that I may have an
healthy Soul in an healthy Body.

Some men's prayers are abominable, some men's are accepted. The reason is this;
some men are out of favor, therefore their suites are scorned: some men are in
grace, therefore their prayers are heard. I had therefore rather be in grace
with God, then have all the grace in the world without the grace of God.

Some pray for an alms, which yet will give no alms, they would receive good,
but they will do no good, they would not be denied in their own desires, but
they will not stick to cross the desires and good deeds of others: but
doubtless he, that will give no alms to man, is unworthy to receive an alms
of God: he that can without pity see the wants of christians, deserves that
his own wants should be vnpittied of Christ. ^ee that crosses the good
desires and good deeds of others, deserves a cross to his own, and a curse
to himself. I will therefore do good, that I may find good: I will hear the
cry of others, that I may be heard my self: I will not deny my good will to
man, least God should deny his good will to me. I will not cross men in their
lawful desires, least that God should deny me mine.

Every man will pray for his friends: but few for their enemies: yet he, that
will not heartily pray for his enemies, (as our Lord did, and Saint S^euen) he
shall not be partaker of the prayer of our Savior, nor the praise of his
Saints. For Christ prayed only for those, that should have his Spirit: and
those only have the spirit of Christ, which do resemble Christ. And indeed it
is just that he, that will not pray for his enemies, should be debarred of
Christ, who out of his love did pray for his foes, and does make the^ his
friends.

The Psalmist says, I^ I incline unto wickedness with my heart, the Lord will
not Psalm* (...)*
hear me. For in deed Gods ear inclines to us, as our heart inclines to him:
and if we decline from him, and with our hearts incline to wickedness, we move
him to decline from us, and to incline to wrath. If we regard not him in our
hearts, why should he lend us his ears? If we will listen un* to that, which
he would have us loath, why should not he loath that, to which we would have
him listen? I will therefore expel my sins, least God should repel my
suites. I will wash ^al 26. ^.
mine hands in innocence, O Lord, and so will I go to thine altar.

Not to pray, or to contemn ^al. 14. ^^ 21. ^ 15
prayer is a certain sign of a wicked man. I will therefore provoke my self
to pray, that I may be assured that the Spirit of God is in me, and that the
miscrie of the wicked belongs not to me, assuring my self that they, that will
not pray to God, make themselves a prey unto the Devil.

It is a rule of wisdom, To serve the season, and wisely to be followed of
them, that delight in prayer. For there is a time, in which God is near, and
ready to be found. Let us therefore seek him, whiles he may be found, and
call upon him whiles he is near; or otherwise we may call, and not be heard,
we may seek him, and yet not find him. There is also a time* in which a man
may be better disposed to pray, then at an other: let us therefore beware we
loose it not, lest if we will not pray, when we may, we shall not be able, when
we would.

I have heard some complain of their dulnes, and bewail their in disposition
to pray: Let them but lengthen their complaint and lamentation, and strike
their rockie hearts with a serious remembering of their own miseries, and Gods
mercies to them, and by the grace of God prayers shall gush out of their hearts,
as waters did out of Psalm. 105
the Rock. Neither despair, though thou feelst thy self as dead: for it is a
true toke^n of the life of the spirit, to seel and lament the deadness of
spirit.

Some imagine, if God hear them not as soon as they desire, that he will not
hear them at all, and that they are of no reckoning with him: in which they
are injurious to themselves, and to God; to themselves, because this fancy
does quench their feruencie, and hinder their perseverance: and to God, who
does not always hate, when he makes as though he hears not. For by seeming
to neglect us, and by denying our suites at the first, he^ would rouse up our
spirits, he would try our patience, and exercise our says, he would show us
that not our merits, but his own mercy moves him to hear us, and finally he
would instruct us to make more account of his benefits, when they come. For
commonly things lightly obtained, are lightly esteemed.

Many men pray for things, that are hurtful to them. I will therefore beg
temporal blessings, as they may be blessings to me: and whatsoever I pray for,
I will submit my self to his wisdom, and desire him to hear me, not to my
prayer, but to my profit: not as I think, but in what he knows to be
fitting for me.

There are certain men devoted to their wicked lusts, that stick not sometimes
to say that they care not, so they may have half an hour before their death
to repent them of their sins, and to pray to God for mercy. These men by
their presuming of mercy are in great danger to feel the severity of justice.
They speak as if they had repentance in a string, as if they could pray when
they listed, and as if they could have God to hear them, when they would
themselves. But I will repent and pray for mercy in my youth, least I should be
rejected in mine age: I will cry now, that I may be heard now: I will not
refuse to seek him now, least I should not find him anon: I will sue unto him
for his grace, whiles I am like to live, that I may not be refused, when I am
like to die. I will die, whiles I live, that I may live when I am dead: and I
will pray whiles I may, least I cannot when I would. I will live, whiles I live,
that I may not die when I die: I will sue for grace now, whiles it is offered,
least for contemning grace now, I should be denied grace hereafter.

Because God has set down all things in an unchangeable and eternal decree,
and has determined from eternity what gifts he will give unto the sons of
men, therefore some imagine that it is to little or no purpose for a man to
pray. This is a profane, and foolish fancy*; profane, because it draws a side
the heart from duty. For the rule of our obedience is not the secret decrees
of God, but his revealed pleasure. Now Psalm. 150. 1. These. 5.
his will, which he has disclosed to us, is, that we ought to pray unto him,
and that continually. I say again, it is a foolish fancy: for as God has
ordained the end, so he has appointed means unto it: as he has ordained to
give men these and these gifts, so he has ordained and commanded that men
should ask them. And if he give temporal things to any man, that is not
devout, pious, and understanding, know that such things, which should have
been for his good, do make for his destruction by reason of his corruptions.
But this is a certain truth, God gives nothing to any, which is a true blessing
unto him, but he gives him grace truly to desire it. I will therefore ask,
least I should not receive, I will seek, least I should not find, I will knock,
lest the gates of grace should not be opened to me. I will sincerely,
instantly, and incessantly pray for glory, that I may have hope that God will
vouchsafe me glory.

These things (good Reader) I have written for thy profit, which I commend to
thee, and thee to God, farewell in Christ.

Trin-vni Deo gloria, Thine in Christ T. T.

CERTAIN NECESSARY Rules to be remembered of every Christian concerning
Prayer, viz.
IF thou would make such a prayer as God may be pleased to hear, thou must
repent thee of thy sins, and so daily renew thy repentance as thou renuest
thy sins, as Isay 1. 15. Dan. 9. 5. 6.

2. Before thou make thy prayer to almighty god, thou must be or at least
desire to be reconciled to those, whom thou have offended, as need requires
Math. 5. 23. Mark. 11. 25.

3. Thou must prepare thy self both in heart and mind as one that is to
speak familiarly unto god Eccles. 5. 1.

4. Every petition thou make, must proceed from a lively sense and feeling
of thine own wants, and of thy spiritual poverty; for otherwise no prayer
can be powerful and hearty and consequently acceptable unto God.

5. Thou must endeavor that thy prayer do proceed from an earnest desire of
that grace thou want, and this desire indeed before God is prayer it self,
Exodus 14. 15. Romans 8. 26.

6. Thy prayer must proceed from saving and true justifying Faith, because it
is impossible that either thy person or thy prayer or any other duty thou
performest, should be pleasing unto God without Faith Heb. 11. 6.

7. It must be grounded upon Gods word, and not framed after the carnal
opinion and fancy of thine own brain as 1. Epist. John 5. 14.

8. Thou must present thy prayer to God alone, and to none other, for none else
can here all men, in all places, and at all times, but he only.

9. It must be presented to God in the name, merit and meditation of Christ
alone, for we our selves are not worthy of any thing but shame and confusion,
Coloss. 3. 17. John 16 23.

10. Thy affections should be instant and persevere in prayer and that not only
in the time of prayer, but also afterward and till the thing asked be granted
Luke 18. 1. Esaias 62. 7.

11. Every prayer should ordinarily have in it, if it be set and solemn, some
thanksgiving unto God for his benefits both for soul and body Phil. 4. 6.

12. When prayer is ended thou must have a particular Faith whereby thou may
depend upon God for the granting of thy particular requests so far forth as god
shall see them fitting for thee Mark 11. 24.

13. Lastly, thou must labor to do and practice that which thou praiest for,
and not only to pray for blessings: but to use all lawful means whereby those
blessings which thou ask may be obtained.

12. Brief notes showing the necessity of Prayer.
BEause without prayer we cannot give unto God his due glory which belongs
unto him.

2. We can neither be assured that we are Gods Children, nor that we have
right unto any creature, before we make conscience to practice this duty daily
Romans 8. 15. 16.

3. All things are sanctified unto us by the word and by prayer, therefore
without prayer every thing works to our condemnation 1. Tim. 4. 5.

4. Without prayer we cannot look to obtain any thing from God as a blessing,
nor to turn away any evil from us Math. 7. 7.

5. We are no better then earth-wormes and worldlings, and not fit to speak
of any thing well without prayer Romans 8. 5.

6. The Lord our God commandes us all to step into the breach with godly Moses,
and by hearty prayer to stay his hands from being avenged of the iniquities
reigning amongst us, Ezekiel. 22. 30.

7. God requires a daily and constant course of prayer at our hands, which has
been the practice of the Saints of God in all ages Job. 1. 1. Psalm. 1.

8. God does daily bestow blessings upon us, therefore we must daily serve
him, Lament. 3. 23. Psalm. 103. 2.

9. Because Satan is never weary of tempting us therefore we should have our
loins girt and be always upon our watch to resist him 1. Pet. 5. 8.

10. We have not a days warrant no not an hours certainty of life, therefore
we are at no time to be unprepared, because we know not the hour when our
master comes Math. 24. 42.

11. We are Pilgrims and Travelers in this World, and therefore we must
travel each day home ward to our own country Heb. 11. 10.

12. By our^calling we are watchmen, Soldiers, etc. and therefore we must
daily be exercised in this spiritual warefare as 2. Tim. 2. 6.

FINIS.
Set a watch O Lord before my mouth and keep the door of my lips Psalm. 141.
3. Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, he acceptable in
thy sight, o lord my strength, and my redeemer Psa. ^9. 4.
A GODLY AND necessary Prayer to be said at all times.
O Eternal God, and in Jesus Christ our most merciful and loning father, we
thy unworthy and unprofitable servants, do here in thy sight freely confess,
and acknowledge before thy Divine Majesty, that we are most miserable and
wretched sinners and grievous transgressors of all thy holy Laws and
Commandments: that as we were borne and bred in sin and stained in the
womb, so have we continually since that time multiplied many actual
transgressions against thy Majesty, both in thought, word, and deed, so that
our sins are grown more in number, than the hairs of our head, and heavier in
weight, than the sands by the Sea shore: therefore, it is thy mere mercy long
ere this they have not pressed us down to the very pit of Hell, thou only O
Lord know our sins who know our hearts, nothing can be hid from thy
al-seeing eye thou know both what we have been and what we are, yea our
conscience do accuse us of many and greiuous evils, and thou being far
greater than our conscience, art able to lay much more unto our charge: we
appeal therefore from thy justice to thy mercy, which is above all thy works
how much more above our sins, Entreating thee to look upon us in the face
and countenance of thy well pleased son Christ Jesus, for his sake O Lord we
pray thee be good and gracious to all our sins and iniquities past, of what
nature or kind soever they be, whether of ignorance or of knowledge, of
commission of evil or of omission of our duties, wash them all away in the
blood of thy dear son, bury them in his grave, and lay such a weight of his
righteousness upon them, so as they may never be able to rise up against us,
either in this World to accuse us, or in the World to come to condemn us. And
because O Lord our nature is so prone to commit sum, and that with gree
dinesse, so that if thou should even at this instant, give us a free pardon
of all our sins, yet we confess, such is the corruption of our weak flesh,
that without the restraining grace of thy holy spirit, we should fall into the
same sins again or unto worse, therefore, we humbly pray thee most gracious
God not only to pardon that which is past, but also purge our present
corruptions, and by the grace of thy good spirit prevent those that are to
come: grant good Lord that we may think it more than sufficient that we have
spent the time past of our lives, according to the lusts of the flesh, and
after our own desires and fancies, and may now even resolve to dedicate the
rest of our lives that yet remains to thy glory, our own comfort, and the
good of our brethren, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

In these our weak prayers O Lord, we are not mindful of our selves alone,
but of thy whole Church dispearsed over the face of the earth far and wide,
bless O Lord the principal member thereof, our dread Sovereign, king James:
Enrich his royal heart with all grares necessary for so high a place, stablish
his throne we beseech thee, and let his soul be bound in the bundle of life
with thee O God, bless Queen his wife, make her a help unto him in the best
things: bless their Royal Progeny, and grant that they may not want one of
that line, to sit upon this throne, so long as the Sun and Moon endures,
Bless all his Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel, be thou present with
them, and president over all their counsels, as may be most for thy glory,
the honor of the King, the peace of the State, and the comfort of thy people.
Bless all the Judges and magistrates of the land, Bless the Ministers of thy
Word and Sacraments. Thou that art the Lord of the harvest, thrust forth many
faithful and painful Laborers that they may feed thy people with knowledge
and understanding, bless O Lord all the afflicted members of thy Church,
diseased either in body or mind or both, especially those that suffer for the
testimony of a good conscience. O Lord to whom all their cases and necessities
are manifest, we beseech to make al their bed in their sickness, lay no more
upon them, than thou shall make them able to bear, give them the true sight
and feeling of their sins, so far as may lead them to true repentance, with
hearty sorrow for the same. And good father deal with them in mercy and not in
justice either to release them out of that present misery wherein they are,
either by life that they may glorify thee in this World, or by faithful
departure that they may be gloriffed of thee in the world to come. These
mercies most gracious God, and whatsoever else thou know in thy wisdom to
be better for us than we our selves can ask, we beg them at thy hands not for
our own merits, for they are nothing, but for the merits of thy decre son
Christ Jesus our Lord and savior in whose name and in whose words we conclude
saying, Our father which art in Heaven, etc.

Morning Prayer for private Families.
MOst gracious God and merciful Father, thou that art glorious in power and
holiness, we thy poor and miserable* Creatures, being but dust and Ashes, do
here humbly prostrate our selves and our sinful souls, before the throne of
thy Majesty, Confessing and acknowledging from the bottom^ of our hearts, that
we are most vile sinners, conceived and borne in some, and that we are by
nature nothing else but a ^^nye of all wickedness, whese nature and property
is to grow and increase in sin, as we grow in years, and to war strong in
wickedness, even as the powers of our minds and bodies receive strength: and
although our cursed estate does here in greatly appear, yet our sin is made
out of measure, sinful, through the exceeding grace, which thou have offered
unto us. by thy Gospel of thy dear S^^me, whereby we are so far from
pro^iting, that of our selves without the grace of thy holy Spirit in our
hearts, we should war worse and worse: wherefore we beseech thee O Lord, as
our s^nes have magnified themselves in an infinite length, breadth, depth, and
height: so let thy mercies which pass all understanding outstrippe them, and
howsoever by reason of our sins, we have justly deserved to be deprived, of
all thy blessings in this life, and hereafter to have our portion with the
devil and his Angels: yet O Lord God, we pray thee remember that we are thy
people, and sheep of thy pasture, whom thou host redeemed with thy most
precious blood, despise not therefore O Lord the work of thy hands: but for
thy glories sake, and for thy blessed names sake spare us, sparevs good Lord,
according to thy usual dealing with those which in prayer have had recourse
unto thee, and according to the old and unchangeable Nature of a kind, long
suffering, and merciful God. Thy mercy O Lord has manifestly appeared unto
us this night past, in that thou have given us quiet rest and sleep, for the
refreshment of our weak bodies, whereas for our sins past committed the day
before thou might justly even in our dead sleep have taken our souls from
us, and so suddenly have brought us to our account, but it has pleased thee to
spare us, and to give us a larger time of repentance: O Lord, as thou give us
space, so we beseech thee give us also grace, to repent us of our former evil
ways, and to turn unto thee, and for as much as thou have commanded in thy
holy word, that no man should be idle, but every one occupied in godly and
virtuous exercises, according to their Callings: we most humbly beseech thee,
that thine eyes may attend upon us, daily defend us, cherish, comfort, govern,
and counsel us, in all our studies and labors, in such wise, that we may
spend and bestow this day, and all the days of our lives, according to the
blessed will, setting thee always before our eyes, and living in thy fear,
ever working that which may be fonnd acceptable in thy sight, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, in whose name we end as he has taught us saying. Our Father
which art in heaven, etc.

Evening Prayer for private Families.
OAlmightie Lord God and in Jesus Christ our most merciful and loving Father,
we thy poor and unworthy servants, do here from the ground of our hearts,
render unto thy divine Majesty, in that poor measure we are able all praise
and thanks for all thy blessings and mercies, bestowed upon us from time to
time, ever since we were born, until this present hour, especially O Lord we
thank thee, for those inestimable blessings which concern a better life, and
our eternal happiness, as our Election before the foundations of the world,
our Creation into the world, our Redemption by the blood of thy dear Son
Christ Jesus, when we were worse then nothing, our Sanctification by the holy
Spirit, our Uocation from the world, our blessed hope of Glorification in the
world to come. O Lord we confess we have not deserserued the least of all
these thy blessings either temporal or spiritual, but have rather given thee
just cause to deprive us of every one of them, by reason of our manifold
sins, both Original and Actual, which we have multiplied against thee from
time to time, O Lord we confess that our Conception, our birth, yea and our
whole lives have been in sin, living in the breach of all thy Commandments:
our fathers and mothers were sinful, deriuing it even from our first parents,
Adam and Eve, and so to us, that as Adam purchased for us his Children, none
other inheritance, but the unhappy entrance into sin, and corruption, and we
being in his loins, and engrafted into this detestable stock of sin: we
are sorry O Lord, that we have offended thee so willingly, and disobediently
strayed from thy holy Laws: yea, we do unfeignedly condemn our selves in thy
presence, for every one of our sins, purposing in our hearts by the grace of
thy Holy Spirit, to forsake our former evil ways, and to make more conscience
of sin, then ever we have done heretofore. Now for as much as it has pleased
thee, to make the night for man to rest in, as thou have ordained him the day
to travel in: grant dear father that we may so take our bodily rest, that
our souls may continually watch for the time that our Lord Jesus Christ shall
appear for our deliverance out of this mortal life, in the mean season we
beseech thee grant that in our sleep we be not overcome by any fantasies,
dreams, or other tentations, but that we may fully set our minds upon thee,
love thee, fear thee, and rest in thee: and that our sleep be not ^^cessiue
or overmuch, after the insatiable desire of the flesh, but only sufficient to
content our weak natures, that we may be the better enabled the day
following, to live in all godly conversation, in the discharge of our callings,
to the glory of thy holy name, and profit of our brethren, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Bless with us we beseech thee, thy Children and Church in
all places, pour down thy blessings in especial manner upon the Kings most
excellent Majesty, the Queen and her Royal Progeny, bless all the Nobility,
and Magistrates of the land. Bless the Ministers and teachers of thy holy
Word, Lord give a blessing to their labors, that by their ministry such may
daily be won unto thee, as belong unto thine Election of grace. Bless and
succor all the afflicted members of thy Church, wheresoever or howsoever
distressed; be with them in all their sickness, lay no more upon them then
thou shall make them able to bear, give them the true sight and feeling of
their sins, so far as may lead them to true repentance, a hearty sorrow for
the same, howsoever it shall please thee to deal with them, let it be in
mercy, and not in justice, knowing they are but flesh, and in thy good time
send them a happy deliverance out of their misery, either by life or by death,
as it shall seem best t^ thy majesty. Lastly, as duty binds us, we commend
unto thy fatherly protection all our friends and kindred according to the
flesh, whether they be near or dear unto us in affinity, or consanguinity,
and all whomsoever thou would we should commend unto thy majesty, for them
as for our selves we beseech thee, continue thy mercies and goodness toward
us, even for thy dear sons sake Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior, to
whom with thee and the blessed Spirit our Comforter, be ascribed as is most
due, all honor, and glory, now and for ever.

Amen.
Another prayer for Morning.
O Most merciful God and heavenly father, we thy servants do hers humbly
prostrat our selves before thy divine majesty acknowledging here in thy sight,
our heinous offenses committed against thee both in thought, word and work, so
that our sins are grown more in number then the hairs of our heads, and if
thou should enter into Judgment with us, we could not be able to answer
thee one of a thousand, they are so heinous, that the very least of them, being
but conceived in thought, is sufficient in judgment to throw us down to the
lake that burns with fire and brimstone, besides O Lord, we are guilty
before thy Majesty of a huge mass of corruption, which we have drawn from the
loins of our first parents, which of it own nature is enough to condemn us,
if thou should deal with us according to Justice, though we had never
committed actual sin all the days of our leaves: Further O Lord we are full
of blindness, and senseless security, running on headlong to destruction, and
committing sin after sin, although not notorious to the world, yet horrible
before thy pure eyes which see all things: but O Lord we daily groan under
the burden of our sins, inwardly lamenting our own folly. In Heaven, Earth,
or Hell, we see none able to sustain thy wrath for them, but even thy dear.
Son Christ Jesus the Son of thy love, who in mercy infinite, and in compassion
endless, has suffered and overcome that endless punishment, which was due unto
us for them. In him therefore most merciful Father, and through him do we come
unto thee, beingful assured according to thy promise, that thou will accept and
take that full recompense, which he our Savior has made for us, on his
Cross. In him therefore we see thine anger toward us appeased, and thy wrath
satisfied, and our debt paid. O Lord enlarge our hearts with thankfulness to
thy Majesty for the same, and make sin to dye in us more and more, that we
may hate, detest, and utterly abhor all sin, in all men, but especially in
our selves, and strongly (through thy spirit) set our selves in open war
against all sin and wickedness, that we may not please our selves in the
least sin, but straightly examine sin, by the strict Rules of thy holyword,
we may always walk not only before the eyes of man, but circumspectly in
this respect that we have the eyes of thy majesty to take a view of our
doings: we humbly thank thy majesty for all thy mercies, bestowed upon us
either for soul or body, amongst the rest, we acknowledge this not to be
the least, that we have quietly passed this night, and that thou have given us
quiet rest and sleep for the refreshment of our weak bodies, which without
the same could not endure: grant we beseech thee, that we may bestow this day
and the residue of our life, wholly in thy service, wall king faithfully and
conscionably in our callings wherein thou have placed us, O Lord bless all our
governors, whom thou have set over us in thy room, in especial manner shower
down thy blessings upon the Kings Majesty, bless him both in body and soul
with all graces necessary for so high a calling, and make him long a Nursing
Father in this Israel. Bless our graciousqueen, make her a help unto him in
all good things: Bless their Royal issue, grant that they may daily grow in
favor both with God and man, and make them loyal to his majesty all the days
of his life: bless all the Nobility, the Magistrates, and Ministers of thy
holy word, and grant that every one of us from the highest to the lowest may
walk faithfully in our places before thee all the days of our lives, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost, be all praise and
glory both now and ever.

Amen.
Another Evening Prayer for private Families.
O Eternal and everliving Lord God, and in Jesus Christ our loving Father,
thou which have given us our bodies and souls, our health, our strength, our
maintenance, whence have we all these things but from thee, thy fatherly
protection over us this day in our calling, to whom can we ascribe it but unto
thee, that we have lived hitherto, that we have not been swallowed up with
some sudden Judgment, that Satan had not his will upon us, that we know the
way and the means to a better life, that we are delivered from the power of
darkness, and translated into the kingdom of thy dear Son, that we have
daily access into thy glorious presence to offer up our petitions unto thee,
and to make known our wants, whence are all these blessings O Lord, but from
the freedom of thy grace, we confess O Lord, if thou had given us our
deserts, we should have perished long ago: therefore it is from thy mercy
alone that we are not consumed.

Now, if receiving so many blessings from thee, we should not stir up our
selves to return some thankefulnes to thy Majesty for them, how wretched and
miserable creatures should we be. O Lord we pray thee make us ashamed of our
unthankfulness, wound our hearts with the consideration of our own dullness,
whom so many favors have not wrought unto more obedience, and vouchsafe we
humbly beseech thee not withstanding our small deseruings, to look graciously
upon us, and accept this our Evening sacrifice of praise, which we do here
render unto thy Majesty, O Lord let not the skantnesse of our service, make
thee turn away thine eyes from us, but even as thou art wont to spare thy
servants, as a man spares his own son that serves him, and in them to
accept the will for the full performance; so be pleased to look upon us, in
Jesus Christ, grant that we may sensibly feel the power of his death, killing
sin and corruption in us, and the power of his resurrection raising us up to
newnes of life. Make us resolve to renounce, even our sweetest and best beloved
sins, and not to take liberty to our selves, to continue in any known
ungodliness, that we may think it more then sufficient that we have hitherto
given the raines to our ownlusts, therefore now to labor to stop and kill all
sin in the beginning, before it come to the act, and resolve to bestow the rest
of our lives according to thy blessed word. And because the night is at hand,
which thou have appointed for us to rest in, he beseech thee to take us into
thy fatherly protection this night and ever: command the guard of thy holy
Angels to pitch their tents about us, and preserve us both sleeping and waking,
that we may be the better fitted and prepared the day following to go on in
our vocations and callings to thy glory, our own comforts, and the benefit of
our brethren through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. In whose name we beg
these mercies at thy hands and whatsoever else thou know to be needful
either for soul or body, better then we our selves can ask in that form of
prayer, which he himself in his holy word has taught us saying, Our father
which art in heaven, etc.

Another Morning prayer.
MOst merciful God and loving Father, we thy poor and unprofitable servants
do here humbly cast down our selves and our sinful souls, before the
footstool of thy majesty, acknowledging and confessing that we are not
worthy to approach into thy presence, much loss to have any thing to do with
thee in any part of thy most pure worship, and service, seeing we have lived
and continued in the breath of thy holy commandments not only through
negligence and infirmity, but many times witingly and willingly, contrary to
our own knowledge, and the holy motions of thy good spirit, to the wounding of
our own souls and consciences and to the great dishonor of thy maiestis. O
Lord we bes^ech thee regard us not as we are in our selves, but look upon us
in the countenance of thy son our All-sufficient savior Christ Jesus, for his
sake we pray thee be gracious and good to al our sins both in general and
particular, original or actual, of ignorance, or of knowledge, of omission or
commission, whereby we have offended thee, from the first hour of our
conception, till this present time. Lord accept the death and passion of thy
son, as a sufficient ransom for all our sins, bury them deeply in his
grave, and cancel the book of thy wrath wherein they are written with his
blood, that they may never be laid to our charge either in this life present or
in the next. Let thy blessed spirit seal the pardon of them all to the comfort
of our consciences. Furnish us we beseech thee with all needful graces,
especially as Christians to walk worthy of Christ Jesus in holy conversation:
and vouchsafe to bless al good means unto us which thou have sanctified for
our continual groath in grace, and thy fears, especially thy holy word and the
ministry thereof, print deeply in our hearts all wholesome instructions, which
are delivered and taught us out of the same by thy ministers, good lord make us
thankful evermore for all thy benefits bestowed upon us, chiefly for thy
son Christ Jesus the fountain of all good to us and ours, as also for all
those blessings that concern this life present, as health, liberty, apparel
and such like, for thy fatherly protection over us, and bringing us to the
light of this present day: keep and defend us we pray thee from all evil that
may hurt us, and from falling into any gross sin, that may displease thee, set
thy fear always before our eyes, that we may spend this day, and all the
days of our lives, to thy glory and the peace of our own consciences: for
this day we beseech thee give a blessing to our endeavors in our calling, that
we may be therein conscionably occupied, knowing that thou seeest even the
very secrets of our hearts, and that nothing can be done, be it never so secret
without thy knowledge, these mercies and blessings we pray thee to grant unto
us for Jesus Christ's sake our Lord,

Amen.
Another Evening Prayer.
Eternal God and in Jesus Christ our most merciful father, thou which art the
father of mercies, and the God of al consolations, we thy unworthy servants do
here according to our bounden duties humble our selves before thy majesty,
and rendering in that poor measure we are able all praise and thanks for all
thy mercies and blessings bestowed upon us from time to time, ever since we
were borne until this present, for our election, creation, redemption,
vocation, justification, sanctification, preservation, and the hope of our
glorification herafter: as also for all those blessings that concern this life
present, furnishing us continually with all good things necessary that we
stand in need of. More especially, O Lord we thank thee, y^ thou have
preserved and defended us this day, from al perils and dangers both of body and
soul, wherinto many have fallen, and we might also, had we not been guided by
thy merciful providence. O Lord we confess to the shame of our own selves,
that we are not worthy of the least of all these thy mercies, but as we were
conceived and borne in sin, so have we lived in iniquity and in the
transgression of thy laws, not regarding to be governed by the holy word, and
therefore have justly deserved, that thou should pour upon us all shame and
misery in this life and eternal condemnation in the World to come: but O Lord
we know that thou art a God full of mercy, stow to anger great compassion, and
wilt not the death of a sinner, but rather that we should live. In confidence
of this thy mercy, we confess before thy majesty our manifold sins, in
treating thee to pardon them all for the merits of Christ Jesus; and seeing
thou have given us so large a time of repentance, grant that we may now at
length return unto thee in sincerity of heart and contrition of spirit. And
for this night present we beseech thee sanctific our rest unto us this night,
that we may enjoy the same as thy blessing, that thereby our wearied bodies
being refreshed with moderate and quiet sleep, we may be the better enabled
to walk before thee in our callings the day following, to thy glory and our
own comforts, through Jesus Christ. Remember with us, thy Church and children
in all places, gather together thine elect, forgive the crying sins of this
land, make an end of these days of sin, and hasten the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Preserve thine anointed and our dread soueraign King, the Queen
and their royal Progeny, defend and keep them from plots and trecheries both
abroad and at home. Let thy spirit of wisdom, of Council, and of upright
judgment rest upon all the Lords of his majesty's honorable Privy Council,
the Nobility and magistracy for the best good of this whole Land, Bless y^
painful preachers of thy holy word, give good success we pray thee to their
studies and labors, for the winning of so many souls as thou have ordained to
eternal life; comfort all thy afflicted that suffer under thy hand, and
howsoever it shall please thee to deal with them, yet support them with
patience and thankfulness to undergo whatsoever it shall please thee to lay
upon them, and when thou shall see it fit, send them deliverance that either by
life or by death Christ may be to them advantage. Lastly we beseech thee good
Lord to bless all our kinsfolks in the flesh and all others whom thou would
est we should pray for, hear us for them and them for us, and Christ Jesus for
us all. In whose name we shut up these our imperfect prayers in that perfect
form which he himself has left us, saying Our father etc.

Morning Prayer for a private person.
MOst Glorious God and merciful father, I thy most unworthy creature, do
here confess before thy Divine Majesty, to thy glory, though it be to the
shame and confusion of mine own face, that I am not worthy to appear before
thee, much more unworthy to offer up my prayers unto thee, with confidence that
thou should hear them and grant my requests by reason of my manifold sins
and transgressions that I have heaped up against thy majesty, ere since I was
borne until this present day. And now O Lord being come before thee, I must
needs confess the vileness of my estate. I was conceived, bred and born in
sin, and in sin have I continued all my days, I have drunk Iniquity like
water, yea, I have drawn it after me, and tied it unto me as with great ropes,
yea, I have eue^ made a mock of sin, and it has been a pastime unto me to
do wickedly: Notwithstanding O Lord thou have called upon me, but still I have
refused, thou have again and again stretched out thy hand, but I have not
regarded, thou have sought to reclaim me, but I have hated to be reformed;
thou have often called upon me by thy blessed word, yet notwithstanding I have
despised thy patience and abused thy goodness; so that I have given thee just
cause to heap upon me all thy seareful plagues and punishments which in the
extremity of thy law do belong unto the wicked. It is thy unspeakable mercy
that thou did not make my bed my grave, never to have risen again. but O
Lord I know there is abundance of mercies with thee, that thou may be
feared: and exceeding experience have I had of thy goodness, long suffering,
and patience toward me, therefore. I grow in hope still, that thou purposest me
good and not evil, to save me and not to destroy me: beseeching thee to accept
the death of Christ as a full satisfaction for all my sm^^es, to wash them away
in his blood, and to binds them in one bundle, and cast them behind thy back
never to be remembered, I humbly thank thy majesty for thy manifold mercies
extended toward me, this night past and al y^ days of my life for my quiet
rest and sleep, my food and raiment, my health, peace, and liberty, and the
hope of a better life in the merits of thy dear son Christ Jesus, for all
these thy mercies, O Lord I have nothing to render unto thee, but thine own.
If I could give thee my body and soul, they might be saved by it, but thou
were never the richer for it, yea, even since I rose I have tasted many of thy
blessings, and thou have begun to serve me, before I have begun to serve thee,
I can show no reason why thou should bestow all these blessings upon me more
than others, but that thou art merciful, and if thou should draw all back
again from me, as justly thou may, I have nothing to say, but that thou art
just, and seeing O Lord I am now to enter into the affairs of this day, I
beseech thee bless me in the duties of my calling this day and ever for
idleness and godliness, can not stand together, and it is thy pleasure that
in the sweat of my face I should eat my bread, O Lord preserve me from all
fraudulent and de^eitfull courses, draw my affections more and more from the
love of the World, and fix my heart upon those things which are above, and if
things succeed according to my mind by thy blessing upon my labors, make me
thankful unto thee, if any cross come, make me patient and careful to
profit by every chastisement that it shall please thee to lay upon me, knowing
that howsoever they are greiuous for the present, yet in the end they will
bring the quiet fruit of righteousness to al them that are thereby exercised;
which God grant for his Christ's sake, to whom with the holy spirit be all
praise now and ever

Amen.
Evening Prayer for a private Person.
O Eternal God Father of our Lord Jesus Christ and in him my most merciful
father I humbly confess before thy glorious presence, that I am altogether a
lump of sin, and a mass of corruption, and therefore have for feited thy
favor and incurred thy high displeasure, both in thought, word and deed. My
sins O Lord are more in number than the hairs of my head: yea, far more than
I can possibly feel or know, and if I should go about to reckon up my
particular offenses, I know not where to begin or where to make an end. It is
thou O Lord who know my sins, to whom the secrets of my heart are manifest,
and nothing can be hid from thy sight: besides my consciense does accuse me of
many greiuous evils, and I daily feel by full experience how frail I am, how
prone to euel and backward to all goodness, my mind, my heart and affections,
and all the faculties both of soul and body, are full of vanity, profaneness,
dullness, deadness, and drow^inesse in matters of thy worship and service. But
O dear father I have learned from thy mouth, that thou art a God full of
mercy, slow to wrath, and of great compassion and kindness toward all such
as are heavy laden and groan under the burden of their sins. O Lord extend
thy great mercy toward me poor sinner, and give me a general pardon for all
mine offenses whatsoever, seal it to my conscience in the blood of thy dear
son Christ Jesus, assuring me more and more of thy love an favor toward me,
and that thou art a reconciled father unto me in the same christ. O Lord I
beseech thee principally give me victory over those sins, thou know my
nature most prone to commit. Mortific in me whatsoever is carnal, and
sanctiffe me by thy good spirit, and knit my heart vnthee for ever. Lord grant
that I may take delight in the reading and hearing of thy holy word: that I may
love and reverence all the faithful Ministers of the gospel, give O Lord a
melting heart, that I may tremble at thy word, let not my sins hold back
thy mercies from me, nor mine unworthiness stop the passage of thy grace. I most
humbly thank thee for all thy blessings bestowed upon me necessary for this
life, as food, raiment, health, peace, liberty, etc. which many of thy dear
children do want being notwithstanding bought with the precious blood of
Christ Jesus as well as I. Bi^t above all, dear Father, I praise thy name for
the blessings of a better life, especially for thy holy word and sacraments
and all the good I enjoy thereby for the continuance of thy gospel, the word
of truth, the means of our salvation, for the death of thy son and all that
happiness I receive thereby: O Lord open my blind eyes every day more and
more, to see and consider of thy great and marvelous love toward me in all
these things, that by the dew consideration thereof my heart may be drawn
nearer unto thee to love thee much because thou have given much: and as thou
do abound toward me in goodness, so grant that I may abound toward thee in
obedience and thankfulness, and in these my weak and imperfect prayers O Lord
I am not mindeful of my self alone, but of the whole estate of thy Church
wheresoever, bless all christian Kings and Princes, calling upon thy name,
especially our dread Sovereign the Kings Majesty, the Queen, and their roial
Progonie, Bless all the nobility, the magistrates and ministers of the Land,
that all their Councels and labors may begin at thy fear, and may be referred
thy glory. Succor and comfort all those that are comfortless, sanctify all
their afflictions and troubles unto them, that they may tend to thy glory, and
their own good. Finally, O Lord according to my bounden duty I commend unto
thy Majesty all my friends and acquaintance, beseeching thee for them, as for
my self to bless us all, in our particular places, and grant that we may do
those things which may be to thy glory and our comforts, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. In whose name I end as he has taught me saying, Our father which art
in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy-will be done in earth
as it is in heaven, etc.

A Prayer for a private person necessary at all times.
Almighty God and in Jesus Christ my most merciful and loving Father, I do
here in thy presence acknowledge that I am of my self a most wretched and*
miserable sinner, both in respect of the corruptions of my heart, as also the
transgression of my life: more particularly I do acknowledge the infidelity
of my heart whereby I have not yet learned to depend upon thy providence for the
things of this life, nor upon thy mercy for the salvation of my soul: I
confess O Lord, the Atheism and profaneness both of my mind and heart,
whereby all my thoughts and affections are estranged from thee, and so glewed
to the things of this life, that I can take more joy and delight in doing mine
own will, and in serving mine own lusts, then ever I would ^^ in serving and
obeying thee. I acknowledge likewise the pride of mine own heart, whereby I do
eralt my self in the vanity of my own conceit above thy majesty, and above my
Brethren, whom thou have made far more excellent then my self, as also the
security of the flesh, whereby I put away the day of wrath far from me,
promising to me self freedom from all thy curses and plagues, notwithstanding
I walk in sin and in the stubbornnes of mine own heart, my hypocrisy
whereby I am content my self only with an outward name and profession of
religion and holiness before men, not regarding the truth and power of
godliness: besides O Lord my life abounds in all Actual transgressions
against every one of thy commandments, I have lived in the abuse of thy
mercies, and have not been drawn nearer unto thee. In neglect of thy
Judgments and fatherly chastisements both upon others and upon my self, and
have not profited thereby to true repentance, and reformation of life: yea O
Lord I have lived in the pro^anation of thy holy ordinances, thy Word,
Sacraments, and this exercise of Prayer, neither preparing my self hereunto
^right, nor being conuersent therein, with that care. diligence and conscience
as I ought, and therefore thou may justly deprive me of that fruit of
edification I might have reaped by the reverent and religious using of these
divine Ordinances. Many other sins O Lord I have committed, the least whereof
if thou should lay unto my charge, I were never able to appear in thy
sight, or to answer thee one of a thousand. I beseech thee deal favorably
with me, as thou art w^nt to do with thy children, that call upon thy name,
and seek thee in the truth of their hearts. In the midst of Judgment, I pray
thee remember mercy; open my blind eyes that I may come to a particular
knowledge of my sins: touch my hard and stony heart, that I may sigh and
groan under the burden of them, being heartily displeased with my self,
because I have dishonored thy name, stir up my heart also that I may hunger
and thirst after Christ and his righteausnes, and after every drop of his most
precious blood, in him alone to be well pleased with me, and for his sake to
pardon and forgive me all my sins, wash them all away in his blood, and my
heart from the filthiness and impuritie of them all, say unto my soul, I am
thy salvation, and let me feel thy good spirit persuading my conscience, by
the inward testimony of the same, that my sins are pardoned, that I stand
discharged of them all before thy Judgment seat, and seeing it is the lot of
thy children to be tried sundry ways, O Lord prepare me to the days of
trial: Arm me with spiritual patience to endure thy hand, that I may
meekely, and contentedly submit my will, to thy good will and pleasure,
howsoever it shall please thee to deal with me, only teach me to profit
under thy rod of correction, and grant that I may learn thereby to deny my
self, to forsake this world, the pleasures, profits, and preferments of the
same: to make vile and base account of them, in respect of the heavenly things,
destring to be dissolved and to be with Christ, that sin and the corruption
thereof, might be abolished, and I may ^aue near conjunction ^ith thy
Majesty in thine ^wne Kingdom: notwithstanding, so long as ^ho^ please to
hold me in this earthly Tabernacle, increase daily more and more the graces of
thy Holy Spirit in me, as namely Faith, Repentance, Fear, Love, Humility and
a good Conscience, and all other graces whereby thine Image may be renewed in
me, that the longer I live in this world, the nearer I may draw to thy
Kingdom, indeauouring to serve and please thee, in righteousness and new
obedience, all the days of my life. Be merciful I beseech thee to all thine
afflicted, whether with sickness upon their beds, or distressed in conscience
for sins, relieve them I beseech thee accorcording to their several
necessities: strengthen them in their weakness, sanctify all thy corrections
unto them, and grant them a speedy issue in thine own good time, as shall
seem best to thy godly wisdom. Be merciful to all my friends in the flesh,
and acquaintance in the Spirit: and all other for whom I am bound by any duty
to pray for: granting unto us all a supply of all graces needful for our
present state and callings, and eternal salvation of our ^oules: these mercies
I beg ^t thy hands for Jesus Christ's sake, in that prayer which he has taught
us saying, Our Father, which art in heaven, etc.

Morning Prayer for the Sabbath day, before hearing of the Word.
O Most gracious God, and merciful Father: we thy unworthy servants, do here
prostrate our selves, our bodies and selves, to offer up to thy majesty this
morning sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, for all thy mercies and blessings
bestowed upon us: we bless thy name for the quiet rest, and comfortable sleep
this night passed, from all perils and dangers of the same: we confess O
Lord, if thou should deal with us according to our deserts, thou might
have made our beds, our graves, and our sleep our death: even for the sins of
this night past: O Lord we have done more against thee this week past then we
have done for thee all the days of our life: yet notwithstanding O Lord,
manifold are thy mercies toward us still, and thy goodness is infinite, in
every particular which befalls us we have exceeding experience of thyloue. It
is thy great mercy that we which have so many ways provoked thee, should be
suffered to live to behold the light and comfort of the day: but herein thy
mercy is much more manifest that having been heretofore profaners of thy
Sabbaths, barren and hypocritical professors of thy holy word: yea, fruitless
and unprofitable hearers of the same, that-we should yet enjoy the blessed
opportunity of another Sabbath. O Lord we confess thou might justly have
fatted up our hearts, and given us over to a Reprobate since, and commanded the
doors of thy Sanctuary to be shut up against us, and not to suffer us to
tread within thy Courts. O Lord, grant that we may rate and esteem thy mercy
toward us in this kind, according to the true value thereof, and that we may
not carelessely forget this or any other of thy favors, and as thou have of
thy mercy brought us to the beginning of this holy Sabbath: so we humbly pray
thee enable us to sanctify the same, as thou requirest, and our duty binds
us: Lord make us to remember, that this is not any Commandment, or Ordinance
of man, but that it is thine own ordinance, and one of those laws which thou
wrotest with thine own hand, namely, that this day should after a more
special manner, be consecrated to thy service: Lord give us grace, that in
this thy Sabbath we may beware of doing our own works; or of seeking our own
wills* or of speaking vain and idle words, that we may seriously bind our
selves to the performing of such duties, as do belong to this day. O Lord we
know that herein we shall meet with many corruptions, in this holy service,
our own corrupt nature and affections will think it a task that can not be
endured: besides in the world we shall have many examples of the wicked to
draw and entise us from our diligence and constancy in our godly course: but
we beseech thee from the bottom of our hearts, to strengthen us, that these
things prevail not against us, and grant that we may more esteem the
performance of our duties to thy majesty, then either the contenting of our
own corrupt natures, or wicked persons; and seeing O Lord, we are now to hear
thy holy word: we beseech thee pour down thy blessings upon our endeauours
this day, in time of prayer, grant us reverence to thy Majesty, faith in the
promises of thy Son Christ Jesus, a lively feeling of our own wants, and a
continual remembrance of all thy former favors, and mercies toward us: and
when we hear thee speaking unto us by the mouth of thy Ministers, be pleased
to give unto us unlocked and understanding hearts, rectify our Judgments,
sanctify our affections, and strengthen our memories, that those holy
instructions, which we shall hear reverently, and attentively, may of us be
practiced faithfully and effectually in the whole course of our lives, through
Jesus Christ our Lord: give unto the preacher O Lord a door of utterance,
touch his tongue with a Cole from thine Altar, that he may deliver the word of
life boldly, that whatsoever corruption lies hid in our hearts, the power of
thy holy word may search and discover it to the very bottom: and grant that
we may not hear it as the word of a miserable mortal man, like unto our
selves, but as it is indeed the word of thee, the everliving God, who art able
to save and to destroy. And because Satan a deadly enemy to man's salvation,
ready to pick the seed of thy word which is sown in our hearts: therefore
we pray thee O Lord, confound Satan and all his works, and be thou more
merciful in blessing thine own ordinance unto us, then Satan either is or
can be possibly malicious to hinder the same: for this end and purpose we
beseech thee O Lord, to take out of our minds all vain and wandering thoughts,
all covetous desires of the world, and whatsoever else thou know to be an
enemy to the saving hearing of thy holy word, that thy word may be unto us,
not as our sins deserve it should, but as it is in it self thy power to our
salvation, that it may be as seed sown in good ground, which bring forth in
us plentiful fruit, to thy glory and our own comforts, through Jesus Christ
our Lord and only Savior, to whom with thee and the Holy Spirit, be all
praise and power, majesty, and dominion: now and for ever.

Amen.
Evening Prayer on the Sabbath day.
Everlasting God, and in Jesus Christ our most merciful and gracious Father:
we thy poor servants are here met together in the fear of thy majesty, and
in the confidence of thy mercy to offer up our eueuing sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, for all thy mercies and blessings bestowed upon us, in most
abundant manner: especially O Lord, for that thou have not suffered us to walk
in darkness, ignorance and blindness, but have given us thy most holy and
blessed word, to be a lantern to our feet, and alight unto our paths, to
eternal life. We render to thy majesty from the ground of our hearts, humble
thanks for that portion of thy blessed word, which this day through thy mercy
we have been made par takers off: we confess O Lord, that we have heard the
same with manifold infirmities, and much weakness: nevertheless we pray thee
let thy power appear in our weakness, and vouchsafe to water with the dew of
grace, every of these particular instructions, which this day or at any other
time, we have been taught out of thy holy word, that they may be as seed sown
in good ground and may bring forth much fruit to thy glory, and our own
comforts in this world, and the eternal salvation of our souls in the world
to come. O Lord we confess thou might justly have given us over to a
reprobate sense, for our negligence and carelessenes in matters of thy worship
and service: yca, even O Lord, our last behavior in hearing of thy holy word,
has been so far short of that which we ought to have done, that we have
deserved that thou should make thy word a savor of death unto us, and not a
savor of life: we confess O Lord, our knowledge is very small in comparison
of the time, we have enjoyed the blessing of thy holy word, so plentifully
preached among us, and our practice is far short of our knowledge, which
makes our case the more miserable: but O Lord God seeing thou art so good unto
us, in bringing us to a view of our own defects and wants, be thou also
merciful in giving unto us a heart to lament and to be truly humbled before
thy majesty for them: we beseech thee in Jesus Christ to be a reconciled
Father unto us, freely to pardon and remit all our sins, and grant that the
word which has been sown among us this day, may take deep root in our
hearts, that neither the scorching heat of persecution or affliction cause it
to wither, nor the thornie cares of the world choke it, but that we may daily
grow up to these holy duties, till at length we come to a perfect age in Christ
Jesus: and forasmuch as we are taught in thy holy word to make prayers and
supplications for all men: we are not only mindful of our selves here
present, but of thy children and Church in all places. Bless O Lord all those
that thou have set in authority over us, especially thy servant and our
sovereign the kings Majesty, sanctify his go^ernment, unto us. Bless the
Quee^e and there hopeful Progeny, the Nobility and Magistrates of the Land,
grant that we may be godly and quietly governed under them. Bless O Lord the
faithful Pastors and ministers, of thy holy word, to whom thou have committed
the dispensation thereof and the charge of thy people, yt both in their life and
doctrine, they may be found faithful, setting only before there eles, thy honor
and glory, and that by them, all poor sheep, which wander and go astray may
be brought home into thy fold: and o lord as feeling members of one body whereof
Christ is head, we pray thee for all such as are afflicted with any cross or
tribulation, whether in body or mind or both, that it would please thee to
give them patience and constancy to endure thy holy hand so long as it shall
please thee to exercise it upon them, give them strength of faith against all
assalts of Satan whatsoever, give them the pardon and remission of their sins,
sealed unto their constiences by the blood of thy dear son Christ Jesus: Be
pleased O lord to deal with them in mercy and not in justice, knowing they are
but dust and ashes, and in thy good time release them out of that misery they
are either by life that they may glorify thee here, or by faithful departure
they may be glorified of thee hereafter. These mercies and whatsoever else
thou know necessary for us we crave at ^hy hands in that form of Prayer
which Christ has taught us in his Gospel. Our father etc.

A Prayer before the receiving of the Lords Supper.
MOst merciful father, I thy unworthy servant, do here render to thy Majesty
humble thanks, for that it has pleased thee, notwithstanding al my former
sins and unworthiness, to inuit me to this blessed banquet which thou have
ordained for the strengthening of my wea^e faith, and for the preservation of
the memory of Christ's death. O Lord I beseech thee give me grace to put on the
wedding garment, and seeing thou have commanded that I should examine my self,
grant that I may not presume to thrust my self into thy holy presence, without
a due examination of mine own estate, both how I have lived, and also how I am
prepared for so weighty a service: I desire to do it O Lord, help my desire: I
promise to live more holy than I have done, give me power I pray thee to
perform my promise. O Lord I confess I am by nature a child of wrath as well
as others, give me a true and lively faith, wherewith, as with a spiritual
hand, I may be spiritually joined unto thee, that in this outward pledge,
whereby it has pleased thee to stoop to my senses, by visible signs of bread
and wine, setting forth thereby invisible graces, so grant good Lord I may
wholly rest in thy death and passion, which is the matter of both thy
Sacraments, cleanse me O Lord that thou may enter into me, and may
vouchsafe to take up thy habitation within me, I know O Lord that I am most
unworthy of this excellent mercy: but it is thou that for thine own names sake,
have showed unto me this great salvation, not sparing thine only begotten son,
whom when the fullness of time was come, thou did send into the World, made
of a woman, that in him thou might receive a full satisfaction for my
sins, committed both in body and soul, remove far from me O Lord all
swelling, disdainefull and uncharitable affections, for this is a feast of
love, therefore to it a malicious and reuengeful heart cannot be a welcome
guest, and when I present my self before thee at thy table O Lord I beseech
thee restrain wy wandering and idle thoughts, and let them be seriously fixed
on that which is the Sacrament namely the death of my savior, quicken me up to
deuote and consecrate my self for ever, unto his service, who has vouchsafed
himself to be a sacrifice for me, and grant that when I see bread and wine on
the table with my bodily eye, I may with the eye of my soul behold Christ on
the Cross, and when I look upon the wine powered out of the vessel, I may
consider how Christ's blood was powered out for my sins, and as I receive this
bread and wine into my stomach for bodily sustenance, so cause me I beseech
thee to feed on the body and blood of our Lord and Savior Christ that it may
be nourishment for my soul,

Amen.
A Prayer after the Receiving of the Lords Supper.
O most loving and merciful father, I cannot give thee thanks worthy enough
according to the desire of my mind, for the inestimable treasure of this
heavenly food, which thou have now made me partataker of in this heavenly
mystery, to wit the true bread of heaven that everlasting meat that abides
for eue^^ thy blessed son pur Savior Christ Jesus in whom, I have obtained,
by the gift of this holy Communion, an earnest of an immortal inheritance, to
come, O Lord let not this precious blood of his be shed in vain for me, but
nourish my soul by his flesh, and more and more cleanse it by his blood:
quicken me O Lord I beseech thee in this life, that in the body of his Church I
may be partaker of all spiritual blessings through him, and as thou have
separated me O Lord from the wicked, in this holy banquet, so keep me I pray
thee from their corruptions, that I be not as a dog that returns to his
vomit, and as a filthy swine that is washed to her wallowing in the mire: but
good Lord grant that I may seusibly feel the death of Christ to be sweet unto
my soul, as I do now these creatures of bread and wine, to afforde a pleasant
taste and refreshing to my body, O heavenly Father let me not depart hence
forgetful of thy kindness, but grant that I may even now at this present time,
even resolve with mine own soul to walk in a better course of holy obedience
to thy Magesty, than heretofore, having respect unto all thy Commandments: and
as I have been this day put in mind of the benefit of Christ's death; so let
me every day think often of his death, that thereby I may live unto
righteousness, and learn to die unto sin, and grant that ever hereafter: I
may so walk before thee that all men may see that I am become a new creature;
thus endeuouriug to walk in this life according to thy will expressed in thy
holy word, I may hereafter enjoy the ioies of thy kingdom in thy presence
there to abide for ever and ever

Amen.
A P^aier before a man begins the works of his calling.
O Almighty and everliving God, seeing all just and lawful vocations and
callings grounded upon thy word, are warranted for us to live in, and also
have commanded that no man should be idle; give me grace I humbly pray thee,
that I may walk faithfully before thee as in thy holy presence, so that no
deceit, cunning or guile take any hold of me, but that I may labor truly and
diligently, as doing thine own work. Good Lord I beseech thee so prosper and
bless my godly endeavors, that in Jesus Christ they may be a seal of thy
favor toward me, to maintain me and mine, and that I may be also helpful
and beneficial unto others, knowing it to be a better thing to give than to
receive: and when it shall please thee O Lord by thy blessing upon my labors,
that my basket and my store is increased, grant that I may not ascribe to mine
own industry and pains, but to give thee the praise of it, to whom it wholly
belongs. And good father grant that I may not set my heart upon these outward
things, but rather as riches increase, so I may be more and more afraid of my
self, least the cares of this World, and the deceitfulness of riches, choke
in me the seeds of grace, and so steal my mind away from better things, and
let me not I beseech thee so eagerly follow the duties of my calling, that I
should abridge and skant my self of convenient seasons for heavenly and
spiritual exercises, but always make me behold thy all seeing presence, in
whose sight all things are naked, that so I may approve my self unto thee by a
straight and upright carriage, and in so doing I shall imitate thy son Christ
Jesus, who in the days of his flesh humbled himself, to live as a man upon
this earth, by following a painful trade, and when the time was come that he
was to publish himself to the World, he was never idle but went about doing
good, yea, with that alacrity and cheerfulness, that it was his meat to do
the will of his father that sent him. O Lord grant that I may follow his steps
endeavoring to please thee in the whole course of my life through the same
Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior

Amen.
A Prayer containing humble confession of Sin, and desire of pardon.
O Eternal God and merciful father, infifinite in justice and truth, taking
vengance upon all disobedient children, and yet abundant in goodness and mercy
toward al such as unfeignedly fear thy name and return unto thee in sincerity
of heart and contrition of spirit, prostrating their souls before thee. I most
vile and wretched sinner do humbly beseech thee of thy infinite mercy to have
compassion upon my sins, which are so grievous and so vile and loathsome, as
thy pure eyes can not abide to look upon them, I confess O Lord, that all my
life has been in sin, our fathers and mothers were sinful even from the
s^ock of our great grandfather Adam, whose blindness should have been our
light, and whose sight was turned to our blindness and darkness, by the
deceitful entisements of that enemy of our salvation, that subtle serpent
Satan, by whose baits our forefather being clothed with innocence and
integretie and unspeakable happiness, was moved by the desire of the knowledge
of that which thou would he should have been ignorant of, by breaking of
which thy commandment, he with the woman which thou gave to be a help and
comfort unto him, were according to thy determinate will, cast out of Paradise,
a place of joy to a place of misery, and labor. I beseech thee most gracious
God, smite my hard and stony heart, and make it even to melt with in me, at
the sight of my manifold transgressions: settle in it I pray thee that godly
sorrow which causes repentance, unto salvation not to be repented of, humble
my soul under thy mighty hand and suffer it not to freeze in the dregs of mine
own corruptions. and make my head full of water, and mine eyes a fountain of
tears, which may run down like a river day and night: and grant O Lord, that I
may sorrow not so much because of hell and damnation which is due unto me for
my sins, but that my chiefest sorrow may be this, that I have offended so
good and gracious a God as thou art, in abusing thy mercies, and requiting thy
exceeding love with so greiuous sins, O Lord I am bold to come unto thee at
this time, not in my own name, for who am I that I should dare to press into
thy presence, but in the name and mediation of thy dear and well-beloved son
Christ Jesus. Let his death and passion be a full satisfaction for all my
sins, wash me thoroughly in his blood from mine iniquities and cleanse me from
my sins, let not thy hand of justice destroy me, but give me the comfort of
thy help and stablish me with thy truth. Most gracious father, thou which art
the father of mercies and the God of consolations, of thee I ask mercy and
forgiveness of all my sins, thou would that none should perish, but that
all should be saved and come to the knowledge of thy truth: thou have commanded
me most gracious God in thy holy word to call and knock unto thee, whereupon
thou have gratiousty promised so to find, as to enter into me and to
entertain me. I beseech thee make good my promise unto me at this time, and
regard my tears my sighs and my groans, which do knock at the gate of thy
mercies, I endeavor most gracious God and strive to do thy will, Lord make good
thy promise I beseech thee in thy word and accept my desire, and howsoever
vilde wretch that I am, ever since I Couenanted with thee to do thee service,
I have either vngratiously forgotten, or ungratefully remembered all thy
benefits, and have not so esteemed thee for them, as I would have done a
mortal friend for a few common Courtesies, yet never the less have mercy upon
me. I can not excuse my faults, and If I should, yet my consciense would
condemn me: for I had thy express word to stay me and mine own conscience
to bridle me, yea I would have allowed those things which I did, if any other
had done them but my self, now when my memory is the handwriting of my debt,
and my thoughts are willing w^^nesses against me, and mine own knowledge
condemns me; what remains but that I must needs fall into thy hands, O Lord
I beseech thee according to thy wonted mercy and old loving kindness, have
pity upon me miserable sinner, and grant me a free remission of all my sins
and a perfect reconciliation with thee in Christ Jesus: this O Lord I earnestly
crave at thy hands even for the same Jesus Christ sake our Lord and savior

Amen.
A godly Prayer in time of sickness or at the point of Death.
Almighty God, and in Jesus Christ my most merciful Father, I thy poor and
wretched servant, which do here lie under thy hand, feeling thy punishment of
the corruption and transgression that is in me, and in all flesh, even this
same sickness which at this time thou have sent unto me, I do here humble my
self under thy hands, and acknowledge against my self my heinous sins and
corruptions, so that I confess that I have not only deserved sickness of body:
yea, the separation of my soul from my body, but also the separation both of
body and soul from thee and thy kingdom for ever: but good Father I humbly
beseech thee look upon me in the righteousness of Christ Jesus, in whom thou
have loved me before the foundations of the world were laid: and though sin
have brought sickness, and sickness be an undoubted messenger of death, at the
time thou have appointed: yet grant good Lord, that I may be undoubtedly
persuaded in this, that death is swallowed up in victory, and that this death
can no more hold me under, then it has done Jesus Christ, into whom I am
translated: therefore I beseech thee give me a sweet feeling of my
incorporation into Christ Jesus, in whose death though I dye, yet I shall live,
by y^ virtue of his resurrection eternally: O Lord, in this my sickness, give
me I beseech thee a deep touch and a sensible understanding of my sins past,
that I have not used this temporal life which thou did lend me more to thy
glory, that I did not so watch for death, as that I was no better prepared for
it, that I was no more diligent in my calling to seek the advancement of thy
glory. Now O Lord I pray thee take from me all guile of Spirit, all disposition
to flatter or to sooth up my self, or to lessen either the number or the
quality of my sins, cause me even to break up my heart, and to search and
try my ways, that so out of the abundance of my feeling, I may pour out a
most plentiful and sincere confession before thee, knowing it to be in vain
to endeavor to hide that from thee, which thou (before whom all things are
naked) do know better then my self: yea such is thy mercy, that when I do
lay my sins open, thou do cover them: good Father I beseech thee, give me
that mind, which a seek man should have, and increase my patience with my
pain, and call to my mind all which I have heard, or read, or felt, or
meditated, to strengthen me in this my visitation, that though I never taught
any good while I lived: yet I may now instruct others how to die, and to bear
patiently whatsoever thy holy hand shall lay upon them. Apply unto me al thy
mercies and merits of Christ Jesus, as if he had died for me in particular,
be not far from me, I beseech thee when the enemy comes to tempt me, but
when he is most busy, then let thy good spirit be busiest also to defend me,
and let my last hour be my best hour, and my last thoughts and words the
best that ever I did think or speak. Lord I know that I can not escape death,
then why should I fear it: and if I must dye, why not now, if it so please
thee? for my chiefest happiness is behind, and I can not have it, unless I go
unto it. I confess O Lord my pains are great, but seeing I travel to heaven,
make me patient I beseech thee to bear my pains, and when it shall please
thee to call me out of this veil of misery, command thy holy Angels, I humbly
pray thee to carry my soul into the bosom of blessed A. braham, there to
rest with thee in eternal glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
A Prayer of thanksgiving unto God, for Deliverance out of any Sickness.
ALl honor and praise be given unto thee, most gracious God, and mercisull
Father, for all thy mercies and favors, bestowed upon me, even from my cradle
to this present hour: for my Election, Creation, Redemption, Justification,
Sanctification, Preservation, and that blessed hope of Glorification in the
world to come. O Lord, thou have loaded me with thine abundant favors, as if I
had ever done thy will, although I never knew thee as I ought, loved thee as I
should, obayed thee as thou commandedst, nor been thankful to thee as thou
have deserved: exceeding experience have I had of thy goodness many times, but
never more then in my late sickness, wherewith thou did visit me. Lord
grant that I be not in the number of those, who are forward to ask in time of
trouble and affliction, but slack and careless, to acknowledge their
thankfulness, when mercy is bestowed: like those Lepers, that when they were
cleansed, returned not to give God thanks for his mercy. O Lord, thou have
chastened me and corrected me: but herein appears thy mercy, that thou have
not given me over to death. I confess, thou might justly have cut me off
and deprived me of the rest of my years: but it was thy good pleasure to
deliver my soul from the pit of corruption. Imprint in my mind I beseech thee,
the vows and promises, which I made in my sickness of better obedience and
service to thy majesty, then heretofore, and grant that I may make conscience
to perform them: and let me know that howsoever thou have now given me some
little respite and prolonged my days: yet I must not de^eiue my self, in
putting far from my remembrance the day of my death, but that I may make a
holy use of this thy fatherly correcting me, and to express my thankefulnes in
my life and conversation, in walking godly before thee, and in preparing my
self for my end, that I may finish my course with joy, and be ready to meet
my Savior in the clouds, and to rest with him and his holy Angels for ever,
and in his everlasting kingdom of glory.

Ame^.
A Prayer for a Sick man.
MOst gracious God, and in Christ Jesus our merciful Father: we poor
wretches gathered here before thee, do truly and most freely confess, that
we are most vile and miserable, utterly unworthy to speak unto thee, or to
receive the least favor from thee, by reason of our many and grievous sins,
our blindness of mind, ignorances, negligences, peruersenes of heart, and
vnseruiceablenesse in our lives: but with all we do remember thy great love,
and merciful promises made unto them, that with ^enitent and humble spirits do
sue unto thee: wherefore we are enboldned to approach unto thy throne of grace,
in the name of thy Son Christ Jesus, beseeching thee for his sake to forgive us
all our sins original and actual: wash us (we pray thee) in his blood, and
cloth us with his righteousness: give us grace to turn unto thee with our
hearts from all our sins, and enable us by thy grace to serve thee in
righteousness and holiness all the days of our lives. Take care (we beseech
thee) of this thy Servant, whom thou have afflicted before our eyes: O Lord
receive him to thy grace, and assure him of thy glory: grant unto him faith in
thy promises, patience under thine hand, and hope of thy mercy: restore him (if
it be thy blessed will) to his perfect health again: and bless all good
means unto it: if not, prepare him for death and for thy kingdom: comfort him
with an assured hope of a joyful resurrection, and whenever his soul shall
depart from his body, grant that it may be presented without all sin to thee,
through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior.

Amen.
A Prayer for a Woman with child.
BLessed God, and gracious Father, I thy poor Handmaide do here humbly
present my self before thy throne of Grace: beseeching thee to forgive me all
my manifold sins committed against thee: bury them in the death of my Savior,
thy Son Christ Jesus: O Lord I beseech thee for his sake to accept of me and
this poor worm enclosed in my womb: vouchsafe to give us thy Son, and to
sanctify us with thy Holy Spirit: grant me strength and patience, I humbly
entreat thee, to endure and overcome those pains, which for my sins are
worthily imposed on me. Assuage them, O Lord, I pray thee, and vouchsafe me a
safe deliverance with safety to this child within me, if it may please thy
Majesty; so will I dedicate my self, and that which thou shall give me, to
the glory of thine holy Name: O Lord, hear: O Lord, help: be thou my God, and
my guide, my salvation, and my succor; not for my merits, but for the honor
of thy mercy, and the all sufficient merits of Jesus Christ, to whom with
thee, and thy Holy Spirit, three persons, but one everliving and euerlouing
God, be all honor and glory, for ever and for ever.

Amen.
A Prayer for a Midwife by her self alone.
O Lord my God, I beseech thee forgive me my manifold sins and wickedness,
accept of me, I beseech thee, in thy Son Jesus Christ: honor me with all
the graces of thy spirit* grant me wisedoms, modesty, temperance, and a
religious heart. Bless me in this calling, to which thou have appointed me:
prosper me, I pray thee, in the thoughts of my heart, the words of my mouth,
and the works of mine hands. Be merciful (I most humbly beseech thee) to all
those women and children with whom I am to deal. Be merciful to this thy
Servant, that is now in travel: O good Lord, comfort her, strengthen her, and
grant her a seasonable and safe deliverance: bless her burden, O Lord, and
give i^ strength and life to be borne: so will I render praise and thanksgiving
unto thee. Hear O Lord, and grant me my hearts desire, for Christ Jesus his
sake, mine only Lord and Savior.

Amen.
A Thanksgiving private for the safe deliverance of a woman, to be said by the
Midwife, or some woman present at her Delivery.
WE give thee thanks (most merciful God*) for all thy mercies and favors
to us, for Electing, Creating, Redeeming, Sanctifying, and Preserving us: for
our health, peace, and liberty, for the word and Gospel, and for preserving
both it and us from that barbarous Powder Treason of wicked Papists: and
finally for the safe deliverance of this thine Handmaide, and the birth of this
Infant: we beseech thee give us thankful hearts unto thee, and grant that
by true thankfulness we may consecrate our souls, our selves, and services
unto thee all the days of our life, endeavoring to lead a godly, quiet and
virtuous life before thee in this world, that we may live for ever with thee
in the world to come, through Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior. Amen.
The Lord be merciful unto us, send health and strength unto this thine
Handmaide, Lord bless this Child, vouchsafe it life, that it may by Baptism
be admitted into thine house, and have interest in thy Covenant, the Lord
keep us all, and honor us with his grace in this life, and with immortal
glory in the life to come.

Amen,
A Prayer in time of Pestilence, or any other Contagious Sickness.
MOst gracious and everliving god, whose Judgments are unsearchable, and
works past finding out, much less to be comprehended within our weak and
shallow brains, we can not wonder that we are afflicted with so many sorts of
diseases, and extraordinary visitations, for we confess that our sins have
provoked thee not only to take vengeance upon our bodies and those things that
belong unto us for this life, but also even that thou should seperats both
our bodies and souls from thee for ever to the e^ternall destruction of both:
and howsoever this judgment of the plague be grievous upon us, yet it is the
smallest part of our desert, and if thou should make it cleave fast to our
loins, and even sweep us off from the face of the earth, as dung is swept away
till all be gone, we have nothing to except against thee, but that thou art
just, for we have multiplied our sins before thee, and have pressed thee
with the burden of them as a Cart is pressed with sheaues: so that neither we
nor our Fathers have kept thy Commandments: and besides O Lord we must
confess thou have justly plagued us, because we have abused and set at
naught, thy manifold mercies, which thou have showed unto us for our
conversion, as the continual admonitions given unto us by thy ministers,
rising early and late, yet we have hardened our hearts as in the day of
slaughter, and have despised thy Prophets, and put far from us the evil day,
thereby adding drunkenness to thirst: yet notwithstanding we will return unto
thee that have smitten us, for thou art the father of mercies and the God of
forgiuenesses: O remember us not according to our sins, but according to thy
mercies, O Lord think upon us for thy goodness sake, clear us we beseech
thee, and make us free from the contagion and Leprosy of sin, and then we
shall be freed from the noisome infection of the Pestilence, so that it shall
not hurt us, teach us O Lord to fear sin as we fear the sickness it self,
for it is the cause of this wasting sickness which is the fruit of sin, but
this good Father belongs only unto thee; for thou can do both the one and
the other: therefore comfort us we pray thee according to the days that thou
have afflicted us: turns us unto thee O Lord, and we shall be turned, convert
thou us and we shall be converted: If we humble our selves and meet thee with
true faith, unfeigned repentance, with hearty sorrow and tears, thy wrath shall
cease, and then thou will call in again thy messengers, commanding thine
Angel to put up the sword of vengeance into the ^heath, and show mercy upon
us, and if it be thy good pleasure to stretch out thy hand still, and chastise
us yet more for our Iniquities, give us we pray thee grace and strength
patiently to endure thy fatherly hand, to the utmost trial, and teach us that
whenever we are judged by thee, we shall not be judged with the world, and
much better is it for us to be temporally corrected in this life, then
eternally to ber tormented in the life to come: therefore O Lord, we choose
rather to fall into thy hands, then in to the hands of men, because thy grace
is great, and mercy is with thee that thou may be feared, laying fast hold
of faith in Christ Jesus, who is theeuerlasting propitiation and perfect
sacrifice for all our sins, and in whom alone thou art well pleased, to whom
with thee and thy good spirit, be all honor and glory now and for evermore.

Amen.
A Prayer for the Kings Majesty and the whole State.
OEternall God and gracious Father, who in thy eternal counsel, and
inestimable wisdom, have ordained Kings and Princes to be as Fathers and
Nurses to thy church, and as thou have given them high sovereignty, and
special authority, so thou have communicated unto them thine own names and
titles, both to put them in continual remembrance that they are for thee, and
for thy glory, and also us thy subjects of that same continual love and
obedience which we owe unto thy Majesty, that under them we may be godly and
peaceably governed: and seeing y^ by thee Kings reign, and thy sovereign
authority reaches over all, we beseech thee good Lord, show thy mercy upon al
christian Kings and Princes, calling on thy name: especially we pray thee
multiply thy graces upon thy servant and our dread sovereign, James by thy
providence, King of great Britain, France and Ireland, defender of the faith.
As thou have doubled his croune and lifted his head above others: so we pray
thee double and redouble thy graces and blessings upon him both spiritual and
temporal: make us evermore truly thankful we beseech thee for all thy
preseruations of him from thine and his enemies: especially grant that we may
never forget that inestimable deliverance of his Majesty and the whole state,
from that more then barbarous and hellish plot of the gunpowder treason, keep
him as the Apple of thine eye, and preserve his Royal person from al
conspiracies and treasons both foreign and domestical, and continue his
government over us: and grant there may not want one of that stock to sit upon
this throne till thy son come to Judgment. Bless in like manner we beseech
thee the Queens Majesty, make her a help unto him in all good things: power
down thy blessings upon there Royal progeny, and grant that they may daily
grow in grace and favor both with God and man, and make them loyal to his
majesty all the days of his life, always afford thy gracious presence to the
honorable lords of his Majesty's Counsel: be thou president over them at their
table, and order their purposes, and direct all their consultations, as may
make most for thy glory, the honor of the King, and the good of this land and
commonwealth: give thy blessing upon all the Magistrates of the land and courts
of Justice: grant that they may draw forth the sword of justice, for the
destruction of vice and wickedness, and for the maintenance of Gods true
religion and virtue. Bless O Lord the house of Aaron and Tribe of Leui, the
ministers of thy word and Sacraments: and seeing these are thy Stewards which
thou have set over us, to disperse thy mysteries: good Lord give us grace, not
to esteem of them as mere mortal men like our selves, but as they are indeed
the ambassadors of thee, the everliving God, who art able to save and to
destroy; and that they are not such as reign over our faith, but as helpers of
our joy, which preach not themselves, but Jesus Christ our Lord and count
themselves our servants for Jesus sake: furnish them liberally of thy rich
treasure with all graces, fit for so excellent a work, and give us grace with
our best endeauours to further y^ maintenance thereof: to this end bless al
schools of learning, especially both the Uniuersities of this land, that daily
there may proceed such as may be profitable Instruments both for church and
commonwealth, and in these our prayers we are not unmindful of the afflictions
of Joseph, we beseech thee send thy Spirit of comfort, to all the afflicted
whatsoever whether in body or in mind or both: especially those that suffer for
the testimony of a good conscience: we beseech thee to stand by them in all
their distresses, and be thou more near to defend them, then Satan either is
or possible can be to seduce and draw the^ from thee: give them patience to
endure whatsoever it shall please thee to lay on them, hearty and true repentance
for all their sins, and an happy issue from their miseries, as shall seem best
to thy godly wisdom, either by life that they may glorify thee in this
world, or by faithful departure they may be glorified of thee in the world to
come, and that for Jesus Christ's sake our Lord and only Savior; In whose name
we conclude these our weak prayers as he has taught us. Our Father which art
in heaven, etc.

A Prayer containing the sum of the Lords Prayer.
Our Father which art in Heaven. Most gracious Lord God, we thy children and
servants in thy only son Jesus Christ our savior, assured here of by thy good
spirit, do heartily desire thee as we are made, redeemed, and sanctified to
praise thee, give us thy children grace to acknowledge thee the only true God
and to worship thee in thought, word and deed: that so thy name by us may be
hallowed, teach us which way we may most honor thee while we remain here,
and to set our hearts wholly thereunto, keep us from taking any part of thy
glory to our selves, and let us account it our greatest honor to honor thee,
and be ever afraid of dishonoring thee any way, and because we have no power
nor know the means of our selves to serve thee; let thy kingdom come, give us
thy word to be faithfully and painfully preached among us, with thy holy spirit
to work inwardly in our hearts, faith, fear, hope, and love, with all heavenly
graces that we may become thy subjects and heirs of thy kingdom; send us
zealous governors and faithful Preachers, that Satan, Antichrist, heresies,
vice and scismes, may be utterly destroyed, and our dear and precious souls
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, which day we pray thee to hasten; in the
mean season thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven: make us to forsake
our selves and all worldly vanities, doing nothing but what thou co^mandest,
and all that thou do will us to do it heartily, joyfully, readily,
faithfully, and with a constant heart, as thy Saints and Angels in Heaven
performs it, and because our bodies crave necessary sustenance without which
we cannot serve thee give us this day ourdaily b cad. We befeeth thee to bless
our daily labors to get sufficient maintenance and al necessaries, that we may
be able to do thy will, Let neither care nor covetousness oppress us, but
wholly commit our selves to thy faithful providing for us, and good father
forgive us our trespasses. Let not our sins either hinder or deprive us of
thy mercies, we confess that we have grievously sinned against thee, both
originally and actually so as it is thy mere mercy the weight of them have not
pressed us down to the pit of hell, but thou art merciful in Christ Jesus and
for his sake we beseech thee pardon ^^ as thou have promised and persuade our
consciences that we are forgiven by giving us grace to forgive them that
trespass* against us, give us power to continue in all godly courses and lead
us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, that neither in inward or
outward temptation we may ever be vanquished, but may ever overcome, which we
desire (O father of heaven). as thou have all rule and power and may have
glory and praise of hereafter, for ever and ever, and as we are bound in duty
for our election, creation, redemption, justification, sanctification, for all
earthly benefits, and spiritual comforts and the certain hope of eternal
glory, to which glory O father bring us and that for Christ Jesus sake our
Lord and only savior

Amen.
A prayer upon the Articles of the Creed.
O Heavenly father from whom all good gifts come, I pray thee in thy mercy
through Christ Jesus my savior to grant me thy gracious gift of a sound
justifying faith which I neither have nor can have by nature, that I may
believe in thee O God only, the father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth,
and also in Jesus Christ thy only son and our Lord, which was conceived by
the holy Ghost, bo^ne of the Virgin Marie, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was
crucified dead and buried, that descended into hell, and rose again the third
day, and ascended into heaven, and there si^te^h at the right hand of thee (O
God) father Almighty, from whence he shall come to judge us all both quick
and dead: and that I may b^ le^^e in the holy Ghost, and that there is a
Catholic church a Communion of Saints, the forgiveness of sins, and the
resurrection of the body, and life everlasting, that so I may be truly
persuaded of thy fatherly providence over me, and what Christ has done, that
is for my deliverance, and the holy ghost to be my comfort and assistance,
being a member of the church, and making me effectually partaker of all the
privileges thereof to my endless joy and happiness, which O father give unto me
I beseech thee for Christ's sake.

Amen.
A Prayer upon the ten Commandments.
O Eternal Lord God I thy humble servant, that do owe all dutifu^l obedience to
thee and am made partaker of manifold benefits both for body and soul, which
then by the blood of Christ thy only son have delivered from that everlasting
bondage which by corruption of nature I was held in, and from everlasting death
which I was subject unto by daily breaking of thy commandments: I beseech thee
give me grace now and ever hereafter to have none other Gods but thee: neither
to make to my self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing in heaven
above or in the earth beneath, nor in y^ waters under the earth, to bow down to
them to worship them. Nor that I take the name of thee my Lord God in vain.
Remembering to keep holy the Sabath day, and to labor six days doing all that
I have to do; but in the seventh day, which is the Sabath of thee O Lord my
God: give me grace to do no manner of work. And that I may honor my father and
mother. Never to commit any murder, neither Adultery. Nor to steal. Nor to
bear false witness against my neighbor. Nor to covet my neighbors house, nor
his wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, not any
thing that is his, that so I may do always my duty to thee, O God, all the
days of my life, believing, fearing, worshipping, giving thanks, and loving
thee with all my heart, with all my mind, with all my soul, with all my
strength, and loving my neighbor, friend or foe even as my self, to do to
all men even as I would they should do to me* to love honor and succor my
father and mother, to honor and obey the King, Queen, Prince, and their
ministers, to submit my self to all my governors, spiritual and temporal, to
order my self to all my betters, lowly and reverently, to hurt no body by word
nor deed, to be true and ^ust in all my dealings, to bear no malice in my
heart, to behave my self in the whole course of my life, as thou may be
glorified, my duty discharged, my conscience comforted, my brethren woone or
confirmed, and thye mouths of all the wicked stopped, which O father vouchsafe
to grant me, for thy great goodness sake, and thy beloved sons ^ake Jesus
Christ our Lord, to whom with thee and the holy spirit, be all praise and
honor given by me and all thy Saints this time and for evermore.

Amen.
A Prayer containing the doctrine of the sacraments.
O Most merciful father, thou have given met not only thy holy word to teach
me faith and obedience, but also two Sacraments, outward signs and seals of
inward graces, Christ and all his benefits. Give me wiledome O Lord, to
acknowledge the benefit and thankfully use the same, beseeching thee that as
by baptism I am received into the church, and by water outwardly am washed: so
let it scale, the assurance of the purging of my soul from sin, by Christ's
blood, and appear outwardly by thy holy spirit, killing in me corruption, and
stirring me up to holiness of life, rejoicing in my new birth, and growing more
and more therein daily; that so I may prepare my self in knowledge, in true
repentance, hearty love, and a sound faith, to come and be partaker of the
Lords supper, which is the other sacrament to nourish me up in the same, where
by the signs of bread broken, and wine poured out, taken and given, Christ my
savior with his benefits is offered, that gave his body and shed his blood for
me. Now, O Lord, as by my hand I take the bread and wine, and with eating and
digestion receive also the strength to nourish my body: so I pray thee give me
faith, to apply Christ with his merits, that I may feel the virtue thereof to
nourish my soul, that I may not come unprepared, least I eat and drink (...)
own damnation, in ^andling such holy mysteries: neither let me contei^^e or
neglect to be partaker when by the Church thou do call me, but obediently
and thankefully communicate with my breathren* to strengthen my faith, increase
mutual love, showing obedience and Gods mercy in Christ's death, till he come
to judge us all at that great day, and that for Christ's sake, our Lord and
only Savior.

Amen.
Prayer before meat.
MOst gracious God, and merciful father, from whom all good gifts proceed, we
poor wretches beseech thee to sanctify to our uses these thy good creatures
which we shall receive now of thy mercy: give us grace we pray thee to use them
soberly and purely according to thy will, and grant y^ by these blessings which
thou so largely bestowest upon us, we may see thy love toward us, seeking
likewise for that spiritual bread of thy word, which is the food of our
souls, that by the same we may be nourished to eternal life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Thanksgiving after meat.
WE confess O Lord, it is of thy only goodness and mercy that we live, move,
and have our being in this life, and all things whereby our life is preserved
comes from thy majesty: good Lord we beseech thee make us thankful for
these and al other thy mercies both spiritual and temporal: and as thou have
now fed our bodies with corporal food: so good Lord we pray thee nourish our
souls with that heavenly Manna the food of eternal life, through Jesus Christ
our Lord

Amen.
Another before meat.
ALinightie God, which have created meats and drinks for man's sustenance,
sanctify them to the use of thy children, without difference, that they may
use them for their health, and have given strength to nourish our bodies to thy
pleasure: make us sober and thankful partakers of the^, and grant that the
end of our eating and drinking may tend to enable us to serve thee in our
several places through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Another after meat.
WE humbly pray thee most gracious God and merciful to sanctify these thy
good creatures, which now of thy mercy we have received at thy hands, that they
may turn to the nourishment of our bodies where unto thou have appointed them:
and teach us to remember that it is thou which to us and to all thy creatures
give food in due season, and therefore that we abuse not thy mercies, but in
some good measure endeavor to walk worthy of them in the course of our lives:
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Another before meat.
WE magnify thygreat name most gracious God, for all thy mercies bestowed
upon us from our cradles, to this present, especially that thou have given us
Christ Jesus, and with him all the blessings belonging to this life, and to that
which is a far better: we thank thee for all temporal blessings, these which
we are now about to receive grant that our weak bodies being by them
refreshed, we may much more seek for the food of our souls, which abides
unto eternal life, that so we laboring to do thy will commanded in thy word
here in this life we may hereafter enjoy y^ ioies of thy kingdom in thy
presence, there to abide for ever and ever.

Amen.
Another after meat.
IT is thou O Lord, who have elected, created, redeemed, justified, sanctified
preserved, and now at this present fed us; thy name be blessed and praised both
now and for ever. God save his church universal the Kings Majesty, the Queen
and their royal progeny, forgive us all our sins, comfort the afflicted,
remove thy judgments far from us, send thy Gospel a free passage, and grant
us and all the Israel of God, grace, mercy, faith, truth, and peace in thy Son
Christ Jesus our Lord.

Amen.
Another before meat.
Eternal God, which have commanded us in thy holy word, that whether we eat
or drink, or whatsoever we do, al should be done to the praise of thy name,
and whereas any of thy creatures which we receive, can not be available to the
nourishment of our bodies, except they be sanctified by thy word and prayer:
we beseech thee bless these thy good gifts, which now we are about to
receive of thy bounteous liberality, that we being by them strengthened, may
be better enabled to proceed in the discharge of our several Callings, to thy
glory, and our own comfort, through Jesus Christ.

Amen.
Another after meat.
HUmble and hearty thanks be rendered unto thee most gracious God, for all thy
mercies, for the comfortable refreshing which thou have now vouchsafed unto us:
we beseech thee forgive us our sins, which makes us unworthy of the least of
thy mercies: pardon we beseech thee our great un thankfulness, and let thy
mercy to our bodies stir up thankfulness in our souls; God preserve his Church,
the Kings Majesty, the Queen, their progeny, these Realms, increase our faith,
prosoer thy word and Gospel among us, confound Satan and all the euemies of
thy truth, and grant us mercy and peace in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Amen.
Grace before meat.
MOst gracious father, we beseech thee forgive us all our sins, bless these
creatures unto our use, that they may be to our health, strength and comfort,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Grace after meat.
WE give thee thanks, most merciful father, for feeding us at this time, and
for all thy favors of this life, and of the life to come: we beseech thee
continue thy loving kindness still unto us. Lord save thy Church, our King and
his Realines, and give thy Gospel an happy passage amongst us, to thy glory,
and our comfort, through Jesus Christ out Lord, and Savior.

Amen.
Godly Directions for the right Receiving of the Lords Supper.
1 THere is required preparation as the commandment of the Apostle plainly
shows, which pertaines to al communicants without exception: Let every man
examine himself. 1 Cor. 11. 28.

2 Knowledge of y^ grounds of religion, especially of the use of both
Sacraments. 1. Cor. 11.. 26.

3 Faith, for all sacraments are seals of righteousness of Faith. Rom 4. 11.

4 Repentance, which stands in a hearty sorrow for sins committed in hatred
and detestation of the same, and a resolved purpose of amendment and obedience
for the time to come.

5 Charity toward men; for this Sacramentis a Communion, whereby all the
receivers jointly united together in love, do participate of one and the same
Christ.

6 When we see two signs to be received, bread and wine, we must call to
mind that Christ is our perfect Savior both bread and water of life. Heb. 7.
25.

7 When we beheld the bread and wine set apart by the Minister, and consecrated
by repeating the promise and prayers made for that end, we must call to mind
that Christ was ordained by God, to be our Mediator and Savior. Ioh. 6. 27.
Acts 2. 23, 36.

8 When we see the bread broken, and the wine powered out, we are to meditate of
Christ seriously, who was crucified for us, and broken by his sufferings whereby
life and righteousness was performed unto us: Zach. 12. 10.

9 The giving of Elements into the receivers hands, signifies unto us that God
does truly and really give Christ with his merits to every believing
receiver, which should put us in mind of the unspeakable love of God toward us.

Rules to know true faith, by the fruits thereof.
T^iue and saving faith is a supernatural gift of God, and a special
persuasion wrought by the holy Ghost, in the hearts of those, that are
effectually called concerning there reconciliation and salvation by Christ,
this says in whomsoever it is, it has these effects.

1 To believe that the Scriptures contained in the old and new Testament; are
the very word of God, and so much as is needful to be believed unto salvation,
is contained therein: John 5. 39.

2 There will be an unfeigned desire to be taught and instructed in the word of
God, and to have the understanding thereof, and most to affect those means
which are most effectual to that end and purpose.

3 There will be a continual sorrow and grief for thy ignorance and defective
understanding of the word of God, and no marnell; for what can be more greiuous
to the children of God, then not to know, or understand, or not to remember the
evidence of his own everlasting estate, and the will of his Master.

4 He will examine himself whether his reading or hearing the word, read or
preached, his meditating conference and study in it do norish his love and
delight, and belief in it Ps. 119. 92. 97.

5 Where true faith is, there will be a credit and authority given to the word
of God above al traditions whatsoever, and a reiection of whatsoever he knows
to be opposite to the same word of God Ps. 119. 92. 113.

6 There will be a lightness and cheerfulness in the conscience when any
thing is done agreeable to the word of God, and a trouble and heaviness in the
same when any thing is done contrary to the same word Psalm. 119. 92.

7 There will be a hoping in the promises of God, an awful fear of his
threatenings a desiring of the blessings and an endeavor to avoid the curses
contained in the word and an equal believing the one as well as the other.

8 There will be a continual thanks giving unto God for his inestimable
blessings in revealing his word unto him, and vouch safing liberty and means
to come to knowledge and understanding of the same, whereby we may see what a
grievous judgment is on them from whom this word is hi^.

9 Lastly, the least measure of true f^^t^, that a man can have is ^hen of an
humble spirit, by reason of the smalenesse of his faith, he does not yet feel
the forgiveness of his sins and yet is persuaded that they are pardonable
and therefore desires y^ they should be pardo^ned, and with his whole heart
prays to God to pardon them. Esaias 42. 3. Luke 17. 5.

Christian directions necessary to be practiced in the course of our lives.
FIrst and above all things see that thou fear God and keep his commandments
for this is the whole duty of man Eccles. 12. 13.

2 Exercise your mind in meditating often on the works of God, as his creating
and governing the world, his prospering and punishing the wicked, his blessing
and correcting his children as seems best to his godly wisdom Ier. 12. 2.
Math. 25. 31. 32.

3 Submit and humble your self for your sins, that the lord may raise you
up, for he that judges himself aright shall never be judged of the Lord, 1.
Cor. 11. 31.

4 Love all things for Gods sake, and God chiefly for his own, and remember
you make him your friend, whosoever be your enemy this you shall do, if as an
obedient child, you live always in the eye of your heavenly father.

5 Never make mention of God or any word or work of his, but with fear and
reverence, nor of any man but with love, using his name as you would have him to
use yours Deuteronomy. 28. 58. Math. 7. 12.

6 Let no more holiness appear outwardly then you have inwardly in your heart
which God sees, and in which he desires truth, neither please your self with
your unprofitableness or unwillingness to perform that which is good. To. 12. 11.

7 Speak often to the praise of God, never or little of your self, because
many words can not want iniquity, therefore speak as few as you can, rather
none, then unprofitably. Pro. 17. 27. Iam. 1. 19.

8 ^re-patient under the correcting hand of God, because, 1. He does it. 2. ^ee
does it for your good: 3. ^ee will moderate it, and supply strength, and in his
due time will deliver you out of it. Psalm. 39. 9.

9 Stick fast to God as well in adversity as in prosperity, the one being as
necessary as the other. If you have necessaries, be humbled for them, and use
them well, lest he that gave them take them away. Iam. 1. 2.

10 Take heed of performing holy duties for fashion sake, or without feeling
and profit, for this is hypocrisy and profanenes. Heb. 3. 12. Esaias 1. 11.

11 Whatsoever you take in hand, first take counsel by Gods word whether it be
lawful or not, be it for profit or pleasure. 2. Sa. 2. 1. 1. Sam. 30. 8.

12 When you awake from sleep, awake with God, and before all things give him
your first fruits and calves of your lips. 1. Confession of sin: 2. Request of
things necessary for body and soul. 3. Thankfulness for mercies received,
especially your last preservation and rest.

13 Eschew as much as in you lies all occasions of sin, and wisely endeavor
your self in subduing the least, that at length the greater may take no place.

14 Set your self carefully as in gods presence, that setting him at your
right hand you may not fall. 1. Cor. 10. 32.

15 Use prayer as a door to open morning, and a lock to shut evening, first
preparing your heart to seek the Lord, and think in the morning that day may
be your last day, and when you go to bed, you know not whether you shall
rise, unless it be to judgment.

16 Wait upon the Lord* and he will direct your way, become his servant in
obaying his will, for this is your truest liberty. Psalm. 37. 34.

17 Think evermore your present estate and condition, to be the best estate
for you whatsoever it be, because it is of the good providence of God.

18 Account of every day as of the day of death, and therefore live now even as
though you were now dying, and do those good duties every day, which you would
do if it were your last day.

19 When night comes before you lie down in bed, call to ^^^d how you have
spent the day passed, and think that day lost, wherein you have not done some
good.

20 Always remember that the greatest work you have to finish in this world is
to die well, and to make a happy departure out of this world, for they which
dye well, dye not to die, but to live eternally.

29 Esteem not of your self better then you are, for the more vile you are in
your own eyes the more glorious you are in y^ eyes of God, for he rejects
the proud, and gives grace to the humble. 1. Pct. 5. 5.

22 Redeem the time past of your life with Repentance, and look to the time
present with diligence, and to the time to come with providence. Ephesians. 5. 16.

23 Exercise your self in reading something of gods word daily, and do not
only serve God your self, but see that all that are under your charge do the
same. Dev. 6. 6

24 When you crave any blessings at the hands of God ask them in the name of
Christ, for no man comes unto the Father but by him. Ioh. 14. 6.

25 In all your affairs before you attempt any thing, first ask counsel of
God, whether it be lawful to be done, and then you may do it with a good
conscience. 1. Sam. 30. 8.

26 Let your carriage in the world be such as may show your dislik of y^
world: for if any man love y^ world, the love of the father is not in him,
because the love of the world is enmity with God. 1. Ioh. 2. 25

27 Arm your self continually against temptations, knowing them to be your
portion in this life, and learn from Christ and his Apostles to bear them
patiently. 1. These. 4. 4. 5.

28 Be more afraid of secret sins the^ of open shame, and be always persuaded
you are in the presence of God, and let all your actions be framed accordingly.
Ier. 23. 24. Acts 17. 28.

29 In all your afflictions and miseries be still persuaded that your
punishment is far less then your ^^^ne.

30 If Gods mercies abounds to wards you, merwell not, if he mix them with
some crosses, for God sends blessings with crosses, lest you should despair,
and crosses with blessings, lest you should presume.

31 Such ontward blessings which you can not have, desire God, you may not be
vexed for them, for if you greedily covet such things, it is longer before you
shall enjoy them, and more subject to abuse them when you have them.

32 When you would do any good or receive any good, offer up your endeavors in
a sacrifice to God in Christ, beseeching God to give his holy Spirit to
sanctify his own sacrifice.

33 When God visites you with affliction kiss the todd^, and offer up all to
him, from whom you have received your self, for the more you struggle under
his hand, the worse it will be for you.

34 In all your actions remember that God takes notice not only what you do,
but whatsoever is done directly, or indirectly, all is done and governed by him.

35 In health prepare for death, for no man can assure himself to live one
hour.

36 Omit no opportunity to hear the word, and bse all the means of your
salvation, though you feel your self most unwilling there unto, for you know
not when God will give a blessing.

37 The more godly thou art, and the more graces and blessings are upon thee,
the more need thou have to pray, because Satan is then busiest against thee,
and because thou art easily puffed up with a conceited holiness.

38 In prayer, desire God to give thee grace to remember the bedroll of thy
sins to humble thee, and the Catalogue of his mercies, truly to make thee
thankful.

39 Consent not to the least sin, for that is the way to fall in to many sins,
and if you make no conscience of one sin, you will not make conscience of
many and great sins.

40 When thou prayest for any grace, and God grants not thy desire, but often
gives thee the contrary: yet consider, God ever hears his children for their
good, though not according to there desires.

41 Register up thy sins especially those that have most dishonored God, and
wounded thine own conscience, set them often in thy sight, chiefly them when
thou have occasion to renew thy repentance that thy heart may be thereby
humbled.

42 Labor to see and feel thy spiritual poverty, the want of grace in thy
self, especially those inward corruptions of unbelief, pride, self-love, etc.

43 Endeavor to show thy self a member of Christ and a servant of God, not
only in the general calling of a Christian, but also in thy particular
calling, in which thou art placed.

44 Eramine the Scriptures diligently to see what is sin, and what is not sin,
in every action, and so carry in thy heart a constant purpose not to sin, in
any thing: for faith and the purpose of sinning can not stand together.

45 Strive to obey God in all his commandments, and let thine endeavor be
suitable to thy purpose, to do nothing at any time against thy conscience
rightly informed by the word of God.

46 When thou fallest into any sin, a great or little, against thy purpose
and resolution, restnot in it, but speedily recover thy self by repentance,
humble thy self, confess thine offense, and by prayer entreat the Lord to
pardon the same.

47 Make conscience of idle, vain, dishonest and ungodly thoughts, for these
are the seeds and beginnings of actual sin, in word and deed, the want of
this care is oftentimes fearfully punished.

48 Whatsoever good thing thou go about, do it not in a conceit of thine
own worthiness, but in humility, ascribing the power and praise thereof to God,
lest he curse thy best doings.

49 Use outward things as meat, drink, apparel, in that manner and measure
that they may further godliness, and may be as it were signs, in which thou
may exprsse, the hidden grace of thy heart.

50 Labor not to go beyond any, unless it be in good things, make conscience
of thy word, and let it be as a bond: deal justly with all men, and in all
companies, either do good or take good.

Signs of Salvation in whomsoever they appear.
Love to the children of God. 1. John 3. 14.

Delight in y^ word of God. Psalm. 119. 111.

Often and fervent prayer. Psalm. 45. 18.

To be zealous of Gods glory. Romans 12. 11.

Denial of any ^uffi^^^^cy in our selves. 2. Cor. 3. 5.

Patient bearing the cross with profit and comfort. Man. 16. 24.

Faithfulness in our ^^^ li^gs which God has placed us in. 1. Cor. 7. 20.

Honest, just, and con^^^onable dealing in ^^^ our actions amongst m^n. 1. Cor.
10. 33.

Assured faith in the promises of God. Acts 16. 31. Sincerity of heart. Pro.
11. 20.

The Spirit of Adoption. Romans 8. 25.

Sound regeneration and ^anctification. Romans 8. 14.

Inward peace. Romans 5. ^.

Groundednesse in the truth. Col. 1. 23.

Continuance to the end. Mar. 24. 13.

If these graces be in us and abound, they will make us neither idle, nor
unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, that is, they will make
us sound and sincere professors of the Gospel. 2. Per. ^. 8.

7. Observations needful to the reverent reading, and hearing of the Word of
GOD.
1 PReparation for the manner of reading it. Eccles. 4. 17.

2 Wisdom to understand it. Iam. 1. 5. 1. Kin. 3. 9. 2. Chro. 1. 10.

3 Diligence to continue in it. 2. Ti. 3. 14. Act. 14. 22.

4 Meditation and conference for the better keeping of the matter. Deu. 6. 6.
Joshua 1. 8. Psa. 1. 2.

5 Faith to believe tt. Heb. 4. 2. Iud. 20.

6 Obedience to practice it. 1. Sa. 15. 22. 23. Ier. 7. 23. Math. 7. 21.

7 Prayer for a ble^^ing upon it. Mat. 21. 22. Mark 11. 24. Iam. 1. 5.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS of this Book.
AN Introduction to Prayer. page 1 2 Certain Rules concerning Prayer. pa. 49 3
Brief notes showing the necessity of prayer. page 53 4 A godly and necessary
Prayer to be said at all times. pa. 59 5 A Morning prayer for private Families.
pa. 68 6 Evening Prayer for private families. pa. 73 7 Another morning pray
page 81 8 Another Evening prayer for private families. pa. 87 9 Another morning
prayer. page 93 10 Another Evening Prayer. page 98 11 Morning prayer for a
private person. pa. 104 12 Evening Prayer for a private person. pa. 110 13 A
Prayer for a private person, necessary at all times. pa. 118 14 Morning Prayer
for the Sabbath day before the hearing of the Word. pa. 127 15 Evening Prayer
for the Sabbath day. pa. 136 16 A Prayer before the Receiving of the Lords
Supper. pa. 144 17 A Prayer after the Receiving of the Lords Supper. pa. 149 18
A Prayer before a man begins the works of his calling. pa. 135 19 A Prayer
containing humble confession of sin, and desire of pardon. page 159 20 A
godly Prayer in time of sickness or at the point of death. pa. 167 21 A Prayer
of Thanksgiving unto God for Deliverance out of any sickness. pa. 173 22 A
Prayer for a sick man. page 176 23 A Prayer for a woman with Child. pa. 180
24 A Prayer for a Midwife by her self alone. page. 182 25 A Thanksgiving
private for the safe deliverance of a woman to be said by the Midwife or some
woman present at her Delivery. page 184 26 A Prayer in time of Pestilence, or
any other contagious sickness. page 186 27 A Prayer for the Kings Majesty and
the whole state. page 192 28 A Prayer containing the sum of the Lords Prayer.
pa. 199 29 A Prayer upon the Articles of the Creed. page 204 30 A Prayer upon
the ten commandments. page 206 31 A Prayer containing the doctrine of the
Sacraments. page 210 32 Prayer before meat. page 213 33 Thanksgiving, after
meat. page 214 34 Another before meat. page 215 35 Another after meat. page
216 36 Another before meat. page 217 37 Another after meat. page 218 38
Another before meat. page 219 39 Another after meat. page 220 40 Another
before meat. page 221 41 Another after meat. page 222 42 Godly Directions for
the right Receiving of the Lords Supper. page 22^ 43 Rules to know true Faith
by the fruits thereof. page 226 44 Christian exercises necessary to be
practiced in the course of our lives. page 231 45 Signs of salvation in
whomsoever they appear. page 247 46 7. Observations needful to the Reverent
reading and hearing of the word of God. page 249
FINIS.
Faults escaped.
IN the Epistle Dedicatorie: read period of your timee. And page 31. l. 17.
read I will fast to pray, and pray to fast.


