Asylum Veneris,


OR A SANCTVARY for LADIES.

Justly PROTECTING THEM, their virtues, and sufficiencies from the foul
aspersions and forged imputations of traducing Spirits.

Ipsa sibi Virtus pretium nihil indiga laudis. Claud:

LONDON Printed by Edward Griffin for Laurence L'isle, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Tigers head. 1616.

(...) with all variety of Graces and Abilities. Every thing grows there in so
good order, that the searching eye of Malice can find nothing to be lopt,
little to be pruned. The hand of Heaven has made it as it were a Nursery,
from whence many Virtues and Perfections are often times transplanted into
others.

This inward Beauty, graced with an outward comeliness, makes me think you,
that complete Heroine, which Venus spoke of, when she said;

Haec est caeruleis me cum consurgere digna
Fluctibus, and nostra potuit considere Concha. Well was she worthy on the seas
to ride,
And in our Shell sit with us side by side.


Hence, Madame, I presume to place you, like an armed Cherubin, at the very
entrance of this Sanctuary, to put back such, as have not on the Livery, which
your self do wear.

That serviceable Love, wherewith I have always honored your noble Family
the Spencers, and their Allies, directing it self upon some respects in a more
particular manner to you, was the chief occasion that I first erected it.
Protect it, and having kissed your worthy hands, I will ever rest,

Your affectionate Servant, D. T.

To the Reader.
I Know this age to be very Stoicall and Critical, and that many will censure
the Author to have seriously busied himself in an idle subject; as making no
account of virtue in women, though they come far short of it themselves. But
I have Plutarke, and many other worthy persons for my Precedents, Besides I
considered with my self that if the Trophies of Miltiades were of power to
recall Themistocles from his effeminat and wanton courses, much more should
their Perfections and Sufficiencies, whom we account the weaker Vessels, be of
force to stir us up to all heroical attempts and atchieuements. And blessed S.
Augustine does most ingenuously confess, That from their constancy he
received much encouragement in his first conversion. But the slight approbation
I make of it my self, may be witnessed by my long suppressing it. And but to
prevent others, who had gotten from me some imperfect copies, I would never
have published it now. Careless therefore of all snarling Cynicks and their
taxations, with Horace I only court the learned and the good.

-- quibus haec sint qualia cunqne
Arridere velim; doliturus, si placeant spe
Deterius nostra. --
To the looser sort of Women.
STand of you foul adulterate brats of Hell,
Whose lunges exhale a worse then sulfurous smell,
Do not attempt with your prophaner hands
To touch the Shrine, in which chaste Virtue stands.
Hence Messallina, hence, back to the stew,
And in that cage thy blouded Pinions mew.
Hence you that weigh not, so your thoghts be stilled,
Though Naboth's blood be innocently spilled;
And being bankrupt of each native grace,
Think to catch Iehu with a bird-limed Face.
Hence frisking Faeries, that like Herod's Noice,
Esteem of dancing, as your chiefest piece,
And with Sempronia care not, so your Lute
Delight the Hearers, though your Souls be mute.
Hence you, that seek by Philtres, drugs, and charms,
To bring the curl'd-head Youth into your arms;
And do not fear by poison to remove
A worthy Husband, for a worthless Love.
Hence you, that practice Aretines vile shapes,
Yet can so fairly soder up your scapes.
That in your Nuptials first assaults, the Bed
Shall boast the conquest of a Maidenhead.
Hence you that strive to have your outsides brave,
Yet are within far fouler then your Slave;
And will not let, being stirred by ranker veins,
The Groom away, to try your Stallions reins.
For Women only is this Place ordained,
But you are Monsters, and their Sex have stained.
Hence therefore, hence, you base, unhallowed crew,
Hope for no shelter here, All such as you,
That hitherwards for help, and succor fly,
Plucked from the Altar, must abjure, or die.
In delicatum Lectorem, e MART.
COnsumpta est vno si le^mate pagina transis,
Et breuiora tibi, non meliora, placent.
Dives, and ex omni posita est instructa macello
Coena tibi; sed te mattya sola juuant:
Non opus est nobis nimium lectore guloso;
Hunc volo, qui fiat, non sine pane, satur.
To the nice and dainty READER.
Has one conceit by chance filled up a side,
Thou skip'st it ore, and do the work deride.
Amongst them all, those which the briefest be,
And not the best, are pleasing'st unto thee.
I have not spared to furnish out my board,
With all choice Meats, the Shambles could afford
Veale, Mutton, Lamb, Pig, Capon, but in sooth
Save iu^kets, nothing likes thy lickerish tooth.
We such a Reader, trust me, do not need,
As too much like an Epicure does feed:
Give me that Man, who when he sits to eat,
Will fill himself with bread, as well as meat.
The Contents.
The Proeme.
CHAP. 1. Of Women's worth in general. CHAP. 2. Of their Beauty. CHAP. 3. Of
their Chastity. CHAP. 4. Of their outward modesty. CHAP. 5. Of their Humility,
and supposed Pride. CHAP. 6. Of their Silence and falsely objected
Talkatiuenesse. CHAP. 7. Of the Constancy of their Affections. CHAP. 8. Of
their Learning and Knowledge. CHAP. 9. Of their Wisdom and Discretion. CHAP.
10. Of their Valor and Courage.
The Epilogue. 11.
In which their abilities and graces are proved to be as weighty as Men's;
their weaknesses and imperfections only shadow of theirs: and Men generally
taxed for their erroneous and side-respect in the choice of wives, as the maine
cause of their after-complaints.

Asylum Veneris, OR A SANCTVARIE for WOMEN.
Proaemium.
VIrtue is made a whited wall, which every idiot does delight to soil. He that
knows no part of her but the name, will notwithstanding have her banished for
her worth. If she flourish never so little, some trick or other must be put in
practice to give her a remove: but she, who as the Poet says.

Nec sumit, aut ponit secures
Arbitrio popularis aurae. Nor takes, nor leaves her dignity, and crown
For any vulgar fawn, or baser frown,


Can at her pleasure free her self from check; and with the splendour of her
majesty disperse those earthly exhalations which being belched out of the
bosom of wretched malice, would obscure his glory. She stands continually
firm and upon her square: her constancy is like the suns, which neither for
our praises, nor our curses will be moved to hasten or slacken his carere. She
imitates the Moon, and howsoever savage wolves do houle and bark at her,
she is not moved to forgo her Sphere. Antoeus like, the oftener she is cast
to ground, the greater strength she still recouereth. Hi^ foiles do serve her
as a file, to give him courage point. She is Collossus etiam in puteo; put her
into a dungeon she retains her state. He that laboreth by the interposition of
some scandalous delation to eclipse her brightness, may peradventure with the
silly Fly, make the object of his envy an occasion of his tragedy.

What sweet perfections are in women, which ill disposed men have not
endeavored to deprave, through false and forged imputations? what fair
abilities and graces, which they have not sought to black with their
calumnious aspersions? She has been a long time the white, at which their
hate has leuelled; but as they that shoot against the stars, may
peradventure hurt themselves, but never endanger them; their arrows many times
have rebounded back, and delivered a fatal answer to those that sent them:
The dissection of their weakness has happened to be a strict anatomizing of
their own.

The snuffers in the Temple were of pure gold, to signify unto us, that such
as take upon them to remove from others the superfluity of the week, that
their light may burn out the clearer; ought to be free from all taxation
themselves. It were ridiculous for any man to talk of a mote in his neighbors
eye, when there is a beam in his own. He may well bear with a wart, who is
himself disfigured with a wenne. But alas! it is the nature of sick and
crazie appetites, to think the meat which is set before them, is unsavory,
when indeed the fault proceeds not, but from a mere distemperature in their
own palates. The diseased person complains of the hardness of his bed, when
the cause of his disquiet is a weakness in his bones. Look upon such as are
overcome with wine, and ye shall see them ready to accuse even temperance it
self of their own folly: the earth, which stands still immovable, cannot
escape their censure. They will by no means be persuaded, but it is that which
reeleth, when alas! it is only their own brains, which are set on wheeling.
But I will not here profess my self a champion to that sex, least by so doing
I might be thought to question their sufficiency: the strength of their own
merit, without the help of any foreign supply, is that which must free them
from the siege of barbarous opposition, and set their honor out of the reach
of daring contradiction, which out of doubt will easily be effected, as by the
sequel briefly shall appear.

CHAP. I.
Of women's worth in general.

THere is no greater argument of a generous mind, then to joy in whatsoever it
sees generous in others. The Owl and the Bat, though they have eyes to
discern there is a sun, yet have so evil eyes, that they cannot delight in
the sun: it is for Eagles only, and such kingly birds, as have had no other
Aerie for their breeding, than the lap of love, to gase with pleasure and
admiration on his glory. The meaner sort of people, whose spirits are oppressed
and aggraued with such grosser humors, as the channels of their blood are
usually dammed up with; dare not but with cowardly fear approach the palaces
of Princes: it is honor enough for them, they think, if they may be suffered
to observe the frontispice, or at the most to take a view of such inferior
offices, as are in them. Their ambition is of a shorter wing, then to aspire so
high as to look into a room of state; yet even these, if in these meaner
parts their duller observation find any thing, which holds not correspondency
with their conceit, will not stick at their departure for a little error to
discommend the workmanship of the whole frame. They which out of a cynicall
disposition do wound the reputation of Women with inuectiues, are men of no
better garb. The graces have found no sweeter habitation upon earth to rest
in, then their bosoms. Our Savior did not scorn when he came down from
heaven to make the womb of a Virgin, the receptacle of his glory. Whereupon
Saint Bernard transported with a diuiner ecstacie, cries out, O venture
capacior coelis, diffusior terris; latior elementis; qui illum continere
valuit, quem totus mundus capere non potuit. O blessed womb, wider then the
heavens, broader then the earth, larger then then the elements; which was able
to contain him, whom the whole world was too little to receive. And to say
truly, where could virtue in the pourpris of this universe, have picked out a
fairer mansion? It seems to me that Women were erected of purpose for her to
soiourne in; and that, by the hand of God himself, who built her, built her I
say, (for this is the proper word, by which the mouth of wisdom in the
original expresses her creation) to show the absoluteness of his skill, in
the closing up of his work. But Calumny suggesteth here, that she was built
indeed, but the foundation was a crooked rib. Inde genus curuum, placidae
virtutis inane.


And from hence a crookedness both in manners and behavior has ever since
descended by way of propagation, from her to her posterity; which I will no
otherwise confute, than by condemning such of ignorance, as have been authors
of this improper speech: Art would have termed it an Arch, which of all kinds
of Architecture is both the firmest, and the fairest. But this is not the
period of their traducements: they will seem to tax the Artisan himself of
error and mistaking. He made her for a help, say they, to Man, when she fell
out to be nothing less; as if that patron of all exemplary goodness had been
ill advised in his ends. They consider not the fault is in themselves, if they
prove contrary to his intention. Their own peruersenes is that, which makes
them such as they report them. Let Phoebus have the guiding of the day and ye
shall see it clear and lightsome, but if Phaethon have the mannaging of those
steedes, his presumptuous over weening will go near to set all things in
combustion. I but, say they, she was according to that Spanish adage; Armas del
Diablo: cabeza del Peccado: destruycion del Parayso; The sword wherewith the
devil cut the throat of man's felicity; she was the head of sin, the
overthrow of Paradise. But let them consider the good they gained by this her
error, and transgression; and unless their foreheads be of Adamant, they
will recant those blasphemies and cry out with a better reformed zeal, O
foelix culpa, quae talem, ac tantum meruit Redemptorem! O necessarium Adae
peccatum, quod Christi morte deletum est! O happy fault of Eve, which stood in
need of such a worthy, and so mighty a redeemer! O needful offense of Adam,
which was not to be cancelled, but by the death of Christ. Then was it, and not
till then, that the doors of those everlasting taberacles, in which the king of
glory has is residence, were opened unto wretched Man. He was driven out of an
earthly Paradise by one Angel, that he might be welcomed by Legions of them
into a heavenly one, whereof that other was but a figure and a type. And this
it may be, was the cause why God after the time of her fall, and not before,
entitled her Heuah, the mother of the living. I will omit many things, and not
insist upon any long.

Her breast is as a precious cabinet in which the choicest of all Virtues are
preserved. Our Savior himself could not but wonder at the faith which he
found in the woman of Canaan, and forgot not in the height of his admiration to
crown it with applause. Malice notwithstanding would persuade the world, that
their outside is a shop for vanity; their inside a warehouse for impiety;
that conscience in them is but peevishness; chastity, waywardness, and
gratefulness a miracle. In a word, that their bosoms are fuller of mischiefs
and disasters, than ever was Pandoras box: and that like the Apothecaries
painted pots, they may be fair without, yet full of poison within. And surely
I must needs confess, that there are some, on whom she may justly fasten
these reproaches. For howsoever the matter be the same, there is a difference
notwithstanding in the form. The finest cloth has a list, and the purest
gold, is not without some dross. But let not prejudice, like one of Circes
charms work such a fearful metamorphosis upon the minds of men, as to make
reason brutish; judgment and understanding, things of little sense. Let them
not show themselves, like bores, as ready to root up a bed of roses, as a
dunghill: but consider that the earth hurts not the sun, with those mistie
vapors, and exhalations, which she breaths forth against it; but depriueth
her self by them of that comfort, which the cheerfulness of his beams would
otherwise afford her. And so from these general notions and conceits of Women's
worthiness, I will now slide to some particulars, amongst which their Beauty
is the first that offers it self to be considered.

CHAP. 2.
Of their Beauty.

THis is that blazing light which virtue like another Hero, sets up in the
face of Women, as in the turret of her habitation, to guide thereby the course
of those generous and heroical Leanders, who being enamoured of her fair
deserts, cannot brook that the threats and menaces of a rebellious fortune
should hinder them from repayring to her lodge, or that any other disastrous
accidents whatsoever, should prevent their affection from making a personal
presentment of their service, to so sweet and heavenly a mistrisse: It is the
only harbinger, which provides a resting place both for her and hirs,
whithersoeuer they do go: it is the loade-stone of all hearts; and in a word,
a loade-starre to all eyes. Beasts only cannot discern it, and let them be
in the role of beasts that do not honor it.

The force thereof is such, as has enforced the greatest conquerours to submit
their glory, and to cast the trophies of their victories, as ensigns of their
subjection at her feet. Sampson, who like another Atlas could carry cities on
his shoulders, and by the vigor of his arm which served him as an army, both
confront and confound the batalions of his uncircumcised enemies; did
notwithstanding this his more then natural strength, become an homager to her.
Solomon for all his wisdom was made her liegeman; and David who in his youth
had overcome the Lion and the Bear, and did afterward vanquish that
prodigious Philistim, the thunder of whose Threats proclaimed nothing but
terror and amasement to the Israelites: upon the sight of Bershabe, and that
at a sufficient distance, was captiuated by her comeliness. Darius may be so
great in power, that all regions may fear to touch him. Yet Apame his
concubine will dare to take the crown from his head, and set it upon her own.
If she strike him, he must be patient, and when she any way distasteth him,
seek by flatteries and smooth insinuations to work his reconcilement. 1. Esdr.
4. v. 30.

What should I tell you how Achilles doted on his Brisis? or how Alcides was
enthralled to his Omphale? The very Gods themselves, if any credit may be
given to the fictions of Antiquity, have acknowledged by their submission, a
greater deity in women's faces, then their own. Beauty even in the capitol of
heaven has hung up many monuments of her conquests. And hence it may be, grew
that speech of Leonidas, who, when he beheld an image of Venus armed, said, it
was more then needed, considering how, when she was naked, and altogether
unprovided of such steely complement, she had subdued Mars himself. It is not
then for any mortal eye to withstand the fierceness of her assault. Virtue it
self can be no armor of proof against her shot.

Her darts pierce deeper, and wou^d swifter far,
Than the sharp arrows of the God of war:
Who would be sure his enemies should die,
Must touch his weapon with a woman's eye.
Jove, though he held the thunder in his hand,
Was feign to stoop, when Leda did command:
Bright Phoebus found in Daphnes looks a flame,
Which scorcht him more, than he this earthly frame.
Arcesilaus an ancient statuarie, to represent the fulness of her power unto
us, made a Lioness of marble, and about it many little beauteous Cupids,
sporting themselves therewith in sundry manners. Some made it drink out of a
horn, some put shoes upon the feet of it: some tied it with ropes unto a
stake: all of them according to their several humors made it the subject of
their delightful pastime. The beast transported as it were with the fairness
of those objects, seemed to forget her savage nature, and to joy in the course
of their proceedins. And surely it has often happened that beauty has abated
the edge of furic; and set a mild aspect upon the face of cruelty. She has
forced tyranny many times to alter his rougher dialect, and to utter silken
words at her entreatie.

Naught under heaven so strongly does allure
The sense of man, and all his mind possess,
As beauties lovely bait, that does procure
Great warriors often their rigor to repress,
And mighty hands forget their manliness,
Drawn with the power of an hart-robbing eye
And wrapped in fetters of a golden tresse,
That can with melting pleasance mollify
Their hardened hearts, enured to blood and cruelty
Yet even this in women (and in them alone of all the creatures in this world
in has her chiefest perfection) stands liable to scandal, Envy makes it a
proverb, that If she be fair, she must be foolish but the spirit of truth
confuteth it as a popular untruth, with the example of Sarah, who
notwithstanding her excellency in this kind was such, as had so set on fire
the heart of Abimeleck, that if God himself had not interposed his authority,
she must have been of necessity the spoil and prey of his intemperancy; was
endued besides with such an extraordinary measure of knowledge and discretion,
that the Lord commanded that worthy Patriarch her husband to show himself in
all things obedient to her directions. Ester by means of both prevailed so far
with King Assuerus, that she delivered her people from the merciles proiects of
their oppressors, and made them fall into the snares, which they had laid for
others.

What should I speak of Judith, or of Deborah? the one so famous for the
deliverance which she procured her country: the other for the prudent
government, whereby she did long protect it? both of them notwithstanding most
remarkable for their eminency in both. I could levy infinite examples out of
the writings of prophaner authors to convince this error; but I see, that even
common sense does give it the fatal blow. For indeed, where should we look
for knowledge, but in her whose first ambition was the height of knowledge.

It is not usual for any to covet, what they do not conceit. The silly
Paisant regards a pearl no more than Esops Cock, because he knows not
the use thereof. The Queen of Shebas repairing to king Solomon, gave Israel an
ample testimony of her understanding.

But if according to that Tuscanphrase, tutto vain scorza, all be in the bark,
and nothing in the body; If there be only a superficial tincture, an
outward dye, not woaded with any graces or abilities, which might color it in
grain, this Sanctuary will afford them no protection. I must liken them my
self unto a ragged wall, whose deformities are hidden with some curious piece
of hanging: or to those carriages of state, which are covered over with
embroidered sumpterclothes, when the loading consists of nothing peradventure
but lome and rubbish; or last of all to a stately building, which puts the
weary trauailer a far off, in mind of some great inhabitant, but when he
draws near unto it, he finds there is only some poor decrepit beldame,
and her curre, residing in it. As a jewel of gold in a swines snout, says the
mouth of Wisdom, so is a fair Woman, which is without discretion. Prou. 11.
13,

Olympias derided a lusty Gallant of her Court, who had matched himself, as
she well understood, with one of the loulier hew, but looser crew, and said,
that if he had been a creature endued with reason he would never have made his
eyes the instruments of his contraction.

Venus was seldom pictured without the graces by her. Antiquity held them for
her true and faithful assistants, without whom she would not willingly do any
thing. Hereupon it is reported, that when Paris was to reward her with the due
price of her perfections, she did not only summon them, but Hymenaeus, Cupid,
and all her little louekins, to come and deliver their opinion and their
counsel in that business. And out of question where these are wanting
Beauty is but imposture. It is the devils maskingsuite, wherewith impiety and
impuritie do many times disguise themselves. Yea whenever the spirit of
darkness would seem an angel of light, he finds not in all his ward robe a
fitter habit. There are many though, which make this the only ground of their
affections; and which, like little babies, so the cover of book be gay,
respect not the contents. But alas! they suffer themselves to be guided by an
Ignis fatuus, which without much wariness will lead them to their own
destruction. The love of beauty argues a lack of reason, and comes as
Saint Hierom says within an inch of madness. Wisdom will never be deluded
with these appearances; so the lining be good, let the outside be what it will.
She knows that the foul to ade may have a fair stone in his head, that the
fine gold is found many times in the filthy earth; and that the sweet kernel
lies often in a hard shel. Yet I must needs say with the Poet.

Gratior est pulchro veniens e corpore virtus.
That virtue likes her much better, when she finds it in a comely lodging,
then when she is bound to seek it in an ill favored creature, like a pearl
in a dunghill. Such as would be protected here therefore, must produce their
warrant. If they be black without, they must make it appear by their manners
and behavior that they be beautiful within; and so on the contrary, if they
be spotless in body, that they be spitelesse in mind; if they be fair as
the moon, that they be likewise pure as the sun, or it will advantage them
but little, to make this the refuge of their safety. She that has a fair
body, but a foul mind, is like unto him that has a good Ship, but an ill
Pilot. The period of that Panegyricke, which was penned by the Psalmist in
praise of the kings daughter, was this, That she was all glorious within. And
surely in such as are not so, neither beauty, nor embroiderie can justly
challenge the name of ornaments.

It is not purple, needle-worke, or precious stones that must adorn and
beautify a woman.

These be arguments of her wealth, not of her worth, and get her nothing but a
popular applause. Pulchru^ ornatu^ turpes mores peius coeno collinunt,
Lepidi mores turpem ornatu^ facile factis co^proba^t.


Ill gestures defile good garments, but virtuous conditions are a rich lyning
to a mean outside. If she would therefore be the subject of discreeter
admiration, she must esteem these accessory adjuncts, no better, then did
Lysander those jewels and costlier tyres, with which the tyrant of Sicilie did
court the love and affection of his daughters. She must eye them with no
greater respect, then she would the trappings of a horse, which add not to
the goodness of the beast, that bears them; and wear them not so much for
fame as for fashion. Virtue must be her chiefest garnish. Beauty may procure
delight, but it will hardly purchase love, unless temperancie and modesty,
like two judicial Schoole-mistresses, have the fashioning of her carriage and
conversation.

Donec er as simplex animum cum corpore amaui;
At mentis vitio laesa figura tua est. I liked thy body as I did thy mind
Whilst in thy bosom I no craft did find;
But those vile cankers, which have gnawn thy soul
Have marred thy favor) made thy beauty foul.


And so from hence will I now turn the course of my discourse, and come to
speak a little of their Chastity, a thing excellent in many, yet traduced by
the most. For behold, Hylax in limine latrat, I hear it closely pursued with
hue and cry, even in the very entrance.

I seek if any wench deny,
Sophronius, up and down:
But not a wench which does deny,
find I through out the town;
As though it were a wicked thing,
and whence disgrace might rise;
Yea no way lawful to deny;
no wench at all denies.
Be none then chaste? yes out of doubt,
we thousands chaste may call:
What then do they? they do not grant,
yet nere deny at all.
Which harsher censures, whether they proceeded from the discontented humors
of these particular persons only whose feet well felt where the shoe did
wring them; or from a general deprauation rather of thosetimes, I know not.

But there are many hold it as their creed,
That all of them are false, if they be tried:
If some seem chaste, it does of this prrceede
They have the wit to do, but not be spide;
And know by deep dissembling and good heed,
With sober looks their wanton lust to hide.
With these the Satyrist gives up his verdict, and finding chastity for the
rarenes of it in those ruder times, as prodigious as either a milke-white
Raven, or a coleblacke swanne, examineth such as go about to wiue, what
hellish furies they be which drive them to it; and wondereth that any,
considering the world affords such infinite store of neck-ties, so many
lofty turrets, and deeper wels, should endure to yoke themselves to the
vicious imperfections of a creature so lascivious and imperious.

-- Tarpeium limen adora
Pronus, and auratam Iunoni caede iu vencam,
Si tibi contigerit capitis matrona pudici:
Paucae adeo vittas Cereris contingere dignae. Within the temple prostrate on
thy face,
Offer the gods thy prayers in any case;
To Juno then, with loud, but hallowed cries,
A horne-guilt Heifer see thou sacrifice,
If thou a wife have got, that is free from blame,
Chaste in her life, and spotless in her name;
So few there be, whose purer worth appears
Such as may claim the garlands Ceres wears.


But out of doubt, these are not the legitimate children of a stayed conceit.
Jealousy that adulterate and spurious brat of love and fear, was their only
sire: and indeed this is a monster, which never looks upon virtue, but with
a froward and suspicious eye. It resembles in effect the Iuie, which does
always hurt that most, which it most embraces. Such as have it in their
brain, will not be persuaded, but that which affords pleasure to themselves,
does give the like contentment to others. Bassa Ionuses, who with hissword, as
with a pen of steel drew the conueighances, which did enstate his Sovereign
Selymus the first in the territories and dominions of the Mamalukes, became so
desperately enamoured of the beauteous Lady Manto, by birth a Grecian, but by
the chance of war his prisoner, that he did not only admit her to his board,
but of his captive made her in a while the lawful partner of his bed. And for
a time they so delighted in each others love, that as the Poet said of Cephalus
and Procris.

Non Iouis illa viri thalamos praeferret amori:
Non hunc quae caperet, non si Venus ipsa veniret,
Vlla erat; aequales vrebant pectora flammae. TO was not the state, nor
sovereignty of Jove
Could court her chaste affections from her love;
Nor was there any Venus in the skies,
Could from her looks withdraw his greedy eyes:
Both like true Turtles wheresoere they came,
Consumed, and wasted in one equal flame.


But desert we know is the fuel of desire; and good, whether it be sensible,
or such as reason leads us to seek; is loves solicitor. It is the general
object of each man's appetite, of each man's will, and therefore they which
possess it; are no less totmented with fear, then they which yet pursue it.
It is a treasure, which the more they joy in, the less secure they grow of
their enjoying. They are prone to believe, that what their own palate does
like, cannot but like another Witness this worthy Soldier, who by doting on
his Mantos face, began to doubt of her faith.

-- facies, aetasque iubebant
Credere adulterium; prohibebant credere mores. Her age, and beauty wild him
to believe,
That her falsedealing gave him cause to grieve
But when her virtuous carriage he did eye,
His heart rele^ting gave those thoughts the lie.


Yet in the end he suffered himself to be so far transported with this
frenzy, that like a glutton, who fearing that any should wrong his mawe by
intercepting the dish it most delighted in, catches at it so rashly, and so
roughly, that through his inciuility he beguileth himself, and pleasureth
only the earth with the purchase of his greediness; he altered quite the
scene of his proceedings. His words were now not accented with love, as
beforetime they had been. He vnaceustomed himself to Cupids dialect, and
never uttered his mind unto her but in a tragical and churlish key. To be
brief, his rage could find no rest, till such time as having chosen his
weapon for the Physician of his Fury, her purer blood was made a purging
Potion for his Jealousy. Many to the great impeachment of Women's worth have
bin sick of the like distemperature. Their Understanding has had no Tutor,
but their own idle Fancy, which has settled in them such erroneous opinions,
that what through prejudice and passionate Affections, they will by no means
be persuaded that Honesty and Beauty can ever harbor under one roof; but
that there is so great an Antipathie betwixt them, that like Castor and Pollux,
they show not their motions together in one Sphere. And here they instance
their assertions upon that firebrand of Greece, which being brought to Troy,
did set it on a flame; and for better confirmation of their heresy produce
that saying of the Poet,

Formosis leuitas semper amica fuit. Loosenes was still companion to the fair.


But those alas must be very narrow eyde, who if a Gnat but spread his wing
betwixt them and the Sun, do think it is eclipsed.

One drop of poison cannot infect the Ocean, though a little leaven may
peradventure sower a great lump. It were ridiculous for any man to contemn
the Rose because there is a prickle in the bush or neglect the Corn, because
there is some cockle in the Barn.

We should not let th'ensample of the bad
Offend the good; for good by paragones
Of evil, may more notably be rade:
As white seems fairer, matched with black atone;
Ne, all are shamed by the fault of one. Sp. T Q Cant. 9.

For lo, in heaven, where as al goodness is,
Emongst the Angels, a whole legione
Of wicked sprights, did fall from happy bliss?
What wonder the^, if some of women al do miss?
As there is often a Mars his heart in a Cupids body; so may we many times
discover a Diana apparelled in the garments of Venus. Witness Sarah, Rebekah,
Rachell and Susanna, with diverse others which stand upon record in the
Court-roles of Heaven for their unmatchable perfection in either kind. I could
bring both Lucrece and Penelope upon this Stage, and make their well known
worthiness the pampering food of my discourse, but I will omit to speak of
them: as likewise of her, whose husband, it may be, coming somewhat near the
lips of his mistrisse, and finding himself denide the complement of his
desire, because his breath was noisome and unsavory, came home and blamed his
wife, for having never informed him of that defect: when she, good soul, out
of her chaste simplicity replide, She knew not but that al men's mouths had smelt
like his. The daughter of Ericus, Governor of Calcis, the chief town in the
Island of Eubaea, being taken by the Turks, was for her extraordinary beauty,
as the choicest part of all the spoil, presented unto Mahomet the second, whom
when he could neither by threats, nor flatteries conform to his desires, he
most inhumanely commanded to be slain.

But non est admirationi vna arbor, says the Philosopher, vbi in eandem
altitudinem tota sylua succrescit. What should we make particulars the subject
of our admiration, when Histories give us notice of whole countries peopled
with Women of no less desert.

The Lacedaemonians were generally so Chaste, that when Geradas was asked why
Lycurgus had made no laws for the punishing of Adultery: his answer was that
amongst them there was not one addicted to such incontinencie; But if there
were, said the stranger: why then said he, he should pay for the forfeiture of
his misdeede, a Bull of that growth and bigness, that standing upon the top of
the Mountain Taygetus, he might drink out of the river Eurotas. It is
impossible, said his Guest a creature of that greatness should be found. Geradas
assured him with a smiling countenance, it was no less impossible, that Sparta
should afford within her confines any such offender.

One of the meanest amongst them both for birth and breeding, when a Chapman as
she stood in the Market to be sold, demanded of her, whether she would prove
honest if he should buy her; replide upon the instant. I will prove honest
though you should not buy me.

The Cianians were so free from any taxation this way, that for the space of
seven hundredth years it was never known that any Matrone amongst them had
unloosed to a stranger the girdle of her honesty; or any Virgin bestowed upon
a lustful friend the flower of her Virginity.

The Eastern Indians did never prostitute their Bodies, but to him, who did
present them with an Elephant; and that the law permitted them to do, with no
little approbation of their worth, that could be valued at so high a rate.

Those religious and holy Vestals, who had the charge of that immortal and
sacred fire, which was by Numa consecrated to the gods, were so respected for
their spotless purity, that if by chance they met at anytime some wretched
malefactor, who by the appointment of justice was conducted to his Death, they
had a privilege to reprieue him: so that the Votresse upon her deposition
would affirm that the encounter was only casual.

Poets inform us that Venus had her chariot drawn by swannes, to signify
unto us, that Women as they labor to be neat and cleanely in their Clothes,
should strive to be sweet and comely in their Conversation. Many may
peradventure make it their delight, to stand and gase upon the Estrich for the
rareness of her Plumes; but not any will make it the dish which their Appetite
shall feed upon, because of the rankness of her flesh. They must harbor
therefore always a special care within themselves, that as they have Vultum
Veneris, the badge of Beauty in their Face; they have likewise cestum Veneris,
the marks of Virtue in their Forehead; least want of grace in their outward
gesture, might make their inward goodness liable to misconstruction.

Chastity must have settled Gravity for her Usher; and for her waiting woman,
bashful Modesty; or she shall never procure respective reverence and
observance from those that do behold her. If Ladies of noble rank and
quality, should now and then, though but to sport their Fancy, lay aside the
ornaments of their state, and without their usual attendance show themselves
abroad, disguised in some wanton manner, I doubt not, but they would quickly
find, that many not acquainted with their intent, would not stick to rank
them in the role of Courtisans, nor yet to rail upon them in a phrase, which
only fitteth creatures of that condition. Immodesty is like a Vintners bush,
which gives every man direction, where he may call for wine. Women alone are
said by scandalous and traducing Spirits to give it countenance, a little
therefore now of this; as likewise of the contrary.

CHAP. 4.
Of their outward modesty.

IT is an injury to Virtue, to be committed always close-prisoner to the
Heart. she desires to look out at the eyes, and to go forth now and then in
the words. If she see her self restrained of this liberty, she will go
near with grief to fall into a hectike Fever, and so to die of a languishing
Consumption.

Evil words are, as the Apostle says, the very gangrenes of good manners; if
they eat them not out, they will at least deface them. If Women have immodest
looks, it will avail them little for avoiding the worlds censure, to have
honest hearts. A book is censured many times, by what the title promises; and
Silver, into what fashion soever we melt it, though it cease not to be silver,
yet the outward stamp is that which makes it current.

Crassus had a liking to a goodly Manor belonging to a certain Vestal, which
that he might the better purchase, he took occasion to meet with her in
sundry places, and at sundry times, omitting nothing in his carriage and
conversation, which might any way endere him to her; but by this courteous
intercourse her Innocence grew to be suspected, and in the end, (as Malice is
ever ready to pick a hole in Virtues coat) she was publicly accused, to have
incestuously conuersed with him. Postumia was a little too much in clinde to
laughter, and now and than delighted freely to discourse with Men, but this her
freedom brought her to be arraignd as an Adulteress, whereof when she had
thoroughly acquitted her self. Spur. Minutius, the high Priest absolved her, but
withal advised her, ne verbis vitae castimoniam non aquantibus vteretur, so to
order her life thence forward, that the outward fashion might not prejudice the
inward form.

Forbearance of the Action is no suffient demonstration of a chaste Devotion.
It Is from the settled disposition of the Will, that this purer Virtue does
receive her form. A certain Spanish Less having passed through the hands of
Soldiers; God be thanked, said she, that once in my days I have had my fill
without sinning. But herein silly wretch, she deceived her self: for howsoever
Violence were Prologue to the fact, the delight she took in the performance
convinced her of a fault.

Some could be content to have it, but they would not be thought to desire it.
They wish another would foil them, when of themselves they have a will to
fall. Such as are truly modest, and such assuredly are the most, will not
stick to make their lives the ransom of their Fame: for fear, though they
consented not to the doing, they might be thought to be well enough contented
with the deed.

Theoxena to free her Sisters children and her own from the lascivious
embraces of King Phillip, put weapons into their weaker hands, and persuaded
them Vt imminens ludibrium morte effugerent; to rescue themselves by Death from
imminent disgrace, where in she had no sooner prevailed, but with a heroine
resolution she showed them by her own example, that what she had taught them,
was easy to be done.

Hippo a Grecian, when the Ship in which she travailed was taken by the
Enemy, cast hirselfe immediately into the soft embraces of the sea, to free her
Honor from the luxurious courtship of her Foe. A Gentlewoman of Capua did the
like. But these examples are a little too vehement, that which follows is
somewhat more considerate.

Cn. Manlius having given the Galathians a mighty overthrow at the mount of
Olympus, there was amongst the captives that were taken. Chiomara, the wife of
Orgiagontes, a Ruler in that Province of some note, who being compelled by the
Centurion that had her in custody, to satisfy the beastly appetite of his
debauched affections, imparted afterward the wrong she had received, to some
of her friends, who were come thither to redeem her, and willed them to kill
him as he should kiss her at the farewell. This done, she caused his head to
be cut off, and bringing it home in her own lap, cast it for a present at her
husbands feet who vented the passions, which the sight thereof had stirred up
in his bosom, with words which sauoured somewhat of reproof: O Woman, faith
is an excellent thing: But she confronted his pity with her own purity, and
told him, It was more excellent by far, there was but one man living, that
ever knew her.

A Vestall Virgin to prevent the violence of an unlawful pursuit in a Prince,
who much affected her for the beauty of her eyes, plucked them out her self,
and having cast them on the ground before him, bad him glut himself with those
traitorous objects, which had conspired with his lustful Thoughts, to make her
a prey to Infamy. A Gentlewoman of Portugal, to cut off the importunacie of
diverse, who in the time of her widowhood, did continually solicit her for
some nightly kindness, fearing least the flesh might in the end betray her,
seared up those natural parts with a burning firebrand, saying: God forbid
that for thee I should ever fall into so foul a sin.

Fatua, the wife of Faunus from the day of her marriage was never known to be
the object of any masculine eye, but her Husbands. She did not fashion hirselfe
according to the Moon, who then looks merriest, when the Sun is furthest
off: but to the Marrigolde, which never opens it self but whilst he does eye
it. Zenobia so much renowned in the East, for many singular virtues and
abilities that were in her, never imparted hirselfe, no not to the partner of
her Bed, any longer, then she knew hirselfe not to be with Child.

Pulcheria, sister to the Emperor Theodosius the second, and rightly so named
for her more then ordinary beauty, both in body and mind, matched hirselfe to
Marcianus with no other intent, then to add thereby some strength to his
authority, as well appears by the conditions, to which she first of all had
tied him. viz. That either of them should for ever preserve their Chastity
untouched; a thing which was willingly accepted of by him, and thoroughly
performed by both.

The Milesian Virgins, whether through the distemperature of the air, or upon
any occasion of discontent, I know not, were on the sudden possessed with such
a fury, that neither the prayers of their friends, nor the tears of their
Parents, could divert them from an obstinate and selfe-wild resolution, which
they had to hang themselves, and many notwithstanding the wariness of their
Keepers, to the terror and amasement of the whole City, did continually by
subtle slights and devises, give these their tragical purposes their
determinate effect; till at the length one of the wisest Senators caused a Law
to be proclaimed, That whosoever in that manner did abridge her days, should
after her death be carried naked through the marketplace: the consideration of
which dishonor, such was their settled Modesty, did not only restrain them,
but free them from this frenzy. Shamefac'tnesse, is nothing else, says the
Philosopher, but a fear of Ignominy and just Reproach. These Virgins were so
sensible thereof, that to remove it even from their Ashes, they were content to
forbear that which they most desired.

I could muster up an army royal of those heroical examples, to destroy
those Monsters, which make the Virgin fame of Women their tributarie food. But
who sees not, that even the most of those few, which are Actors of uncivil
parts, can produce Men for their Authors. Such a one who preferred her Honor
before her Life, has notwithstanding for her safety of her Husband suffered
it like litter to be trampled on by the Lust of a deadly Enemy, and done that
for him, which she would by no means have committed for her self. There are
of those, who for their Husbands profit and advantage do lend their bodies
out, and that by their express appointment and entremise. Phaulius the Argien
offered his wife unto King Philippe through ambition; as Galba did out of
courtesy and civility; when having feasted Mecaenas at a Supper, and finding
that his wife and he began with signs and glances to plot a further matter,
that he might the better shoulder up their love, he feigned a heavy sleep,
which he avouched with no little grace. For upon the instant a fellow being
emboldned thereby to cast a theeuish hand upon his Cup-borde of Plate, he cried
out unto him freely. Stay, stay, thou knave, see thou not, that I sleep for
none, but for Maecoenas?

Phaedo a Philosopher, after the desolation of his Country, made the
prostitution of his wife, the substance of his Revenue. And how many be there
amongst us, who cull out the choicest Beauties of of the Land, and having
married them, stall them afterward, as they do their Wares, with no better
intent then to procure themselves that good which Pharaoh did to Abraham for
Sarahs sake? In a word, if we examine every thing but with indifferency, we
shall find, let Women be what they will, they cannot possibly be so bad as Men.

For when a man is bent to speak his worst,
That in despite of Women he can say,
He calls them but incontinent and cursed,
No greater fault he to their charge can lay:
To rob, to spoil, houses to break, and burst;
Whole Cities, Towns, and Countries to betray;
Usury, Murder, all such sins appear
Proper to Men, Women of them are clear.
Again, that even in those things, wherein we report them faulty, they can
unburden themselves on Men, as on the sole Sollicitors, and Counselors of
their irregular proceedings. Ahashuerosh will not suffer a Virgin to come near
him, till after six months purification with oil of Mirrh, and other six
months with pleasant odours, and sweet perfumes.

Some Husbands have such curious eyes, that if their wives want color of their
own: they must seek for a supply. They had rather behold them artificially
painted, then naturally pale. This is that which tieth their Affections to the
perch, which otherwise peradventure being pro^e to bate at any thing, would get
on wing and follow game. But alas! they consider not that as Pythias,
Aristotle's Daughter was wont to say, The fairest color in the face of a Woman
is that, which arises from her bashful Modesty; and that only Blushes are
the Scarlet Robes in which the Graces delight to show themselves abroad. She
that is clothed with these virmilion Habits, and has this glorious tincture
in her Countenance, need not fear the rude assaults of an Elephant, nor start
at the fierce incursions of a Bull. It is a Shield of surer temper, then that
of Pallas to defend her Honor from invasion. Pudor arx pulchritudinis, says
Demades: It is Beauties fortress: and according to Saint Bernard, Venustatem
ingerit gratiam auget; it adds comeliness, and gives an increase of grace.
The brightness of it daseleth the eyes of Sin, puts Lust out of his part;
and makes Temptation to forget his Qu. Those other borrowed decencies, are
nothing but mere sophistication and imposture. An able judgment will never
suffer it self to be deluded by them. The King of Ethiopia viewed the
sumptuous Garments that were sent him for a present by Cambyses Emperor of
Persia, with no little admiration, but when he understood by those that
brought them, that the purple die they were of, was an invention of Men: Surely
said he, both the garments and the men are full of deceit. The application
would be fit, if charity did not suppress it.

CHAP. 5.
Of their supposed Pride.

PRide had her original in Heaven, but having forgotten, as it were, the way,
by which she fell from thence, could never since return. Like an exile did she
pace the Earth, and found no habitation, till some say Women took her in, and
made their hearts the settled place of her abode. Conformable to this is that
unhallowed fiction of another, who reports to the world, how Satan, that
sworn enemy to Man, having matched himself in marriage with Iniquity, had by
her nine children, which he placed with several persons, fitting in
disposition to their several humors and inclinations in manner following.
viz. Simonie with Priests, Hypocrisy with professors, Oppression with Nobles,
Usury with Citizens, Deceit with Merchants, Falsehood with Servants,
Sacrilege with Soldiers, Pride with Women, Luxury with all.

Plutarke condemns those of his time as overmuch addicted to the service of
this hell-borne Fiend. The Egyptian wives, says he, by the decrees, and
ordinances of their Ancestors, were forbidden the use of Shoes, to put them in
mind, that it was their duty to keep still at home, a point which many now
observe, but alas! out of another respect. They will not stir abroad, says
he, because they have not their embrodered Pantophles, their chains of Pearl,
their costly Carquanets, their Eare-rings, and their Unions. And behold, me
thinks, I hear some whisper, that by the beating of the Pulse, those of our
Age should labor of the like distemperature. For let them be well rigged, and
set out, they will be gadding presently with Dinah, though the loss both of
life, and honor were the propounded guerdon of their folly. They consider not,
say they, that the snaile is safe while it harbors in the Shell; but so
soon as she comes forth to make show of her Horns, she meets with many
lets, which occasion their drawing in again to her grief and shame.

A Woman, says Simonides, should be like the Be, chaste and frugall, busied
still about her huswiuerie; no wanderer at any time abroad, but always
careful of her progeny at home.

The virtues that in Women merit praise,
Are sober shows without chaste thoughts with in
True faith, and due obedience to their make,
And of their children honest care to take.
How to govern well her Family should be her chiefest study. She should not
hunt ambitiously after popular applause, but rest contented with the Conscience
of her own deseruings, and think it praise enough to be thought praiseworthy
by such as live within the bounds of her own threshold. She should remember
with Thucydides, That those of Women still are counted best,
Of whom in praise or dispraise me^ speak least.


The Lacedaemonians could not endure to hear their wives commended by a
Stranger. They thought it not fit their Virtues should be known to any but to
their Husband; and hence it was, their Virgins went always open-faced, till
such time as Hymen had linked them to some loving Mate, and then their beauty
was canopied from the general view of all, and made the solitary object of
their particular choice alone. The Turkish Women are forbidden by the Alcoran
to show themselves vnuailed to any but their Fathers and their Husbands. And
the Venetians observe in a manner the like custom, even at this day say our
adversaries, but by their favor it is notout of any good respect: for in them
it is only a depraved and corrupt opinion, which the knowledge of their own
wickedness makes them carry off another worthiness. Nor do I speak this
unadvisedly; for it is a Maxim of infallible truth, That open suspecting
others comes of secret condemning our selves. These Women-quellers would
seem to countenance their proceedings, thinking to break the back of
Innocence, by ouercharging it with scandalous imputations, which they can no
way prove by any surer demonstration then their own adulterate opinions. To
what end, say they, is that prodigious variety of apparel which they use, but
to ensnare the hearts of ignorant and vndiscreeter persons?

Vni, si qua placet, culta puella sat est. If any wench delightful be to one,
She Is trim enough, and decking needs none.


Bravery in ancient English was called Baudrie; and curious Calls in those
humbler times, were accounted but the stales of a careless Callot. They be the
Weres and Nets of Lust. Virtue delights not in them at all: they be things
which cannot any way advantage her. For as all men know,

Her gloriousstate no borrowed grace does need
Her Beauty finds of skillful Art no lack,
She seems as lovely in a Shepheads weed,
As they that wear the Indies on their back.
In a word, they be the noted ensigns of disorderly Pride, in which the very
folds and motions of the Heart are charactred unto the life. Let us but cast a
serious eye say they, upon the vanity of Women in this kind, and we shall
quickly find them to be the least part of what they seem; Inter tot ^
honestamenta vix inuenies mulierem. They be fensed in on every with such
innumerable borrels, and fantastical attoures, as Chaucer calls them, that
without some difficulty you cannot discover what creature it is that bears
them. And from this consideration peradventure grew that saying of the Comicke;
Negotij sibi qui volet vim comparare, nauim, and mulierem, haec duo comparato.
Nam nullae res magis duaeplus negotij habent; Hethat would busy himself
indeed, must get him a Woman and a Ship. For there are not any two things in
the world that require more trimming. Dum comuntur dum pectuntur, annus est;
says another. They be a year in keaming and in curling of themselves.

I might well fear to be swallowed up of these waves, did not my Genius prompt
me, that the Star, by which I steare my course, bids me not fear the rage of
Scylla, nor the threatenings of Carybdis, but on with courage, till I have
worthily achieved, what I willingly attempted: and I know, let Women's
adversaries make what head they can to overthrow the strength and glory of
their reputation, there are exemplarie Virtues enough in her alone, to protect
it from the fury of malignant Tongues; and therefore I will boldly dare to
defend them even from this.

Ignorance it self must needs confess that Pride consists more in the
Heart, then in the outward Habit, and that it peereth as often through a ragged
coat, as through a velvet cloak. For if apparel, jewels, odours, and such
like accesserie complements did give it form, it were no way possible, that
Women should be freed from this crime. But alas! these are no other then
outward ornaments, which howsoever peradventure they may give it luster, can
add no life.

Beauty, Birth, and Breeding, if any thing (for these be their chiefest
pieces) would cause both tumor and inflammation in them, were their minds so
light and wavering, as some would have them; but we see notwithstanding all
these, how humble and how debonnaire Rebekah was, who did not only out of
meckenesse satisfy the request of Abraham's servant, then a stranger to her, in
giving him water to drink, as he desired, but went her self with all
alacrity to the Well, and drew some likewise for those of his retinue, and
their Camels. Nor did the massy Rings, and Bracelets, where with he afterward
rewarded this her kindness, alter any way the composition of this settled
form.

It is true that Vashti was degraded from her dignity, for the rebellious
pride and disobedience which she showed toward her Lord and Sovereign; but
Esther was elected in her place, who with her Buxome and lowly carriage found
favor in the eyes of her Assuerus, and forgot not in this transcendent of her
honor the miseries and afflictions of her distressed Countrymen, nor was she
ever wanting in the performance of that due respect, which she did owe unto her
poor friend Mardoche. It is true likewise, it may be, that the daughter of
Nicephorus the Emperor, was so neat and so nice, that she never washed her
but in dew, nor spent her time in any thing, but in painting, poudring, and
perfuming of her self, which brought upon her in the end so odious and so
loathsome a disease, that for the stench of her Body, there was not any could
endure to come nigh her: all are not yet to be condemned of the like. This age
as corrupted as Men would make it, affords many of extraordinary birth and
quality, who having shook hands with Vanity, and took an everlasting
Farewell of all worldly Pleasures, do altogether spend their hours in the
solitary contemplation of celestial things, making with all humility and
singleness of Heart, the goodness of their God, the continual subject of
their Meditation. I could here set diverse Precedents on foot, to back and
second my discourse, but as our own English Poet, says:

This al men know full well, though I would lie,
In Women is all troth, and steadfastness,
For in good faith, Ineuer of them see,
But much worship, bounty, and gentleness,
Right coming, fair, and full of meekness,
Good, and glad, and lowly, I you ensure,
Is this goodly angelike Creature.
Having freed them therefore from this, I will now turn my plee to the defense
of their Tongue, which stands at the bar of weaker Judgment, accused of
prodigious Intemperancie, and has many forged Writs and Processes served upon
it for the same.

CHAP. 4.
Of their Talk atiuenesse.

PHidias, say their adversaries, that worthy Workman, so renowned through the
confines of Peloponnesus for the rareness of his skill, made an image of
Venus, treading upon a Torteise, to show thereby unto us, that Women should be
wedded to their Houses, as are the Statues of Saints and Martyrs to the
Temples, never desiring to gossippe it abroad; but making Silence always the
God of their Devotion.

They should never speak, but either to their Husbands, or by their Husbands;
nor take it ill, if like a Trumpeter, or one that plays upon the Cornet or
the Flute, by suffering them to be the Organes of their speech, they send forth
sounds more grave, and more delightful then their own. But alas say they,
these principles are but lightly practiced: for look wheresoever they come,

-- verborum tanta cadit vis,
Tot pariter pelues, tot tintinnabula dic as
Pulsari. Iam nemo tubas, atque era fatiget:
Vna labor anti poterit succurrere Lunae. Such a tempestuous storm of words
do fall,
Youl'd think so many Basins iangling were,
Or Orkeney's Bells were sounding in your Ear;
Now none need spend their breath on Haubois more,
Nor with loud Clarions make their inwards sore.
One Woman's tongue, without the help of these,
Makes noise enough the fainting Moon to ease.


And some what suitable to this, is that Epitaph of theirs, by which the
excessive talk atiuenesse of a Spanish Lady is commended to the knowledge of
Posterity. The substance thereof is this.

Aquiyaze sepultada
Lamas que noble Sennora,
Quen su vida, punto ni hora
Tuvo la boca cerrada
Yes tanto lo, que hablo,
Qne aunque mas no hade hablar,
Nunca llegara el callar.
A donde el hablar llego. Here lies entombed underneath this Stone
A Dame, whose Tongue had cause enough to moan.
It moved as fast, as does the swiftest Sphere,
And found nominutes rest throughout the year,
Forth rusht her words in such abundant store
That now (how ener) she shall nere speak more.
Her silence yet will never equal be
To what she spoke by many a large degree.


And for a more pregnant proof of these malignant Pasquils, Xantippe must be
placed upon the Market-crosse, whose Passions like a deaf body, because they
could not hear the voice of reason themselves, that reason might not be
altogether incapable of theirs, would be sure to express their meaning in the
loudest strain. So that Socrates when he was demanded, how he could endure her
clamours, had no other answer wherewith to shadow this her imperfection, then,
That for the children which she bare him he could as well abide her prating, as
he did the cackling of his Hens for the Eggs they laid him. A certain
Portugal, how truly, though I know not, is made an Abbettor to them in the
like. His fellow Senators having convinced a Criminell, of some more then
ordinary fault, and consulting among themselves, what death was best to equal
his offense; some would have him hanged in chains alive; some torn in pieces
with wildehorses; others pined to death; and some again cast quick into his
grave; Tush said he at length, these judgments are but iestings, if you mind
to torture him indeed, use no delays, but marry him. And surely, say our
opposites, this man according to that Castilian Adage, Hablo de la feria, segun
lefue en ella: spoke of the Mart according as he found it. They allege
another, who at a monthly Sessions in the Town, whereof himself was a
Burgess, upon good deliberation and advise preferred a petition to the Judges
of the Bench, desiring them they would be pleased to grant him liberty to die.
For he was not able any longer to endure the disdainefull braues, and haughty
menaces, which his Wife like a triple-mouthed Cerberus did continually thunder
out against him; which favor if they would vouchsafe him, he made no doubt,
but to find a speedy passage unto Heaven, having suffered so long a
Purgatory here on earth. Another inscription of a Tomb is produced by them,
composed in manner of a Dialogue, the Argument whereof does show, say they, that
howsoever Death be nothing but a suffocation, and extinction of all heat in
every natural Body, he cannot yet with that icie coldness qualify the
cholerike and fiery temper of their Tongues.

Heus viator! Miraculum. Vir and vxor non litigant. Qui simus, non dico. At
ipsa dicam. Hic Bebrius ebrius me Bebriam ebriam nominat. Heus vxor! etiam
mortua litigas?

Hus. List Passenger, thou shall a wonder see
Here lovingly the Man and Wife agree.
Our names, and what we are, I will conceal.

Wif. But goodma^ goose, I will our Names reveal:
This Beber, bibber, free of Drunkards Hall,
Me Bebresse, bibbresse does at al times call.

Hus. Now out alds! good Wife, I prithee hold;
For shame for bear, now thou art dead, to scold.

Judge here, say they, whether this wretched Man, that caused this to be writ
upon his grave, lived not continually upon the rack, or no. In a word they set
it down for a sure Position, that -- Dos est vxoria, lites.


The only Dowry that a Woman brings, Are strifes, contentions, end less
quarrel

And are not ashamed to affirm with the Satyrist, that

Semper habet lites, alternaque iurgia lectus,
In quo nuptaiacet: minimum dormitur? in illo Brawles chidings, iarres, attend
the marriage bed:
And where a Wife lies, seldom sleeps the Head.


But I see it is high time to cast a bit into the mouths of these unbridled
Steeds, least with their hedstrong course they tread this nobler Sex under
their hoofes, and make their innocence dung and litter for themselves to
wallow on. And since they do oppugn us with the Achieuements of the dead, that
I may foil them at their own weapon, I will produce the Monument of Rubius
Celer, which does witness, that he lived with Caia Ennia, his wife, forty
three years, eight months, having never received from her all this while, any
just occasion of offense. That of Albutieus Tertius like wise does avouch, that
he lived 52. years with his wife sine querela, without any manner of vexation,
quarrel or disturbance. The like equality of affections was without any let,
or mixture of molestation in Acme and Septimius, as appears by that which is
uttered by Catullus to the perpetual honor of them both.

Vnam Septimius misellus Acmen.
Mauult, quem Syrias, Britanniasque;
Vno in septimio fidelis Acme
Facit delitias, libidinesque:
Mutuis animis amant, amantur.
Quis vllos homines beatiores
Vidit? quis venerem auspicatiorem? Poor Septime rather had his Acme have,
Then Syrias wealth, or Britains Isles so brave;
Chaste Acme no strange dalliances does try,
Her thoughts nere stir, but when her Septime's by
With pure obseruace each to other move,
With natural minds they be beloved and love:
Who ever did a happier couple see,
Or who two Turtles louinglier agree?


But this is not all, say they, Plenae sunt rimarum, huc atque illuc effluunt.
Look what secrets be committed to their custody, shall be kept as safe, as
water in a Sieve. And hereupon one of the three things, that Cato still repented
him of, was, if he had imparted any thing to a Woman, which he would not all
the world should know. They allege the weakness of Sempronia, Fuluia, and
diverse others in this kind to instance these erroneous propositions. But the
sight of that worthy Roman Epicharis shall make them vanish like Meteores
before the Sun, who being privy to a great conspiracy intended against
Nero, was so constant in concealing it, that notwithstanding she were torturned
day by day in the most grievous manner that could possibly be imagined, could
no way be forced or enduced to be wray her accomplices, and that to the
perpetual shame of sundry noble Senators, who in the same trial fainting
like Crauens under the scourge of Tyranny, objected in hope of some release
their very Brothers unto death, and cast their dearest friends into the jaws
of danger. The Athenians caused a Lioness of Marble to be made without a
Tongue, and erected it in the market place to the never dying honor of Leona,
who upon the like occasion, and in the like extremity showed no less
taciturnitie than the other. I will not, because I think this point already
clear enough, allege any more examples. It is an imperfection no way proper
to the Universal, but such a one as by mere accident fasteneth it self upon
some individual, whose carriage by reason of the meandness of her breeding
and education, was never fortified with the retentiue rules and principles of
Morality, without which the mind is always very dangerously sick of a
continual Dysenterie. And thus I think that want of Secrecy is as incident
to Men and found as often in their bosoms, as in any of this Sex. Wherefore I
come now to the next thing, which is questioned, and that is the sincerenesse
and constancy of their affections.

CHAP. 7.
Of their affections.

THey be like looking-glasses, say their adversaries, which represent no object
longer then it stands before them, and not then, but with some flattery or
deceit. Their words are like the Sirens, never uttered but to work some
wrack, their tears like the Crocodiles, never shed, but to purchase some
occasion to be cruel They have as the Frenchman says, Visage d'Ange, the
shape and semblance of an Angel; but alas test de Diable, and oeil de
Basilie. The brains of a Devil, and the eye of a Basiliske. The Tuscan gives
us in a little Volume their lively Caracter, Di di si, efa di no. Their
thoughts are never seconded by their Words, nor followed by their Deeds. They
come many times forth hand in hand, as if they did intend to tread one
measure, but as in Galliard, they fall off on a sudden and forsake each
other. They never eye one another but a squint, and are then most distant from
each others view, when they seem to face each other most. In all their actions
like the Crab, they look one way, but go another. And therefore say they, Ci
dice donna, dice danno. He that names a Less, in effect names a Loss; and
in our native language Woman carries no other sound with it, then Man's Woe.
The Latins to show the softness, but withal the swiftness of their
affections, say she was called mulier quasi mollis aer; and for confirmation of
this fantastical Etymology, that of Petrarch is alleged.

Femina e cosa mobil per natura,
Ond'io soben, amoroso stato
In cuor di donna picciol tempo dura. Light wavering things by nature Women are:
Hence in their Hearts, my knowledge is full sure,
An amorous state can but a while endure.


But let them show me an affection more sincere then that of Iulia, the
daughter of C. Caesar toward her husband Pompey the great, who when his
garment was brought her from the field all stained with blood, out of the fear
she had of his well doing, fell straight into abortion, and by and by expired,
the fruit of her womb serving but as a Prologue to her own ensuing Tragedy.
Let them show me I say, one more grave and settled, then that of Portia toward
Brutus, who scorning to survive his honor, and seeing Iron was denied her,
made burning coals the conuoye of her Spirit to her deceased love. In a word,
let them show me one, more firm and constant, then that of Hipsicratea toward
Mithridates, who desiring no better fortune, then should follow him, was
content to veil her beauty under a manly habit, and withal to exercise her
daintier limbs on horseback, and in deeds of arms, that she might the
better participate with him in the dangers and cross occurrences of his
wars. The consideration of which her loyalty, was such a comfortable
cordial to him in that wretched and miserable estate, wherein he was, when he
fled from the victorious sword of Cn. Pompeius, that cum domo, and penatibus
vagari se eredidit, vxore simul exulante. He thought himself, notwithstanding
he were no better then a fugitive, sole Lord of heaven and earth by the
fruition of her company. Agathocles, King of Sictlie finding himself well nigh
disseazed both of life and State by his rebellious Nephue, provided all things
that were necessary, for the transportation of his Wife Theoxena into Egypt,
from whence he had her. But she most affectionately besought him not to furnish
Slander, with so fair a parallel for his kinsmans parricide, as her
departure. Nubendo se non prosperae tantum, sed omnis fortunae inisse
societatem. That by Marriage she had not made her self a companion for him
only in prosperity, but in all adverse chances whatsoever. Neither was she
unwilling to buy the embracing of his latest breath, with the hazard of her
own. This puisne age of ours affords the like example in Isabella, sister to
Charles the Emperor, and wife to Christierne King of Denmark, whose
discontented subjects, when they had degraded him from that royal dignity;
would willingly have conferred the types thereof upon her: but she most
valiantly refused them; thinking it a greater honor, and more beseeming the
duty of a Wife, to lead a languishing life in exile with her husband, then to
live a Princess in the highest transcendent of all Soueraignetie without him.
What should I speak of Artemisia, or Alceste, when Provinces peopled with
Women of no less integrity toward their Husbands, expose themselves unto our
view? Those of Mynia in Thessalie, when their husbands according to the laws of
Sparta, were by night to suffer death for their ambitions, and ungrateful
usurpation over that City, under pretense of speaking with those condemned
wretches before their execution, entered the prison, and having changed garments
with them, vailing their faces under a show of grief, made means for their
escape, themselves remaining in their place to abide with constancy,
whatsoever the deluded Magistrate should inflict upon them, for this their bold
attempt. Conrade. III. After he had compelled Guelphus, D. of Bauaria to open
to him, and to his forces the gates of Winsbergh, and to yield up the town to
his mercy, granted upon some easy entreatie, that the Duchess, and such
other Matrons as were there, should depart untouched, and carry with them
whatsoever they could conveniently upon their shoulders: whereupon forgetting
their precious ornaments, and such things as Women usually most delight in, and
charging themselves immediately with no other burden, then with their
Husbands, they forsook the place; which pious act of theirs so mollified the
heart of the Emperor, that he caused them to be brought back, and
cancelling the wrongs and injuries which had incited him to that sieg, received
the Duke into his favor, restored him to his dignity, and seated him again
without any charge or innovation at all in his ancient government. But I will
now retire a little from these softer Virtues, which can no more be separated
from this Sex, then whiteness from the Swanne; and curtain up a while the
Table, in which I have hitherto labored, as with the pencile of Apelles to
give each foule-mouthd Mantuanist the lively representation of Women's
perfections in a lovely Venus, whilst I endeavor hereafter withal the art I
can, to limme them forth in an armed Pallas, sprung out of the very head of
Jove, and endued with such learning, wisdom, courage, and other the like
abilities, which Men, overwhelmed with self-conceit presumptuously entitle
Masculine, as being essential to themselves alone, that they may justly
challenge the garland even from the greatest worthies, as in brief shall
plainly appear.

CHAP. 8.
Of their Learning.

LEarning in the breast of a Woman, is likened by their Stoicall adversaries to
a sword in the hands of a Madman, which he knows not how to rule as reason
shall inform him, but as the motions and violent fits of his distemperature
shall enforce him. It does not ballast their Judgments, but only adds more
sail to their ambition; and like the weapon of Goliath, serves but as an
instrument to give the fatal period to their Honors overthrow. And surely
this fond imagination has purchased a free inheritance to it self in the
Bosoms of some vndiscreeter Parents, who hereupon will by no means endure
that their daughters should be acquainted with any kind of literature at all.
The Pen must be forbidden them as the Tree of good and evil, and upon their
blessing they must not handle it. It is a Pandar to a Virgin Chastity, and
betray eth it, by venting forth those amarous Passions, that are incident to
hotter bloods, which otherwise, like fire raked up in embers, would
peradventure in a little space be utterly consumed. But if this be their fear,
let them likewise bar them the use of their needle: with this did Philomela
fairly character those foul indignities, which had bin offered her by Tereus
the incestuous husband of her sister Progne; and why then may not others
express their loves, and their affections in the like form? Cupid has wings,
and like another Daedalus, if his passage be stopped by land and water, he will
cut through the air, but he will be Master of his desires. You cannot hinder
his Pinnions from Soaring hie, by depriving him of a quill or twain. Affection
is ingenious, and can impe them, as it pleases her. Leander will not for a
Hellespont be kept from Heroes kisses, nor Daenae by a brazen Tower from
Jupiters embraces. Be Juno never so jealous, Love has a Mercury, that can at
all times delude her Spies. Et quid non fiet, quod voluere duo?


To converse with the dead, and this is to converse with Books, has bin still
accounted the readiest way to moralize our harsher natures, and to weane them
from all inbred Barbarism to more humane and civil conversation. And hence it
was, that Julius Agricola, when he had obtained the government of this our Isle
that he might abasethe fierce and fiery temper of the inhabitants, whose
knowledge could demonstrate nothing but by arms, took from the nobler Britons
their sons, and trained them up in all the liberal Sciences, whereby he
made them willingly submit themselves to the Roman Empire, and not prone to
rise so often up in arms as formerly by reason of their rough-hewen
dispositions they had accustomed to do. Now I see no hinderance why they
should not produce the same effect in them, which they do in us, their bodies
consisting of the same matter, and their minds coming out of the same molde.

But if those prohibitions proceed from a providence in them to prevent a
curious desire of searching further into the Cabinets of Minerua, then is
fitting, an error incident to capriocious, and working Wits, such as they
would have Women's for the most part to be, let them show me what Men are free
from the like weakness.

Knowledge is infinite, and admits no bounds. It is Jacobs ladder, and
reaches from the lowest part of the Earth, to the highest place in Heaven.
Man's Thoughts are like those Angels, which were seen by the Patriarch in his
Vision, never at a stand, but still going either up or down. And therefore
Solomon anouncheth, that Qui addit scientiam, addit and dolorem; an acquist of
learning brings with it an increase of labor. For the more a man attaineth
unto, the more he sees to be attained, and so not content with any former
purchase, wearieth out himself in pursuit of that, which is behind. Nil
actum credens, cum quid sibi cernit agendum. Those that are altogether
unfurnished of this diuiner complement, are as the Italian terms them
humanate beftie, things that resemble reasonable creatures only in the bark and
rind, and could not possibly be distinguished from Statues made of clay and
marble, but by their outward sense and motion. These are they, which like
Aesop's Cock, spurn at the Jewel, which they cannot prize, and such were
Nero, Domitian, Clisthesnes, who as Tacitus reports, Virtutem ipsam excindere
concupientes; studying as much as in them lay, how to bring Virtue herself
unto the Block, made Philosophy a capital offense, and put to death, those
Professors of Wisdom and good Arts, which betimes did not retire themselves
from the reach of their infernal rage. And such as these, no doubt are those,
or at lest not many degrees short of them, who out of an idle supposition of
their own addle brains think learning a thing superfluous in any. For as it
is a plain testimony of Ignorance it self to know nothing: so is it an ample
sign of Dullness to rest satisfied with the knowledge of any something. Adams
fingers, notwithstanding Gods menaces, will be still itching at the forbidden
Tree: The Children of Israel for all the threatening Proclamations which Moses
does divulge amongst them from the Lord, will hardly be restrained from
advancing forward at the mount of Sinai. The Bethshemites will be peering into
the Ark, though the lives of more than 50000. of them be made the forfeiture
of their presumption. Divine S. Augt stine will be diuing into the mystery of
the Trinity, till he see a child become the censurer of his folly: and holy,
Daniel will trouble himself in searching after the condition of future times,
till an Angel from Heaven will him to stand upright in his place. In a word,
it so bewitcheth us, that we grow desperate in the chase. Pliny will have no
other Vrne, then the mountain Vesuuius for his ashes, when he cannot find
out the reason of his flames: nor Aristotle any other Sepulcher than Euripus,
when angling for the hidden causes of his ebbes and flows, he sees nothing
will hang upon his hook. And upon this intemperancy of Men, was grounded
peradventure that Moral precept of Antiquities, Noli altum sapere, Aim not at
things beyond your reach, as likewise that admonition of S. Paul's. Be wise unto
sobrietic. From al which premises I gather this conclusion, That meats might as
well be forbidden women for fear of surfeiting, as the use of learning for
fear of ouerweening, unless we our selves will be content to be registered
with them, as liable to the like miscarrying, in the same role. But I hear our
Adversaries cry out, what a prodigious thing it was counted among the Romans
for a woman to speak in public, and when it happened, what speepy recourse
they had unto their Augures to know what disastrous fortune so strange an
accident might portend to their Commonweal. Against which particular Custom
of a people, which for Wit and Valor might boast themselves the legitimate
children as well of Mercury, as of Mars, I will say nothing, though I could
easily show with what good success the Daughter of Hortensius pleaded the
Matrons cause, to the freeing of them from the greatest part of that grievous
taxation, which the Trium-viri had most injuriously imposed upon them. As
likewise how Amaesia Sentia, being arraigned before L. Titius then Praetor,
pleaded so stoutly and exactly to every point of her Inditements, that she
acquitted herself, maugre the power of her enemies, with the general applause
of all.

To that, wherewith they urge us out of holy Writ, touching the restraint of
their teaching, and speaking publicly in the Temples, I answer that the
blessed Apostle in that to the Corinthians. 1. Ep. 14. verse. 34. alludeth only
to some ignorant and prating Gossips, who when attention should be given to
the dispensers of Gods mysteries, are continually asking to their own hurt, and
others hinderance, such frivolous questions, as on the instant are begotten in
their idle Brains. And in that to Timothy, 1. Ep. 2. verse. 12. where he
permits them not to teach, because, as they would have it, Semel docuit, and
omnia subuertit; She taught but once, and that once brought all things out of
order, he does but utter his own opinion, and howsoever he allow not of it,
yet he does not condemn it: So that his meaning, as I take it, there, is only
this; They should not when men of sufficiency are in place, and such as can
discharge the duties that appertain to so high a calling, usurp over their
authority. For otherwise the Scripture informs us, that Deborah was a
Prophetess, and that Anna the Daughter of Phanuel. Luke 2. verse. 37. never
stirred out of the Temple, but spent therein both day and night, in prayer and
fasting, and speaking fervently of Jesus Christ the Savior of the world, to
all that waited for their deliverance in Jerusalem. And indeed the light of
the Moon is needelesle; when the Sun is in his Transcendent, but if he be
gone, her Beams, though not so pregnant, will afford much comfort. Apollos
may be eloquent and mighty in the Scriptures, Priscilla yet may take him unto
her, and expound unto him the ways of God more plainly.

But Scientia inslat; Knowledge puffs up, and there is nothing, say our
opposites, more swelling and imperious, than a Woman, that sees she has the
superiority and start of her Husband in any thing: -- Faciunt grauior a coactae
Iuu. Sat. 6.
Imperio Sexus; minimumque libidine peccant.
As if they should conform themselves to men's weaknesses, and pattern out
their own Abilities by their Defects. He that is deprived of his bodily sight,
is content to be led, though by a child: and shall he, that is blind in his
understanding disdain to be directed by her, who by the ordinance of God, and
the rules of sacred Wedlock, is allotted him a fellow-helper in all his
businesses? The Husband and the Wife are the eyes of a Family; if the right
one be so bleared, that it cannot well discern; the guiding of the Household
must of necessity be left unto the left, or on the sudden all will go to
wrack. And surely I see no reason but the Hen may be permitted to crow,
where the Cock can do nothing but cackle. So that learning, we see, is an
ornament, and a decency, most expedient for Women, were it for no other
respect, then to supply, as occasion may require, the defects that are in Men.
And truly some of them, by seconding a natural propension in themselves to
letters, with an industrious pursuit, have attained to so high a perfection in
them, that men considering how imperiously they challenge a pre-eminence over
them herein, have had just cause to blush at their own ignorance. There are
some, which Antiquity obiecteth to our view, whose many rare and profitable
inventions made them deserve the names of Goddesses here on earth, as Pallas,
Ceres, and the Sybills, whose mouth it pleased God many times to use as a
sacred Oracle, whereby to publish unto the world, what he purposed in his
will. Others again, which have had the tutoring of diverse very famous and
worthy persons, as Aspasia, Macrina and Diotime, who by her prayers and
deuouter sacrifices, prorogued a certain pestilence, which was then to light
upon the Athenians, till ten years after. I could here allege Nicostrata,
the mother of Euander, who was the first that taught the Latins what letters
were, as likewise Corinna, Sappho, Sulpitia, and the Schoole-mistresse of
Pindare the Lyrike, all of them worthy admiration for their excellency in
Poesy; but I desire not to travel far, for what I may procure near home. A
country-woman of our own, having disguised herself into the habit of a
Student took her journey to Rome, where in a while she grew so famous for wit
and knowledge, that from one degree of Dignity to another, she stepped at
length into Saint Peter's Chair and had the custody of the Keys. And this if
their adversaries like deaf Adders stop not their ears when Reason
charmeth, may very well suffice to maintain them learned. Their Wisdom is
the next, which men with their traducements would enuiously impeach, but you
shall quickly see it vncanopied of those mistie clouds, which would obscure it,
and shining out as clear as brightest day.

CHAP. 9.
Of their Wisdom.

WOmen are wise enough say their adversaries, if they can but keep themselves
out of the rain. Indeed it would much advantage men, if their understandings
were limited with such narrow bounds. Their imperfections would not furnish
them with matter of laughter so readily as now they do, nor their ablest
virtues be so often ouermatched by them, as now they are.

It has bin our policy from the beginning to busy them in domestical
affairs, thereby to divert them from more serious employments, in which if
they had not surmounted us, they would at least have shown themselves our
equals, and our parallels. Spinning, knitting, sowing, preserving, and the
like, as we would make them believe, are their chiefest pieces: But all ages
have affoorded some, whose Spirits being of a stronger temper, and harder edge,
then to turn at such persuasions, have travailed beyond those Herculean
Pillars, and made manifest to the world, that the Brains of a Serpent have
been lodged in the Head of a Dove. For proof hereof let us search no farther
into the bosom of Antiquity, then those times, in which the pride and glory
of Italy, sat chained, as a Trophie, on the victorious arms of the barbarous
Goths, and we shall find, that there lived then amongst them Queen
Amalasunta, who with such wonderful discretion and moderation so managed their
harsher minds, that she found not in them, all the while she reigned, the
least rub or stop, which might interrupt the smoother course of her
proceedings. After her, we shall hear of Theodelinda, Queen of Lumbardie, a
Woman famous and much renowned for her singular virtue in the government of
State affairs; and after her of Theodora, the Grecian Emperesse, one not
inferior in Wisdom, or sufficiency to the former. But that we may draw
somewhat nearer home; what King or Prince almost of the latter days, and make
inquiry through the largest part of Christendom, did ever deserve to be
compared to Isabella, Queen of Spain. At her first coming to the crown, she
found the greatest part of her Estate in the hands of the greatest, which
notwithstanding she recovered in so just and peaceable manner, that they, whom
she dispossessed, continued most affectionate unto her, and were willing to
forgo, what formerly they had willingly usurped. After this she did not only
defend her own Kingdoms from the powerful invasions of foreign enemies, but
withal enlarged them to her perpetual honor, by the glorious acquist of the
kingdom of Granado: besides all which there was in her, as is credibly
recorded by such as knew her, such a diuiner kind of Majesty, as drew from her
Subjects all dutiful respect, and put the most rebellious, without any stir,
or tumult, in mind of their obedience: withal such a discerning judgment in
the choice and election of Ministers fit for those places, in which she meant
to employ them, which as the Poet says, is the chiefest Art that belongs
unto Soueraignetie.

Principis est virtus maxima nosse suos.
And afterward so liberal a mind to reward the worthiness of their deserts,
that since, there have bin few in Spain of any note or credit, which were not
of her creation. Gonsaluo, the great Captain, did more highly value himself
for the happiness he had to be preferred by her, then for all the famous
victories, and worthy Acts, which made him honored of all Men both in Peace
and War. So that in a word, the glory and the reputation, which Ferdinand her
husband got by her, was no less a Dower, then the Kingdom of Castile. What
should I speak of Queen Anne of France, a Lady of no less worth, then
wealth, wife to two Kings, Charles and Lewis, but to neither of them any way
inferior, either in justice, clemency, liberality, or holiness of life? What
of Lady Margaret, Daughter to Miximilian the Emperor, who with no less
wisdom, moderation and equity governed her State a long time? Hungary,
Naples, Arragon, and Sicilie afford us diverse examples of the like kind; but
since the wind is fair, I will disanchor from these foreign Coasts, and
having hoisest up my Sails, make have unto our own. And behold I am met upon
the shore by that wonder of her Sex, Queen Elizabeth of happy memory, of whom
Tasso maks this honorable mention; That howsoever their own ill fortune had
decreed, she should be separated from the Church, nevertheless says he,
l'Heroiche virtu dell animo suo, and l'altezza dell ingegno mirabile le rendeua
affectionatissimo ogni animo gentile, and valoroso. The Heroical virtues of
her Mind and the wonderful profoundnesse of her Wit, endeared every noble and
valorous disposition most affectionately unto her. And indeed the world cannot
produce a fairer example out of all Antiquities Court-roles, in which goodness
was evermore equally matched with greatness; honesty with Policy; mildness
with severity: liberality with frugalitie, or affability with majesty: and in
which we may see such prudence in governing; such moderation in commanding;
such readiness in rewarding, such discretion in promising, such religion in
performing. So that all her abilities rightly considered we may say of her, as
was said of Greece, Sola factorum gloria^ ad verboru^ copia^ tetendit. She
alone has equalled with her deeds all that ever could be said of her in words,
and deserved that which Alexander wished, that Homers quil to be the Trumpet of
her Praises. But not to keep her Princely Ashes too long out of their Sacred
Urne; I will only utter to the astonishment of Fame, that which the Muse of
divine du Bartas sung of her with admiration, stiling her, and that without
flattery.

La docte Elizabeth, la prudente Pallas,
Qui fait que le Breto^, desdaigneux ne desire,
Changer anmasleiougd'une femme l'Empire
Qui tandis qu Erynnis less d'estre en enfer,
Rauage ses voysins, and par flamme and par fer,
Et que le noir effroy d'vn murmura^t orage,
Menace horriblement l'vniuers de naufrage:
Tient heurense paix sa Province, ou la Loy
Venerable fleurit auec la blanch Foy,
Qui na pas seulement l'opulence faconde
Dn matern^la^guage; ains d'une bouche ro^de
Peut sibien sur le champ harenguer en Latin
Grec, Fra^cois, Espagnol, Tudesque and Flore^tin
Que Rome l'Emperiere, and laGrece, and la France
Le Rhin et l'Arne encor plaident pour sa naissance. Elizabeth the learned,
Pallas the wise,
Who makes the Britains scornfully disdain,
For the male yoke to change a females reign,
Who whilst Erynnis, weary now of hell,
With fire and sword does all her neigbors quell,
And that the black fright of a murmuring storm.
The world with shipwreck threatens to deforme,
In happy peace her provinces does sway,
Where Law and Faith do never fall away.
Who is not only very richly stored
With the sweet wealth her language does afford
But can so well and volubly address
Her tongue upon the sudden, to express
Her hie conceits in Latin, and can speak
Such Spanish, Dutch, such Tuscan and such Greek,
That Rome, Greece, France, and Spain and Arne, and Rhine
Each of them plead, and say, By birth she is mine.


And so I leave this glorious Sun lodged in her West, till she rise again at
the approach of the Sun of glory, to behold Queen Anne our gracious
Sovereign, whose virtue like that Star in the East, draws Princes, from a
far to do homage and service to her worthiness. Let us but consider with
what wisdom and discretion she has hitherto governed her own domestical
affairs, and from thence we shall presently conclude in her behalf, as
Artaxerxes, surnamed Mnemon, did in the behalf of that poor man, who
presented him with an apple of extraordinary bigness, which when he had
received with a cheerful countenance: and withal informed himself, that it
was of his own planting. Persolem inquit, videtur hic mihi commissam sibi vrbem
de parua magnam redacturus. Now by the Sun, said he, were a City committed
to this man's custody, of a littel one he would surely make it great, of a
mean one, mighty. I could here to stop the mouths of our adversaries
produce the names of diverse honorable personages, which like blazing lights
do continually wait upon this glorious Cynthia, and are eminent in the eyes
of the world for sundry notable graces and perfections; but I will now again
look back a little upon those elder Times, and come to Helena the wife of
John, king of Cyprus, who perceiving that her husbands weakness was a blot
whereon the greatest part of his nobility continually played, and that the
Kingdom was the stake at which they aimed, and which unless her better skill
prevented, they by their false play were like to win; she took the
government into her own hands, to the release of the Land, and the relief of
all her subjects. And surely where the sword does rust for want of use, or is
so full of gaps and flawes, that it cannot well be used, I see no reason but
the Distaffe should be suffered to supply the place. God, when the children of
Israel, after the death of Ehud the Beniamite did evil in his sight, sold them
into the hands of Iabin King of Canaan, who for twenty years most grievously
oppressed them, and when there wanted a Judge for their deliverance, he sent
them upon the cry of their lamentation, Deborah a Prophetess, the wife of
Lapidoth. Iud. 4. 4. by whose counsels and directions Barak, the son of
Abinoam freed them from the cruel hand of Iabin, and the bloody sword of
Sisera. And all the people, says the Text, came up as occasion compelled them
to her dwelling under the Palm Tree, between Ramah and Bethel in mount
Ephraim, and received judgment from her. I cannot therefore but condemn the
Salique law, and tax it of injustice, by which the worthiness of Women is
excluded, as a thing altogether eccentricall from the crown of France. But
leaving this, do we not see that the greatest Captains, and the grauest
commanders have thought it no disparagement to their worth, to take a piece of
the Fox from them, wherewith to piece out the Lion in themselves, for the safer
effecting of their high dessignes? Coriolanus whom neither the majesty of the
Commonweal in the persons of Ambassadors, nor the reverence of Religion in
the countenance of the Priests could move, was by their tears, like a hard
Diamond with the blood of Goats, so mollified, that on the instant he did
abate the edge of his fury, and turned the point of his weapon from the bosom
of his ungrateful Country.

The Captain of that Garrison, which Hannibal had planted in Tarentum, was
desperately en amoured of a certain gentlewoman, who had a Brother that served
at the same time in the Roman army, under Fabius the Consul, which when he
understood, he commanded him as a fugitive to hasten thither; where making use
of his sisters cunning flatteries he drove the Governor in a short time to
betray the town, which was committed to his custody. To be brief, what had
become of the two sons of Alexander, King of the Jews, when immediately upon
their Fathers death, the incensed multitude, in revenge of that hard and cruel
slavery, wherein he had always held them during his life, hastened to the
Palace with their weapons in a readiness to destroy them; and had given those
their tragical dessignes a bloody Catastrophe, but that a Woman's wisdom on
the sudden altered the Scene of their proceedings, and hatching a Dove out of a
Serpents egg, according to Sampsons riddle; out of the fierce brought
sweetness, and out of the deuourer meat, by casting the corpse of her deceased
Lord into the midst of the market place, and telling them, that as in his
life time she would willingly have diuerted him from those tyrannical and
cruel courses, which had most justly stirred them up to anger against him: so
now, being dead, she was ready there with them to torture his wretched
carkasle, and to fling it to the dogs; only she entreated them to commiserate
those little infants, which were so far from being guilty of any fault, that
they could not possibly have been privy to any fact. Which words of hirs
wrought such an impression in their minds, that they did not only choose
those children with one consent for their Sovereign Lords, but afforded
likewise honorable burial to the exposed corpse. Nay what had become of the
whole nation of the Jews, if the wisdom of Judith had not cunningly
practiced the harsh affections of Holofernes, and with her speeches, actions
and behavior so enchanted his warlike Spirits, that he minded no arms at
all, but hers, which if at any time they happened to compass him, he thought
himself no less than a glorious Planet in a golden Sphere?

Queen Cleofis, after she had yielded her self to Alexander, redeemed by
lying with him her lost kingdom; Illecebris says Q. Curtius, consecuta quod
virtute non poterat, having obtained that of him by flattery, which she could
not keep from him by force; And undoubtedly there is nothing, if once they be
pleased to employ their wits, in which they cannot very easily ouer-reach and
gull the wisest and the ablest men. David cannot so stiffly resolve to revenge
him self on Nabal and his household, but Abigail will make him through her wise
behavior quickly relent. Out of which consideration it may peradventure be,
and no worse, S. Aug. calls them Muscipulas animae; latrones vitae: Mouse
traps for our souls; Pickepurses of our affections. But I will here hang up
Fabius his Sheilde, to handle a while Marcellus his sword; and having spoken of
their Wisdom, come now to treat of their Valor.

CHAP. 10.
Of their Courage and Valor.

Revenge and cruelty are the Symptoms of a sickly resolution, and cannot
fasten upon the Temperature of a mind, that is truly valorous. But these in
Women, say their Adversaries, have, like vlcerous Cankers eaten into their very
marrow, and wrought such a general corruption in all the powers and faculties
of their Souls, that there can not any Crisis possibly be made of their
recovery. The world does not harbor in it a Creature more vindicatiue, says
the Poet.

Scylla, and Charybdis Sicula co^torquens freta,
Minus est timenda: nulla non melior fera est:
Adeo cruentus stimulat faeminam dolor. Scylla, Charybdis, and those rocks
that tear
The Seas proud billawes, need not half that fear,
There Is not a Beast throughout the world so wide,
Which, than a Woman, is not far more mild.
Such bloody Passions, in her bosom reign,
When outward crosses cause her inward pain.


For instance whereof they allege Parisatis, who having apprehended the
Carien, that had cut the hamstring of Cyrus her younger Son, caused him for
the space of ten days to be continually tortured; after that, his eyes to
be bored out: and finally molten mettle to be poured into his ears, till he
breathed his last in this miserable torment. She condemned Mithridates, who
had wounded him in the temples, to that hellish torture of the Troughes, in
which after he had pitifully languished 17. days together, with much a do
he died. As for Mefabates, who deprived him of head and hands, having won
him at dice of her son Artexerxes, she delivered him to the Executioners, and
commanded them to flay him alive, and afterward to tear his body in pieces,
and to hang both his skin and it on several gibbets. The mother of Mahomet
II. was so incensed against Moses Bassa, who by the command of his Sovereign
had massacred her younger son, a child but 18. years old, that nothing
could appease her fury, till she had him, with hands and feet fast bound,
delivered up unto her; which being obtained, she struck him first into the
breast with a knife, then made a hole in his right side, and by peece-meale cut
out his Liver, and cast it before his eyes to the Dogs to eat. These things
considered, the Satyrist had reason, say our Opposites, to cry out:

-- minor admiratio summis
Debetur monstris, quoties facit ira nocentem
Hunc sexu^, and rabieiecur incendente feruntur
Praecipites, vt saxa iugis abrupta. -- We need the greatest Monsters less
admire,
Then this same Sex of theirs, when rage does fire
Their livers; and to mischief bears them all,
Headlong, like rocks, which from their cliffes do fall.


Nor is it a thing to be much wondered at, say they, to see those so void of
mercy, that are so full of fear. (...); is a position out of check. The
heart, that faints at the alarmes of an enemy, cannot possibly be recovered,
unless it drink the Spirit of his blood. To minister any other aurum
potabile, than this unto it, is mere vanity, and will produce but a weak
effect. This alone is that extracted Quintessence, which beyond all Chymicall
inventions, must free it from those Paralyticall resolutions, and Epileptike
convulsions, whereinto, upon the very noise of his approach, it is always apt
to fall. The Emperor Maurice in a dream saw a Soldier, called Phocas,
killing his Wife, his children, and afterward himself, with which Vision
being sorely daunted, he enquired of his son in law Philippicus if there were
not such a fellow in the Army, who told him, yes; and withal that he was a
roaring youth, but yet a very Crauen; Whereupon the Emperor concluded with a
troubled countenance, that if he were a Coward, he would sure be cruel. And
indeed this argument may hold in men, in whom want of courage is occasioned
either by some diminution, ablation, or deprauation of the animal, and vital
spirits; by reason whereof they never think themselves secure, till their
enemies death sign the Quietus est, which must set them free from the
dangerous pursuit of hazard and molestation: but in Women it must fail, from
the quickness of whose apprehension, arises many times a sudden fright,
which upon a more serious consideration of the object does as suddenly vanish.
And thus let me see if the Soul of the wisest and the worthiest man be able
to resist the first conceits and fantasies that assail him, and starteth not
as out of a natural subjection, with much palenesse and contraction at the
noise of thunder, the unexpected discharge of a Cannon, or the sudden crack
of some great ruin. Sure it suffices here, as in other Passions, that his
opinion remain safe and sound, that the setlednes of his discourse undergo no
alteration or attaint, and that he give not his consent to his affright and
sufferance. I must confess yet, there be many Vultures, Harpies, and hellish
Furies amongst them, in whom as in Media, and the like, Passions are so
predominant, that they make not a superficial impression, but penetrate so
far into the seat of Reason as to infect it, and corrupt it. But if things
may be censured with indifferency, our Adversaries will find, that Cruelty
even in these, is not an imperfection of Nature, but a defect of breeding.
Cyrus his Nurse, while he was young would now and then suckle him with the
blood of Beasts and fowls, that were newly killed, which bred such a habit in
him, that being manlier grown, he never returned from the slaughter of his
enemies, but he licked his sword: Which barbarous and beastly thirst of his,
was an occasion that Tamiris having cut off his head, caused it to be cast into
a tub of man's blood, with this exprobration of his cruelty. Satia te sanguine
quem sitisti, cuiusque infatiabilis semper fuisti: Now glut thy self, inhumane
Tyrant, with that, whereof heretofore, thou could never have thy fill. The
Plants of Eden, in the state of innocence, were apt, it seemed, to riot in
their growth; the walks and allies thereof were likewise subject to be quickly
defaced, and ouershadowed with weeds, and therefore the Lord himself took
care that Man should be put therein to keep it, and to dress it. And indeed
it is the property of some vigorous and active Spirits, when they find a
vacation of good employments, to make themselves a Termtime of bad. The
brightest sword will quickly rust, if it be not used; The fatter the soil, the
sooner will the field be ouergrowne with nettles and briers, if it lie long
fallow. Neglect is vrenda filix innascitur agris. Nature, if she be not
continually lopt and pruned, will suddenly grow debauched. It is said of
Scylla, that he was cupidus voluptatum, Much addicted to voluptuousness; sed
gloriae cupidior; yet never, but when business of more importance failed him.
The like is likewise recorded of Demetrius, the son of Antigonus and diverse
others. But I am led a little from my level. It appears out of all these
premises, that to say Women because they be fearful must of necessity be
cruel, is a deceitful conclusion; and that Cruelty, because it is found in
the vntutoured bosoms of some few amongst them, must needs, like a beloved
Guest, be inwardly harbored of them all, is a consequence, as void of Charity
as the other was full of Sophistry. For as for the first.

Men's immota manet, lachrymae volvuntur inanes. Some softer dewes from their
fair eyes may fall.
But nothing can their nobler minds appall.


And for the other, there can be no certain demonstration grounded upon
particular observation. But not to follow Women's valor any longer afar of,
as Hippolytus did the Goddess Venus, I will begin to court it at a nearer
distance, and make known in breife unto the world, that amongst them are very
many, which deserve a wreath of Bays, as well as a garland of Roses; and to
have their Temples shrouded under the Olive, as well as shadowed with the
Lilly. Pliny the younger had a neighbor, near unto a certain house of his
in Italy, wonderfully tormented with certain Ulcers, which had befallen him in
those parts that were the occasion of our first Parents shame. His Wife in the
end, considering how long he languished, besought him earnestly that she
might view his grief, and that she would more freely than any body else tell
him in brief, what he had to trust unto; which when she had obtained, she
found it was impossible, he should ever be recovered, and therefore counseled
him, as the safest and surest remedy, to kill himself. And finding him too
soft for so rough an enterprise: Nay do not think, said she, sweet friend,
that the pains I see you suffer, concern not me, as well as you, and that to
free my self from them, I will not take the same medicine, I prescribe to
thee. I will accompany you in the Cure, as I have done hitherto in the Care.
Cast of this fear, and believe assuredly, that we shall meet but with
pleasure in this passage, which must rescue us from such torments. Come, my
Love, we will go joyfully together. This said, finding that she had already
warmed her Husbands courage, she rosolueth from a window in their lodging to
fling themselves headlong out into the Sea; and to maintain even to the end,
this loyal and vehement affection, where with she had ever formerly embraced
him, she would have him dye within her arms; and that her strict enlacements,
might not slacken either through the fall, or fear, she caused him to be fast
bound unto her middle, and in this manner for the easing of his life, abandoned
her own. But this was a Woman of mean rank, and amongst such, it is not so
strange a thing to see now and than some traces of extraordinary goodness.

extrema per illos
Iustitia excedens terris vestigia fecit. When just Astraea stepped from earth to
skies,
From poor folks hearts she took her latest rise.


I will bring you others from the Palaces of Princes, where (some say) Virtue
seldom quartereth. Arria, wife to Cecinna Poetus, when she saw, that her
Husband afterthe overthrow of Scribonianus whose faction he had followed
against the Emperor Claudius, was led away by the soldiers as a prisoner, and
that she might not be suffered to accompany him in the same ship; hired upon
the instant a fisher-boate, and followed him in that manner from Sclauonia to
Rome, where one day, Iunia the wife of Scribonianus accosting her in presence
of the Emperor somewhat familiarly by reason of the Society of their fortunes,
she thrust her back veryeagerly with these words. Heavens forbid that I
should either speak or listen unto thee, in whose lap Scribonianus was slain,
and thou yet alive. These and other the like words gave her friends occasion to
suspect, that she was not minded to continue long, the slavish captive of an
insulting fortune. And hereupon did Thrasea her son in Law beseech her, not
to lay violent hands upon herself, asking her whether she would be content
that his wife her Daughter, if he at any time should chance to run the like
hazard, which Cecinna did, should do the like? whereunto she answered, Would
I? yes, yes, assure thy self I would had she lived so long, and so peaceably
with thee, as I have done with him. These desperate replies made them more
narrowly observe her gesture and demeanor: which when once she had
discovered. You do wisely, said she, well may you make me die more uneasily;
but keep me from dying at all, you cannot; and therewith rising furiously out
of her chair, she ran her head against a post, and a while after being
somewhat recovered of the blow; Did I not tell you, said she, that if you
denied me an easy death, I would make choice of some other, how painful
soever it did prove. The end of such an admirable virtue was this. Her husband
Paetus was somewhat too faint-hearted, to prevent what the Tyrant had cruelly
designed against him, by doing it himself. One day therefore amongst other,
having employed all the inducements, persuasions end exhort ations that were
fit for such a business, she took the poynard which he wore, and holding it
naked in her hand, for the conclusion of her discourse. Paetus, said she, do
thus; and having upon the very instant given herself a mortal stroke about
the stomach, and then snarching it out of the wound, presented it unto him, as
the Legacy of her affectionate love, with this noble, generous, and immortal
encouragement, Paete non dolet. Hold, take it Paetus, it has not hurt me at
all. The Sum of which worthy story is punctually comprised in this ensuing
Epigram. Mart. lib. 2. Ep. 14.

Casta suo gladium cum traderet Arria Paeto,
Quam de visceribus traxerat ipsa suis;
Si qua fides, vulnus, quoth feci, non dolet inquit;
Sed quod tu facies, hoc mihi, Paete, dolet. When to her Paetus Arria did
present
The sword, wherewith her bowels she had rent;
This wou^d, quoth she, torments me not, believe me
But what thou make, sweet Paetus, that will grieve me.


And upon the instant he struck himself with the same weapon; ashamed, in my
opinion, that ever he had needed so dear and precious an instruction. But
shall I show you a Rosy Bud, that will bloome no longer, than it may lie in
the bed of winter: a Fire that burns not but when cold water is cast upon it:
a Marigold, that opens not, but at a setting Sun? look then upon that
young and honorable Roman Lady, Pompeia Paulina, who having in the spring of
her youth, matched herself with Seneca in the full fall of his age, would not,
after Nero had decreed his death, upon any rearmes be dissuaded by him from
dying with him. It was, she said, a necessary Journey, and could never be
better undertaken, then in his company. Seneca was much delighted with this
glorious determination of hers, and told her, that he would not envy her that
honor: and withal, that howsoever there might be an equality of constancy
and resolution in both of them toward their common end: the beauty yet, and
glory of the action would be greater on her side then on his by far. And so
hand in hand after many sweet farewels taken, and soft embraces, they set
themselves in a readiness to welcome death, and had their veins wide opened
presently to let out life, to let in him.

Harmonia the Daughter of Hieron the Syracusan, would needs be buried in
those flames in which her Country burned. Mithridates knew not how to die, till
his sisters had marked him out the way. Asdrubal, though very valiant, was fain
to take a precedent from his wife to free himself from his foe.

But I hear these magnanimous and high designs of theirs, traduced by our
adversaries, as if a dull and stupid ignorance of the danger which they
undergo, or some obstinate and selfe-willd humor to effect, what they
undertake, were the principal causes of their being. When indeed their true
original is an absolute and determinate will, to preserre honor and duty
before all the dangers of the world, as the sequel in a more warrelike and
martial manner shall discover unto them.

Marulla a Maid of Coccinum in Lemnos, when Solomon Bassa thought unexpectedly
to have surprised the Town, took up the weapons of her Father, whom she saw
slain before her in the gate, and did not only revenge his death upon those
that approached her, but kept out the Turk and all his forces, till the
Citizens moved with the alarm, made haste to succor her. At the siege of
Alba Regalis, amongst other women was a tall Hungarian, who thrusting in
amongst the soldiers, with a sith in her hand, at one blow struck off the
heads of two Turks, as they were climbing up the Rampire. At the battle of
Coy, which was fought between Selymus the first, and Ismael, and for the
terriblenesse thereof entitled by the Saracens themselves, The only Day of
Doom, were found in the fields of Calderan, amongst the heaps of men that were
at that time slain, the bodies of diverse Persian Women, who had armed
themselves out of no other intent, than to share with their Husbands in those
bloody purchases. At the siege of Agria, the women showed themselves no less
valiant, then the men, in beating Mahomet from the walls, and massacring his
Soldiers on every side. One amongst the rest, taking from her dead Husband his
Sword and Target, did sacrifice therewith immediately the lives of three of her
enemies to his Ghost, and her own revenge. But I will now muster up whole
armies from sundry Nations, of generous and warlike Lasses, such as shall
confound our Adversaries with their presence, and serve as a Test to discover
much weakness in the stourest Men. The Persians flying from the Medes, are
met without their City gates by their Mothers and their Wives, who taking up
their garments, demanded those fearful hares, Number in vteros matrum vel vxorum
vellent refugere, whether they thought to shroud themselves from the pursuit of
their enemies, within the compass of those forms again, or no? with which
spectacle and speech of theirs, they grew so much ashamed of their own
saintheartednesse, that presently they turned head, and recovered the victory
which before they had most basely lost, out of the hands of their enemies.
Philip the son of Demetrius, having besieged the Town of Chio, caused
Proclamation to be made, That as many slaves, as would fly from thence to him,
should enjoy liberty, and with all their Masters wives, which ignominious
affront so incensed the women, that without delay they ran armed to the walls,
and assaulted him so fiercely, that in short space they enforced him, which the
men could never do, to raise his Army, and remove his Forces, with no little
loss of Honor, Labor and Expense. The very same persons, when their Husbands
were assaulted by the Erithraeans and their confederates, and finding
themselves unable to contend with them, were content upon composition to depart
out of Leuconia only with one shirt and one upper garment: reproved them very
sharply, that they could endure, having forgone their weapons, to march naked
through the squadrons of their enemies, and wished them for the keeping of
their Oath, in stead of their clothes to take their sword and their shield, and
to tell them that those were the proper garments which belonged to men of
valor. They obeyed them herein, and with this their boldness so terrified the
Erithraeans, that they were glad of their departure. The Inhabitants of Curzola
perceiving the Turkish forces to approach, out of cowardly fear for sooke
their town, leaving behind them, not above twenty men, and fourscore Women,
who with great courage defended the place, and in the end, seconded, as it
were, by heaven with a tempest from the North, rescued it wholly from the
violent assaults of those barbarous Mahometanes.

Nicholas Serpietre, chief Leader of the Ratians against Friar George Bb. of
Varadine, in aid of Isabella, Qu: of Hungary, having most dishonourably lost,
by reason of his fear and careless neglect, the greatest part of his
Regiment, was for his baseness so much distasted by his heroicke Wife, that
she did not only reprove him, and that sharply, for the same, but withal
absented herself from him a long time, as loathing the society of one so
degenerating from the strains of true Nobility, as to prefer the safety of
his life, before the safeguard of his Honor. What shall I need to show, how
the Saguntines in defense of their Country, armed their dantier limbs against
the troops of Hanibal? or how when the Dutchmen were overthrown by Marius,
their Women being denied the favor of living free in the service of the
Vestall Virgins, slew both themselves and their children; to show how much
they hated and detested a servile subjection? The Celtes a people in France
between the rivers Garunna, and Sequana, before such time as having passed the
Alps they obtained that part of Italy, which afterward they inhabited, fell
at ods amongst themselves, with such implacable hatred, that it seemed nothing
but the utter ruin and extirpation of each other could alaie the tumult. But
the women thrusting themselves into the midst of those factious leuies, took
notice of their differences, and reconciled them with such equity and
dexterity, that they departed together from the field without the least sign
of any former partialities amongst them; in honor of which their prowess and
wisdom, they admitted them ever after to al their consultations both of peace
and war. And in the league which they made with Hannibal, it was articulated
and agreed upon, That if the Celtes should have occasion at any time to accuse
the Carthaginians of wrong offered, the Carthaginian Captains and Commanders
in Spain should have the hearing of the business; But if the Carthaginians
should complain of the Celtes, the knowledge of the cause should be by
reference committed to their Women. What should I speak of Tamyris amongst the
Scythians: of Theoxena amongst the Greeks; of Octauia, Portia, Caia, Cecilia,
Cornelia or of Cloelia amongst the Romans: all of an extraordinary temper, and
sprightly carriage, but the last, even by Posena, the professed enemy of her
Country, for her stout and valiant attempts against himself, so much
admired, that he presented her with a Horse, the only honouable reward of a
true martial Virtue? The French talk of Jane la pucelle? who when the
Kingdom of France in the time of Charles the VII. lay panting for want of
breath under the burden of our English arms, courageously releiued it, and
having chased the forces of the Duke of Bedford from Orleans caused the King
her Sovereign to be crowned at Rhemis, and set him afterward in peaceable
possession of all his Territories. Have we not in our own Confines, that
princely Voadicia, for in this point I will not mention any later times, who
with her warlike Amazonians maintaind the reputation of her State, and kept it
long on foot against the feirce invasion of the Romans? And therefore as our
English Poet says. Spencer F. Q. lib. 3. Can. 2.

Here have I cause, in men just blame to find,
That in their proper praise too partial be,
And not indifferent to Woman-kinde,
To whom no share in Arms, or Chinalrie
They do impart, ne maken memory
Of their brave gests, and prowess martial,
Scarce do they spare to one, or two, or three
Room in their writs, yet the same writing small,
Does all their deeds deface, and dims their glorious all.
But I have drawn this wire out too far, I will now therefore break it off,
and in a little model express the large remainder of this work.

The Epilogue.
THucydides was of opinion that an honest and virtuous Woman should as charily
cloister up her Fame from the Ears of Men, as she would her Face from their
Eyes. But Gorgias was of another mind. For though he would not have their
Beauties seen; he was content their virtues might be known. And Plutarke
much approves those Roman Laws, which permitted Women as well, as Men,
according to their desert, and dignity, to be publicly praised, at the
solemnizing of their Funerals. For howsoever Aristotle affirm, that nature
intends always to produce that, which is most perfect, and therefore
willingly would still bring forth the Male, counting Females, it should seem,
like those, that are borne blind and lame, or any other way defective, the
prodigious errors and mistakings of her operations: Howsoever likewise their
adversaries would deprive them of that glorious caracter of Gods divinity
imprinted in the heart of Man at his creation; because it is said in the 1.
Cor. 11. v. 7. That man is the Image, and glory of God; but Woman is the glory
of the Man; And hereupon would conclude, that their whole Sex is but an ample
demonstration of natures Crazinesse, and their own unworthiness: Plato yet
maintains, that if there be any distinction betwixt their sufficiency: and
ours, it is not essential, but accidental, and such a one as is grounded
merely upon use. And therefore, says he, as both the Hands are by nature
alike fit for all manner of actions, till application and employment bring in a
difference of Right and Left. So Women and Men have in them the same aptitude
and ability for the well managing of civil and military places, and it is
exercise alone, which begets dexterity in the one and the other. Which example
he drew peradventure from the doctrine of the Pythagorians, who divided all
things into good and evil; and in the rank of those that were good, placed
the Righthand, the Male, and that which was limited and finite: in the rank of
those that were evil; the Left Hand, the Female, and that which was infinite.
But omitting this, his conclusion is, That as those bodies are most perfect,
and fitting for every action, which can, if occasion require, as well apply
their left hand to the business, as their right: so is that Commonwealth the
most absolute which for good government can make use of Women, as well as of
Men.

It is an Axiom in Schools, whereof no quaere can be made, That Substantiae
non recipient aut maius, aut minus. Substances admit not either more or less:
wherefore as one stone cannot be said to be more a stone, then another, so
far as concerns that essential form, which gives a being to them both:
no more can one man be said to be more perfectly Man then another. And so by
consequence the Male shall not be thought more worthy then the Female, in
regard of his essence, because they be comprehended both under one kind: but
if in any thing he have the start, and advantage, it is merely by accident, and
no way else. As concerning that forealleaged position of Aristotle's, I confess
it is true, that nature in the production of things does continually mind the
perfectest; and therefore intends the bringing forth of Man in his kind,
but not Male more then Female. For if she should always produce the Male, she
should commit an extraordinary incongruitie; because as from the body, and the
soul, arises a compound more noble, then his parts, which is Man: so from the
company of Male and Female does redound likewise a compound, which is the only
preserver of humane generation, without which the parts would soon decay. Male
and Female therefore, are by nature always together, neither can the one exist
without the other. One Sex alone is an argument of imperfection; and therefore
the Heathens did attribute both of them to God. Orpheus said of Jupiter, that
he was Male and Female. So that the graces and abilities which are in them,
howsoever they may vary in some outward traces and lineaments, are in form
and substance the same with ours. Let us consider if the magnificencie of of
Semiramis and that of Sesostris; the subtlety of Tanaquil, and that of
Seruius; the courage of Porcia, and that of Brutus; of Timoclea, and that of
Pelopidas; do not resemble one the other very nearly. Virtue may alter now
and then her habit, but she will never change her hew; the nature and
condition, the temperature and constitution, the diet and course of life of
those in whom she abides, do but furnish her a wardrobe of so many several
suites and shapes wherewith at her pleasure she disguiseth hirselfe in outward
appearance. Achilles was valiant in one kind, Ajax in another: Nestors
wisdom, and that of Ulysses were not alike. Agesilaus and Cato were both
just, but not in the same manner. Eirene loved her Husband otherwise then
Alcestis. Cornelias magnanimity was of a differing strain from that of
Olympias: yet notwithstanding all this there is but one Fortitude, one Prudence,
one Justice. The diversity of the operation arises only from the variety of
the Organe. But self-conceitednesse has like a canker eaten into the hearts of
Men, and possessed them with such an admiration of their own sufficiency,
that they look but with a scornful eye upon the sufficiency of others. In
choice of Wives they respect not any virtuous qualities. They account them but
impertinences, and things of little use. Has she wealth, she cannot possibly
be without worth.

Optima, sed qnare, Cesennia, test marito;
Bis quingenta dedit; tanti vocat ille pudicam:
Nec Veneris pharetris macer est, nec lampade feruet;
Inde faces ardent; veniunt a dote Sagittae. Best was Cesennia by her husband
thought;
But why? she to him many hundreths brought:
Her grace, and virtue he does wholly rate,
After the fair proportion of her State.
He grows not lean through Paphia^darts or torch:
Her dowrie's that, which does his bosom scorch.


They take upon them to be their Heads, and therefore if they prove not as
they ought, the blame must light upon themselves. If Vashti be disobedient,
let Assuerus be blamed, for commanding her that, which being contrary to the
Laws of Persia, did not beseem her modesty to do. The eye is in fault if
the foot do stumble. The Chariot of the Sun, as I said before was glorious,
and did afford much comfort, but when Phaeton had the guiding of it, his
unadvised rashness set all things in combustion. It is here as it is at Irish,
if we have a bad cast, we must seek to better it by good play. If a woman be
sharp and sower in her conversation, it becomes Man with the mildness of
his behavior, mingling as it were Oil with Vinegar, to qualify the
tartness, and like a skillful Surgeon, never to apply a Cataplasme where
he sees an ointment will serve the turn. If she be obstinate and selfe-wild,
he must remember the Apologue, that the blustering Wind the stiffer he sought
to blow the Trauailers Cloak from him, the straighter he made him bind it to
him: whereas the Sun by shining gently upon him so prevailed, vt praeaestu
simul cum pallio tunicam exueret, that through overmuch heat, with his Cloak
he did likewise put of his Coat.

-- Bacchae bacchanti sivelis aduersarier.
Exinsana infaniorem facies; feriet saepius.
Si obsequare vna resolves plaga,
Says the Comicke.

Passions in women are like wild beasts sooner tamed by following, then
overthrown by withstanding. Tumors and inflammations are but exasperated by
Corrosiues, the readiest way to recover them is by lenitiues.

Lenefluit Nilus, sed cunct is amnibus extat
Vtilior, nullas confessus murmr vires. Nile softly flows, but yet more
profit yields
Then all streams else, in making rich the Fields,
Whilst gently gliding on his moister way,
He with no murmr does his force bewray.


He must not think to use them, as Esops Labourer did his God, from whom he
then wrung most, when he did most wrong him. It is otherwise here.

-- peragit trauquilla potestas,
Quod violenta nequit; mandataque fortius vrget
Imperiosa quies -- Calm power with much facility does do,
What stormy force can nere attain unto.
Still peace does bear a more imperious sway
And far more strongly urge them to obey.


This is that field of Bio's, which if you praise it, will yield more fruit,
then when you plough it.

If she be light and wanton, and that the freeness of her carriage make him
suspect the fairness of her conscience, let him conceal it closely, and
remember how Joseph, when he doubted the B. Virgins faith, would not make her
a public example, but determined with himself to put her away privily: and
this was noted in him as an effect of justice, and uprightness by the H. G. it
self. Private admotions, like precious balmes, are seldom applied but with
good success: churlish restraints are of another nature.

Sinunquam Danaen habuisset ahenea turris,
Non esset Danae de Jove fact a parens. If beauteous Danae had not bin detained
In walls of brass, great Jove had never rayn'd
Into her chaster lap that golden shower,
Which broke the stalk of her fair virgin flower.


Like whetstones they set an edge upon the dullest appetite, and are oftentimes
the occasioners of misdeedes in such as never thought to step awry.

Nullus in vrbe fuit tota, qui tangere vellet
Vxorem gratis Caeciliane tuam,
Dum licuit, sed nunc positis custodibus ingens
Turba fututorum est. -- Whilst to his wife, Caecilian, gave access,
None did themselves unto his house address:
He had no sooner though appointed Spies,
But straight a swarm of Lechers thither hies.


Prohibitions in this kind are but prouokings. Besides they are to little
purpose. For as our English Poet says.

It is not iron bands, nor hundredth eyes,
Nor brazen walls, nor many wakefull Spies,
That can withhold her wilful wandering feet:
But fast good will with gentle courtesies,
And timely service to her pleasures meet,
May her perhaps contain, that else would algates fleet.
Let him consider likewise if his own Lordlynesse be not a maine efficient of
her lewdness. For indeed,

Non been conueniunt, nec in vna sede morantur,
Maiestas and Amor. -- Love has a smiling face, and cannot brook
To see it self checked with a surly look.


Mildness and Affability are the true Parents of legitimate Affections; all
other Complements and serviceable Demonstrations are but impostures; and to
speak truly, the bastard issue of Sinister and Side Respects. Witness our
witty Epigrammatist. Mart. lib. 2. Epig. 55.

Vis te, Sexte, coli; volebam amare;
Parendum est tibi: quod iubes, coleris
Sed site colo, Sexte: non amabo. I would, good Sextus, feign have loved thee;
But thou desire worshipped to be:
Thy hest shall be obeyed but thou will prove
That they, which worship. Sextus, will not love.


All Cynicall rigor therefore and austerity must be quite divorced from the
nuptial yoke. A Stoicall brow, a churlish accent, or a countenance any way
Tyrannical, and which shall seem to exact observance, is the bane and poison
of amorous embracements. The ancient Pagans did always place the Statues of
Persuasion, and the Graces near to that of Venus, to show, That married people
should by fair demeanor and soft entreaty, without brawling or contention
obtain their desires at each others hand. Isaac that blessed Patriarch, was
seen by Abimelech as he looked out at a window, to sport himself with his
Rebaccah; An example confounding the arrogant behavior of such, as will not
remember, that the woman was taken out of the side of man, to be rankt in
equal estimation with him; and not out of his foot, to become litier for his
proud and insolent ambition to wallow on. They are not al of them Saints, I
must confess, but such as have their imperfections and defects, as well as we;
(...), says Plato, There is no sweet, but has some sower: The wine is not
without his Lees; and the Be, as it has Honey, so it has a Sting.

-- Medio de font leporum
Surgit amari aliquid, quod in ipsis faucibus angat. There Is nothing so
delightful to our Taste,
But leaves some bitter savor at the last;
And ereit come to settle in our mawes,
Offensive proves even to our very jaws.


But whosoever shall neglect them for these, resembles those, who for one
illrellishing grape forbear the whole cluster; or because they have been
scratched with the Bush will forgo the Berry. But were they never so crooked
in their carriage, never so deformed in their conversation, that well-tempred
Wisdom, by reason whereof men challenge such a pre-eminence over them, should
easily, me thinks, work some amendment. For though not every Beast in the
Forest, nor every Tree in the wood, can be thoroughly stripped of their wilder
nature; the Hunts-man notwithstanding out of those, and the Gardener out of
these, will find a means to reap some profit. The water of the sea is
vicious, and unfit for drink; Fishes yet make it their nourishment, and
Mariners, as well, as Merchants use it as chariot to carry them into far
countries. In a word, no sublunary thing is more needful unto man, than fire:
It affoordeth him both Light and Heat, yet if the Satyr be too busy with it,
he may peradventure burn his beard. The Physician can extract a cordial out of
the deadliest poison; and out of the basest mineral a noble Quintessence. But
men are so far from this, that women to countenance their basest actions can
bring Precedents from home. Ahabs weakness was a cause of Iezabels
unworthiness. Such a one is proud and haughty, but if you mark her well, you
shall find, her husband is the Glass by which she trimmeth herself. -- in
vulgus manant exempla regentum;
Vtque ducu^ lituos, sic mores castra sequuntur.


The deeds of men in authority, are always Patrons for those of lower rank.
A subject usually eyes nothing but the example of his Superior. Does Aristotle
stammer? those that are under him will affect it as a sovereign grace: Is
Plato any thing crook shouldred? he shall have many that will imitate him.
Has Alexander the great a peculiar writhing of his neck? no doubt but
Hephestion out of his love would willingly seem to have the like. It is the
nature of true affection not only to palliate and disguise the blemishes of a
friend, but with all to joy in them somerimes. -- Balbini polypus Agnam


Delectat -- and to make them often the subjects of settled imitation. Is there
any tumor therefore or inflammation in the Leg, or other inferior parts of
the body? let us see if the defluction which causes it, proceed not from the
Head, Where there is a near conjunction, no marvel if there happen a sudden
infection.

-- grex totus in agris
Vnius scabie cadit, and porrigine porci,
Vuaque conspect a liuorem ducit ab vua.
One scabbed sheep may mar a fair flock, one measled hog endanger a whole
heard. The clearest eye many times by viewing only that which is bleared,
becomes abnoxious to the like peril. Let us not complain then like that
foolish fellow, of a pain in the Hand, when there is an impostume in the Head.
If we would have women without spots, let us keep our selves without stains.
But here our adversaries cry out,

Quid iuuat ad surdas si ca^let Phemius aures?
Quid misera^ Thamyram picta tabella iuuat? Deaf Ears in Music take but
small delight,
Fair Pictures please not, where there wa^teth sight.


Little avails the wisdom of the Inchanter, if the Adder be not disposed to
listen. What effect can either Precept, or Precedent produce in those, who have
armed themselves with a willful Resolution, to put by all good counsel and
persuasion? Oleum perdit and impensas, qui bouem mittit ad ceroma; says the
Proverb, An Ox will never prove a Wrestler, use what care and cost you can.
Let your plees be never so well tempered with wisdom and discretion, your
speeches sa- ^ Let him spy one wrinckle on her brow, And he shall straight his
Mistress disauow: Let her skin writhell; let her eyesight fail, Her teeth wex
yellow; or her cheeks look pale; Pack huswife, hence, this honest man shall
say; Out of my doors; dispatch, use no delay; Your dropping nose occasions my
disdain, I must have one, that has a dryer brain.

For there are, which make Virtue the mark whereat they level; Let us but
listen a while, and we shall hear many tragically sighing out, what Demenetus
uttered in the Comedy, Argentum accepi, dote imperium vendidi; I have gotten
money but I have purchased misery, and for a large Portion forgone my
liberty. M. Aurelius will not dare though, to cast himself into the loose
embraces of a Strumpet, so she bring an Empire to him for her dowry. Many of
lower rank, out of a couerous desire to soder up a cracked estate, let not to
do the like; but in the end they may cry out with Esau, The pottage has
refresht me, but my birthright's gone. Plaut. in Aulul.

-- sunt multae in magnis dotibus
Incommoditates, sumptu sque intolerabiles;
Nam quae indotata est, ea in potestate est viri;
Dotatae mactant and malo, and damno viros.
Let all things be rightly considered, and we shall find that rich wives are
but bills of charge. She that has no such addition to make her weigh will be
continually ready to conform herself in all things to her Husbands will; but
she that has the start in that, will have it in all things else, or the whole
house shall perish in her Fury. Intoler abilius nihil est quam foemina dives.


There can be no greater torture to a man, then to be matched to a woman whose
fortunes are of a higher built roof than his own. Iuv: lib. 2. Sat. 6.

Nil non permit it mulier sibi, turpe putat nil,
Cum virides gemmas collo circundedit, and cum
Auribus extensis magnos commisit Elenchos. No Act so lawless; no attempt so
vile,
But she believes becomes her well, the while
About her neck fair sparkling gems she weres,
And with large Pendants loades her stretched ears.


Beauty therefore is vain, and riches are deceitful, says (Pro. 31.) the H.
G. but a woman that fears the Lord, she shall be praised. She opens her
mouth with wisdom, and in her tongue is the Law of kindness. Her Husband
shall be known in the Gates, when he sits among the elders of the Land. The
frailty of the first is fully characterd in this ensuing Poem, occasioned, it
should seem, by some great and sudden alteration discovered in the Subject,
which for the corespondencie it holds with this discourse I will here wholly
insert.

A glorious place I did of late behold,
Whose outside richly decked with burnisht gold;
Did seem to me a Mansion fit for Jove,
For virtuous Pallas, or the Queen of Love.
I thought so sweet a seat could not but be
The sacred harbor of some Deity.
The roof thereof was arched like the skies
And graced with stars, which though but mortal eyes,
Yet such they were as like Promethean fire,
In frozen earth could kindle hot desire;
Such as could warm the Liver; quick the brain,
And move affection in the dullest Swain;
It joyed me much to see my weaker sight
Curiously search this Labyrinth of Delight.
One Beauty seen, I straightway more discover,
And ravished, cry; Who would not be a Lover?
Through crystal Casements I might easily see
The lovely Graces in their sport full glee;
And by and by the Archer and his Mother
With wanton dalliance courting one another.
An entrance was into this princely place,
Whose currall Gates took up a seemly space;
From forth betwixt the Leaves issued a breath,
Could set a gloss upon the face of death,
And now and then came forth a gentle sound,
Whose sweet concent did Orpheus quite confound.
It much affected many mortal ears,
And might have drawn bright Angels from their Spheres
But beauty fades, and lovely parts decay,
Green Herbs do quickly turn to withered hay;
The blushing Rose, the glory of the morn,
Does oftentimes become the mid-daies scorn.
This seeming Eden I did lately view,
But all things varied from their former hew;
Nothing I saw, which I might term the same,
So short a Date has every earthly frame.
Yet in this change Time could not vant his force;
So I had not finished half his annual course,
Since first that glorious parcel of the skies,
Was made the happy Object of mine eyes;
Whereat the affections, formed in my breast,
As underpropped with to weak arest.
In their own ruins did themselves entombe,
And like Abortiues perish't in the Womb.
My thoughts shall therefore never more embrace
The washie tincture of a female face;
Beauties imperious looks may force mine eye,
But virtues Liege-man my poor heart shall die.
Yet some may tax me for a wavering mind;
Whose love goes out at every blast of wind:
But let these know; buildings though nere so tal,
If once their Base, and groundwork fail, must fall.
As for the vanity of the last, I will take Martial for my Patron, who being
condemned by a friend, for having refused to marry with a wealthy Widow,
returned him his reasons in this pithie Epigramme.

Vxorem quare locupletem ducere nolim,
Quaeritis? vxori nubere nolo meae.
Inferior Matrona suo sit, Prisce, Marito,
Non aliter fuerint Faemina, Virque pares.
Mart. lib. 8. Epigram. 12. Demand you why, with one that is rich
to marry I denide?
The reason was, unto my wife
I would not be the bride.
The Matrons must inferior be,
good Priscus, to the Man;
Or never will they equal be,
do Priscus what you can.


But the Couvre-feu Bell has already rung, and it is now time the Drawbridge
of this our Sanctuary were pulled up, and the gates thereof shut in. Such as had
Oil in their Lamps are already entered; If any seek admission hereafter,
whatsoere their allegations be, they must attend a Iubile for a second opening;
till when to stop the mouths of their adversaries, most whereof, like
Euripides, though they rail upon them at the board, are well contented with
them in the Bed, I publish here in a little volume, this poetical Character of
their worthiness.

-- They are the comfort of our lives,
That draw an equal yoke without debate;
A Play-fellow, that for of all grief drives;
A Steward, early that prouides and late;
Both faithful, chaste, and sober, mild, and trusty,
Nurse to weak Age, and pleasure to the Lusty.
FINIS.

