A letter written by Cutbert Tunstall late Bishop of Duresme, and John
Stokesley sometime Bishop of London, sent unto Reginalde Pole, Cardinal, then
being at Rome, and late bishop of Canterbury.

A letter written by Cutbert Tunstall, late Bishop of Duresine, and John
Stokesley, sometime Bishop of London, so acknowledged and confessed by the said
Cutbert, about 14 days before his departure out of this his natural life, in
presence of the most Reverend father in God MATTHEW Archebyshop of Canterbury
and others, which letter was sent by the same two Bishops, to Reginalde Pole
Cardinal, being then at Rome, and of late Archebyshop of Canterburye.
FOr the good will that we have borne unto you in times paste, as long as you
continued the kings true Subject, we can not a little lament and mourn, that
ye neither regardinge the in estimable kyndenes of the kings highness
heretofore showed unto you in your brynging up, nor the honor of the house
that ye be come of, nor the wealth of the Country that ye be borne in, should
so decline from your duetye to your prince, that ye should be seduced by fair
words and vain promyses of the Byshope of Rome, to wind with him: going
about by almeanes to him possible, to pull down and put under foot, your
natural Prince and Master, to the destruction of the Country yt have brought
you up. And for a vain glory of a red hat, to make your self an instrumente
to set forth his malice, who has styrred by all means that he could, all
such Christian Princes as would give ears unto him, to depose the Kings
highenes from his kyngedome: and to offer it as a pray to them that should
execute his malice, and to stir, if he could, his Subjects against him, in
styrringe and noryshynge rebellyons in his realm, where the office and duetye
of all good Christian men, and namely of us that be Priests, should be to
bring al commocion to tranquylytye, all trouble to quyetnes, al discord to
concord, and in doing the contrary, we show our selves to be but the
ministers of Satan, and not of Christ, who ordained all us that be priests, to
use in all places the legacion of peace, and not of dyscorde. But syns that can
not be undone that is done, second it is to make amends and to follow the
doing of the prodigal son, spoken of in the gospel: who returned home to
his father, and Luke. 15.
was well accepted, as no doubt ye might be, if ye will say as he said in
knowledging your folly, and do as he did, in retourning home again from your
wanderyng abroad in service of them, who little care what come of you, so yt
their purpose by you be seruede. And if you be moved by your conscience, that
you cannot take the king our master as Supreme head of ye Church of
England, because the Bishop of Rome has heretofore many years usurped that
name universally over all the Church, under pretense of the gospel of
Matthew, sainge: Tues Petrus, and super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam:
Mat. 18.
Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church. Surely that
text, many of the most holy and ancient expositours, wholly do take to be
meant of the faith then first confessed by the mouth of Peter, upon which
faith, confessing Christ to be the son of God, the Church is builded, Christ
being the very lowest foundation stone, when rupo^ both the Apostles them
selves, and also the whole faith of ye Church of Christ, by them preached
through the world, is founded and builded, and other foundation none can be,
but that only, as Saint Paul says: Fundamentum aliud. etc. No other
foundation 1. Cor. 3.
can any man lay, besides ye which is Christ Jesus. And where ye think that
the gospel of Luke proves the same authority of the Bishop of Rome, saying:
Rogaui pro te Petre, ut non deficiat fides tua: and t^aliquando co^uersus,
Luke. 22.
confirma fratres tuos. Peter, I have praide for thee, that thy faith should
not sail: and thou being ones converted, confirm thy brothers. Surely that
speaks of the fall of Peter, known to Christ by his godly prescience,
whereof he gave him an ynkeling that after the time of his fall, he should not
despair, but return again and confirm his brethren, as he ever, being most
fervent of them, was wont to do. The place does plainly open it self that it
can not be otherwise taken, but this to be the very meaning of it, and not to
be spoken but to Peter. For else his successors must first fail in the faith,
and then convert, and so confirm their brethren. And whereas ye think that
this place of the gospel of John, Pasce oues meas, Feed my sheep, was spoken
only to Peter, which words make him sheperde over all, and above all: S.
Peter himself testifies the contrary in his Canonical epistle, where he
says to all priests: Pascite qui in vobis est gregem Christi, 1. Petri. 5.
feed the flock of Christ which is among you, which he had the^ do by the
authority that Christ had put them in, as follows, Et cum apparuer it
princeps pastorum, percipietis immarcessibilem aeternae gloriae coronam, And
when ye chief Shepperde shall appear, ye shall receive the incorruptible croune
of eternal glory. The same likewise Saint Paul in the Acts testifies,
saying: Attendite vobis and vniuerso gregi, in quo vos posuit Act. 20.
spiritus sanctus, regere Ecclesiam Dei, Give heed to your self and to the
whole flock, wherein ye holy ghost has set you to govern the Church of
God. Where in the orygynall text, the word signifyinge Regere, to govern,
(...), ye same word that was spoken to Peter, Pasce, feed, for it signifies
both in the scripture. And that by these words he was not made and
co^stitute Sheperde over all, it is very plain by ye fact of Saint Peter,
which durst not enterprise much conversation amongst ye Gentiles, but eschewed
it as a thing unlawful, and much rather prohibitede then commanded by
Gods law, until he was admonyshed by the reuelacion of the shete full of
diverse viandes, mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles, where if Christ by
these words, Pasce oues meas, Feed my sheep, had given such an universal
governance to Peter, then Peter being more fervent then other of the
Apostles, to execute Christ's commandment, would of his own courage have gone
with out any such new admonicion, to Cornelius: except peradventure you would
say, that Peter did not understand the said words of Christ, for lack of
the light which these latter men have obtained to perceive, and thereby
understand the words of Christ to Peter, better then Peter himself did. And
strange also it were to condemn Peter, as an high traitor of his Master,
after his Ascension (as he in deed were worthy) if his Master had signified
unto him that the Byshopes of Rome, by his dying there, should be headdes of all
the Church, and he knowing by these words, Pasceoues meas, Feed my sheep, not
withstanding his masters high legacy and commandment, yet would stee, as he
did from Rome, until his master encountering him by the way with terrible
words, caused him to return. And because this history perauenture might
not waghe against an obstinate mind to the contrary, what shall we fay to the
words of Saint Ambrofe, declaringe and affirming as great and as ample
prymacie to Paul, as to Peter, upon these words of Pauler Qui operatus est
Petro. etc. he that wrought for Peter. etc. Thus he writes, Petrum solum
nominat, and sibi comparat, quia primatum ipse acceperatad fundandam ecclesiam:
se quoque pari modo electum ut primatum habeat in fundandis Ecclesijs Gentium.
Et paucis interiectis. Ab hijs itaque (videlicet Apostolis) qui inter caeteros
clariores erant probatum dicit Paulus donum quod accepit a Deo, vt dignus esset
habere primatum gentium, sicut habebat Petrus in praedicatione circumcisionis.
Et sicut dat Petro socios viros egregios inter Apostolos, ita sibi iungit
Barnaba^, qui diuino iudicio ei adiunctus est: gratiam tamen primatus sibi soli
vindicat concessam a Deo, sicut and soli Petro concessa est inter Apostolos,
dederuntque sibi inuicem dexteras. etc. Et Paulo post. Quis auderet (inquit
Ambrosius) primo Apostolo resistere, nisi alius talis, qui fiducia electionis
suae sciens se non imparem, constanter improbaret quod ille sine consilio
fecerat? Which may thus be englyshed: He names Peter only, and compares him
to him self, for he received a prymacie to build a Church, and that he in
like sort was chosen to have a primacy in building the Churches of the
Gentiles. And shortly after it follows. Of the Apostles he says, his gift
was allowed which he had received of God, that he might be found worthy to
have the primacie in preaching to ye Gentiles, as Peter had in preaching to ye
Jews. And as he assigned to Peter for his companions, which were ye chosen men
amongst the Apostles, even so also does he take to him self Barnabas, who was
joined unto him by Gods judgment, yet did he challenge still to him self alone
the prerogatyne of primacie which God had granted him, as to Peter alone
was it granted among other of the Apostles. So that the Apostles of ye
circumcision gave their hands to the Apostles of ye Gentiles, to declare their
concord in felowshipe, that either of them should know that they had
received the perfection of the spirit in the preachinge of the gospel, and so
should not need either other in any matter. And shortly after, who should dare
resist Peter the chief Apostle, but an other such a one, which by the
confidence of his election might know him self to be no less, and so might
reprove boldelye that thing which he inconsiderately had done. etc. This
equality of dignitye of Paul, which S. Ambrose affyrmeth by Scripture to be
equally committed to Peter and Paul, S. Cypriane and Saint Jerome do extend
to all the Apostles. Cyprian saying thus: Hoc erant vtique and ceteri De
simplicitate clericorum.
Apostoli, quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio praediti, and honoris and
potestatis. Undoubtedly, all the rest of the Apostles were the same yt Peter
was, endewed with like equality of honor and power. And Saint Jerome thus:
Cuncti Contra Io^inianum.
Apostoli claues regni celorum accipiunt, and ex aequo super eos Eccle siae
fortitudo fundatur: All the Apostles received the Keys of the kyngedome of
heaven, and upon them as indifferently and equallye is the strength of the
Church grounded and establyshed. Which Saint Jerome also as well in his
commentaries upon the Epistle to Tite, as in his Epistle to Euagrius, shows
that these primacies long after Christ's ascension, were made by the devise of
men, where before, Communi clericorum consilio, singulae Ecclesiae regebantur,
etiam Patriarchales: By the commune argrement of the clergy every of the
churches were governed, yea the Patriarchal churches The worcester des of S. Jerome be
these. Sciant Cap. 1. super. Titu^.
ergo episcopi se magis ex consuetudine quam dispensationis dn^icae veritate,
presbyteris esse maiores: Let the Bishops understand, that they be greater
then other priests, rather of custom, then by the virtue and verity of the
Lords ordinance. And in his epistle to Euagrius he has like sentence, and
adds thereunto: Vbicu^que fuerit episcopus, sieve Romae sieve Eugubij, sieve
Co^sta^tinopoli. etc. Wheresoever a Bishop be, either at Rome, or at Eugubin, or
at Constantinople. etc. he is of all one worthiness, and of all one priesthode.
And that one was elected which should be preferred before other, it was devised
to the redress of scismes, lest any one chalenging to much to them self,
should rent the church of Christ. These words only of saint Jerome, be
sufficient to prove that Christ by none of these three textes (which be all
that you and others do allege for your opinion) gave to Peter any such
superiority, as the Bishop of Rome by them usurps. And that Peter nor no
other of the chief Apostles did vendicate such primacie or superiority, but
utterly refused it. And therefore gave pre-eminence above them selves to one,
that though he be sometimes called an Apostle, yet he was none of the. xii.
as Eusebius in the beginning of his second book called Historia ecclesiastica,
does testify alleging for him ye great and ancient clerk Clementem
Alexandrinum saying thus. Petrus, Iacobus ac Johannes post assumptionem
saluatoris, quamuis ab ipso fuerant omnibus pene praelati, tamen no^ sibi
vendicarunt gloriam, sed Iacobum qui dicebatur Iustus, Apostolorum Episcopum
statuunt: Peter, James and John, after Christus ascencion into heaven, although
they were by him preferred well nigh before all other, yet they challenged not
that glory to them self, but decreed that James, who was called Iustus,
should be chief bishop of the Apostles. By these words it is clear, that
James was the bishop of ye Apostles, not because, as some men do gloss, he was
elected by ye Apostles, but because he had thereby primacy and honor of a
bishop in Ie rusale^, above ye rest of ye apostles. And one thing is especially
to be noted, and also marueled at, that the Bishops of Rome do challenge this
primacie alonely by Peter, and yet Saint Paul which was his equal, or rather
superior by scripture in his Apostolate amongst the Gentiles, whereof Rome
was the principal, suffered at Rome where Peter did, and is commonly in all the
church Roman, joined with Peter, in all appellacions and tytles of
pre-eminence: And both be called Principes Apostoloru^, The chief of the
Apostles. Upon both is equally founded the church of Rome, the accountinge of
bishops of Rome, many years agrees thereunto. For Eusebius says, that
Clemens tertius, Lib. 3. cap. 21.
post Paulum and Petrum, pontificatum tenebat: That Clement was the third
bishop after S. Paul and Peter: Reconynge them both as bishops of Rome, And
yet therein preferringe S. Paul. With like words saying of Alexander
bishop of Rome, that Quinta successione post Petrum atque Paulum, plebis
gubernacula sortitus est: Alexander obtained the governance of the people by
succession, the first bishop after Peter and Paul, Irenaeus also, as Eusebius
recites, that Fundata and aedificata Ecclesia beati Lib. 5. cap. 6.
Apostoli, Lino officium episcopatus iniungunt. After the church was ones
founded and builded, they charged Linus with the office of the Byshopricke of
the holy apostle. Whereby appears, that they both jointly constituted him
Bishop of Rome, and received only their Apostle ship enjoined unto them by
Christ. And therefore if the bishops of Rome challenge any pre-eminence of
authority by Peter, they should as well, or rather by Paul, because they both
founded it, and both there preached, and both there suffered: Resigning
first that byshopricke to Linus, and all at ones. And if ye will peradue^tur
lean to the former preaching there by Peter, which by scripture can not be
proved, yet then at the least saint Paul and his successors in Epheso, should
have like prima ciether, be cause he founded first that church, though Saint
John after that did build it: as witnesses Eusebius, saying: Ecclesia quae
est apud Ephesum, a Paulo quidem fundata Lib. 3. cap. 23.
est, a Iohanne vero aedificata: The church which is at Ephesus, in deed was
founded of Paul, but it was builded of S. John. And so Peter should have no
other primaci in Rome, but as Paul had in Epheso, that is to say: to be
counted as the first preachers and co^uerters of the people there to the faith
of Christ. And as well might al ye Bishops of Ephesus, challe^ge the primacie of
al nations, both Gentiles and Jews by S. Paul Apostolum Gentium, their
founder, as the Bishop of Rome by S. Peter, Apostolu^tantum circumcisionis, in
case he were the first founder, chalenging primacie over all. But undoubtedly
this primacie over all yt the Bishops of Rome of late do chale^g, was not
allowed nor yet known nor heard of among ye ancient fathers, though they
had ye church of Rome in high estimacion, as well for the notable virtuous
deeds, that the clergy there did show and exercise abundantly to their
neighbors, as witnesses the said Eusebius, alleginge there the epistle that
Dionysius Lib. 4. ca. 23.
Alexandrinus wrote to Sother Bishop of Rome, testifyinge the same: As for that
city of Rome was the most ample and chief City of all the world, witnessing
saint Cypriane, saying: Plane, quoniam pro magnitudine sua debeat Carthaginem
Roma praecedere, illic maiora and grauiora commisit: Certainly, because that
Rome ought for her greatness excel Carthage, therefore there he committed the
greater and more grievous offenses which S. Cypriane also when he had done
certain acts, yea and made certain determinacions and statutes unto the
Bishop of Rome, he did not submit them to his reformacion, or judgment, but
only sygnified his own sentences, to like him also. And yet adding
thereunto, that if any Bishops, meaning as well of Rome as of others which were
of the contrary opinions to him, would otherwise think or do, he would not
then his sentences should be to them prejudicial or compulsory, but to follow
their own wits and customs, Tum quod vnusquisque episcoporu^ habeat sui
arbitrij libertatem, tum quod vnusquisque praeposi tus ratione^ sui actus sit
domino redditurus: Partly for yt every one of the Byshopes has liberty of
his own will: and partly for that every gouernoure shall make an account to
God of his own deed. as it appears plainly in his Epistle to Stephanus and
Iulianus. And in the third Epistle to Cornelius, toward the end, speaking of
the refuge that one Felicissimus a Nouatia^ after his conde^nacion in Africa
made to Rome, he impugneth such appeals, saying: that, Quia singulis
pastoribus porcio gregis esta scripta, quam regat vnusquisque and gubernat,
rationem suiactus domino redditurus, statutum est ab omnibus nobis, aequumque
pariter ac iustum ce^semus, vt vniuscuiusque causa illic audiatur, vbi est
crimen admissum. Forasmuch as every pastor has his flock by portion
committed to him, which every one ought to rule and govern, and must give
account to the Lord of his administracion, it is decreed of us all, and we
think it both mete and just, that every man's cause and pley, should there be
heard, where ye crime is committed. This holy and excellent clerk and martyrs.
Cypriane, would never have either impugned their refuges to Rome, from their
own primates, or so obstinatly holden and maintained his determinations in the
counceles of Affrike, contrary to ye opinions of ye Bishop of Rome, and to
their customs, without any submissio^ by word or writing, if ye primacy over al
(which ye bishops of Rome do challenge and usurp) had been grounded upon ye
plain scriptures, as you with some others do think. And it is to be supposed
also, yt he would in all his epistles to the^, have called the^ Patres or dn^os,
Fathers or lords as superiors, and not always Fratres and collegas, brothers
and fellows in office, as but his fellows: which yet more plainly does
appear by the Acts of the Councelles of Aphrycke in S. Augustines time, by
the which it is euidente, that though the faith of Christ, was by the
Romans first brought into Aphrike, as S. Augustine does Epistola 16. 2.
confess, yet it was not read nor known, that the Byshopes of Rome used or
challenged any exercise of sovereignty in Aphrike unto this time. And yet then
he did not challenge it Iure diuino, but Praetextu definitionis cuiusdam canonis
in co^cilio Niceno: That is, by the right of gods word, but by the pretense
of a certain canon supposed to be in the council of Nice. Which article
could never be found, though it were then very diligently sought for
through all the principal churches of the East and Southe: But only
alleged of Julius Vide duas Epistolas ad bonifacium. pp. 1. ot. conciliorum.
Fol. 307. 308.
bishop of Rome, out of his own librarye. And you may be well assured, that
if these in scriptures had made for it, neither the bishop of Rome would have
left that certain proof by scriptures, and trusted only to the testimony of
an article of that council doubted on unlikely to be found. Nor yet Saint
Augustine with Did. 16. Viginti.
his holy and learned company, would have resysted this demand, if it had
been either grounded upon Scriptures or determined in that or other council,
or yet had stand with equity, good order or reason. How be it, the largenes
and magnificencye of buyldinges of that City, and aunciente excellency and
superiorite of the same, in temporal dominions, was the only cause that in the
Councels, (where the Patriarchall seas were set in order) the Bishop of Rome
was lotted in the first place, and not in any such constitucion made by
Christ, as appears well by that, that Constantinople, being at that time of
this orderinge of the Patriarchall seas, by the Emperors most amplye
enlarged, being before a small town, and of no renown, and by them most
magnificentlye builded, and advanced worldly with all tytles, Prerogatives and
Privileges temporal like unto Rome, and therefore called Noua Roma, New Rome,
was therefore advanced also to the second sea and place. Antiochia in the
East, where Saint Peter first took the chair before he came to Rome, and
christen men had there first their name given them. Yea, and Jerusalem,
which was the first mother city of our faith, and where Christ himself
first founded the faith, rejected with Alexandria, to the third, fourth,
and fyfte places, because at that time they were not in so high estimacion in
the world, though in the faith of Christ all they were auncientes, and some of
them mothers to Rome.

Truth it is, that the Bishops Hist. tript. Lib. 4. cap. 16.
of the Orient, for debates in matters of the faith, among them selves
made suits to the Bishop of Rome, but that was not for the Superiority of
jurisdiction upon them, but because they were greatly divided. And those
countries as well Bishops as others much infected with the Heresies of the
Arrians, whereof the w^ste was in a manner clear. And among the Orientes none
were counted indifferente to decyde those matters, but where all suspecte of
affection for one cause or other: wherefore they desired the opinions of the
Bishops of the west, as indifferent, vntangled with affections of any of those
parts, and incorrupted with any of the Arrians, as appears by the Epistles
of S. Basil written in all their names for the said purpose. In the which
also it is especially to be noted, that their suit was not to the bishop of
Rome singularly, or by name: but as the tytles do show, to the whole
congregation of byshopes of Italye and France, or of the whole west, and
sometime preferring the French bishops saying, Gallis and Italis, and never
naming the Romans. And for a clear proof that the aunciente Fathers knew
not this primacie of one above al, we need none other testimony, but their
determination in the council of Nice, that Alexandria and Antiochia, and
universally all other primates, should have the whole governance of their
confyne countries, likewise as the byshope of Rome had of his Suburbicans. And
this determination proves also, that your three Scriptures mente nothing
less, then this primacie over all. For god forbid that we should suspect that
counsel as ignorant of those plain Scriptures, to the which sith yt time
all Christendom has leaned, as ye anchor of our faith. And if you like to read
ye ancient ecclesiastical histories, there you may se, that Athanasius and
other patriarchs did execute yt primacie, as in making, consecrating and
ordering of churches, Bishops and clerks in their countries east and south,
as ye bishops of Rome in yt time did in ye west and north. And if ye would yet
any thing obiecte against any of these witness, the^ for to eschew co^tencio^,
and for a final co^clusio^, let ye bishop of Rome stand to his own confession
made many years paste by his predecessoure Agatho, to themperoure Constantine,
Heraclius, and Tiberius, in his epistle written to them in his name, and in ye
name of all the Synodes which he thought to be under ye sea Apostolic,
wherein sone after ye beginning of the epistle, he co^prehendeth them al under
ye name of the bishops dwelling in the north and west parts of their empire.
So that there in his own epistle, he confesses al his subjects or
obedie^ciaries, to be only of ye north and west: and so appears euede^tly by
his own confesssio^, yt neither by gods law nor ma^s law he had to do with any
person of ye east or ye southe. And this his high sovereignty over al
chale^ged, as you and others say, by scripture, as by his own confession quay
led and brought to a little and straight angle. And this Agatho, was not a man
unlearned, as appears by ye acts of ye vi. synod Consta^tinopolitane in ye
iiii. act, where in is written at large, and expressed ye said epistle and
confession. And before the primacye of Peter, which ancient doctors speak of,
that was only in preachinge and teachinge the faith of Christ, whithe he
first among all the Apostles, and first of all mortal men, did express with
his mouth. That primacie did so adhere to his own person, that it was never
derived nether to any Successor, nor to other Apostle, but chiefly to him
self: for all other professing after the same, speak it after him, who had
professed it before. Moreover all the Apostles, as S. Ihon says, be
fundamentes Apoca. 21.
in the heavenly Jerusalem; and not Peter only. Moreover Cyprian affyrmeth, as
is aforesaid, that al ye Apostles were of equal dignity and power. which al
ancient authors likewise do affirm. For Christ gave the Apostles like power
in ye gospel saying: Ite, docete omnes Gentes, Mat. 28
baptizantes eos. etc. So and teach all nations, baptizinge them. etc. And S.
Paul as is said before, knew no other primacie given to Peter to preach in
any place, but among the Jews, as he him self had among the Gentiles: as he
writes to the Galathia^s, where S. Ambrose, as is before said, affirms ye
same. And that the mother of all churches is Jerusalem, as before is said, and
not Rome, ye scripture is plain, both in the prophet Esaias: De Sion exibit
lex, Esd. 2.
and verbum Domini de Jerusalem: Out of Sion shall the law proceed, and the
word of the Lord out of Jerusalem. Upon ye which place S. Jerome says, In
Jerusalem primum fundata ecclesia, totius orbis ecclesias seminauit: Out of
the church first found in Jerusalem, spronge all other churches of ye whole
world. And also in the gospel, which Christ before his ascension commanded
his Apostles to preach over all the world, beginning first at Jerusalem: So
that the bishops of Rome universal power by him claimed over all, can not by
any scripture be justified, as if ye have read the ancient fathers
expositions of the said scriptures, as we suppose you have sith your letters
sent hither concerning this matter, and would give more credence to their
humble and plain speaking, then to the latter contencious and ambicious
writers of that high, and above the Ideas of Plato his subtilitie (which
passes as ye write) the lawyers lerninge and capacity: we dout not, but that
ye perceive and think the same. And where ye think that the king can not
be taken as supreme head of the church, because he can not exercise the
chief office of the church in preaching and ministering of the sacraments, it
is not requisite in every body natural, that the head shall exercise either al
manner of offices of the body, or the chief office of the same. For albeit the
head is the highest and chief member of the natural body, yet the
distribucion of life to all the members of the body, as well tothe head as to
other members, comes from the heart, and is minister of life to the whole
body as the chief act of the body. This similitude yet has not his full place
in a mystical body, although the scripture speaking of king Saul, says: Cum
esses paruulus in oculis tuis, 1. Reg. 15.
constituite caput in tribubus Israel: When thou were but of small reputation
in thine own eyes, I made the head amongst the trybes of Israel. And if a
King amongst the Jews, were Caput in tribubus Israel: hoc est hominum
videntium Deum per vmbram, tempore legis, multo magis princeps Christianus
caput est in tribubus Israel, hoc est vere per fidem videntiu^ Christum, qui
est finis legis: The head in ye tribes of Israel: that is of men which see
God by a shadow in the time of the law, much more is a christian King head
in the tribes of spiritual Israel, that is: of such which by true fayeth see
Christ which is the end of the law. The office deputed to the Bishops in the
mistical body, is to be as eyes to the whole body, as almightye God says to
the prophet Ezechiel: Speculatorem te dedi Dom^i Eze. 3.
Israel. I have made the an over seer over the house of Israel. And what
byshope so ever refuses to use the office of an eye in the mystical body, to
show unto the body the right way of lyuinge, which appertains to the
spiritual eye to do, shall show him self to be a blind eye: and if he shall
take other office in hand then appertains to the right eye, shall make a
confusion in the body, taking upon him an other office, then is given to him
of God. Wherefore if the eye will take upon him the office of the whole head,
yt may be answered unto yt, It can not so do, for it lacks brain. And
exaumples shows likewise, that it is not necessary always that the head
should have the faculty or chief office of administration, you may see in a
Nauye by sea, where the Admyrall, who is captain over all, does not meddle with
stering or gouerninge of every Ship, but every Master particular must direct
the Shype, to pass the Sea in breaking the waves, by his sterynge and
governance, which the Admiral the head of al, does not him self, nor yet
has the faculty to do, but commands the Masters of the Shipe to do it.
And likewise many a captain of great Armies, which is not able, nor never
could peradventure shoot or break a spear by his own strength, yet by his
wisdom and commandment only, he atchiueth the wars, and attayneth the
victory. And where ye think that unity stands not only in the agreing in
one faith and doctrine of the Church, but also in agreing in one head: if ye
mean the very and only head over all the Church our Savior Christ: Quem
pater dedit caput super omnem Ecclesiam, quae est corpus eius: Whom the father
has set over all the Church, which is his body, wherein all good
christian men do agree, ye say truth. And if ye mean of any one mortal man
to be head over al ye Church, and yt to be the bishop of Rome, we do not agree
with you. For you do there err in the true understanding of scripture, or else ye
must say, yt the said council of Nice and other most au^cie^t did err, which
divided the administration of churches, the Orient from the Occident, and the
Southe from the North, as is before expresed. And that Christ the universal
head, is present in every church, the gospel shows Vbi duo vel tres
congregati fuerint Mat. 18.
in nomine meo, ego in medio eorum sum: Where two or three be gathered
together in my name, there I am in the mids of them. And in an other place:
Ecce ego vobiscum sum, vsque ad con Mat. 28.
summationem seculi: Behold, I am with you, until the end of the world. By
which it may appear Christ the universal head every where, to be with
his mystical body the Church: who by his spirit works in all places, (how
far so ever they be distaunte) the unity and concord of the same. And as
for any other one universal head to be over all, then Christ him self,
scripture proves not, as it is showed before. And yet of a further proof, to
take away the scruples, that peradventure do to your apperaunce rise of
certain words in some aunciente Authors, and especially in S. Cyrianes
epistles, as the unity of the church stood in the unity with the bishop of
Rome, though they never call him supreme head, if you preaslye weyghe, and
confer all their sayings together, ye shall perceive that they nether spoke
nor meant other thing, but when the bishop of Rome was ones lawfully elected
and intronizate, if then any other would by faction, might, force, or
otherwise, (the other living and doing his office,) enterprise to put him
down, and usurp the same byshopricke, or exercise ye others office him self.
As Nouatianus did attempt in the time of Cornelius, that then the said
fathers, reconed them good catholics yt did communicate with him yt was so
lawfullye elected, and the custom was one primacie to have a do one with an
other, by congratulatorie letters, sone after ye certentee of their election
was known to keep the unity of the church. And they yt did take part or
maintain that other usurper, to be scismatiques, because that usurper was a
Scismatike, for that, Quia non sit fas in eadem ecclesia, duos simul esse
episcopos, nec priorem legitimu^ epm^ sine sua culpa deponi: That it is not
lawful for two bishops to be at ones together in one church. Nor that the
former bishop being lawful, ought to be deposed gyltlesse, without his fault be
proved. And this is not a prerogative of Rome church, more then of any other
cathedral, special, patriarchall, or metropolitical church, as appe reth in
the. iii. epistle of the first book, and in the eight of the second, and of
the fourth book of Saint Cypriane to Cornelius. Whose words and reasons,
all that peradventure might seem to conclude the unity of the church in the
unity of ye bishop of Rome, because they were all written to him in his own
case, may as well be written to and of any other bishop lefully chosen and
possessed, who percase should be likewise disturbed by any factions of ambitious
heretics, as the bishops of Rome then were. And where ye think the name of
Supreme head under Christ given, attributed to the Kings majesty, makes an
innovation in the Church, and perturbation of the order of the same: it can
not be any Innovation or trouble to the Church, to use the room that God has
called him to, which good Christian Princes did use in the beginning when fay
the was most pure, as Saint Augustine ad Glorium and Eleusium says, Ait enim
quidam: August. epist. 162.
Non debuit Episcopus pro co^sulari iudicio purgari: quasivero ipse sibi hoc
comparauerit, ac non Imperator ita quaeri iusserit, ad cuius curam de qua
rationem Deo redditurus esset, res illa maxim pertinebat One there is which
says, that a Bishop ought not to have been put to his purgacion before the
judgment seat of ye deputye, as though he him self procured it, and not
rather the Emperor him self caused this inquirye to be made, to whose
jurisdiction, (for the which he must answer to God) that cause did especially
pertain. Chrysostom writes of that Imperial authority thus: Laesus est qui
non habet parem vllu^ super terram, summitas and caput est omnium hominum super
terram.

He is offended that has no peer at al upon the earth, for he is the highest
potentate, and the head of all men upon earth. And Tertullianus ad Scapulam
says: Colimus ergo and imperatorem sic, quo modo and nobis licet, and ipsi
expedit, vt hominem a deo secundum: and quicquid est a deo consequutum so lo
deo minore^, hoc enim and ipse volet: sic enim omnibus mayor est, dum solo vero
Deo minor est. Idem in Apologetico de Imperatoribus capite. 30. loquens ait:
Sciunt quis illis dederit imperium, sciunt qui homines, qui and animas
sentiunt, eum Deum esse solum, in cuius solius potestate sunt, a quo sunt
secundi, post quem primi ante omnes, and super omnes Deos. We so honor and
reverence the emperor in such wise, as is lawefull to us and expedient to
him, that is to say: as a man next and the second to god, of whom is derived
all the power he has, but yet inferioure to god alone, for so is yt his
pleasure to have it. For thus is he greater then all men, while he is
inferioure but to God alonely. And the said Tertullianus in his book
Apologeticall speaking of Emperoures: They know who has given to them their
gouernemente, they know what men they be them self, and understanding they
have of man's souls, but so that they perceive that God is he alone, under
whose only power they be, and take them self as second to God, after whom
they be the chief before other, and above all the gods: Theophylacttus ad
Romanos super illud: Omnis anima potestatibus sublimioribus Romans 13.
subdita sit, Ait Apostolu^ hic vniuersos erudire, sieve sacerdos sit ille, sieve
monachus, sieve apostolus, ut se principibus subdat.

Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. Hoc est, Etiam si Apostolus
sis* etiam si Euangelista, tiam sie Propheta, aut quisquis postre mo fueris:
Non enim subuertit pie tatem haec subiectio. Et non simplicirer, Pareat inquit,
sed Subdita sit. That is. Although thou art an Apostle, although an
Evangelist, although a prophet, or what soever thou art, be subject, for this
subjection overthrows no godlynes. And he says not only, let him obey, but
let him be subject. And if ye apostles be subject to Princes, much more al
bishops and patriarchs, yea the bishops of Rome and all other. And it is
written in the Chronicles: Dixit ^. Par. 28.
David Salomoni: Ecce diuisiones sacer dotum and Leuitarum in omne ministerium
domus domini, assiste^t tibi, and parati erunt. Et: David consti tuit 2. Par.
16.
principem ad confitendum domino, Asaph and fratres eius. Et: Constituit
Iosaphat in Jerusalem Le uitas 2. Par. 19.
and sacerdotes, et principes familiarum ex Israe^l, vt Iudicium and causam
du^i^, iudicare^t habitatoribus eius, praecepitque eis dicens: Sic agetis in
timore domini, fideliter and cord perfecto. etc. David says to Solomon:
Behold, the priests and Levites divided in companies to do all manner of
service that perteyneth to the house of God, shall assiste thee and be ready.
And in the. xvi. Chapter, David 2. Par. 16.
did appoynte chiefly to thank the Lord, Asaph and his brethren. etc. And
Iosophat the king, did constitute Levites and priests, and the aunciente
heads of Israel, that they should judge the judgment, and the causes of
the Lord, toward all the inhabitauntes of the earth. And he charged them
saying: Thus shall ye do in the fear of ye Lord, saythfullye, and in a
perfect heart. Rex constituit turmas sacerdotales and Leuiticas, vnum quemque
in officio suo. Et sequitur. Ezechias praecepit populo vt darent parts
sacerdotibus, qui dedit consequenter decimas. Et sequitur quod ad regem cum
Azaria sacerdote pertinet omnis dispensatio domus dn^i; and eoru^ qui ad eam
attinent. Et in fine: Fecit ergo Ezechias vniuersa que diximus in omni Judah,
operatusque est bonum and rectum and verum cor^^ domino deo suo, in vniuersa
cultura ministerij Domus Domini, iuxta legem and caeremonias, volens requirere
deum suum in toto cord suo, fecitque and prosperatus est. Josias quoque
co^stituit sacerdotes in officijs suis, man: dauitque plurima. etc.
Furthermore, Ezechias did apoynt the priests and the Leuytes in their order to
wait by course, every man according to his office, whether priest or Leuyte,
for the burnte offerynges, and peace offerynges, and to minister and to thank,
and to pray in the gates of the lodge of the lord. And Ezechias gave
commandment to the people dwellinge in Jerusalem, that they should give
their portions to the Priests and Levites, that they might attend on the
law of the Lord. And that by the precept of Ezechias the king, and of Azarias
the bishop of the house of the Lord, all things were done, to whom pertayned
all the dispensacion of the house of the lord. And in the end it is said.
Ezechias did all those things in all Iurye, he wrought that which was good,
right and true before his Lord god, in all ye furniture of the ministerte of
the house of the lord, according to ye law and ceremonies, desierous to seek
his lor god wall his heart, as he did, and prospered therein. Josias also did
ordeyne priests in their offices, and commanded many things. By all which
yt may appear, yt Christian Kings be sovereigns over the prestes, as over
all other their subjects, and may command the priests to do their offices,
as well as they do other: And ought by their Supreme office, to see yt all men
of all degrees do their duetyes, whereunto they be called, either by God, or by
the King. And those Kings that so do, chiefelye do execute well their office.
So that the kings highness taking upon him as Supreme head of the Church of
England, to see that as well spiritual men as temporal do their duties, does
nether make innouacion in the Church, nor yet trowble the order thereof: But
does as the chief and the best of the Kings of Israel did, and as all good
christian kings ought to do. Which office good Christian emperors
always took upon them, in calling the universal counseles of all Countries
in one place, and at one time to assemble, to the intent, all heresies
troubling the church, might be there extyrped: calling and co^maundinge as well
the byshope of Rome, as other Patriarchs and all Primates, as well of the east,
as of the west: of the southe and of the north, to come to the said
Counceiles. As Marlianus themperoure did in calling the great council of
Calcedon, one of the iiii. chief and first general councelles, commanding
Leo, then Byshope of Rome, to come thereto. And albeit Leo nether lyked the
time, which he would for a season should have been differred: nor yet the
place which he would have had in Italy, where the Emperor by his own
commandment had called it to Calchis in Asia, yet he answered themperoure,
that he would gladly obey his commau^demente, and sent thither his agentes to
appear there for him. as does appear in ye Epistles of Leo to Martiane the
Emperor. xli. xlvii. xlviii. and in the. xlix. epistle to Pulcheria Empress.
And likewise desires Theodosius Epist. 81.
the emperor to command a concell of Bishops to be called in Italy, for taking
away such contencions and troubles, as at that time troubled the quietness of
the churches. And in many mo epistles of the same Leo, it does manyfestly
appear, that themperours always assembled general councelles by their
commandments. And in the six Council general it appears very plainly,
Action. 4.
that at that time the bishops of Rome made no claim nor used tyttle to call
them self heddes universal over all the catholyke church, as there does
appear In subscriptione seu salutati one synodica suggestionis antedictae,
Which is thus ad verbum: Pijssimis dominis and sereniss. victoribus and
triumphatoribus, dilectis filijs dei and dn^i nostri Jesus Christi, Constantino
Magno imparotori, Heraclio and Tiberio Augustis, Agatho episcopus seruus
seruorum dei, cum vniuersis sy nodis subia ce^tibus co^cili^ apostolicae sedis.
In ye superscriptio^or salutacio^ of ye foresaid sinodical prea^ble, which is
thus word for word: To the most godly Lords and most noble victors and
conquerours, ye well-beloved children of god, and of our Lord Jesus Christ: to
Constantine the great: Emperor, to Eraclius and Tiberius Cesars, Bishop
Agatho the servant of the servants of god, withal the conuocations subject
to the council of the sea Apostolic, sends greetinges. And says,
expressing what countries he reckened and comprehended in that superscription
or salutacio^. It follows that these were under his assembly, which were in
the North and East parts. So that at that time the Bishop of Rome, made no
such pretense, to be over and above all, as he now does by usurpation,
vendicatinge to him self the spiritual kyngedome of Christ, by which he
raygneth in the hearts of all faithful people, and then changes it to a
temporal kyngedome over and above all kings, to depose them for his
pleasure, preaching thereby, Carnem pro spiritu, and terrenum regnum pro
coelesti, in damnatione^, nisi resipiscat suam. The flesh for the spirit, and
an earthely kingdom for an heavenly, to his own damnacion, if he repent not.
Where he ought to obey his Prince by the doctrine of Saint Peter, in his
first epistle saying: Subiecti estote omni humanae creaturae, 1. Pet. 2.
propter deum, sieve regi quasi praecellenti, sieve ducibus tanquam ab eo missis,
ad vindictam malefactorum, laudem vero bonorum: Be ye subject to every man's
ordinance, for the Lords sake, whether to the king as to the chief, whether
to the dukes, as sent of him to the punishment of the evil doers, and to the
praise of the good. Again S. Paul. Omnis omnia Romans 13.
potestantibus sublimioribus sub dita sit, with other things before alleged.
So that this his pretensed usurpation to be above all kings, is directly
against the scriptures, given to the church by the apostles, whose doctrine,
whosoever ouerturneth, can be nether Caput, nor Infimum membrum ecclesiae.
Wherefore, albeit ye have heretofore stycked to the said wrongfully usurped
power, moved thereto as ye write by your conscience, yet sythens now ye see
further, if ye lust regard the mere truth, and such ancient authors, as
you have been written to of in times paste, we would exhort you for the wealth
of your soul, to surrender into the Bishop of Romes hands, your red hat, by
which he seduced you, trustinge to have of you, being come of a noble blood,
an instrument to aduau^ce his vain glory, whereof, by the said hat, he made
you participante, to allure you thereby the more to his purpose. In which
doing ye shall return to the truth, from which ye have erred. Do your
duty to your sovereign Lord, from whom ye have declyned. And please thereby
almyghtye GOD, whose laws ye have transgressed. And in not so doing, ye shall
remain in error, offendynge both almyghtye GOD, and your natural
soueraygne Lord, whom chiefly ye ought to search to please, Which thing,
for the good mind that we heretofore have borne you, we pray almighty God
of his infinite mercy, that you do not.

Amen.
FINIS.
Imprynted at London in Paul's church yearde, at the the sign of the Brazen
serpente, by Reginalde Woulfe. Anno Domini M. D. L X.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


