A DISCOVERY OF D. IACKSONS VANITY.

OR A perspective Glass, whereby the admirers of D. IACKSONS profound
discourses, may see the vanity and weakness of them, in sundry passages, and
especially so far as they tend to the undermining of the doctrine hitherto
received.

Written by William Twisse, Doctor of Divinity, as they say, from whom the
Copy came to the Press.

Job 38. 2. Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge?
Imprinted ANNO M. DC. XXXI.



To the understanding Reader.
TWo sorts of men there are (to pass by the mere Politicians ready to serve
the times, and their own turns without any fear of God or man) which now
undermine that doctrine of grace, which formerly they themselves have believed,
and by the preaching whereof they have receyved the grace whereby they are what
they are, in any true good. Some under a show of modestic and simplicity, hold
off themselves and others from admitting so high points; as not willing to
believe that which is above their comprehension. But others take up the cause a
clean contrary way, and would bear the World in hand, that the failings of our
divines, in this doctrine, came from shallowness, and want of profound
knowledge in Metaphysicall speculations. Of this later rank, Mr. D. Iackson is
the ringleader. This man doubts not to profess, that he has found no
character of the incomprehensible Essences ubiquitary presence (no not in the
Holy Prophets and Apostles writings) from which he has receyved so full
instruction, or reaped the like fruits of admiration, as from one of
Trismegist, an Egyptian Priest. part. 1. page 55. So that the sentence which he
passes upon Vorstius (whom he seems more to aemulate in overturning the
divine attributes, then any other) does shreudly reflect upon himself: The
evaporations of proud fantastic melancholy, has ecclipsed the luster of
glorious presence, in this prodigious Questionists brain, which would bring us
out of the Sunshine of the Gospel, into old Egyptian darkness. From the
same Egyptian learning, thorough Plato and Plotinus, he takes his draught of
the divine decrees. For he acknowledges no decree of God, concerning humane
actions, good or bad (no not of those which God promised to effect either
concerning his mercy in Christ and Christians, or concerning his judgments to
be effected by the wicked) but only disjunctive, that is by his own
instances, part. 2. Sect. 2. cap. 17. Aut erit, aut non erit; it shall either
rain all day tomorrow, or befaire all day tomorrow (in which example of a
false disjunction, he may seem to teach that Gods decrees may also be false;)
the Sun will either shine, or not shine, this day at twelve of the clock.
Surely from this character of a divine decree, though we can receyve no good
instruction, yet have we as much fruit of admiration, as D. Iackson himself
receyved from the former of ubiquity. For what Christian can satisfy himself
in wondering, how erit illa die, (which is the usual expression of Gods
decree, in the Prophets phrase) can be interpreted by erit aut non erit? how
all the promises, which declare Gods decree of dispensing his grace, upon all
nations, by the ministry of men, as ra ne or dew upon herbs, should be so
glossed; it shall either rain, or not rain? or how all the decreed promises
concerning the prevayling course of the Sun of righteousness in and by his,
and his servants activitie, should be flouted with this disjunction: it shall
shine, or not shine? It would bring some fruit of admiration, if any Prince or
Law maker, should make no other decree, about such things as concern their,
and their subjects good, but merely disjunctive, either men shall do so, or
not so; either they shall do good, or suffer evil: For though men have not
power of determining absolutely future actions, yet they come nearer to that,
then the indifferency of an even-weighing disjunction does import. They put
so much weight as the efficacy of their will can bear, to that scale wherein
they place, this shall be. But Plato and Plotinus conceyved (or rather in some
of their discourses expressed) no more then this: All Christians therefore are
by D. Iackson called back again to this, as if by the Prophets and Apostles
they had been carried too far; It can not indeed be denied, but the Platonists
did commonly so decipher their humane ideas of divine decreeing as D. Iackson
does. For Alcinons de doctrina Platonis, cap. 12. has the same relation in
plain terms, which D. Iackson has turned into his strong lines of Oxford:
Sic fatum (ex sententia Platonis) pronunciat: quaecunque anima talem vitam
elegerit, and hujusmodi quaedam commiserit, consequenter talia patietur. Libera
ergo est anima, and in ejus arbitrio, vel agere, vel non agere ponitur; quod
autem sequitur actionem, ab ipso fato perfinitur. Veluti ex eo quod Paris
Helenam rapiet, quod quidem in ejus erat arbitrio, sequetur ut Graeci de Helena
decertent. Indeterminatum atque indifferens natura sua, liberate nostra, in
utram placuerit, statere lancem quodam modo declina^te, mox aut verum aut
falsum, ex possibili sit. But if D. Iackson had not too much been carried away
with admiration of these ideas, he might have receyved a double inctruction
from this Alcinons. 1. That Plato did overthrow his own idea, by granting a
fatal decree of the Grecians fighting against Troy (in which war were
contained so many thousands of humane actions as there were soldiers in the
Grecian army) in exemplifying the liberty of humane actions from fatal decree.
2. That Plato went before Aristotle (of whom he was forsaken in better notions)
in denying; upon that libertine ground, any contingent, especially free actions
to come, to be true before they be acted. Which Swarez himself (in his
Metaphysics) confesses to be no less an error then the overturning of
Christian faith does amount to, liberate nostra, mox aut verum aut falsum* ex
possibili sit. Had not the same passion of admixation stood in the way, he
might have learned out of Marsilius Ficinus (to whom he is beholding for other
Platonicall notions) that Plato himself was, by fits of another mind. For so
says this Author, de Theol. Platon. cap. 13. Deus naturarum omnium temperator,
dum regit cuncta, singula pro singulorum regit natura. Quoniam vero motor
primus praevalere debet and dominari, ideo sic animos (ut Plato vult) quasi
cogit ad bonum, ut bonum ipsum nolle non possint. And that these second
thoughts of Plato were more agreeable to Christian faith, the same Marsilius
Ficinus is witness, Epist. lib. 2. Epist. cui tit. Homo quam difficile extra
habitum naturalem posilus felicitatem sequitur, tam facile hanc in naturalem
habitum restitutus assequitur? where treating of the like question, he says:
Quid respondebimus? Magi, Pythagoraei, Platonici, Peripatetici forsan sic:
Denique exactissima Theologorum examinatio rem omnem breviter ita concludit:
Quamohrem motor ipse qui animum proprie vertit ad infinitum, est ipsamet sola
infinita potestas, quae mentem, pro libera voluntatis natura, modo quodam movet
ad eligendas vias maxim libero. Rursus pro infinita moventis potentia, ad
appetendum finem usque adeo incitat, ut non appetere nequeat. From the same
Platonist, D. Iackson might have learned also more sense, then to outface all
his readers with that unheard of stinking bulle of his own proper forging
(which both in his epistle dedicatorie, and also in diverse parts of his
treatises, he makes the basis of his vain conceyts,) namely that if God
should have certainly* and immutably decreed any singular action or end of man,
then God should be deprived of his freedom. For let him but look in Marsil.
Ficin. Theolog. Platonica, de immort. anim. lib. 2. cap. 12. he shall find
this Title: Voluntas Dei necessaria est simul and libera. And in the Chapter
it self, he shall find that the Platonists would be ashamed of such
flim-flam. In ipso bono certe summa naturae necessitas una cum summa liberate
voluntatis concurrit. Atque ibi naturae necessitas, voluntatis confirmat
libertatem, and libertas necessitati consentit, usque adeo ut necessario liber
voluntariusque Deus sit, and voluntary necessarius. A nobis id tantum ubique
affirmari optamus, quod Deo sit dignum, quale est, in Deo cum summa
necessitate, summam congredi libertatem. Sed in hac re meminisse oportet, ut
placet Thomae nostro, splendori Theologiae: quamquam divinae voluntatis actus,
secundum conditionem, positionemve, quando dici potest rem hanc aut illam
necessario velle, viz. postquam semel eam voluit, cum sit divina voluntas non
aliter immutabilis, quam essentia, ipsum tamen suapte natura non habere eum
necessitatis absolutae respectum ad effectus suos, quem ad seipsum habet. I
would have englished these passages, but that I conceyve no man to be in
perrill of misguiding by D. Iacksons fustian kind of writing, except he
understand not only a Latin style, but one of iron, clay, brass, sylver and
gold, like the Babylonish image, which none but Daniel could interpret. Neither
is it needful, that I should go about the examining or discovering of D.
Iacksons dreams. It is done to my hands, with singular learning and judgment,
in the ensuing censure. Which as it seems, was written by D. Twisse, for his
own contentment; as Scholars are wont to find themselves willing work in
communing with those, which bring forth extraordinary notions. But in such a
subject as this, it could not long be kept private. An honorable man therefore
having gotten from the Author a copy, could not but communicate the same with
his friends, by whom at length it came to the Printer, whose profession is to
make such works public, as are of public use. And howsoever upon Politic
considerations, disputes of this kind are forbidden and suppressed; yet it
were to be wished, that more were found, amongst those that are able to defend
the truth, which were not so servile unto the times, as by their silence to
become accessory unto the murder of that religion, which they profess and
believe. In reason also, it were better that such as dislike of and undermine
by piecemeal insinuations, the doctrine hitherto receyved amongst us, would lay
us down the full platform of their opposite doctrine; and not content
themselves with some plausible snatchinges and catchinges, at commune tenants,
not manifesting in the mean time, how they can bring their jarrings in those
parts which they question, to agree with others, which as yet they dare not
question. It is by experience proved, in the low Countries, that Arminianisme
tends directly to Socinianisme, which is the only dangerous and damnabled
heresy of this age. If our Arminians can show us how to bound these waves of
the same lake, or avoid those rocks any better then they of Holland, they have
no reason to envy us the common courtesy of Seamen. Let them takeup therefore
(if they love plain dealing) the Remonstrants confession and Apology, and
either testify their full consent with them; or signify how far we ought to
sail by that compass, and in what part of that Sea-card we are to leave them,
and where the danger lies. D. Iackson would persuade us (page 1. sect. 3. cap.
18.) that if his doctrine of love and grace universal, were well taught and
pressed in the particulars of it, all men would unfeignedly endeavor with
fervent alacrity to be truly happy, and that with astonishing fruit. Surely if
he know such particulars of any doctrine, as would bring forth such miraculous
fruit (a hundred fold more then the doctrine of Christ himself and his
Apostles could atteyne to, who never brought all their auditors to unfeigned
endeavor and fervent alacrity in seeking of God) I say he knows such
particulars, and will not impart them to the World, the engines which extorte
confession, might be better employed about him, then ever they were about any.
It is well known by experience, that neither the generals, nor the
particulars either of the Jesuits doctrine concerning universal grace in
Spain, or of the Lutherans in Germany, or of the Arminians in Holland, have
brought any such miraculous fruit of pietye. Neither have I yet heard of any
such extraordinary success upon D. Iacksons doctrine at Newcastel or Oxford,
but may at least be equalled (to say no more) by the success of their
doctrine, which have pressed the contrary tenants, in a thousand congregations
of England. Except therefore he declares his doctrine in the particulars of it,
he must pardon us, if we make no more account of his general colors, then of
those new inventions or projects, which promise so incredible wonders, that
they can find no credit, but only with those that are willing to be deceyved.

TO THE PRAEFACE OR SOME PASSAGES IN THE EPISTLE DEDICATORIE.
I Desire to fetch a walk in your Paradise of contemplation; and allthoughe
you profess to encampe therein, and are very martial in your words and
phrases of terror, little answerable to that expectation which a Paradise does
bespeake; yet does it nothing dismay me, because you profess opposition only
against the enemies of God, and my self, though a chief of sinners, yet have
found mercy at the hands of God, that I should be faithful unto him and to
his truth in such sort, as to do nothing against it, but rather engage all my
poor ability 1. Cor. 13. 8
for it. And in case I find your self going not the right way to the truth
of God, (an error incident to as great an Apostle Gal. 2. 14.
as S. Peter), I shall take boldness to enterpose my judgment forth discovery
of error, and that I hope without all just blame, or deserved censure in
respect of that old acquaintance which has been between us; for as much as I
have learned both of my great Mr. in knowledge natural, Amicus Socrates,
amicus Plato, amicior veritas. And of my far greater Mr. in knowledge
spiritual, and to whose blessing also Ethic. 1. 6. (...).
I chiefly owe my progress in knowledge natural, that he who loves his
Father or Mother more then him is not worthy of him; and whose peremtory voice
is this also; If any man come to me and hate not his Father, and Mother, and
Wife and Children, and Brethren and Sisters yea and his own life also, he
cannot be my disciple. God Matthew. 10. 17.
forbid, the mayntenance of truth should be interpreted to proceed from
hatred, or want of love to a man's person; Luc. 10. 16
though in the manner of carriage offense may be given both to God and man.
For he is a perfect man that sins not in word. Luther was conscious of this,
when before the German Princes Iam. 3. 2.
in a meeting at Woormes, a part of his protestation was this, that he was not
a man that made profession of holiness; acknowledginge that as a man, he might
err; but I am verily persuaded, he was conscious off a good heart toward God.

The cause that mooveth me herunto is partly the profession which you make in
your Epistle Dedicatory, that diverse passages in your discourse do manifest,
that what I accoumpt the ^ower leven of Arminianisme, is very tastfull unto
you, which now you begin to set a broach in print, as hertofore you have
uttered them in the pulpit, and afterward by writing communicated unto others,
whereof diverse particulars have lately come unto my hands; which have put me
to some pains, and to the spending of some precious time, in the scanninge of
them. As for the passages, tending that way, in this book of yours, I reserve
them to be considered in their place. But as for the profession which you make
in your praeface, I purpose here, to take that into consideration, before I
pass on farther in my way. It is not so unusual (you say) nor so much for you
to be censured for an Arminian, as it will be for his Lordship (to whom you
dedicate it) to be thought to patronize Arminianisme. Herby you seem praepared
to stand upright and not couched under the burden of this censure, as Isachar
was by Jacobs prophecy to couche under his: and withal you do imply that,
that honorable Lord, to whose patronage you inscribe this your Treatise, may
herby be thought to patronize Arminianisme. And you do well to signify, that
his Honor is not like to take it well, to be so conceaved off; as who has
ever hitherto been accoumpted both orthodoxe himself, and a Patron of those
that are such. Yet these insinuations of yours, seem to me some th^nge strange
on your part. For I have found by experience in other writings of yours, that
you hertofore have affected to be the inventor of a middle way, and so the
report goes of you: though I confess, I never found the issue of your
discourses answerable; which has made me conceave, that practice of yours to
have been but a praetence; and herin I am confirmed by this your praesent
profession. For ought I perceave, you are more foul then Arminius himself,
both as touching your Tenets, and the manner of maynteyninge them; they more
void of truth, this more void of Scholasticall argumentation, to prove what
you undertake. It may be you take more boldness to profess your opinions now
then hertofore; allthough I see no reason for it, nor can believe, that
Arminianisme is like to find more countenance under the reign of King
Charles, then it did under the reign of King James; who professed Arminius to
be the enemy of the grace of God; and as I have heard, King Charles himself
has taken notice of his Fathers distaste that way, and sometimes made
profession of it. But satisfaction you endeavor to give unto his Lordship,
which you say you are not bound to give to others. Yet it is well, that for his
Honors sake, your reader is like to partake of this courtesy in the way of
satisfaction unto many as well as unto one. For my part, I desire not to oblige
you unto any thing; but rather to entreat you, that you would be pleased to
take notice of those moral obligations, that belong unto all, in the way of
honesty; namely that you would undertake less, and prove more, as in this
particular; when you profess that all other contentions in the point of Gods
Providence and Praedestinat^on, between the Arminians and their opposites,
will be only about words, in case they do all agree in this, That your
Allmighty Creator has a true freedom in doing good; and Adams offspring a true
freedom of doing evil. I think since the beginning of these differences,
never any, neither Papist nor Protestant; neither Lutheran, Calvinist, or
Arminian was of this opinion besides your self; but the more transcendent and
supereminent shall be your sufficiency, in being able to perforforme this. And
indeed, I have found you wonderously conceyted, of the force of consequence,
which these propositions (as you imagine) do conteyne; and in two treatises of
yours, you have spent a great many words, in dilatinge upon them, and shaping
consequences from them, but as inconsequently, as an Adversary could expect;
abusing your self with the confusions of those things, which being
distingnished, the consequences you frame, would streite-way vanish into
smoke, and prove to be no better, then mere imagination of a vain thing.

And this confusion of yours does appear in that opposition which you make,
of other positions to these; as when you say; If any in opposition to Arminius
will maynteyne, that all things were so decreed by God before the creation of
the world, that nothing since the creation, could have fallen out otherwise
then it has done, or that nothing can be amended that is amiss, then you must
crave pardon of every good Christian to oppugn his opinion; and that not only
as an error in Divinity, but as an ignorance. In which words of yours, I do
observe first, that you do not herin oppose Gods decreinge all things, but
only a certain manner of decreinge all things, as in denyinge that all
things were so decreed by God. Secondly you do not well to couple your self
which Arminius in this. For I never found that Arminius maynteyned, that God
did decree contingency, but not any thing contingent, which is your Tenet in
diverse pieces both printed and manuscript. He excepts, I grant against Perkins
for saying, God did will that sin should be. Yet he himself professes,
that Deus voluit Achabum mensuram Exam Praedest. sect. Page 162.
scelerum suorum implere; and whereas the Jews went far enoughe in their
ignominious handlinge of Jesus Christ, he confessethe that Deus voluit Judaeos
progredi quousque progressi Page 114. 115.
sunt. Thirdly, I would this were all, (to wit sin) that you are pleased to
exempt from being the object of Gods decree. But the case is apparent, that you
deny faith, and repentance, and every gracious action to be the object of Gods
decree. For it is manifest, that these all are contingent actions; Now your
opinion is, that God decreethe Contingency but not any contingen^ thing.
Though on the other side you confess God cannot decree necessity, but withal
he must decree things necessary also. Lastly, do you know any that maynteyne
any such Tenet (either in opposition to Arminius, or otherwise) which here you
obtrude upon your opposites? I assure you I know none such. But whatsoever our
Tenet be, I pray remember your promise, that if we agree with you in the
former, namely, that God has a true fredome of doing good, and Man a true
fredome of doing evil, then you will not dissent from us in other points
controverted. And do you know any of us to deny either of these? And yet we
may desire explication of that, which you pass over smoothly, as though it
needed none. For what do you mean by liberty of doing good, and liberty of
doing evil? is it quoad specisicationem? or only quoad exercitium? dare you
profess that God is free to do evil, as well as good? or that Man since his
fall, and in the state of nature is free to do good as well as evil? quoad
exercitium we grant that both God is free to do or not do, whatsoever he
does; and so likewise Man is free to do or not do, whatsoever he does. Why
do you take such pleasure in confounding things that differ, at least in not
distinguishing them? Yet this is not all the confusion we complain of. For
Gods absolute power is one thing, his ordinate power is another thing, for
this includs his will. God could have refused to make the world, when he did
make it, and he made it freely; but supposing Gods decree to make it, and to
make it at that time it was impossible it should be otherwise, as it is
impossible that Gods will should be changed. In like sort, God does all this
time continne the World, and he continues it freely. But yet in respect of his
decree to continue it certain years it is impossible, upon this supposition,
that it should end before the time appointed. Again, what mean you to
feign any such Tenet, on our parts in opposition to Arminius, as that God for
soothe has so decreed all things, that nothing can fall out otherwise then
it has done? For we expressly to the contrary maynteyne, that God has
decreed many things to come to pass in such sort, that they could have fallen
out otherwise, to wit all such things as are contingent. For we do not
maynteyne that God has decreed, that all things shall come to pass
necessarily; but some things only necessarily, and other things contingently.
And in respect of these modi rerum in general, which are necessity
contingency, we say it is impossible that any thing should come to pass
otherwise, then God has decreed they shall come to pass, in this sense: to
wit, if God has decreed some things to come to pass necessarily, they shall
come to pass necessarily; if he has decreed some things to come to pass
contingently, they shall come to pass contingently, and it is impossible, that
things should come to pass otherwise. And I praesume you will not deny this,
though thereby you shall contradict your self, in respect of that Tenet, which
here you cast upon your Adversaries, and disavowe as an error and ignorance. I
say, contradict your self, unles you distinguishe those things, which in this
your Tenet, you deliver without distinction, and confound as your manner is.
But by your leave, whatsoever God has decreed, that shall come to pass, and
that in such sort, as supposing his decree, it shall be impossible to be
otherwise; neither will we fear your censures of error and ignorance, noe nor
your praesumptuous consequences of involvinge enmity against your sweet
disposition, of the all-seieng and unerring providence of God; thus with words
as sweet as butter, and as soft as oil you would work in your Reader an
opinion of your devotion to Godward, to praevent suspicion of ill affection to
his providence, when you turn out All decreeing, and put in Allseeing in the
place of it. Whereas before you made show, as if you excepted not against our
Tenet of Gods decreeinge all things, but only against the manner of it, and
his so decreing all things. But be not deceaved, God is not mocked. Let us
ever fear to mask profanes, with the vizard of devotion, and do not you
think with the smoke of words, in such sort to dazzle the eyes of your
intelligent Reader as to disable him to discern your deeds in their proper
colors. Neither have you any color for this your Tenet in denying God to have
decreed all things, but only in respect of sin. And what reason have you to
range sin amongst the number of Things, without distinction, consideringe; it
is rather a mere privation of some thing, then conteynes any positive thing
therein. Yet, as I said before, your opinion were tolerable, did you maynteyne
all other things to be decreed by God besides sin. But your opinion is, that
God decrees contingency, but not the things contingent, which is in effect to
deny in plain terms that God has decreed that any Man shall believe, or
repent, or perform any gracious action. God foreseethe these things, but
decreethe them not; this is your foul opinion, in that opposition to the
praerogative of Gods grace. For if God by his grace and holy spirit does
work men unto faith and repentance (in showing, mercy unto whom he will)
then vndoubledly he did decree thus to work them. For God woorketh all
things according to the Ephesians. 1. 11.
caunsayl of his will. And his will I hope you will not deny to be aeternall.
Yet you seem to strengthen your opinion with a reason of State. Therefore be
like (amongst other reasons yet concealed) you decline the acknowledgment of
Gods all decreing providence; because that Tenet is aforerunner of ruin to
most floorishing states, where it grows common, and comes to full light.
Heathen States then undoubtedly, had never any experience of such ruins,
proceeding from any such cause: I doubt not but you will accommodate this your
prophecy, or political observation, unto Christian States. And what
Ecclesiastical history (I pray) has affoorded you this oracle? Noe ancient
history I am persuaded, do you rely upon in this; for as much as you will not
acknowledge that this opinion which you impugn, was received amongst any
States of ancient times. Is it then (as it is most likely) that the later times
experience has cast you upon this interpretation of Gods providence, whereupon
you are bold to make rules, and to commend them unto posterity? And I pray
answer me, was the Kingdom of Bohemia one of those flourishing States, wherein
the conceyte of Gods all decreeing providence, was a forerunner to the ruin of
it? And did Prince Palatine, and the lady Elizabeth, or their Asociates, bring
in this conceyte amongst them? did this opinion grow common there? Did that
Kingdom consist of more Protestants then Papists? Or amongst the Protestants,
was the number of Calvinists more, then of Lutherans? Speak plainly, and say,
the choosing of a Calvinist to be their King, was the ruin of the State, and
of the Provinces, which were as members incorporate therinto: say Calvinisme
was the ruin of the upper and the lower Palatinate. And herupon let your
Almanacke of Prognostications proceed, and be bold to tell the States of the
Low Countries, that this Tenet is a forerunner of their ruin also, and unles
they and we forthwith turn Arminians, we are like to be lost, and fall into
the hands of Papists. But of what Papists? Not such as Thomists, and the
Dominicans, the most learned Divines in the Church of Rome (for they maynteyne
that God determines the will of Men and Angels to every act of theirs whether
good or evil, as touching the substance of the act, by influence general; and
over and above also unto every good and gracious act, such as faith is and
repentance, by influence special. And as he does thus determine the wills of
all his creatures, so from everlasting he did decree thus to determine them.)
Belike the Jesuits are they into whose hands we are like to fall, unles with
speed, we turn Jesuits, that so herafter we may comfort our selves as
Themistocles did, with Periissemus, nisi periissemus, we had been undone if we
had not been undone, and that utterly both body and soul. Happy are the
Lutheran and Arminian party, that they are acquainted with no such forerunner
of their ruin. They are like to hold their own, while they acknowledge a
sweet disposition of the Allseeing, and unerringe providence, and leave out
All deorecing providence, out of their Creed.

But let the Dominicans look to it, least their ruin be not at hand also, as
well as ours. For there is to be found such an oracle in some Men's writings;
that whosoever shall embrace the doctrine of Gods Alldecreeing providence, let
them know this opinion is the forerunner of ruin ito most floorishing States
and Kingdoms, where it grows common, or comes to full light. And the
experience of the course of these times, and especially in the ruin of the
Palsgrave, and of so many Christian Provinces with him. For certainly (...) no
time or part of the world besides, was any such experience to be found, so
conveniently to serve your turn. Is it not great pity but that the Kings
majesty and his Counsel, and both houses of Parliament, should be acquainted
with this mystery of State (for why should I doubt but that God will hear the
affectionate prayers of his people, and in good time establishe a perfect union
between the King and his people. In the mean time we will wayt upon the Lord,
who has hid his face from the Es. 8. 17.
house of Jacob, and we will look for him; Yea and we will give him Es. 62. 7.
no rest until he restore Jerusalem the praise of the world.) This I confess
is a way to supplant your Adversary opinions, but of any power you have to
confute them, and thereby to praevent the growthe of them, I have found little
evidence in other of your writings, and by the general survey I have already
taken, I have small hope to find any great satisfaction in this. But let us
examine this point a little more narrowly. You suppose that some in opposition
to Arminius do maynteyne, that all things were so decreed by God before the
Creation of the world, that nothing since the Creation could have fallen out
otherwise then it has done; and nothing can be amended that is emisse. But I
know none of any such opinion; nay rather they whom I concenve you do most
aim at, do directly teach the contrary. We are willinge to profess with
Austin, that Non aliquid sit, nisi quod omnipotens fieri velit, velsinendo
Enchirid. cap. 95.
ut siat, vel ipse faciendo; Nor ought comes to pass but that which the
Allmighty will have to come to pass, either by suffering it to come to pass,
or himself working it. And with the Articles of Ireland confirmed by our State
in the days of King James, that God from all aeternitie did by his
unchangeable counsel ordeyne, whatsoever in time should come to pusic. Now
whatsoever God willethe, he willed eternally. For in God there is no
variablenes nor shadow of change. And Iam. 1.
supposing the will of God that such a thing shall come to pass, either by his
operation or by his permission; it is impossible in sensu composit^, in a
compound sense, that it should not come to pass. But this impossibility is
not absolute but only secundum quid, in respect of somewhat, to wit of Gods
will, decreeing it, and is always joined with an absolute possibility of
coming to pass otherwise in sensu diviso, in a divided sense. As for example,
it was absolutely possible that Christ's bones should be broken, as well as any
of the thieves bones that were ^rucified with him. For both his bones were
breakable, and the soldiers had power and freewill to break them, as well as
the others bones: but supposinge the decree of God, that Christ's bones should
not be broken, upon this supposition, I say, it was impossible, they should be
broken. Nay further we say, that unles things impossible to come to pass
otherwise then God has decreed them, upon supposition of Gods decree, be
notwithstanding absolutely possible to come to pass otherwise; it were not
possible for God to decree, that some things shall come to pass contingently.
For to come to pass contingently, is to come to pass in such sort, as joined
with an absolute possibility of coming to pass otherwise. Thus we say with
Aquinas, that the efficacious nature of Gods decree is the cause why contingent
things come to pass contingently and necessary things necessarily; his words
are these: Cum voluntas divina 1. Quest. 14. art. 8.
sit efficacissima non solum sequitur quod si antea quae Deus vult fieri, sed
quod eo modo fiant, quo Deus ea fieri vult. Vult autem quaedam Deus sieri
necessario, quaedam contingenter, ut fit ordo in rebus ad complementum
universi. Seeing the will of God is most effectual, it follows not only that
those things come to pass, which God will have come to pass, but also that
they come to pass after the same manner that God will have them come to pass.
Now God will have somethinges come to pass necessarily, somethinges
contingently, that there may be an order amongst things to the complete
perfection of the Universe. And accordingly God has ordained all sorts of
second causes, both contingent causes to work contingently, as the wills of
men and Angels; and necessary causes to work necessarily, as fire in
burninge, the Sun in giving light, heavy things in mooving downwards, and
light things in moovinge upwardes. And as he has ordained them to be such
kinds of Agents thus distinct; so he has ordained, that they shall work
agreably, and he sets them going in working agreably to their natures, the
one contingently the other necessarily. So that whatsoever, the will of God is,
shall fall out contingently, the same fallethout in such sort, as it might have
fallen out otherwise; if good, so as it might have fallen out worse and been
marred: if ill, yet so as it might have fallen out better and been amended. And
the eleventhe Article of Irelande having professed that God from all eternity,
did by his unchangeable counsel ordeyne whatsoever in time should come to
pass, addethe herunto by way of explication that so this was ordained as
thereby no violence is offered to the wills of reasonable creatures, and neither
the liberty nor contingency of second causes is taken away, but established
rather. So that the opinions which you make bold to supplant or prevent, are
opinions of your own making, not of others maynteyninge; And to set an end
to his own fancyes, every man may take liberty when he pleasethe, without any
great pains taking, about argument to overthrowe them.

SECT. I.
IN the first Section and before the first Chapter, according to exact method
(as you profess) in reference unto your former Discourse, you propose two
things to be enquired: 1. How this truth of Gods being most certainly known
by internal experience unto some, may by force of speculative argument be made
manifest unto others. Secondly how his nature and attributes may be fitliest
resembled. The latter of which two I should never have expected in a
Philosophical, or Theological discourse. Yet I will prescribe to none, but
give every vessel leave to vent his own humor, and to be delivered of such
notions, wherewith his brains have been conceaved. If we have any use to make
of them, we may; if none, we are little the worse for that. Every being has
three passions denominating it. For there is a truth of it, there is a goodness
of it, there is an unity of it. Therefore also all these are to be found in
the being of God. But it seems not to be your meaning to speak of this
truth, which is a passion of being, a simple term; but rather of the truth
of this proposition, There is a good, to wit, how it may be made manifest by
speculative argument, you desire to inquire; grantinge it to be most certainly
known by internal experience, unto some, whereby unles you understande our
Christian Faith, I discern not your meanninge. Upon the first point, you will
not have us to look for much as yet; and the reason you give, is enoughe to
put us out of expectation of any thing at all. For allbeit a desperate enemy
despayring of his life, Is thereby the more animated to sight; yet an Adversary
in discourse, by evidence of argument brought to despair of maynteyning his
Tenet, is not thereby the more provoked to dispute. And therefore I see no just
restraynt to hinder you from bestowinge your best ability upon this argument,
even in this place. And your self confess, that notwithstanding all this,
you may proceed upon such advantages, as grounds of nature give you. And your
main purpose extendes no further.

CHAP. I.
YOUR first Argument is not like to strike your enimye with any great fear or
despair. Arguments weak or weakly prosecuted, weakneth the cause maynteyned,
strengthenethe the cause oppugned. And first it is not handsomely carried, thus
If every particular generation has causes, then all generations have some
cause; implyinge that every generation has many causes; all have but one. But
carry it how you will, it is not capable of any sound inference. It is true,
Every generation has his cause: therefore all generations have causes; But what
causes? only the same causes, which every one has a part, aggregated
together. For as you make an aggregation of particular generations; so the
cause of this aggregation, inferred, can be but an aggregation of the
particular causes of particular generations. So that nothing at all is
concluded here hence distinct from the praemises, much less the being of the
Godhead herby evidenced. Then your second inference is as wild, when you add,
Otherwise all should not be of one kind or nature. For there is no congruity
in affirming the whole by aggregation, to be of the same kind or nature with
every particular. For every particular is unum per se consistinge ex actu and
potentia; But the whole by aggregation is unum per accidens, consisting of many
particulars (each whereof is unum per se) heaped together, not by any natural
union united into one. As we do not say the bushel of corn is of the same
kind with every particular grain, as also it cannot be said to be of a
diverse kind in any congruitie, allthough there were diverse kinds of graynes
therein; But rather an heap of graynes, whether of the same kind, or of
diverse kinds. Again you propose your argument, not only of the generation of
Man, who is of one kind, but of all generable bodies, who are well known to
be of diverse kinds, and therefore why should you accoumpt it any absurdity,
for all these to be not of one kind or nature? Furthermore, when you make
show of such an Inference as this, All must have some cause, otherwise they be
not of one kind or nature, you do herby imply, that All, that have some
cause, are in a fair way to be of the same kind or nature, which upon
consideration you will find to be utterly untrue. For all creatures have some
cause, yet are they not any thing the more of one kind or nature; Allthoughe
they have not only some cause, but the same cause also, namely God. Like as
though things have different causes, yet it follows not that they are of
different kinds: As all mise are of the same kind, though some are bred
equivocally, some univocally; so of lise and diverse others. For although
Averroes were of opinion, that mise bred equivocally, and mise bred univocally,
by generation were of different kinds, and thereupon maynteyned that such as
were bred equivocall, did never propagate their like by generation; yet I do
not think you are of that opinion, it being contrary to manifest experience.
And to us it is manifest (who believe the creation) that the first creatures
were not produced by way of generation, yet did propagate their like, and were
of the same kind with creatures propagated from them. But Averroes was an
Atheist even amongst Arabians, and denied all creation. I am sorry, you are so
unhappy in defend^nge truth, especially such a truth as the being of God; but
the best is, that truth needethe no man's defense. I hope you will prove
nothing more happy in defending errors. Yet I deny not, but that the greatest
Divines do conclude that there is a first cause (that is God) because the
progress from effects to causes, and from causes inf^rior to causes superior
cannot be infinite. According whereunto your argument should^ have proceeded
thus. In generations, as of the Son by the Father, the progress upwardes
cannot be infinite. Therefore at length, we must ascend to the first of Men, as
Adam, who was not borne by generation of Man; (for then he had not been the
first) but otherwise; and in like sort of the generations of all other things,
that they had their beginning from some superior cause, to their own natures;
which supreme cause of all, we accoumpt to be God. But yet I think you are
not ignorant, that some Schoolmen maynteyne the world might have been
everlastinge, and that by creation; in which case there should be an infinite
progress^ in generations; unles as Aquinas in his reconciliation of seeminge
contradictions in Aristotle, In Opusculis.
to praevent an infinite number of immortal souls hence ensuinge devisethe,
that though the World had been from everlastinge, yet should it not be
necessary that there should have been an infinite number of Men deceased,
because says he, God could have praeserved the first Man from generation,
and propagation of his like, until some five or six thousand years ago: so
you should take some such course to praevent an infinite progress in natural
generations. But I mean not to put you to any such shifts. For I hold
creation from everlastinge, to be a thing impossible, and that the
impossibility thereof, may be made evident by demonstration; and accordingly
that fiction of Aquinas before mentioned, to be of a thing merely impossible
also. So that in fine, this argument of yours, though with little accuratenes
proposed by you, is drawn from the creation; which kind of argumentation in
the Praeface you seemed to put of, till another time, yet in the first place
you have fallen upon it, ere you are aware. Bradwardine writing against the
Pelagians, layethe down two suppositions as the ground of all, whereof Summa de
causa Dei, contra Pelagium. Nullus est processus insinitus in Entibus. Deus est
sum. perfectus and sum. bonus, tantum quod nihil perfectius vel melius esse
potest.
this is the second, that there is no infinite progress in entities; but that
in every kind there is one supreme. The other is that God is most perfect and
good in such sort as nothing can be more. And least he should seem to suppose
this without all proof, one argument and but one he produces to prove this.
And the proof is to this effect: It implies no contradiction to say, such a
one there is; therefore it is necessary, that such a one have being, and it is
impossible there should be no God. If any Man deniethe the Antecedent, it
behooveth him to show, wherein the contradiction does consist. And it is very
strange, and so strange as incredible, that for the best nature to have
existence, it should imply contadiction. As for example, we find these
manifest capital degrees of perfection amongst entities corporal. Some liave
only being, some have being and life also; some have being, life, and
sense; some unto all these add reason also. Now that nature which includes
both being and life, is of greater perfection, then such, as have being
without life, and it is no contradiction for such natures to exist. Again that
nature which includes both being, life, and sense, is of greater perfection,
then that, which includes only being and life, without sense, and it is no
contradiction for natures of such perfection to exist. Again, that nature
which besides all these, in the notion thereof includes reason also, is of
far greater perfection then the former, and it implies no contradiction, for
natures of such perfection to exist^ Lastly, there are besides all these,
natures purely spiritual, which we call Angels or Intelligences, of far
greater perfection, then natures material and corporal, and it implyethe no
contradiction, for natures of such perfection to exist, as the Philosopher
has demonstrated the existence of such substances abstract from all material
concretion: Why then should it imply any contradiction, for a nature of
greater perfection then all these to exist, unles they are supposed to be of
greatest perfection, even able to make a World out of nothing; and
consequently to be of a necessary being themselves. For if possible not to be,
how is it possible, they should atteyne to being? Not of themselves; For
that which is not, has no power to give being to it self. Nor of any other;
whether of a nature superior or inferior. Not of any of inferior nature. For a
Man cannot possibly produce an Angel, neither by generation, nor by creation.
If by a superior; this is to acknowledge, that there is a nature existent
superior in perfection, unto Angels. And if Angels had a necessary being;
then saying they are of a certain number, their number also must be
necessary; Now if it implies no contradiction, that God should be, it is
most necessary, that he is and must necessarily be granted, that he is. For
being supposed to include greatest perfection, if he had no being, it were
impossible he should have being; seeing nothing can bring it self from,
nothing to being, neither can ought else produce him. For if any thing
could, then that, whatsoever it were, should be of greater perfection then
he. This is the argument of Bradwardin. And the same was the argument of
Aquinas long before, and but one of the five ways, which he takes in the
proof of this. The first way and more manifest, as he Aquin. 1. qu. 2. art. 3
says, is that which is taken from the consideration of motion; where hence he
concludethe that we must at length ascend to one who moovethe, and is not
moved, and that is the first moover, which (says he) all understand to be
God. The second is drawn from consideration of the nature of the cause
efficient. For (says he) we find even in insensible things an order of
efficient causes, one subordinate to another, wherein he supposethe there cannot
be an infinito progress; and secondly, that nothing can be the efficient cause
of itself. Hence it follows (says he) we must ascend and rest in one
supreme efficient, which acknowledgethe no efficient of it, and that all
understand to be God. The third way is that, which has been already
prosecuted, from the consideration and comparison of things possible, with
things necessary. The fourth is from the degrees that we find in things, as
some things are more or less true, more or less good, more or less noble;
whence he concludes, that something must be acknowledged to be most true, most
good, most noble, and that to be the cause of truth, goodness, and perfection
in all others, as fire is the cause of all heat. And that which is the cause
of all others, we acknowledge to be God. The first and lastis drawn from the
government of the World, and the consideration of the order of things amongst
themselves; whence he concludethe, there is some thing that orderethe them,
and that must be God.

This last argument is, that which Raymund Sebond does In his Theologia
naturalis. In Prologo.
so much dilate and insist upon. And whereof he is very confident, like as of
the success of his undertakings in general; as namely to make a Man a perfect
Divine, within the space of a monthe; and that without any knowledge to prepare
him, so much as the knowledge of Grammar, and yet he shall not be proud of it
neither.

Vasquius further tells us, that Aegidius was of opinion, Vasq. in 1. disp.
20. cap. 3.
that this truth, that there is a God, is a truth known of it self. And
albeit Thomas Aquinas denyethe it to be a truth per se notam quoad nos; Yet in
it self he professethe that it is Aquin. 1. q. 2. art. 3.
per se nota for as much as the predicate is included in the very nature of the
subject. And to my judgment it seems also to be so quoad nos, if it be duly
consid^red and pondered what we understand by God, to wit the most perfect
nature of all others. Now how is it possible, that that which is more p^rfect
then all others, should not have being? And every man knows that, that which
has being, is more perfect, then that which neither has, nor can have
being, (such as is the nature of God, if it have no being.) For according to
the Proverb, a live Dog is better then a dead Lion.

In the next place you inquire, whereunto you shall liken him? This indeed was
the second thing you proposed to be inquired into. But in what congruitie to a
Philosophical, or Theological discourse, I leave it to others to examine. I
will be content to sum up the accoumpt of what you deliver, rather then to
argue the unseasonablenes of such a discourse. Though nothing can exactly
resemble him, yet some thing, (you say) can better notify how far he is
beyond all resemblance, then others. But truly, what you mean herby is a
mystery unto me. I should rather think, the incomprehensible nature of God is
not to be manifested by way of resemblance, drawn from inferior things. That
he is the cause of all things does better represent the nature of God, then
the resemblance of him to any thing; especially consideringe, what cause he
is, to wit an ^fficient cause of all things, and that not univocall but
equivocall; and consequently such as comprehendes all things eminently, but in
perfection without comparison beyond them. For comparison has place only
between things agreeinge in kind, or in proportion. But God and his creatures
agree in neither. This I confess may draw to admiration. As the Philosopher,
who being demanded what God was, required three days liberty, to put in his
answer; and at three days end, required three more, and at the end of
these, three days more, giving this reason of his reiterated demurring upon
the matter; because the more he gave himself to the contemplation of the
nature of God, the farther he found^ himself of from comprehendinge it, but
whereas you add, that such admiration will more and more enlarge our longinge
after his presence: I do no way like either your collection, or the phrase,
whereby you express it. For as for the presence of God; of the very
apprehension thereof we are not capable in this World, but by faith. Neither
can any natural admiration arising from natural inquisition after the nature
of God, and consideration of the fruiteles issue thereof, draw men to a longing
after that presence of God which they know not. Both the knowledge of the
presence of God, and a longinge desire after it, I take to be a work of
special grace, and not any work of nature; upon the power whereof I find you
doa^e too much in all your writings.

Painters (you say) can more exactly express, the outward lineaments of
things, then we their natures. Painters expressions are in colors; our
expressions are not so, but rather in words. And what a wild comparison is
it, to compare things so heterogeneall in exactnes. But though the expression
of the one fail in exactnes, in comparison of the other, yet the delight taken
therein (you say) needs not: And thus you plot to make the love of God a work
of nature, whereunto the natural conceptions of him, though nothing exact, by
means of the creature may lead us. These conceptions of yours, are in my
judgment as far from truth, as from piety. The frequent ebbes and flowings
of Euripus, may cast a Philosopher into admiration, not comprehending the
reason of it, yet bring him nothing the more in love with it. Angels are of
very glorious natures, and in a manner quite out of the reach of our reason,
both touching their being in place, their motion, their understandinge, and
the communicatinge of their thoughts, and exercising of their power; yet all
this brings us never a whit the more in love with them. Impressions of love
are wrought only by the apprehension of goodness in the object, which alone
makes things amiable; as a beautiful picture affects the sense with
pleasure and delight. But now I find, that from the impression of love, you
slip I know not how, to the impression of truth: and this I confess,
delightethe some minds of purer metal; as Aristotle speaks of the delight
that a Man takes, in the demonstration, whereby it is prooved, that the Diameter
in a squate, has no common dimension with the sides of it, or that a triangle
has three angles equal to two right. Especially if the conclusion be rare
and long sought after but not found, as the squaring of a circle received as
knowable in Aristotle's days, though not known till of late, as Pancirolla
writes and Salmuly in his commentaries upon him, about 30. years before that
time. Yet some speculations may be as vain as curious: as to prove, that two
Men in the World there are, that have just so many hayres on their head one as
another. But to make a rain bow in the air, and by ocular demonstration
prove the truth of that which reason concludes, namely that as often as a
raynbowe appears in the clouds, though it seem but one, yet indeed there
are as many, as there are Men that behold it, because it discoverethe a secret
of nature, very curious and nothing vain. For it is the glory of God to hide a
thing, and it is Prove. 25. 1.
the glory of a King to find it out. And seeinge God has Eccle. 3. 11.
set the World in Man's heart, though a Man cannot find out the work that
God has wrought from the beginning to the end; yet it is good to be doing,
and to discover as much as we can, especially such as have a calling herunto.
But to proceed, you put your Reader in hope of great matters by your
perfourmances, namely to have a sight of some scattered rays, of a glorious
light, which Saints have in blessedness; and to this purpose to elevate us, to a
certain Horizon, whose edges and skirts shall discover this. Thus you phrasify
the matter gloriously, and prosecute your allegory in allusion to the brightness
that appears in our Horizon after the Sun set. But surely that Sun did
never yet rise upon us, and when it does, surely it shall never set. And I
much doubt, least the glory of your phrases prove to be all the glory we are
like to be acquainted with before we part.

Hence you proceed to a rule of Decorum in all resemblances, that so you may
make way to betray your learning in Hieronymus Vida his Poetry, passinge his
censure upon a comparison of Homer, wherein he compares Ajax retiringe from the
Trojans unto an hards kinned ass, driven with batts or staves out of a corn
field, by a company of children. The comparison is justified by Vida, but
thought not fit to be applied in like sort unto Turnus, unles a Lion be put in
the place of the ass, in the judgment of those courtly times wherein Virgill
lived, thereby desiring belike to justify Virgill also. I still attend, when
those scattered rays you promised us, of that glorious light, you spoke of,
will break forth; But it may be, we are not yet come to the Horizon, whose
edges and skirts alone can discover them. But yet to stay our stomachs you tell
us by the way; that the Holy Prophets in their courtly Decorum observed in
framinge comparisons, are nothing inferior to any Poet, though as good as
Virgill and Homer also. They are something beholden unto you, for your good
word. Your instance is out of Esaias 31. 4. Like as the Lion and young Lion
roaring on his pray, when a multitude of sheepheards is called forth against
him, he will not be afraid of their voice, nor abase himself for the noise of
them: so shall the Lord of hosts come down to fight for Mount Sion and for the
hill thereof. I begin to conceive, this was it you went with child withal,
in casting your self upon this digression touching the resemblinge of the
nature of God. And because the comparing of Virgill with Homer, is a pretty
point of humanity learning; and you had observed this passage in Scripture
suitable to that of Turnus his description in Virgill: to vent this piece of
learning, you have drawn in by the cares a discourse or rather an inquiry,
How Gods essence is to be resembled, the issue whereof is but this, that the
Prophet observes a very courtly decorum, in resembling him unto a Lion.

Yet by the way take this; If it were not courtly enoughe to compare Turnus to
an ass as Homer compares Ajax, but rather to a Lion; do you think it courtly
enoughe to compare the Lord of hosts to a Lion? And what courtly decorum is
observed think you when the second coming of Christ is compared to the
coming of a theife in the night? Persuade your self; the holy Ghost affectes
no courtly decorums; his language is always savoury to a gracious spirit,
not otherwise. The wits of Virgill and Homer both at the best, savoured but of
the flesh, So does not the word of God. I honor them both in their kinds;
but I would not have them remembered the same day, wherein we consider the
spiritual decorum of the language of Gods spirit.

Well, the child is delivered, and these panges are over; Now we may expect to
be advanced to the Horizon you spoke of, for the discovery of those scattered
rays of glorious light, wherewith you inamoured us. But first we are to be
acquainted with three sorts of errors out of Austin, in settinge footthe the
Divine nature; The first (you say) arises from comparing God to bodies, as by
saying that he is bright or yellowe; the second, from comparing him unto
souls; as by attributing forgetfulness unto him; The third by attributing such
things unto him, as are neither true of him, nor of any other, as in saying
that he is able to produce, or begett* himself. Yet you tell us fictions, or
suppositions must be used of things scarce possible, whereby to represent God,
in default of better. And thus you make way for a fiction of yours, whereby to
represent God, and that is of a soul diffused: thoroughe the whole Universe.
Now that Deus was Anima Mundi, was an old opinion of certain heathens two
thousand years ago. And what necessity, I pray, of any such fiction? And
withal it is a fiction full of absurdity; considering that a great part of
this Universe is a World of souls of diverse kinds; and the rest are
incapable of souls whether they are inferior to animate things as baser
bodies, or superior even to reasonable souls themselves, as Intelligences. And
I wonder what you meant by that sorry qualification, when you say. You must use
fictions of things scarce possible; Implyinge that this fiction of yours which
here you introduce, is of a thing scarce possible; Whereby you seem to conceave
that this is a thing not absolutely impossible.

Neither do I find any congruitie, why bodies abstract or Mathematical,
should be of fitter capacity to receave this imaginary soul whereby to
represent God. Only I confess, that an imginary body is most fit for an
imaginary soul, but neither fit to represent God by. For what virtues, I
pray, can you find in them, fit to resemble him? Yet you are not at end of
your extractions, though the end of this Chaptor touching Gods resemblance,
moovethe us to send an end to our expectations, and to look no more for
those seattered rays of that glorious light you spoke of. The child you
travayled with, was Homers comparinge Ajax to an ass, and Virgils comparinge
Turnus to a Lion, and Vida his judgment thereupon, and the Prophets concurrence
with the wit of the latter, and three errors mentioned by Austin, in
resembling the nature of God. And last of all a fiction to this purpose of a
thing scarce possible, and that something refined, and the whole put of to
further extractions, and all the glory, we were put in hope of, is the glory of
a few phrases, wherewith you wish your Reader, seeing his cheer, to be merry,
for he is welcome. And thus you have given us a flashe of powder without shot,
but not without smoke. Our enterteynment may be better in the chapter
followinge.

CHAP. II.
Concerning two Philosophical maxims which are said to lead us to the
acknowledgement of one infinite, and incomprehensible essence.

FROM leight shows we come to solid discourse, at least we are promised such.
The principles whereof are two, termed springs and founteynes, that they may be
the fitter, for the baptizing of Atheists, (so you speak) as they are fit
enough for the confirminge of Christians. The first is, Whatsoever has limite
or bounds of being has some distinct cause, or author of being. This is
taken for a proposition known of it self; yet are the terms very ambiguous,
as namely the term limite or bounds. In one place you profess that
beginning of being is one special limit of being. New I confess, that in
this sense, the proposition is evident thus, Whatsoever has a beginning,
has a cause thereof distinct from it self; because nothing can have a
beginning of being without a cause; Neither can any thing give being unto it
self. And therefore, if all things in this World are acknowledged to have had
a beginning; it must be acknowledged that they had a Maker which is God. But
that this World has had a beginning has not been acknowledged by all: Nay
the Learned est Men that ever were out of the Church of God, as Aristotle and
his Followers, have utterly denied the World to have had a beginning as you
well know; And therefore unles, the contrary be prooved, and these Philosophers
confuted, we have herby nothing profited in convicting Men's consciences of this
truth by the light of reason, That there is a God; and so are far enoughe
from baptizinge Atheists into the name of God the Father. Much more from
baptizinge them into the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the H. Ghost.
And therefore I am persuaded that your proposition is not delivered in this
sense, but rather you extend the word limits or bounds to a greater
generality of signification, in which sense, you would have it supposed, that
All things, besides God himself, have limite and bounds of being, not in
regard only that they had a beginning which is questionable, but in regard
that they are Entia finita, which is out of question; In like sort the word
being, is of ambiguous signification; For it may be taken, either for being of
essence, or for being of existence. The limits of existence or duration are
such as whereby things are said to have a beginning or an end; and that at
such a time or other.

But the limits and bounds of things according to their essence, are such, in
respect whereof Entia are said to be fini^a, or infinita. Now in this latter
sense, your proposition has been very questionable, amongst the most learned
Philosophers, that have been. For Aristotle and his Peripatericks never
doubted, but that this visible World was finite.

Yet that he did acknowledge a cause of it, is no where evident. Nay he
opposethe Plato, and the rest before him, who maynteyned, that the World was
made, and so accordingly, that it had a beginning: whereby it seems, that he,
denyinge the creation of the World, denied therwithall that the World had any
efficient cause. And indeed, whosoever maynteynes, that the world had a
beginning by creation, must therwithall maynteyne, that either it was made of
something, or of nothing. You will not say that it is a thing evident that the
World was made of some preexistent matter, which matter had existence without
creation. For that is unto us Christians a manifest untruthe. Therefore you must
be driven to maynteyne, that it is a truth evident of it self, that the World
was made originally out of nothing; or at least, that it may be immediately
concluded evidently, by a principle, which is evident of it self; thus
Whatsoever has bounds of being has been made, the World has bounds of
being: therefore it has been made; and seeing it was not made of any thing
preexistent; therefore it was made of nothing. Now what Wise man will
acknowledge this discourse to be evident? considering how many Learned
Philosophers conceaved it to be a thing impossible, that any thing could be
made out of nothing; as also consideringe that the H. Ghost imputethe the
acknowledgement hereof, not to any natural evidence, but only unto faith, as
where the Apostle says, by faith we believe that the World was made, so that
things which we Heb. 11. 2.
see were made (...), not of things that do.

2. You proceed to the enlargement of this position, and tell us, that this
maxim is simply convertible thus, Whatsoever has cause of being, has also
limits of being, because it has beginning of being: For, omnis causa and
principium, and omne causatum and principiatum. There is little soundnes either
of Logic or Philosophy in all this. For to say that a proposition is simply
convertible, is in a Logical phrase, to say, that it is a good consequence
which is drawn, from the proposition converted to the convertent, that is to
the proposition wherinto the conversion is made. But this is untrue of the
proposition convertible, which you speak of. For an affirmative universal
cannot be thus converted by simple conversion, but only an Universal negative,
and a particular affirmative. But I leave your words, and take your meaning;
You say it is also true, that, Whatsoever has cause of being, has also
limits of being. Now both this proposition is naught, and the reason worse.
For the Son of God, Confundunt Graeci Theologi in hac disputatione (...).
Danaeus Censur. in Lumbard. did. 29.
the second person in Trinity, has cause of being from his Father: for he is
begotten of him. And the H. Ghost, has cause of being both from the Father
and from the Son: For he proceedethe from them both. Yet neither God the
Son, nor God the holy Ghost, have any limits of their being. If you say, the
Persons are limited, though the nature of the Godhead be not; I would gladly
know how the Person of the Son, and of the H. Ghost are more limited then
the Person of the Father. For of the Son and H. Ghost, I know no other
limitation then this, that the Son is not the Father, nor the H. Ghost:
Likewise the H. Ghost, is neither the Father nor the Son. And in this sense,
the Father is limited as much as either. For as the Son is not the Father, so
the Father is not the Son; and as the H. Ghost is not the Father, so the
Father is not the H. Ghost. You should have said, All things that have cause
of being by creation, have also limits or bounds of being; Or thus, All
things that have cause of being in time, and not from everlastinge, have
limits, and bounds of being. Or if you would apply it to generation, thus,
All things that have cause of being by generation of sinite Agents have limits
and bounds of being. Yet none of these is to the purpose, save the first. And
that first proposition supposethe the creation, which yet is not evident, but
unto faith. So then you see how weak this proposition is; Yet the reasons
you bring for the proof of it, are much worse. Your first reason is this,
because it has beginning of being. Now if by limits of being, you mean
limits of existence, such as is the beginning of duration, then your proof is
merely identicall. But if you mean by limits of being, limits of essence,
whereby a thing is said to be Ens sinitum, the consequence is true I confess,
but nothing more evident is the conclusion, by this reason, then it was before
of it self. For that it has a cause efficient which producethe it, does as
well argue a finite condition of the thing produced, then that it has a
beginning. Yet neither does the havinge of an efficient cause sufficiently
argue, that the effect produced is finite, unles the efficient cause be finite.
For to say that a finite thing could produce an effect infinite, is to
maynteyne that a cause in workinge should exceed the sphere of his activity.
But there is no place for this exception, in case the efficient cause be
infinite. And I have Hill. in hic Philosophia Luceppea, Epicurea, Democretica.
known some infer herehence that the World is infinite; Otherwise say they,
there shoude be no effect of God suitable to the power of so infinite an Agent.
And consider; finite things are able to produce finite things, equal unto
themselves, why then may not God being infinite produce something that is
infinite? It may be answered, that the experience of producinge equals to the
producers themselves is true only in the way of generation. And so God also in
the way of eternal and incomprehensible generation producethe a Son equal
to himself, yea, the same with himself as touching his nature. But this is
grounded upon a mystery of faith, which has no evidence unto reason
natural. For allthoughe by reason and meditation on Gods works we may
atteyne to the knowledge of God as touching the unity of his nature, yet can we
not thereby atteyne to the knowledge of God as touching the Trinity of persons.
Add unto this, that diverse have not only believed, but undertaken to prove
also, that God is able to produce that which is infinite in extension, either
in quantity continual or discrete.

And Hurtado de Mendosa, a Spanishe Jesuit, and a late Disputatione in
Philosophiam Vniversam a Summulis ad Metaphisicam.
Writer, is most eager in the mayntenance of this. So far of are your
propositions from caryinge evidence in their for heads. Yet you suppose an
argument which is very inconsequent. For you suppose, that whatsoever has
cause of being has also a beginning, of being, and that in time. But this
is notably untrue unto us Christians. For the Son and Second person in the
Trinity has a cause of his being, to wit the Father. Likewise the H.
Ghost, has not only a cause, but causes of his being, to wit both the
Father and the Son, for he proceedethe from them both; yet has he not such
beginning of being as you speak of. For both he and the Son are
everlasting like unto the Father. Your second reason is woorst of all, as when
you say: For omnis causa est principium, and omne causatum est principiatum.
For in the meaning of this proposition causa and principium, are taken for
voces synonymae, words of the same signification; not signifying two things,
the one whereof is consequent unto the other. And what sober Scholar would
affirm, that omnis causa est principium, as principium signifiethe the
beginning of being, whereas indeed it is the cause of beginning of being to
its effect, rather then formally to be styled the beginning of being it
self. That which followethe of the limits of things, more easily or more
hardly discerned, according as the cause is found to be preexistent in time
or no, is an assertion as wild, as the similitude whereby you illustrate it;
and all nothing to the purpose, to prove, that whatsoever has cause of
being, has also limits of being, though still you proceed ambiguously
without distinction, either of being, or of the limits thereof.

For first, where the cause is not preexistent in time, as in things risinge by
concomitance, or resultance, yet the effects are as easily seen to be limited,
as when the cause is preexistent in time; as for example; the light of the
Sun, and the light of the candle which flow from those bodies by natural
emanation, was as easily seen to be limited, the first time it was, as after
the light is a long time hid from us, and afterward appears again unto us.
Secondly, what if the limits be not seen, what I say is that to the purpose?
Angels are invisible, yet we know, their natures are limited. Thirdly, what
think you of the World, has it limits or no? You think (no doubt) it has;
yet was not God the cause thereof preex^stent in time, but only in eternity.
For before the World, no time had any existence. Again suppose the Wolrd had
been made from everlasting, which some Scholemen have held to be possible; in
this case, God should have no preexistence either as touching time actual, or
as touching time possible; Yet I hope that limits of the World, even in that
case had been as discernable to Aristotle, as now they are to you. As for the
similitude whereby you illustrate it, that rather shows how in such cases
when effects do rise by way of concomitance or resultance, they are hardly
distinguished from their causes then how their limits are hardly discernable.
Yet what should moove you thus to amplify, how hard it is to discern such
effects, from their causes, I know not. For what hardness, I pray, is there, in
discerninge light to be different from the body of the Sun that gives it, or
from the body of a Candle, or of a Glowewoorme, or of some kind of rotten
wood, or from the scales of some fishes that cast light in the dark? Yet is
all this nothing pertinent to the confirmation, or illustration of the last
proposition propounded by you. How far dependence upon a cause does infer
limits of being upon the thing dependinge, I have already spoken; What meant
you to distinguishe of the consideration of effects and causes, according to
the consideration of them either distinctly, or in gross, unles it be to puzle
the Reader as much as you confound your self, when eftsoons you manifest that
you speak of them both as they have causes, which is to consider them only as
effects. For that notion alone has reference to a cause. But whether this
does infer that they are limited, I have already thereupon delivered my
mind.

3. Hence you proceed to the solution of new problemes, and that as a mere
naturalist. Why men in these days are not Giants; why Giants in former times
were but men. And the reason you give is, because the vigor of causes
productive or conservative of vegetables, of man especially, from which he
receavethe nutrition and augmentation, is less now then it has been, at
least before the flood. The latter of your two questions is wild. For what do
we understand by Giants, but men of a Gyantlike stature? and is it a sober
question to ask, how it commethe to pass, that men of an huge stature are
but men? For suppose men were of never so vast a proportion of parts, as great
as the Image that Nabucliodonosor set up in the plain of Dura, or as great as
the Colossus at Rhodes; should not men notwithstanding be men still? and
neither Angels nor beasts; much less either inferior to the one or superior
to the other. If the heavens were infinite as some conceave that an infinite
body may be made by God, yet should those heavens be heavens still, and a body
still.

Neither does it follow, that therefore those Giants were men still, because
the matter of nutrition and augmentation was finite and limited. For though
they had been turned into Woolves or other beasts, the matter of nutrition had
been limited still; yet in such a case, they had ceased to be men. As
touching the stature of men so much lessened in these days in comparison unto
former times; I no way like the reason thereof assigned by you. First because it
caryethe no evidence with it, and you give no light unto it, but barely suppose
the truth of it. Secondly because you limit it, in comparison of the like
causes before the flood; As if there were no Anakims known since the flood. Of
late years in the place where I dwell, has been taken up the bone of a man's
leg, broken in the digging of a well, the bare bone was measured to be two
and twenty inches about, in the calfe, and the spur about the heel was
found also, and that of a very vast proportion. It seems the whole body
lyethe there. If King James were alive, and heard of it; it is like enoughe
that out of his curious and Scholasticall Spirit, whereby he was carried to the
investigation of strange things, he would give order that the body might be
dug up, and the parts to be kept as monuments of the great proportion and
stature of men in former times. As touching the stature of men in these days
what does Capteyne Smith write by his own experience of the Sasque Sahanocts,
borderers Voyages a discoverye of C^ptayne John Smith in Virginia.
upon Virginia on the North; He professethe they seemed like Giants to the
English; One of their wero^nees that came aboard the English, the calfe of
his leg was 3. quartars of a yard about, and the rest of his limbs
answearable to that proportion. Sure I am the siege of Troy was since the
flood; and Homer writing of the stone that Aeneas took up to throw at his
enemies calls it (...)
(...).
And he was little acquainted with Noah's flood, that said Terra malos homines
nunc educat atque pusillos. Thirdly in these days some are very low, some
very tall of stature in comparison; yet the vigor of causes nutritive and
augmentative is the same to each. So in all likelihood both before the flood
and after, such difference was found.

The Spies sent by Iosuah to take a view of the land of Nub. 13. 34.
Canaan, having seen the Sons of Anak, seemed in their own sight but as
grassehoppers in comparison unto them.

Yet the vigor of food and nourishment was the same to both. Far better
reasons might be alleged, if I mistake not, of this difference; and withal I
see no reason to the contrary, but that men might be of a great stature in
these days, as in former times, and that by course of nature; if it pleased
God to have it so. But I have no edge to enter upon this discourse, it is
unseasonable, and I desire rather to deal with you in matter of Divinity, and
especially to encounter you in your Arminian Tenets. The question followinge,
why vegetables of greatest vigor, do not ingrosse the properties of others
less vigorous, is a senseles question.

For whether you understande it of vegetables in the same kind, or of a
diverse kind, it is ridiculous. As for example. Would any sober man enquire
after the cause, why that vegetable which is of the greatest heat, has not
the property of such a vegetable, that is of less heat? Or why that which is
vigourous in heat, has not the property of that which is vigorous in cold,
or in any other disparate quality? Nay why should any man expect a reason why
different kinds of things have different qualities? Is it not satisfaction
sufficient to consider, that they are different kinds of things, and therefore
no merveyle if they have different properties? The cause hereof derived from the
vigor of that which propagates is very unsound; For that which propagates, and
that which is propagated is of the same kind, and consequently of the same
property. And the question proceeds equally as well of the one as of the
other. If you should ask how it comes to pass, that man is not so
intelligent a creature as an Angel; it were very absurd to say the reason is,
because the Father of a man was not so intelligent as an Angel, and therefore
he could not propagate a man as intelligent as an Angel; least so he should
propagate a more intelligent creature then himself. I say this manner of
answer would give little satisfaction. For the question was made of man, not
of this man in particular, but of mankind, which comprehendes the Father as well
as the Son. And again, the Son may be more intelligent then the Father,
though not after the same manner intelligent as the Angels are. The followinge
question is as little worth the proposinge as the former. For what hostility
is to be feared between the air and the water? But you make choice to
instance in the hostility between the earth and the water, as a matter of
dangerous consequence. You demand the reason why the restles or raging water
swallows not up the dull earth. I had thought the earth had been fitter to
swallowe up water, then water to swallowe up earth. For suppose the Sea
should overflowe the Land, should it thereby be said to swallowe it up? Then
belike the bottom of the Sea is swallowed up by the Sea. And by the same
reason, the Element of the Air swalloweth up both Sea and Land, because it
covers them; and the Element of fire in the same sense, swalloweth up the
Element of the air. And the heavens swallowe up all the Elements, for as much
as they do encompasse them. Every Naturalist conceaves, that it is not out of
any hostility, that the Element of water is disposed to cover the earth, but
out of inclination natural, to be above the earth, being not so heavy a
body, as the massy substance of the earth is; And we know it is withdrawn
into certain valleys by his power who jussit subsidere valles, as the Poet
acknowledgethe, who was but a mere naturalist, and that in commoda^
habitationem animatium, that the earth might become a convenient habitation
for such creatures, in whose nostrills is the breathe of life; of whom the
chief is man, made after the likeness and image of his maker, and made Lord
over his visible creatures. The last question is worst of all, and all nothing
to the purpose, but mere extravagants. What sober man would demand a cause,
why the heavens do not dispossess the elements of their place? might you not
as well demand, why the fire does not dispossess the air, and then why it
does not dispossess the water? and lastly why it does not dispossess the
earth of her seat? which is as much as to say, why is not the heaven where
the eartheis, and the earth where the havens are? whereas every man knows,
that the more spacious place, is fitter for the more spacious bodies; and the
higher places more agreeable to lighter bodies, like as the lowest place is most
fit for the body of the earth. To say that the nature of the heavens, has
not so much as liberty of egresse into neighbor elements, is as if you
should say, that light things have not so much as liberty of mooving
downwards, nor have heavy things liberty of moovinge upwardes. Yet there are
cases extraordinary, when a certain universal nature mooves them contrarily
to their special inclinations, for mayntenance of the integrity of the whole,
and for avoydance of all vacuity. I see no reason for that other assertion of
yours, that nature cannot set bounds to bodies natural, but rather is
limited in them. What think you of the souls of men, do not these as other
souls prescribe limits unto the matter? Materia prima was accoumpted in
Zabarell. de materia prima.
our University, to have dimensiones in determinatas, and that it received the
determination thereof from forms, but by the operation of Agents, in their
several generations. I confess nature it self is but the effect and
instrument of God, who is the God of nature as well as of grace. But yet
whether every thing that has bounds of nature, as the World has, does
herby evidence and infer the creation thereof, is such a question, wherein
Aristotle and his followers did peremtorily maynteyne the negative; and the
Scripture it self do the impute unto faith, our acknowledgement of the
Creation.

4. Now we come to the scanninge of your second Principle, Heb. 1^.
Whatsoever has no cause of being, can have no limits or bounds of being.
This in part has evidence of truth thus, Whatsoever has no efficient cause
of being, the same has no beginning of being. But if it proceed of limits
of essence, or of quality, or of quantity, it requires help of reason to
make it good. For as many as denied the World to have a beginning, denied as
it seems, that it had any cause of being; and thought the being thereof to be
by necessity of nature. Yet did they maynteyne that the World had limits of
quantity, and quality. For they maynteyned that Infinitum magnitudine was
absolutely impossible, as Aristotle by name. By your distinction followinge, of
diverse ways whereby being may be limited, you make no mention of limitation
by havinge a beginning thereof; which yet has been the chief, if not only
limit, which hitherto you have mentioned.

Again, why should you make but two ways, confoundinge the limits of
quantity, with the limits of intensive perfection in every several kind. It
were too much in my judgment to confound limits of quantity, with limits of
quality, which yet are both accidental. But most unreasonable it seems to
confound either of these with intensive perfection of every several kind. But
how will you accommodate the members of this distinction to the former
proposition? Almighty God has no cause of being; therefore he has no
limits of being. Now, I pray, apply this to the members of your distinction
concerning the kind of limits of being. Is he without limits in number? why
then belike he is numberles. Yet indeed he is but one and can be but one in
nature, and in persons can be but three, and must needs be three. Is he
without limits in quantitio, and so infinite therein? But in very truth he
has no quantity at all. Is he without limits in qualities, not material
(for such are not incident to him) but spiritual, and so infinite therein* Are
there no bounds of the degrees of his goodness: why but consider, in God there
are no degrees, no qualities at all.

As touching perfections created thereof indeed, we have several kinds, but
none such are to be found in God. Only because God is able to produce them,
therefore they are said to be eminently in God, though not formally. But the
like you may say as well of any material attribute, as of spiritual. For God
can produce all alike. Therefore all are eminently alike in God. Of things
visible the most perfect, you say, are but perfect in some one kind. It is
true of invisible creatures as well as of visible; but this kind is to be
understood of a kind created. But you may not say, that God is perfect in all
such kinds, but rather in none of them. For that were to be perfect in
imperfections. Gods perfection transcendes all created kinds, and he is the
Author of them, producinge them out of nothing. They that maynteyne the World
to have been eternal, maynteyne it to have been so, by necessity of nature.
And all such would peremtorily deny, that it was possible for the World not to
have been; and therefore in this discourse of yours it would have becommed you
rather to prove the contrary, then to suppose it. How the Heaven of Heavens
should be accoumpted immortal I know not, seeing they are not capable of
life. And seeing death properly is a dissolution of body and soul,
immortality must consist proportionably in an indissoluble conjunction of the
body and the soul, which is not incident to Angels (much less to Heavens)
which have neither bodies nor souls whereof to consist. Neither does Seneca,
in the place by you alleged, speak of Angels, in my judgment, but rather of
the Species of things generable; particulars, though subject to corruption,
being enabled for generation, and thereby for perpetuation of their kinds, and
consequently for the mayntenance of the World, and that for ever. It is well
known that the Platonickes, though they maynteyned the World to have a
beginning, yet denied the matter whereof the World was made, to have had any
beginning. Of the same opinion were the Stoics. Their common voice was, De
nihilo nihil, in nihilu^ nil posse reverti, and accordingly they might well
conceave, that God might be hindered in his operation, by reason of the
stubbornes and churlishnes of the matter; and so the censure of Muretus upon
such Philosophers, I conceave to be just. Yet by your leave, I do not think,
that any creature, capable of immortality, in what sense soever applyable to
Angels as well as unto men, can be made immortal by nature. Yet I doubt not,
but God can make creatures in such sort immortal by nature, as that no second
cause can make them cease to be. For it is apparent, that God has many such,
as namely the Angels and souls of men. Yet still their natures are
annihilable, in respect of the power of God. Neither can I believe, that to be
immortal in Senecaes language, was to be without beginning. For I do not
find, but that the Stoics together with Plato, conceaved that the World had a
beginning. But in this respect he calls them eternal, (I should think)
because the World, together with the kinds of things therein contained,
subject to corruption and generation in particulars, should have no end, and
that by the Providence of God. We believe that nothing is absolutely
necessary, but God. But Aristotle believed the World also to be everlasting
without beginning, and of absolute necessity. For that the World should be
created originally out of nothing, all Philosophers held impossible, and that
the matter should be everlastinge, and of absolute necessity, whereof the World
was to be made, that seemed impossible unto Aristotle, and that upon good
reason. The creation therefore is to be justified against Philosophers by sound
argument, and not avouched only by bare contestation. That which followethe, we
Christians are apt enoughe to believe, but you take upon you to convict
Philosophers of the truth of them by evident reason; this I say you undertake,
but prove not. You say, that the most strong and perspicuous way of inferringe
the existence of God, is by this, that all things are originally derived from
him, and made by him. And indeed, let it be prooved, that the World had a
beginning of being, and it will be manifest thereby, that there is a God, to
wit, the Maker of the World. But you have not yet prooved against Philosophers
that the creation of the World is to be acknowledged. Nay this kind of argument
(which I acknowledge to be the most pregnant and illustrious) you put of till
another time, and to another discourse of yours, and yet all that you have to
say does but harp upon this, though herein you do but fumble, and prove
nothing, supposing belike, that feeding us with expectation of some
perfourmance of yours, this way herafter, we should be the more willingly
drawn to bear with the imperfection of your discourse here. Yet had it been
far better for your credit in my judgment, to have wholly passed it over
according to your project mentioned at the first, then thus slightly to
dispatche it.

5. But you have not yet dispatched it as it seems. Now you begin to
dispute the creation of the World; but your phrase in expressinge it, is very
incongruous, as when you suppose Philosophers to maynteyne, that the root of
incorruption in the heavens, can brook no limits of duration, but must be
imagined without end or beginning. Now Philosophers maynteyned (and they only
were the Peripatetickes. For Aristotle ingenuously acknowledgethe in his books
de Caelo, that all Arist. de caelo. lib. 1. cap. 11. conti. 102.
that went before him, supposed the heavens to have had a beginning) that the
Heavens were without beginning and without end, not that the root of
incorruption in the Heavens (as you speak) was without beginning and without
end. For of any such root of their incorruption he disputethe not; and I
verily think, that herin, affecting to phrasifie, you speak you know not
what. Now this he maynteyned, in opposition unto those, who feyned the World to
have had a beginning ex praejacente materia; which matter had no beginning.
And Aristotle concurringe withal that went before him in this, that nothing
could be produced out of nothing, and opposing them in the point of matter
praejacent, drew up his Tenet to this pitche, that the World had no
beginning. As if he had disputed thus; If the World had a beginning, it must
have its beginning either ex aeterna materia praejacente, or no. But not ex
aeterna materia praejacente, as he labored to prove, therefore if it had a
beginning, it must be of nothing; Now all granted that ex nihilo nihil sit;
whence it followed that it could have no beginning at all. And truly, I am of
opinion, that his Tenet was more sound then his opposites; and that with
better reason it may be maynteyned that the World had no beginning, then that
the matter or Chaos rudis indigestaque moles, whereof the World was made, had no
beginning. Now that Principle wherein they all agreed, nothing can be made of
nothing, they thought to be evident of it self, and such as needed no proof.

Yet Averroes in his commentaryes upon the books of Aristotle's Metaphysickes,
gives a reason of it, disputing thus. Lib. 12.
If the World were made, and that of nothing, then it was possible to be made
before it was made; which we willingly grant. Now says he I demand, in what
subject this possibility was? And withal tells us that Ioannes Grammaticus
made this answer, that it was in Agente, which Averroes takes up in scorn,
but confutes it not. Now Grammaticus his answer rightly understood is fair
and full; not meaning that any possibility or power passive was in God; but
that there was an active power in God so allmighty as enabled him to make a
World out of nothing, and consequently was foundation sufficient to denominate
the World possible to be, before it was; not by any physical possibility,
which always requires a subject really existent, to support it; but only
Logical, which is nothing else but negatio repugnantia, which is appliable to
non ens. For that which is not, may be denominated possible to be, in case
there be an active power existent sufficient to produce it. But to proceed;
against the opinion of Philosophers you dispute thus, If the Heavens can brook
no limits of your duration, such as are beginning and end, why should it
brook limits of extension? as it does. For the heaven is supposed by them to
be finite in extension. For answer whereunto I say the reason is manifest. For
an infinite magnitude actual is impossible, and admits manifest contradiction
as Aristotle has disputed the point at large. But to be without a beginning
of duration, they conceaved to be nothing impossible. Nay rather to the
contrary, to have a beginning out of nothing, all of them conceaved that to
be a thing utterly impossible. And albeit in other cases they held motion,
magnitude, and time to hold exact proportion, yet those cases were nothing to
this purpose.

And whereas you say duration is a kind of extension; implyinge thereby, that
extension is the Genus to magnitude and duration, as unto two species
comprehended by it, I take this to be untrue. I judge rather, there is no
univocall notion common to duration, and magnitude; though this be little
material. But if you can show that it implyethe as great contradiction that
the World should be everlastinge, as that it should be infinite in magnitude,
then you should speak home indeed to the purpose. And I profess I make no
doubt but the demonstration of the one may be as evident, as of the other: but
that is a task, which you have not hitherto performed. And whosoever
undertakes it, is like to find opposites enoughe. For there want not
Schoolmen, that Biel: in 2. sect. did. 1. q. 3. a Scot there answeareth.
Gandavatia his arguments proo ving the impossibility of the World to be from
everlasting.
maynteyne the possibility of both, namely both of the everlastingnes thereof
in duration without beginning; and of the infinity thereof in extension. And
one though no Schooleman, has adventured to prove that the World is
actually infinite, saying that otherwise, there were no effect suitable
enoughe, to so infinite a cause and agent as God is:

Yet I fear not any of these colors, but am persuaded that each is
impossible, and that the impossibility of each may be demonstrated, and the
reasons to the contrary evidently refuted. But you hitherto have rather begged
what you undertook to prove, then prooved it. Yet you proceed, saying
things caused are always limited. But you should have prooved, that things
of limited essence are always caused, and have a beginning of their
duration. So that this your proposition is nothing to the purpose, were it
true. But neither is this proposition always true, as has been showed in
the example of the persons in the Trinity. And yet on this point, which is
neither universally true, nor at all to any purpose, you insist liberally in
your followinge discourse.

You should prove, that whatsoever has limits of extension, the same also
has beginning of duration: which yet I deny not to be a truth, and
demonstrable, but of the demonstration hereof, your discourse has failed
hitherunto. When you argue thus, It is as possible to put a new fashion upon
nothing; as for any thing that is, to take limits, or set form of being from
nothing. You corrupt the opinion of your opposites and not refure it. For they
that maynteyne the World had no beginning, do also maynteyne, that it took
no beginning of the limits thereof: And as they do not say, the World took
his beginning from nothing; so neither do they say, that the World took the
beginning of his limits, or took his limits or form from nothing. Now you,
by this form of your dispute, do instruct Atheists how to discourse against
the creation of the World, thus; If God made the World out of nothing, then he
put a new fashion upon nothing: But it is impossible that any new fashion
should be put upon nothing; therefore it is impossible that God should make
the World out of nothing. Now in this Syllogism the minor is most true. For
not any thing can consist of nothing as the matter and of a fashion, as the
form thereof. But the consequence of the major, is most untrue. For when we say
that God made the World out of nothing, our meaning is not that nothing was
the matter whereof the World was made, but only that it was the terminus a quo,
not materia ex qua. As much as to say God made the World, whereas nothing went
before, neither had God any matter whereon to work when he made the World. And
Philosophers affirminge that the World had no beginning, do therwithall deny
that the World took either being or limits from any thing. You turn their
negative into an affirmative, so to corrupt their opinion, in stead of
confutinge it. They thought, it needed not any thing to give it being or
bounds of being, least they should be driven to affirm that something
could be made out of nothing: whereas they had rather maynteyne; that the
world ever had existence by necessity of nature. Neither did they maynteyne,
that the world took limits or being from it self any more then from any
other, which you devise and impute unto them, in stead of convictinge their
Tenet of error, by force of argument, in the way of natural reason which you
undertake. And therefore havinge so weakly disprooved the everlastingnes of
things limited, you do thereby betray the weakness of your proof of Gods
illimited condition from the everlastingnes thereof.

6. And yet as if you had confounded all the Philosophers that ever lived, in
the point of creation, you proceed magnificently to suppose, that the conceyte
of being without limits is essentially included in the conceyte of being
without cause precedent, which if it were true, then were it a truth per se
notae, and consequently the creation of the world evident of it self even to
common reason, saying it is supposed to have limits. And again your discourse
is so fashioned, as if Philosophers maynteyned that the world took beginning
of it self, which is untrue and indeed a thing evidently impossible, namely
that any thing should take beginning of it self. And indeed if a thing
could give being to it self, it might give what it lusted to it self, if so
be it had a lust, which the Elements and Heavens have not: Yet those Aristotle
maynteyned to have been from everlastinge, not that they gave beginning to
themselves, but that they took no beginning from any thing. The reason
whereof was, because they could not conceave, how any thing could be made
out of nothing, a thing contrary to all natural experience: upon which kind
of ground your self but erst builded your discourse, when you said, things
caused, as induction manifestethe; are always limited and molded in their
proper causes. Yet notwithstanding upon this fiction, of a thing able to give
being to it self, you dilate at large.

I grant, that upon this fiction nothing could restrain it from taking all
bodily perfection possible to it self, in case it had power to give being to
it self. But never any Philosopher maynteyned, that it had power to give
being to it self. For they that maynteyned a Chaos precedinge the production
of the world, maynteyned that out of this Chaos, God produced all things, and
not that the Chaos or ought else gave being to itself. And Aristotle that
denied such an eternal Chaos, and maynteyned the world had no beginning, was
far from maynteyninge that the world gave being to it self. Secondly I
answer, that though it should thus receave all bodily perfection possible,
yet this should not be infinite, and without limits as you would have your
Reader to suspect without proof, and indeed unles this be imagined, it is
nothing no the purpose. The reason why in this case, it should not be
infinite, is this; because all bodily perfection possible is but finite, as
they conceaved, and therein conceaved nothing amiss. So of quantity or
quality, the impossibility of either to be without measure in bodies, whose
perfection is only finite, is a sufficient hinderance from taking either
quantity or quality without measure. In like sort, let Vacuitie (as you
speak) be left free to give it self full and perfect act; let it take all
possible perfection, yet since all possible perfection of bodies, is supposed
to be only finite, it will not follow that the perfection taken shall be
without limits: which yet you must prove, otherwise your discourse is of no
force to prove, that whatsoever has n^ cause of bring distinct from
itself, is without limits. Allthoughe the Philosophers that maynteyned the
world or matter thereof preexistent to be without beginning, driven herunto,
because they conceaved not how it was possible, that any thing should be made
out of nothing; yet did they never maynteyne that the one or the other gave
being to it self. Yet this fiction you pin upon their sleeve, to supply the
weakness of your discourse. Much less could it enter into any sober man's
conceyte, that they gave power to a Vacuitie, to give it self full and perfect
act, saying Vacuitie is stark nothing; which the Chaos was not, but a
material thing, though merely passive and nothing active. But as for
vacuitie that is neither active, nor passive, as being stark nothing. And yet
to this you add a further solecisme in this your fiction; as when you suppose
this vacuitie to have power to assume either bodily substances or spiritual;
which the Chaos had not, no not so much as in capacity, being wholly material,
whereas spiritual substances are immateriall. And yet, I confess as you give
unto that which is nothing power to assume which it list, either bodily or
spiritual substances; it may well be said that nothing has power
indifferently to assume either or both of them. This I propose by way of an
universal negative, not by way of a particular affirmative as you do, making
the term nothing, to be the subject in your propositions, and not an
universal sign only. Yet all thus assumed (as you speak) should be but
finite; because all possible perfection besides the nature of God it self, is
but finite. Therefore I say it should be but finite, if any thing at all;
which caution I do put in, because upon due accoumpt, it will be found, that
the sum of all this, in a good sense, will prove to be no more, then just
nothing. For suppose, nothing does assume bodily substances; again suppose,
nothing does assume spiritual substances; put this together, and add
nothing to nothing, and see whether the total will prove to be any jot more,
then just nothing. You proceed further, and tell us that while we imagine it
without cause of existence or beginning, no reason imaginable could confine
it, to any set place of residence or extension, why rather in the center, then
circumference, or either rather then both. In this you seem to have reference
to that which immediately went before, and that was a vacuitie. And in very
truth upon this supposition, where now the center is, nothing was; where now
the circumference is, nothing was; and in all the bodies between, nothing
was. For you suppose a vacuitie of all, and nothing to be, where now there is
some thing. Yet this nothing by your leave, must be confined in reference to
the places, where bodies were before or after. And the places where bodies were
before, being the same, by your supposition, with the places which now are,
must needs be finite. For undoubtedly, the space of this whole world, between
the center and circumference, yea and including both, is but finite. But
foortwith you relapse to the former iniquity of your supposition; and in
steed of havinge a being without beginning, which was indeed the opinion of
some great Philosophers, concerning the world, or concerning preexistent
matter, whereof the world was made, driven herunto upon supposition, (as of a
thing impossible) that nothing could be made out of nothing; wherein all
agreed, though otherwise of different opinions, nor different only but
contrariant also: I say, from this true state of their opinion, you relapse,
to the worlds taking of beginning to it self; which is rather to maynteyne
that it had a beginning (though of it self) then that it had none at all;
yet this alone was affirmed by them, and not the other. Of which other, namely
of taking beginning to it self, imagination only (you say) is the true cause.
And therein you say true, but this cause is to be understood of your
imagination, not theirs: For they imagined no such taking of beginning to it
self, either in the world it self, or in the preexistent matter thereof. Yet
upon this you found a new imagination, of extendinge (forsoothe) its
existence both ways, and drawing a circular duration to the instant, where it
begins; to wit where it begins in your imagination not in theirs; for they
imagined no such thing. And indeed, he that imaginethe white to be black, I
see no reason why he may not proceed further and imagine black to be white,
and add unto this a third, to wit, that white is neither white nor black,
and black is neither black nor white. Of circular motions I have read; but of
circular durations I have neither read nor heard till now; well, let us
understande it of duration in circular motions. But if you please, imagine time
to be circular like the motions of your orbs, and in course of time to return
at length to the beginning of it. For what else to make of the instant where
it begins, I know not. It seems by this discourse, that you have seen the
gigge, and if your brains have not run round, I assure you mine have all
most in followinge you. At length you come to a more sober supposition and
expression; as when you relate their opinion thus, that the world has a true
present being without any cause precedent. This I confess is suitable to
their opinion whom you impugn; who were driven herunto (as I said) because
they could not comprehend, how any thing could be made of nothing. But
when you add, without a superior guide to appoint it a set course, you
something swerve from the right. All maynteyned the world could not be made
out of nothing. But all of them did not deny that it had a guide to direct it.
The Platonickes and Stoics acknowledged a divine understandinge to have made
the world, but out of a prejacent matter, which they conceaved to be eternal,
and to acknowledge no maker. Now as they acknowledged a maker, so they
acknowledged a Governor, though sometimes hindered in his course, by the
stubbornes of the refractary matter, which acknowledged no maker. Aristotle
maynteynes also a first moover, therefore he acknowledged a guide also. But
whereas he acknowledged him to be a necessary Agent (as I conceave) it was in
effect as much, as if he had acknowledged, no Governor. But all agreed that
the duration either of the world, or of the prejacent matter was everlasting
for the time past, and that the world should be everlasting for the time to
come. To this Plato yielded. And so contained all duration imaginable both
ways; namely both for the time past, and for the time to come; but with this
difference, that for the time past it was actually infinite; only the duration
for the time to come not actual, but in such sort infinite, as it should
never have an end. Now this consideration opens a fair way to a discovery
of the impossibility of this conceyte of theirs concerning the eternity of
the world, or the eternity of time, and that by very evident reason; (though
I deny not but men have and may set their wits on work in quashinge the
evidence thereof; in their zeal I think to defend the honor of Aristotle.)
For if the world were everlastinge? Paulus Venetus, though zealous to defend
the possibility hereof, yet acknowledgethe it would follow, that the part is
equal to the whole, nay greater then the whole; and that in so evident a
manner, that he has no other way to answer it, then by professinge that this
maxim, Totum est majus sua part, is of force only in materia finita, not in
materia infinita; which in effect is as much as to say; The world may be
everlasting I will maynteyne it, but I forbid any man to dispute against it.
For I purpose to deny all maxims that are made use of, in disputing against
it; and will be bold to say that they all have force only in materia finita,
and not in materia infinita.

And because seeing I have excepted against weak courses of argumentation, in
defense of the creation; it may be expected I should substitute stronger
arguments in the place of them. I will not spare to address my self herunto
so far as out of the old store of my Philosophy I have in readiness. And yet
if things be considered aright, there is no necessity of any such course. For
certainly we have no need of it for the fortification of our faith, that being
built only upon the word of God; and according to that old saying: Fides non
Grego. in Euangel. hom. 26.
habet meritum quoties humana ratio praebet experimentum. And as for Atheists,
may we not justly say of them, as Abraham says of the rich Gluttous
brethren. If they believe not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they
believe thoughe^ a man Luc. 16. 31.
should rise from the dead. Especially consideringe that the Scriptures
suppose (in my judgment) the creation to be acknowledged by general instinct,
actualed by consideration of the course of the world; as where it is said, The
Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handy Psalm. 19.
1. 2. 3.
work, Day unto day utters the same, and night unto night teachethe
knowledge. There is no speech or language, where their voice is not heard. And
as is the voice of the Prophets in the old Testament, such is the voice of the
Apostles in the new. The invisible things of God, that is his eternal power
and Godhead, Romans 1. 20.
is seen from the creation of the World, being considered in his works, so
that they are without excuse. And Paul preachinge before the Athenians, in an
University much addicted to Aristotle's Philosophy, yet is bold to suppose
this, as a thing without his preachinge received amongst them, God that made
Act. 17. 24. 25. 26.
the World, and all things that are therein, seeing that he is Lord of Heaven
and Earth, dwellethe not in Temples made with hands. Neither is woorshipped
with men's hands, as though be needed any thing, saying he gives to all life
and breathe and all things. And has made of one blood all mankind, to dwell
on all the face of the Earth, and has assigned the seasons, which were
ordained before, by the bounds of their habitation. And the being of the World
from everlasting, though by creation, does apparently limit the power of God
thus far, that he could not then have made it sooner. And if God could make
the creature like unto himself in everlastingnes, why not in any thing else,
saying the Apostle, speaking of the Godhead as evidenced by his works, notes
it to consist in his eternal power. But come we to that manner of
demonstration which is expected, leaving such arguments as Mornay prosecutethe,
Romans 1. 20.
as namely the novell invention of all Arts and Sciences, as appears by
History, and the like, evidencinge that the World had a beginning: It is well
known that the most general opinion is (even of Aristotle himself) that an
infinite magnitude or a number actually infinite, is a thing utterly impossible
as that which implyethe manifest contradiction. Now let those arguments be well
observed, and considered, whether the most pregnant amongst them, may not with
as great evidence be accommodated against the everlastingnes of the World, to
prove it to be a thing impossible. As for example. One of the most forcible
arguments that I have found to prove the impossibility of an infinite
magnitude is this. If a magnitude were actually infinite, then it should
consist of an infinite number of yards or else; for if it consisted but of a
finite number of them, the whole could be but finite. Now it is manifest that
such an infinite magnitude can consist but of an infinite number of inches. And
herehence it followethe, that the number of inches, and the number of yardes or
else in such a magnitude are equal; and herehence it follows that an inch in
this case should be equal to a yard or ^ll; which is impossible, and
consequently as impossible it is that there should be any magnitude infinite.
In like sort, if the World were everlasting, then the days past should be
infinite, and not so only but the years past should be infinite; and so the
number of days and number of years past, should be equal, and consequently
a day should be equal to a year; For if twenty days were equal to twenty
years, then certeynly one day should be equal to one year. For fi ab
aequalibus aequalia demas quae remanent erunt aequalia. Now it is impossible
that a day should be equal to a year, and consequently it is impossible that
the World should be everlasting without beginning. Perhaps some may say that
the same reason might prove as well that it is a thing impossible the World
should be without end. But this is untrue, though at first sight men are apt
to be deceaved with a show of paritie, where indeade there is no paritie. For
though we shall continue as the Angels already do without end, yet
herehence it shall never come to pass, that it can be verified of such that
they have continued an infinite space of time; but still the space is finite,
though with addition of continuance longer and longer in infinitum. But if the
World were without beginning, then an infinite space of time were actually past
already, which implies manifest contradiction as before has been showed.
Now consider the answer to the former argument, and whether it be of any
force. The only: course to weaken it is to maynteyne, that datur infinitum,
infinito insinitius. One infinite may be greater then another, to wit an
infinite number of years past, greater then an infinite number of days past.
This at first sight seems to be a mad kind of answer. For hence it
follows that one infinite can not be admitted, but that therwithall you must
admit an numberles number of infinites. As for example; If there were past an
infinite number of years, then saying every year conteynes 365. days, you
must acknowledge that this infinite space of years consists of 365. parts,
each whereof is infinite. And whereas if the World were eternal, and the space
of time past, infinite, then the millions of years past were infinite also;
whence we infer that the space of millions of years past being infinite
consists of ten hundred thousand parts, each whereof is infinite, and each
infinite part consists of 365. parts, each whereof is infinite also. And this
is the very argument that Aristotle uses in his Metaphysickes to prove that
there cannot be an infinite magnitude; for then it should consist ex
infinitis, now indeed this they do grant that streyne their wits to
maynteyne the possibility of infinity in magnitude as namely Hurtando de
Mendosa in his disputations; A Summatis ad Metaphysicam tract. de infinito.
as being necessarily driven herunto. And the like course they must needs take
that maynteyne the possibility of infinity in time past. But as for the
possibility of it in time to come, that is altogether of another nature, as
before I have showed. Now I will clearly overthrowe this answer and prove
evidently that an infinite number of years is not greater then an infinite
number of days; and I prove it thus. If upon the position of an infinite
number of days, there follweth hoc ipso, the position of an infinite number of
years, then an infinite number of years is not greater then an infinite
number of days. All experience justifies this. For if upon the position of a
quart of measure, follows the position of two pints, then it is manifest that
two pints is not greater then a quart, and so give instance in what you will,
it never fayles. Now to the major proposed I add my minor thus; But upon the
position of an infinite number of days, hoc ipso there follows the position
of an infinite number of years; And therefore an infinite number of years is
not greater then an infinite number of days. The minor I prove thus; Upon the
position of an infinite number of days there shall follow a position of a
number of years not finite, therefore infinite. Not finite; For if the number
of years arisinge from the presupposed number of days were but finite, then
the days whereof this number of years consists should be but finite; For the
days should be but 365. times more then the years. And a finite number
multiplied by a finite number, can bring forth but a finite number. But we
have supposed, and the Tenet touching the possibility of the Worlds
everlastingnes does suppose the days past, to be possibly infinite. Which yet
by this one argument we have demonstrated to be impossible. Consider one
argument more. Paulus Venetus maynteynes it is a thing possible that the time
past of the World should be infinite; yet to exercise his wit, he disputes
against it in this manner in effect. If the time past were infinite, as we all
confess, the time to come may be infinite, then the part shall be greater then
the whole, as for example, the time from yesterday upwards shall be greater
then the time from this day upwards; which he prooveth thus. The time from
yesterday upwards, is equal to the time from yesterday downwards. (This is
supposed for as much as all confess it to be possible that time should be
without end.) But the time from yesterday downwards is greater then the time
from this day upwards; therefore the time from yesterday upwards, is greater
then the time from this day upwards. The minor he proovethe thus. The time from
yesterday downwards, is greater then the time from this day downwards. But
the time from this day upwards is equal to the time from this day downwards;
therefore the time from yesterday downwards is greater then the time from this
day upwards; and consequently the time from yesterday upwards (being equal to
the time from yesterday downward) is greater then the time from this day
upwardes; which is as much as to say, that the part is greater then the whole.
These inferences depend upon this maxim most evident, that which is equal to
a greater, is also greater. Now mark how Paulus Venetus answeareth this
argument, which is of his own devisinge; and his answer is this; This maxim
the whole is greater then his part, has place only in matter finite, not in
matter infinite. A most absurd answer; for it is in effect to forbid all
disputation against him. For we cannot dispute without grounds to insist upon.
And no more evident grounds can be devised, then such as conteyne the rules of
contradiction. Yet I will make it manifest, that this maxim must have place in
all matter, whether finite of infinite. To maynteyne that the whole is not
greater then the part in some case is to maynteyne that both parts of
contradiction are true in some case. But both parts of contradiction cannot be
true in any case; neither in matter finite nor in matter infinite; Therefore in
no case can it be truly maynteyned that the whole is not greater then the part.
The minor I prove thus; there cannot be greater difference between matter
sinite and matter infinite, then between ens and non ens. But both parts of
contradiction cannot be true either about ens or non ens; (like as one part
must be true de omni ente and non ente); therefore neither can they be true in
any matter whether finite or infinite. Again if this which he says were
granted, then there could be no disputation as touching the nature of God,
saying he is infinite. And if we take away the rules of contradiction, we take
away all disputation. Now I proceed in scanning that which follows in your
discourse.

7. I have hitherto followed you in the course of your own suppositions, and
showed how far short you fall of provinge what you intended, allthoughe your
fictions have been wondrous wild. We commonly say, Uno data absurdo, mill
sequuntur, we do not say infinite. Yet I see no reason to the contrary, but
that from these thousand absurdities, others may follow, and that in
infinitum. Though fewer follow it suffizethe us, if your collections be of
the number of them. By the way, let me tell you, your marginall quotation
stands in no congruity with the text. Then you compare impossibilities, and
tell us, that for a mere logical possibility, to take beginning of actual
being from it self is as impossible, as for that which is thus supposed to
take beginning, to be restreyned to any determinate kind or part of being;
Implyinge that the opinion of Philosophers, which you oppose did maynteyne,
that a mere Logical possibility did take beginning of being from it self;
whereas indeed there is no such matter. Never any Philosopher was found to
doat in such manner as you fashion the nobler sort of them. This is a mere
fiction of your own brain. For first whether they maynteyned the World to
take beginning of it self, as you seem to fancy they did, or the praejacent
matter, whereof it was made to take beginning of it self; yet herby they did
not maynteyne that a mere Logical possibility, did take beginning of actual
being unto it self. For they were never found to maynteyne that the World
was a mere Logical possibility, or that the matter praejacent whereof it was
made, was a mere Logical possibility. Secondly they never avouched, that
either the World, or matter praejacent whereof it was made, did take beginning
of being to it self, as you impute unto them, without all modesty, only
endeavoring to supply the weakness of your argument, and give some color of
strength to your discourse, by the corruption of other men's opinion. But
Aristotle's opinion was, that the World was without beginning; and the former
Philosophers opinion was, that the matter whereof the World was made, was
without beginning: and the reason of both was this, because they conceaved
not how it was possible, that any thing could be made out of nothing. So that
your argument rightly accommodated should run thus, It is as impossible that
the World was without beginning, as it is impossible that, that which is
without beginning should have any limits of being, and be finite. Now this
they would maynteyne to be utterly untrue; and were it true, yet is it not so
true, as to be evident of it self. And you have hitherto affoorded no evidence
at all to justifye it. And again there is both reason, why, whether a body
have beginning of being, or no beginning of being, yet can it not be
infinite, because that implyethe manifest contradiction: and on the other side,
Divines have been found to justify, that a body might have been everlastinge,
by the power of God, and consequently without beginning. And again, if the
World has a beginning (as we believe it has) it must necessarily follow,
that some thing should be made out of nothing, which not only Philosophers
conceaved to be impossible, but the H. Ghost also professethe it to be a
truth so far overreachinge the ordinary capacity of man, that he imputes it
unto faith, saying, By faith we believe that the World was made. What I
think of your modells I have already signified. Hebr 11. (...).
In fine you tell us, whereto they tend, which you express im pomp, saying,
They are destinated to the errection of an everlasting aedisice. And that is a
certain proposition concerning the nature of God, namely, that God is such a
one, as he should have been, if he had had beginning of himself. Which
assertion of yours how well it becomes the honor of God, let every sober
Reader judge. For you affirm that God is of such a nature, as should be
existent, upon supposition of a thing impossible; namely, The taking of
beginning of being from ones self. By the way I observe, that though you
maynteyne God to have no beginning of being, yet you deny him to take
beginning of himself; and thereby distinguishe between such things upon the
confusion whereof alone, the plausibilite of your former discourse did wholly
depend. For whereas Aristotle maynteyned that the World was without beginning;
and the ancient Philosophers before him were of opinion, that the matter
praejacent, whereof the World was made, was without beginning, you shaped their
opinions in such sort, as if they had affirmed, that the World took beginning
of it self, or the praejacent matter whereof the World was made, took
beginning of it self, which indeed is most absurd; yet not their opinion but
your fiction; the less was your ingenuitie in pinninge such a conceyte upon
them: though I confess, it served your turn well, this corruption of their
opinion wrought by you, being your best argument to strengthen your discourse.
By the way I observe, you make God to be the sole Maker of all things, yet I
never found you to acknowledge God to be, the sole Author, or so much as
Author of faith and repentance.

CHAP. III.
Of Infinity of Being, or of absolute Infinity and the right definition of it
by Ancient Philosophers.

BEFORE you come to your Philosophical Divinity, you are pleased to acquaint
us with some Logical formalities. You dispute that there is no medium between
nihil and aliquid, praesupposinge that some Answerers in the Schools, though
few, would make choice to affirm a medium between these. You say to find a
medium betwixt them by abnegation, is as hard as to assign a space or vacancy
between a line and a point that terminates it. And this is a very hard matter
I confess, even as hard (to requite you in your own Rhetoric) as to find
a space between a part of a line and the point that joins it to the other
part. To this you resolately add, that what name soever we propose, unles it
have some degree or portion of entity answearinge to it, we may justly say, It
is just nothing. But this to my understanding is untrue. For to the name of
God no degree or portion of entity is answearinge, but rather entity, without
degree or portion. It may be you understande this part of your discourse as
well as the former, of the names of entities create in distinct on from God the
entity increate. For forthwith you confess, that these reasons
notwithstanding though they firmly hold in secular disputes of
predicamentall or numerable entities, yet the infinite essence comes not within
this division. So then God, is neither aliquid, nor nihil. And therefore it is
not so hard to find a mean by abnegation between these, as to assign a
space between a line and a point that terminates it; unles you will say, that
to acknowledge a God is as hard, as to acknowledge such a space or vacancy. As
then God is not nothing, so he is too excellent, you say, to be comprehended
under the name of some thing. And indeed the word Aliquid signifiethe a part
of quidditie, or entity, which cannot be affirmed of God, neither in respect of
created quidditie; For in that respect, he is verily nihil, and not at all
aliquid creatum; Nor in respect of quidditie increate; for that has no parts;
and if it had, God should be rather all that quidditie, then a part of it. And
thus we may say that aliquid and nihil are not contradictories: if they were,
it could not be avoided, but God himself must admit the denomination of one
of them. But if it be farther objected, that God is aliquid in respect of
quidditie or entity, neither create nor increate in special, but considered in
common to them both. So also it may be denied that God is aliquid, or a part
of such entity or quidditie, saying no entitie, is common to create and
increate entities. For entitie is no univocall Genus, fit to comprehend God
and his creatures; though some subtle inventions have been on foot brought
in by some to justify that the word ens does univocally comprehend God and
his creatures. But you seem not to approove of such speculations. For as much
as you deny him to be a numerable part of entity; and if he were a species of
ens, he might well be numerable with the other species thereof. Therefore I
think it needeles for me to undertake the disproovinge of Scotus his reasons,
though curious ones, whereby he prooves the univocation of the word ens in
respect of God and his creatures. It should rather have been your task, who
undertake a discourse of this nature, which for my part, I had never meddled
withal, had it not been for some pieces of corrupt Divinity, which you patch
on in some places to this your Philosophy. Yet by the way we are to consider,
that allthoughe the word aliquid be an unfitt denomination of God, yet ens is
not, which though it be not univocally attributed unto the Creator and the
creature, yet usually it is analogically. God may well be said to be an ens
independent, and upon whom all other entia do depend. You farther proceed
to give a reason why the Latin word ens, is not fit to denominate God, so to
make the Divine nature a mean by abnegation, not only between something, and
nothing, but all so between ens and non ens. For the word ens you say, out of
Mirandula, has the form of a concrete. And every concrete has his name from
that nature whereof it participates; as hot is that, which participates of
heat; white is such a nature as participates of whitenes. But God cannot be
said to participate of essence. In this I find some defect. First, because
you do not show, how ens, which you call a concrete is divided, (as
concretes are) into a part material participating, and a part formal
participated. In a word, you do not once offer to resolve ens into the parts
of its signification. Secondly, there is little congruity between ens that
which has being, and hot or white, that which has heat and whitenes. For
that which has whitenes in it, or heat, is a substance, or subject really
existent, wherein the quality of heat or whitenes is found. But the word ens
admittethe no division comparable, or congruous herunto. For you cannot with
sobriety say, that ens signifies a nature really existent, wherein essence is
found distinct from the nature signified, or coming over and above unto it, as
heat does over and above to the constitution of the subject. And therefore it
followethe not, that because hot does signify a subject participating of
heat, therefore ens also signifies a subject participating of essence. A
great deal of difference there is between concretes of accidental
denomination, and concretes of essential denomination. As Homo and Animal,
which may be accoumpted concretes, in respect of such abstract notions, as are
conceaved under the terms of Humanitas and Animalitas. The specificall essence
being constituted by the abstract notion, and not participating of it, as
bodies participate of heat. The truth is, all compounds do properly admit a
concrete denomination, as in whom the suppositum (as Homo and Animal,
differethe from the nature denominatinge it, as Humanitas and Animalitas. But
in things not compounde it is not so, least of all in God. For though Homo be
not Humanitas, yet Deus est ipsa Deitas. Aquin. 1 q. 3. art. 3. De rebus
simplicibus loqui non possumus nisi per modum compositorum, a quibus
cognitionem accipimus; and ideo de Deo loquentes, utimur nominibus concretis ut
significemus ejus subsistentiam, quia apud nos non subsistunt nisi composita.
Et utimur nominibus abstractis, ut significemus ejus simplicitatem. Quod ergo
dicitur Deitas, vel vita, vel aliquid hujusmodi esse in Deo, referendum est ad
diversitatem, quae est in acceptione intellectus nostri, and non ad aliquam
diversitatem rei. That God is one, by whom all things are, is true; but this
description is little congruous to the nature of God; in as much, as it could
have no place before the creation, or in case the World had never been created.
Yet Gods nature is still the same. I cannot admit that things created
participate of Gods being. They have their being from God, I grant; but I
cannot admit their being to be any part of Gods being, or Gods being to have
parts. Yet if all things are from him, how can you avoyde, but that God
himself shall be from himself. Unless the Apostle help you in this
discoursinge, In that he has put all things under him, it is manifest that he
is excepted who did put 1. Cor. 1^.
all things under him. But be it so that all other things are from him; and
then also accidents as well as substances are from him, and can they
participate of Gods being? Of accidental being, I grant they do participate
and that from God, but not of Gods being. If so; how much more must faith
and repentance be acknowledged to have their production from God; which I much
fear, you will be found to deny, if not at first hand, yet at least in a
second place, by maynteyning it in such a manner to be the work of God, as
upon condition of man's will; which in my judgment is in effect to deny that
God is the Author of them. The name of God I am, opens a fair way to the
expoundinge of a mystery, which you meddle not with, contenting your self with
ventinge of phrases, in settinge forth the nature of God. The existence of
all creatures may be accoumpted as a mere accident to their essence; for as
much as all of them have being after not being; and from being either do or
may return again to not being. It is not so with God, who is everlastinge
and that formally by necessity of nature. So that whereas the essence of every
creature abstract from existence, includes a possibility formally indifferent
to being or not being, Gods essence includes a necessity of being, an
impossibility of not being. Your lines of amplification are either very wild
and without sense, or my wits are too shallow to comprehend them, the rest I
cannot construe, the close I can, when you say the essence of God is the bond
of all things that can be combined or linkt together. I can construe these
words, but not comprehend their meaning. The combination of things together,
you understand, it seems in affirmations and negations. Now that Gods essence
should be the copula, whereby the subject and predicate in all propositions,
are linkt together, and that whether true or false; Holy or profane, may well
pass, I think, for the tenthe wonder of the world. God only is by nature,
all other things by the will of God. I am that I am say the the Apostle, but
by the grace of God. God only is in such sort as that his existence is his
essence, we are in such sort, as that our existence is not our essence. For
sometimes we were not; and if it pleased God, we might cease to be. But yet we
live and moove, and have our being, and all in him. I cannot admit that
Angels participate of Gods essence, or that God communicates his essence to
any, but to his Son. They, as all other things, have their essence from God,
but not his; Yet are they according to the Image of God. Other creatures may
have vestigia footestes of God. In the reasonable nature alone is found the
Image of God; I say the Image of God, but not the essence of God.

2. Whether Angels are creatures, and consequently of a finite nature, no
Christian makes question. But as touching their nature, understanding, place,
and motion attributed unto them, they are such secrets and mysteries unto me,
that I have no heart to meddle with them. The Scriptures, tell us, that Marc. 5.
9.
a Legion of devils were in one man; and of the good, that Mat. 18. 10.
the Angels of little children do always behold the face of God their
Father. But touching the nature of God, to say that his indivisible unity,
comprehends all multiplicity is an ambiguous speech; both because
multiplicitie is found in evil as well as in good; and the phrase of
includinge, to my thinking, inclines to signify, comprehension formal rather
then vertuall. As for Senecaes sentence, which you so much magnify, as if we
could not say more of him in fewer words, I judge to be an unwoorthy speech
to denote the nature of God, as indeed more false then true, or rather false
throughout, and void of all truth. And why should we expect any tolerable
description of the nature of God from an heathen man, and from a Stoicke, as
Seneca was. So Lucan, Deus est quodcunque vides, quocunque mover^, out of the
mouth of Cato Vticensis, a man of Stoicall profession, as Seneca was. And such
sayings as these, Deus est totum quod vides, and totum quod non vides, savor
hotly of an Atheifticall opinion, of such, as being ignorant of the nature of
the true God, deified the nature. And commonly their several Gods denoted only
several parts of the World, as Vesta the Earth, Jupiter the air, Baal or Bell,
and as some say, Hercules, Tyrius the Sun. Yet several Nations, like enough
had their several opinions, but all concurring in this, namely in adoring the
creature, and specially all the host of heaven, in steed of the Creator. And
then withal they had an universal Deity, whom they called Pan, representing
the whole Universe. And according to Platonicall opinion, God was accoumpted
Anima Mundi. And thus with them, God was Totum quod vides, and totum quod non
vides. Yet I may well grant, that more could not be said in fewer words, but
this is in the way of falsehood, and not in the way of truth. The best
construction, that can be made of it, is to say that God is the Author of all
that we see, and of all that we do not see. Yet this was not the opinion of
the Stoics, of whose profession Seneca was. For though he did believe the
World was made, as Aristotle professethe in his books de Caelo, it was the
opinion of all that went before him: Yet did he not believe, that it was made
out of nothing, but that Lib. 1. cont. 102.
the matter whereof the World was made, was eternal. Therefore they did not
believe, that God was the Author of all, both of that we see, and of that we
do not see. Your self confess, they conceaved the matter to have been
coeternall with him, and not so only, but able also to overmatch the
benignity of his active power by its passive untowardlines. Again I do not
find, that any of them maynteyned, that immateriall substances were made by
God; for then they should all be made out of nothing. For Angels consist not
of material extensions. And it was their general voice that nothing could be
made out of nothing.

3. The analogy you speak of, is without all proportion. For the picture of a
man, though it be no true man, yet it may be a true picture; and whether a
true picture or no, yet undoubtedly it has a true being, though imperfect,
in comparison to the being of a man. And therefore herehence to conclude, that
no creature truly is, is without all proportion: Man indeed is but the Image
of God, as some things are the Images of men: Whence it followethe; as the
Images of men are not men, so man the Image of God is not God. But to infer
that therefore man is not in truth, or has no true being, has no ground,
no foundation. If the being of a creature is but the shadow of true being,
then humanity (which is the being of a man) is but a shadow of true
humanity, and brutality, which is the being of a beast, is but the shadow of
true brutalitie. And is it proper think you to say, that the truth of all
these are found in God, to wit true humanity etc. David and Solomon were
types of Christ; but I never read, nor heard, that the creatures are types of
the Creator. Effects they are, and the works of God; and as the cause does
shine in the effect, so Gods eternal power and Romans 1. 20.
Godhead are made manifest by his works. Yet the types of Christ, were not
types according to their essence, but according to their course of life and
actions. And yet the very actions, whereby they represented Christ, were true
actions in themselves separate from typical signification; though the actions
of Christ or office of Christ, were of far greater dignity and price then
were the actions of men which represented him. Before the World was made, this
proposition was true, God alone is, and he could again make it true if it
pleased him, by turninge all things into nothing, from whence they came. But
now other things also are. Otherwise there could be no place, either for the
name of creatures, or for the representation of God in them. And how can that
be said not to be, or not truly to be which as you say, participates of Gods
being? It is true, God alone is in such sort, as whose essence and existence
are all one. For as much as possibility in him is mere necessity, not so in
any creature; as who all were not, before they were, and again may return to
nothing, if so it please him that made them, to dispose of them. What is that
ancient Philosophy of the heathen you speak of, and how well it accordes with
this, I know not. As touching the nature of God, I know no such discourses
superior, if equal to the discourse of Aristotle Lib. 12. c. 3. cont. 39.
in a certain chapter of his Metaphysics. Your text, I am God and there is
none besides, is fair short of congruitie with your present discourse. For
will it follow that because there is no God, besides him; therefore there is
nothing that has any true being besides him?

4. It is incredible that the Stoickes or any other, held nothing worthy the
name of essence, which was not (...). Such speeches rather make men unworthy to
be esteemed of any faculty of wit. But what think you? is God (...)? Cap. 1.
(...). (...).
Have you forgotten the diversity of errors, which in the former chapter you
mentioned out of Austin, the last whereof was, to conceave that God could beget
himself? Yet if (...) shall be the property of God, as your self confess by
Plotins Philosophy (you might as well have said by the Philosophy of Heathens
that denied creation out of nothing) there shall be many Gods, even as many as
there be immateriall substances, which they called minds or Intelligences from
their narure; but from their office we call Angels. But this error, you say,
was easy to be checked, If the favorers of it had been put in mind, that these
their demi Gods, by necessary consequence of this opinion, must have been
acknowledged insinite in being. So that had you lived in their days, you had
easily brought of not Plotin only but Aristotle also and all others from this
point of heathenisme. For necessary consequences all must yeilde unto,
especially if the consequence be perspicuous also, as you seem to suppose, by
the little or rather no light you give unto it by force of argument. For
oportet, ut lancem ponderibus, ita animum veris and perspicuis cedere. And
saying Intelligences, if made, must needs be made out of nothing, which I am
persuaded you will not deny, hence it followethe, that you could evidently
convict all those Philosophers of error in denyinge the Creation. Yet shall not
you by this your confidence any way hinder us, from givinge God thanks, for
bringing us acquainted with his word, and givinge power unto it by his Spirit,
to make us by faith to believe that the world was made, and that the things
Hebr. 11. 3.
that be, were not made of things that do appear. But of this your
confidentiary consequence we have discoursed enoughe in the former chapter.
Touching the comparison between Plato, and Aristotle; or between Platonicall
and Aristotelicall Christian, does any Aristotelicall Christian deny, that
immateriall substances have their dependence on God? If any man by Aristotle's
discourse, has been withdrawn from acknowledginge this truth, he ceasethe
to be a Christian, and becomes an Atheist. The meanest Christian by light of
grace knows more then Aristotle by light of nature concerning God. So might
Plato, if by tradition he received something derived from the Word of God, and
believed, which Aristotle either received or believed not. Compare their
achievements (if you please) by light of nature, either concerning the nature
of God, or the knowledge of the World and the parts thereof: that is consider
what each affirmed, and what reason for his assertion each delivered, and
thence consider whose ability deserves to be preferred. Plato with the rest
maynteyned the World to have a beginning, but the matter, whereof it was made,
to be eternal. Aristotle maynteyned the World to be everlastinge. Zabarell
thinks he had better reason for this opinion of his, then Plato, and the rest
had for that opinion of theirs. I am of Zabarells judgment in this. The
eternity of the matter is as absurd to us Christians, and as contradictious
to the truth of God, as the eternity of the World. But supposing the
eternity of the matter, and denyinge the eternity of the World, this brings
forth some proper absurdities over and above the former. The continuance of
the World for everlasting is maynteyned by Plato as well as by Aristotle,
herein cried down by others, in that maynteyninge it to have a beginning, yet
denies that it shall have an end. Plato maynteyned you say, the creating of
immateriall substances, Aristotle denied it: This was suitable with the opinion
of Aristotle, who denied the possibility of creation: that not suitable with
the opinion of Plato. For if the World could not be made out of nothing, which
Plato affirmed as well as the rest, why should he think that Angels could
be made out of nothing. For if the more excellent nature could be produced out
of nothing, why could not the lesser nature, such as matter is by the same
power, be brought out of nothing? Again you say, Plato denied things
sensible truly to be: Aristotle, we doubt not, professed the contrary, which of
these opinions, I pray, is most agreeable unto reason? Is not the latter, and
that both by the light of nature, and by the light of grace? Is it not true of
us all, that in God we live and moove and have our being? And if our Act. 17.
2^.
life be a true life, our motion a true motion, is not our being also a true
being? especially, if as you say, all things that are, do participate of
Gods being. But let us come to Senecaes interpretation hereof; that is they put
on a countenance of being for a time, being incapable of the stability, and
soliditie of true being. Mark, I pray, whether this be a sober speech. For
either the being of sensible things is a true being or no. You say a true
being, then herin you shall contradict both, Plato and your self also: If
not a true being, then saying it is said that in this they continue not, it
followethe that they want not so much continuance of true being, as
continuance of such a being, as is no true being. Nay the Gloss corrupts the
text, as I prove thus. They that want continuance or stabilitie of true
being, fail not in the want of true being, but only in want of continuance
of true being: so that her by it must be confessed, they have true being,
though they have little or no continuance therein. Again it does not follow,
that because they want continuance, therefore they are incapable of continuance.
For cannot God preserve the Heaven and Earth for ever if it please him? Yet
these are sensible things. Again what meant either the Author or the
Interpreter to say, that sensible things have no stabilitie of being; when in
the opinion of Plato, the Heaven and Earth were to continue for ever, as well
as immateriall substances; especially if the continuance of those were by
nature, of these only by grant, or Chartar of their Maker. And of this we read
from you, of the other we read not. I willingly confess, the being of God
cannot be communicated unto any, but by the Father unto the Son; and therefore
I have already misliked, that you should maynteyne, that the Creatures do
participate of Gods being.

5. That Principle Omnia unum sunt, was the position of Melisus as well as of
Parmenides. And though Simplicius does not double with you (for why should
you suspect that, especially saying any man may err and misreport another
opinion without doublinge); but though he erred not, and Parmenides indeed
acknowledged distinction (and no other liklihood but he did), yet this is far
from justifyinge that mystical interpretation which you make of Parmenides his
meaning: allthoughe you positively deliver that Parmenides meant the same that
Plato did, to wit that Multitude of things visible is but the multiplied
shadow of invisible independent unity. He spoke Poetically, you Figuratively;
which kind of discourse, as I remember, Aristotle sometimes reprehended in
Empedocles. But surely, either you mistake, or I; who rather think that
saying to be delivered in respect of the matter, wherehence all things are
derived; and not in respect of the Agent, who derives them. Sure I am, it may
as naturally signify respect to the matter, as to the Agent; yea and much
more, and that for two reasons. First, because the matter whereof every thiing
consists, is of the essence thereof, so is not the Agent. Secondly because all
other things, besides the matter, came from the matter, in their opinion, but
all other things besides the Agent, came not from the Agent. For the matter it
self, in their opinion, proceeded not from the Agent, but was as eternal, as
God himself. Nay nor all other things, besides the matter, came from the
Agent; but some as it were in spite of the Agent, being overruled with the
untoward lines of the matter, as your self but a little before professed to be
the opinion of the Stoics. In Gods essence is only his own being formally,
ours vertually and eminently, in as much as God can produce it, and exemplarily
also, but that, I confess, is something mysterious unto me, save that I
conceave, it respects his understandinge, like as to be in him vertually,
respectethe his power. And I doubt not, but that the essence of God does
represent unto him, all natures possible. But to say that this being of the
creature in God, cannot be with safety committed to the creatures own charge
and custody, is a very wild phrase, and as much as if you should say, Gods
infinite wisdom, and power, and essence cannot be committed with safetye, to
the creatures charge and custody: for nothing that is in the creature is
formally in God; nothing that is formally in God, can be communicated to the
creature.

6. Howsoever Aristotle had employed his wit yet without grace it had never
ended in his happiness. And yet I tell you, he has done strangely herein, and
in my judgment to the wonder of the World, in so much that I may wonder,
that you take so little notice of it. But seeing he had only the book of Gods
creatures, whereabout to exercise his wit, and to read God therein, and whereby
his eternal power and Godhead is manifested; and you know, this book is
written in a woonderous hard language, and requires many years stoody to
atteyne to the understanding of it; and necessarily we must begin with the
knowledge of the creatures: Therefore no merveyle if he began with the
knowledge of things visible; but thence he ascended to the discovery of things
invisible. In his Physics he discoverethe unto us, a first moover; and he
has Metaphysickes as well as Physickes; and in his 12. book especially he
discoursethe of the nature of this first moover, and that unto admiration. He
shows also the references of immateriall creatures unto him, and of
material creatures unto them all. But as touching that reference which you
glance at the reference of creation, he speaks nothing indeed thereof. For he
believed it not; but as touching the opinion then current with some, of the
making of the World out of a praejacent matter, he gave himself to the utter
disproovinge thereof, in his 8. book of Physics. Undoubtedly he gave himself
to the contemplation of this (whatsoever you out of cunninge insinuate to the
contrary, to make the better way, for the broachinge of your conceytes) yet
never perceaved, that the definition of infinity imagined by him in the
divisibilitie of magnitude or succession of time, was but a mooveable image of
that true and solid infinity, to wit of God. We are reasonably well acquainted
with the nature of God in the School of Christ; yet have we not learned the
Infinity of God to be such, as may sitly be resembled by the one, or by the
other. To my understanding it is quite contrary, even by that definition of
infinity which your self applaud in saying. Insinitum est extra quod nihil
est, infinity is that without which nothing is. Now infinity in division of
magnitude and succession is quite of a contrary nature, being such as semper
liceat accipere aliquid extra, we may always take something without it; as
when more and more divisions in magnitude may be still made; and more and more
revolutions in time may still succeed. And Aristotle might well deny that
definition of infinity, which you propose. For by that definition, the
uppermost sphere of the Heavens, might justly be accoumpted infinite. And
other Philosophers, that proposed this definition, which you say was
censoriously rejected by him, did as well as Aristotle understande Infinite
only in quantity. And if you blame Aristotle, for this acception of the word,
you must blame the rest as well as him. So that with all these that maxim,
insinitum est, extra quod nihil est, signified, that an infinite body was such,
as without which no body was, or no quantity was, the meaning whereof I
conceave might be this; No measure of quantity could be imagined, that was
not comprehended under infinite quantity. Now we know, that no quantity, or
bodily dimensions are to be found in God, but altogether without him. Yet you
seem to attribute such a kind of infinity unto God: for you would have the
definition of insinite not to be appropriated to quantity only, but to be
simply and absolutely considered, as much as to say, it should comprehend that
which is infinite in quantity also. Yet we confess, immensitie is one of the
attributes of God, because he filles all places, but yet by your leave, without
all quantity. Your comparison is very incongruous. For infinity in length
comprehends all length formally; but will you say in like ^ort, that Gods
infinity in being, comprehends all being formally? Is the being of a body of a
man, of a beast in God formally? Exemplarily and vertually, or eminently they
are in God; but so is not all longitude, in that which is infinite in
longitude, but rather formally, and admi^th all denominations of length. God
does not admit all denominations of being. Thus, say you, did these Ancients
feel after, and seek the Lord; whereas alas, they thought not at all of God in
this their definition of infinitum, when they said, infinitum est extra quod
nihil est. Aratus, I confess, was far more Theological, then most of them,
when he said, that in God we live and moove and have our being; but this
has little correspondency with the former definition of infinitum. As sillily
do you conclude against Aristotle, as for the other Philosophers, when you say
he came far short of the truth in saying insinitum est, extra quod semper
aliquid est. For this is applied by Aristotle only to division in magnitude,
and succession in time, not unto God, as neither did the other Philosophers,
which gave another definition of infinitum; apply that their other definition
unto God, but all of them accorded in this, that finitum and infinitum were the
differences of quantity and of corporeal dimensions. And as for infinity of
being, Aristotle had nothing to do with that consideration in his Physics,
where he treatethe of infinitum. For infinite applied to being, is a
difference of ens, and so belongs rather in consideration to the Metaphysics,
whose subject is ens, then to the Physics, the subject whereof is corpus
natural. To infer infinity of being from no better ground, then those
branches of infinity, which consist only in possibility and succession, were a
very sorry inference in my judgment, and little becomminge any grave divine. For
by continuance of time, and succession of creatures in time, no specificall
perfection is added; but only individualls of the same kind succeed one
another. The Angels themselves being to continue for ever, shall ever produce
new thoughts new actions; but does this argue any infinity in them? By this
manner of discourse, Aristotle had better reason to conceave of Gods infinity,
then we Christians. For he maynteyned succession of time and of the parts of
this World by individual propagations, both without beginning and without
end, which we do not: but as we know the World has had a beginning, so we
believe it shall have an end; And consequently the producing of more
individual substances shall have an end. And whereas all Species, and
individualls formerly produced, being put together, do make up a number only
finite, how can this infer, that God is infinite? especially if so be, more
Species might be produced, then have been produced. For either it argues a
greater power to produce more and more kinds of things, or no. If it does;
then the producing of those that are produced, is no evidence of Gods greatest
power. If is does not; then the number of things produced, were they double
to that they are, or shallbe, cannot evidence that Gods power is infinite.
Again, saying God is yet in producing more and more, we can have no evidence
herby of Gods greatest power, till he come to the end of his works: therefore
as yet we have herby no evidence of his greatest power, or that his power is
infinite, though perhaps the world may have, to wit, when God is come to the
end of his workinge. Yet when that time is come, wherein God shall cease from
producinge new, all his works put together being but finite, how can that
consideration, evince a power infinite? Wherefore Hill that Atheist in his
Philosophia Epicurea etc. maynteyned, that the World already made, was
infinite; because it was fit (as he thought) that an infinite cause should
have an effect correspondent, and therefore, says he, the world must be
infinite. To proceed a little further; when the time shall come, that God shall
surcease to produce any new thing either in kind, or individual the
particulars produced put together from the beginning of the world to that day
shallbe but finite, and how can this infer a power infinite? Now all this
discourse of yours proceeds, upon supposition, that all things are produced
by God, and not only by course of nature; but by such a cause as was first
created, and since maynteyned, and governed, and ordered by God, which truth
was nothing evident to the greatest Philosophers that ever were. And you well
know that the creation of materia prima, was denied by them all. And therefore
I should conceave that the infinitenes of God, is rather evidenced by his
manner of producing things, then by the number of things produced; as namely,
by his creating of the World, and that of nothing. For if God has power to
give being, unto that which has no being, but only is capable of being (as
put the case to a man or Angel) and that by his word and will, he is as well
able to give being to any thing conceavable, (that is capable of being,) by
his word and will; and Qui potest in omne possibile is est omnipotens. He that
can give being to any thing that is possible to be, he is Allmighty.

Again, if God were finite in perfection of entity, then it were easy to
imagine a more perfect thing then God; and then that also should have an
existence. For if the essence or existence of a nature less perfect should be
all one, how much more should this be verified of a nature more perfect. And
consequently, there should be many Gods, one different in perfection above
another.

CHAP. IV.
There is no plurality of perfections in the Infinite essence; albeit the
perfection of all things be in him. Of the Absolute Identitie of the Divine
essence and attributes.

AS for the argument, which you propose, We must either allow the Gods to have
bodies, or deny them sense, because sense is never found without a body. I see
no great cause to mislike it; especially if it be rightly proposed, as it may
be, thus, because sense (to wit in proper speech) cannot be found without a
body. For is not sense an organicall faculty, that is such a faculty as
cannot exercise its function without material instruments? How you dispute in
justifyinge your censure upon this argument, let the Reader judge. God the
supreme Artificer can make Virtus formatrix, (you say) do more then Epicurus
can by all his sense and reason; and hence you conclude, that therefore God has
both sense and reason. Whereas you may as well prove that God has bodily
substance in him, both because he setts virtus formatrix, on work in
producing bodies, and can do more then we can withal our bodies and souls.
Therefore if you please, you may in confidence of such illations, proceed to
say that God consists of a body, and soul too. The Psalmists Philosophy is a
poor ground for you to build on. For you may as well conclude out of the
Psalmist, that God has eyes, and ears, and hands also, as when he say the,
The eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are open unto their
prayers. The Psalm. 34. 15. Psalm. 118. ^6.
right hand of the Lord is exalted, the right hand of the Lord has done
valiantly. And if you are pleased to attribute sense unto God, why do you not
attribute unto him feeling, and smelling, and tastinge also? Whatsoever we
come to understand by our five senses, why may not God understand the same
without sense, as well as Angels. That God only is, and all things numerable
are but mere shadows of his being, are your own principles and phrases; and
to draw conclusions from such grounds, is to build Castles in the Air. You
think to help it by saying, that Hearing sight and reason are in God
according to their ideall patterns or perfections, you might have taken in
three senses more as well, and have said that smelling, ^astinge and feelinge
are in God according to Ideall patterns and perfections; and justify Epicurus
too, in maynteyninge that the Gods have bodies. For though our Savior said,
a Spirit has not flesh and bone, yet you know how to justify that bodies
and souls, and flesh and bone, and Luc. 24. ^9
brains and senses, yea and the basest thing that is, are in God, to wit,
according to their ideall patterns and perfections. For we make no question,
but that all these things are known to God, and he is able to produce them,
(and no more do you require in the next Section unto this, that all things
are in God;) yea materia pr^a and all. And this conceyte of yours you
prosecute* with a great deal more Rhetoric then Philosophy or Logic.
Certainly not to be, and not to have operation, are far more different
between themselves, then nihil agere, and otium esse. For these are formally
the same, the other are not. For like (...), to be, and to work, are in
themselves manifestly distinct, so must be their negations also; so are not
nihil agere, and otium esse.

2. Your affectation of phrasifyinge, more like a Rhetorician, then a
Philosopher, makes you overlashe and cast your self upon resemblances without
all proportion. As when you say, all things are in Gods power, as strength to
moove our limbs is in our sinews, or motive faculty. Now in this, I say, is
no proportion. For saying all things are in God because he can produce them,
so strength (by just proportion) should be in our sinews, because our sinews
could produce it, which is palpably untrue. You should rather say, as the
motion of our limbs is in our sinews, or in our motive faculty rather,
because our motive faculty can produce such motion. Yet this were a very
strange resemblance taken at the best. For it is nothing strange that our
motive faculty should moove our limbs; but that God, should produce all
things out of nothing, is so wonderful strange a thing, that the most learned
Philosophers could never digest it, and the H. Ghost imputes it unto faith
that we believe it. Here Hebr. 11. 3.
you confess that sense cannot be without a corporal organ, whence it follow
the manifestly, that if sense be in God, then also corporal organs must be
found in God. And again you confess, that what we feel by sense, he knows
much better without sense: how little then did it, become you to profess, that
he argued like himself (that is sottishly belike) who said, we must either
allow the Gods to have bodies, or deny them sense? I make no question, but
that the Divine essence represents the natures of all things: For by knowing
himself, Divines say, he knows all things. But is this representation only
of natures extant as you speak? If so; how did he know all things before the
World was? how shall he know all things, after that the World shall cease to
be, some natures only reserved. How variety sets forth unity, as you
speak, I am to seek; yet the variety of Gods creatures, by your leave, is not
infinite.

3. Of the questions proposed by you, let the Reader judge, as they deserve; as
also of your solution of them, and of your more accurate and exquisite
distinction of universalitie, and totalitie, then the Platonicks ever atteyned
too, you distinguishinge it, not only from that totality, which arisethe from
aggregation of parts, but from that also, whose extent is not more then equal
to all the parts: which last member, I confess, is very curious, to wit, that
there should be a totalitie more then equal to all his parts; and I little
wonder that the Platonickes, were not acquainted with this subtle curiosity.
Gods nature we acknowledge to have no parts, but yet conteynes all entities,
not formally, but vertually, or eminently and examplarily; which eminent
comprehension is equivalent to a formal comprehension of all (if possible)
though the number of them were infinite; but not greater, because a number
cannot be imagined greater then infinite. Exhaustinge by particulars derived
from them, belongs to natures that conteyne the particulars formally; as a
bushel of wheat by substraction of graynes may be exhausted, it belongs not
to natures, that conteyne particulars eminently. To say that God is being it
self, or perfection, does not exclude plurality in my judgment, and that
for this reason. Humanity is humanity it self, yet this hinderethe not, but
that many thousands may be partakers of humanity. In like sort, though divine
perfection be perfection it self, yet this hinderethe not, but that many may
be partakers of Divine perfection. But you speak, I confess, of plurality in
the nature of God, and that in respect of attributes real, not of
denominations personal. For plurality her of undoubtedly you do not deny.
Now to say that God is all perfections eminently, does no way hinder his
formal unity; as likewise his formal unity does nothing prejudice his
perfectious eminent plurality.

4. I see no cause for this distinction of yours, concerning Ideall
perfections, and internal perfections. For if you understand ideall
perfections of perfections external and possible to be created by God, but
from everlasting represented unto God by his essence; there is no cause why you
should exclude the plurality of these from the essence of God. For what Divine
can doubt, but that as the perfections of created things are many, so they are
all known by God, and from everlasting were represented unto God; and
plurality of finite perfections represented unto God, and known by him, does
no way hinder the unity of Gods infinite essence, no more then it hinders the
unity of our souls essence, such as it is. But if you mean it not of Idea
representata, but representans; so I grant, there is but one in God, as there
is but one essence, which essence of God represents all entities, and
quiddities possible. But the argument which you use to prove this unity in
God, is neither congruous, nor sound. Not congruous, because it tends only to
this, namely to prove that God is illimited and infinite; as much as to say,
that all kind of entities are comprehended in the nature of God; but whether
they are so comprehended, as with distinction of plurality, or without, that
is another question, to the clearing whereof, you confer nothing for ought I
yet perceave. You demand, if Gods being be absolutely illimited, what could
limit or restrain it from being power, from being wisdom, from being
goodness, from being infinitely whatsoever any thing that has being is? I leave
the congruity of your last phrase to be justified by your self. I dare not
say, that God is whatsoever man or beast is. But touching your interrogation, I
say, it is nothing to the purpose. For the question in present is not, whether
Gods being be both life and power, and wisdom, and goodness, and whatsoever
any thing is, which is your phrase, not mine: But the question is, whether all
these are one in God, or more, that is, whether his life be his power, and
both, his wisdom, and all these his goodness, and every thing else, that any
creature is, whose being also (as you say) is infinitely in God. Not whether
all these things are in God, but whether all these are drawn to an unity in
God, without all plurality? If you frame your argument in another fashion to
help this, as thus; What hinders Gods life from being his power, and
wisdom etc. I answer that the formal notions of these is sufficient to
hinder it, except you can give some better reason to the contrary, then
hitherto you have done. A second incongruitie I find in your discourse and
that is this. That question, the decision whereof you meditate in this chapter,
arose from that which formerly you maynteyned; that all things were in God, in
a kind of Ideall, and transcendentall manner, now your self have confessed
that Ideaes were of substances, if not only of them. For your words are these,
If Plato meant that there were as many several Ideaes eternally extant,
whether in the first cause of things, or without him, as there were substances
specifically distinct, etc. But here you give instance only in such things as
are of accidental notion and denomination with us, such as are life, and
power, and wisdom, and goodness. Lastly, I have already showed that this
argument of yours is not sound, whereby you prove Gods being to be illimited,
because forsoothe it is independent: As if this consequence were evident of it
self, whereas on the contrary, all Philosophy is against it. For Aristotle
maynteyned the World to be independent; all others maynteyned the matter whereof
the world was made to be independent: Yet none conceaved, that herehence it
would follow, that either of them was therefore illimited, or at all
illimited. That Gods attributes are not really distinguished, we all confess,
you need not have brought in Austins authority to justify this. But you take
upon you to confront Atheists by evidence of demonstration wherein you fail
very much. For it will not follow, that if these attributes be distinct among
themselves, or from the essence of God, then the Divine essence is limited.
Like as on the contrary, it will not follow, that if the essence of something
be limited, the attributes thereof must needs be distinct from the essence. For
the soul of man is limited, yet some have maynteyned that the faculties of the
soul are not really distinct from the essence of the soul, as Scotus, and
that by shrewde arguments. And Zabarell professethe, that Intellectus practicus
is all one with Voluntas. And all beit the power of God be distinct from the
wisdom of God, yet if both be acknowledged to be infinite, each in his
kind, what prejudice is this to the infinitenes of Gods essence? Neither will
it follow, that one attribute shall want so much of infinite being in his
kind, as another has of proper being distinct from it; consideringe that
these notions are of different kinds. As for example, if a body, as put the
case, the outward heaven, were infinite, there should be both infinite
length, and infinite breadthe, and infinite thicknes, neythers infinitenes
being any whit prejudicial to the infinitenes of the other, because they are
of different kinds. And what color of reason have you, why infinitenes of
power should prejudice the infinitenes of wisdom, though they were distinct
really, which yet we believe they are not. And what think you, if some
attributes be found answerable to personal distinctions in the Trinity? Is it
not commonly said that the second person in Trinity is the wisdom of the
Father, and commethe from the Father per modum intellectus; and that the H.
Ghost proceeds from both per modum voluntatis? But I have no edge to look
into the Arc, or suffer my disputation to trenche upon these mysteries. Yet I
confess, though the Father be not the Son, nor the H Ghost, etc. Yet they
are not really distinct one from the other. In the Trinity there is alius and
alius, not aliud and aliud. But you maynteyne that Gods power is his wisdom,
etc. which yet notwithstanding I misl^ke not, but only do question the
argument, whereby you endeavor to prove it, and to my judgment it seems very
superficial. But my comfort is this, if you weakly maynteyne the nature of
God, you will as weakly oppose the grace of God. Again I say, it will not
follow, that if the several beings of wisdom and power were distinct, and
not identically the same with the essence of God, then the essence should not
be infinite. For it may be said that the essence is infinite in a being
substantial; the power and wisdom of God are infinite in a being
accidental, though such as necessarily flows from the nature of God. Indeed
if it were prooved, that there is no accident in God, then the case were
clear, that these attributes were not distinct from the essence of God, as
indeed they are not; but this is more then hitherto you have prooved. And till
you have prooved it, they may be conceaved as distinct from the essence (as
before has been said) without any prejudice to the infinity of Gods essence,
or danger of exposing it unto nakedness, for ought your discourse, has as yet
alleged to the contrary.

5. As for that definition of a thing absolutely infinite; Infinitum est, extra
quod nihil est, which you make so much reckonninge of; I take it to be a vain
conceyte; considering that the Philosophers who urged it, never made any such
construction of it, as you do; but applyinge it only to material bodies of
quantity and extension, maynteyned that in this sense the World was infinite.
But Aristotle does not approove of such a notion of infinite, as nothing
agreeable with the denomination; the world being finite rather then infinite in
his opinion; and yet as they all thought, without the world nothing was. Yet
some in my knowledge have avouched the world to be infinite, though I nothing
commend either their learning, or their honesty herein. And in those former
days finitum and infinitum, were taken only for material differences of
bodies nothing at all belonging to immateriall natures, abstract from bodily or
material extension of parts. And Zabarell (as I remember) observes as much (as
touching the opinion of Aristotle) upon the last chapters of the eighthe book
of Physics. And how far forth infinitum is to be acknowledged in nature,
Aristotle in his Physics has discoursed. Now in the sense before spoken of,
it is very absurd, to attribute such a definition of infinity unto God, who is
not only a Spirit but the Father of Spirits, and incapable of parts, much more
of extension in any material manner. But let the words be shaped after such a
construction as you devise to make the definition suitable to the nature of
God; to wit, as if he were such an entitie, as comprehendes all entitie. I say
it is manifestly untrue. For is not the World and all the parts thereof, from
Angels unto the basest woorme that creepethe, and drop of mire, or sparkle of
fire, or the least cinder; are not all these something, and that extra Deum?
For though eminently they may be said to be in God, yet undoubtedly they are
extra Deum formally; and to my understanding it is absurd to say, they are
identically contained in Gods essence. It is true that Gods essence does
represent them. For God knows them not, but by knowing of himself and his
essence, and being of infinite power, can produce any thing that implies not
contradiction. I cannot represent a fit comparison: but such as the creature
can affoard if you give me leave to make use of, I say that every thing which a
glass represents, is not identically contained in the glass, neither is it
true, that whatsoever is known by the understanding of man or Angel, is
identically contained in the understanding or spirit of man or Angel. As I
have said, so I say again; I see no evidence of that consequence you make
thus; God is illimited, therefore all things are in God; and therefore also,
all things that are in God, or are attributed unto him are all one. That which
you add, when you say, whatsoever is incapable of limit, is incapable of
division or numericall difference, is very ambiguous; and the ambiguitie being
cleared, will prove partly to be without all question, and nothing to the
purpose, partly as questionable as ever, where it is to the purpose. For that,
that which is infinite in essence, must be one and not many, I think is
without question even amongst Atheists nowadayes, that have any learning in
them; allthough a man may fail in the demonstration of it, as here you do.
For to be infinite in essence, is to comprehend all specificall entities not
numericall. For such, as such, differ not in essence. And for it to be
multiplied according to numericall differences only, seems nothing
prejudicial to the infinity of the essence, save only as infinity of essence
is corruptly conceaved to imply quantity. Infinity of power does more
evidently include opposition to numericall plurality, then infinity of essence
in my judgment. But be it, not only without question, but also supposed to
have been made evident by some demonstration of yours, yet is it nothing to the
present question. For the question in present is not, whether there may be two
Gods: but only, whether in the one nature of God, there be not things
different; to wit whether Gods wisdom be not different from his power, and
both these different from his goodness; that is in a word, whether there be not
any accident in God. And yet, unto this question you are arrived, but in a very
indecent, and incongruous manner. For whereas before you had undertaken to
prove, that all things were in God according to ideall perfections, by all
things understandinge substances chiefly, as of Angels, and men, and beasts
of all sorts. And in this chapter do undertake to show, that all things thus
being in God, are not in him by way of plurality, but drawn to unity: and
accordingly should herby prove, that the essence of an Angel, and the essence
of a man, yea and the essence of a beast, and of every base thing is so in God,
as one with him, and one with every thing: You shift of from this, and in the
place thereof, only mention, how Gods life, and wisdom, and power, and goodness
are all one in God. And this you prove only from this, that God is illimited;
which is as sorry a consequence as that, whereby you prooved his illimited
condition, to wit from this, that he is independent, and received not his
being from any thing. Which consequence of yours, is so far from natural
evidence, that it is repugnant to all Philosophers of old, who maynteyned
either the World, or the first matter (not to speak of Intelligences) to be
independent of any efficient cause, and without all making, yet did never
conceave that herehence it must follow, that either of them should be
infinite. No less inconsequent is that, which follows also, as when you
say, Whersoever it can be truly said, this is one and that another, or this
is, and is not that, each has distinct limits. I say this is untrue. For
suppose a body were infinite; In this case both length, and bredthe, and
thicknes were infinite; yet length were only length, and not bredthe, yet
never a whit the less infinite. Neither is infinity in thicknes any hinderance
to infinity in breadthe, though breadthe be not thicknes; nor infinity in
breadthe, any hinderance to infinity in length, though length be not
breadthe. In like sort the infinity of Gods power should be no prejudice to
the infinity of his wisdom, though his wisdom be not his power; Nor the
infinity of his goodness, any prejudice to the infinity of his power, and
wisdom, though his power, and wisdom, and goodness were different in
themselves. But to come nearer; what think you of the Persons in the Trinity?
The Father is the Father, and neither is he the Son, nor the Holy Ghost; will
you herehence conclude that he is not infinite? The Son is the Son, but he
is neither the Father nor the Holy Ghost; will you therefore say, he is not
infinite? The Holy Ghost, is the Holy Ghost, but neither the Father nor the
Son, will you hence infer that he has limits, and is not infinite? And is
it not confessed not only by great Schoolmen, but even by our divines also,
that the Son is produced of the Father per modum intellectus? Is he not the
wisdom of the Father, and what difference between the wisdom of God, and
the understanding of himself? And do they not also confess, that the H.
Ghost proceeds from both per modum voluntatis? And as we say, Gods
understanding is not his will, though it be no different thing from his will;
and Gods will is not his understandinge, though it be no different thing from
his understandinge, so we may adore the indivisible unity of the Godhead,
notwithstanding the Trinity of the Persons, though we are not able to
comprehended the mystery hereof. It is true, our understanding is such, as that,
oportet intelligentem phantasmata speculari; and imaginatio non transcendit
continuum. Yet notwithstanding we atteyne by discourse to the acknowledgment
of things immateriall, as of our souls, yea and of Angels; yea and of the
God both of men and Angels; yet not by material things as by the pictures of
them, as you phrasify it, but rather as in the effects; wherein as it were in
glasses do shine the causes of them. Thus Aristotle from the motions of the
heavens has inferred the existence of immateriall and abstract substances as
the moovers of them. And we commonly say, that the World is as a glass wherein
the glory of God is represented. His eternal power and Godhead being made
manifest by his works, as the Apostle speakethe Romans 1. 20. Of Gods illimited
being we make no question; but well we may question the soundnes of your
arguments, whereby you prove it, as also the soundnes of those consequences,
which you make from it. And far better it is to content our selves with the
simplicity of our Christian faith, in believinge of God, what Gods word
teachethe us, then to depend upon weak reason for the confirmation thereof. For
weak reasons do rather betray a cause, then justify it. We believe that God
is one, and that there is no plurality of natures in him, but only of Persons.
And we must take heed that the Metaphysicall extract of vis unita fortior
(which you speak of) do not so far possess us with the contemplation of
Gods unity, as to deny the Trinity. And touching the attributes of God, as
neither distinct from the essence of God, nor from themselves, we do not much
affect curiosity of demonstration; but if any man voluntarily undertake such a
task, we look for substance of sound proofs, and are not content to have our
mouths filled with emty spoones. You seem to gratify God with your
hyperboles; but surely he does not put us to tell any untruthes for him, as
man does for man, to gratify him. You enterteyne a conceyte of Gods power,
above all conceyte of infinite power; of Gods wisdom above all conceyte of
infinite wisdom; of Gods goodness above all conceyte of infinite goodness. To
be essential to the nature of God, is more noble, I grant, then to be
accidental: but how any power can be greater then power infinite, or any
wisdom greater then wisdom infinite, or any goodness greater then goodness
infinite, I cannot comprehend yet I verily believe, that whersoever infinite
power, and infinite wisdom, and infinite goodness is found, that nature is
not accidentally but essentially both powerful, and wise, and good, as namely
the nature of God: though of the evident demonstration thereof, for ought you
have brought to help us herein, we may be still to seek. As for succession,
and extension, we hold that each is impossible to be infinite. And neither of
them any attribute of God, as power, and wisdom, and goodness is. And
therefore, the comparison you make of the nature of God in this kind, must
needs be wondrous wild.

Yet I envy no man the delight that he takes in these and such like
contemplations, but rather wonder that succession, and extension should be
reckoned up by you as excellencyes and perfections contained in God, and that
all these mentioned attributes laid out in several, should have infinities
added unto them. Much more should we have wondered, if the issue of your
discourse had been answearable to the original, which is to show, not how
power, and wisdom, and goodness are all one in God, which are with us of
accidental denomination; but to show how every substance is in God, of
Angel, of man, of beasts, of birds, of fishes, of woormes and every creeping
thing; and that all these are to be accoumpted excellencyes and perfections.
And surely they had need to be in God, in a more excellent manner, then they
are in themselves; otherwise their advancing so high, would be too great a
degrading of the nature of God.

But to add my mite of discourse, touching the being of all things in God,
and the precise unity of all things in God, which under a form of plurality
according to our conceytes, are attributed unto him. As touching the first,
that all perfections are in God, is to be acknowledged without all controversy,
because we understand by God such a nature, as nothing can be imagined better;
and I approove of Aquinas his reason. Like as heat if it did exist of it
self, it should comprehend all degrees of heat: so the essence of God being
all one with his existence, that is he being essentially (...), all
perfections of being must necessarily be comprehended in him. But as for the
perfections of being which are found without God, according to their several
ranks and kinds therein; ^s namely of being, without life, of being and life
without sense, or reason; of being, life, and sense without reason, of both
being, life, and sense, and reason: as they are not like unto God according to
any univocall notion of Species, o^kind, but only analogicall, which as Aquinas
shewethe, is this, that God is entitie by essence; every other thing is an
entity only by participation. So likewise their perfections cannot be said to
be in God univocally, but only analogically, as the effect is said to be in
the Agent, in as much as he has power to produce it. It is true, some things
are attributed unto creatures, which cannot be attributed unto God; and some
things are attributed both to God, and to the creatures. As for example; God
is not a body, man is a body; God is a spirit, an Angel is a spirit; God
has being, so have all things; God has life, so have many things. God is
wise, good, powerful; these attributes are likewise conveniently given to men
and Angels. Yet these denominations, in admitting whereof both God and
creatures do agree, are as different in respect of God and the creatures, as
those denominations in the communion whereof they do not agree. As for example
the Spiritual nature of God is as far different from the spiritual nature
of an Angel, as from the bodily nature of man or beast, as being infinitely
different from each. And therefore it is that some make the measure of
perfections in the creatures not their approximation in nature unto God, but
rather their remotion a non esse. One creature having more perfections of
being then another, and consequently so much the more remooved from not
being. But the creatures of greatest perfection being but finite are still
infinitely remooved from God who is infinite. So that like as the bodily nature
of man does not agree in any kind with the spiritual nature of God; so
neither does the spiritual nature of an Angel agree in any kind with the
spiritual nature of God. But God is equally an equivocall Agent in respect of
both. And no merveyle; for the denominations wherein God and the creature
agree, are commonly such as are of accidental denomination unto the creatures;
as when we say God is wise, and holy, and powerful; a man or Angel is wise,
and holy, and powerful etc. But is there any color why, the nature of God
should come nearer unto those things that are of accidental denomination in
us, then unto those that are substantial; whereas every mean scholar knows,
that substances are more noble then accidents, and as for substantial
denominations wherein God, and the creature do agree, if they be examined, it
will be found that in the resolution of the truth, the agreement will appear
to be only in negation. As when we say, God is a spirit, the negation of
extension corporal and material, is the only thing, wherein the nature of
God agrees with an Angel. Like as our Savior intimates the description of a
spirit in distinction from a man, to consist in this, that a spirit has not
flesh and bones. And Luc. 24.
as for the general not on of entitie common to all, mark what a vast
difference there is herein between God and the creature, and such as excludes
all univocation. God is an entity independent, and whereof all other entities
depend both for their production, and for their preservation, and that out of
nothing, as touching the last resolution of them into their first principles.
Let it suffize then, that all perfections are in God, and that they all are his
one most pure and most simple essence. But as for created perfections, the word
created is a term diminishing perfection; but such as they are, they are in
God only, as effects are in their causes, and they not univocall, but
equivocall only, or at the best but analogicall. Let us come to the
consideration of the unity of Gods attributes, especially with Gods essence,
whence it will follow, that an unity of them is to be acknowledged amongst
themselves. And the question will come to this, whether there be any accident in
God? Not that I have any edge to these Metaphysicall speculations; or that I
think our language to be fit for them, for want of terms of Art in common
use to express such notions, as here must necessarily occur: But only being
provoked herunto by your discourse, who here and there inculcate foul errors
in Divinity, and that depending sometimes upon these, or such like
Metaphysicall contemplations.

Some therefore argue thus. If there were any accident in God, then there
should be some essence common unto God with complete substances create, to
wit an essence supporting accidents. And if there were any common essence to
God with other substances, then there were to be acknowledged something in
nature before God; as the Genus is commonly accoumpted in nature before the
Species thereof. And further, it seems, that if any genericall nature were
common to God and us, then some part of Gods essence should be found in us, and
some part of our essence should be found in God. Like as the essence of
Animalitie being common unto man and beast, is found both in man and beast. And
consequently. God creatinge substances, should create in part a certain common
essence, which is found in himself, and so the self same essence should be
both the Creator, and the creature. If to avoyde these dangerous consequences,
it be replied that to support accidents is not af any essential denomination,
but accidental; as great absurdities seem to follow on that part also. For
if to support accidents be an accident, this makes way to a progress in
insinitum without end. For even this supportation of accidents, if it be an
accident, must be supported by a substance and so without end. Again if to
support accidents be an accident; it must either flow from substance, in case
it be an accident proper; or be brought from without by some agent, if it be an
accident common. This latter cannot be admitted in respect of God. If the
former be, then there must be acknowledged some common essence both to God and
other substances, whence this accident flows, and then we are, where we were.

Another argument may be conceaved thus. It is commonly received, that every
substance is more noble, and of greater dignity then any accident. And
therefore if accidents were to be found in God, some thing should be found in
God, more ignoble then his creatures.

If accidents were to be found in God, then either they shall denote entities
of perfection or imperfection. Impossible it is that any entitie of perfection
should be found in God. For Deus est quo nihil melius excogitari potest. If
of perfection, then it is the very essence of God and no accident, for as much
as Gods essence is (...), which comprehendes all perfection of entitie. Like as
heat comprehendes all degrees of heat.

Again an accident is compared to the subject, as an act to the power of
receavinge it. But there can be no power passive in God: For as much as passive
power is always perfited by the act. And so the nature of God should admit
perfection from an accident.

Lastly, God is a Spirit, and therefore no bodily or material accident can be
found in God; if any be found in him, it must be spiritual. Now as Aristotle
says, there are but three sorts of things in the mind of man, and they are
either faculties, or passions, or habits. Of these, passions are too base to be
attributed unto God, and they are not severed from change. And as for habits,
they suppose an imperfect nature, which is perfited by them, which cannot be
verified of the nature of God. Now the faculties of God are either of
understandinge, or of willing, which are operations immanent or of working
without by operations transient. If it may appear, that Gods faculty of
understandinge is all one with the act of his understandinge, then it will
thereby appear that the faculty of the understanding is not distinct from the
nature it self of God: considering, that albeit it is without question that
the faculty of man's understanding is distinct from the act of his
understandinge; yet some have questioned, whether the faculties of a man's soul
be really distinct from the substance of the soul, and maynteyned that they
are not, as namely the Sco^ists. But what need we proceed further. Aristotle
him self, that great naturalist has acknowledged the first moover to be his
life, and his intelligence.

Yet consider in reason; If Gods essence and existence be all one; how much
more his understanding faculty; and his actual intelligence. For an
understandinge faculty can easily produce the act of understanding; but
essence cannot give it self existence. But essence and existence in God are
all one. For if they were not, then either his existence should flow from his
essence, which is a thing utterly impossible. (For act cannot flow from
possibility; neither can any thing be conceaved to be productive, unles it
suppose existence.) Or existence must proceed from some exter^or Agent that
causethe it; Now this were to maynteyne some superior cause unto God himself,
which has power to create him. In which case he should have something better
then himself, which is flat contradiction to the nature of God, whom we
conceave to be such, as nothing better then he can be imagined. But I willingly
profess, I nothing like these curiosities, neither did I ever give my self to
this kind of study before. There is no reason but may be shaken by wrangling
opposition. Faith cannot.

SECT. II.
Of the Several branches of absolute infinity; or of the infinity of the
Divine attributes as they are severally apprehended by us.

CHAP. V.
Of Divine immensity, or of that branch of absolute infinity whereof infinity
in magnitude or space imaginary is the shadow.

HENCE you draw us to the speculation of the several branches of absolute
infinity; and first of Gods immensitie, which you premise unto Gods eternity;
whereof I muse not a little: considering that immensitie is an attribute
denominating God in respect of creatures; and is not any otherwise considered
by Schole Divines nor by your self neither, but in this respect that he
fillethe all places. And therefore before the World was, and before there was
any place to fill, he could not be said to fill all places. As for eternity
in being without beginning, that is an absolute attribute, and was ever
verified of God. Perhaps you consider immensitie not as it signifies his
filling of all places, but as it signifies his ability to fill all places.
Yet this is in reference unto place, and we commonly confound Gods immensitie
with his ubiquitie. Much less can I approove your Rhetoric, as when you make
infinity of space to be the shadow of Gods immensitie. First because infinity
of space is neither existent nor possible to be existent, and to my judgeme^t,
such a thing seems not fit to be a shadow of that which is existent, such as
you suppose the immensitie of God to be. Secondly immensitie of space is in
respect of that quantity which is called quantitas motis quantity of
extension, and capable of division, but the immensitie of God denominates him,
in respect of that quantity, which is called quantitas virtutis, quantity of
virtue, incapable of extension or division. And therefore the one seems no way
sit to be the model of the other. Thirdly shadows do many times exactly
represent the proportion of the thing shadowed; and if at some times they are
far less, at other times again, they are far greater then the bodies
which they represent, as when the day declineth and the shadows of the evening
are stretched forth, as the Prophet speakethe. And indeed you may well say
that Ier. 6 4.
immensitie of space is even in this respect a shadow of Gods immensitie. For
immensitie of space is absolutely infinite; but Gods immensitie as it signisies
his existence in all places, (neither do I find it otherwise considered,
either by Schoolmen or your self) is absolutely finite: For as much as all
places put together are but finite, nor can possibly be any more then finite.
But let us consider the particulars of your discourse. You tell us, that our
imaginations will hardly suffer infinity to be severed from time and place.
This is a paradoxe to me. I had thought rather, it had been far (...) for us
to imagine time finite, and place finite, then either of them infinite. For it
is a ruled case, that infinitum qua infinitum non potest cognosci; Yet you will
have it so easy to be imagined, Arist. phys. 1. cont. ^6.
as that you make it a very difficult matter for imagination to apprehend
either time or place otherwise then infinite. If you had avouched it of time
and place indefinite, it had been less distant from the truth; yet that also
distant from the truth. For undoubtedly my imagination may conceave a time
definite, as well as indefinite; As for example, it may as well conceave three
years space of time, as well as more years space of time then three, without
de^ing how much: the like may be said of place also. As for infinite time and
place, as it is impossible that any such thing should be, so I promise you, I
cannot conceave that it should be so easily (as you suppose) if possibly
imagined. Yet you take upon you to give a reason of so uncouth an assertion.
But that proof is as inconsequent, as your former assertion was insolent. For
though sensible things cannot easily be separated in our understanding from
place and time, yet when herehence you infer, that place it self cannot be
separated by the understanding from the immensitie thereof, nor time it self
from the eternity thereof, I find neither art in this consequence, nor any
tolerable color or show of reason to make it probable. And to the contrary
(as I said) It is a ruled case that infinitum qua infinitum non potest
cognosci. And therefore it is so easy a thing to separate infinity from time
and place; as it is impossible, that in the understanding of man it should be
con^oyned with them. Yet this is not all the error of this your discourse. For
the Antecedent is utterly untrue: as when you say, that sensible things when
they are winnowed from the rest into the closet of the understanding, they
still reteyne their circumstances of time and place. Whereas to the contrary it
is undoubtedly true, that Intelloctus abstrahit ab hic and nunc; the
understanding considers things abstract from time and place; and so does
the imagination also: Only this is the condition of the imagination, in
distinction from the understanding, that imaginatio non transcendit continuum:
It cannot consider things abstract from continuitie, that is from extension of
parts: but from time and place it can abstract, how much more from the infinity
of each And surely each faculty were a sorry winnower, if it could not separate
the graynes of natural things, from such gross hu^kes that in wrappe them.
It is true we are apt to imagine a local distance, beyond the utmost surface
of heaven, but it does not herehence follow, that we imagine an infinite
distance beyond it, but rather indefinite. And therefore we are apt to imagine a
distance without the globe of Heaven, because we can imagine the globe of
Heaven in as small a proportion as we list, even no bigger then one of the
globes in our College Libraries. In like sort we may imagine time before the
World; for who doubtethe, but that it was possible that time should have been
sooner then it wa^ and wh^s it is now about six thousand years since the
World began; so if it had pleased God, it might have b^ne 1^. thousand. But
do not you infer herehence, that we do imagine infinite time preceding the
World; for that is not held to be possible as finite time is. But it is an
easy leap, I confess, in the ^rrour of a man's imagination to pass from time
indefinite, to time infinite, and to take one for the other. To imagine a
successive dur^tion of time much longer before the creation of the world, th^n
has been the continuance of it since, is one thing* but to imagine an
infinite duration of time before the World, is another thing, and much
different, ^ea infinitely different. Looking back upon this discourse of yours
to prove* whether it might admit any other toler^ble construction; I conc^ved
your meaning might perhap^ be this; not that place and time could not be
conceaved without the immensitie of the one, and the eternity of the other*
but ^ather that immensitie could not be conceaved without place, nor eternity
without time. But upon serious consideration I do^ not find this latter
interpre^tion to be any way congruous unto your text. For you plainly profess,
that albeit both reason and faith drives us to confess both time and place to
be finite, yet our imaginations will hardly suffer infinity to be severed from
them, which can admit no other interpr^tation then that which I have impug^ed.
That which you talk, of certain School brains pu^ed in passing this
unsoundable gulf, and that so far as to suspect, that God, who now is in
every place of the world created by him, was as truly in these imaginary
distances of place and time before the creation was att^mpted; is nothing but a
bundell of mysteries unto me. For I never kn^we any that offered to p^sse that
unsoundable gulf, you sp^ake of, otherwise, then by imagining^; and how their
brains were p^zled in giving way to this imagination I k^owe not; much le^ do
I understand* how being pu^ed in this imagination, they should herehence grow
to suspect, that God was as truly in that imaginary distance of place as in
things truly exist^t, and ^ruly distant ^ach from other. And most of all do I
wonder, what you mean to clap the imaginary distance of time* with the
imaginary distance of plac^. For though I have read of some that discourse of
vacuum lo^i, an imaginary distance of place, and maynteyne that God was and is
therein* yet I never heard nor read of any man discoursing in like sort of
Vacuum temporis, and maynteyninge that God was and is therein. And as touching
the question, whether God be i^ Vacu^ or in that imaginary distance you spe^ke
of; I have read the question proposed by Vasquius, and the opinion of some
Vasq. ^n (...). p. disp. 29.
mentioned, who maynteyned that God was in Uac^; but very few; yet he
reckonnethe Cajetan for one; but whence does he fetch this ^pinion of
Cajetan? no^ out of his Commentaries upon Aquinas hi^ Sums, where is the
proper place for a Schooleman to manifest his opinion herabouts; but out of his
Commentaries upon Io^n. 1. v. 12. which makes me suspect the fidelity of his
relation or interpretation of Cajetan. The other which he mentionethe is Major
upon the 1. of the sentences and 37. distinction. And sinc^ we are fallen upon
it* I am willingly to confer discourse with you herabouts. And first, I say,
that Scripture and reason seem to favor it. For King Solomon professes 1.
Kings (...).
that the Heavens of Heavens do not conteyne the Lord: and likewise Job says
of him* that He is higher then the Heaven, Job. 11.
and deeper then Hell; and certainly God is able to produce a body without the
Heavens, and consequently in Vacuo; and herupon it seems to some, that in good
reason God should first have a being there, before he produce the any body
there. And this is one reason of many, which Brad wardine usethe to prove,
that God is in Vacuo: (for tha^ is his opinion) though Vasquius was not
acquainted with him. Now by your leave, I will consider your reasons to the
contrary. First you demand whether this local distance be created or no^*
whether it be something or nothing? I answer, that ^rteinly it is not
created, as being just nothing yet so as that it is possible a body should be,
where before was no body. As for example where now the World is, before the
World was, (...) no body, yet was it then possible there should be a body, So
without the Heavens is no body, yet is it possible that a body should be
without the heavens. You proceed saying, If it be nothing, then they had an
imagination of an infinite space which really was nothing; and we grant they
had. For they held it only an imaginary space or distance. Further you
infer; If really nothing, then it could not be truly termed an imaginary
space, before the World was created. A manifest inconsequence. For as men may
imagine things that are not, so such things may be truly termed imaginary
things which are not real. And there is no such difference, as you avouche,
between these two, To imagine an infinite space, and to say, that There is an
imaginary infinite space. For whersoever there is the imagination of an
infinite space, there must needs be an infinite space imagined. And therefore
as often as there is in man the imagination of an infinite space without the
heavens, this is as much as to say, there is an infinite space imagined by man
to be without the heavens. But I observe your subtlety following. Before the
heavens, you say, there could be no imagination of any such space; therefore
there was no such space imagined. I answer; though before the heavens there
was no man at all to imagine it, yet nevertheless was it imaginable, and now
you confess it is so imagined. And not only do we imagine a Uacuum to have
been before the World was, but even since the World is, to wit, without the
Heavens. And taking it aright, is not only now so imagined by us, but a truth
that a Uacuum is without the heavens, and was before the world was, where now
the world is. For the error of the imagination is to mistake in the right
meaning of Vacuum. For commonly it is imagined under the notion of a space
existent, whereas indeed it is rather the negation of a body existent, joined
with the possibility of a body to exist. So without the heavens is no space or
body, yet possible is it, that a bodly space should be. Neither is it required
herunto, that it should be created by God; for only real things are created by
God, but the negation of bodies existent requires no creation, but rather the
suspension of creation. You think the reality of this imagination to be God,
whom the Hebrews call (...) place; I rather think the realitie of it is a
voydenes of a body or bodies with the possibility of existence of a body or
bodies. Touching which possibility, if it be demanded in what subject it is;
I remember what answer Ioannes Grammaticus made to the like question,
reported by Averroes on the 12. book of Aristotle's Metaphysics, namely that
it was in God, to wit fundamentally not formally. For I nothing doubt but his
meaning was this. In God allone is found an almighty power to make the world
out of nothing, whence it follows, that before the world was, there was a
possibility that the world should be, and the mere active power of God is
sufficient to denominate this possibility. A possibility physical or
natural requires a subject to support it, but a possibility logical not so,
as being only negatio repugnantie, a want of repugnancy. And if God was able to
make a world out of nothing, then surely it was no contradiction, that the
world should be, and consequently the world was possible before it was. And yet
to draw a little nearer unto you in this; I profess, I find it more hard to
maynteyne, that God i any where as in a place, then to maynteyne that God is in
Uacuo. For mark how Durand distinguishethe; Place, says he, Durand. in 1.
did. 37. p. 1. q. 2.
is considered two ways, either as a natural thing, or as containing the
thing placed therein. As it is a natural thing, God is in every place, but as
it conteynethe the thing that is said to be therein; so God is in no place
secundum se, in respect of himself. For nothing without him is able to
conteyne him; but in respect of his effects, he is in all places; because he is
contained of nothing, but rather conteyneth all things, and preservethe them.
But in respect of his effects he is every where. For he fillethe every place
with his effects; and in this sense, it is proper to God to be every where.
Herupon some may conceave that God may be called (...) place, because he
conteynethe all things, rather then is contained. Yet we know that the
continency of place is corporal, and ordinarily the place is more base then
the things contained therein. But Gods continency is merely vertuall and
spiritual, and in dignity infinitely beyoud the most noble creatures. And we
have no great cause to doat upon the Rabbines, whose Philosophy was never a
whit better then their divinity. Yet one thing more: The question was whether
God might be said to be in Uacuo, and your discourse is only to deny, that
there is any such infinite space as is imagined, either now to be without the
heavens, or hertofore to have been before the world was, but you take no notice
of the Arguments made to the contrary, much less do you take any care to
answer any one of them. And yet to my thinking some are shrewde ones, and
different courses are taken in answearing them; which argues that one man's
answer gave little satisfaction to another. I will therefore take this pains
in part for you, and represent the arguments of Bradwardine, who takes upon
Bradward. Summa de causa Dei contra Pelag. lib. 1. cap 5. coroll. 2.
him to prove, that God is essentially and presentially every where, not only
in the World, and all the parts thereof; but also without the World, in that
Uacuum or site imaginary; and withal I will make bold to show you my
judgment of them. His first argument is large; in effect this: God can moove
the World by a direct motion further Eastward, or further Westward. Upon this
supposition he proceeds thus. Either God was here before, whether the World
is now moved or no; Again, either God continuethe there from whence the World
was moved, or no. If God was there before his motion thither, and continuethe
still where he was before the motion from thence, then it is manifest he was
and is in Vacuo. But if from the time that the World moved from hence, he
cease to be here, and upon the Worlds mooving more Eastward, he begins to
be there, then God changethe his place with the world, ceasinge to be where
formerly he was, and beginning to be where formerly he was not; and
consequently God shall be moved at the motion of the world, as the soul of
man is said to be moved, upon the motion of the body. But this seems very
uncouthe to be attributed unto God, though some are content to swallowe it,
not satisfyinge themselves in finding out a convenient answer. Others deny
the supposition, to wit, of a direct motion competent to the world. But says
Bradwardine, to deny that God is able thus to moove the world, is to curtll the
Allmighty power of God; and therefore that opinion says he, is amongst the
Articles which were condemned by Steven Bishop of Paris. Yet of those Articles
it was wont to be said, non transcendunt Alps, they do not climb over the
Alps; and we may as well say, they do not go a ship board to sail over our
narrow Seas. In my judgment the supposition is unsound and the contrary
rather true, namely that the world cannot be moved Eastward or Westward; not
thoroughe any impotency in God, who can do all things that imply not
contradiction; but by reason that this is such a thing as implyethe
contradiction, if it be well considered, and therefore is impossible. For it
supposes that without the world there is a space, consisting of parts,
thorough some parts whereof more or less: the world may be moved. But this is
utterly untrue; for they themselves confess, that the space they speak of is
only imaginary. Now herehence it followethe that the motion thorough an
imaginary space, must be only an imaginary motion, and no real motion.
Secondly we answer, supposing the motion true and real and such a thing
possible; that God is said to be in the world not secundum se, but secundum
effectus, as before we had out of Durand, because with his effects he filles
all things, all places. Now though these bodies do thus moove, and
therwithall the effects wherewith he fills them, yet he himself is not
moved; because himself, as himself cannot be said to be any where, but as
in himself he was before the world was, so in himself he continuethe to be
still. His second argument is this: Suppose God create another world without
the heaven; then either God is there, where he was not before, and so shall be
changed in place; or if he were there before, then he was in Uacuo. I answer,
that God may be in things, wherein he was not before, not because himself
becommethe otherwise then he was before, but because things which before were
not, now are; and God with his effects does fill all things and all places,
as they have their being, and ceasethe to fill all things, as they cease to
have any being. In a word God is said to coexist, or not coexist with things
anewe, not that he does either begin or cease to coexist with them; but in
respect that they do either begin or cease to coexist with him. His third
argument is, that as many as deny God to exist in Uacuo, must be driven to deny
that God could make the world bigger or less then it is. But we see no cause,
why we should be cast upon any so absurd assertion. We grant that God could and
can make a real and spacious distance beyond the Heavens: but till God does
create such a distance, we deny that there is any such, though we deny not,
but man may imagine such. Again he say the we must be driven to maynteyne,
that God necessarily made the world n the site. A. where now it is, and that
before the world was made, there was no other site, but the site A. where now
it is. But we say that before the World was, there was no site at all, not only
no site different from the site A. but also not so much as the site A.
neither. And that to imagine any different sites before the world was, is to
imagine distance of parts, where neither any parts were, nor distance; though
such distance of parts be imagied by us, like as Chimeraes are, and such like
fictions. Again he disputes thus: Except Uacuum be granted to have been
sometimes, the world was everlasting; I answer; Uacuum sometimes was; but the
question between us is not about the existence of it (as such negations and
possibilities may be said to exist) but only about the nature of it, to wit
wherher it contained any distance of parts as it is imagined after the form of
a positive thing. This we deny, and do maynteyne that Uacuum is only a
voydnes of bodies with possibility of existence of bodies, not of existence of
bodies therein, as in a space capable of bodies as it is imagined, but simply
of their existence. His chiefest argument is this (...) when God created the
world either he was there before he created it or no. If he were there before
he created it, then he was in Uacuo. For before the creation was, nothing was
without God, but Uacuum. If you say, God was not there before he created the
world; this he says is contrary to reason. But to my judgment it is contrary
to all reason, to say that the differences of site, as here (...) there were
extant, before any thing was created. Well he prooves it thus; for say^^^ he,
God must first be there, before he works there. I answer; Gods works are of
diverse sorts; there is a work of creation, a work of preservation, and a
work of moovinge his creatures agreeably to their natures diverse and sundry
ways, as he thinks good. Now all other operations of God about his creatures,
suppose his being in them, they being already created, but his creation does
not, much less does it suppose his being there as in Uacuo. For to be in
Uacuo, is as much as to say to be in nothing. Which I confess is true of God
taking it as a negative thus, God was not in any thing. The truth is, all
differences of place and site as here, and there, and else where, are not, but
by creation. For to say that God is in some site or place, is to say, that some
site or place or thing is coexistent with God, which cannot be without
creation. That which he addethe herunto is of the same nature, and admitts the
same solution, now I proceed along with you.

2. To the Atheists demand, where God was before the world was; your answer
is, God was in himself. I do not Mal. 3. 6.
mislike it: and so I say, God is in himself still. For he is not changed.
Only in the creation and preservation of all things, virtue did and still
does flow out of him always, so that with his sweet influence he fillethe
all things. To be contained in place, is too base a condition for the nature
of God, he rather conteynes all things. So that even now, God is no where
contained; before the world he was no where conteyninge, because there was
nothing without to be contained and nourished by him. Neither is it any thing
harshe to say, that God was in no place, where there was no place for him,
wherein to be. But between the question which you propose, and the answer
thereunto, you do insperse some strange assertions, affecting curiosity of
discourse, more then sobriety of sense, as when you say; In respect of
eternity and immensitie, no creature, no positive essence, no numerable part
of this Universe, is so like unto him, as this negation of all things, which
we describe by the name of nothing. A string may be strayned so high, as by
breakinge to mar all the music; and some wits have affected so high a
streyne of subtlety of sentence, as that they have degenerated into nonsense.
Such is this assertion of yours, wherein you affirm, that no numerable part of
this Universe (as much as to say, neither man nor Angel; yet was man made
after Gods image and likeness) is so like unto God as nothing. Ou^ upon such
abominable speeches; whereby God himself who is the breath of, our nosthrills
is made, if not just nothing, yet to come nearest unto nothing. What sport are
Atheists like to make with this? why like David's fool, say in their hearts,
there is no God: when a Christian, and a Divine, and a great writer, whose
works are current, when others are not, is found to profess, that no
creature is so like unto God as nothing. Yet this is not all; for you say
also, that no positive essence is so like unto God as nothing, as if God
himself were not so like unto himself as nothing is. And indeed we commonly
say nullum simile est idem. Yet by your leave the Son of God is the image of
his Father, and dare you say that he is not so like his Father, as nothing is!
No merveyle if the Spirit of confusion overspreades your discourse like a
garment. For what sense, I pray, is there in this speech of yours as when you
say, that this name, nothing, is the description of the negation of all
things; whereas indeed the negation of all things, is much fitter to be the
description of this name, nothing; then the name, nothing to be the description
of the negation of all things. For the description is usually larger then the
term described. The reason you bring to justify so uncouth a speech, is as
absurd and odious, and false as your former assertion, as when you say, Nothing
has neither beginning nor end of days. Fie, fie upon such shameful
assertions, as much remooved from wit as from honesty. Has nothing neither
beginning nor end of days, which is as much as to say, that the days of it
are everlastinge? why I say, It has no days at all, no being at all, no not
so much being as propositions attribute unto negations and privations. I say
it never had, nor has, nor ever shall have any days, at all, neither is i^
possible it should have days, for as much as it is utterly impossible, that
God should not be, or cease to be, who is the sovereigne being, and i^ whom
but erst, you professed that all things are, and that in a better manner then
they are in themselfes. And shall this name nothing be now so far advanced,
as to be above all positive essences, or parts of this World, in likeness unto
God, and that in respect of eternity, and immensitie? But what eternity or
immensitie of being is to be found in that which has no being at all, nor ever
had, nor ever shall have, nor can have, no not so much as negations have? Yet
the Heavens have had continuance so long, as not very well known to man; and
so have the Angels had, and shall have for ever. The smallest part of this
Universe, has some magnitude; some parts have quantitatem motis, quantity of
extension, and that all most incredibly great, certainly incomprehensible by
the wit of man, as the Heavens; other parts have quantitatem virtutis,
quantity of spiritual perfection, as the Angels, and that also inscrutable
by the wit of man. But as for the name nothing, that has no magnitude at
all, neither of corporal extension, nor of spiritual perfection, unles you
will return to the imaginary distance of space without the Heavens, which but
erst you disputed against. For no immensitie otherwise can be found in this
your nothing, which you advance so high as in eternity and immensitie, to be
so like to God, as no creature, no positive essence, no numerable part of this
Universe more, or so much. If in consideration of the most monstrous
incongruitie of your assertion, and that as God has his being necessarily, so
it is a thing utterly impossible, that nothing should have any being; to shift
your self out of this absurdity, you shall say, that by nothing you
understand not the negation or privation of any thing whatsoever (which yet
was delivered by you without all limitation) but only the negation and
privation of things created: yet herein you shall fall into a new nonsense.
For then your proposition shall run thus in effect, No creature is so like
unto God as no creature, which yet is as untrue as absurd. For surely every
creature is more like unto God, then no creature, in as much as it has a true
being, which the negation or privation of a creature has not. And yet you
consider not that in this sense, nothing, has an end of days. For as soon
as the World began to be, forthwith ceased the being of nothing which went
before it. But you proceed to take the word nothing in a more large
signification, as when you forthwith say, The negation of all things is more
like unto God then any one thing; You were as good say, that it is more like
unto God, then God himself, yea then the Son is like unto the Father. What
blasphemous conceytes are these, and how fit for Atheists to make merry
withal. And that you may not seem to run mad without all reason, you add
a reason unto it, and the reason is this, Because no distinct or proper place
of residence can be assigned to nothing, or to the negation of all things. A
most absurd reason, and only plausible unto them, that have lost their wits,
in the wilderness of their confused imaginations as you have done. For in such a
sense no place can be assigned to the negation of all things, as makes it more
base, then the vilest thing that is, so far of is it from advancing it to
any likeness unto God above such things as have being at all. For therefore no
proper place can be assigned to God, because he fills all places, and if
there were a thousand Worlds he should fill them all, nor by being contained
in them, but by conteyninge them, yet not locally conteyninge them, but
vertually. But therefore no place can be assigned unto the negation of all
things, because it is incapable both of place and being, whether,
circumscriptive as bodies are capable of place; or desinitive, as Angels are
said to be in place; or repletive, as God is said to be in all places. Nay it
is not so much capable of place, as accidents are, which are in places not per
se of themselfes, but per accidens, as they affect bodies, which are in place
of themselfes. For in very truth, the negation of all things never had, nor
has, nor ever shall or can have, any such existence, as propositions attribute
to negations or privations. For it was ever false, and is, and shall be to say,
Nihil est; For as God all ways is, and that necessarily: so it is impossible,
that this proposition should be true Nihil est. Yet that it may in some sort
appear, that this your wild discourse proceeds from the zeal of the glory
of God, that so you may advance him, above that which is most like him, to wit
above nothing or above the negation of all things, you tell us, that this
nothing is most unlike him. Yet this also is a new nonsense, namely that,
that which is most like unto God, and that for eternity and immensitie, prime
branches of Gods infinity, should be most unlike him; and herein you manifestly
contradict your self. For if it be most unlike him, then every thing is more
like unto God then it, which before you denied; and to the contrary affirmed,
that no positive essence, no numerable part of this Universe was so like unto
God as it, to wit, as nothing. Yet now you say even this nothing, is most
unlike him: and as it were to endoctrinate our plumbeous cerebrosities, and to
supply our insufficiency of proovinge so quaint a point of Metaphysicall
untruthe, namely that this name nothing is most unlike unto God, you help us
in a freindly manner with a reason hereof, and that is this, because for soothe
nothing is truly, and absolutely no where. But why did you not add, that as it
is no where, in respect of place, so it never was, nor is nor shall be in
respect of time; nor is it possible that it should be, like as it is
impossible that God should not be. For nihil esse, est Deum non-esse: to say
that nothing is, is to say that God is not, or to deny that God is. But you
proceed to exercise your wit in disparaging nothing; and whereas before you
said, that it was no where; next you say, that It is not in it self; as if to
be in it self, were some kind of being some where. And you add as it were a
reason hereof, when you say, non entis non est actio, non est qualitas, non
conditio. But this reason is as good as the rest. For that nothing should be in
it self, it is not requisite, that it should have either action, quality, or
real condition. Or if it had either of these, it should not be in nothing. And
why should you accoumpt it a condition of being, to be in nothing? You add
that nothing cannot have any right or title to be accoumpted it self; a
wondrous strange assertion. For if it be not it self, then it is not the same
with it self; if it be not the same with it self, then it is different from
it self, and that in something. For if in nothing it be diferent from it
self, then every way it is all one and the same with it self. But if in
something you conceave it to be different from it self, it behooves you to
show what that something is, wherein nothing is said to be different from it
self. But if nothing can be alleged, wherein it differethe from it self,
then surely it is the same with it self, and consequently it has good right
and title to be it self. You proceed in your unprofitable subtilties, and
tell us, that we may truly say some objective conceytes are nothing. Yet surely
every conceyte is something, but the objects of some conceytes, perhaps your
meaning is, are nothing. Now the objects of conceytes are the things conceaved.
You might then as well have said, that somethinges conceaved are nothing. And
it is a truth; for Chimeraes may be conceaved, and Tragolaphoi, and Centaures,
and after a sort privations and negations also, which yet are no real thing.
But we cannot rightly conceave (you say) that nothing should have any degree
or kind of being. And I say, that neither is any such conceyte requisite to
maynteyne, that nothing may have just right and title to be termed it selse.
And yet by your leave, if it were possible that God should have no being, then
this proposition Nihilest, were possible to be true, and not otherwise. Now in
maynteyninge this proposition you have proceeded so far, as to affirm that
nothing has neither beginning nor end of days, and that therein it is most
unlike unto God in respect of his eternity. Want of being, you say, is the
worst kind of barrennes. But is it not more sober to affirm, that want of
being is no kind of barrennes at all. For barrennes implies being. And why
should you put your self to such pains of phrasifyinge, in proovinge that
nothing cannot bring forth any rank of being? since no such thing is
needful to this, to wit, that nothing may have right or title to be termed
it self; taking it as an affirmative proposition, wherein nothing is the
subject, not as a negative, wherein the word nothing is only a sign of an
Universal negative. For in this latter acception, it is utterly untrue, saying
every thing may be termed it self, as in saying a man is a man, and so is a
mouse a mouse; and so the negation of all things (which is your own
description of the word nothing) is also, it self, to wit, the negation of
all things. And so it is true to affirm that nihil est nihil.

Thus far you have discoursed of nothing; now you come to discourse of
something, or rather of God.

And God, you say, cannot be said to have being no where, before the World was
made, but with this limitation, save in himself. But I judge this to be a very
improper speech, as that which supposethe Gods being in himself to be a kind
of being somewhere, which in my opinion is untrue.

The truth is, God is in himself, but not as in place. And to be in place,
here, or there, or every where, is a denomination too base to be attributed
unto God: who as Durand says is no where that is in no place secundum se, in
respect of his essence, but every where by his effects, as filling all places,
all bodies, all Spirits, whether of men or Angels with his effects. You say,
he is so in himself as that he is more then all things. But consider I pray,
how is plurality a fit attribute for indivisible unity? Yet it is ^ue, he can
produce more then all things of this world of creatures put together, are. You
say he is longer then time; I had rather say, He is more ancient then days;
because he is eternal, and being eternal and all mighty could have made time
more ancient then it is. You say, he is greater then place; It had been more
fit to say, he is greater then space; because the greatest place, is but the
hollow superficies of the uppermost heaven, the spacious body whereof is far
greater; and God greater then it.

Yet is this a very improper speech, because comparisons ought to be of
things in the same kind. But Gods greatness and the worlds greatness are far
different in kind; the greatness of the world, being quantitas motis, quantity
of extension; and the greatness of Gods being quantitas virtutis, quantity of
spiritual perfection. Yet in this sense it may pass. He is vertually greater
then the space of this world, because he could and can produce a greater space
then this. You say he is more infinite then capacity it self; Belike you
suppose capacity to be infinite, in saying God is more infinite. But created
capacity cannot be infinite; though greater, and greater it may be in
infinitum, yet still finite; and this is all the infinity, that we do or can
conceave by succession or addition; and so Gods power to produce greater
neither does nor can receave any bounds or limits. And as God is able to
enlarge time and place, so is he able to limit it, but by your leave with
distinction. It is not possible that time past should be made less, then it
is. But if I mistake not you overlashe, when you say, that God by his
essential presence or coexistence is able to limit time and place. For as the
limitation of things proceeds from Gods will, not from his essential
presence; so likewise, it is Gods power that denominates him able to limit all
things according to the pleasure of his will, and not his essence, or
essential presence or coexistence. It is true, that nothing could have
beginning or continuance of being but by him: and it is true also, that all
other things have had beginning, and still have continuance, and that from
him. Though this was no Article of the Peripateticks faith, yet it is an
Article of our Christian faith. And herehence, to wit, from Gods preserving
all things, and workinge in all things, does Aquinas infer, that God by
his essence (not only by his power) is in all things, because, and that
according unto Aristotle's doctrine, Movens and motum must be simul. But then
again you know, or may know how this inference is impugned by Scotus and his
followers. As if this were the Scot. 1. sect. did. ^7. qu. 1.
property of a finite Agent, to work only on things indistant from it. But
God being an infinite Agent, they conceave it to be his property, to be of
power to work upon that which is distant from him; if by supposition, it were
possible, that God were distant from any thing, or any thing from it. And
therefore though if he be in all things, at the center of their supportance as
you phrasifie; yet this is to be in them only by his power, and operation; and
great Schoolmen have peremptorily denied, that herehence it can be soundly
inferred, that he is in all things by his essence. It is untrue that things
in succession, may be in number infinite. They may by succession be more and
more without end; but never shall they come to be infinite. Likewise it is
impossible that God should be in more things then those that are, or may be;
because it is impossible that there should be more things, then those that
are or may be. And withal I wonder, how you can maynteyne that God is in those
things that yet have no being, but only may be.

3. You have discoursed so long of infinity, that your discourse seems to be
transfigured into it. For the sentence, wherewith you begin this Section,
has no end, no way out of it. Had the evaporation of proud phantasticke
melancholy, eclipsed the luster of his glorious presence, in that late
prodigious questionists brain, which would bring us out of the sunshine of the
Gospel, into old Egyptian darkness. Here your Reader becomes erect, to
understande, what then: But you falling upon givinge a reason of the last
clause, by way of parenthesis, utterly forget to make up the sense of your
former sentence. This Questionist you speak of, seems by that which
follows, to be Vorstius. For his opinion is, that of enclosing God in the
Heavens, and excluding his essential presence from this inferior World, which
was (as you report) first brought forth in Egypt. So that it seems, the
Egyptians were long ago troubled with this disease, arising from the
evaporations of proud phantasticke melancholy, as well as Vorstius; yea and
some Nations too. You say indeed it was not propagated to many Nations, thereby
implyinge, it was propagated unto some. Only few Philosophers of the better
sort enterteyned it (as you say) except Aristotle or the Author of the book De
Mundo. You would say, I take it, that no Philosophers of the better sort
enterteyned it, except Aristotle etc. as it lyethe, your sentence is
incongruous. But herein, you say, Vorstius did dissent from them, in that he
held that God was and is every where by his power and immediate Providence.
This error of his, you censure as exceeding gross and unsufferable in that he
makes Gods infinite power, wisdom, and goodness in whole sweet harmony,
Divine Providence especially consistethe, but as Agents or Ambassadors to his
infinite Majesty: as if his infinite Majesty only were full compeere to his
essence; unsitting to be employed abroad, or to keep residence any where save
in the Court of Heaven. Concerning Vorstius, I profess, I never found any
such sufficiency in him, especially for Metaphysicall discourse, as should make
any man zealous of salving his reputation. And that the essence of God should
be confined to one place, more then to another, yea to the Court of Heaven,
rather then to the basest corner of the earth, is so absurd to my judgment,
that I profess ingenuously, all the reason and wit that I have, is not
sufficient to make it good of Angels, as being Spirits abstract from material
extension. And I will remember how Aquinas So Scotus understands him. 2. did.
2. q. 6. Durand. in 1. did. 37. quest. 1.
makes Angels to be in place, only in respect of their operation. And places
are for the natures of bodies, and not of Spirits: and Durand discoursethe
strange things of the nature of Angels, and such things, as I am willingly
content they should continue as they do without the reach of my comprehension.
How much more absurd were it to confine the essence of God more to one place,
then to another. And indeed, to my judgment, to be in place, is too base a
denomination to be attributed unto God. And Durand as already I have showed,
professethe that God secundum se is in no place, but only secundum effectus,
and so every where, for as much as he fillethe all places with his effects. And
as God is said to have been in seipso in himself, before the World was made,
is he not so to be accoumpted still? according to those verses of course in
this argument. Dic ubi tunc esset, cum praeter eum nihil esses:
Tunc ubi nunc inse, quoniam sibi sufficit ipse.


And is there not reason for it: For Gods essence has no respect to outward
things, as his power has, and his operation has. And see, whether by
ascribing place to him, you shall not be driven to acknowledge that God is in
Uacuo, which opinion but erst you impugned. For suppose many Angels existent
in the air, (as some are called Princes of the air,) and so within the
hollow of the moon, and suppose God should annihilate all that body of
Element or Elements within the hollow of the moon, the bodies and spheres of
the Heavens only remayninge. It will not follow herehence that the Angels
supposed to be within the hollow of the moon, shall be annihilated, because
they being abstract substances, and undependant on any matter, shall exist
still, and consequently shall be in Uacuo. For Uacuum is only a voydenes of
bodies, not of Spirits. And who doubts, but that God could have created
spiritual substances only, and not bodily; in which case they must be said to
be in Uacuo, or no where without them. Then again suppose these Spirits
themselfes within the hollow of the moon should be annihilated; yet God
shall not cease to be existent there, upon the annihilation of Angels, like as
Angels did not cease to exist there, upon the annihilation of bodies: and
consequently God himself shall exist in Vacuo; and all this comes to pass
by placing his essence there in distinction from his presence, and from his
power. Do not all confess that God is no where without himself as contained,
but only as conteyninge? now to conteyne is the work of his power, and of his
will, and not of his essence, save as his essence, and power, and will are all
one realitie in God. And so God may be said to be every where, not only three
manner of ways, to wit, by his essence, by his presence, and by his power:
but more manner of ways, to wit, by his knowledge, by his wisdom, by his
will, by his goodness. Yet all these shall be but one way, as all these are but
one in God. But yet in proper speech as Gods essence is no where, but it may
content us to say, that God ever was and is in himself only: so his goodness is
no where, but in himself, his knowledge, wisdom, and understanding no where
but in himself; his will and mercy and justice no where but in himself; his
power to make, to preserve, to work no where but in himself: but the
operations of all these united in himself, are every where, and so says
Durand; God fillethe all things with his sweet influence and effects of his
power, wisdom, and goodness, all which are as it were the Trinity of his one
essence. Thus we may say, his power, and wisdom, and goodness reachethe unto
the earth, and to every thing within this canopy, either by way of influence
natural, or by way of influence gracious; like as in the Palace of the third
Heaven, by way of influence glorious. All which are not properly his wisdom,
and power, and goodness, but rather the effects of them; of them I say, which
yet are all one thing with his essence. But Gods essence is such as implyethe
no respect unto outward things, as his wisdom, power, and goodness do both,
in the way of mercy, and in the way of judgment.

It implies contradiction to affirm his power, or wisdom to be more infinite
then his essence, if so be we conceave his power, and wisdom to be his
essence. And yet to be in many places more then another thing is, is not to
make it infinite, because all places put together, are but finite, much less
to make it more infinite.

Not only some great Schoolmen, as you speak, but all of them for ought I
know to the contrary, distinguishe of Gods being in all things by his
essence, by his power, by his prosence; and so the vulgar verse runs, Enter,
praesenter. Deus est, and ubique potenter;
Allthoughe they take several courses in the explication of them, as we may
read in Vasquez. Three of which explications, Vasq. in 4. qu (...). art. 3.
disp. 30.
he takes upon him to confute, to wit, that of Alexander Halensis, as also
the way of Bonaventure, and lastly the way of Durand: and rests himself upon
the explication of Aquinas, followed as he says by Cajetan, Albertus,
Aegidius, Ricardus, Capreolus, and Gabriel, and the exposition there set down
is this. 1. God is in all things by his essence, because his substance is not
distant from things, but joined with them, whether in respect of himself, or
in respect of his operation. 2. By his presence, because he knows all things.
3. By his power, because his power reachethe unto every thing. Now I freely
profess, I cannot satisfy my self in this distinction. And to my judgment,
presence is only in respect of essence, or of that individual substance
whatsoever it be, which is said to be present, whether it has knowledge or
no, what power soever it has much or little, and whether it work or no. Now
the essence of God is never parted from his knowledge and power. And God
indeed cannot be said, in proper speech, to be more distant from one place
or thing, then from any other. But he may be said, I confess, to be in one
place more then in another, in as much as he does manifest himself more in
one place, then in another. He is in all places as the Author of nature, and
communicating the gifts of nature; in special sort he is said to be in his
Church as the Author of grace, and communicating the gifts of grace, but in
most special manner in the third Heaven as the Author of glory, and
communicating himself in glorious manner unto his Angels and Saints; all
which diversities of being are rather in respect of his power, then of his
essence. For how is God said to be in any thing? as contained? by no means,
but rather as conteyninge; which containing is a transient operation of God,
proceeding from his power, and his will. Thus says the Apostle God is not
far from every one of us; for as much as in him we Act. 17. 27. 28.
live, and moove, and have our being. And mark but the particulars of
explication proposed by Vasquius, according to the best opinion, in his
judgment, to wit, according to that of Aquinas. God is in all things by his
essence, because his substance is not distant (and this is most true, I
confess; for certainly he is no more distant in place from a mouse, then from
an Angel) but he is joined with the things themselfes, whether in respect of
himself, or of his operation.

So then if Gods operation be joined with the things themselves, it suffizeth,
(by this opinion) to maynteyne, that God is present with them by his essence;
yet if you consider it well, you shall find, that this is all one with his
presence in respect of his power; for that was expounded thus; God is in the
whole Universe, by his power, because his operation reaches unto every thing.
Next, consider, how God is in every thing by his presence. First, to say that
God is in every thing by his presence, seems a very absurd manner of speech:
for it is as much as to say, that God is present in every thing by his
presence. Then consider the explication of it. He knowethe all things,
therefore he is present with all things: Now this seems very absurd. For we
read that God revealed to Elishah, what was done in the King of Arams 2. King.
6. 1^.
privy Chamber; might therefore Elishah justly be said to have been present in
the Kings privy Chamber? We know the number of the Stars, what therefore, are
we present with them? God foreknowes things to come, is he therefore present
with them also, which yet are not? Vasquius himself professed before, in
confuting the opinion of Durand, that Nothing is said to be present with
another, unles that other thing were conscious thereof, and he prooved it out of
the digests, and out of the law Coram; Coram Titio aliquid fecisse jussus non
videtur praesente eo fecisse, nisi is intelligat; and also out of the 112.
epistle of Austin, plane sorsitan satis est, si praesentia hoc loco
intelligamus, quae praesto sunt sensibus, sive animi, sive corporis, unde etjam
ducto vocabulo. praesentia nominantur. As if praesens were as much as prae
sensibus. To this I may add that of Aeneas in Virgill, when the cloud wherewith
his mother Venus had covered him, vanished away, then he breaks out into these
words Coram, quem quaeritis adsum Troius Aeneas. But now consider, according
to this interpretation of the word praesent God shall be said to be present
with none, but with intelligent creatures: for such alone can know him and
take notice of him; and because but few of them take notice of him; therefore
he can be said to be present, but with a few of them also. Yet Aquinas his
explication of Gods being in Aquin in (...). qu. (...). (...). 3.
all things by his presence, is quite of a contrary nature, to wit, because
God knows them, and not because they know or take notice of him. Last of all,
to be every where by his power, is said to be in this respect, that his
operation reaches to every thing. Now who seethe not that this presence is
rather in respect of his operation, and actual workinge, then of his power to
work. And if we ascend to the ca^se of his operation, we must ascend not only
to the power of God, but even to his wisdom, and goodness, as which is the
cause of his operation, as well as his power. And if we look for some thing
more proper, to admit this denomination then other, we must take notice of his
will, rather then of his power, as which is the most immediate cause of his
operation. For infinite power to be able to reach every possible effect, is no
more, then to be able to produce it, or being produced to preserve it, or to
work in it, or by it, whatsoever it pleasethe, which is nothing pertinent to
the being of it, therein as in a place, which belongs to essence rather then
unto power: For when I am said to be here and there, the meaning is not, my
power is here or there, but my person, which is properly said of me, because I
am a body, to which kind or natures, place properly belongethe. But as
touching the essence of God, that being spiritual and infinite, it is not
capable of any place to conteyne it, but rather it conteynes every thing: in
which respect your self have already observed, that by the Hebrews he is
called (...) place it self. Now Judge, whether God may be said in any
congruitie to conteyne bodies by his essence, or Spirits either created; and
whether that were not to signify, that bodies and Spirits created, were of the
essence of God. Neither is it proper to say, that God by his essence does
work either the creation or the conservation of outward things, but rather by
his understanding, power, and will. For to work by essence, is to work in the
way of natural Agents necessarily, but to work by wisdom and will, is to
work after the way of free Agents, freely. If God were every where, (according
to the saying reported and avouched by you) before there was any distinction
of times; then surely God also was every where before there was any
distinction of place. For certainly distinction of time, and distinction of
place began together.) And must you not herby be driven to the
acknowledgement of a Vacuum before the World was, and that containing
distinction of parts, in such sort, as to make way for the denominations of
here and there, and every where, and that God was therein, and every where
therein, before the World was? which opinion your self in this very section
have impugned. To discourse of the effects of Gods infinite power, in case his
knowledge were not infinite; or of the effects of his infinite knowledge in
case his power were not infinite, I judge to be a very vain thing; because it
is impossible that the one should be infinite without the other. For seeing
many things cannot be brought to pass without knowledge; like as without
knowledge none of such things can be brought to pass at all: so likewise,
without sufficiency of knowledge, such things could not be brought to pass,
as require such a proportion of sufficient knowledge to perform them. And if
God had but a finite power, he could foreknowe no more things, then could be
brought to pass by that finite power. It is true, God is, where any thing is,
but how? as containing it, not as contained by it; but it is untrue, that God
is, where any thing may be. For without the Heavens something may be; but God
is not without the Heavens. For without the Heavens is Uacuum; but God is not
in Uacuo, as before your self have disputed. And indeed how should he be
there seeing he could neither be there as conteyninge, nor as contained. For
that which is nothing, is neither fit to conteyne, nor fit to be contained.
In fine, I observe, how Gods being in all things you reduce unto two heads; The
one is his creation; the other, his preservation of them. And so I confess,
God is not distant from any of us; for as much as we live and moove, and have
our being in him as the Apostle speakethe.

4. The two ways as you make them of Gods being every where, as you construe
the Prophet Jeremy, are by Piscator conceaved to be but one; the latter words,
Can any hide himself in secret places, that I should not see him? being but
an explanation of the former, Am I a God at hand, and not a God a far off.
As much as to say, that God seethe as well things done in earth, as things
done in Heaven. So that in Scripture phrase, things done in earth are called
things done a far of, God speaking herein according to vulgar apprehension.
Whereas God is said to fill Heaven and Earth, hence it is that God is said to
be neither circumscriptively in place as bodies are, nor definitively as
Angels are, but repletively, that is filling all things; but how? that is
says Durand with his effects.

God does more then fill Heaven and Earth. For he has made them, and does
maynteyne them, not only fillethe them with all creatures fit for them.

Water filles the bucket, and the bucket conteynes the water: But God forbid we
should so conceave of the nature of God, as by filling the Heavens and the
Earth, to be contained in them.

His infinite power and wisdom serves his turn first to make them,
afterward to preserve them, and unto proper and congruous ends to order them,
and with his various effects to fill them, but not with his essence, least we
should be driven to ascribe extension to his essence, and maynteyne that he was
and is in Uacuo as before I have showed. Undoubtedly Gods essence is as present
with us on earth, as with the Angels and Saints in Heaven, and no more
distant or absent from us, then from them.

But how is God present? Not as praesensibus Corporis according to Austins
exposition of the word praesent; for God is no sensible thing, for then he
were corporal, and to be praesensibus animi is nothing to the purpose. God
does coexist with every thing that is. For they do exist, and God does exist:
But does God coexist with them in time? they do exist in time, that is their
measure of duration, but God in eternity that is the measure of his duration,
to wit himself.

They do exist in place, that is the measure of corporal extension; but does
God exist in place, who has no extension? does he not rather exist in his
own immensitie which is all one with himself, like as is his eternity? In a
word, the several beings of one thing in another are usually comprehended in
these verses. Insunt pars, totum, Species, Genus, and calor igni.
Rex in Regno, res in sine locoque locatum.


Now see whether any of these are competible unto God. Your self have observed
and approoved the Hebrews conceyte in calling him (...) Place. Let this then
pass for a peculiar being of God in all his creatures, whether visible or
invisible, corporal or spiritual, namely that as he has made them, so he
conteynes them, praeserves them, orders them, fillethe them all with his
effects, and works the good pleasure of his own will in them, and by them.
And this his presence, it is impossible he should withdraw from them, ^ave as
he shall be pleased ^o destroy them, and take all being from them; and lastly
that his very essence is as indistant from the meanest worm, as from the most
glorious Angel. But to talk, of Gods piercing or penetrating all things not
with his effects only, but with his essence, as the light pierc^th the air, I
dare not enterteyne any such g^osse conceyte of the most simple and spiritual
nature of God, for fear attributinge extension unto his essence, and such as
should continue though the World were destroyed, and make room for the
essence of God, to extend it self in Uacuo, and the parts thereof (which are
merely imaginary) as well as in the World, and in the parts thereof, like as
before I have argued. The power of God does exercise it self, according to
the pleasure of his will: And therefore it seems wondrous strange to me, that
you should ascribe power to God, to dispose of his essence, as touching the
placinge of it in space local.

Neither do I see cause, why glorious Angels should be required to prepare a
place of residence for God, more then bodies inglorious.

God I acknowledge to be as well in the basest worm, as in the most glorious
Angel. And so far forth as it beto Gods essence to be every where, I
presume no sober Divine will maynteyne, that it is other then a natural
attribute unto God, and not in his power freely to dispose of his essence
either otherwise, or so.

And therefore when you ask, whether upon the creatinge of a new Heaven, it is
not possible that God should be therein? I answer; look in what sense God is
said to be any where, in that sense it is impossible that God should not be
here. And yet without all change in them, though not without change in things
without him, one creature being annihilated, and another created a new. And
though Angels be subject to change, yet God is not. But when you shall prove
that change is no fruit of impotency, I will reno^nce the Prophet that laythe,
The Lord is not changed, and Mal. 3. 6.
take you for my Apostle. And surely if not to be changed, were to be impotent;
how impotent must God needs be, Iam. 1. 17.
with whom is no variablenes nor shadow of change?

5. Gods immensitie is no more subject to his will and power to be streitned,
then his eternity: But as God is not in time, that being a measure only fit
for creatures subject to mutation, but in his own eternity, which is all one
with himself: So neither is he in place a measure fit for creatures only
subject to extension, but in his own immensitie, which is all one with
himself. And as by his eternity he does transcendently and supereminently
comprehend all times: so by his immensitie does he comprehend all places. So
that neither do we say, that the first could not be, neither do we say, that
this your second way can be. Only we dare not say, the essence of God does
pierce all things; least we should give unto his simple and indivisible nature,
some kind of extension.

And how can you avoyde it, in making the essence or substance of God to pierce
all things; how, I say, can you avoyde the maynteyninge of Gods essence to be
changeable from place to place, (upon supposition that the World may moove
either Eastward, or Westward, farther then it is) or that his essence is in
Uacuo, and that after a manner of extension, as before has been argued. Now
you tell us, that mutabilitie is imcompetent with infinity: yet in the very
next section foregoinge, you reckoned it a point of impotency not to be able to
change, as Angels do their mansions, when they mislike them. Of which course
of Angels, either as touching their mistake, or change of mansion I am
nothing conscious, as neither am I of any oracle tending that way.

By your leave; there is no proportion between Gods immensitie in respect of
all places filled by him, and the infinity of his nature.

For seeing place and created things can be but sinite, his immensitie this way,
never extends farther then to the filling of a finite creature. Neither do you
well to confound distinction with limitation, as if they were all one. For when
we distinguishe Gods power, and wisdom, and goodness, or the Persons in the
Trinity, herby we do neither limit the nature of God, nor the Persons, nor his
attributes.

It is true, that God is the supporter of all things, and in this respect, the
Apostle acknowledges, that He is not far Act. 17. 27. 28.
from any of us, for as much as In him we live, and moove, and have our being.

6. You say that God was, when nothing was. A most improvident speech, and as
good as sack and sugar unto Atheists. For it is as much as to say, that God
was nothing, or that sometimes God was not. But eftsoons you alter this
dangerous form of words, and tell us that God was, when nothing was besides
himself. Without all peradventure, before the creation of the world, there was
neither distinction of time, nor of place. Though you do not cloathe God with
an imaginary space as without him; yet may you do as great wrong, to imagine
such a space in the nature of God, as it seems you do, and that you call
immensitie. For you say, such an imaginary space should be a check to his
immensitie, as being a parallel distance local. So that you seem manifestly
to acknowledge a distance in Gods nature, but you would not have it checked by
any parallel distance as immense as himself. This imagination is wondrous
gross. Whereas on the contrary, I find none to conceyte of any immensitie in
God, otherwise then as he is said to fill all places; and therefore before
places or bodies are existent, only a power and ability is in God to fill all
places; and that filling, Durand professethe to be in respect of the effects
wrought by him, and wherewith he filles all places, not with his essence
piercinge all things as you discourse, as if it were as big as the World, or
as an infinite World: and yet you think to charm this extravagant conceyte,
with calling it indivisible.

And so the light of the Sun which filles the world, with manifest extension,
is yet indivisible.

Gods essence, you say, conteynes the Heavens. I would, you would consider this
phrase well, and what it imports.

If you were asked what the essence of man conteynes, would you say, that it
conteynes any thing more then that, which is of the essence of man, as Animal
rationale? Yet without making any bones of scruple in the prosecution of your
own conceytes, you say that the essence of God conteynes the Heavens. May you
not as well say, that the essence of God made the Heavens?

I had thought it had been a more congruous speech, to say, that God by his
power and will made the Heavens, and so does preserve and conteyne them rather
then by his essence. For in respect of essence, only such things are
attributed unto God, as do necessarily belong unto him; as for example that he
is, eternal, unchangeable, omnipotent, most wise, most good. But no sober man
would say (I think) that God is the creator, preserver, conteyner of all
things by his essence. But these attributes belong unto him by the freedom of
his will. I nothing doubt, but that if the World were a thousand times bigger
then it is, God should be as intimately coexistent to every part of it, as he
now is to any part of this Heaven and Earth, which we now see. For all things
that live or moove or have any being, do and must live, and moove, and have
their being in him. But yet, as it is by his will that he made them, and not
by his essence: so it is by his will, and not by his essence, that he does
preserve them.

You pursue the phrasifying of your own conceytes according to your own
pleasure: But where do you find in Tertullian or Philo the penetration of
Gods essence thorough all things? Yet I confess Anselme says, that Natura
Dei penetrando cuncta continet; and whether you took it hand over Ansesm.
Monolog. cap. 23.
head from him I know not: You seem to make Gods essence a space of some
spiritual extension; to which kind of conceyte our imagination I confess, is
wondrous prone; as if it did penetrate all things as light does penetrate
the air, and so fill all things with it self, and not only with his
multifarious effects as Durand interprets it. Now this is a dangerous
conceyte and obnoxious to a foul error, and opposite to the simplicity of
Gods nature: which you perceave well enoughe, and therefore you think to check
this error of conceyte, by saying that he is indivisible, as if words would
serve the turn to salve Gods pure simplicity.

Durand I am sure professethe against this penetration which you are so
enamoured with. Durand. 1. did. 37. q. Quando dicimus Deum esse in rebus, non
intelligimus eum esse in iis ut partem intrinsecam, vel intrinsecus
penetrantem: sed intelligimus eum esse praesentem rei, non solum secundum
durationem, quia and quando res sunt, nec secundum contactum corporalem cum non
sit corpus nec, virtus in corpore, sed secundum ordinem qui in Spiritibus tenet
locum situs in corporibus. In hoc tamen excellit ordo in Spiritibus situm in
corporibus; quia per situm se habet unum corpus ad aliud immediate quoad sui
extremum: sed per ordinem se habet Spiritus ad corpus immediate secundum
quodlibet sui; For thus he writes, when we say, that God is in things, we do
not understand him to be an intrinsecate part, or that he does intrinsecatlie
penetrate them: but we understand him to be present to the thing, not only
according to the duration thereof, in being when the things are, not by
corporal touch, seeing he is not a body, nor any quality in a body, but
according to order, which in Spirits, is answerable to situation in bodies.
Which order in Spirits, excells situation in bodies in this respect; because by
situation one body is with another only as touching the extreme parts thereof
immediately. But by order a Spirit is immediate to a body in respect of every
part thereof.

Our imagination, I confess, is apt to imagine God to be as it were of most
subtle quantity penetrating all. But to conceave so of an Angel is too
gross, how much more of God.

Durand. 1. did. 37. part. 2. qu. 1. number 17. Differentiae situs non
extenduntur ad substantias incorporeas, cujusmodi sunt Angeli. Huic autem
contradicit imaginatio, quae non transcendit quantum and continuum, secundum
quod formamus nobis de Angelis aliquod Quantum Subtilissimum. Sed in hoc non
est rectum credere imaginationi, quia Angeli abstrahunt secundum rem a quanto,
sicut a quali: and ideo sicut non sunt albi aut nigri, frigidi, aut calidi, and
sic de caeteris qualitaetibus corporalibus: sic non sunt magni vel parvi, quia
non sunt quanti, and per consequens hic vel ibi ratione suae essentiae, quia
hae sunt proprietates quanti.

The proper differences of corporal things says Durand are not to be
extended to incorporall things, such as Angels are. Imagination contradicts
this, which does not transcend quantities, according whereunto we fashion to
our selves Angels, as if they were of a most subtle quantity. But we do not
well to follow imagination in this. For Angels are natures abstract as well
from quantity as from quality; and therefore like as they are not white and
black, cold and hott, and so of the rest of corporal qualities: and so they
are not great or small, because they have no quantity, and consequently, are
not here, or there, in respect of their essence, seeing these differences are
proper unto quantity.

But some may say, If Gods essence be not here, where is it then? I answer
that God is as much here as any where, and when I say God is here and every
where, I do not exclude his essence. For by God I understand his essence. But
I deny that he is here or any where else secundum ess^ntiam. as if his essence
had any situation here, which kind of being is proper only to bodies, and not
to Spirits, and makes Gods nature subject to extension.

We may be bold to say, that Gods essence is indistant from every thing; For
herein we go along with the Apostle, who says, that God is not far from
every one of us. For in him we live and moove and have our being. But as for
penetration of all things with Gods essence, I leave that phrase to them that
like it. As for Gregory's trime^bred sentence, one part thereof alone is to your
purpose, namely when he says, that God is intra omnia non ^nclusus. And
indeed we all say, that God is so in all things as that he rather conteynes
them, then is contained by them. Now which I pray is the more sober speech, to
say that Gods essence conteynes all things, or to say that Gods power and will
conteynes all things, let every learned and sober Reader judge.

7. Though I deem it not much woorthe the while to search after this
distinction in Anselme, the place whereof you conceal. Yet I have taken that
pains to the end I might the better consider in what sense, and upon what
ground of reason he does deliver it. And in his Monologion I find he
discoursethe of Gods being in time and place. But no such distinction can I
find in him, nor any such assertions as you impute unto him. In his 19. chap.
he disputethe that God is in no place and time. In the 21. How he is in all
places, and in no place. In the 22. That It may be better understood that God
is said to be always then in all time. In the 23. How it may be better
understood, that God is said to be every where then in all places. But that it
is fitter to be said of God that he is with place, then in place, I find no
where nor in any place in Anselme. Yet you avouche it as the distinction of
Anselme, and as well approoved of good writers, but who they are, you keep to
your self. Notwithstanding you tell us, that the resolution of doctrine
according to the former distinction, is blameable in two respects. 1. For that
it conceales much matter of admiration (which the description of imme^sitie
used by Barnard and others, does promptly suggest. 2. Because it does
occasion an erroneous imagination of coextension in the divine essence. As
touching the first; I see nothing to the contrary, but that Gods being with
every place, does every way conteyne the very same matter of admiration, which
his being in every place does. For the woonderful nature of his immensitie in
plain terms is but this, (though it may be phrasified diverse ways as it
pleasethe the writer) that he conteynes all things and is contained in none.
Now this may as well be signified, by saying God is with every place, as by
saying God is in every place. For being with a place is indifferent to admit,
such a manner of being with it, as namely by way of containing it. But being in
a place, does rather incline to signify a being contained by it. Which is
opposite to the active containing of it. Place say the Durand, may be Durand.
(...). did. 37. q. 2.
considered two ways, either as a natural thing, or as containing the thing
placed. As it is natural thing, so God is in every place; but as it conteynes
the thing said to be in it, so he is in no place. For he conteynes all, and
is contained of none. As for the imagination of coextension in the divine
essence, to my judgment, your opinion in making the divine essence to
penetrate all things, has been very prone thereunto. And how to be with
every thing, does more include a coextension of nature, then to be in every
thing, I cannot possibly conceave. But I pray in what sense of truth, or
truth of sense, can you aver that every body is with every place? You may as
well avouche that every worm here on earth is with the Sun, or with the
place of the Sun. And can the mathematical dimensions of a bodily substance,
be accoumpted the place, of that bodily substance, that you should say, Every
bodily substance is with the mathematical dimensions thereof, and that even
there where you speak of a substance his being with a place? And why you
should term them mathematical dimensions rather then Physical I know not.

You say that Gods being in every place and in every part of every body, so as
not to be contained in them, does exclud all conceyte of coextension. But I
see no reason for this assertion: it rather includes an extension of Gods being
beyond all things, then hinders or excludes the conceyte of coextension with
the things that are: especially whereas you maynteyne that God is in all things
not only as containing them (with cannot be attributed unto God in respect of
his essence, as I have showed, but rather in respect of his power and will) but
by way of penetration thoroughe all, and that in respect of his essence, (and
not in respect of his power only) like as light is diffused thoroughe our Hemi
sphere; which similitude I am bold to add, because you fail in affoording
us any resemblance to succor our capacity of apprehension this way. But I
dare not adventure upon such an apprehension, because in my opinion it is too
gross to be attributed to the nature of God. I content my self with this,
that as God before the world, was in himself, so he is in himself still
according to that old verse, Tunc ubi nunc in se quoniam sibi sufficit ipse.


But then nothing being made, he had nothing to conteyne, and govern, and
work by or in, as now he has. As touching all other manner of being in all
things, I content my self with ignorance. You magnify Trism g^sts definition
of Gods immensitie, and much good do it you. It is suitable with your
dicourse. But do you remember what censure Aristotle passed upon Empedocles,
for this figurative and obscure manner of expressions in Philosophical
discourse? And indeed when we take pains in searching out the truth, why
should we encumber our selves with resolving figures into plain speeches,
that so we may have something whereon to dispute. Hertofore you told us that
God was the center of all things, and that of supportance: now out of
Trismegist you tell us, that God has a Center and that every where, but not
of supportance passive I think, as whereby he should be supported, but of
supportance active, whereby he supporteth all things. Now hereof we can easily
find both a center and a circumference. For Gods supporting of the earth, may
well be accoumpted the Center, and Gods supporting the heavens may well be
accoumpted the Circumference of Gods supportinge the earth. In as much as
there is no divine supporting without it, at least of material creatures, but
all with it. Though it be true, that God could and can make the world much
bigger then it is. But Gods will has herein circum^scibed himself, thus
far to proceed as he does, in supporting all things and no farther. I do
not like your phrase of enlarging the actual coexistence of Gods essence. For
dare any sober divine say, that Gods actual existence has bounds, and that
these bounds may be more or less enlarged? And yet the face I confess of
your discourse, looks hitherwardes. How then do you say, that the bounds of
Gods coexistence with his creatures are or can be enlarged? The only way to
help it, is to say, that Gods existence is never enlarged, but the existence
of creatures, by the increasing of new, may be enlarged, and consequently Gods
coexistence with them may be said to be enlarged, not that his existence is
more then it was, but that the existence of created substances, is more then it
was. And more creatures coexisting with God, then formerly there did, he does
coexist with more then he did. His existence is no greater then it was, nor
has no larger bounds then it had; but creatures are supposed to exist by the
power of God, more then formerly did exist. And yet the omnipotency of God
has pitched a circumference to Gods coexistence with his creatures, and that
is the circumference of the world. For without it God seems to have no
coexistence with his creatures but all within. And albeit God could make the
world greater and greater, yet still it should be but finite, and as there
should be a circumference of all creatures existing, so likewise of Gods
coexisting with them. To say, that God only truly is, is one of the paradoxes.
That God alone is id quod est, that is, that whatsoever is attributed unto God,
is essential to him, not accidental, I have often read. But that God only,
truly is, I never read but in your writings. In him we live, and moove, and
have our being says Saint Paul: but this by your subtle commentary must be
understood with a distinction: In him we live but not truly; in him we moove
but not truly, in him we have our being but not truly. That God conteynes all
things, and is not contained in any thing, we easily grant. Spheres do
conteyne by way of place; but I hope, you will not say, that God in such sort
conteynes any thing; though therefore called by the Hebrews (...), because he
conteynethe all things. And yet certainly, there is no Sphere conteynes so
much, but that a square figure may conteyne as much, though not under the same
limits. And can any man make doubt, but God could make a World of a square
figure, that should conteyne as much as this World does, though in this case
the Circumference of the World should be greater then now it is? But because
that all things cannot comprehend God, therefore you say, He is rightly
resembled to a sphere, whose Circumference is no where.

A proper resemblance of the nature of God to a thing utterly impossible, and
fit matter for Atheists to make themselfes sport withal, I say impossible
more then one way.

For first, it is a thing impossible, that a body should be infinite.

Secondly it is impossible, that a body infinite should be Sphericall. If you
ask, of what figure then should it be? my answer is, it should be of no
figure. For figures are the bounds of quantities; and it is contradiction to
make a boundles quantity consist of bounds; or a bounded and figured
quantity without bounds. And yet, if all this were received as fit, and
convenient, what shall we gain thereby, when all this while we imagine him to
be merely corporal, who indeed is merely spiritual? For I do not think you
look to find spheres any other where then among bodies.

We read and hear of the Spheres of Heaven; but I never read or heard of the
Spheres of Angels or Spirits, as if they might be of a round or square figure
as bodies are, much less is any such figure fit to resemble God. Yet upon
these conceytes as extraordinary achievements of yours in the way of
Metaphysicall discourse, you proceed in the next place to the solution of
certain difficulties; that so Drismagist his definition of Gods immensitie,
may find the more easy admittance, into the Articles of our imagination, if
not into the Articles of our Creed. Which yet truly I should not have excepted
against, but rather have admitted, if to no other end, yet to this, even to
cut of curious speculations about the immensitie of God; had you not so far
magnified it, as if it had been some Oracle of natures light, and made use of
it, not as a Rhetorical flashe, and diaculation only, but as a serious maxim
to rely upon in Philosophical discourse; where the best decorum is, to make no
use of tropes and figures, but of plain and proper terms, that we may not be
to seek of our own meaning.

8. Your former discourse about the Sphere, together with the Center and
Circumference (spoken of) of Gods immensitie, you perceave is likely to raise
some Spirits; and therefore aforehand, you show a course how to lay them. The
first is, How a Center should be conceaved to be every where? The second How
the indivisibility of Gods praesence should be compared to a Center? To the
former, you answer, that As the Divine essence by reason of absolute insinity
has an absolute necessity of coexistence, with space or magnitude infinite;
so were it possible there should be (as some Divines hold it possible there
may be) a magnitude or Sphere actually infinite, this magnitude could have no
set point for its center, but of every point designable in it, we might avouche
this is the Center: Every point should have the negative properties of a
sphericall center, there could be no inequality between the distances of
several parts from the Circumference of that, which is insinite, and has no
bounds of magnitude. So then God by absolute necessity of nature must coexist
with that, which neither does exist, nor can exist by the opinion of most. For
that an infinite body should exist, is not only by Aristotle and Aquinas
prooved, but most generally held to be impossible. But if such a thing be
impossible to exist, it is also impossible that God should coexist with it;
and consequently most false, is that which you say, namely that by reason of
his infinity, it is absolutely necessary, that God should coexist with it.

Now will it not follow herehence, that it is absolutely necessary, that God
should not exist at all, and that by reason of his infinity? For to coexist
with that which is impossible to exist, what is it, but not to exist at all? OF
what dangerous consequences do your wild assertions go as it were with
child, withal; and how fit are such lettice for the lips of Atheists?
mark how Durand discoursethe against this conceyte of yours, as when you say,
that by reason of his infinity God must be every where.

Per eandem rationem dicendum est quod non competit Deo esse Durand. 1. did.
37. p. 1 quest. 1.
ubique, ita quod infinitas suae substantiae sit ei, ratio ubique essendi, Si
enim competeret Deo esse ubique ratione suae essentiae infinitae hinc competi
ei esse necessario ubique, vel in loco infinito, and nullo modo finito, sicut a
contrario dicitur de Angelo quod ratione suae essentiae finite convenit ei esse
in loco finito, and nullo modo in infinito.

By the same reason we must say, it agrees not to God to be every were, so as
that the infinity of his substance, is unto him the reason of his being every
where. For if it belonged to God to be every where in regard of his essence
infinite, then necessarily he should be every where, or in an infinite place,
and by no means in a finite place; like as on the contrary, it is said of an
Angel, that in regard of his essence finite, it agrees to him, to be in a
finite place, by no means in a place infinite.

Secondly you tell us, that some Divines hold it possible, there may be a
magnitude or material sphere actually infinite. But you do not love to
betray your Authors.

I have read in a late Spanish Jesuit a discourse to prove Petr. Hurtado de
Mendosa. disp. in Vniversam Philosoph. Tract. de Infinito.
that infinitum potest dare. But in this he is a mere mountebanke, and
affectator of singularities, I have hertofore read also in Hills Philosophia
Lencippaea, Democritica, so bold an assertion as this, That the World is
infinite; Otherwise, says he, the effect were not suitable to the cause. For
God the Author of the World is infinite. But he was conscious of this his
heterodoxy in the opinion of the World, and therefore would profess (as I have
heard) that if in Oxford he should dispute thus, we in the University would
cry out for a Limitor, for this Infinitor.

And truly these and such like disputes, I reckon not worthy to be named the
same day, with the demonstrations that are brought to the contrary. And I may
take liberty to profess thus much, how that observinge the Jesuit before
spoken of, Hurtado di Mendosa by name, to affect subtilties and curiosity of
demonstration, in zeal of maynteyning the truth, which as Austin sometimes
saydo, A Deo dicitur verum quodcunque dicitur; I took leave of my better
studies, destinated to the mayntenance of Gods grace against all Pelagian,
Jesuitical, and Arminian oppositions, and to examine the arguments of Hurtado
in that point, and went a large way in the solution of them, and confutation of
his insolent assertion, until I thought it high time to return to such aliene
meditations; considering it might be a practice of Satan, to cast a ball of
provocation in my way, and thereby to cause a diversion, from more grave, more
seasonable and more profitable contemplations. But yet I profess I never heard
or read before of any that maynteyned the possibility of a Sphere to be
infinite, as that which implies a manifest contradiction. For figures being
the bounds of quantities it should imply a bounded quantity without bounds.
But in the fiction proposed, you say, every point should be the center as
pertakinge of the negative properties of a Center: that is, there should be no
inequality between the distances of several points from the Circumference of
that which is infinite as for example. Suppose the world were infinite
Eastward, and infinite westward. Now consider a direct line passinge over S.
Michaels mount to Dover and so forwards Eastward, and in like manner from Dover
to Saint Michaels mount, and so forward, westward. From dover Eastward is
infinite, and from Saint Michaels Eastward is but infinite. So then these two
are equal that is the part is equal to the whole. For the line from, Dover
Eastward is but a part of the line from Saint Michaels Eastward in infinitum.
This contradictious absurdity amongst many other, follows upon supposition of
any body or extension infinite. By the way observe a great incongrutie; though
you suppose a sphere infinite, yet you conceave it to have a Circumference.
But to have a Circumference is not to be infinite. Touching the second
difficulty, to wit, how the indivisibility of Gods presence in every place
may be compared to a Center: You say, this comparison is right, in as much as
God has no diversity of parts. And indeed I find no small uniformitie,
between the beginning of this your discourse of Gods immensitie, and the end
of it. For about the beginning you professed; that No creature, no positive
essence no numerably part of this Universe, was so like unto God as notting;
And now you say, he is rightly resembled to a point, which every man knows,
is much about the same proportion, and quantity of just nothing. For
immensitie and eternity no Angel so like unto God as nothing: and again for
his indivisibilitie, you say he is rightly compared to a point, which is as
much as nothing. Of the sobriety of these your discourses, let the Reader
judge. But you think to help the matter by saying, that His presence again
is like to magnitude actually infinite, in that it can have no circumference.
Now consider I pray, How will you make the Majesty of God amends, for these
your injurious comparisons, to wit, in comparing him, to magnitude actually
infinite, which indeed is just nothing? For in the most general opinion of
Philosophers and Divines, magnitude actually infinite, is a thing utterly
impossible to have any being. And mark withal, how you contradict your
self. For here you suppose, that magnitude infinite can have no circumference;
and but a little before, your discourse was of an infinite Sphere that had a
circumference. At length notwitstanding your* former assertion of justifyinge
the comparing of Gods indivisible essence unto a center, or point of magnitude;
Now* you confess that the indivisibilitie of the one, and indivisibilitie of
the other are heterogeneall, and consequently asymetrall, the best
Philosophical truth I have hitherunto found in your discourse. But least all
this while you should seem utterly extravagant in your incongruous comparisons
of the nature of God to vile things, or rather to Nothings; first you mince
this Philosophical maxim, as when you say, They are of times asymetrall; and
then you corrupt it by interpretation as if asymetrall signified not absolutely
incommensurable, but only not exactly commensurable. Whereas in truth you shall
as soon prove the Diameter of a square commensurable to his, side as to
prove the indivisible nature of God commensurable to a point of quantity. Est
quoddam indivisibile, says Durand, quod est aliquid quantitatis ut punctus:
Durand. (...). did. ^7. quest. 2.
Aliud est indivisibile quod est totalitur extra naturam quantitatis, ut Deus.
What an absurd thing were it to compare the soul of man to a point in a
quantity; the soul being so indivisible as to be all in all, and all in every
part; how much more so to compare an Angel, most of all the divine Essence?
And the soul of man is much fitter to represent God by (man being made after
the image of God) and God is all in all, and all in every part of the world,
but not as forma informans, as the soul is, and consequently neither extended
with the extension of the world, nor moved at the motion of the world; nor any
part thereof. Hence you say it is that the most subtle Schoolmen or
Metaphysicall Divines as well ancient as modern, resolve it as a point
irresoluble by humane wit; whether a mathematical point or center, can be the
complete, and definitive place of an Angel, albeit they hold the Angelical
natures to be as truly indivisible, as points or centers are.

I doubt there is little truth and sobriety in all this. If there be, I must
confess^ I was never acquainted with any of these concealed Schoolmen or
Divines either ancient, or modern, at least in these particulars; For you tell
me that, which I never heard or read of before; yet I have been acquainted with
fopperyes more then enoughe, amongst them, and might have been with more, if I
had any mind thereunto. But for the most part I have ever shunned those
trifling subtilties. But consider we the particulars, which here you give us a
part. For to make your assertion good, you are to show, not only that these
Schoolmen you intimate, do hold the point you speak of irresoluble, but
also that Hence they do hold it so; that is, because the indivisibilitie of
centers, or points, and of spiritual substances are heterogeneall and
asymmetrall, that is, not exactly commensurable.

But let us consider the point it self, concerning a Mathematical point. Now
I pray consider this: As Mathematical quantity is herein distinct from
quantity Physical, because that is abstract from matter, this is not: so a
Mathematical point, must herein be distinct from a point Physical, in as much
as that is abstract from matter, this is not.

Now quantity, and poincts Mathematical thus abstract from matter, are but
only in imagination. And do the Scholemen, you speak of, maynteyne it as a
point irresoluble, whether an Angel may be defined within a point of
imagination only? what were this, but to have no being at all but in man's
imagination? Wherefore you may be advised, to let the question run rather of a
point physical, then of a point Mathematical, unles you look for some
succor, from that rule of course Mathematici abstrahunt, nec mentiuntur.

Yet that would prove but a broken toothe and sliding foot, to keep you
from error in this. But I think the Nominalls are those most subtle
Schoolmen you speak of; I envy not the glory which you give them, be it as
great as that which Scaliger passethe upon Scot, Occam, and Sincet. The
nominalls are much magnified by Hurtado di Mendosa. And I find in Gabriel Biel
such a question as this, Whether an Angel may determine unto himself a
certain quantity of place, (...). 2. did. 2. q. 1.
in such sort as be cannot coassist unto, or be defined by either a greater or
a lesser, and the answer is said to be according to Occam in his Quodlibets
1. quest. 4. First that there may be given the greatest place of an Angel, so
that he cannot extend himself to a greater. Secondly, there cannot be given
the least place of an Angel, in such sort that he cannot define himself
within a less. For my part I utterly dislike all these conceytes of an Angels
power to extend or confine his own essence: it seems so opposite at first
sight to a spiritual perfection, and so obnoxious to the imputation of
corporal extension unto them. And I manifestly perceave how they puzle
themselfes, in laboring to scatter such mists of scruples, as their own
fancyes raise, and are driven to profess, Nihil in his materiis tam
absconditis puto temere asserendum. But Gabriel. 1. dift. 2. q. 3.
let every man make his own bed, and lie as soft as he can, I will not hinder
any. But we are not hitherunto come to the point; you point at; yet neither
Physical nor Mathematical, but that which I mean is your point
Philosophical. (Pardon me, if I pick up by the way some crumes of merryment
to refreshe my Spirit in so unpleasing an argument.) The reason why the least
place, for an Angel to define unto himself, cannot be given is, because
says he, Posset coassistere loco punctuali pro eo quod ipse est indivisibilis.

Now you see we are upon the matter; and withal quite off from your assertion.
For even these Nominalls do not hold it to be a point irresoluble, as you
speak, but resoluble, and they actually resolve it for the affirmative, to
wit Gabriel Biel, after Occam. Now what will you say if they resolve it for
the negative, and so both ways, namely both negatively and affirmatively,
(which you say, they hold for a point irresoluble). And indeed they resolve
it both ways: for I have not told you all; They interpose a caution, and the
caution is this, Si possibilie esset locus indivisibilis: Whence you may easily
guess what their meaning is; to wit, that indeed a punctual and
indivisible place cannot be existent, and consequently neither can an Angel be
defined therein, or coasist thereto; there is the resolution negative. But in
case such a punctual place were possible then an Angel might coasist thereto;
there have you the resolution affirmative, in both opposite to this assertion
of yours.

But who they be you speak of, that hold this point irresoluble, you
conceal. And yet it may be, some such there are.

For as Cicero sometimes said; there was nothing so absurd, but had been
delivered by some or other of Philosophers: so the like may be verified of
Schoolmen also: For amongst all kinds of humane writers there may be some
vanities more or less, and some think most amongst Schoolmen; according to
the censure passed upon them, Ab hoc tempore Joan. Trit. Abbas Sphanheimensis.
P. Dialect.
Philosophia sacularis sacram Theologiam sua curiositate muliti saedari caepit.
From Angels, you proceed to God, and without scruple maynteyne, that he is as
properly in every Center as in every place; and I confess the reason here
added why you may say so, is very sound, seeing we acknowledge him a like
incomprehensibly and indivisibly in both. For surely a man may say, that which
he does acknowledge; but take no more along with you herein, then are willing
to accompany you, and upon good terms.

Now Occam and Biel propose certain terms, and they are these, si locus
punctualis possibilis esset. But if such a thing be not possible, to say that
God is therein, is to say that God is in nothing, and so you return to your old
course of amplifyinge the immensitie, or indivisibilitie of the glorious
essence of God that made us. And whereas we are willing to acknowledge that God
is in all things as conteyninge them; I do not find that a point is of any
conteynable nature. As for example, there is punctus lineam terminant; now
suppose God conteynes the line, and conteynes not the point, shall the line
herupon be without an end? I profess I cannot find any other thing in the
notion of such a point, but negatio ulteriorie tendentiae, and what need has
this of the divine power to conteyne it? And surely the point which continues
a line, is nothing more then the center of the earth, and of that you profess
in the next chapter and second section, that it is a matter of nothing. The
manner of Gods indivisibility we conceave (say you) by his coexistence to a
Center: his incomprehensiblenes, by his coexistence to all spaces imaginable;
as much as to say. The indivisibility and incomprehensiblenes of God, is best
conceaved, when we conceave his coexistence to such things as are found only
in imagination, or to things that are, but have no realitie in them, Now if
God be all in all, and all in every part, is he not better conceaved, by
comparison with the soul of man, (which is made after the image of God) then
by comparison to a base Center, or things in imagination only? especially
seeing Imaginatio non transcendit continuum. If God were more in a great place
then in a less; then it would follow that an Asses head should participate
the essential presence of the deity (I speak in your own instance and
phrase) in greater measure, then a man's heart does. And do not you affect
some popular applause in this discourse of yours, the vulgar sort being apt to
conceave the contrary, namely that a man's heart participates the essential
presence of the deity in greater measure, then an Asses head: and by the same
reason; they may conceave that a man's head participates the essential presence
of the deity in greater measure, then an asses heart, which yet is as contrary
to your assertion, as to the truth. But it is manifest herby, more then
enoughe, that your care is not so much for the investigation of truth, as to
give satisfaction unto vulgar conceyte.

9. That Gods immensitie or magnitude, is not like magnitude corporal, as
being without all extension of parts, as there is no doubt, so we need no
great pains to satisfy reason, how this may be; especially to every Scholar,
that knows but that received* Axiom even amongst naturalists concerning the
soul, namely, that she is all in all and all in every part, not only in the
least child new borne, but in the greatest Anakim that ever was, which in my
opinion gives far better satisfaction, then by multiplyinge bare words, as
in saying God is unity it self, infinity it self, immensitie it self,
perfection it self power it self, which serve neither for proof nor for
illustration. But if we go about to satisfy imagination, we shall never come
to an end. For Imagination transcends not that which is continual, and has
extension of parts; and all your courses of illustration hitherunto have
inclined this way. You speak in your own phrase when you say that all these
before mentioned, to wit, unity, infinity, immensity, perfection, power are
branches of quantity; whereas we have more just cause to profess that no
quantity is to be found in God, no more then material constitution is to be
found in him. We make bold to attribute unto God quantitatem virtutis,
quantity of virtue and perfection; but every scholar should know that
Analogum per se positum stat pro famesiori significato. And yet to speak more
properby, the quantity of God, which we call quantitatem virtutis, and the
quantity of bodies, which we call quantitatem motis, quantity of extension,
have no proportion at all between them; but the term of quantity attributed
to both, is merely equivocall. It is true, that if God were not, nothing could
be, for as much as all other things have their being from him. But it is a
very incongruous course, in my judgment, which you take, by multiplyinge of
quantity material, to guess of Gods immensitie. And yet you should have
observed a better decorum in your phrase, if insteede of multiplication, you
had putin the word amplification. For immensitie is rather magnitude infinite
then multitude. I cannot away with that which you subjoine, that imaginary
infinity of succession or extension should be a beam of that stable
infinitenes which God possessethe. Hertofore you called it a shadow, now a
beam. And is this a proper course, to run out to the imagination of things
impossible to represent God by? For whereto tends this, but to conceave him
infinite, first by way of extension, which is quite contrary to spiritual
perfection, and secondly after such a manner as is utterly impossible to be.
Yet such courses, all they must needs take, that seek out to satisfy
imagination. For imaginatio as we commonly say in Schools non transcendit
continuum. You proceed to show how Gods immens^ie has no diversity of
parts; and your argument intends to draw to an inconvenience as many as
maynteyne the contrary. But the inconvenience which you infer depends only
upon peradventure thus. A concurrence of all parts in number infinite, would
perhaps be impossible; why then perhaps it would not be impossible; and what
then shall become of your argument. Besides this; the whole frame of your
argument is unsound. For infinite natures, such as man is, there is no
necessity of the concurrence of all parts to the performing of all actions, no
nor to the performing of any action. As for example if he gives himself to
study and meditate, there is no necessary use of other then of the inward
faculties of his mind. If he plays upon the Lute, there is no use of his
legs and feet. If he fights with his enemies, there is no use of his
tongue or teethe, nor so much use of his legs as of his hands, though
sometimes one pair of legs is better then two pair of hands, yet not to
fight, but to run away rather; though (...), as Demosthenes sometimes said,
being put to his wits to save the credit of his courage. Indeed if God were
not as he is, he could not be so omnipotent as he is, we need no pains at
all to prove this.

10. We are never so safe in matter of divinity, as when we go along with
scripture, and one place may easily prevent the mistaking of another, if we
give our selves to the due consideration of it, and submitt unto those means
which God has appointed for our edification. And the Scriptures represent his
being every where in respect of two things. 1. In respect of knowinge all
things, as Why say thou o Jacob Es. 40. 27. 28.
and speak o Israel. My way is hid from the Lord, and my judgment is passed
over my God. Know thou not, or have thou not heard, that the everlasting God
the Lord has created the ends of the Earth, etc. 2. In respect of his power
containing Psa. 119. 7 8. 9. 10.
them, as whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or whither shall I slay from
thy presence? If I ascend into Heaven thou art there, etc. Let me take the
wings of the Morning and dwell in the uttermost parts of the Sea, yet thither
shall thine hand lead me, and thy right hand hold me.

But to talk of Gods essence penetrating and diffufed, is to vent such
phrases, as I dare not adventure on, I have already told you, what I have
read to the contrary, in some, naming my Author, as you take liberty to do
the like, without naming of them.

Quando dicimus (says Durand) Deum esse in rebus, non intelligimus Durand. 1.
did. 37. part. 1. q. 2
eum esse in iis ut partem intrinsecam, vel intrinsecus rem penetrantem, ut
magis infra patebit: sed intelligimus eum esse praesentem rei non solum
secundum durationem, quia est, quando res sunt nec secundum contactum
corporalem, quum non sit corpus nec virtus in corpore, sed secundum ordinem,
qui in Spiritibus tenet locum situs in corporibus. In hoc tamen excellit ordo
in Spiritibus fitum in corporibus, quia persitum se habet anum corpus ad aliud
immendiate, quoad sui extremum: sed per ordinem se habet Spiritus ad corpus
immediate secundum quod libet sui: saltem non est hoc dubium de Spiritu
increato scilicet de Deo, quicquid sit de aliis: propter quod potest dici esse
non solum juxtares, fed in rebus. And Ibid. p. 1. q. 1.
again in a question following, Per eandem rationem dicendum est quod non
competit Deo esse ubique, ita quod infinitas suae substantia sit ei ratio
ubique essendi: sed est ubique solum ratione suorum effectuum (us dictum fuit
in praecedente questione. Si enim competeret Deo esse ubique ratione suae
essentiae infinitae, tunc competeret ei esse necessario ubique vel in loco
infinito, and nullo modo finito, sicut a contrario dicitur de Angelo, quod
ratione suae essentiae finitae convenit ci esse in loco sinito, and nullo modo
infinito. Esse autem ubique non est esse in loco infinito. Ergo infinitas
Divinae essentiae non est ipsi ratio essendi ubique, quod tamen assumebat ratio
aliorum.

In a word, I have no edge to cast my self upon any curious inquisition
hereabouts, because errors are dangerous about the nature of God, either in
denyinge unto him, what is beseeming him, or ascribing such things unto him, as
do unbeseeme him; which in the Schools are accoumpted certain kinds of
blasphemies.

I content my self with the simplicity of Scripture institution; which
professethe, that God fills Heaven and Earth, and this undoubtedly is true,
as Durand says in respect of Gods effects, wherewith he fills all things;
as also that he knowethe all things, that he cannot be any where as
contained, but is every where as conteyninge, governing, orderinge, working the
good pleasure of his will, in and by all things.

Now whether God conteynethe all things by his penetrative and diffused
essence, and not rather by his power and will, let every sober Reader judge.

Before the World was, God was in himself, and so he is still; how his power
is extended to the making and conteyninge of his creatures, I easily conceave,
but how his essence is extended, I conceave not. I conclude with those old
verses. Dic ubi tunc esset, cum praeter eum nihil esset,
Tune, ubi nunc, in se, quoniam sibisufficit ipse.


CHAP. VI.
Of Eternity, or of the branch of absolute infinities, whereof Successive
Duration of the imaginary infinity of time is the model.

I See no reason to subscribe unto the proposition wherewith you begin your
discourse on this Argument, as touching the exact proportion between immensity
and eternity. For Gods imme^sity is that whereby he is ubique or every where,
like as by his eternity he is semper or always: But to be every where
supposes the creations, but to be semper always, does not: For God was
always ever before the world: Again God in proper speech has true being, and
consequently true Duration of Being, which having neither beginning nor ending
is properly eternal. But God in proper speech has no quantity, and
consequently neither extension, and so in proper speech cannot be coumpted
immense, which signifies extension without beginning and end; and having no
extension at all, being merely spiritual and not material. And ere you turn
over a new leaf, your self make doubt, whether Time has the same proportion
to eternity, as magnitude created has to Divine Immensity. In a word, I do
not believe you are like to find so many nothings to resemble God by in this
argument of eternity as you did devise in the other of Immensitie. That saying
of Tertullia^ you mention, is no more appliable to Gods eternity as it is said he
was to himself Time, then to his immensity, as it is therein said he was unto
himself a World; And for ought I see, God is so still, and not only was so
before all things; in as much as he has no more need of them, then before all
things he had. You say we cannot properly say God was in time before the world
was made; I say such a speech in my judgment seems to be neither proper nor
improper; but directly false, even as false, as to say God was in place before
he made the world: For before the world was made there was neither time nor
place: Now he is in neither as contained in them, but only as containing both
time and place, which before the World, absolutely were not at all, and
consequently could not be contained by him. I do not think that Austin
himself was conscious of any acutenes in inferring that God could not have
been before all times, if he had always been in time; for common sense does
justify, that that leg which was ever in the stocks, was never out of the
stocks. But whereas you say, that we believe God to be as truly before all
times future, as before all times past, and seem to affect it as a subtlety of
opinion herein.

I willingly profess, that if it be a subtlety, it is of so subtle a sense, as
quite passes mine intelligence: I had thought it might be avouched of every
thing that is past, that it is before all times to come: And that all future
things are behind the things that are past.

Neither had I thought any reason needful to be given of this: because common
sense, I think does justify it.

Yet you seem to make this a peculiar property of God, that like as he is
before all times past, so also he is before all times to come.

Yet I guess at your meaning: For we now existent, allbeit we are before the
things that are to come, yet it is not necessary, that we should be after them.
But God as he is before all, so, if it please him, he may be after all; For God
is that which was, and is, and is to come; that is, which shall be, and that
for ever of himself.

Now this phrase; to be after all, in a sublimate streyne of conceyt attributed
unto God, is more truly and perfectly to be accoumpted his being before all,
then after all, in your opinion, as it seems; like as the Heavens invironning
the Earth, though they seem to sense to be under the Earth, and under our
Antipodes, yet indeed they are above them; So God in being after all things
future, is more properly and truly to be accoumpted before them.

This mystery I seem to find by your subsequentd iscourse and I wonder what
you mean to carry your self so in the clouds, when you might have expressed
your self plainly.

And surely it is no glory to affect a lofty understanding of your own phrase,
above the apprehension of your Reader, when your terms are not sufficient to
express your meaning. This is to equivocate like the Jesuits. Of that conceyt
of yours I will prepa^re my self to consider against the time, I shall arrive
to your more full discourse thereof, in the pa^s subsequent of this Chapter.

In the next place you propose a conclusion which is this. His eternity then is
the inexhaustible founteyne or Ocean, from which time or Duration successive
does perpetually flow.

But I can neither justify this inference, nor the truth of the proposition
inferred: For I know not from what premises of yours, it can be inferred.

That, which went immediately before, was this: God is before all times future,
as well as all times past; Now to infer that God was before all time,
therefore all time flows from his eternity, is no good consequence. You might
as well argue thus. God was before all place, therefore all places flows from
Gods eternity. We our selfs are before all times that are to come; but
herehence it follows not, that all times to come flow from our eternity, or
from us.

Suppose Angels had been made before the World, yet would it not thence
follow that the World did flow from them.

Now for the proposition it self inferred, it is subject to exceptions diverse
ways. The phrase, to flow, savoureth of a natural and necessary emanation, and
so much the more when it is resembled by the flowing of water from a founteyne.
But nothing created does in such sort flow from God.

Natural emanations from God are not to be found but in God, and that in
respect of the Persons; the Son being natural and necessarily begotten of
the Father, and the H. Ghost naturally and necessarily proceeding both from the
Father and the Son.

Again, the water that flows from the founteyne on from the Ocean, is of the
same nature with the founteyne, on with the water of the Ocean, so is not time
of the same nature, with eternity from whence, you say, it flows.

Again it is untrue that eternity produces time or duration of things
created: for the duration of them is nothing else, but the continuance of their
existence.

Therefore look what produces the things themselves, and maynteynes them,
being produced, from thence they are to be accoumpted to have their beginning.
Now it is the power and will of God, whereby things are created and preserved,
and not the eternity of God. By the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and
all the host of them by the breath of his mouth. We no where read, that by the
eternity of God all things were made, Angels and Men, Heaven and Earth.

And so likewise as by his word he made all things, so by the power of his
mighty word he supports all things. Heb. 1. And Ioh. 1.
therefore all things both touching their being and duration, depend upon the
mighty word of God: this we have ground for: But that they depend upon his
eternity, we have no ground to affirm; though it is true that both God, and
his Word, and Spirit are eternal, otherwise he could not be the Creator of the
World. Upon the back of this, you come in with a new Paradox, namely that From
all eternity, there was a possibility for us to be; as if it were possible for
a creature to be from all eternity.

Yet I know some Scholemen have maynteyned it (as what will not wild wits dare
to undertake): but does it therefore become a Divine, to suppose it without all
proof? I hold it to be impossible, and Durands reasons to the contrary are
more pregnant, in my judgment, then any that are brought for it: to wit, that
then, years and months, days and hours should be equal; for each of them,
even years, should be infinite, and days, and hours, yea and minutes past,
should be but infinite; whence he inferres, that to every minute should be
equal to an year; and albeit he invadeth only eternity of things in motion;
yet I see no reason to the contrary, but the argument is appliable as well to
all created things, though not subject to motion, though the evidence of
deduction is not so manifest as in case of motion.

I know well that Aquinas enterteyned the opinion of this possibility, out of
zenle to uphold the creditt of Aristotle in some measure. But then taking upon
him to reconcile seeming contradictions in his opuscula, and one of them being
this; If the World were eternal, then the souls of men pa^ were infinite,
supposing the immortality of them; according to the opinion of Aristotle: And
both Aristor. as well as Aquinas himself hold it impossible that there should
be infinitum actu either in number or in magnitude: Mark how he reconciles
this, and what course he takes to prevent an infinite number of souls; Though
the World, and Man (says he) had been everlasting, yet the first man might
have been preserved without generation for an infinite space of time, and not
begin to generate till about six thousand years ago.

By this let every sober man judge to what shifts this great Schoolman was put
to salve this opinion of a possibility, of the worlds being eternal from
contradiction. To this you add that in like sort our actual being or
existence whiles it l^steth, is composed of a capacity to be what we are, and
of the actuation or filling of this capacity; you might well say so or in like
sort, for there seems as like truth in this as in the former. Man as he is
unum perse is said to consist ex potentia et actis, which is as much as to say
ex materia et forma rationali; which Maxim had a capacity of receaving this
form, upon whose conjunctio^ does arise that compositum, which we call a man,
and us it had a power, so an appetite thereunto, all which was contained under
that principium generationis which is called Privatio, According to that saying
Materia appetit formam sicut femina virum. But the particular appetite being
satisfied with the form, it no longer remains, nor the capacity to receave
it, that time being now past. But rather an appetite there is in the matter to
a new form, by corruption of the present compound, which is the natural
ground of man's mortality. And the general appetite of matter is never
satisfied.

Much less is this capacity a part, whereof man does consist. For every
Philosopher knows that the capacity of the matter belongs to that principium
generationis which is called privatio. Now Privatio, though it be principium
generationis as well as Materia and forma; yet is it not principium compositi.
Ex tribus principiis Homo generatur? ex duobus tertiu companitur? But perhaps
you speak not of the capacity of the matter to receave a form, which is
proper only to compound substances; But of the possibility of Being, before
they are, which is extended even to Angels. But then I say much less is the
nature of man to be said, composed of such a capacity; for this capacity is not
so much as potentia physica, but a only potentia logica, to wit, negatio
repugnantia, as when we say 'twas possible the world should be, before it was,
for it implies no contradiction: For Gods almighty power was able to make it
out of nothing. So it was possible that Angels should be before they were. In
like sort it was possible, that man should be, before he was. But neither man
nor Angels can be said to be composed of such a possibility; or of such a
capacity, for that were to say that a real and positive thing is composed of
that which is neither real nor positive. And it is impossible that a thing not
real or positive should be a part of that which is real and positive. But
yet, you may say; All created things consist ex potentia and actu, be they
never so simple and uncompound, as the very Angels themselves, God alone is
Actus purus void of all passive power. But as touching this power by your
leave, I take it not to be spoken inrespect of the potentiallity going before
the Act, which you say is actuated, but rather in respect of a potentiallity
consequent to the Act, or concomitant with it, as we conceave it of such a
nature as may cease to be, or be destroyed.

Or last of all, it may proceed in respect of the distinction between essence
and existence, which is found in all things beside God himself: In which
respect they are said to consist ex potentia et Actu, which kind of
composition, as I remember, is called Metaphysica; and it extends to all
created things in distinction from all other compositions whatsoever, which are
peculiar to some more then to others. But in what congruity this capacity may
be said to be filled, when essence is actuated by existence, I comprehend not.
For to be filled, presupposes the existence of that which is to be filled. And
existence seems rather to conteyne essence, then essence, existence. But most
paradoxicall of all is it, that existence should be composed of capacity, and
the actuatio^ or filling of it: Whereas existence, in my judgment, is rather
the actuation formal of essence, then is composed thereof.

In the next place you tell us, that life (especially sensitive) is but the
motion or progress of this capacity toward that which fills it; or as it
were, a continual sucking in of present existence, or continuation of actual
being, from somewhat preexistent. I think there is a liberal error in this,
and instead of life sensitive, as I take it, there should be life vegetative.
Now this doctrine of yours is wondrous strange. There is a motion and
progress in life vegetative by way of augmentation, but not by way of
generation.

Neither has the existence of any vegetable, much less man, any degrees:
Neither is it of the nature of any substantial form, much less of a soul,
least of all of the reasonable foul, to be brought in, much less to be sucked
in, by degrees.

And if our existence be present, as you call it, how can it be sucked in? For
we suck in that which we have not; not that which we already have. Neither
could we have power to suck in ought, much less the actual sucking in of
ought, unles already we had existence: For without existence presupposed there
can be no motion. And of degrees of existence, especially of substantial
forms, or of the things compounded of them, I never heard till now: Degrees,
or rather a graduall extension of quantity is gotten by that act of vegetation
which is called growth or augmentation. So then, not existence, simply, but of
quantity rather; nor the existence of quantity neither, but a greater extension
thereof is sucked-in by things that grow: Neither is this extension sucked in;
but rather matter of nourishment is sucked in, which by the peculier operation
of the soul is first fitted for nourishment diverse and sundry ways, and after
that converted into nourishment, and appropriated to each part; and after that
by another peculiar property of the soul, there flows from it augmentation of
quantity; which is not sucked in from without, but only the materials of it:
This wild phrase and manner of speech of yours, if it proceed, is sufficient to
corrupt all Philosophy, and not Divinity only.

The next point, I confess, is no Paradox, when you say, Except the
vegetables by which our life is continued, had existence before they become our
nutriment, they could not possibly nourish us. This, I say, is most true: for
if they had not being before, they were just nothing; and it is impossible that
that which is nothing, should nourish any thing.

Nay, if they had not their being before, they should have no being at all:
for Milk or Bread if it had no being before it nourish us; surely it has no
being of milk or bread when it does nourish us, by being converted into flesh
and bone; for then surely, it is neither milk nor bread. The next assertion is
very obscure, if at all it has any truth in it, as when you say, These
vegetables themselves cannot exist, unles they did draw their existence or
continance of their being, from that which did exist before them, and unto
which they do by motion or continuance often their being approach: For you
propose this of life vegetative, which is found in plants as well as men; and
the matter of their nourishment is only the moisture or fatues of the earth;
which fatnes of the earth, how it draws existence or continuance of its being
so much as in your sense, I cannot conceave; sc. Matter of man's nourishment,
Honey, and potted butter, and poudred beef, and bacon, and biscuit, how they
draw it from that whereunto by motion or continuance of their being they
approach: Wherein you seem to have a sublimate conceyte, resolving the
continuance of all things into the operation of God: But, by your leave, they
do not draw their continuance from God; God gives it rather, and that by
natural means, whereby things are preserved from putrefaction, which is the
destruction of their being: Which preservation against putrefactio^, is either
in the nature of the things themselves, which God by an ordinary natural
course has wrought in them, onby the Art of Men: Which you resolving without
more ado into the operation of God carry your self not like unto a
Philosopher, but like unto that Grammarian who being demanded by a gardenar
what should be the reason, why weeds thrived so fast notwithstanding all his
care to weed them out, and pluck them up by the roots; when good herbs
prospered so slowly notwithstanding all his care, not only to plant them, but
being planted to water them, and to manu^e the ground that bare them; Derived
the reason of all this from the providence of God; Whereat a Philosophes
standing by laughed, not that he despised the Providence of God, but because he
conceaved there was a more immediate reason thereof, though it also were
subordinate to the providence of God, and that was this. As for the weeds that
grow of themselfes, the earth is a natural mother unto them; but as for the
herbs that were planted in her bosom, she was but a stepmother unto them;
and ergo: no merveyle if she mainteyned her own children, her own fruits
brought forth by her better, then strange children brought unto her to be
fostered by her. But be it as you intimate, that all things draw their
existence and continuation of their being from God; but how will you unfold
that mystery of yours that follows, namely, that by motion or continuation of
their being they approach unto God? For I have read, that the Crow lives out
nine men's lives (measuring every age to be an 100. years) and that the Heart
lives thrice as many years as the Crow; and that the Raven trebleth the Hearts
endurance; whence came that Theophrastus his complaint of natures inequality,
that to Hearts and Crows had given so long time of continuance, which was
denied unto man: what shall we say therefore that these have approached nearer
unto God then Man? Perhaps you will say, yes, in respect of Gods eternity: Why
but herein, your self shall be brought to plead against your self; For in the
eight sect: of your former chap. discoursing how the center of Gods immensity
might be said to be every where; you gave this reason or exemplification of
it; that be supposing a spear infinite, every point is equally removed from the
circumference, as put the case, S. Michaells mount should be as near to the
circumference Eastward as Dover, and consequently Dover as far of as S.
Michaells mount, though the whole breadth of England lie between them.

And by the same reason the life of a Raven shall be as far of from eternity,
as the life of a Heart, and the durance of an Heart as far from eternity as the
Durance of a Crow, though three times as much; and the durance of a Crow as far
of from eternity, as the durance of a Man, though nine tunes as much.

In the next place, as by way of inference, you add: So that future times and
all things contained in time it self, presuppose a fountain of life. I will
not trouble my self with your inference: What such move you to make choice of
future times to instance in, rather of times in general, whether future,
present, or past?

I doubt preexistence to future times is in your imagination a very mysterious
point; and such as you are loath your Reader should be acquainted with: For as
Aristotle says of Fallacies, (...), to discover them, is to solve them; so
you may fear, the bare discovery of your conceyt may be enough to discredit
it. And yet, to show how well you please your self in it, you say that this
fountain of life, presupposed to future times, and all things contained in
them, is as truly preexistent to their future terminations, as it was to their
beginnings.

How will you construe this sentence, and accommodate it to future times,
whereupon notwithstanding it proceeds, as well as of things contained in time,
both touching the terminations of them, which are future, and touching the
beginnings of them which are past? Surely you cannot; ergo: the latter part of
the sentence must be accommodated not to future times wherewith you began this
sentence, but to all things contained in time it self. And these indeed have
had beginnings which are past, and we do expect future terminations or,
motions of them, according to the parts of future time, so long as time it
self shall last.

But what is this strange assertion you are impregnated withal, when you
deliver it as a rare and curious conceyt, that things contained in time do
suppose a fountain of life not only to the beginnings of them, but also to
their future terminations and motions. Whereas to my poor conceyt, if a
founteyne of life be presupposed to things past, it must be presupposed also
to things to come: And there is no curiosity in this; the inference rather is
most vulgar; For seeing future things are behind things past, quod est prius
priori must needs be prius posteriori; yet, that which is before a former
thing, must needs be before a latter thing.

Hence you proceed (whether by following on, or falling of, let the Reader
judge) to censure that common saying, Tempus edax rerum, as relishing more of
poetical wit, then of Metaphysicall truth. For which kind of censure
delivered by you, I find no just reason; For what? can no truth satisfy you,
but that which is Metaphysicall? And why you should make such an opposition I
know not; as if what I ever relished not of Metaphysicall truth, were no truth,
but rather of Poetical wit: and whatsoever relished of poetical wit, did
not relish of truth. You may as well censure Aristotle's Physics, and Ethics,
and Politiques, and Rhetoricks, for surely they do not relish of Metaphysicall
truths; no nor Euclides Mathematics; no nor of Poetical wit neither; belike
they are liable to a double censure.

Yet what think you? cannot Poetical wit have course in conjunction with
truth, as well as in separation from it. Nec fingunt omnia Cretes. No nor Poets
neither. And as for this saying, Tempus edax rerum: I never knew any sober man
or other except against the truth of it before: But if you will put a
construction upon it at your pleasure, to show your wit in refuting it; you
shall therein play the part of a Poet rather then the Philosopher; for some of
them have taken a course to shape stories, according to the use they had to
make of them, and not to follow the direct truth: and this has been said to
be the difference between Sophocles and Euripides: And herein they were like
to Mathematicians of whom it is said Mathematici abstrahunt nec mentiuntur: And
abstracting a line from the matter of it, they may add to it, or take from it
what they list: So you construe this saying, Tempus edax rerum, as if it were
delivered in proper speech, and not by a figure; whereas the meaning is
Synecdochicall; that in course of time things do consume and wast, not that
time it self does wast them; For time being the duration of things; how can
the duration of a thing consume it self?

Yet is your reason whereby you oppose this common saying very loose, as when
you say, If time did devour things, what could possibly nourish them or
continue them from their beginning to their end, And that in two respects; for
neither the saying signifies that time should devour the^, before the time
appointed for the consumption of them: And though time did consume them, yet
some thing else might contnue them; For their own natures wherein God has made
them, are for a time apt to resist that which labors to corrupt them. And
other means also there are for the preservation of the^: As man by using
means for his preservation may hold out longer then he which uses none;
neither did the Authors or approvers of that saying, Tempus edax rerum, ever
conceit that any thing should desire the destruction of it self, as you are
pleased to rove in impugning it: And look in what sense time does not destroy,
but things are destroyed in time; in the same sense, things temporal have not
the continuation of their being from time, but from somewhat else in time; For
when things are preserved, by the wit and industry of man from putrefaction,
they do not receave this preservation of theyrs from time, but from the wit
and industry of man: And ergo: as time does not wast, so neither does time
preserve from wasting.

It is a paradox if not a manifest untruth, rather to say that the motions of
things themsselfes, and their endeavors, to enjoy or enterteyne time
approaching is that which does wast and consume them; For albeit in man
sometimes you find such causes of consumption, yet in all other creatures
inferior unto man, as beasts of all sorts, how can you make it good that they
out of a desire and endeavor to enterteyne time do wast themselfes, who know
not so much as what time is? How much less will you be able to make it good in
vegetables of all sorts, as plants and trees, and in all sorts of mixed bodies?
Nay, how will you make it good in man? Some die by course of nature, and that
either through age or sickness; when a man of 100. years old dies, what motion
or endeavor is there in him to enterteyne that wasted him? and how will you
prove, that had not this motion or endeavor of his been (as all endeavors are
voluntary and free) he might have lived longer.

When God sent apestilence among the Israelites, that in the space of 3. days
swept away 70. thousand; was it a motion of theirs, or an endeavor to
enterteyne time, that consumed them? Nay, when any disease proves mortal, how
can it appear that when one man died of an Ague, another of the Dropsy,
another of the squinancy, another of the plurisie, another of the consumption,
that all of them died of a certain disease, called their motions and endeavors
to enjoy and enterteyne time approaching: A disease, that I think was never
known to Hipocrates or Galin, or any Physician before or since. I should think
the desease of Pastime should wast us more then the desease of enjoying Time.
Others come to their ends by violent deaths, some in war, some by course of
justice, others by private malice: In all these I find my self in the briars,
and cannot possibly conceive, how men's own motions and endeavors to enjoy
time should wast or consume them: or in case a man makes a way with himself
by hanging drowning or poisoning. Not altogether so wild is that conceyt of
yours which follows, in saying we naturally seek to catch time. Yet wild
enough; for it is untrue that men catch. Time; they catch opportunity, which is
(...), and not a little differing from (...). Now opportunity is only an
advantage of doing something conveniently offered to us in the course of Time.
As it is good to make hay while the sun shines, ergo; I will roundly set my
self to the making of Hay, while this opportunity is offered, wherein I catch
not time but opportunity; for the Time were the same in case it rayned, but the
opportunity for making of Hay were not the same, because the wether in that
case were not the same; And Hay-making requires fair wether.

Who they are, who acknowledge no difference between Time and Motion, I know
not; I should think no man so blockish as to confound them, seeing motion it
self may be of more or less continuance in respect of Time, as well as any
thing else, And in the same Time somethings more or less slowly, something more
swiftly, some in one kind of motion, some in another: But of diverse kinds of
time, that should belong to things moved, with diverse kinds of motions, I never
heard that any Philosopher has discoursed.

Aristotle I confess, defines time to be numerus motus secund. prius and
posterius; but this is not to confound time with motion, but rather to
distinguish the one from the other: For he g^ves a far other definition of
motion it self: And albeit the time of every temporal thing be the duration
of it, whether it rests or moves, yet if the questions be made how long such
a thing has continued, or when such a thing began to be, or ceased to be; We
have no better means to answer it, then by numbering the revolution of the
Sun, if we will show how many years; or of the Moon, to show how many
months; or of the Diurnall motion of the Heavens, to show how many days ago
such a thing was done, or began, or ceased to be; or to show how many days, or
months, or years any thing has continued: and ergo: Aristotle in his
Physics considering time as the measure, in such sort as has been expressed,
gives a definition suitable, in saying it was numerus motus per prius and
posterius. Which definition when your true Philosophy shall me^d, we shall be so
ingenuous as to give congruous respect unto it.

As you began, so you proceed to acquaint us with your subtleties in
Philosophy concerning time, Motion (you say) in true observation goes one
way, and drives time another way, as the stream which runs Eastward, turns
the wheel Westward.

This curiosity is worth the examining, it may minister some merry matter of
refreshment unto us, which in my judgment, your reader has no little need of
to take him of from too sad and serious attention in tracking your obscure
phrase, and treading out therhence some morsel of good meaning.

I thinck you speak of motion circular, and that of the heavens, because
nothing so fit to notify unto us Time, as that, and of such motion you speak
as immediately before you have signified: Well then; The circular motion of the
Heavens goes one way, and drives Time another way: Before you told us that
Motion notifies Time, here you say, It drives Time; but how? Not the same way,
but another way as the streams which runs Eastward, drives the wheel
Westward: And which way. I pray does Time pass: Eastward of Westward? As
there is a motion of the heavens, that makes the day, which is from East to
west; so there is a motion of the Sun which makes the year, and that motion is
from West to East; does each motion drive time a different way or the same
way? Again each motion is not only from East to West, as the first, and from
West to East as the second; but the first is again from West to East, and the
second is again from East to West; You have not told us, which way Time is
driven by motion; and ergo: being to seek, you drive our inquisitions diverse
ways, and perhaps all different from your own; And all because you will not
acquaint is with the way you conceave to your self, ergo; you drive us other
ways, as the motion drives time: Let us see whether we can have any help from
your comparison.

The stream, you say, running Eastward drives the wheel Westward; Now this
seems to us untrue, and so far forth as it may be tolerated for true, surely
it drivs the wheel no more Westward then Eastward: First I say it is not
true: For the wheel by the stream is turned neither Eastward nor Westward
but round; Now to move Eastward or Westward is to move motu recto a straight
motion, but to move round is not to move motu recto, but orbiculari, not by a
straight motion, but circular: Yet because circular motions may be said to be
toward the East or toward the West, and so the motion of the wheel may be
(as you say it is) Westward; yet then I say it is no more Westward then
Eastward, as it is manifest in all circular motions: And indeed the river
moving according to his natural course drives the wheel before it, but the
wheel being round, moves round, not only Eastward as the river goes, but
Westward also; For to move circularly toward the East in respect of some
parts, is to move circularly toward the West also in respect of other parts,
not Westward only or principally so as to give the denomination of a motion
Westward, rather them of a motion Eastward.

But all this while we have not found which way Time is driven in your
opinion: For sure your meaning is not that time is driven circularly (though I
have observed you to discourse of circular duration.) And my reason is this: if
the motion from East to West should drive Time another way of motion circular;
then seeing that motion which makes the day is contrary to that motion which
constitutes the year, it would follow, that the time of the day should go a
way quite contrary to the Time of the year: And as little reason to drive time
another way, in respect of direct motion.

For there is no reason why the way of Time should be toward the East,
rather then toward the West, or contrariwise; and why rather either of these
ways, then toward the North or toward the South.

And no mervayle, seeing the way of place is one thing, and the way of time
another: For though the stream run directly Eastward, and turn a wheel
round; it is nothing strange, since both are bodies apt to moove, and the stream
apt to run downward, and a wheel apt to be turned round. But time is not a
body that it can move ane way.

And this reflects my thoughes upon the consideration of another incongruity,
as when you say, motion goes one way; you might as well have said, motion moves
one way; whereas it is the body that moves, and motion is the act of it, but
it self moves not.

Yet there is a proper way for a body moving, and so for motion. And it may be
there is a proper way for time as when that which is to come becomes present
time, and present time, becomes past time; as this year the last year was to
come, now it is present, and after a while it will be past: So all the way of
time is this, and shall be, it is, it was: one after another.

And (by your leaves) motion drives it no more then rest: If the Heavens should
stand still, yet might things continue still the same time that God has
appointed them, as well as in the case of their motion.

Neither is it true, that our actual existence slides from us with time; our
being still continues the same, by you leave, and not our capacity of being
only; For Socrates senex non differt a Socrate puero according to our
University learning, which whether it be true Philosophy or no, let the Reader
judge; I say, he differs not in substance, I do not say, he differs not in
accidents: I doubt not but Socrates was auncienter in his old age, then in his
childhood, and different both in quantity of body, and quality of mind; But I
see no reason but his existence was still the same: And as for capacity of
being, I see no reason why that should have any place where being already is:
As for substantial actuation of capacity of Being (which you make to be
continual) after a man has his being I know none; Neither am I conscious of
any such desire; and it is strange to me, that you should be more privy to my
desires then my self. I desire to increase in knowledge, and to grow in grace
and goodness, and in favor with God and man.

But of any desire of actuation or replenishment (as you speak) of the capacity
of being, I am nothing conscious to my self: Neither can I acknowledge any new
coexistence (with time approaching in respect of any mutation of my existence,
but in regard that times do change and succeed one another, I may be said to
coexist anew with them, because they coexist anew with me.

Neither do I know any such office of time as you devise to be assigned to it
by eternity, as to repayr that ruins which tions present or past, have wrought
in our corruptible substance.

No mervayle that you could not brook that time should be accounted edax rerum:
For now I perceave you maynteyne time to be reparatrix rerum, yea the curer of
diseases; For to repair the ruins which motion has made in our corruptible
substances, what is it but to cure deseases? So that time is a simple of more
sovereigne virtue, then I was ware of; but I know not whether it were ever
known to Hippocrates or Galen; I doubt it was not; And that tempus is edax
rerum, has better authority to confirm it I think, then that it is reparatrix
rerum: And consider in reason, time is the duration of things temporal, whence
it comes to pass, that the very ruins themselfes which are wrought in our
corruptible substances have their time, that is, their duration; so have all
deseases: Now let any sober man judge, whether the duration of such a ruin,
such a desease, be fit to repair it, fit to cure it; What time then shall
cure or repair it? Take the most sovereigne remedies to repayr such ruins, to
cure such deseases, and the duration or time thereof has no power to repayr or
cure it, but the nature of that remedy applied may; which nature and the
application thereof, is not time, but the remedy has a duration, which is the
time thereof, whether it be applied or no.

As for the motions of the heavens numbered according to preority and
posteriority, which in a Physical consideration is the time of every thing, as
the fittest measure to measure out the continuance of all things, as little
power has that to repair ruins or cure deseases, more then to make them.

In the next place you draw us to the consideration of Plotinus his excellent
observations. I had rather you would acquaint us with some accurate conclusions
and demonstrations of his. Yet these observations which you so magnify in a
Platonic, such as they are we will consider them. The first is that the best
of our life, the very being of things generable is but as a continual draught
or receite of being, from the inexhaustible founteyne of life. This is one of
his (so much by you magnified) observations, and a very proper one. As if a man
should say, the very water, be it the best of waters, is but a stream flowing
from the fountain of waters. Is not this an excellent observation, thinck you?
Yet you add some thing of your own, which partly swerves from truth, and
partly marres Plotinus his music; For you make the very being of things
generable, and the best of our life to be all one; whereas the wickedest men
that are, are the miserablest things that are, are things generable, and have a
being as well as the best; And in the state of our corrupt nature we had a
being, and so had Paul when he persecuted the Church of God, and Peter when he
denied his Mr. and David when he committed adultery with Bathsheba and caused
Vriah to be slain with the sword of the children of Ammon; but did this being
of theirs, or their very being, deserve to be accounted the best of their life?
Now whereas you say, Our being is a continual draught of being from the
inexhaustible founteyne of life: I find no mention at all of any fountain of
life in Plotinus, His words as you cite them are, Videtur in rebus
generabilibus id potissimum essentia esse, scilicet tractus quidam ab ipso
esse, (this is all he has concerning the inexhaustible founteyne of life as
you paraphrase it) ex generationis initio, quousque ad temporis extrema
perveniat.

And to my understanding his meaning is no other, then that the essence of
things generable is as it were esse fluens, like as we say, linea est fluxus
puncti in longitudinem. And thereupon his first sentence is this, that take away
erit from things generable, and forthwith they cease to be: And to things that
are not such, if you add erit to them, it shall befall them a sede ipfiue esse
labe, to slide from the seat of being; All which are but odd streynes of
expressions of that which to know is worth just nothing, if at all there be any
sound truth in their subtleties: But hence he concludes indeed that the being
of a thing generable is not natural unto it; and therefore (you will say) he
must have it from something, and what can that be, but from the founteyne of
life; as it is well known Plato first, and accordingly Platonickes maynteyned,
that the world was made by God.

To this I answer, that albeit they attributed the making of the world to God
not out of nothing, but out of matter actually preexistent; yet here Plotinus
discourses, not of the creation whereby the world was made, but of generation,
whereby the parts of it were continually meynteyned; Neither does he discourse
of the efficiency of the being of things generable, but only of the formality
thereof: But if over and above a question were moved as touching the efficiency
of being, who can doubt but his answer would be either ascribing this to the
individual generating, and virtus seminalis as his instrument, working to the
extracting of forms ex potentia materiae; or otherwise to the Dator formarum;
in neither of which should he as an heathen man ascend unto the inexhaustible
founteyne of life, whither you would draw him, to make the magnifying of his
excellent observations the more specious: But what should Christians expect
from the Scholar of Ammonius and Mr. of Dorphity? Now, whereas he confines
this to things generable, do you magnify that also! What think you of
Augul^s? Is not their being also a continual draught or receipt of being from
the inexhaustible fountain of life, as well as the being of things generable?

But proceed we to take notice of the rest of his so excellent observation:
Nature (says he) hastens unto that being which is to come, nor can it rest,
seeing it draws or sucks in that being which it has, by doing now this and now
that, being moved as it were in a circle, with the desire of essence, or of
being what it is. By this I perceive where you dipped your pen that dropped forth
such wild conceits as before in this very section I have encountered with; to
wit, in Plotinus his Philosophy, fit lettice for such lips as like them. And
for the obscurity of conceit, your writings, to my thinking are very like unto
his; and the rather may men be moved to suspect, there are some rare notions in
them which they understand not; Yet by the way you sometimes insperse such
glosses as make Plotinus meaning worse then it is; as when Plotinus says of a
thing generable, that movetur in orbem quodam essentiae desiderio, that it is
moved round with a certain desire of essence; you render it this with desire
of essence or being what is: Now Plotinus says, not of any thing that it has
a desire to be what it is, which is very absurd; for nothing desires what it
has already, but rather what it has not: So when Plotinus says, that esse
sibi haurit, it draws unto it self being; you render it thus, It sucks in
what it has; whereas indeed it is a thing impossible for any man to suck in
that which he has, but rather he sucks in that which he has not.

Nor can I approve this saying of Plotinus, that A thing generable hactens to
that being which is to come; which Plotinus seems to understane only of Time;
Now we rather on the contrary many times complain that time passes away too
fast; yet again some there are, I confess, that think time never passes
away fast enough: Both are conscious of times hasting more or less; but
neither are conscious of their hastening to Times: And the truth is, the
swiftest motion and the slowest motion is in respect of the same time, which
indeed in neither swift nor slow, though motions in time may be swift or slow;
yet the swiftest mover no more hastens to time to come, then the slowest mover,
how excellent soever Plotinus observation be in your conceit, yet I grant we
may be said to hasten to a being which is to come, but this being is always
accidental never essential: A man may make have to be rich, and such a one
says Solomon can not be innocent: A man Pro. 28. 20.
may grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to make
have therein is commendable: and so for 2. Pet. (...). 18
everyone to be diligent and quick in the works of his calling: But our
essential being we have not unto, it is the same still; for Socrates being old
differs not essentially from himself being a child: Indeed we labor for the
preservation of our being; but all our actions tend not hereunto, they tend to
the service of God as well as to the service of our selves.

And how in these motions whatsoever we move in orbem, or as it were in a
circle I know not; That quaint conceit I leave to Plotinus till your commentary
may unfold the meaning of it.

Now you tell us (belike in a suitable proportion unto the conceits of
Plotinus, or rather in some degree beyond them) that Nor we men, nor any
creatures (specially generable) are permitted to draw or suck so much of our
proper being from the founteyne of eternity at once, or in any one point of
time as we list, and that We have our portions of life or self-fruition
distributed peecemeale and sparingly unto us, least too much put into our hands
at once might make us prodigal of the whole stock.

It is great pity the pages of your book be not stored with the word Mystery;
for they are nothing almost but mystery; This is delivered not only of men,
but of all creatures generable: Why then, all creatures generable have a list
to draw or suck more of their proper being from the fountain of eternity,
then they do or can suck: Surely you charge them with that they are nothing
guilty of; For, not to speak of stones and mettalls nor of vegetables; How
does it appear there is any such desire in brute creatures, whether beasts or
birds or fishes^ that neither know eternity, nor their own proper being, nor
what it is to suck more of it at once then is fit.

And as for my self amongst reasonables, one though a poor one, having some
knowledge both of eternity in the way of Christian Divinity, and of my proper
being in the way of natural Philosophy; yet what it is to suck more of my
portion of being at once then God think fit, I am utterly ignorant, and
therefore cannot be conscious to my self of any such transgression: Suppose
the durance of my being in the appoyntement of God be between 50. and 60.
years, do I desire or can I desire to enjoy these 60. years in the space of
20. or is it possible by the almighty power of God that I should? I grant the
knowledge and goodness I have arrived unto by Gods grace in the space of 50.
years, I might have arrived unto in the space of 40. Yet am I not conscious of
any desire I had of this: But this is only my accidental being, and therefore
deserves not simply to be accounted my proper being.

The like may be as touching the Qualities or Quantity of my body: But my
substantial being, that only deserves to be accounted simply my Being; And
this I had all at once, as I had my organicall body, and soul all at once;
though the continuance of it I had not all at once; For that was impossible I
should have, it being a continuance by way of succession of days after days
etc. And ^f I had had all at once, there had been no succession; and therefore,
in my judgment, it is absurd to say our portions of life are pece-meale and
sparingly distributed unto us, lest too much being put into our hands at once
might make us prodigal of the whole stock. And which implies, that God could,
if it had pleased him, have made us enjoy the whole space of our life at once;
For that were to make time past, present and to come, to exist alltogeather,
which, I think, every wise man will judge to be impossible: Yet this case being
put; how were it possible to the contrary, but that we must needs spend it all
at once? For like as the space of life of 60. years must necessarily be spent
in 60. years: So if we had all this space together in one day, or one year,
we wust needs spend it together in the space of a day, or a year: In a word,
since this cannot be true of our essential being, which we have all at once
undoubtedly; nor of our accidental being; for that cannot be properly
accoumpted our being; it remaynes to be understood only of the continuance of
our being: And to desire to have all this at once, is to desire to have at 7.
years, as much age as others at 60: But no man desires this, though lately we
hear, that after the surrendering of Rochel, maidens, by reason of the famine
there during the Seige, of 16. years old were found to look like women of an
100 years old. We rather desire in old age to be young, like unto Moses who
being an 100. and 20. his eye was not dimne, nor his natural strength abated.
Yet your conceit is manifestly impossible; for it proceeds not of having the
qualities of age in youth, but the very continuance, which is as much as to
say, at seven years of age to be as old as a man of 60. which no man desires,
neither is it possible for God to effect.

This piercing of time, or reduction of many years into a small space being as
utterly impossible as the penetration of dimension in magnitude, if not much
more.

Men's stocks may be spent in one year upon as much pleasure as another may be
taking in seven years: but the continuance of space or time to come, can
neither be taken before the time, nor spent.

2. In the next Section you are more popular; I do not say more true: For you
give me no cause to say so.

For first, in my Judgment, it is a manifest untruth to say, that time is a
participation of eternity: For as immensity is to place or magnitude, so is
eternity unto time: But place or magnitude is no participation of immensity,
therefore also time is no participation of eternity.

And like as Gods immensity is without extension, and therefore quite of a
different nature from magnitudine corporal; So his eternity is without
succession; and therefore of a quite different nature from duration corporal.

And whereas you say, that He should desine the several branches of time most
exactly, that could number or decipher that several actuations, draughts, or
replenishments, which are derived from the infinite founteyne of life and
being, to fill the capacities or satiate the internal desires of things
temporal; Here again you slip back to the transcendentall notions, far
above, not only common sense, but all sobriety of conceit.

You tell us of actuations, draughts, and replenishments derived from the
founteyne of life to fill capacities, and internal desires; all which
together with the several branches of time you speak of, and their
references to the actuations after mentioned, are so many hobgoblins unto me:
what are the parts of time, I seem to understand, time past, time present, and
time to come, but what the Several branches are, I know not.

The founteyne of life is it, that which brings natures possible into act of
being? But how hereby he can be said to satiate their internal desirs, I
comprehend not: For while a thing is only possible, ^t neither has, nor can
enterteyne any desire of being. Perhaps you may say, that when things are, they
may desire continuance: And it is the founteyne of life, that as he made all
things, so he does perpetuate them so long as he thinks good. But what
mystery, the deciphering of this actuation or perpetuation does conteyne, so
avaylable to the definition of the several of time, I therefore know not,
because you have not vouchsafed the enucliation hereof unto your Reader.

I find no sense in that which follows, as when you say the motion of the
Heavens is more uniforme then time (which you call the duration of things
temporal): For every part of time is still uniforme, and that in such sort as
it impossible to be otherwise; be the motion never so deficient in uniformity.
As an hour is still the same, whether motions herein be swift or slow, or both
swift and flow (as such different motions may be in the same time without all
question) and that according to all variety; yea though one and the same
motion, I mean of one and the same subject be partly swifter, partly slower,
and that in all variety of degrees.

So is the month, so is the year most uniforme, taking it to consist of how
many days and hours soever you will: I grant things in time may dure more or
less; but time it self admitts no contraction or dilatation; as for example,
a day cannot be contracted into the space of an hour; nor an hour cannot be
dilated into the space of a day; but the motion of a day may be contracted and
reduced within the space of an hour; that is, a thing may move as fast in an
hour as it does in a day, I have heard of a Pope, that when his country men
presuming of his omnipotency, entreated they might have two summers in a year,
made answer as Elias did to Elisha, that he had asked a very hard thing; yet
it might be obtained by them upon a condition: And when they being eager to
obtain what they desired, showed their willingness to accept of any condition;
Hereupon the Pope told them, that upon condition to account 24. months to
their year, they should have two summers every year: This was a cunning trick
to fill his country men's mouths with empty spoones: He was no more able to
gratify his contrymen in this, then Mark Anthony was the Athenians, who
having imposed a double tribute in one year; was told by an Orator, that if
he could give them two Summers, and two Springs within the compass of one
year, he might exact two revenewes, not otherwise.

I know no such double duration or course of time indented, as you speak of,
what if a man be sometimes in health, and sometimes in sickness? the condition
of his life, and the quality thereof it diversified, his duration is not; as
appeates by this: In the same time wherein one it sick, another is not; one in
pleasure, another in pain; it is manifest, the time may be the same, though
the condition much different.

These conceits of yours are so popular, that they cross withal: In grife or
pain to thrust time from us, is but to wish it were shorter then it is; as it
is signified Deuteronomy. 28. 67. In the morning, thou shall say, would God it were
evening. and at evening thou shall say, would God it were morning: And yet the
meaning hereof in effect, is but this, to wish that our pain were shorter,
then would we not care though the time were longer. And so our joy to be
continued, we desire not the moments of our time to be fixed.

Still you confound a man's condition with the time, as if time it self were
sweet or sour. Let every sober man judge, whether it be not an absurd conceyt
to affirm, that men desire to prolong their days by living the same time over
and over again. As if we could not have the sam^oy, without living the same
time over and over again: Whereas it is manifest, that in one and the same
time, one man may be in case and joy, another in pain and sorrow.

And yet in serrow the fr^ction of our existence is never the less perfect,
then in times of joy, for joy and sorrow are no parts of existence, for
existence is found never a whitt the less where joy and sorrow have no place:
This you confess in the next place, where you say; that the pleasure of
borrowed ^ife is to the identity of being but at water to the pipe through
which it runs. yet both serve alike to fill up the matter of your discourse,
both the confusson of things different, and the correction of such confusion.

And if the gluts and gushes of pleasure (as you phrasifie it) may be at one
time much greater then at another, surely they may continue at one time as well
as at another, and therefore for the continuance of pleasure, it is not
necessary to desire the stay of time, which is a thing impossible: Yet you
pleased your self not a little in your former popular discourse of this nature.

The fruition of pleasure may be as entire as our selfs; and it is no more
true, that they are begotten and die in every moment, then it is true of us,
that we are begotten and die in every moment: For this scrupulous hicetie
arises from no other ground, then the being measured with time, their duration
is partly past, partly future, and but a moment present: And judge whether this
conceit of but a moment present, be not a vain conceit: For I pray, what is
that which follows this present moment immediately? Is it a moment only, or
no? if not a moment only, what is become of your conceit? If a moment only,
will it not follow, that time consists of nothing but moments? And you may
as well say, that magnitude consists of nothing but points, which were indeed,
to consist of nothing.

We truly say, this day is present; this month is present; this year is
present, like as time is said to be present, to wit, by way of succession of
parts, which parts are not moments succeeding one another, but times
Homogeneall, though according to reason divisible in infinitum, as all things
continual are.

3. How the Angels do accoumpt the continuation of their duration, I know
not; but surely we have no better means to accoumpt their duration past, then
by the making of the World, and the number of yearly revolutions of the
Heavens, that have been since. But because we believe, that God could have made
Angels, and no visible World; yea and made the Heavens without moving of them;
in which case yet I doubt not but their duration, and continuance thereof
should be known to themselfes, but by what means I know hor.

The Learned do distinguish of the duration of Angels, from the duration of
things material; and so accordingly their measures; making time to be the
measure of the duration of the one; and even of the other: Yet I have no cause
to think that their duration is a participation of eternity more then time: And
like as their magnitude spiritual is no participation of immensity; so neither
is their duration any participation of eternity.

They are creatures as well as we, though no mortal creatures, and have their
beginning as well as we; and the time shall come, when we shall be (...) even
as the Angels themselfes, and continue as long as they, yet never atteyne to
Luke 20.
any eternity of being, though our being shall never have end: But seeing both
theyrs, and ours had a beginning; therefore it is impossible that it should
ever grow to be eternal.

I see no reason why Angels should not be said to watch for opportunities of
time as well as we.

The Devil I am sure is still compassing the earth. Job. 1. and goes about
like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour, and do they not wayt all
opportunities to do mischief? And why may not Angels as well wayt all
opportunities to do us good, according to the will of their and our Heavenly
father? Especially considering they are all ministering Spirits sent forth for
the good of them that shall be heirs of salvation. Hebr. 1.


But I confess, how this waiting or expectance of opportunity should be said
to feed them, I am as much to seek, as to define how it is said to feed us;
unles in respect of Hope; and so I see no reason, but that it may be as well
said to feed them also; for surely their own glory is not at full, and they
wait for the enjoying of that; neither our glory nor grace is yet at full;
and as they rejoice at the conversion of a sinner; how much more will they
rejoice at our salvation; and why may they not be said to wait and hope for
that also, and rejoice in the hope, as we do?

If a desire to continue what they are does argue, they have not all that in
present possession which is allotted to their complete duration; then surely
they never shall, nor we neither, no not in the state of glory, have all in
present possession which is allotted to our duration: And what, I pray, is
wanting? You will say the future duration; but what, I pray, do we get by
that, when as fast as duration future becomes present, so fast duration present
becomes past? Yet surely by continuing what we are, we loose nothing; and if by
this, that our duration passes in respect of time, we cannot be said to loose
any thing; then surely by this, that duration comes on as fast, we cannot be
said to gain any thing. If indeed we should grow weaker and weaker, and our
strength and prosperity should pass with time, then we should be loosers by
it, not otherwise; So if we should grow stronger and stronger, and our strength
or prosperity should increase with time, then we should be gayners by it, and
not otherwise.

Now I hope it is without question; that the glory of Heaven shall not
increase, but be at full, at the very first, and so continue without end. And,
in my judgment, it is a very poor conceit, to deny that a man has his whole
life together, because the duration of it, is not all at once.

If we had our life by degrees, one part at one time, and another part at
another time, this were a manifest imperfection; but having all of it
together, to conceave that the duration and continuance hereof longer and
longer is an imperfection, is a very wild conceit in my judgment: This were to
cast us upon the denial of Gods continuance; For like as our time being upon
supposition of 60. years, if we should have all of it, within an hour, it
should end at an hours end; so likewise, if God should have his continuance
all at once, it should end all at once.

But we say, that the Divine essence as it is without beginning, so it is
without end: and nothing past with him, nor nothing to come to him, as it is
with all creatures, which are subject to motion in some kind or other: if not
of corruption, yet of perfection, at least capable of it: if no such thing
were, yet as they come from nothing, so they might return to nothing: But that
God, as he gave them their being, so he continues it. As for God he receaveth
not his being from anything, no not from himself: But is most necessary to
exist, and most necessary to continue, without loosing of ought that is in
himself, no not so much as a thought; nor receaving any thing into himself,
no not so much as a new thought, or a new affection: All which, and changes in
respect thereof are incident unto Angels, though not so much as unto us; who
also have material motions, as local, and alteration, and that tending to
corruption.

In a word, as man's existence is as it were an accident to his essence; because
the nature of a man is only of it self passively possible to exist, and God
can give existence to such a nature, or make the humane nature to exist, as he
has done; so likewise to Angelical natures, existence is but an accident.

And as existence is an accident to such essences according to our conceit of
them; so is continuance an accident to such existences. In which respect every
day and hour, both man and Angel may be said to receave a new accident, which
before they had not.

But it is quite otherwise with God; For as his existence is all one with his
essence; (because it is absolutely impossible his essence should not exist:) so
his continuance is no accident to his existence: because it is necessary that
God should be, and so be, as to be without beginning and without end: And
therefore though our continuance be new to us, as being an accident unto us, and
wrought by motions; yet Gods continuance is no accident unto him; For it is
impossible, he should not continue, who is of necessary being: But of this, and
of the indivisible nature of Gods continuance more hereafter.

I willingly confess, that because Angels were made of nothing, therefore
their continuance is merely at the pleasure of God, and have parts divisible,
in regard that God can set an end to them, whenever it pleases him.

But I know no cause to deny, that they enjoy an entire self-fruition; For
though they have not all their continuance at once, yet seeing their continuance
is no part of their essence, which is a thing indivisible, I see no reason why
they should be denied, entirely to enjoy themselfes.

Man grows to perfection in parts integrall, though not in parts essential,
which perfection of parts integrall, as it daily grows, so it makes him daily
more fit to perform the offices of nature, and duties of his calling; and so
may be said, not to enjoy himself entirely (according to that perfection)
which belongs unto him but by degrees: But it is not so with Angels; yet may
they acquire something unto themselfes accidentally, which before they had not.

God can acquire nothing: His duration ('it is true) is indivisible; For there is
no prius nor posterius therein; For he is subject to no kind or manner of
motion.

I do not like the manner of your justifying this indivisibility of Duration
in God: as when you say, he cannot gain ought to day, which yesterday he had
not; or loose to day, what yesterday he had: For this, in my judgment, is
incident to glorified creatures: For shall not the glorious condition of men
and Angels be at full without gayning any new or loosing any old? Yet no
doubt, their duration notwithstanding shall be divisible; God is not.

Perhaps you will say, they loose the former days existence, and gain the
following days existence: And so we do much more properly in this world, but
without impediment to the same-nes of our existence: For to loose the former
days existence, and gain the following days existence, is but to loose our
coexistence with the former day, and gain a coexistence with the day
following: Now this is no impediment to the same-nes of existence in duration;
which I prove thus: It is incident to God, yet is he still the same in
duration: And that it is incident to God, I prove thus; God himself was
yesterday coexistent to yesterday, and now he is not; for if he were, then
yesterday should now exist, which is not only untrue, but impossible to be
true, for then time past should be present: And the reason why this is no
impeachment to the most perfect same^nes in duration is manifest; for to
coexist with some thing yesterday, and not to day, may arise from no
variablenes from within, but only from variablenes in something from without:
As, namely, therefore God does not coexist to day, with many things to day,
with which he did coexist yesterday, is not because of any change in God, but
by reason of change in these outward things, which had a being yesterday, but
to day have not.

In that which follows you manifestly betray your cause: For that God has
such fulness of joy and sweetness of life, that nothing can be added thereto in
joy or sweetness; does no way infer, that therefore, the duration hereof
cannot be added unto him, and the continuance thereof: Your comparison utterly
overthrowes you: For as in a body infinite, though there cannot be a middle
nor extreme; yet there are parts without parts by way of extension; So in
infinite life, though it has, no extremes, as being without beginning and
without end, yet this hinders not but that it may have parts going before, and
parts coming after by way of succession.

And whereas you say, that Natures capable of these differences have always
the one accomplished by the other, is either without sense; as if you mean it
of the parts of time, as if one were accomplished by the other; For how I pray
you, is time past or present accomplished by that which is to come, or that
which is present or to come accomplished by that which is past: Or if in
respect of natures subject to time, which are perfected by time, or rather in
the course of time; thus, as it is sometimes true, so sometimes it is
notoriously false: For as there is a time of growth in perfection, so it is well
known that there is a time of diminution, and corruption also; And, I pray
you, how does a man's dotage accomplish him either in soul or body? And in the
Kingdom of Heaven, what accomplishment by time, when our glorious condition
shall be as full and perfect at the first, as in the progress, for what space
imaginable soever.

As for this state, it is well known, that as there is a time of repayring and
increasing, so there is a time of impayring and decaying: And though perfection
cannot be perfected, yet it may be continued; so it is in man, so it is in God;
but by necessity of nature continued in God; by the pleasure of his gracious
will continued in the creature: And therefore though his essence being infinite
excludes such a continuance as is wrought by reiterated acts; yet it excludes
not such a continuance as is by necessity of nature, but rather includes it, it
being of the nature of life infinite to be as with beginning, so also without
end: Even created Angels and Saints shall have no want of continuance in the
Kingdom of Heaven; much less God the Author of their continuance, more then
of his own; Yet shall he continue and that by necessity of nature, both to the
worlds end, and after that without end. Yet nothing in him is to come to him;
nor nothing from without can come to him; For who should give it him? But the
duration both of men and Angels is maynteyned unto them by the will and
pleasure of God: And herein consists the true difference between the duration
of creatures and the Duration of God; For as for prius and posterius, past, and
to come, this has his foundation only in respect of motion, And therefore
time is commonly not reputed a fit measure for the essences of things, but
only for individual substances: and these only generables, not of substances
merely spiritual, as you may remember Plotinus has taught you. What do you
mean by the degrees or acts of life, an infinity whereof you place in God? We
commonly accoumpt three sorts of life, and no more, to wit, vegetative,
sencitive, and rational; Of an infinity I never hard before in this kind: And
as for the degrees of these, I doubt not but there may be degrees in any; as in
each kind some may be more quick and vivacious then other. But none of these
kinds, much less the degrees of the^ ar found in God formally, but iminently:
And as for the plurality in respect of such as are decreed by him, the case is
clear, that they are infinitely far of from infinity; for undoubtedly the
things decreed by God are but finite. I do not agree with you to conceave God
to be everlasting in refere^ce to perpetuity of succession; for that kind of
everlastingnes is a part past: But eternity cheifely consists in being
everlasting a part ante, and before there was any succession at all.

But here, by the way, you give me an hint of what you make your foundation of
many wild discourses; and for which I have looked all along; And not till now
you have bolted it out, as where you say, Gods interminate existence is present
to the whole and every part of succession: which long ago has been discovered
to be a very vain conceit, though embraced by as great a Schoolman as Aquinas
himself; who hereupon builds his opinion of the presence of all things in Gods
eternity: And his opinion herein is built upon a very plausible comparison, and
devised correspondencie between Gods immensity and eternity, for like as God
by virtue of his immensity does fill all places, and should coexist with every
part of magnitude, although, upon supposition, it were infinite: In like sort
God by reason of his eternity should fill all times, and coexist with all
times, and all things that hereafter shall exist in time.

But the fallacy of this comparison, and the error of this assertion has now
long ago been discovered by Ioannes Scotus: It is true indeed, God must needs
coexist with all 1. Sect: did: 79. q. 1.
places. and all things in place; but not until the place it self* and the
things therein do exist: As if the world were twice at big as it is, God
should coexist in every part of it; But yet God does not coexist with any such,
because, as yet there is not any such to coexist with him: In like sort God
shall coexist with all times, and all things existing in all Times; but when?
Not till these times and the things therein shall be found to exist: and as they
shall be found to exist, so shall God coexist with them: Now all Times, and all
things contained in all times do not exist but by way of succession,
(magnitudes exist otherwise, even all together) and in like sort God shall
coexist with them, to wit, by way of succession: Nor that Gods existence is
or shall be by way of succession; (for nothing in God is found that succeeds any
thing in God) But because both times, and creatures in times do exist by way
of succession, in respect of whose succession and not of any succession in God,
God is denominated, and that properly enough, to coexist with them by way of
succession, in as much as they exist, and consequently coexist with him by way
of succession: Like as a pole fixed in a river does coexist with diverse parts
of the stream by way of succession; not that any motion or succession is found
in the pole, but only in the parts of the stream, that succeed in their course
one after another: velut unda supervenit und^: And albeit Alvarez has taken
great pains and showed great wit in justifying the opinion of Aquinas in this
(yet no otherwise then upon the supposition of the predetermination of Gods
will) and in dissolving the arguments which Scotus brought against it; and that
in such so^t, that in so spinous of matter I have sometimes thought it a matter
very difficult to find out a clear solution of his reasons; yet (I thanck God)
as it was the first work I undertook after I left the university, before ever
I thought of dealing with Arminius, so I seem to have fully satisfied my self
therein; and am reasonably persuaded of ability to give satisfaction, on that
point, to others also.

But to proceed along with you; In the next place you tell us, that God
considered in himself, He is every way indivisibly infinite and interminable;
not only, because he had no beginning, nor shall have ending: Here your
attentive reader would expect what is answerable to this not only, and when you
come in with but also; but here he must hold his breath till you have
dispatched your parenthesis; and if he hold his breath till you come to make up
this your imperfect sentence, he is likely never to draw it again: Again when
you say, God is indivisibly infinite and interminable, considered in himself;
you leave your Reader to suspect that your opinion is, that God considered not
in himself, is not indivisibly infinite and interminable, and the meaning
thereof I am yet to seek.

But consider we what you insert in your parenthesis; For so might time or
motion be held interminable, could the heavens have been created from
everlasting: So they might, as much as to say, as well as that of whom but
e^st you spoke, and that was of none but God: But God, you said was indivisibly
infinite, and interminable, not terminable: Wherein in making so incongruous a
comparison, whether you had forgott your self, or streyned to be delivered of
some involved conceyt, the congruity whereof must be far fett, and dear
bought, before a man can meet with it, I know not he obvious meaning which your
text aims at, seems to be this; God is infinite and interminable, not only,
because he is without beginning and without end; for so the heavens should be
infinite and interminable, put case they were created from everlasting, but in
an other respect also; which respect or cause you forgett to express, to
perfect the sentence of yours, which is otherwise very imperfect; Yet in this
way of interpretation of your text, there are faults enough; for to make the
heavens like unto God in this, you should putt the case, not only of being
created from everlasting; but also of being to be continued without end,
otherwise they cannot be like unto God both as he is without beginning, and
also as he is without end: Secondly though the case were thus put, yet is it
incongruous enough; for albeit herein they should be like unto God in being
without beginning, and without end: Yet herein they should be nothing like unto
God in being indivisibly infinite, and interminable; whereof notwithstanding
proceeds your comparison: we acknowledge a difference in this, and that a
mighty one, though the heavens had been created from everlasting, etc. not
because all Gods continuance to come is present, as you devise; but because
Gods duration and continuance is impossible to be divided, the continuance of a
creature is not: For God can make the continuance of any creature to cease this
day and hour; but it is impossible Gods continuance should cease; for he is
of necessary being: As for the conceyt of prius and posterius in Gods duration;
that is a sorry conceyt, for that is to be found no where, but where there is
some motion or other, spiritual or corporal, either in place, or alteration
in quality, or augmentation or dimination in quantity, or generation and
corruption: And you may remember that your excellent Mr. Plotinus, whom you so
much magnify, confines his discourse of time to things generable, as if he
meant the Angels were free from such a division of duration as is made by
prius and posterius; How much more God? But of such a division as I speak; the
Angels cannot be free from it being creatures; but only God, who is ens
necessarium, of necessary being; And therefore his continuance or duration is
impossible to be divided from his continuance to morrow, because it is
absolutely impossible, that it should ever cease: and therefore whenever time
and place, and things contained in them shall exist, and as long soever as they
shall exist, God must necessarily coexist with them, and it is impossible it
should be otherwise: But before time and place had course, though God did
exist, yet did he not coexist with them; So likewise before time to come does
exist, and the things that are to exist therein, it is impossible that God
should coexist with them.

But whereas you say in your parenthesis, that had the Heavens been
everlasting, their revolutions nevertheless should have been truly numerable,
and therefore terminable; It is true, I confess, of some of them, as 10. 40.
60. 100. 1000. etc. but impossible that all should; For had the Heavens been
everlasting, their motions undoubtedly had been innumerable, neither could we
ever come to the first number while we could.

Secondly you say all things contained in their circuit should have gotten
somewhat which before they had not, and this something, you say is either
addition of duration, or (which is all one) continuance of their first
existence, or new acts of life, or sense, or reason.

All very odd, and little or nothing congruous to things gotten by motion,
without which nothing at all is gotten: Now every poor Scholar knows what is
gotten by motion; For if it be motion local, a new site is gotten; If
alteration, a new quality, if augmentation or diminution, a new quantity; If
generation and corruption, the matter getts a new substantial form; Now where
none of these are gotten, there is no addition of any new thing: And it is well
known, that the Divine Essence is capable of none of these, neither of new
place; nor new quality, not new quantity, nor new form substantial; Allbeit
he continues for ever, and consequently there can be nether prius nor
posterius to be divided in God: But yet because you enterteyne a wild conceit
of Gods eternity indivisible; you would have his duration so, ind visible; as
if both the time past, and the time to come were drawn together within an
instant: And therefore, you say, that all other things have either addition of
duration, or continuance of existence, or some new acts of life, or sense, or
reason; the last whereof is only congruous and agreing with the nature of that
motion which is called alteration; as the two last and the first, may have
reference also to generation, or augmentation; from all which the case is
clear that God is free, notwithstanding that his continuance which is to come
be not said, to be present, at which wild conceit and the justification thereof
you seem to aim: But as for the two first, which yet you make to be all one,
they have no place of consideration among the terms that are acquired by
motion: And dare you deny, that God has continuance of existence or duration?
But you will say no new duration is added unto God: Who says it is! And what
new duration is added unto man by his continuance? God may add something unto
him if it please him; but if he continue him in statu quo, what addition, I
pray? You will say duration: I demand; whether naturally or supernaturally? if
supernaturally, then God does a new create it; But God has long ago ceased
from creation: again then not only every day, and hour, but every minute
also, and every part of a minute God should creare a new duration: If
naturally, then by motion corporal, or spiritual; Now I pray devise, if you
can, what motion that is whereby duration is procured; Yet I confess, thus
far God may be said to add duration; in as much as he will not set an end to
it, though he can.

But as for the duration of God, it is impossible, that should have any end.

But some may say, If Gods future existence be not present, when it is present,
something is added to Gods former duration; As for example, when tomorrow comes
God is a day older, then he was: I answer, nothing grows older by access of
time, but that which took it being either with time, or in process of time;
So did not God.

Secondly, I answer, Gods future existence is nothing else, but his coexistence
with time to come, or with things which shallbe in time to come; which is an
external denomination, arising from the futurition of things to come: In any
other sense it is false to say that God has any future existence, or past
existence.

But his coexistence with time or things in time may be said to be past, or to
come, as well as present; and in this sense is the Scripture phrase to be
understood, when it is said that God is he which is, which was, and which is to
come: That is, when this World, and Angels were fifst made, then he was, that
is, he did coexist with them, and so all along unto this day present; And so
shall exist all along with all creatures and times that are to come: Now this
existence of God, more properly to be called his coexistence is partly past,
partly present, partly to come; not in respect of Gods existence, (who has
neither motion nor shadow of change, and consequently nothing in him is found
to be past or to come) but in respect of the existence of creatures which is
partly past, partly present, and partly to come.

Henceforth you acquaint us with certain definitions of Eternity; The first is
out of Boethius, which you commend above that which follows out of Aquinas,
belike it fitts your turn better in your conceits, then that other of Aquinas;
and therefore deserving well at your hands you bestow upon it that preferment
which you think good; Well let us consider it: Aeternity (then in Boethius
accoumpt) is the entire or total possession of interminable life, all at once,
or together.

The scope you aim at, is to prove that in Gods eternal being there is no
succession; Et quis Herculem vituperat? who ever said there was? In man the
very life vegetable, sensitive and rational grows more and more perfect by
degrees: No such motion, no not to perfection, is to be found in God; In
Angels there may be a succession of thoughts and of affections: no such
succession is to be found in God.

Yet does he and you also maynteyne Gods life to be interminable, that is, of
such a continuance as is without end, as well as without succession.

But you shall never be able to prove herehence, that Gods existence is present
to every part of succession of other things, as namely, both to that which is
past, and also to that which is to come.

Aquinas definition though very artificial you grant, yet does not, you say,
imprint so lively a character and notion of the everliving God his infinite
happiness, as the definition givon by Boethius does: Aeternitas est duratio
manens, uniformis, sine principio and fine, mensura carens.

This lettice fitts not your lips like to the former; because, belike you
cannot find by this, that time past and future should be present unto God; as
you conceave to find by the former; but you will never be able to make it good.

4. Yet Plotin is your Oracle in Philosophy beyond all, who gives, as you say,
a more deep apprehension of it in fewer terms, saying Aeternitas est vita
infinita, which you render thus, Eternity is infinity of life: Like as if when
man is defined to be a reasonable creature, you should render it thus, A man is
the reasonablenes of a creature.

We all grant, nothing in God is past, of that which belongs to God by
denomination from within, nothing is to come. Only things without God are such
as they may be both past, present, and to come, successively. I do not mislike
that saying of Plotius, to wit that when we say God is always, we breed in
our minds a wandering imagination of plurality or divisibility of duration.
But yet so long as we understand Gods duration though indivisible yet
equivalent to divisible succession in things without, there is no error, in
which respect we may justly say with scripture God was, and is, and is to come,
in as much as he was coexistent with things past, when they were existent, is
coexistent to things present shall be coexistent to things to come.

And not to say, as you would have us, that God is now coexistent to things
past, and to things to come as well as to things present. There is nothing
hitherto alleged out of Boethius or Plotin, that can justify this; no more
then in the definition of eternity made by Aquinas; yet Aquinas had a conceyte
of the existence of all things both past and to come in Gods eternity, not
only as they are known: For that is to exist rather in Gods knowledge then in
his eternity, and that is esse secundum quid, and in esse cognito only, it is
not to exist simplicitur, absolutely. I do not dislike your notification of
eternity, to be that which always is and cannot cease to be, save that I
find no virtue in the word to be extended to this latter clause; allthoughe I
conceave, that whatsoever always is the same, does necessarily imply such a
nature, as cannot cease to be.

And therefore the Apostle takes eternal power and Godhead to be terms
equivalent. You say that in true Philosophical contemplation it is not
onething truly to be and always to be. There is a typographicall error in
this, if I be not deceaved; and the sentence should run thus, It is but one
thing truly to be and always to be. This I take to be your meaning, but I
acknowledge no truth in it. For if this were true, then all creatures should
have no true being; for certainly they are not always.

And if they have no true being, then they have no being at all, as afterward
yourselfe acknowledge this manner of consequence to be good. And albeit to have
a being and to have a true being be all one, yet hence it follows not, that
truly to be and always to be is all one. I grant that to be always, without
beginning and without end, does infer an independent being. But even true
beings may be dependent; otherwise the beings of Angels and men made after the
image of God were no true beings. For undoubtedly their beings are dependent
beings.

Another use of the word always is to note (as you say,) the interminable,
indistiuguishable, and indivisible power, which needs nothing besides that
which it actually and for the present has. But I see no congruity in the word
always to signify all this. And first I wonder what you mean to leap from
Gods life and power; seeing you propose the infinity of each, as several
branches of Gods infinity to be discoursed on a part, Say then it denotes his
interminable and indivisible being or duration: yet I cannot like this neither.

For though the term always, does congruously denote his interminable
being, to wit, without beginning and without end: Yet I see not how it can
note his indivisible being. I grant this latter may be inferred out of the
former, for as much as that which is always, cannot be produced, but must be
of necessary being and consequently indivisible in such sort, as that the
duration of it to day, cannot be divided from the duration thereof to morrow:
for then it should cease to be, which is impossible, saying it is presupposed
to be of necessary being. We deny not, but God has all that belongs to his
divine nature; though not for the reason you give to wit, because he truly
is. For that were to infer, that nothing besides God h^he any true being,
which were to deny the being of all creatures.

The divine nature conteynes a totalitie of increated entitie (if a totalitie
may be imagined of that which has no parts.) As for created entitie, that is
not to be found in God at all but only from God. All creatures may have need
of some thing else then continuance, as namely their natures being capable of
greater perfection; then yet they have atteyned unto. As for continuance, they
have only thus far need thereof, because otherwise they shall cease to be;
and so likewise God himself, if he should not continue, he should cease to be.
Only here is the difference. The creature may be said properly to need
continuance, because he depends upon the free will and pleasure of another, for
the obteyning of it, to wit, upon the will of God.

But God depends upon no other for the obteyninge of his continuance; no nor
upon his own will neither.

And therefore he cannot be said to need continuance, but rather that he must
needs be, because he is not ens contingens, but ens necessarium, of no
contingent, but of necessary being. By your leave, Eternity conteynes more,
then to signify the having of whatsoever is expedient to be had.

For undoubtedly, it signifies also the continuance of all that without
beginning, and without end.

But you after your manner, seem under these ^rmes whatsoever is expedient to
be had, to include and comprehend duration future, as if duration future were
already present unto God; which is a groundles conceyte, arising merely from a
superficial interpretation of the nature of eternity, which is commonly
called an instant of duration.

(...) It is true, the duration of God is not to come; For it is present, and
incapable of succession as being subject to no manner of mutation.

But there is a duration of time, and of things measured by time to come; which
future duration is no way present to God, in respect of his coexistence with it.

It is most true, and proper enough to say with Scripture phrase, that God is
he which was, and is, and is to come: which phrase of specche implies neither
change, nor succession in God, but only in things without God.

Again, wisdom, power, and goodness are expedient to concur in the supreme
essence: But this eternity comprehends not, but only the continuance of all
these without beginning, without end.

That a thing loses so much of perfection, as it wants of duration, is a
wild assertion; unles under perfection, you comprehend duration; and then your
proposition is identicall, and no more then to say, that a thing loses so
much of duration, as it wants of duration.

Otherwise I say it is manifestly untrue, not only because Aristotle was bold
to say that, Bonum non ideo melius quia diuturnius; good is not therefore better
because the more lasting, or everlasting, but also, because by the same reason
of yours it would follow that a Crow, an Heart, and a Raven were much more
perfect then a Man; if it be true as some write, that a Crow lives three times
as long as a Man, an Heart three times as long as a Crow, and a Raven three
times as long as an Heart.

Sure we are the least star has continued from the beginning of the World.

(...). I muse not a little to see Platonicall and Plotinicall Philosophy, so
much advanced by an Oxonian: as if Aristotle's learning left Logicians perplexed
in a point of sophistry, and only Plotinicall Philosophy would expedite them.
And lookinge back to what you have discoursed of, out of Plotinus, if so be I
might light on that parcel of subtlety suitable to this end you speak of, I
profess, that as I find no thing in that which you have alleged out of
Plotinus, that is not vulgar, nothing worthy of that commendation which you
besto we upon him, (thereby reflectinge no small commendation upon your own
peculiar studies in Plotinus:) so withal, I cannot imagine what piece of wit
that is, the ignorance whereof does perplexe either any other better Logician,
or my self either, in the resolution of that question, which you propose.

Neither do you accommodate any sentence of Plotinus herunto, that might serve
as a key to open that lock, which as you say, is so hard to be opened, but
leave your Reader at randon, to pore after it. But whether it be Plotinus his
resolution or your own, let us consider it.

And first the question proposed is, Whether Socrates in the instant of his
dissolution or corruption, be a man or corpse, or both. To be both (you say)
implies contradiction, and yet you say, there is as much reason, that in this
instant he should be both as either. Thus have we the question and that argued
in part. Now follows your resolution, as it were our of Plotinus, though you
allege no crumme of any sentence of his for it. Now I observe that your
solution, though you would have it seem to be but one, yet indeed it is
diverse; the one nothing to the purpose, the other something to the purpose,
but utterly overthrowing your former assertion, as when you said, There is as
much reason he should be both as either. The third overthrowinge the very
foundation of the question it self, in effect professing that it proceeds
from a false ground or supposition.

A manifest evidence that you are still to seek how to satisfy your self
herin, or others in this unproffitable speculation.

And if this be to be endoctrinated by Plotinus, make you as much as you will
with your knowledge of Plotinus his Philosophy, I shall have no great cause to
complain of my ignorance therein.

Your first resolution is, that he was a man and shallbe a corpse. This I say,
is nothing to the question. For the question proposed is, not what he was, or
what he shallbe, but what he is in the instant of his dissolution.

In the next place you seem to speak more to the purpose, when you say that
in the instant of his dissolution, he cease to be a man, and begins to be a
corpse. But even this also, is not fully to the purpose. For the question is
not, what he begins to be, or what he cease to be, in that instant, but
what he is.

Yet because substantial forms have no degrees as accidental forms have,
and therefore cease to be, or begin to be all at once; therefore I take your
answer at the best to be this; that in the instant of his dissolution, he is a
corpse, and not a man, which is directly contrary unto that which formerly you
affirmed saying, There was as much reason why he should in this instant be
both, as either.

Your third resolution different from both the former is this: that the space
of dissolution is not in an instant, as the question supposed, but a space of
time consisting of parts, which is not to answer the question, but utterly to
overthrowe it; and withal it opens a way to a new difficulty; for in this
case it may well be demanded, what portion of this divisible time shall be
allowed to the being of a man, and what to the being of a corpse; and take heed
least you ascribe one instant to the last of the first form, and another
instant to the beginning of the succeeding of the second form.

For seeing two instants cannot be immediate, it will follow herhence that
materia prima, shall some space of time actually exist without any form.

As for my self, I never ^ept upon Plotinus his Parnassus, nor was ever
acquainted with his muses. Nay, I have been so long time departed out of the
universitie, and while I was there so long remooved from these kind of
studies, that I may well be said to have forgotten Aristole. Nun^ mihi sunt
oblita sophis^ata. Yet will I adventure to compare the remnants of my old
Peripateticke store with your achievements out of Plotinus.

I say then, the resolution of this question depends upon the resolution of a
more general question.

And that is concerning the beginning and ceasing of form, now the rules
thereof most received as I remember, are these. The forms we speak of are,
either permanent, or successive. Forms permanent begin per primum sui esse,
by the first instant of their being; desi^unt per primum sui non esse, they
cease to be, by the first instant of their not being.

In such sort as to say, that immediately before such an instant they were not,
but at such an instant, and in the time following they were. Again, touching
their endinge, you may say, Immediately before such an instant they were; in
and after such an instant, they were not.

As for forms successive, such as are time and motion, they are said to
begin per ultimum sui non esse; by the last instant of their not being; and
to end per primum sui non esse, by the first instant of their not being.

That is, at such an instant motion (speaking of motion properly as it includes
succession) was not: for it cannot be in an instant but immediately after it
was.

Again touching the ending of motion we may say, at such an instant motion was
not, but immediately before, it was. And accordingly, to the question proposed,
I answer; Corruption or dissolution is taken either in a complicate
signification, comprehending the whole alteration that went before the ceasing
of the form, and then all that while, undoubtedly Socrates was a man, and not
a carcass.

But if only for the desinency or ceasing of the form humane. I say, in that
instant, wherein he is said to desinere or cease (it being the first instant of
his not being, as before has been showed, to be the manner of desinence or
ceasinge of all forms permanent) he is a corpse; but immediately before he was a
man.

In the next place you tell us of Plotins conclusion, namely, That while we
seek to sit that which truly is with any portion of quantity, the life of it
being thus divided by us, loses its indivisible nature.

First, I like not that assertion, whether it be yours alone or derived from
Plotin, in saying, that God alone truly is.

I well know our being is of a quite different nature from Gods being: but to
deny that we creatures have a true being, is as good as to deny that we have
any being at all.

Secondly, I know no man; that goethe about to fit Gods nature, with any
proportion of quantity.

Yet we maynteyne, he was coexistent with all things past, is coexistent with
all things present, shall be coexistent with all things that are to come in
their order, and that without all, divisibility, or succession in himself: his
coexistence after the manner forementioned, implying only divisibilitie and
succession in the creatures.

Of time, you say, no part truly is but the present.

So then the present time, at least truly is. Yet but a little before and often
hertofore you have professed, that nothing but God truly is.

Now give me leave to maynteyne some paradoxes, as well as you.

I say, all time truly is, and is present, as well as that which you accoumpt
to be only present.

For how does this present hour exist but by succession of parts.

If you accoumpt nothing present but an instant; it is well known, that an
instant deserves no more to be accoumpted time, then a point deserves to be
accoumpted magnitude.

But if you speak of time properly, it must have parts, which cannot exist
together, but only by succession. As for example, this minute of an hour is
present but how? only as having a part past, and a part to come.

For this only to exist is to exist by way of succession. In like sort this
present hour does truly exist; but how (...) as havinge a part past, and a
part to come.

So this present year does truly exist, as having a part past, and a part to
come.

In like sort the time of the Gospel, accoumpting from the day of Pent^cost,
when the H. Ghost came down upon the Apostles, unto the end of the World, may
as well be said truly to exist, namely thus, as having a part past, and a part
to come.

So dividing the World into two parts; The old world, from the beginning of
time by creation unto Noah's flood; and the new World, computed from Noah's
flood to the end of the World: I say the time of this World does only exist,
as havinge a part past and a part to come.

So the time of the whole World from the beginning to the end, may be said
truly to exist, to wit, by way of succession of parts, havinge one part past
and another to come. For not the least part of time does exist otherwise, to
wit, by coexistence of parts, but only by succession of parts.

They who made doubt, whether navigators were to be accoumpted amongst the
living or amongst the dead, affected more wit then truth. For if Navigators,
undoubtedly, they are livinge and not dead; Indeed after they have set
forth, we are uncerteyne what is become of them: and equally as uncerteyne
may we be, what is become of our freindes that are travayled unto China by the
way of the Continent. But to make doubt whether time consists rather of being
then of not being, is a conceyte little becoming a Philosopher in my judgment,
though it may become such a one as enterteynes a vulgar contemplation of
things successive, and in motion, whether by Sea or land.

I should think that sorry imagination, is grounded upon conceavinge that
nothing in time is but an instant, which if it were true, would infer that
time were nothing but a succession of instants.

But were it so; yet surely the shortness of continuance of any thing, nothing
hinders the true being thereof, when it is. A child of a day old, has as
true being, as Methusalch had, who lived till he was, almost a thousand.

It seems the sent of Plotinus his subtilties, has perfumed all those that
have dwelt under his shadow; and therefore no merveyle if Ficinus commenting
upon him, savoureth hereof also. He compares, you say liternitie to a center,
and time to the points or extreamities of the line in the circumference allwaye
moovinge about the Center, so that if it were an eye it might view them all at
once.

I doubt not, but ere we depart from this chapter, we shall meet with the
Circumference of eternity as well as with the center of it; but not from
Plotinus his text, or Ficinus his Commentaries, but from one that will be bold
to add a Gemora to their Talmud.

For it is fit the World should profit in subtilties as well as in solid
points, and not always to stand at a stay. But a word of this by the way:
Though future times, and future things are all known to God, yet not by reason
of any existence of theyrs in eternity, or Gods coexistence with them for the
present. For how does God at this time coexist with them, which at this time
have no existence at all?

Again, God looks not out of himself for the knowledge of any thing now,
more then he did before the World was made.

For surely the making of the World wrought no change in him as touching the
manner of his knowledge, with whom there is no variablenes nor shadow of
change. When you take upon you to tell us how Eternity is indivisible, to
wit, by containing all the parts or perfections possible of succession in a
more eminent manner then can be contained in time it self. I pray remember,
that in like manner you professed, that God did conteyne all entities even the
entities of brute beasts; and you expo^nded it in this sense, because forsoothe
he was able to produce them.

And thus we easily grant God conteynes all perfections of successions, in as
much as he can produce them. If so be succession may be coumpted a perfection,
whereof but erst you made doubt, whether it had any being at all. Yet we doubt
not, but God can produce them; yea so far forth as to exceed all that is
contained in time.

For as much, as he could have made the duration of the World, ten times more
then it is like to be.

I do not affect to quarrel with Plato his wit; much good do you with it,
and if you please your self with such fancies, as namely that time is a
moovable image of that which is unmooveable; a divisible image of that which is
indivisible; a successive representation of that which is without all
succession; a model finite, with beginning and end of that which is infinite,
without beginning and end, you shall not displease me.

You have another sophisme or seeming contradiction to unloose or salve by
these rarities of curiosity; and that is, how it may be verified, that Petrus
in aeternitate aegrotat, and Petrus in aeternitate non aegrotat. If this were
spoken of the same time, you say it were contradiction; but being spoken of
eternity, you say it is not, and yet you confess Eternity is more
indivisible, then any time.

Let who will think, that you have salved this knott of seeming contradiction,
to my understanding you leave it as you find it. The propositions containing a
seeming contradiction are both absurd.

For Peter cannot be said to be sick in eternity, as in that which is the
measure of duration eythe* of himself, or of his siknes, but only in time,
with which time, eternity, I confess, is coexistent, but when? not till the
time that Peter's sickness does exist, nor after it has ceased to exist. For
coexistence supposethe existence on both sides. And as the existence of the
creature is past, present, or to come; so is Gods coexistence with it, either
past, present, or to come; which has both Scripture and reason to warrant
it; whereas your wild conceytes are warrantable by neither.

6. Materia prima, is ingenerable and incorruptible not because it is no body,
but because it is no compound body. But God is ingenerable and incorruptible,
because he is no body at all: Therefore better it is to liken him unto the
Angels who are ingenerable and incorruptible, because they are Spirits.

All things generable come from matter only as touching their material parts,
not as touching their forms; neither can they be said so properly to spring
from it, as to be compounded of it. But from God all things spring in the way
of an efficient cause, yea the matter it self also, and that out of nothing.

If matter be most unlike him, in wanting the true unity of entitie, other
things belike have this; And if they have unity of entitie, it is to be hoped
they have true entitie also, verity being the property of entitie, as well
as unity, and consequently they may be said to have a true being, which you
hertofore, and that very often have made proper and peculiar unto God.

I wonder why you make the Creator and essence it self to be terms of equal
signification; whereas God is not the creator of all things by his essence, but
by his freewill rather.

Those things which necessarily belong to God, are usually ascribed unto him,
by way of essence, but not such things, as contingently denominate him,
arisinge from the liberty and freedom of his will.

God, you say, is the incomprehensible perfection of all things; do you mean
of things create only, or only of things increate, or of both? You cannot
mean it of things create: For no create perfection is found in God: Nor of
increate; For no imperfection at all is found in essence increate.

The Earth is not unmooveable: some have conceaved it to moove naturally:
Undoubtedly, it may be moved, otherwise it were not Corpus natural; And
Earthquakes do manifest as much.

If it cannot be moved by the force of Man (yet by prayer of faith, Mounteynes
may be remooved, and cast into the Sea), yet it may be moved questionles by
the force of Angels, at least by the power of God.

Neither is infinite vigor of vitalitie required to an immovable condition in
the opinion of greater Clerks then our selves, as who think all Angels to be
no way capable of local motion.

Yet you talk of a mobilitie of the Deity (a prodigious phrase) though you
think to charm it, by calling it more then infinite, and calling the motion
thereof a supermotion; and this his mobilitie, as well as his immobility
formerly spoken of, you make to proceed from the infinite vigor of his
vitalitie.

Nor does eternity (say you) receave addition from succession infinite;
Belike it receaves succession (in your opinion) though no addition thereby. For
if it receaves no succession at all, what sober man could expect, that it
should receave addition by it.

At length you come toward that, which I have a long time looked for:
Eternity, you say, is like to a fixed center, because indivisibly immutable,
but it is also as you say, like unto a circle, but you tell us not wherein,
nor why.

And as Trismegist did define Gods immensitie, by the similitude of a Sphere,
whose Center was every where, but his Circumference no where.

So you will take upon you to define Gods Eternity, neither out of Trismeg st,
nor out of Plotinus, nor out of Ficinus, but out of your own invention to be a
Circular duration, whose instants are always, whose terminations or
extreamities never were, never shall be.

We willingly grant, that Gods eternity is a duration without beginning, and
without end; This is nothing strange, nothing remote from vulgar capacity.

But to say it is a Circular duration, is such an attempt, and so audacious, as
I think, it never entered into any sober man's brain either sleeping or
wakinge, before it was fancyed by your self.

Lets bid farewell to Aristotle's Philosophy, and let Platoes Divinity come in
the place of it. Distill Plotinus his Philosophy, and Ficinus Commentaries upon
Plotins Enneades throughout, and see whether any such Extract can be made, as
this Circular duration you dream of, and commend to the World as some rare
notion.

Of Circular motion I have heard and read; But of Circular duration never.

Nay things that have circular motion, were never affirmed to have Circular
duration. For motion may be from space to space in a round figure, returning
thither, where it begun, but duration is neither round, nor goethe round.

For though the Heavens run round, yet the time of the Heavens and of the
World runs not round, nor returns to the period of time from whence it
began.

Yet is duration successive more fit to be accoumpted duration Circular, then
duration constant, which has no parts succeedinge.

I hold it to be a notorious untruthe, to say that eternity coexists to every
parcel of time. For to say it coexists with time to come, is to say, that
eternity existethe, and time to come existethe also, which latter clause is
most false. For if it were present, it were not to come.

No time defines eternity, we say, but rather eternity sets (...) end to
time.

But we dare not enterteyne so absurd a conceyte as to say, eternity
circumscribs time; as if time were some lower sphere, and eternity an upper
sphere, and so time should be a circular duration as well as eternity.

Your next sentence begins to open the mystery, as when you say, Though the
motions of the Heavens should continue without end, yet every period of time
shall fall within eternity, now totally existent.

I mark your phrase well, as when you say, It shall fall within eternity,
implyinge that eternity is beyond it, in respect of time to come; like as it
is said to be before all time, in respect of time past.

Now to discuss this phrase of yours of falling within eternity: This phrase
(I say) here used, is utterly out of his place. For in proper speech it has
place only in respect of quantity continual, outreaching all other things we
speak of.

Thus all things in the World besides the uttermost Sphere, fall within the
uttermost sphere; so that the uttermost sphere does not only extend so far
as they do, but beyond them.

Now to say that every period of time falls within eternity, is to suppose,
that eternity extends beyond it so as to exist beyond it; which is true of all
time past. For God did both coexist with it, and does continue after it.

And as touching time present, it may be justified in this sense, to fall
within eternity, in respect that Gods continuance is not at an end with this
present, but continues without end.

But to imagine that at this present Gods continuance does actually extend
farther then this present, is a most absurd conceyte; As if forsooth God had
not only an existence present, but also an existence to come, and that this
existence of God to come is present. Whereas neither of these is true, but each
false, and that most absurdly false.

For first God has no existence to come, for if he had, then he should have
also an existence past, and consequently he should be measured with time, and
subject unto motion. And whereas the Scriptures do confess that God is he
which was, and is, and is to come; this is to be understood of his coexistence
and not of his existence; as much as to say God does not only coexist with all
things present, but also did coexist, with all things past; that is to say with
every one of them in the time of their existence, and also shall coexist, with
all things to come, that is to say, with every one of them in the time of
their actual existence.

Now this coexistence of God with things past, and things to come is not
present, only his coexistence with things present, is present, his coexistence
with things past, is past, and in that respect it is said he was; so likewise his
coexistence with things to come is to come, and in that respect only it is
said that God is to come.

By this we may judge of the proposition following which is this.

God has been, is, and ever will be, unto every minute or Scruple of time that
has been, is, or shallbe, alike everlastingly coexistent. If one word had
been left out (to wit the word everlastingly) it might have admitted an
handsome interpretation, and a sober meaning taken respectively thus, God has
been coexistent to things that have been, is coexistent to things that are,
shall be coexistent to things that shall be.

But to apply all these differences of time past, present, and to come, to each
of the things mentioned, (as namely to say, that God has been, and is, and
shall be coexistent to all things that have been, and is, and shall be,
coexistent to all things that shall be) is most absurd.

For the coexistence of God does as well implye the exisstence of the things
themselfes with which God is said to exist, as the existence of God.

And therefore though it be true to say, that God was coexistent with all
things past, because there was a time when these things did exist and at the
same time undoubtedly God did coexist with them; yet it is false to say that
God does or shall coexist with things past; for that saying does implye, that
things past do now exist; and also are to come. In like sort though it be
true: that God does now coexist with all things that now are, for as much as
both these things do indeed at this time exist, and God must needs coexist
with them as the author and preserver of their existence; yet it is untrue to
say that God does now coexist with time past or to come, and with the things
which were or shall be therein, for if this were true; it would follow that not
only God is now present, but also that time past and time to come, are also
present withal things contained in them, which every man knows to be most
untrue.

Last of all though it be true that God shall coexist with the time to come,
and the things therein, because both they shall exist, and consequently God
must needs coexist with them, as the author and preserver of them; yet it is
most untrue to say that God shall coexist with time past and present and the
things therein, for if this were true it would herence follow that both time
past, and present with all things contained in them were both to come, which
how absurd a speech it is, let every sober man judge.

And yet that this is the meaning appears by the adding of the word
everlastingly, which addition makes the proposition untrue in every member of
it, though taken respectively, which otherwise as I have showed might admit a
tolerable interpretation. For though it be true that God was coexistent with
Noah's flood, yet is is un^ue that he was everlastingly coexistent with it.

At the time of Noah's flood God was coexistent with it by virtue of his
eternirye, which makes him necessarily to coexist wiih all things when they
are, like as by virtue of his immensitie he necessarily fills all places, as
soon as there are any places to fill. But God was not everlastingly coexistent
with Noah's flood, for as much as neither before the time of Noah's flood, was
God coexistent with it nor after: For to coexist with Noah's flood does implye
the existence of Noah's flood: But Noah's flood did neither exist before the time
of it nor after.

In like sort to say that God does now coexist with all things present is true;
but to say he does everlastingly coexist with this time present, and the things
therein is most untrue: For if this were true, then it were as true that he did
coexist yesterday, with this day and shall coexist to morrow with this present,
which is utterly untrue; for if it were true, then yesterday and to morrow
should be this present day, Nay it would follow that this present day were
everlasting (and not time only in general) if so be God did everlastingly
coexist, with it.

Last of all it is true that God shall coexist with the fall of Babylon; but it
is untrue to say that God shall everlastingly coexist with it, for if that were
true, then he should coexist with it both before it were, and after it were
past, whith is impossible. For it would imply that Babylon should fall, before
it shall fall, and after it has fallen. And all this confusion arises from a
precipitate and superficiary apprehension of the nature of eternity being
commonly accoumpted but an instant, which indeed is a truth, because in the
nature of God there is no succession, and that not only in respect of such
motions whereunto bodies are subject, but in respect of such motions which are
incident unto Angels. In regard of which motions the differences of time past,
present and to come are attributed unto God, in respect of his coexistence with
them, without bringing in such monstrous conceits as are hat^hed in the
fancyes of some, though I profess I know not many such, nor never read or
heard of the like till now,

So then the reason why God was coexistent with time past and the things
therein; is coexistent with time present and the things therein, shall be
coexistent with time to come and the things therein, is not only by reason of
his own indivisible, and in erminable unitye; or rather is not at all by
reason of this, for this consideration is rather opposite to the determinations
of was, is, and is to come, which you attribute unto God, then any way suitable
with it, but rather in regard of his eternity, in which respect he must
necessarily coexist with all times according to their several differences;
provided that they have an existence; for otherwise: how shall God be said to
coexist with them.

But then again I say not only in respect of eternity are these
denominations given unto God, but also in respect of the acquisition of new
successive parts, not in himself but in time and things contained therein. For
because God cannot be said to coexist with such things that have no existence
at all, And all things without God have not their existence at once but some
at one time some at another, hence is coexistence with them attributed unto
God, according to differences of time past, present, and to come, not by reason
of any succession of parts in God, but only in respect of succession of parts
in time, and motions, in all things without God.

But we shall have a mad World quickly, when men shall take upon them
doctorally to dictate conclusions unto others from certain principles (as
about the eternity of God, and the indivisible nature thereof) superficiarily
apprehended, and never rightly, much less sufficiently understood.

What time you have bestowed in the study of these attributes of God I know
not; but as for my self I profess I never bestowed any hereabouts as I can
remember, but ever contented my self with common notions generally received.
And whereas I met sometimes with strange suppositions grounded upon these
common notions, I have rather contented my self with ignorance how to justify
them, then to think it worth the while to enter upon the discussion, only in
the question about the presence of all things in eternity maynteyned by
Aquinas, I found in Scotus a discovery of that errourous conceit.

And though Alvarez has labored to repair the credit^ of Aquinas in that
particular and to answer Scot, yet the vanity of that discourse of his, I have
labored to discover, and therein have reasonably well satisfied my self.

Now being cast upon these Meditations, by reason of this your discourse, which
in the very Epistle dedicatory manifest your affection toward Arminianisme,
which I profess I hate as much, as I love the grace of God, and desire to be
zealous in the mayntayning of it to my last gasp; I am driven herewithall to
take into consideration your Philosophical discourse concerning the essence of
God. and his attributes, and finding therein some prodigious assertions by way
of deduction from the received notions of Gods indivisible and yet eternal
being; out of the Logical faculty which I brought with me long ago, out of
the University, I make bold to observe well the soundnes of such illations,
and finding no ground for them, but rather utter disproportion between them,
and the principles wherehence they are inferred, in the course hereof I become
better acquainted with the nature of Gods eternity then before; and hope to be
better enabled to encounter any unsound assertions, derived therehence and
grounded thereupon, then heretofore.

And we are like to be acquainted with your mysteries to the full in the next
Section.

7. You suppose duration successively infinite.

In this case it is true that God cannot be said to be after all duration
successive. For to be after it, is to be when duration has an end, but you
suppose that such duration shall never have end.

And in this case it can neither properly nor improperly be said, that God is
after it. For it is manifest contradiction to say, that has an end which is
supposed to have no end.

You seem to groan in the delivery of some quaint subtlety when you write
thus: Yet that eternity now is and ever was a^ infinitely preexistent to all
ages in succession coming toward us one way; it is, and was to the Worlds
nativitie the other way.

Here you make a full point, whereby it comes to pass, that wanting a
principal verb, the sentence contaynes a manifest nonsense; and it is the
observation of others as well as mine, if diverse such non-sensed propositions
have dropped from your pen in this discourse, yet your meaning we see plainly
in the sentence following, as when you say, This is a point which we must
believe, if we believe God to be eternal, and know what eternity is.

So the former speech of yours though imperfect, and indifferently capable of
being, pronounced to be a fable as a truth, we perceave to be received by you
as a truth, and not so only but affected also by you as a truth, whose
consideration has not been so well taken to heart, by those who have had Gods
eternal decrees and the awardes of it most frequently in their mouths and
pens; as it has been by your self.

Thus you accommodate your self to the venting, and your Readers to the
expecting of some sublimate and so quintessentiall a conceit, that poor
Calvin and Beza, and such like unproficients in Academicall studies, never
attained to the depth of any such speculation.

Once before I observed a certain gradation tending to this purpose, and that
with some wonderment, as when you affirmed in the beginning of this section,
that God was as truly before all times future, as before all times past.

As if to be before all times future, were a greater matter then to be before
all times past; whereas I had thought that such poor snakes as my self might
truly be accoumpted to be before all times future. So in this place it might
well make a man wonder what you mean to affirm in solemn manner that God is
and ever was as infinitely preexistent to all ages coming toward us, as to
the Worlds nativitie.

As if to be preexistent to the times to come, were as great a matter as to be
preexistent to times past, which might seem to carry no sobriety in the
forehead. For ever the meanest worm that creepes upon the Earth, is
preexistent to all ages to come, but none is preexistent to all ages past but
God himself. But there is, no doubt a mystery in this.

Heretofore I had a sent of it: But now it begins to break forth in great
measure.

For when we say God is preexistent to all ages past, and consequently must
needs be preexistent to all ages that are to come, we understand all this but
one way according to the course of time from future to the present, from being
present to become past, and so that which is first actually existent, is before
all that which arrives to actual existence afterward. But you tell us of two
ways and that God is preexistent before all ages past one way, and before all
ages to come another way, by which other way your meaning seems to be this,
that as God is before all ages past, so also he is after or behind all ages to
come; which phrase of speech in saying God is after or behind any thing,
because you think it too ignoble to be attributed unto God, and perhaps in
part to astonish your Readers with some strange language being never acquainted
with the like; This being after all ages you are pleased to instile and call
his being before them, but another way or a different way from his being,
before all ages past.

As if a man should say that the Horse goes before the Cart one way, and the
Cart may be said to go before the Horse another way, which later is indeed
and in substance of sense no other, then to go after the Horse.

In like sort we may say the calling of the Gentiles is before the calling of
the Jews one way, and the calling of Jews goes before the calling of the
Gontiles another way, to wit as it comes after it.

So the rising and flourishing of Antichrist goes before the fall of Antichrist
one way, and the fall of Antichrist goes before the rising and flourishing of
Antichrist another way, to wit it follows after it.

Now if this manner of language does not go beyond all Canting, I know not
what does. But take we your phrase according to this sense, yet there is no
truth in this assertion. God indeed was before all ages past, because he was
when they had no beginning; but he shall not be after all ages to come, because
he shall not be when all ages have an end.

For according to your own opinion all ages shall never have end. And for this
reason in the very beginning of this section your self affirmed, that God
could not properly be said to be after all times and durations to come. For
what (said you) can be after that which has no end? To this I added, this
could not be affirmed either properly or improperly, because there was no truth
in it, as that which employed a manifest contradiction.

Much less properly or truly can it be said that God is preexistent to all
ages to come after a different way from that whereby he is said to be
preexistent to all ages past.

But let us see whether any greater measure of sobriety, can be found in that
which follows.

In the next place you tell us, that As he is no Christian Philosopher, much
less a true Christian divine, that would deny that whatsoever is by God
decreed, was so decreed before all worlds: So he is no Christian Philosopher,
much less a true Christian divine, that shall refer or retract the tenor of
this speech, (before all worlds) to that only which is past before the world
began, whatsoever can be more properly said or conceaved to be past, then to
be yet to come, or to be in every moment of time designable can have no
propertye of eternitye. So then whosoever shall dare say that it is a more
proper speech to affirm, that God did choose us in Christ before the foundation
of the world, then to say that God shall choose us in Christ after the end of
the World, you will be bold to deny him the title both of a Christian
Philosopher and of a true Christian divine also.

By the way let me ask you, what that is which you call past before the World
was; for before the World was, nothing at all was but God. Again, though we
say the decrees of God, were before the world was, yet no divine that I know
says they were past before the World was; for the decrees of God are nothing
but the Counsel and will of God, which undoubtedly we say continue the same
and ever shall. In the last sentence you teach us that it may stand well enough
with eternity, to be said to be past, present, and to come; so we do not
affirm it to be more properly past, then present or to come. Yet I promise
you, I nothing like to say that God is past, I had rather say he was and is,
and is to come. As much as to say, God is of necessary being, and still
continues, and it is impossible he should be otherwise, in which respect we
may truly and properly say he was coexistent with every thing that is past, (to
wit in the time of its existence,) is coexistent to every thing present, shall
be coexistent to every thing that is to come (to wit in the time of the
existence of each thing) and all this not by any succession of parts in
himself, (as who is subject to no motion) but by succession of parts in
outward things, with which or whom, he is said to coexist, his own existence
being perpetual and invariable.

These your propositions I can find reason to make them good in some tolerable
construction. Yet you add a reason of it, which should be more evident then
the Conclusion, but indeed is far more obscure, and when the meaning of it is
perceived, is found to have most need of reason to prove it, as being in show
contrary to all reason; yet you content your self with dictating it, and
thence proceed to a wild goose race of illustration by the heavens that environ
both us and the Antipodes; so to make way for the circular duration which
formerly you attributed unto God, by comparing it with the heavens turning
round (upon supposition) in a moment.

The rational proposition without reason delivered is this: For that only is
eternal which always is, and so always is, that it has precedence or
preexistence infinite to all successions, which way soever we look upon them or
take their beginning, whether backwards or forwards: Now this saying of yours
is full of incongruities if not rather of foul absurdi its.

For first you suppose the beginning of succession may be taken backwards or
forwards; but how is this possible? is succession indifferent to begin
backwards or forwards? Is time indifferent to begin backwards or forwards?
The first time is the beginning of it, but as for the last of time will any
sober man call that the beginning of it, unless you make time like to a
pudding, where a man may begin at which end he will. And surely I see no
reason but a pudding may be in better sense, acknowledged to have two ends,
then time two beginnings, Especially two such beginnings as you ascribe unto
it, the one backwards and the other forwards; for begin at which end of a
pudding, you will, you may be well said to go forwards and not backwards.
Again suppose your own phrases be allowed you, and that the end of time may
be taken for the beginning, yet where there is no end to be found how will you
devise a beginning? As for example, Time we all know had a beginning but you
suppose that time to come shall have no end, for though this world shall have
an end, yet men and Angels shall have no end, but live with God for ever.

For the same reason, though God be infinitely prexistent before times past,
yet he cannot be said no not in your phrase and your meaning, that he is
infinitely preexistent to all times to come, the meaning whereof is to continue
infinitely longer then all ages to come; for that were to suppose that God
shall be when all ages have run their course and are come to an end, which
you suppose shall never be. Thus from your Antipodes which you devise in the
course of time, I come to the consideration of the Antipodes in respect of
place and situation. And hereupon I remember what you delivered in the entrance
upon this discourse of eternity, and it is this; whatsoever has, been or
rightly may be conceaved of divine immensitie, will in proportion as well suite
unto eternity, and in like manner whatsoever is incident to space of place,
the same in porportion may be verified of space of time. And therefore like as
Antipodes are found in place, so in some proportion Antipodes may be found in
time. For when you begin at the ends of time you seem to turn the heels of
it upwards.

And like as the roundnes of the heavens environing all, salves this and makes
it appear how the heads every where are uppermost howsoever it seems
otherwise to vulgar capacities: so here you have a devise of a circular
duration to salve the turning of times heels upwards, for by this it appears
that in truth time has no heels to turn upwards, but rather wheels to turn
roundwards; like as eternity has a Circular duration, by way of supermotion
or a vigorous rest as you phrasifie it.

Well let Lactantius pass with his error in denying Antipodes, and the vulgar
with their error pass, that think the heavens if they be ^ound be under us.
Now we come to the comparison and comparative demonstration, which is this: As
the heavens are every way above the earth: so is eternity every way before all
worlds. Suppose there be truth in the parts of this assertion, yet I find no
convenience in tho resemblance.

It is true that Tiburne is three square, and a Citizens capp is round, but
there is no congruitie in saying that as Tiburne is three square: so a Citizens
capp is round. Yet I find as little accuratenes in the propositions considered
by themselfes as in saying the Heavens are every way above the earth, for I
know no other ways of the Heavens being above the whole earth which is round,
then by compassing it; In my judgment it is more proper to say the heavens are
every where above the earth (then every way above it,) and on every side above
the earth, or which way soever we go, whether East, West, North, or South, we
shall still find the Heavens to be above the earth.

So likewise I know but one way how eternity can be said to be before all
Worlds, and that is by being before they had beginning. As for that other way
which you devise as it were an Antipodes in time as well as in place, namely to
be when all Worlds are at end, that is to be after all Worlds rather then
before them.

And yet you flatter your self in this erroneus conceit, as if it were some
exquisite invention, by another fiction, and that is by conceyting eternity to
compass and inviron time, as the heavens inviron the earth.

Now because the earth is immovable, but time has succession of parts; and
the heavens wonderful nimble in motion, and contrariwise eternity a constant
and permanent instant; therefore you may do well to salve the (...) in the
Sphere of your discourse to consult with Copernicus about blowing some
quicksilver into the dull and sullen earth and set it going round, and on the
other side persuade the Heavens to favor themselves and take their rest, the
model of eternity, and time represented by you would be something the more
accurate.

Some helps for this you have, I confess, of your own divising, to wit, by
supposing the Heavens to move in an instant, leaving it to the Readers judgment
whether to account that motion a cessation from motion, or a vigorous rest,
besides that of the topp and scourge, which we may have time to consider of in
due place. But to proceed; of the beginning of this World past, and the end of
it to come, there is no difference between us.

To this you add, that the eye of eternal providence, looks thorough the
World, thorough all the several ages, successions, or durations in the World,
as well from their last end, to their first beginning, as from their first
beginning, to their last end.

This World as it had a beginning, so it shall have an end. But successive
duration even in your opinion, shall have no end.

And therefore you cannot say without contradiction, that God looks thorough the
several ages thereof from their last end to their beginning.

Yet this last end, you might have called a beginning according to your phrase
and tenent, maynteyning God to be before all ages, not only before ages past
one way, but also before ages to come another way. Again, that all things are
known to him, as well things to come, as things past, or present, is without
all question.

This is to be present unto God, in esse cognito. But you have another wild
conceyt of the coexistence, both of things past and of things to come with God,
and that for this present, which turn of yours this will nothing serve that
God knows all things.

Last of all as touching this manner of knowledge which you attribute unto God,
it is nothing decent.

We confusse, we may indifferently consider the course of the World past,
either from the beginning unto this present day, or from this present day
rising upwards unto the beginning of the World; because our understanding is of
such a nature, as to consider things in succession one after another. But Gods
understanding, as you well know, is of no such nature, as to consider things
one after another; for so you should maynteyne succession in the nature of God,
and consequently subject him unto time.

Again, God does not look out of himself in knowing the course of the World
throughout; for he knew it as well what it might be, and what it should be
before the World was made, as now he knows what it is, yet certainly before
the World was, he knew it not by looking without him, for then there was
nothing without him to look into.

And surely since the World was made, the manner of Gods knowledge is nothing
altered, for with him is no variablenes nor shadow of change.

Neither do I see any reason why the knowledge of God, whereby he knows all
things, should be called the eye of his. Providence: seeing Providence began
with the world, but his knowledge was the same before the world began, and by
his providence it is more properly said, that he governes all things, then that
he knows all thing^s.

Again you return to the devised Circular form of eternity (yet that will
not warrant a Circular duration thereof, which was your former sigment) and
tell us that there is no period of time, which is not so environed with
eternity, as the earth or center is with the Heavens; save only that the
Heavens are finite, and eternity infinite.

Give me leave to profess the absurdity of this conceyte of yours amongst
many others. For what do you talk of environning that which has no sides,
but only has a kind of extension of succession in lenght of parts one after
another.

Every period of time has eternity before it, and eternity after it, but
this is not sufficient to maynteyne that eternity environs time as the Heavens
environ the earth.

My self was borne before many thousands, whom also I have outlived, but yet
I cannot be said to environ them as the Heavens environ the earth.

If a Crow lives many ages of a Man, and an Heart more then the Crow, and the
Raven more then the Heart; how many thousands have begun to breath and ceased
to breath within the limits of their duration; yet what an absurd thing were
it to say, that they environed them all, as the Heavens environ the earth, yet
you proceed, sitting upon these addle eggs, to hatch congruous conclusions, you
say that in this sense were it possible, the world might have been created from
everlasting, the Eternal, notwithstanding should have been everlastingly
before them. Which as it is most false, so it is most inconsequent. Most false,
for like as God cannot be after that which has no end (as your self before in
a manner professed) and the reason is manifest. Because to be after a thing, as
for instance to be after the world, is to be after the world is come to his
end, which were untrue if the world had no end.

In like sort to be before the world, is to be while the world had yet no
being, which is contrary to the supposition of being everlasting.

Neither does it follow, that because God is before every period of time which
has a beginning, therefore he should be before such a time which is supposed
to have no beginning.

I grant he should be before it by prioritie of cause, and by prioritie of
dignity, but he should not be before it by priority of duration, which is the
only prioritie whereof this discourse proceeds.

Yet you will bring a reason to prove the former assertion, and that is this,
For that period of motion which must terminate the next Million of years shall
have coexistens with eternity now existent, whose insinity does not grow with
succession, nor extend it self with motion; but stands immoovable with times
present, being eternally before times future, as well in respect of any set
draught or point. Whence we imagine time future to come toward us, as in
respect of the first revolution of the Heavens when time took beginning.

This reason has number enough of words; but let us consider what is the
weight of sense it carries; And this is an hard matter to do by reason of the
obscurity that accompanies it; one peuliar character of your discourse; For
what do you mean by the next Million of years? I know not how to account
them, whether in respect of the time present; and so they proceed of the next
Million that are to come; or rather of the Million of years next past; For I
presume, you mean it not of the first Million of years of the world, in case
it were eternal: For if eternal, then it had no beginning, and consequently
as it had no first year, so neither had it any first Million of years.
Therefore I understand it of the next Million of years to this present, whether
it be the Million next past, or next to come, all is one, and it must be true
of both, as well as of either, that they are coexistent with eternity now
existent; and what I pray of all this? when comes the form of Syllogism,
whereby to conclude that God is not only before, but everlastingly before that
which is without beginning. And that Gods continuance extends not only beyond,
but everlastingly beyond that, which never shall have an end?

Give me leave to help you at a dead lift, thus; If the next Million of years
cominge, are coexistent with God, now existent, then also the Million of years
cominge next to that, shall be coexistent with God now existent: And so all the
Millions of years that are to come, are coexistent with God now existent; But
Gods continuance of being, does extend infinitely beyond his now existence:
therefore it does extend infinitely beyond all times to come, though they be
without end; So on the other side: If the Million of years next past does
coexist with God now existent, then also the Million of years next past to
them, does coexistent with God now existinge, and so by the same reason all the
years past do coexist with God now existent; But Gods continuance, has been
infinitely before his now present existence; therefore also it has been
infinitely beyond all the Millions of years, though upon supposition they have
been infinite; This I think is the But of argument you shoot at, though you
have not expressed so much; whether because your Logic served you not, being
used to a confused manner of dictatinge at pleasure what you think good, or
because you envied so much your Readers facility in apprehendinge your meaning.

Thus I have helped you in raisinge a Spirit: Now without your help I will
assay to lay him again.

To the Major; I grant it in part, namely that there is as much reason why the
two next Millions of years, whether you take them of the time past, or of the
time to come, should coexist with God now existent, as well as one Million; but
when you proceed and say; therefore by the same reason all that are to come,
and all that are past, are coexistent with God now existent, you make an
incredible stride or leap, infinitely greater then the stride, not only of
Polyphemus, but of the Colossus at Rhodes too: For a Million and a Million, yea
and a third Million, yea and though you make the progression in such sort while
you will, still the number is but finite, but to leap herehence to all that
are to come, is an infinite leap: For all are infinite both ways, both as
touching time past and time to come: in which respect, no progression, from
Million to Million, shall ever reach to all, nay it shall never make the number
of years remaininge, either for the time past, or for the time to come, less
then infinite.

This is the foul flawe we find in the major: let us come to the minor which
was this; But Gods existence extends infinitely further, and was infinitely
before his now existence. I answer thus; By Gods now existence, you
understand his existence, either in the present instant of time, or in the
present instant of eternity; if of the present instant of time, then the
proposition was not true in any one part of it; For certainly neither the
Million of years next past, nor the Million of years next to come, are
coexistent with God, now existent in instant of time, both because neither many
years can possibly exist in an instant of time; nor God himself; but rather
his existens is in the instant of eternity, though both he and his eternity be
coexistent with every instant of time: Now if it be understood of the instant
of eternity, I deny that God was before this instant, or shall continue one ace
of duration after it; And no merveyle, saying both everlastingnesse for the
time past, and everlastingnesse for the time to come, are supposed, to coexist
in this instant of eternity; Yet have I not all this while discovered the
vanity of the conceyte, which is as a mist before your eyes: You say, the next
Million of years does coexist with eternity now existent; I say this is
notoriously untrue, whether you take it of years past or of years to come, all
is one; for that which is past, and that which is to come, has no existence
with God now existent: And I prove it thus; That which has no existence at
all at this present, that cannot be said to have any coexistence, but things
past and things to come have no existence at all at this present, therefore
they cannot be said to have any coexistence with God; Things future shall have
coexistence with God, to wit, when the time of their actual existence comes;
Likewise things past have had their coexistence with God, to wit, when the
time of their actual existence was.

But neither things past, nor things to come have any coexistence with God now
coexistent, for as much as they have no actual existence at all, the actual
existence of the one being past, and that of the other being yet to come.

Neither does it follow that because Gods infinity does not grow by succession,
therefore things future are now coexistent with God, but because things present
and things future are in succession one unto another, therefore they cannot be
said either future things to be present, or things present to be future.

That reason of yours, (namely that Gods infinity does not grow by Succession,
carries rather some color of proof, why Gods coexistence with his creatures
or with time, cannot be said past or to come, then why things future shall be
said, to be coexistent with God in this present; Yet your self use these
forms, as to say, God was coexistent with his creatures that are past, shall
be coexistent with such things as are to come; and indeed your reason is too
weak to infringe these forms of speeches.

For this coexistence attributed unto God is not in respect of any succession
in himself, but only in the things without him, which come and go one after
another by succession, and you are in the right, when thereupon you deny all
succession in God, because his nature is not subject to any kind of motion;
God was before the World, and is coexistent with and in the World, and shall be
after the World, which being after time, you in your language, enstile his
being before the end of it; but after another manner, then whereby he is said
to be before the beginning of it; But we must give you leave to be as disertus
as you will in Lingua tua; Nobis non licet esse tam disertis, qui musus colimus
severiores; At partinge you give us another paradox; when you tell us It is
impossible to conceive any duration to be without beginning or endinge without
conceavinge it Circular, or altogether void of succession, on the contrary it
is as wonderful to me, how it should be possible for any man to conceive any
duration to be Circular, whether finite or infinite; For the word Circular is a
denomination only of form, and of such a form as belongs to magnitudes, that
have coexistence of parts extended, and of motion in such a form: But time is
neither any such magnitude, nor capable of motion; In a round figure, I
confess, there is no beginning nor end of magnitude, But of duration, round
figures have their beginning, as well as squares; The latter part is as
untrue. Some have been of opinion that the World was everlastinge, and the
motions of the Heavens everlastinge, as Aristotle and his followers.

And some great Schoolmen have thought it possible; how much more could they
immagine it. For surely we may immagine things altogether impossible; And in
the very next lines you confess, men may immagine so if they list, and over
and above you do them the favor, as to further them in this their
imagination, to wit by conceitinge the uninterrupted sluxe of an instant; and
why not as well I pray, the uninterrupted motion of the heavens; and what is
this to the everlastingnesse thereof, saying this has place in the space of a
few years? Neither do we find the Peripateticks needed any such helps to
conceive the everlastingnesse of the world; In the last place you tell us, the
stability of eternity may be best conceived, by the retraction of such a
perpetual flux into one instante; And yet before you told us such at
everlastinge flux could not be imagined; sure I am the retraction of it into
an instante is utterly impossible; And be not these proper things to represente
Gods eternity by, and fit for Atheists to make merry with? That God is
everlastinge, I trust we can demonstrate it, and that he is without succession,
why should that seem hard to conceive, when it is improbable he should be
subject to any motion?

And now I come to the topp and the scourge whence you derive observations of
great force, If not for composinge some great controversies amongst learned
men, yet for facilitatinge contemplation in one of the greatest difficulties,
that Philosophy whether sacred or humane affords to the concerte of the most
curious. At my first cominge to the university, it was a great comfort and
incourageme^t, to me in the studyinge of Predicables to hear a Preacher out of
the pulpit deliver that peccata Iuvenum Predicantur in quale; peccata senum
Predicantur in quid. Shortly after in the Divinity School, I heard a divine in
the question, whether the pope were Antichrist make use of that axiom (...)
uni opponitur; and an other in the point of predestination to allege, that
Scibile was prius Scientia: To hear such notions which at that time were
familiar unto me, so much dignified as to find use in the pulpit and in the
divinity School, it brought me even in love with such learning, which before
seemed to me but course stuff in comparison to one of Ciceroes Orations
especialy, that conspicuae divina philippica famae volvitur a prima quae
proxima, or Ajax Mastigophoros in Sophocles wherewith we were acquainted at
winchester.

How much more might a man like topp and scourge the better while he lives, to
observe what transcendent use good wits may make of it. And yet by your leave,
I find no such difficulty in conceaving how eternity though Permanent, shall
have coexistence with succession or motion.

A Pole fixed in a River has coexistence with infinite parts of the stream
succeedinge one another, without any succession in it self.

While I stand still, an army of men may pass by my side, and thereby shall I
have coexistence in the same time with every one successively; But if I be not
deceived you would devise, how we may conceive eternity to have coexistens with
all parts of motion at once; for such a mad coexistence you have devised to
your self, out of a wild apprehension of the nature of eternity, and you will
not be beaten from it. And you may as well beat your brains to devise how all
parts of time both past and to come, may coexist in one instant, and but erst
you did cast us upon such an imagination, namely of the retraction of a
perpetual flux into one durable or permanent instant. I have already labored,
veteres avias a pulmone revellere, to scatter these vain conceyts.

But proceed we alonge with you; the topp turns so swiftly sometimes, that he
seems to sleep; Indeed we were wont to say that in such a case the topp
sleeps; And in turninge round every bright mark seems to make a circle; what
of all this? hence you say it will be no hard supposall to conceyte that a
moover of strength and vigoure infinite, should be able to moove a body in a
momente. I do not deny, but a man may conceit so, as they do conceyte
Chymeras; and great divines sometimes are found to enterteyne such conceyts, as
are found to be contradictions, such is this: never any question was made of
this, rather it has been generally received, as a thing impossible that
local motion should be in an instant; And the reason of it in this round
motion whereof you speak, is evident for to be in this instant in the same
place what it was immediately before, is rather to rest then moove; and so the
parts of successive motion should not be contracted into unity as you speak,
but rather into nullity.

And you your self are in doubt whether it were fit to call it a cessation
from motion or a vigourous rest or supermotion: you may do well to put it to
Plotinus to resolve this, or Ficinus his Commentaries upon his Enneads. I
perceave you have very vigourous conceits, which whether I should so call them,
or rather a cessation from all sober conceyte or a superconceyte, let the
reader judge. In the mean while that must needs be a proper motion which may
be called a cessation from motion, and a rest and that a vigorous one. Yet
wonderful strange is it, that a rest or cessation from motion should conteyn in
it parts of motion successively infinite, and I confess it were a very hard
thing to determine what to call it; for it is a certain kind of Chimera,
that never I think was hatched in the conceyte of man or Angel before.

If this were granted you, then you presume the moover would not moove it more
slowly this day or year then he should the former; But consider I pray, the
point is not of moovinge it in a day or year, but in an instante; And because
two instants cannot come together, therefore for the time between while, it
must stand still, and because there be infinite instants in every day and
hour, it follows it should be moved about infinite times every day and
hour; and infinite times stand still. Take what co^se you will, it must stand
still as often as it mooves, and because between every two instants of motion
there must be a time of rest, and every one infinitely greater then the instant
of motion.

For between that which is divisible and that which is indivisible, there is
no proportion of greatness; Now this supposition being granted you, (which you
professed to be no hard suppos^) we shall find parts successively ^nfinite in
one revolution, or revolutions successively infinite in one or the same
instante. So like wise E^ope would instruct his Master how to drink up all the
waters in the Sea, provided that first all the Rivers might be stopped, from
runninge into the Sea, for it was most unreasonable that as fast as he drank
the water out, the Rivers should be suffered to pour water in again, and that
with a longer and a larger spoone then he had need to use that eats with the
devil.

And I see no reason but a man might by ocular inspection discover the world
which Galileus has made report of, in the moon, provided that he might have a
stayre case sure enough and high enough and all necessary provisions by the
way, and at his journyes end also, and safe return, to quitt Lazarus relations
of the dead, with celestial relations of ^he terra incognita in the moon. And
yet I confess a truth, I do not find to what purpose you should say there be
parts successively infinite in one revolution. For in the motion of a snayle
this is to be found as well as in the motions of the heavens; for every thing
that is continual is divisible without end, to w tt into parts proportional;
as for parts quotall, as namely fifts or thirds, or fowerths, or hundreds,
these ever in the motion of the heavens are finite, the other are infinite.
Whereupon it is that Aristotle denies there is principium motus, in the seventh
of his phisicks, not speakinge of principium externum and effectivum, for so
the nature of every thing is the cause, both of his motion and of rest, but he
speaks of principium internum, and of the integrall parts of motion whereof no
part can be assigned to be the fist, but that it may be divided in o two parts,
whereof the one is before the other; And in the same sense as there is no first
of motion, so there is no last; for what part soever you take; it is divisible
into two parts, whereof the one is latter then the other.

The like may be said of every thing that is continual, even of magnitude
which is permanent, as well as of time and motion that consist in succession of
parts: but then we must know too, that these parts proportional, are not to be
accoumpted actual, but only potentiall; And so Aristotle dissolves that
Achilles of Zenoes arguments, whereby he would prove that motion being allowed
to be continual, the swiftest moover should never overtake the slowest moover,
if he were allowed never so little ground before him because in the time wherein
he is to overtake the first space, wherein his fellow moover was before him,
that fellow moover will have got some ground more, and while that is in
passinge over by the other, he will get some ground more, and so in infinitum^
the answer whereunto I never yet found explicated by any.

Hurtado di Mendosa amongst other difficulties, the solution whereof he
undertakes, falls upon this also, but most unhappily; for he gives no
satisfaction; Aristotle's answer unto it, is but this; parts sunt in toto non
actu sed potentia; it is spoken in reference to parts proportional; which
answer of his seems a mystery, the right explication and accommodation
whereof I never could be so happy as to find in any; but if I be not dereived
it conteins an admirable and clear solution of the difficulty; but I do not
affect the ostentation of such subtilties.

I know not well how to give accounte for this very diversion from graver
studies. To return I say it is a poor course to lash out unto the supposall
of such impossibilities to show how in one revolution the parts are
successively infinite; whereas this is found in every the meanest motion, which
is a true motion and consists in succession; but in your feigned motion an
instante, it is indeed not to be found, because in an instant there can be no
succession.

But further you say, that upon this supposall there shall be revolutions
successively infinite in one and the same instant. But how this shall be you
have not showed, although I easyly conceave how it may be prooved upon this
supposall, but in a certain kind which I presume you dream not of.

And it is this; if it be admitted that a revolution of the heavens may be in
an instante, then it is as possible that two revolutions may be in an instant,
and in the same instant as well as one, and three as well as two, and three
hundred as well as three, yea and look how many thousand days are past, since
the World began, so many revolutions of the heavens there might have been in
one instant of time. And it is nothing strange if uno absurdo dato, mill
scquantur; but I do not find that you once so much as dream of this; and what
your meaning is, I find no where explained, much less the deduction thereof
manifested. Yet as if you had prooved many revolutions, (upon this supposall)
to be possible in one and the same instante, you discourse what they are to
be called; and you will not have them properly to be termed motion, but rather
the producte of motions infinitely swifte united or made up into a vigourous
permanency; and herence to serve your turn in the explication of eternity, you
add how should not duration of one or of all these revolutions be accounted as
an instant of time, but a kind of duration indivisibly permanent. Here is
strange language, had not we need of an interpreter, or of some urinator delius
to dive into the depth, and sound the bettome if it? I remember what a friend
of mine pleasantly discourst in the university, by occasion of a certain
disputants strange manner of disputation; I have longed says he to hear a
scholar dispute eagerly, and distinguish and go one boldly in school terms
and phrases which himself understoode not. And now to my judgment I have
lighted on such a one.

But whether you understand your self or not I know not. I doubt I never
shall; yet I will not give over, I will adventure to discuss it, and to shake
this rotten stuff in pieces, that at least it may not abuse the readers with
suspicion of some rare notions, whom they cannot endoctrinate. First you speak
of revolutions plural yea infinite, how you have come by them I know not,
unless as capons come by chicken; you made supposall of a thing impossible
enough, namely of the revolutions of the heavens in one instante of time, but
it was only one revolution, and hereupon you steal up many revolations, yea
infinite, I know not how, neither do you once go about to explicate how.

Secondly you will not have it called motion, but a product of motions. Had you
said you would not have these revolutions called one motion but many, there had
been some sense in the speech, though little reason.

For you profess these revolutions to be successive, and no where have you in
the least manner signified them to be interrupt or discont nuall.

And if you take them as continual, why should they not be styled one motion?
But this I think is not it, you insist upon; For you dislike the name of
motion it self; you will rather have it called the product of many motions.

Now here I am at fault, in hu^inge after the meaning of your invention, But
yet as Plutarke makes the hounde to discourse in huntinge after an hare, thus;
he went not that way, nor that way, therefore he came this way; so will not I
give over, but inquire which way the hare runs.

Now then this your product of motions is to be understood either of a product
Physical, or of a product Mathematical; and I explicate my self (as you love
to involve your self) thus.

The product of motion Physical, is the form that is acquired by motion; As
for example, in alteration a quality is produced, in augmentation a certain
measure of quantity; in local motion a new place or a new site; Either in
respect of the whole as it falls out in all direct motions, or only in respect
of the parts, as in all motions Circular; which new site is said to be new in
respect of that which immediately went before.

Now in this motion of the Heavens in an instant supposed by you, there is no
such product Physical, for look what site every part of the Heavens has
immediately before this instant, the same it has still; And therefore you call
it very significantly (I confess) a vigorous permanency; which is as much as
to say, no motion at all; Neither do I think that by the product here spoken
of, you mean a product Physical; Let us come therefore to consider, whether
it may be verified of a product Mathematical, that is in the Arithmeticall
operation of addition: for if two numbers be added together, it will produce a
total, and that total shall be the product.

Now here you speak of revolutions infinite, which being added to greater,
make a product which you call a vigourous permanency; which I profess, in my
judgment seems to be delivered with admirable significancy and congruitye.

For if in teachinge my Scholar Arithmaticque I shall exercise him in
addition, and bid him write seven Cyphars in a rewe thus 0000000 and then bid
him subscribe seven Ciphers under them thus, 0000000, and then bid him add one
unto the other, and tell me what in the product, and he will tell me that he
finds seven Ciphers still, which is as much as just nothing; In like sort
suppose the Heavens standinge still immediately before this instant, and in
this instant to be turned round to the place where it was immediately before,
this deserves to be called a vigourous permanency: that is no motion rather
then a motion: For to be where a body was immediately before, is the definition
of rest, and not competible unto motion.

Nay take such an other revolution, and add unto the former, this also being
rather a vigourous permanency, and so no motion rather then motion, add no
motion, unto no motion, and what will the product be, but a vigorous
parmanency; and so in infinitum, it shall be a vigorous permanency: For no
motion added to no motion while you will, the product shall still be no motion;
but a vigourous permanency.

But I see no reason why you should call this vigorous permanency, infinitely
swifte.

And yet I confess by this supposition of yours the Heavens are made to stand
still faster, then now they go or run: allbeit they run so incredibly swift,
in the judgment of some; that they had rather set the earth goinge, and make
the Heavens stand still in a vigorous permanency, though in a sense much
different from the vigorous permanency you discourse of: And this calls to my
remembrance one of Bastards Epigrams, which he made of himself ridinge on
Sarisbury plain: For being overtaken by a gentelman well mounted, who desired
to have his company; Bastard Spurs his cut, the Gentleman reins his geldinge,
yet could Bastard keep no way with him. Whereupon he complains thus, What
should I do that was bestrided so. His Horse stood still faster then mine could
go.

So the Heavens by your supposall stand still faster then now they go.

I am not a little sensible of the construction that some may make of this
discourse of mine, as namely a great deal too light and vain for a Divine;
especially in a matter of so high a nature, as of the essence of God, and his
eternity.

I profess I am often stricken with fear of transgression in this kind: and
have often meditated the relinguishinge of it wholly, I take so little pleasure
in these Schole quircks.

Yet another consideration affrights me more then this, and that is lest
coming to calculate the Divine attributes by discourse of reason, in following
the course of my weak understanding this way (whereof in this case I am much
suspicious) I should be found to shape the attributes of God in such a
manner, as to attribute that unto God, which does not become his Majesty, or
deny that unto him, which does well become him; and thus I may fall upon
blasphemy before I am awave.

I had rather submitt unto the acknowledgement of attributes divine, by faith,
so far forth as they are revealed unto us in Gods word; then curiously
inquire into the nature of them, by reason, and quaint Scholasticall
argumentation.

But again, I consider, that it may please God to make use of that
illumination as well Philosophical as Theological, which he has given me,
to clear some difficult points, concerning the nature of God, and thereby to
prevent blasphemies each way.

And as, by his grace, I fear to enterteyne any indecent conceyte of the
Majesty of God; so I trust, he will not expose me, to have my fears brought
upon me, but rather by exercise perfect those seeds of knowledge of his Divine
nature, which have been sown in me, both by the light of nature, and by the
light of grace, and assist me also even in these discourses, and make them
means to keep others from being led away into erroneous opinions and enormous
conceytes, concerning his nature, and divine attributes.

And as for the censure of lightness, and want of gravitie, passable upon this
discourse; let the Reader consider; we are now upon the By, and in
consideration of a Monstrous supposition, and most ridiculous prosecutions
thereupon, and let him judge how such deserve to be enterteyned.

Again when we meddle with an obscure, perplexe, and intricate manner of
discourse, if matter of refreshing both of mine own, and of my Readers Spirits
be offered, especially in that way of an harshe and unpleasing discourse; shall
I balke it, and in the affectation of a Stoicall gravitie decline the
quickninge of mine own, and of my Readers senses? It was wont to be said Omne
tulit punctum, qui miscuit utile dulci; and again Ridentem dicere verum, quis
vetap. In a word; I am at thy judgment Reader, to pass what censure upon me
thou please, neither am I unwilling thou should know mine infirmities, as
well as my poor sufficiencyes, that knowing me to be flesh and blood, as well
as others, thou may receave nothing herein for the Authors sake, but only for
the evidence it carryethe with it. And that evidence is the work of God,
though the manner of caryinge it be the work of Man.

Now it is high time to confider the other member of this sentence followinge,
which is this, So should not the duration of one, or of all these revolutions
be accoumpted as an instant or portion of time, but a kind of duration
indivisibly permanent.

Now I find no proportion between this and the former member, though they
be coupled together with a particle of similitude, So. For if the revolution be
as it is supposed by you; to be in an instant of time, why should not the
duration of it also be accoumpted in an instant of time? So likewise, if you
conceave diverse revolutions, yea infinite revolutions, to be in the same
instant of time; what reason is there why their duration should not be
accoumpted also, in the same instant of time? Fof if these infinite
revolutions you speak of, have each of them a several instant, why should
not the duration of each be accoumpted in each soverall instant, and the
aggregate duration of them all, be reckoned to be, in an aggregation of all the
several instants, in each whereof, one of the former revolutions is found?

Secondly, you do not well to join an instant, and a portion of time
together, as terms equipollent, because; no portion of time is an instant, nor
is an instant any portion of time; more then a point is a part of magnitude.
For every thing consistethe of its parts; but neither magnitude consists of
points, nor points of instants.

Thirdly, much less reasen is there, why the duration of one or of all these
revolutions, should be coumpted a kind of Eternity. First, because there is
no kind of eternity indivisibly permanent (such as you here speak of) but
one, and that is the eternity of God. Secondly, what an absurd thing is it to
say, that the duration of a thing in an instant of time and no longer, is
fitter to be called eternity then an instant of time. For the revolution you
speak of is but for one instant of time. For the justifying whereof I appeal
to your own supposall.

It were no hard supposall to conceyte that a moover of strength and vigor
infinite, should be able to moove a body in a moment: This cannot be meant of
any other moment then of time. For to moove a body in an instant of eternity,
requires not a moover of infinite strength; the meanest motion of the meanest
moover, is comprehended (as you acknowledge) within the instant of eternity.
Nay all the revolutions you speak of, though successively infinite, are upon
your supposition in one and the same instant, which cannot be understood
otherwise, then of an instant in time. Now is it fit, that the duration of
such a motion or motions, the beginning and end whereof are both in a instant
of time, should be styled eternity?

And how can that be called permanent, which both begins and ends in one
and the same instant of time? Or how can that motion be coumpted indivisible,
which has parts successively infinite as your self profess in the sentence
immediately before? If these be sober conceytes, I never knew, what sobriety
in this kind means. But let us proceed to the next; The motion of the
eighthe sphere supposed to be such as has been said, that is motion
infinitely swift, or not divisible by succession; the Sun moovinge
successively as now it does should have local coexistence to every star in
the eighthe sphere, to every point of the eclipticke circle, wherein it mooves,
at one and the self same instant, or in every least parcel of time. The
substance of this has reasonable good consequence, from the former
supposition of a thing utterly impossible, and consequently it is not more
impossible then the former. Yet by your leave, you err in many a circumstance.

For first, as touching the main intention of this sentence, the Sun shall
not have local coexistence with every star or with any star in the eighthe
sphere; how can it? there being the huge distance of three vast bodies of the
Spheres, of three planets betwixt the firmament, and the orb of the Sun.

But that upon your former supposition he shall coexist in the same line drawn
from the North to the Southe I grant in Astronomicall computation, and so by
the same computation may be said to have local coexistence with it, though
not in computation physical.

Secondly, mark I pray you, what liberty of speech you take unto your self.
For that which even now you called a vigorous permanency, in this place you
term it a motion infinitely swift: as if you should say, the motion is so
incredidibly swift, that the body indeed stands still and mooves not at all.
As much as to say, such a one talks so fast that he seems, and that in a
vigorous manner to hold his peace.

And indeed I confess, that sometimes it falls out, that the faster we
ride, the later we come to our journeys end; as in case by fast ridinge, our
horse plays the jade, and tyreth under us, and we can hardly make him go. I
had not thought such anomalies and irregularities could have been devised in
the heavens, as namely, that a motion swift, should become a vigorous rest. In
my judgment if the motion of such like discourses of yours were converted into
a vigorous rest, it would give far better satisfaction.

Thirdly you will not have this supposed motion to be divisible by succession,
yet you do impute unto it succession. For but erst you affirmed that it had
parts successively infinite. Now if it has succession, how is it possible,
but that it should be divisible into parts succeeding one another? For like as
magnitude havinge extension of parts, must needs be divisible in respect of
its extension; so motion fluent as it has succession of parts, so it must
needs be divisible in respect of this succession.

Yet you suppose the contrary, like unto the Friar in Chancer, who to show his
contentednes with a little, professed that he desired, but of bread a shiver,
and of a goose the liver, and of a pigge the head, but that for him, nothing
must be dead. So you will have the motion you speak of, to consist of parts
succeeding, yet not divisible into parts succeeding. Lastly, your disi^nctive
is not good, as when you say, in the false same instant, or in the least
parcel of time. For your supposit on is of the revolution of the heavens, not
in the least parcel of time at all, but in an instant, which you well know is
no parcel of time.

Yet I think to charm the absurdity of your former supposition, which
perhaps makes you weary of it, and something confounded in the prosecution
thereof, you would fayn turn it into some small parcel of time: but then, all
that you build herupon falls utterly to the ground.

One sentence remains to be considered, whereby in prosecuting your former
supposition, you desire to lay a ground, for the commodious illustration of
Gods eternity, and that is this: Every star in the eyghthe sphere should be
converted into a permanent circle, and so in one circle there should be
circles for number infinite, as many circles as there be points or
divisibilities in the eclipticke circle. All this I may be bold to say is
nothing to the purpose, but proceeds merely from affectation of holdinge your
Reader in admiration, at the wonderful conclusions, which yet being not
superficially but exactly considered, conteyne most superficial conceytes; the
things you here deliver, so far forth as they have any truth, are as well
verified in respect of every days motion of the heaven; yea as well verified in
a tennis ball, at every turning round thereof.

For look how many circles are made, upon the eighthe spheres turninge round
in a moment; so many circles are made, by the turning of it round in 24.
hours, For the body of the heavens is divisible alike, whether it turn round
in a day, or in an hour, or in a moment; savinge that the turning of it round
in a moment; deserves rather to be accoumpted a vigorous rest, and may be
called a cessation from motion, as your self have professed, and consequently
a cessation from making any circles at all.

But howsoever; I say the body of the heavens is alike divisible and that in
infinitum, because it is corpus continuum; and for the same reason a tennis
ball is so too and upon his turning round, you may as well imagine infinite
circles made by him, according as the points therein are infinite.

Now we come to the application of this fiction (prosecuted with much variety,
partly of Chimericall, and partly of vulgar inventions) unto eternity it
self, as follows: Thus in him that is eternal, or being infinite and in
eternity, are actually contained durations successively infinite. Thus in him,
say you; and what I pray, may an Atheist reply out of that heart of his wherein
he says There is no God. For may he not rejoyne in this manner? And if it be
but Thus; like as the fiction here supposed by you, is of a thing utterly
impossible, so you give us liberty to conceave alike of the Eternity of your
God: not to reiterate the variety of vain conceytes, which have bloomed from
the several branches of this your discourse in prosecutinge so vile a fiction
to represent Gods eternity thereby. Again, how does God conteyne durations
successively infinite? Not formally, you well know, but only eminently, for as
much as he can produce them.

But no such thing appears, nor any model thereof in this your fiction. For
this revolution in an instant, conteynes only it self formally it conteynes
the motion of no other body, neither formally, nor eminently.

Yet thus, you say, Gods eternal being conteynes durations successively
infinite, though there be no more resemblance between them, then between
harp and harrowe; a fox and a fern bushe, no nor any thing like so much.

Yet you proceed in your accommodation thus: The former supposition admitted,
we could not say, that the inferior orbs mooving as now they do, did moove
after the eighthe sphere, but that the times of their motions were continually
contained in it. For the eighthe sphere being moved in an instant, should
loose the divisibilitie of time, and the nature of motion, with all the
properties that accompany them, not by defect (as if it no way comprised them)
but by swallowing up time or duration successively infinite, into an actual
permanency. To this I answer, first; The Heavens moovinge as now they do, I
cannot subscribe unto you intimatinge that the inferior Orbs do moove after
the eighthe sphere: But rather as in respect of their proper motion they go
against it (supposing the eighthe sphere to be the uppermost Heaven) so in
respect of Diurnall motion, they moove not after it, but motu raptus are drawn
a long with it: this is on the By.

Now to the main: I deny that upon your supposition, it will follow, that
the times of these inferior orbs motions, were eminently contained in the
motion of the eighthe sphere.

Your contrary affirmation seems to me wondrous absurd, neither can I devise
any reason for it, or in what sense you take this phrase, to conteyne eminently.

For the common acception of it is this: That conteynes another thing
eminently, which not conteyninge it formally, is able to produce it.

So the Sun is commonly reputed to conteyne heat eminently, for as much as
not being formally hot it self, yet is able to produce heat in bodies capable.

So your self before have acknowledged all things to be in God, not formally
(for he is neither man nor Angel, much less any inferior creature), but yet
is able to produce all these.

But it is impossible that the motion of the eighthe sphere, supposed to be in
an instant, should produce the times of the inferior Orbs motions.

It cannot produce their motions, they mooving as now they do.

For how should an instantaneous or momentany motion in one body, produce a
temporal motion in another body? Much less can it produce the times of their
motions. For that is only in the power of God.

He alone that gives existence to any thing, can give duration and time unto
it.

Neither does it conteyne their motions formally. For their motions are
supposed to be temporal, that is in time, the motion of the eighthe sphere is
supposed to be momentany, that is in an instant.

But a momentany or instantaneous motion cannot formally conteyne a motion that
is made in time.

A swifter motion can conteyne a motion less swift, because it is both so
swift, and swifter also.

And here by accident, and ere I am aware, I have a glimse of your meaning;
and while I dispute against it, I may seem to you, to make for it.

For this instantaneous motion is supposed by you, to be infinitely swift, and
therefore it may well conteyne the motions of Inferior orbs, which are less
swift, as mooving round no soever then in the space of 24. hours; whereas the
eighthe sphere is supposed to moove round in a moment. I think I have sprunge
the partridge, now let me see, whether I have not a spring to take him: First
then I say, this is not to conteyne eminently, but formally rather.

Secondly I say, this swiftnes of motion which you have invented is too swift,
too infinite to serve your turn, to conteyne the revolutions of inferior
Orbs. For you have already professed that it deserves to be called a vigorous
rest, and that it may be called a cessation from motion,

Now let any sober man judge, whether a cessation from motion, whether rest,
and permanency, and that a vigorous one be fit, eminently to conteyne the true
mo^tions of inferior Orbs, which in the space of 24. hours are turned round.
Yet if leave were given you to suppose this also, namely that a vigorous rest
is so infinitely swift, that it might well be said eminently to conteyne the
motions of inferior Orbs; yet how would it herhence appear, that it should
conteyne the times of them also?

Since this vigorous rest which you make to be infinitely swift, is but in an
instant, and the motions of inferior Orbs of like quantity are performed, in
no less space then 24. hours.

Is an instant of time fit to conteyne 24 hours? Yes you may say eminently.
For as fluxus puncti in Longitudinem makes a line, so fluxus instantis for a
certain space of time, makes 24. hours. Any man has reason to give me
leave, to refreshe my self a little while my wits are dulled about such stuff
as this. But you labor to show how the times of the inferior Orbs motions
should be eminently contained in the eighthe sphere, if it moved round in an
instant. And that by this reason: For say you the eighthe sphere being moved
in an instant, should loose the divisibilititie of time and the nature of
motion, not by defect (as no way comprising them) but by swallowing up time
into an actual permanency.

It Is true, I confess, that motion, which is made in an instant; loosethe the
divisibilitie of time, that is, is not made in time. For an instant is no part
nor parcel of time; Again it is well that you do so ingenuously confess,
that it loses the nature of motion, also, and all the properties that
accompany it. For you have already professed, that it may be called a
cessation from motion, and is to be called a vigorous rest or permanency,
rather then motion.

All this I do not dislike. But yet to make way for the conteyninge both of
times and motions, you tell us, that all this is not by way of defect, as if it
no way comprised them, but by swallowing up time or division successively
infinite into an actual permanency; which assertion of yours if we should take
for a truth, we should swallowe many a goageon. For first you imply, that what
a thing comprisethe not, that it has not, by way of defect, which is untrue
for my hand comprisethe not six fingers,; yet that it is without a fixed finger
is not by way of defect. Secondly you give us to understand that a certain
mutation may loose both the nature of time and motion, and all the properties
of them, and yet some way comprise them which is contradictious.

For look what way it compriseth time or motion, surely that way it has it,
and does not loose it. Thirdly it is an absurd thing to say, that an instant
of time swalloweth up time. For to swallowe it up is to conteyne it. But it is
impossible that an instant should conteyne the space of any time, as the space
of 24. hours. For if it be impossible that an hour should conteyne the space
of 24. hours, much more impossible is it, that an instant should.

The motion indeed, which you suppose to be in an instant, conteynes an whole
revolution of the eighthe sphere, (for upon the fiction of this
impossibility, you are pleased to descant much:) but surely this supposition
of yours, though it be of a thing impossible, yet does it not infer, that
this instant shall swallowe up the space of 24. hours, though it swalloweth
up the motion, (as you suppose) which usually is made in no less space then
the space of 24. hours.

Last of all consider I pray the sobriety of this speech: It swalloweth up
motion into an actual permanency (as much as to say, into an actual rest) and
so it comprisethe it, that is, rest conteyneth motion, and that in an instant;
how much more shall the space of 24. hours rest, be sufficient to conteyne a
motion infinitely greater, then an instant does. As for division successively
infinite (as it were to make your deductions the more admirable to vulgar
capacities) it is a very sorry conceyt. For the least time or motion that is, is
divisible in infinitum, like as every continual thing is, though never so
small. By this, let the wise Reader judge, of the profitable nature of the
improvements you speak of in improving motion infinitely swift into permanency
or rest, which is as much as to say, into no motion; and let him well weighe
and consider whether this be not to bring a noble unto nine pence, or rather
unto no pence: and by such improovements, when you cast up your reckoninge at
the years end, you may put all your gaynes in your eyes, and never hurt your
sight.

After this you come in with a new way of conceavinge the first moovers
eternity, and that is as Mathematicians conceave the nature of a sphere, by
imagining it to be produced by the motion of a semicircle upon the Axis. There
is such a definition, I confess, of a sphere, which is defined to be
transitus circumferentiae as which transitus I conceave to be emanation rather
then motion, like as a line is imagined to be fluxus puncti in longitudinem;
and a superficies is imagined to be fluxus lineae in latitudinem. But all these
are very vain imaginations. For neither is it possible, that such things
should have any flux, or if they had, that by their flux they should make
either length, or breadthe, or thicknes in such a figure; but rather a length
so made should consist of points, and a breadth so made should consist of
lines, and a sphere so made, should consist of semicircles, which is utterly
impossible.

And shall we never linne to compare the nature of God to the vain
imaginations of such vain things? Yet seeing you will take your course, we
will take liberty to consider it. And thus you proceed, For let the eternal
be but thus imagined, to be an intellectual sphere, capable of momentany
motion or revolution throughout this World, and the indivisible coexistence of
his infinity to every part of time and place, will be very conceavable. Very
conceavable, you say; but first let us try, whether this conceyte of yours
conteyne any conceavable truth. For if it does not, are we not well advanced
to the conceaving of Gods eternity, by comparing it to such impossibilities?
And first you were as good bid us imagine God to be an intellectual body, as
to be an intellectual Sphere.

For a Sphere is a body, either physical or mathematical, that is, a body at
least of quantitative dimensions. The world indeed is Sphericall, and God is
in every part of it; but will you therefore conceave the nature of God to be
Sphericall also, and his form altered, upon the making of the World, from
that it was before?

Remember I pray, God is in the World and in every part of it but how? as
containing it, not as being contained by it.

Secondly, you will have us imagine God to be capable of momentany motion, or
revolution throughout the World? Now consider I pray, what a congerie of wild
conceytes are involved here. Is a revolution, a motion throughout the world?
Every man knows a revolution to be a turninge round. The orbs of the heavens
have their revolutions, but do they thereby moove throughout the World? or
rather keep their places, and each mooveth only about the bodies that are
within the compass thereof.

Again you know momentany motion is a thing imposible. And that which does
so moove round as you would suppose it, does rather rest then moove. For to be
in the same place where it was immediately before is the definition of local
rest. And your self have confessed it may be called a cessation from motion,
and do affect rather to call it a rest, a permanency, a stabilitie.

If it were a motion, is it fit to attribute motion unto God? Is it fit to
maynteyne that God mooves from place to place? Again the motion of an
intellectual nature as intellectual, is rather the motion of the
understanding in knowing things, then motion local from place to place. And it
is true, that all things done in time and place are known unto God, but
without all motion so much as in the understanding. For even in the
understanding of God, there is no change, much less motion. Lastly by mooving
through the World in an instant, he shallbe coexistent to every part of place
and that in an instant, but how shall we conceave herby, any coexistence of his
to every part of time, as well to all parts of time past, and time to come, as
to the time present?

The light of the Sun is diffused thoroughe all, let us suppose, thoroughe
all the world, therefore it shallbe coexistent to every place, but not to every
part of time, but only to the present. But is it not your meaning that Gods
eternity should be diffused not so much thorough the world; for that belongs
to his immensitie; but rather thoroughe the time of the world, from the
beginning thereof, to the end of all durations successive without end (for you
do maynteyne that successive duration shall have no end?) Certainly this
seems to be your meaning, and then indeed, it is no hard thing to conceave
Gods eternity to coexist with all parts of time past, present and to come, if
so be we conceave it diffused thoroughe them all, as God is coexistent to all
parts of this World, if he be diffused thorough them all (which is your phrase,
and not mine, and utterly disclaymed by Durandus.)

But then what Meant you to add coxistence of place to coexistence of time,
which are woonderous different, the one belonging to Gods immensitie, this
alone to Gods eternity.

Secondly, what meant you to call this a motion thoroughe the World, whereas it
is rather thorough the duration of the World, or thorough the time of the
world, and the parts thereof, from the beginning of it to the end, and
infinitely further. For by the World we usually understand a World of place,
and not a world of time.

Thirdly, what meant you to call, this motion throughout all times a
revolution, does time run round, and by fetching a compass about return to
the beginning of it from whence it first issued? For this is the nature of
revolutions.

Fourthly, what meant you to call it a motion, seeing it can neither be
alteration, nor augmentation, nor generation, nor local motion, though you
seem to devise a motion throughout all time, like unto the local motion of
the eighthe Sphere turning round in a moment. And so you devise as it were a
local motion thoroughe time but it shallbe in an instant, to make up a world
of woonders, that in an instant a motion may be conceaved thoroughe all time,
from the beginning of the World to the end, and infinitely beyond it in
duration. Yet this motion thorough so many thousand years while the world
lastethe, and millions of years after that, shall be in an instant.

Fifthly when, I pray, did this motion begin? was it before the world, or with
the beginning of the world? Not before the world: For, as there was then no
place for God to penetrate (as you speak) and to fill, so there was no time
for him to moove thorough by his eternity. If with the world, then seeing this
motion is supposed to be in an instant, in the first instant God moved
thorough all time to come.

But how was that possible, seeing like as before the World it could not be,
because then there was no time; so in the beginning of the World it could not
be, because the time to come as yet was not. If you say, though it were not
present, yet it was to come, and therefore God could by virtue of his infinite
eternity moove thorough it in an instant, I answer, that by the same reason,
he might as well moove thorough all time before ever the World was. For even
then, though there was no time present, yet there was time enoughe to come.

But like as it is absurd to say, that God by his immensitie did fill all
places before the world, when as yet there was no place to fill: so it is alike
absurd to say, that God by his eternity did fill all times before the world
was, when as yet there was no time to fill. And now I pray, be pleased soberly
to consider, what little need there is of all this pains, in streyning our
conceytes as it were upon tenter hooks, till they are quite out of joint: what
need of so many absurd fictions, of so many impossibilities to prove that
which is most untrue, and yet confidently supposed by you as a principle out of
a superficial consideration of the nature of Gods eternity, Namely, that God
by virtue of his eternity does coexist with all times past, present, and to
come.

For consider I pray, will you say that God did by virtue of his immensitie
coexist with all places before the world was? No sober man I presume, will say
this; why then should you affirm, that God by virtue of his eternity did
coexist with all times before the world was? And if the actual existence of
place, be required unto this, that God by virtue of his immensitie should exist
with it; why should not the actual existence of time as well be required unto
this, that God by virtue of his eternity should coexist therewith? And if
before the world was, God did not coexist with times that were to come (like as
then he did not coexist with place that was to come:) then surely by the same
reason, he shall not at this time present coexist with time that is to come;
and consequently, neither shall he be said to coexist with times that are
past, like as if the world were destroyed, he should not be said to exist
with those places, and bodily spaces, which sometimes were, but in this case
now were not.

And therefore we have little need to trouble our selfs with any such wild and
monstrous fictions to maynteyne the coexistence of God with every part of time.
For as the parts of time shall be found to exist in their order, so shall God
be truly said to coexist with them, and no otherwise, that is, not to coexist
with them all at once, but only in succession, not of Gods duration or of any
thing in God, but in succession of time, and of the things contained therein.

Gods duration we acknowledge to be eternal without beginning and without
end, yet indivisible; for as much as it is no way subject unto motion, no way
subject to any variablenes or shadow of change. For he is of necessary being,
and therefore impossible it is, he should not be. Besides, whatsoever he is the
same he is essentially, and therefore not subject to any kind of change, either
in substance or quality, or quantity or in place.

And as he is the Author of all things, so both the motions and rests of all
things are produced and maynteyned by him, and so may be said after an
eminent manner to be contained in him, and no otherwise. I mislike not Plotins
interpretation of Gods totalitie of being, in as much as he is able to produce
all kinds of being. As for eternity, I had rather rest upon Aquinas his
definition of it, then on yours. For it has no parts formally; and as for an
eminent containing of all parts of duratio^, that is in respect of activitie to
produce them. Now time, and the duration thereof, together with the duration of
things therein, is rather produced by the counsel and will of God, then by
his eternity. And therefore all durations do flow rather from Gods will, then
from his eternitia. To my understanding a body casts but one shadow, and not
many; which casting of a shadow is no other thing then the hindering of light
from the earth or water, according to the bodies proportion, which thereupon
are said to be shadowed by it. These diverse shadows, as you call them, how
they vanishe in every moment, as you speak, I profess, I know not, sure I am
the fishes in the water do not eat them, if they did, certainly they would be
never a whit the fatter by them.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Infinity of divine power.

I Do not affect to contend with you in point of Rhetoric, or to call you
to an account for stiling Time, a spectator of all things. If it be so, it is
the more like unto a Philosopher by his account, who comparinge the world unto
a market, ranged the people thereof into 3. sorts, buyers, sellers, and lookers
on, and these were the Philosophers. Only I would desire that you would give
other the like liberty to speak in their own phrase, and not to challenge
them for affecting Poetical wit more then Metaphysicall truth; as upon such
like terms it was your pleasure to cry down that common adage Tempus edax
rerum. For if you admit time to be a Spectator, you may by as good Rhetoric
admit it to be a devourer, according to that of good authority Inspexit varias
merces oculisque comedit. In like sort studious scholars are accoumpted
Helluones librorum, devourers of books, though not for the readinge of them
only, but for the apprehension of them, and making them their own.

So Cassius Severus had devoured Labienus his works, his orations. For when an
edicte came forth from the Emperor, for the burning of all his writings. (For
as he was an admirable Orator, so he was of an high spirit, and as Seneca
writes, qui in tanta pace Pompeianos spiritus nondum deposuerat.) which edicte
when it came to Cassius Severus ears; why then says he, I must be burnt
alive; for as much as I have learnt them without book. Yet I could be content
to allow you any liberty of phrase, so you would be pleased to speak to our
understanding; whereof you fail in your very first sentence, when you tell us,
that all things wantinge place or time or being, present themselfes anewe in
their proper shape or form; for how any thing can present itself, wanting
both place, and time, and being also, it is a riddle unto me.

I guess your meaning is, that the being of all things is produced in place
and time, which before the time of their production were without both place
and time, and being; which as it is a truth, so it is a most vulgar truth,
yet obscuerly delivered by you, and to no purpose that I can conceave. But be
it so, and that every thing brought forth on this stage, you speak of, acts
one part or other for the mayntenance of the whole; and therefore is of some
power; though in some you think it is to be accoumpted strength and power
passive rather then active.

And yet you say the very earth, in that it sustaines weights laid upon it,
and resists contrary impulsions, is perhaps of active force or operation; As
for the power of mooving to the centers that you say is no more passive then
active but a mean betwixt both. I presume you mean by way of participation,
and not by abnegation of the extremes. Yet in my judgment to swey or moove to
the center is merely active, to be sweyed or moved is merely passive. Yet
other properties there are of the earth, though you pretermitt them. For it is
commonly said, that it covers the errors of Physicians.

And I remember what a Sexton was wont to say, of all his sick neighbors; that
when Physicians have done all they can, yet at length he must heal them,
meaning by making their graves, and with the earth to cover them. I have heard
a Mountebanke report, that when a man's leg is stung with a viper, to put that
leg into the cold earth is a present remedy.

I have heard also what use the Irishe sometimes have made of the cold earth,
when they have overdrunke themselfes with Vsquobath. Yet me thinks that power
of the earth should not be pretermitted which the Holy Ghost gives unto it, in
saying, Let the earth bring forth, etc. But as for the power of assimilating
other things to themselfes, and of preservinge symbolizinge qualities, that
you say is found in the dullest bodies. The active force and power motive of
winds, vapors and exhalations is well known, as also of celestial bodies
especially the Sun, their productive operation cannot be unknown to any.
You conclude that all this power is but finite, and that no created thing is
capable of power infinite, which you affirm only with a perhaps, and such
cautions are very frequent with you, which in this place I take to be most
needelesse.

Now as time and place were as you said shadows of Gods eternity and
immensitie, So, the power of the creature is a shadow of Gods infinite power.
Yet shadows we all know have proportio^s to the substances shadowed by them,
but between finite and infinite we commonly say there is no proportion.

2. God, you say, is more infinite in every kind, then all the united powers
of several natures, though they were for number infinite and each infinitely
operative in its own kind. But let us not lie for God, as man does for man to
gratify him. True and natural beauty needs no painting: And Gods perfection
needs no Mountebanke like amplifications to set him forth. The powers of the
creatures are not formally in God, but eminently, that is, they are said to be
in God in as much as he can produce them, and their effects also. As for
example, though he be not hott, yet can he produce heat in greater measure
then fire does.

But consider I pray you; Can God produce a greater heat, then that which is
infinite? or can he produce a greater number then that which is infinite? It is
apparent that he cannot, not by reason of any defecte of power in God, but by
reason that a greater then that which is infinite to be produced, is a thing
utterly impossible. You are pleased to take notice of a former observation of
yours, which was this, That things by nature most imperfecte, do oftentimes
best shadow divine perfection.

You have already entreated of Gods immensity and eternity; and therein you
have told us, that no positive entity, no numerable part of this vinverse,
does so well represent the immensity and eternity of God, as the negation of
all things, which we describe by the name of Nothing. I think there never
dropped a more vile assertion from the pen of any wise man then this; yet you
desire here again to commend it unto the Reader as some quainte observation.
But what do you mean to repeat it under such form, as by calling it
something though imperfect. Is Nothing, or the negation of all things, to be
accoumpted something though imperfect? yet the same observation you will have
to have place here also. As if this which we call nothing were the most fit
to represent Gods immensity by, yea and his eternity, yea and his infinite
power also.

How near draws this to the making of God to consiste of nullities, since you
say his natural properties are best resembled unto nullities? well, we have
heard what that is which best represents his immensity and eternity, now we
are to expecte what that is which best represents his infinite power. And this
after a long deduction, you express to be the center of the earth, which you
say is matter of nothing.

And thus you maintain a just proportion of discourse concerning Gods
attributes; for still your wit serves you to resemble them either to
Nothing, or to that which you call matter of (just) nothing. But herein you
proceed by degrees. And first you seem to conceave, that this center of the
earth, is in the language of the Holy Ghost, made to be the foundation of the
earth, as in that speech of the Lord to Job chap. 38. 4. 5 6. Where wast thou,
when I laid the foundation of the earth? and whereupon are the foundations
thereof fastened, who has laid the corner stone thereof? And first you commend
the phrase, as surmounting all poetical decorum, and will have the Majesty
thereof consiste therein, sufficiently testifying that it was uttered by God
himself.

Now hertofore, you have made poetical wit to stand in opposition unto
Metaphysicall truth. But of poetical de little, especially in this place, like
enough you have a better opinion. For my part I am persuaded the Majesty of
Gods speech consists in the power of the Spirit, rather then the Wisdom of
the words. Paul also spoke by the Spirit of God, and some have observed
great parts in his very language, but see what Castellio a friend to your
opinions writes of Bezaas judgment concerning this in the defense of his
translations upon the 2. Cor. 11. 6. Paulum (says he of Beza) and
grandiloquentia Platoni, and vehementia Demostheni, and Methodo Aristoteli
atque Galeno anteponit: in quo mihi videtur Pictores imitari, qui Christi
matrem dum honorare volunt, regio vestitu pingunt, and ^idem tamen ita cogente
historia praesepe in quo jaceat Christus infans appingunt nobili sane
solaecismo. Quid enim mundanis regibus cum praesepibus? Mariae gloria est
paupertas, and pictores eam divitiis exornant. Sic Pauli gloria and gloriatio
est Sermonis imperitia.

But let the Majesty of the speech pass as nothing pertinent to our present
purpose, where do you find the center of the earth to be mentioned or pointed
unto in all this? does the corner stone there mentioned, signify so much? or
by the foundation there expressed, must we necessarily understand the center
of the earth? The Holy Ghost seems rather in this inquisition, to have
reference to something without the earth that should uphold it or fasten it,
and withal signifies, that no such supporter can be found. Then you proceed
to admiration at this that the center should bear up the earth and all
things thereon, which center is no body or substance, no not so much as a mere
Angle or corner, nay such as forth with you say is a matter of nothing.

And so in the issue it comes to this, that nothing bears it up, which is
true, in the form of a negative; but not as an affirmative as if there were
any power in the center to bear it up. And why should we conceave that the
center of the earth should bear it up, more then the center of a tennis ball
bears it up, which also might be the center of all if it lay in the middle of
the earth? And if any side of the earth were removed from the center to the
heavens, it would forthwith appear that the center of the earth bears not up
the rest; for that which before was the center would now be driven a^ great
deal higher, and become the outside of the earth. So that the center of the
earth will not serve your turn; will you then run to the center of vacuum or
of the space imagined to contain the earth? Yet you distinguish not of centrum
Physicum and centrum Mathematicum. For who doubts, but that one side of the
earth may be heavier then an other. Again it was wont to be a received Maxim
that Terra non gravitat in loco suo; and therefore there is no need of any
thing to bear it up. For the middle of the world is the natural place of the
earth, which when it has gotten, it swayes not, nor propendes not, nor can be
swayed to weighe downwards; which indeed were to weighe upwards which way
soever.

And have heavy things any need (think you) of supportance to keep them
from weighing upwards? Yet we acknowledge, the whole world and every part of it
is from the finger of God. For the very course of nature is the work of God.
That fire does burn, that the Sun and stars do inlighten the earth, that
heavy things moove downwards, and light things upwards, all this I say, we
acknowledge to be the work of God.

And we wonder at the power of God in making all this by his word, and
supporting all by his word. But being made and as wonderfully preserved by God,
we wonder not at this, that heavy things moove downwards, and light things
upwards; or how it comes to pass, that the earth without a supporter
continues where it is, seeing if it did not continue where it is, it should
moove upwards toward the Heavens lighter then a feather, which is quite
contrary to the nature of the earth. We well wonder at the power of God in
this, that as he made it by his word, so with the turninge of an hand he
could set an end unto it, if it pleased him. And therefore to talk of
chamberinge up sustentative force (in the center) multiplied according to the
several portions or divisibilities of magnitude successively immensurable, to
speak in proportion to your own language, is to affect more Rhetorical wit
then Metaphysicall truth, in plainer terms, is to multiply words without
sense.

So then to amplify the infinite power of God, by surpassing the imaginary
sustentative force of a center, which as your self confess is a matter of
nothing and consequently the sustentative force of it must be a matter of
nothing, is a very poor amplification of the power of God. If the center were
able to supporte the earth not where now it is, but in the hollow of the
moon, that were somewhat to magnify the sustentative power thereof. Yet I make
no doubt, but God could do so by his power. Which case is of far greater
force for the manifesting of his power, then in bearing up the earth where it
is, which indeed being created, and preserved in being, has no need of
supportar^o^ in his own place, where it can moove no lower; and if it moove by
direct motion, it must needs moove higher; which kind of motion is more
proper for a feather the^ for the heavy earth, whose womb is impregnated with
stones and mettalls.

And therefore you do well to take this power of God into consideration as
namely of his ability to toss this universe with greater case, then a Giant
does a tennis ball (yet I never read or heard before of Giants playing at
tennis ball) through out the boundless courts of immensitie. By the way your
overlash, in talking of the Courts of immensitie, wherein this motion should be.
For as for the immensitie of God, that is no fit space to toss the world in.

And as for the immensitie corporal, that is a thing utterly impossible; the
motion you devise must needs be in vacuo or not at all. Now the force of the
center is no way fit whereby to illustrate this power of God. For certainly if
the earth were placed in the hollow of the Moon, it together with his center
would tumble down again; as little congruous is it; for the illustration of
that power of God, whereby he is able to dissolve Rocks of Adamant with the
phillep of his finger, sooner the^ bubbles of water with the breath of the
Canon; In all which you seem to affect not Metaphysicall truth only, but
Rhetorical if not Poetical florishes also. We believe that God, as by his
word he made all things out of nothing, so by his word he can return them
into nothing; this is plain English neither has his power need of any
Pyrgopolinices bombast eloquence to illustrate the Majesty thereof or set it
forth.

3. But from the breath of the Canon you fall congruously upon the
consideration of the mother of it, which creature is commonly called gunpowder.
And here you tell us first that our admiration of Gods active power may be
raised by calculating the imaginary degrees of active powers increase in
creatures; that which follows divisible as well in quantity as operation, is
of no importance but only to fill up. The Canon sends forth his bullet with
greater violence then the Sacher, like enoughe, and so every Ordinance exceedes
other in force of Battery, according to the quantity of charge, or length of
barrel, which I leave to the consideration of the Master of the Ordinance. To
this you add that if the same quantity of steel or iron, were possible to be
as speedily converted into a siery vapor as gunpowder is, the blow would be
10. times more irresistible then it is. I do not think your meaning is to
instruct the would in a new way of making Saltpeter, if it were, Saltpeter men
should be your scholars, I would be none of them.

So much Phylosophie I apprehend, that fire is most swifte in mooving upwards,
as the Element of earth is most swift in mooving downwards. And like as the
contraction of more parts of the earth together makes a body the heavier, so
likewise the more siery anything is, so much the more swift in motion upwards.
But to say that the active force or vigor of motion, always increases
according to the degrees of celerity which it accumulates, is an idle speech,
and as much as to say the more swiftly it mooves, the more vigorously it
mooves. It had more show of congruity to say the more vigorously it is moved
(to wit in respect of the Agents force that mooves it) the more swiftly it
mooveth.

Now you come to the accommodation of all this, unto the infinite power of God,
in this manner, Though the most active and powerful essence cannot be
encompossed with walls of brass, nor chambred up in vaults of steel allbeit
much wider then the Heavens, yet does it every where more strictly girde it
self with strength then the least or weakest body can be girte. For what bonds
can we prescribe so strict so close or firm, as is the bond of indivisible
unity, which can not possibly burst, or admit eruption, wherein
notwithstanding infinite power does as entirely and totally encampe it self as
in immensitie. How incomparably then does his active strength exceed all
comparison? What a mad comparison is it in illustrating the infinity of Gods
power to say that God girds himself with strength more strictly, then the
weakest body can be girt? Do weak persons girde themselfes with strength; or
is Gods girdinge of himself with strength, like to our girding of our clothes
about us? By that which follows it seems that you have an allusion to Gods
girding of himself into a narrow compass, like Ladies that affect slender
wastes. For to what other purpose do you tell us that Gods girding is as
strict, as is the bond of indivisible unity.

And before you told us that the greater force arises from the contraction of
parts. Now has God any parts to be thus contracted and united, that so his
vigor might be greater? what base comparisons are these, to represent the
infinite power of God by them? Then you roll in your woonted Rhetoric to
amplify the vehemence of his motive power; in that it cannot be expressed by a
motion that should bear levill from the Sunnesetting in the west, to the Moon
riseing in the East, which is a very fair mark I confess; for the case put,
is in plenilunio, when the Moon is at full. Then to cast the fixed stars
down to the center, (belike you mean one after another, otherwise there would
be no room for them in the center;) and hoyse the earth up to the Heavens
within the twinkling of an eye, or to send both in a moment beyond the
extreamities of this visible world, into the womb of vacuity whence they
issued, would not strain his power motive.

Yet all this you confess to be less then to bring nothing unto something,
that is, to take not your words but rather your good meaning, to create out of
nothing. Whereby nothing does not become something, but something has a being,
which before it had not. But here you power out many wild conceits besides
this: first as when you say, Essence swallows up infinite degrees of
succession in a fixed instant. I had thought rather this had been the property
of eternity, not of essence. You might as well say essence swallows up all
places into an indivisible unity or point. Then how may eternity be said to
swallow up that which it does not contain; neither formally, (for certeynly
there is no formal succession in eternity) nor eminently. For to conteyne
eminently, is to be able to produce succession; but it is not Gods eternity
that denominates him able to produce time, or the existence of things in time,
but his power. So neither his essence nor his eternity, swallows up motion
for the same reason.

But as for the swallowing up of motion into a vigorous rest, to wit by
mooving the eighth sphere round in a moment; Of the nakedness and absurdity,
that is shameful nak^dnesse of such an assertion, we have discoursed enough.
Again, is it not enough for you to maynteyne motion in vacuo; but you must
needs affirm that this visible world issued from the vacuum which now we
imagine without the extreamities of it? where now the world is, was a vacuum
before the world was, but yet the world issued not from it, neither in the
kind of a material cause, nor in the kind of a formal cause, nor in the kind
of an efficient cause, much less did it issue from that vacuum, which you
term without the extreamites of this world. Then again I know no measure of
perfection derived unto the creature from Gods immensitie, but only from the
counsel of his will, by his immensitie he fills all places but distributes
not the measure of perfections thereby.

When you call Nothing the mother of Gods creatures, tell me I pray, did you
affect poetical wit or Metaphysicall truth? I had thought Nothing had not
afforded so much as the matter of any thing, as the Mother does the matter (at
least) of the child. It is true; we were not any thing before God made us. And
as sure I am that this which we call nothing, did not contribute any thing to
the creation of men.

The baseness of man's original is a common place of another nature; Now your
text is the Infinity of Gods power, but you may squander from it as you please.
Whatsoever implies not contradiction, the production thereof is within the
compass of Gods power, and whatsoever God can do, he can do with ease; His
head aked not in the making of the World, neither does it ache in providing
for, and preserving all things. But to talk of the possibility of more worlds
hand over head, under color of gratifying God in the amplification of his
power, I leave unto them that are not satisfied with the demonstration of his
infinite power in this. Yet as touching Gods omnipotency, for the strengthening
of our faith, we are promised something hereafter; as if all hitherto tended
to the strengthening of our imagination, by comparing it first to the
suste^tative force of a center which is a matter of nothing, and then to the
force of gunpowder which undoubtedly is a matter of something. Whether we are
like to meet with a more wise discourse, concerning Gods infinite Wisdom, if
others know, yet I know not.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Infinity of divine Wisdom. That it is as impossible for ought to
fall out without Gods knowledge, as to have existence without his power or
essential presence.

1. IN the first Section there is nothing that I mislike: we acknowledge God
could not be infinite in power, unles he were infinite in Wisdom also. And
that power ungoverned by Wisdom, would bring forth very enormous effects. But
if a duble portion of wit matched with half the strength would effect more
then a triple portion of strength with half so much wit, surely where the
power is equal, and the Wisdom insinitly unequal, there the effects cannot
be the like. Yet you have been bold to affirm in another treatise of yours,
not yet extant I confess, that If a man had the same infinite power that God
has, he might well think he could dispose thus of things as God has
disposed, by the Wisdom which man already has.

And you give this reason, for in things we can lay any necessity upon, we
can tell well enough how to dispose of them to the end which we seek. As
uncouth an assertion as has passed from the mouth or pen of any man. For we
manifestly perceave that the difference of artificial operations in the World,
does not arise from the difference of men's powers, but merely from the
difference of their skill and Wisdom in several trades.

2. You do not well to confound power with strength; for strength is only
power natural; but there is a civil power goes beyond that. And there is no
question to be made, but Wisdom is to be preferred before the strength of the
body, by how much the qualities of the mind are to be preferred before the
qualities of the body. But where civil power is supreme that rules over the
wisest Counsaylers. No question God is as infinite in Wisdom as in power. But
I take it to be very absurd to say that Gods wisdom is greater then his
power. For is it possible that God by his wisdom can think of any course
fit to be done for the setting forth of his glory which his power were not
able to effect? and seeing you confess his power to be infinite as well as his
wisdom, what should move you to maynteine the one to be greater then the
other, I can not devise. Princes have guides to govern them, which yet are not
therefore greater the^ they, but inferior by far. But in God, his wisdom and
power, though different notions, yet the substance of them is all one and
precisely one in God. The same is the proportion between infinite wisdom and
power infinite, as between sinite wisdom and power finite. But finite
wisdom does not evacuate finite power; therefore neither does infinite wisdom
evacuate the necessity of infinite power.

But to salve the matter, you add that it evacuates the necessity of power
distinct from it. It Is true indeed, in God, though the notions of wisdom and
power are distinct, yet the things signified are one essence in God. And look
in what manner soever infinite wisdom does infer the indistinction of power
with it, after the same manner, does infinite power infer the indistinction
of wisdom with it. For as much as God is essentially wise and powerful, and
therefore infinite in both, and both indistinct in him, whose essence is most
simple and admitts no parts. That wisdom is the father and power the Mother
of all Gods works is such an assertion, that I do not think you can find
any to father it, or mother it but your self. Will you not give us leave to
accommodate it unto the works of man and pronounce proportionably that his
Wisdom is the Father, and his power the Mother of his actions? I take it to
be absurd to inquire after a Father and Mother of works, save in case, the
works themselfes do admit these different sexes as being male or female; yet
in such a case it has a Father and Mother only in respect of univocall
generations not equivocall.

And as for the proportion to justify your allegory, we are content rather to
expecte your pleasure to acquainte us with it, then to trouble our wits about
the deviseing of it. Yet Philo and the Platonicks are a rub in your way, who
(as you say; for I confess I am not so well seen in them,) make knowledge the
mother of all Gods works.

To remoove this you acquainte us with your conjecturall dictates. First that
it is probable they dreamed of a created knowledge. A most improbable conjecture,
that they should conceave, that God brought his works to pass by the knowledge
of a creature not by his own knowledge; Yet that creature by whose created
knowledge God is conjectured to have wrought by, in their opinion, being one
of Gods works, how could that creatures knowledge be possibly accoumpted his
mother in creation. Your second conjecture is, that under these terms they
covered some transformed notion of the second person in the Trinity. Such a
person more fit by far to be the Author of all Gods works in order under God
the Father; But equally improbable it is that this second person in Trinity
should be called by them, The Mother of Gods works. Rather Sapientia in
Latin, and (...) in Greek being the feminine gender; in this grammatical
notion they might accoumpt it (...) the Mother of all things created, which
yet is more then my learning will encourage me to ascribe unto them. And Christ
you deny not to be the wisdom of the Father, but you add that he is the
wisdom personal; but you speak here not of the wisdom personal, but of
the wisdom of the Godhead as it is essentially in the whole Trinity.

Danaeus upon the 32. distinction of Peter Lumbards first book of sentences,
professes the Son to be called the wisdom of the Father, for as much as he
makes the Father known unto us. But though you speak of wisdom as it is
essential, and not personal; yet you may remember, that even the essential
attributes are severally appropriated unto the Person by divines; and in the
course of this appropriation, power is attributed to the Father, Wisdom unto
the Son, Aquinat. 1. q. 39. art. 8. Durand. 1. did. 3^. q. 3
and goodness unto the Holy Ghost. How suitable this is of making wisdom
the Father of Gods actions, let every intelligent Reader judge.

Again I find that Gabriell Vasquius proposes a question, Whether the power
of God does any manner of way differ In 1. q. 25. art. 1. disp. 111.
from Gods knowledge and his will? And herein recites the opinion of Durand,
mainteyning that Gods wisdom and his will, are but the remote causes of
divine actions; and that the power of God is the immediate cause of all. The
contrary whereunto he maynteynes, namely that power or execution is needelesly
attributed unto God, as distinct from his knowledge and his will; and this he
delivers according to the doctrine of Scotus, Bassolis, Ferrariensis, Caietan,
and Aquinas. Neither of these opinions as I conceave serves your turn in
making wisdom the Father, and power the Mother of Gods actions. These flashes
of conceyte are far distante from the conceits of any School divine, that I
am acquainted with.

3. Wisdom (you say) as all agree, is the excellency of knowledge from which
it differs not, save only in the dignity or usefullnesse of matters known or
in the more perfect manner of knowing them. This promises no great depth, yet
it passes my slender capacity to comprehend your meaning herein, or to make
any good sense thereof. You have so long inured your self to a phrase of speech
and expression beyond the capacity of your Reader; that I know not whether at
length you may attain to such a faculty of speech as may transcende the
Authors own comprehension. Who they are that agree in this, that Wisdom is
the excellency of knowledge, I profess I know not.

And I wonder you proceed to discourse of wisdom without distinction; seeing
it may be taken in some sense by Philosophers, in which it is not taken by
Canonical writers. Again in some sense it may be taken by Canonical writers,
in which it is not taken by Philosophers. There is a wisdom to salvation
which the Scriptures communicate to the meanest of Gods children, which kind
of Wisdom was nothing known to Philosophers. And there is a Metaphysicall
wisdom in knowing Ens qua ens, where abouts Philosophers did busy their
brains, which you shall hardly find notice taken of throughout the
Scriptures. Again wisdom is sometimes taken for that knowledge, that rest in
contemplation; sometimes it is taken for such a knowledge as is not commendable
nor right unless it be referred to actio^. Solomon's Wisdom it seems
comprehended both. For the Wisdom that he prayed for, was the wisdom of
government, which respects action; but God gave him other wisdom also. For
this is reckoned up as a part of his wisdom, that he spoke of trees, from
the Cedar tree that is in Lebanon, even to the hyssope that springth out of the
wall, he speak also of beast and of fowls and of creepeing things, and of
fishes. And in this respect it seems, that he excelled the wisdom of all
the Children of the East, and all the wisdom of Egypt. For of Moses it is
said that he was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians. Act. 1. 22.
And this wisdom I conceave to have been in sciences contemplative and not
practical. Yet in Scripture phrase as I guess, it is most generally taken for
wisdom practical, consisting in knowing how to bring about intended ends.
And thus you seem to take it, when you profess that it differs not from
knowledge save only in the dignity or usefullnes of matters known; which is
an harshe manner of expression.

But I take your meaning to be this, that the difference is in the objecte,
and that things of worth and of use are the special object of wisdom. For
so a wise man by his wisdom discernes these things which are most
behoofefull, and advantageous unto him. So then wisdom seems to be (in your
opinion) the knowledge of things useful and behoovefull, that is, the
discerning of what is best to be done to the compassing of this or that end.
Yet by your leave if the end be not good, such a wisard in Solomon's phrase,
shall be accoumpted no better then a fool. And the Holy Ghost has discovered
unto us both in the old Testament, that many Are wise to do evil, but to do
well have no understanding, Ier. 4. 22. and in the new Testament, that the
children of this World are wiser in their generation, then the children of
light. And the unjust Steward had a commendable measure of wisdom in this
kind. Luc. 16. 8. But take it at the best; why should you call this, the
excellency of knowledge? Has not Aristotle delivered the contrary, and
professed that felicity of contemplation is more eminent then the felicity of
action? And I know no reason to forsake him in this. Do not we believe that
our happiness in the Kingdom of Heaven shall consist in the vision of God?
The knowledge of Gods law is knowledge practical, and is not this far
inferior to the knowledge of God, and of the mystery of godliness revealed to
us in the Gospel? I confess the knowledge that we have of God in this life
does confer to action, but that is not enough to make it practical; The
knowledge of things to be practiced and put in execution, that and that alone
denominates knowledge practical. Your last difference of wisdom from
knowledge proposed disjunctively thus, or in the more perfect manner of
knowinge of them, I can hardly make any congruouse sense of.

At first I thought the same difference had been intended though variously
expressed, that the Reader might satisfy himself with which expression he
pleased; little thinkeinge that your self who take upon you herein to instruct
others, were to seek, whether wisdom differed from knowledge, in the object
known, or in the manner of knowinge things; yet upon second thoughts this
seems to be your meaning. But suppose the truth of both concerning wisdom,
namely that it knows things of worth and useful, and that it knows them in
a perfect manner; yet I pray consider, what a mad thing is it to say, that
herein it differs from knowledge. Does the knowledge of things useful differ
from knowledge? well you may say it differs from the knowledge of things less
useful, or not useful at all, but surely it differs not from knowledge. So
likewise the perfect manner of knowinge things, may be said to differ from an
imperfecte manner of knowinge them, but surely it differs not from the knowinge
of them. For we do not use to say that the species is contradistinct from the
genus, but rather one species from another. I profess I am touched with no
small regret to consider how much time I am like to wast in correctinge such
anomalies, if your book should be too frequent in them.

But to proceed, Though no man be wise without much knowledge, yet a man may
know many things and not be wise. In this likewise I find so much confusion,
that a man may very well be to seek in what sense to justify it. I have heard
of a sage Counsaylor, that knew not a letter in his own Mother tongue.
Comineus as I remember was no scholar, and yet a very wise Counsaylour. The
Turks are usually accoumpted as ignorant people as live; yet no doubt the
grand Signior has a wise counsel. And wisdom of government (which now a
days alone is usually accoumpted wisdom) is many times accompanied with
little learning.

Achitophell in his time was accoumpted as an Oracle of God, but of his
learning or great knowledge we read not. And in my judgment this kind of
wisdom seems to be rather a natural gift, then an habit acquired by
knowledge. And it seems to consiste in judginge of most commodious means to
compass ends intended, as in the counsayles of Achitophell unto Absalon, as
also it appears in Solomon's course that he took to discern the true mother
of the Child which was in question; and because they may be crossed if they be
known, therefore to discern how courses commodious for the compassing of
designs may be closely carried undiscovered; as the two hundred men that
Absolon took with him when he went to Hebron, are said to have accompanied 2 Samuel 15. 11.
him in the simplicity of their hearts knowinge nothing; and thus they were
engaged in his treason before they were aware. And the same Absolon by his
pretense of payinge his vow at Hebron signified to his Father, prevented
jealousy in his Father, and took away all suspicion of treason. On the other
side, it is a great point of wisdom to discover the reaches of others in
their courses; as Solomon, discerned the traiterous heart of Adoniah, by the
motion which he made to have Abishag the Shunemite give^ him to Wife, which
Bethsheba perceaved not, and was very willing to gratify him in the
furtherance of his suite.

This was a natural perspicacy in Solomon; for at this time he was very
young, and had not as yet sought the Lord for that spirit of wisdom in
government, as afterward he did; And whereas you say, A man may know many
things, and not be very wise; It is a truth, but a very mean truth. For a man
may know many things, and yet be a very fool; and that more ways then one.
For first few and many are terms of respect; and few things are many in
respect of fewer. And though a man know never so much as these things, that
nothing at all conduce to wisdom; what wise man would expecte that he should
be any thing the wiser thereby? Again, nothing denominates a man simply wise,
but that which makes him a wise man. Now a man may not only know many things,
but be also wise in many things, and yet not deserve the name of a wise man.
He may be a wise painter, a wise graver, wise to work in handicrafts (which is
accoumpted wisdom, both in the phrase of God, and phrase of Aristotle) and
yet all this while be far enough from a wise man. For he only is a wise man
that knows how to govern himself and provide for himself.

Now many times wit, and that in great measure, in trades, is found to be in
a fools keepinge. Nay what will you say; may not a man be wise to do evil,
Ier. 8. 22. wise to satisfy his lust, wise to compass their own wicked
ends; but shall he be accoumpted the wiser man for this? Has not Aristotle
delivered, that Incontinens non potest esse prudens, An incontinent man can not
be a wise man? Last of all suppose that a man knows all that belonges to true
wisdom, but will not practice it, like the Athenians, of whom it was said,
sciunt quae recta sunt sed facere nolunt, shall not such a one be accoumpted
one of Solomon's fools in his proverbs? For are not the Moral virtues and
recta ratio knitt together indissolubly? But come we to the wisdom of God,
Knowledge divine, as it comprehends all things, the name of wisdom best
befits it, not as restrained to this or that particular. And why should it not
be accoumpted wisdom, restrained to what particular you will, seeing he
undoubtedly knows every particular, in most perfect manner* And but erst you
profess that wisdom differs from knowledge only in the usefullnes of things
known, or in the more perfect manner of knowing them. The knowledge of God
which is of himself, is the wisdom of contemplation. His knowledge of other
things to be produced and ordered by him to the settinge forth of his glory is
the wisdom of action.

And the Apostle breaks forth into admiration of the depthe of Gods rich
wisdom and knowledge. Piscator thinks that by wisdom and knowledge one
thing is meant. I am not of his opinion. The text seems to me to make against
that construction; For thus it runs O the depthe of the riches (...) both of
the wisdom and knowledge of God. In saying both it plainly intimates that
wisdom and knowledge are considered as two, and therefore distinct. I take the
meaning to be thus. God by his wisdom discerns courses most convenient; but
by his knowledge he comprehends all, whether convenient or inconvenient. And
because a man may be so far wise as to discern of courses proposed to the
compassing of a certain end, which is the most convenient; Yet because he is
not able to invent all courses, he may fail in wisdom, therefore I conceave
it is said that God is rich both in wisdom and knowledge; because he does
not only judge what is fittest amongst few or many, but amongst all; For he
knows all even the most inconvenient and disorderly courses; but by his
wisdom he judges of the convenience of them, and according to his good
pleasure uses them. Your reason follows to show why the name of wisdom best
besitts the knowledge of God, and that is; For though many things known by
him, whilst compared with others more notable, seem base and contemptible;
yet not the meanest, but may be the object of divine contemplation to a
Christian, that considers not the mere matter or form or physical properties,
but the Creators power or skill manifested in it. You undertook to prove that
Gods knowledge of all things might most fittly be called wisdom; to which
purpose, you should prove, that God may justly be accoumpted wise in knowinge
them; that is, that it might affoorde just matter of such contemplation unto
God, as might justly be called wisdom. But the reason you bring, medles not
at all with the contemplation of God, but with the contemplation of a
Christian. For whereas in coherence you should say, it affords matter of wise
contemplation unto God; you tell us it is an object of divine contemplation to a
Christian.

And whereas you would not affirm that Gods knowledge, as restrained to this or
that particular, was to be accoumpted wisdom, but only as it comprehends all
things; yet your reason makes show of provinge what you affirmed, of Gods
knowledge restrained to this or that particular, and not so only but as
restrained to the meanest particular; though it ends (as I said) not in
avouching that such perticulars may be an object of divine contemplation unto
God, but only in saying that it may be an object of divine contemplation to a
Christian. What incongruities and most unscholasticall solecismes of discourse
are these?

And all this while you confine Gods knowledge to the perticulars of his own
making. But what think you of the particulars of man's or the divills making,
in the most wicked, and sinful courses that have been, are, or shall be in
the World.

Are not these also known unto God, and are these likewise matter of diyine
contemplation in respect of the Creators power, or skill manifested therein: We
acknowledge the wisdom of God to be excellent in the composition of the
meanest worm. Of some likewise we see excellent use as of the be, and
silkeworme; of others we do not, yet we believe that his wisdom being
infinite, he does nothing in vain; he has use of every thing, though we know
it not. And we take notice of a double knowledge the one called scientia
visionis, whereby he knows all things that are, nor such only but even all
such as have been, or shall be, the other called scientia simplicis
intelligentiae, whereby he knows all things possible so far forth as they
are knowable, and between these two knowledges, there is a great deal of
difference, though you seem to confound them.

4. By useful knowledge as I take it, you mean the knowledge of useful
things. Of this you say there are two offices, The one steadfastly to propose a
right end: The other to make, and prosecute a right, choice of means for
effecting it. By this it appears that you speak only of that kind of
wisdom which is referred to action, and whereby agents are accommodated
ad^res gerendas. From the consideration of humane wisdoms imperfection, you
take a course the better to set forth the perfection of wisdom divine. Humane
wisdom (you say) is oftimes blind in both, and usually lame in the latter.

I will endeavor to give some illustration of this. The end, we aim at, is
our good. For Finis., and bonum convertuntur. Ethic. 1. 1. This good is either
natural, or supernatural, both in respect of power to discern it, as also
in respect of power to compass it. The natural good which every one aims at,
is the preservation of his esse, or natural being, and the acquiring of his
been esse, or well being natural. In both these are found errors enough. For
though nothing is a more natural object of man's desires then the preservation
of his being, yet sometimes they are found most unnaturally to affect their
destruction; sometimes through passion, (and that in diverse kinds) in
wonderful manner blinding reason, not only to avoyde shame or rather the
suffering of shame, or to avoyde a worse kind of death, but sometimes out of
miserablenes, rather then they will part with a little, they are wilfully set to
part with all. (...)
(...)


Achitophell whose wisdom was as an oracle of God, went soberly this way,
when he saw his counsel refused: For he went home and set his house in order
and hanged himself; it seems his unsanctified wisdom urged him hereunto.
For as it is written of Caesar that he alone came sobrius ad perdendam
Rempublicam so Achitophell accessi^ sobrius ad perdendum seipsum.

As for the acquiring of well being, this is an end that all affect, but
according to their several dispositions. For the good which they affect being
bonum conveniens agreing to their affections, so it comes to pass, that as men
are of different affections, so they propose unto themselfes different ends.
The luxurious person setts his wits on work for compassing the satisfaction
of his lust; the covetous person he affects to grow rich; the ambitious
person to grow great, the virtuous person to be good according to natures
direction. And thus (...) Ehit. 3. 5.
(...). Look how every man is qualified, such is the end he aims at, but
still natural. But in compassing, there is a great deal of difference; for
some are wise to do evil as appears in Absolons carriage of himself
aspiring to the Kingdom; as also in Achitophells counsayles, which if Absalom
had followed, it has gone full ill with David. Nay generally they are found,
even natural men, to be wiser in their courses though wicked (witness the
un^^st ^teward) then the children of God are in theyres, though honest, and
Christian. The children of this world (says our Savior) are wiser in their
generation, then the children of light. Nay moral Philosophers, in their
instructions unto virtuous courses, have advised their Disciples to set before
their eyes the picture of vice, and to persuade them to take but the like
course in prosecuting virtue, that the wicked do in prosecuting vice. Vt
jugulent homines surgunt de nocte latrones,
Vt teipsum serves non expergisceris?


A manifest argument of the great corruption of man, whose wit serves him so
well in evil things, so ill in good things. Tho improvement whereof is in no
small degree also imputable unto Satan, who is most forward to impregnate the
fancies of men with suggestions unto evil. We have known heavy headed, and
dull persons brought up at school amongst us, when afterward they have taken
other courses, and given themselfes to Ruffianisme, they have been acounted
amongst the wits of the time. But as for the discerning of true good, that
power transcends the region of nature. God must first regenerate us, and
translate us into a supernatural state, before we can discern the things of
God, or these things that belong unto our own peace, which when God has
granted us, then our end is no longer the preservation of our temporal being,
but the salvation of our souls in the world to come, and to this purpose to
cleave unto God by faith and love usque ad contemptum nostri, even to the
contempt of our selfs, as touching this temporal life of ours. And to attain
to this end, we need no consultatious with flesh, and blood; God in his word
has chalked out unto us a direct way unto this end, and therefore it is said to
be a lantern unto our feet and a light unto our paths. But whatsoever the
end be, you tell us that if it be much affected, the less choice of means is
left, the more eagerly we apply our selfs unto their use, and strive as it
were to strain out success, by close embracing them. And for this reason
ignorance, or want of reason to forecast variety of means, for bringing about
our much desired ends, is the mother of self will, and impatience. For what is
self will, if a man should define it, but a stiff adherence to some one, or
few particular means, neither only, nor chiefly necessary to the maine point.
It seems you are in a straight, and therefore fetch about for matter, though
aliene, and here we have met with a good phrase, of straininge out success by
close embracing the means. Yet even in these unnecessary strains, your
discourse is but loose in my judgment. For whether we discern many means, or
few means, all is one as touching the close pursuing of that which we much
affect; For if many, we will make choice of the fittest in our judgment, and
as close embrace them as others do, that do not discern so great variety.

And as for success, that is not in our power to be strayned out, as you
speak, by close embracing the means, Man is a resistible agent, and easily
crossed in his courses; and the ends we aim at, in reference to our best
means, are but of a conjecturall nature, and so of uncertayne issue; Neither
do I see any reason to the contrary, but that a man may be as self willed in
the midst of variety of means discerned by him, as of few means, and if he be
cr^st in them all, much more impatient. For surely the greater variety of
means is represented, the more the way is open to take hold of that which is
neither only, nor chiefly necessary, like as where many ways offer
themselfes, a travailer is in most danger to mistake the most direct way. Self
will I confess is excercised in adherence to means unfitt; as may be seen in
the rude Irish, that will not be brought off from their rude courses, they will
tie their ploughes or harrowes to their horse tails, say what the English will
to persuade them to another course. But it is as well seen in following
different ends. Many will not be taken off from their unclean conversation,
from their riotous and intemperate courses, they count it pleasure, (as S.
Peeter speaks) to live deliciously; these fruits of self-will are not in
adhering to means so much, as in adhering to evil ends. But 2. Pet. 2.
you proceed, and tell us in the next place, that Wits conscious of their
own weakness for conqueing what they eagerly desire, presently call in power,
wrath or violence as partial, or mercenary seconds to assist them. Whereas he
that out of fertility of invention can furnish himself beforehand with store
of likely means for accomplishing his purpose, cannot much esteem the loss
or miscarriage of some one or two. These may seem pretty contemplations, and as
pretily expressed.

But I had little thought that self will, and impatience joined with want of
wit, had also been joined with consciousnes of self weakness. For the
sluggard though but a fool as Solomon says, is as wise in his own conceit as
seven men that can give a reason. And certainly self will, and self Pro. 26.
16
conceyts are companions inseparable. And therefore such commonly make little
question of accomplishing, or as you call it, of conquering their desires, by
their own courses. And yet if they fail hereof, it is nothing strange, since
the best means are but likely as your self style them.

I can as hardly believe that fertility of invention is of power to keep men
from impatience. In my opinion patience as all other moral virtues, depends
rather upon judgment then invention, though formally it is a quality of the
will as all moral virtues are, and not any habitt of the understanding. But
suppose he miscarry in all, then a man's patience must needs bidd farewell to
invention to support it, and it is high time to rely upon judgment. Yet I
trust patience which must have her perfect work, (Iam. (...).) may have course
in this case also; though it be an hard matter you say to keep from foul
play, if the game whereat a man shootes be fair, and good, and most of his
stringes already be broken. It is good they say to have two stringes to a man's
bow. A virtuous man has more then two, you suppose as much, for you suppose
many to be broken yet not all. And surely virtue is not virtue if it keep not
from foul play.

The Stoickes mainteyned that a virtuous man might descend into Phalaris bull,
without the interrup^ion of his happiness. We Christians are taught, and
disciplined to rejoice even in tribulation, and mark well our bow stringes,
because tribulation works patience, and patience experience, and experience
hope, and hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed in our
hearts by the Holy Ghost that is given unto us. (...) ^m. 5. 4.
says S. Paul, I am able to endure all things by the Phil. 4. 12.
power of Christ that enables me, and herupon he exhorts Timothy to be partaker
of the affliction of the Gospel, to wit by the 2. Tim. 1. 8
power of God. The power of Christ, and the power of God are two such stringes
to our blow of patience, as can never be broke. We know his grace to be
sufficient for us, and when his power is made perfect in our weakness, we shall
2. Cor. 12.
have cause to rejoice in our infirmities. For when we are weak, then are we
strong. In a man's own strength no man shall be strong. But blessed art thou o
people, who art the saved of 1. Sam. 2. 9
the Lord, who is the shield of thy strength, and the sword of our glory. Deu.
33. 29
He can make us to be as a Giants sword, and he is a wall of fire round about
Jerusalem. All that sight against it, their flesh Zach. 9. 13
shall consume away, though they stand on their feet, and their eyes Zach. 2.
5.
shall consume in their holes, and their tongues shall consume in their
mouths. But to return. The contingency of the issue is Zach. 14. 12.
within the horizon of our fore sight.

As for horizons of contrivances, let such as fancy them make themselfes merry
with them. All this while the matter of your discourse being of Gods infinite
wisdom, and to that purpose preluding of the imperfect wisdom of man, I have
wondered what you meant to enter upon the consideration of patience; unless it
were to prepare your reader thereby with a more willing entertaynment of your
discourse.

But now I perceive you desire to gratify God with a commendation of his
patience, which that it might seem the more congruous, you pretend that the
infinitenes of his wisdom carries him herunto. And this patience consists in
bearing with sinners which as you say, every minute of their life's violently
thwart, and cross some particular means, ordained for his glory and their
good. Gods patience in forbearing us, and our sins in provoking him are
great enough in their proper colors, they need no inconsiderate
amplification to bombast them, by saying that every minute of life we violently
cross them. For surely either you must suppose man, every minute of his life,
to be waking, or else you delivered this as it were slumbering.

But to touch upon something more material, I pray remember, that you treat
of the wisdom of God, as exercised in intending a right end, and prosecuting
a right choice of means for the effecting of it. Now would you be so good as
to consider, what is the end that God aims at in this, and particularly
whether it be all one, in bearing thus with all, and that of an ambiguous
nature, thus, that in case they do at length repent, and turn unto God, he
may magnify his mercy in their salvation; if still they stand out, and dye in
impenitency he may magnify himself in their just condemnation? And withal I
pray consider, whether this be the course of any wisdom finite or infinite, in
God, or man to intend ends after this ambiguous manner. I mention no other end
of Gods patience, and long suffering, because I know no other end agreeable to
your opinion. That which follows tendes rather to the commendation of the
goodness of Gods will, then the wisdom of his understanding, and therefore so
much the more heterogeneall, and extravagant; as when you say out of the
Apostle that He is light and in him is no darkness; and that He distingvisheth
the fruits of light from fruits of darkness before they are, even before he
gave them possibility of being. An amplification partly idle, partly unsound.
For God must either distinguish them before they are, or not at all; For there
is no change in his understanding; unsound, in saying God gives them
possibility of being. The being of things is from the gift of God, but not the
possibility of being. But you proceed in the same stringe. As impossible it is
for his will to decline from that which he disernes truly good, as for his
infinite essence to shrink in being. God indeed cannot shrink, for he is
indivisible, and you well know what thereupon you have wrought for the
amplification of his power in the former chapter. But I would you had told us
what is that truly good discerned by God, from which you say his will cannot
decline. I cannot be satisfied with your concealments in this particular. What
I pray is more truly good then the setting forth of Gods glory either in his
patience, and long suffering, or in ought else whatsoever? And is it impossible
think you for Gods will to decline this? If so then it were impossible that
God should decline the making of the World.

Is not this a faite way to Atheism? Many things (you say) may and every
thing that is evil does fall out against Gods will, but nothing without his
knowledge, or besides his expectation. In Scripture phrase we find that many
things fall out not only besides, but contrary to Gods expectation as Esa. 5.
where God complayneth of the house of Israel, that while he looked for grapes
they brought forth wild grapes. And Arminius urges this as if it were spoken
in a proper speech.

By the proposition in this place it must be said, that God expects sour
grapes, as well as sweet, for otherwise they should fall out besides his
expectation which you here deny. So then God did expect that Shimei should
rail on David, that Absolon should defloure his Fathers Concubines, that Judas
should betray his Master, that David should defile his neighbors wife, and
cause her husband to be slain by the sword of children of Ammon, and that the
Jews should crucify the Holy Son of God. Say also if you will that God did
with patience, and long suffering expect all this. As for the knowledge of God
there is no question about that, all confessing that all things are known to
God not only at their falling out, but long before, as David professes of his
thoughts that they were known to God a farre-off or long before. Psalm. 139. 2.
But to say that any thing falls out against the will of God, I had thought it
had been generally received for a notorious untruthe. Aquinas I am sure is
flatt against you, where he says, Deus neque vult mala fieri, neque vult mala
non fieri, sed vult permittere mala fieri, and hoc est bonum. God neither
wills that evils shall be, nor wills that evils shall not be, but he will
permit evils to be, and this is good. Part. 1. q. 19. art. 9. Arminius
himself professes ^e minimum quidem fieri praeter Dei voluntatem, nempe vel
volentem Exam. Praedest. Perk. p. 114.
ut fiat, vel volentem non prohibere, sed permittere ut fiat.

You profess that all evil falls out against Gods will, Arminius professes
that nothing falls out besides the will of God, at least willing not to
prohibit it, but to permit it. And no merveyle, for the Apostle has given us
to understand that nothing can resist the will of God. It is true all evil
falls Romans 9.
out against Gods commandment, which usually is called also the will of God
but improperly. For every one knows that he is well able to sin, to
transgress, and consequently to resist this will of God.

Further you tell us, that That which in its own nature (as being made such by
his unalterable decree) is absolutely contingent, is not casual inrespect of
his providence or eternal wisdom. You are at lengh come to the wisdom of
God from whence you digressed, but you seem to bring it in by the ears. For
Casual things are suchas fall out praeter intentionem, besides intention
which is an action of the will not of the understanding where wisdom is
stated. And how can those things be said to fall out, not besides Gods
intention, which fall out against his intention, namely against his will, as
already you have professed of many things; that they do fall out against Gods
will, though not without his knowledge. I would you had given instance in those
absolute contingents which (as you say) are made so by Gods unalterable decree.
But because you have neglected it, I will do it for you. Rain to morrow is a
thing contingent, in this sense, it shall rain, or not rain. For me to walk
abroad or ride forth to morrow is a thing contingent, that is I shall walk or
not walk, ride foerth or not ride. And accordingly in other of your
traditionary writings I have read a discourse of yours touching a certain
disjunctive decree of God. But I pray be entreated to consider, whether such a
contingent before specified, or such a disjunctive proposition be a fit object
of Gods decree. Gods decrees I suppose you will say are all voluntary, and
free, he could have either not decreed at all what he has decreed, or decreed
their contraries. Therefore things of their own nature impossible to be
otherwise, are no fit object of Gods decrees. Now a disjunctive proposition as
above mentioned, is such as it is impossible it should be otherwise. For this
disjunctive (it shall rain, or not rain; my walking shall be, or not be) is
of necessary truth, and therefore no more decreable by God to be, then the
Godhead it self is decreable by him to be.

Again may I not be bold to say, that it is too absurd to talk of his
unalterable decree, if it proceed by way of distinction, to imply that some of
Gods decrees are alterable. All his decrees are more unalterable then the laves
of Medes, and Persians; they are compared to brazen mounteynes Zach. 6. But
here follows a mystery in the next place, and a great mystery: In that he
fully comprehends the number of all means possible, and can mix the
several possibilities of their miscarriage in what degree or proposition he
list, he may, and ofttimes does infallibly forecast the full accomplishment of
his proposed ends, by multiplicity of means in themselfes not inevitable but
contingent. Add hereunto all that follows in this Section. The absurdities
that you mix in this mysterious sentence of yours I desire, and will endeavor
to discover. Here we have three things to be considered.

First certain ends proposed by God to be accomplished. Secondly means
appointed for the accomplishinge of these ends. Thirdly Gods forecast of the
accomplishment of these ends. Touching the first I desire some instance of
those ends you speak of. One instance you give in the sequence of his action,
and it is the apprehension of a Traitor which you suppose to be ordained by
God. Yet is this as absolute a contingent as ought else. And contingents are no
otherwise ordained by God, then to be contingents. For you have already
signified that it is by Gods unalterable decree; So then God has decreed them
to be contingents. Therefore this action also to wit the apprehension of a
Traitor, God has ordained to be of a contingent nature.

The meaning whereof is no more then this, it may come to pass, it may not come
to pass. It shall be, or it shall not be, and accordingly in other treatises
of yours you have discoursed of a disjunctive decree of God, so called from the
disjunctive object thereof, as to say, God has decreed that such a Traitor
either shall be apprehended, or shall not be apprehended. Now there is no need
of any means to procure the accomplishment of such an end thus determined.
For any man is able to avouch that a Traitor shall be apprehended, or no, and
nothing at all to fail in the truth hereof; much less need is there of such
variety of means, and those mixed with such possibility of miscarriage, as you
treat of, to bring to pass such a decree, such an intention of this. But let
the end pass as you have shaped it; this being of a contingent nature, and yet
absolutely intended by God; for you neither express, nor intimate the
signification of any condition, it will hence follow, that any thing of the
like nature may be absolutely ordained by God notwithstanding the contingency
thereof. That is, be it never so contingent and free, as the apprehension of a
Traitor is a free act of man (for you do not suppose him to be apprehended by
dogs or catts but by men rather) yet notwithstanding God is able absolutely to
ordeyne that such a thing shall come to pass. Therefore God is as well able to
ordeyne that at such a time a man shall believe, shall repent, yea or do any
thing though never so free, notwithstanding the contingent nature thereof. Now
I can no where find (though I have perused thoroughly diverse of your treatises)
that you like of this. Yet here ere you are aware (as it seems) you are fallen
upon it, and take upon you to acquaint us with mysterious conceits of yours,
concerning the means whereby God does inevitably accomplish such ends, you may
as well say that God can bring to pass inevitably that man shall believe and
repent though I have found you elsewhere to abhor this. To the consideration
of which means we are now to proceed. Concerning these means you give us to
understand, 1. that they are many possible, 2. that God comprehendes the number
of them all. 3. That he can mix the several possibilities of their
miscarriage, in what degree, or proportion he list. 4. That in themselfes these
means are not inevitable, but contingent. I nothing doubt, but the same end
God can bring to pass by diverse means, and that all these means are known
to God but what you mean by mixing their several possibilities of miscariage
in what degree he list. I understand not. One kind of means is possible to
miscarry, so is another, so is every one, for so you acknowledge them all to be
in themselves not inevitable, but contingent; the meaning whereof I conceave to
be this, they do not inevitably, but contingently accomplish the end
proposed, this I take to be the meaning though incongruously delivered. But how
can God be said to mix these possibilities, unless you mean hereby Gods
comprehending of them all, which is a truth. For God comprehends them all in
his mind, but without mixing of them. But you seem to project a farther
meaning, by the last words as when you say in what degree, and proportion he
list. I take the meaning obscurely delivered to be this; God knows every
degree of their possibility to miscarriage, or rather God makes the possibility
either of each his miscarriage, or of all their miscarriage in what degree he
list; yet it seems you acknowledge no degree of possibility of the miscarriage
of them all. For you maynteyne it as a thing necessary, that all shall not
miscarry in the words immediately following. Have you not such a conceit as
his? God has ordained the apprehension of a Traitor, either by this means or
by that means, or by a third means or by a fourth? if it be I would you had
spoken out, and told us your mind plainly, yet we may take also that into our
consideration in the end. But by the way I see no grounds of these degrees of
possibility which you fancy. For all of the means being as you confess
contingent, and evitable as you speak, I see no reason, but every one should
be equally possible to miscarry. If you had talked of degrees of probability of
miscarriage, I should not have excepted against it, but I seem to have just
reason to except against the degrees of possibility.

Let us come to the third, and that is Gods inevitable forecast of the full
accomplishment of his proposed ends by this multiplicity of means. Now this as
it is plain enough, so it seems as manifestly to be untrue. For that God
should foreknow the issue of things by the means which have only a
contingent operation, is generally disclayned by School-divines the Jesuits
themselves, and Frarius by name in his Opuscula; as that which would infer an
uncertayne, and not infallible knowledge in God. For as much as nothing can lay
a better ground of certainty, then the nature of it can afford.

Secondly either you suppose that all this multiplicity of means you speak
of, shall be used or no. If all be not used, then God does not forecast the
full accomplishment of his proposed end by this multiplicity of means
possible, you speak of, but only by some of them, namely so many as were
used. And indeed it is very strange, that all means possible to be used should
be used to the accomplishment of every proposed end, or indeed of any proposed
end. But if all be used, and all fail save the last, upon what ground can you
say that the end proposed must necessarily be accomplished by this last, which
is as possible to miscarry as the former; for you have not signified that God
always uses this course, as to use the courses first that are most possible
to miscarry, and such as are least possible in the last place; nay your self
profess all the means to be alike possible, and probable. To this you seem
to answer in the sentence following, that it comes to pass by the rules of
eternal wisdom. Namely that if an hundred means be appointed for the
apprehension of a Traitor, and ninety and nine do amiss, the hundredth, and
last by the rules of eternal wisdom must of necessity take. But where these
rules of eternal wisdom are to be found, that you do not tell us, and
therefore we take liberty to discourse against it thus; was it not possible for
God to have used this means in the first, or second, or third, or middle
place, or in the place last save one which he uses in the last? you have not
manifested the least likelihood to deny this. Now if used in the first place,
or in the last place save one it might have miscarryed, why not in this, seeing
the nature of it is not altered but continues the same still, working only
contingently unto the producing of the end proposed, and not necessarily?
Again all other means failing this takes effect (you say) by the rules of
eternal wisdom. Now I demand if none other had been appointed but this,
why could not this alone being used have taken effect by rules of eternal
wisdom as well, as now it does, that is why could not God ordeyn that by this
means only used, the effect intended should be brought to pass, as well as
by this means used after, the use of many other, seeing still the effect coms
to pass by his means alone and not by any other: For if God can ordeyne that
after other means have failed, this means alone shall bring about the end
intended by God, why could he not as well ordeyne that this means alone should
do it, without using of any other means before it.

Last of all, what needs Gods forecast run out to these means for a ground
of its certeynty, when God himself cannot be ignorant of his own
determinations? and therefore having ordained such an end, as suppose the
apprehension of such a Traitor, upon this ground he may be most certain that
such a Traitor shall be apprehended. By the way I will take leave to observe
some positions that have dropped from your pen in this Section. 1. That God can
ordeyne such a thing to come to pass, which is of a contingent nature, as for
example the apprehension of a Traitor. 2. That upon such an ordination of God
success to the means used hereunto is absolutely necessary, you add and
immutably also, committing a great indecorum therein, immutability being a
congruous attribute only to the ordination of God, and not to the success of
things. 3. That means of contingent operation only shall necessarily take
effect. 4. This necessity of taking effect is not absolute but gotten merely by
casual miscarriage of the possibilities of the former means, so you express
it, whereas indeed the possibilities miscarry not; for the means are in their
nature possible, yea and probable too, to produce the end intended as your
self profess. 5. Though this necessity in the effectual working of the
means be not absolute, yet the success of them is absolutely necessary. I say
no more but this, the Theses that Picus Mirandula proposed at Rome were many of
them paradoxicall enough but I do not find that any of these had place amongst
them.

5. There is a fallacy (you say) though the simplest one that ever was set to
catch any wise man, wherein many excellent wits of these latter ages with some
of the former have been pitifully entangled, you that have discerned the
simplicity thereof in all probability, are not like to be entangled therein,
for then you were not any wiser then they; yet it seems all these excellent
wits are but woodcokes in comparison to your self; well let us consider it.
The more, wherein it were not possible for any besides themselfes to catch
them, they thus (you say) frame and set. Whatsoever God has decreed must of
necessity come to pass; But God has decreed every thing that is, therefore
every thing that is, comes to pass of necessity. All things are necessary at
least in respect of Gods decree, The extract or Corollary whereof in brief is
this. It is impossible for ought that is not, to be, for ought that has been,
not to have been, for ought that is not, to be, impossible for ought to be
hereafter that shall not be. I promise you, you have engaged your self very
far not only to look to it that your self be not found to be entangled
herein, but for the performance of a very easy, and clear solution of this
which you term a fallacy, least your self be not found as wise as they which
were entangled herein. Yet I am not ignorant of such a trick of wit, as first
to cry down an argument by disgracing it, and pouring contempt upon it, and
thereupon presuming that any answer shall serve the turn, when the Reader is
before hand awed with such a censure as to forfete the reputation of a scholar,
and to be Metamorphosed into a woodcocke, if he do not applaude it, and
persuade himself to see a clear solution of the former argument, which is
proclaimed base, and sufficient to discreditt all that favor it. Yet some wit
is required to catch a woodcocke. But this is so simple a fallacy as the like
was never set to catch a wise Man. Now a man would have thought your self had
been one of those excellents wits that had been taken in this snare, if it
be a snare; seeing you come but freshly from professing that God decrees such a
contingent, as the apprehension of a Traitor. In which case, it is absolutely
necessary that it shall come to pass. Now why may not God as well decree every
contingent thing, for ought the contingency can hinder it. For what is more
contingent then the apprehension of a Traitor, yet this you say God may
ordeine, and in this case it is absolutely necessary that it shall come to
pass. But let us consider what you have to say to it. I hope you will remember
your own interpretation of it, namely that it must necessarily come to pass
in respect of Gods decree, and so by your own profession not only a
contingent thing, but a free action, may be said to come to pass necessarily,
to wit in respect of Gods decree, as for example, the apprehension of a
Traitor which is as free an action as any, you might have been pleased to have
framed the proposition thus, whatsoever God has decreed to come to pass, must
necessarily come to pass. For you cannot be ignorant that God does as well
decree that some things shall not come pass, as that other things shall come
to pass. As for example Ezekiel. 20. 31. O house of Israel as I live says the
Lord God I will not answer you when I am asked 32. Neither shall that be done
that comes into your mind: for ye say we will be as the heathen and serve
wood, and stone, and Esaias. 37. 33. Thus says the Lord concerning the coming
of Assure. He shall not enter into this city, nor shoot an arrowe there, nor
come before it with shield, nor cast a mount against it. Now we are ready to
attend the discovery of this fallacy, this simple fallacy.

First you tell us of an extract or Corollary hereof thus; It is impossible for
ought that is not to be, etc. Is this the way you take to discover the
simplicity of this fallacy? this savoureth strongly of your fallacious dealing;
in as much as by callecting consequences you labor to discredit the
syllogism, this surely is not to answer it. Besides not one of your
consequences are sound, there is no ingenuity in the collection of them. For
the conclusion of the former syllogism being this therefore, every thing that
is comes to pass of necessity, your self have acknowledged this necessity to
proceed in respect of Gods decree. And therefore what necessity of things
soever you do infer herence, you must accordingly understand it in respect of
Gods decree not otherwise. Now this necessity is but necessity secundum quid
not simpliciter as the learned call it, and such as may stand with contingency,
and possibility to the contrary. Like as the apprehension of a Traitor is a
thing possible not to be and in its own nature merely contingent, but upon
supposition that God has ordained that such a Traitor shall be apprehended by
certain means, you profess that the success of those means is absolutely
necessary, which is as much as to say that the apprehension of that Traitor
upon Gods ordeyning it, is absolutely necessary; which is more then the divines
whom you impugn as overlashing do use to say, or can in any sobriety of
speech be justified. For if it must necessarily come to pass only upon
supposition of Gods decree, then not absolutely but upon supposition.

But consider we your extracts apart; the first is this. It is impossible for
ought that is, not to be; Now this proposition cannot at all be deduced out of
the former syllogism, or out of any part thereof. It depends manifestly upon
another proposition which is not at all mentioned in the former syllogism and
the proposition is this, whatsoever God has decreed that it shall not be, it
is impossible, that should be or come to pass. Now let every sober Reader
judge, with what ingenuity you call this first proposition of yours an extract
of the former syllogism, or of the conclusion thereof; whereas it is nothing
necessary that he who affirms, that All things which God has decreed shall
necessarily come to pass, must also affirm the other, namely that whatsoever
God has not decreed, it is impossible that it should come to pass, wherhe^ce
alone is derived the first abstract you speak of. Nay rather if we consider
the analogy of propositions aright, we shall find that these propositions are
only proportional; Whatsoever God has decreed to come to pass, the same
shall necessarily come to pass; Whatsoever God has decreed that it shall not
come to pass, it is impossible that it should come to pass. These are
suitable indeed, and accordingly we profess that it is impossible that any
thing which is not, because God has decreed that it shall not be, I say it is
impossible that it should be. So likewise as touching the second extract we say
that every thing which has been, so far forth as God has decreed the being
thereof, it is impossible not to have been.

Your third extract is of the same nature with the first, and so admitts the
same answer. Well I still attend the discovery of the fallacy; It may be we
shall meet with it in that which follows, and that is this, But if it be
(as I suppose) very consonant to infinite wisdom, altogether consonant to
infinite goodness and to decree contingency as well as necessity a conclusion
quite contradictory to that late inferred, will be the only lawful issue of
the former Maxim or Major proposition matched with a Minor proposition of our
own choosing, etc. Is this to discover the fallacy of the former syllogism?
Or are you to seek in the solution of a fallacy? If it be not concluded in
mood and figure, you might have signified so much; but indeed no exception
can that way be taken against it. If any term had been aequivocall, the
answer had been by distinction. But no color of any such just exception; so
that every way the form is unquestionable. And therefore no exception is here
to be taken but against the truth of one of the premises.

And I verily believe there is one of the premises that disliketh you, though
you are ashamed plainly, and directly to manifest so much. For so the answer
had been fair, and facile by denyinge it, if not the Major because thereof
you make use in your own syllogism, wherewith you do as it were requite
this, yet at least the Minor which was this, But God has decreed every thing
that is. For I verily believe this is such a dish of lettice as fitts not your
lips. This you say you might have done, but now the liberty hereof is taken
from you, and that by your self. For although the Pope never binds his own
hands, yet you have bound your tongue, and sealed up your own lips from
taking any such exception as this. For you call the syllogism a fallacy, and
that a simple one. Now fallacies are such forms of argumentation, as offend
only in form of argumentation, which kind of exception is to justify the
matter of it, and the truth of the premises, especially whereas you do not
profess that it offendes both in form, and matter, nor show any forwardnes to
deny either of the propositions. Well we gave you a syllogism to answer, in
steed of answering it, you think to make us amends with another syllogism. I
have read that when one presented Augustus with verses looking for a reward,
Augustus in steed of a reward gave him verses of his own making. The Poet
hereupon very liberally bestowed a reward upon Augustus. We expected at your
hands not another syllogism, but the answearinge of our own. But though you
fail to answer ours, I will not fail to do my best in accommodating an
answer unto yours. You undertake to infer the contradictory to our
conclusion, which is to outface your opposites, and to cry a syllogism down
without answearing it.

Yet let us see how well you perform that you undertake. Your syllogism is
this. Whatsoever God has decreed must of necessity come to pass, but God has
decreed contingency as well as necessity, therefore of necessity there must be
contingency. And for the better strengthening of your discourse or
argumentation, you make a motion that an additionall to the Mayor which is
this, Nothing can come to pass otherwise then God has decreed it shall or
may come to pass. Now the judge, or Chancelour in Logical Courts to whom
such a motion should be made, would cry out shame upon it. For that proposition
is an universal affirmative, and you desire that an universal negative should
be added to it to make up an entire Mayor proposition, which were like a sixth
finger upon an hand. And indeed in that case it were neither Categoricall nor
Hypotheticall. For though two propositions with a copulative have place in some
Hypotheticall syllogismes, yet it is always by way of negation thus, Non and
dies est, and nox: sed dies est, ergo non nox, Again upon a second
consideration, the motion would be rejected as being altogether without wit.
For as much as the conclusion intended is well enough inferred without it, and
this additionall conferres no strength to improve the inference. I appeal to
every scholars judgment in this.

Thirdly the proposition it self as touching the latter clause of the
disjunctive, has as little wit as the motion made for the admittance of it.
As where it is said that God has decreed that things may come to pass, you
might as well say that God has decreed that the World may come to pass. For
the possibility of the event of things is not from Gods decree, but rather
from Gods omnipotency. For because he is able to produce every thing that
implies no contradiction, therefore they are denominated possible.

Lastly this proposition which you crave to be admitted is like a Trojan horse,
it will do you more harm then good, as ere we part from this section shall be
made manifest. Yet what need you desire more, your conclusion is granted you,
namely that of necessity there must be contingency, supposing Gods decree. For
Gods decrees are only of doing, or suffering some things, as it is free for
God whether he will do them, or suffer them, yea or no. And therefore though
God had not at all decreed contingency, yet decreing any thing, of necessity
there must be contingency, though he had decreed nothing else, but such things
as we count most necessary, in the course of nature. But we grant also that
God did decree contingency, and decrees necessity in respect of second causes;
as for example God did decree to make fire of such a nature as to heat or
burn necessarily, the Sun of such a nature as to enlighten the air
necessarily, heavy things to move downwards, and light things upwardes, and
all this necessarily. Necessarily I say in respect of second causes, though
this necessity was mere contingency, in respect of the will of God. For he
could have chosen whether there should have been any fire, or world at all,
yea and can hinder the fire from burninge if it please him, as he did hinder it
from taking hold of the three noble children in the furnace of Babylon. And as
God has decreed many things to come to pass necessarily, so has he decreed
many things to come to pass contingently, as in course of nature many things
there are that come to pass contingently by the will of God, and especially
the actions of men and Angels.

And as for that additionall of yours which you craved to be admitted, Nothing
can come to pass otherwise then God has decreed, it shall come to pass, we
are so far from disliking it, that we cannot believe that you do believe it,
and therefore you have taken a course to confound it, as in due time shall
appear. We willingly profess that all things beside God, are created
entities, and such as whose being must necessarily depend or God, or have no
being at all. And not only do we subject res ipsas to the will and decree of
God, but also modos rerum. And these modi rerum are necessity, and contingency.

Nothing (we say) comes to pass, but what God has decreed shall come to
pass. Again nothing comes to pass after any manner whatsoever, but that God
has decreed, it to come to pass after that manner; whether it come to pass
necessarily, God has decreed it shall come to pass necessarily; or whether
contingently, God has decreed it shall come to pass contingently. In a word
that which you deliver faultringly we say plainly Nothing comes to pass
otherwise, then God has decreed it shall come to pass. So then I say we
grant your conclusion. But how does it appear that this conclusion of yours
contradicts our former conclusion which was this, therefore Every thing
comes to pass of necessity. You will say, if every thing comes to pass of
necessity, then nothing comes to pass contingently. I confess this
consequence is plausible, but to whom? to none but ignorants. Of which number
you are not. For your very conclusion it self in the very outward face of it
utterly contradicts this consequence. For is not your conclusion this,
therefore of necessity there must be contingency, which manifestly justifies
that necessity and contingency may stand together, and are nothing oppositie.
And how, I pray, is this necessity, but in respect of the decree of God? And
did our conclusion proceed in any other sense? Your self have acknowledge
that it does not, though therein somewhat faultring also, as it is your usual
course, in taking notice of any truth that makes against your tenants. For are
not these your words in interpreting our conclusion, All things are necessary
in respect of Gods decree? Only you add at least in this respect as if you
would feign draw it to another meaning. Now our meaning is plain. All
things come not to pass necessarily, nor all things contingently, but some
things come to pass necessarily as works of nature, some things contingently
as the actions of men. But by your own received Maxim Nothing can come to
pass otherwise then God has decreed they shall come to pass, therefore God
has decreed that some things shall come to pass necessarily, some things
contingently. But by your own received principle, whatsoever God has decreed
to come to pass, that must of necessity come to pass, therefore of necessity
it must come to pass that some things shall come to pass necessarily, some
things contingently. Now give me leave to represent your own ill carriage, to
your own eyes. The Mayor proposition in our syllogism, and the Mayor
proposition in your syllogism are all one as your self acknowledge in these
words, Let the Mayor proposition stand as it did before. Now if they be all
one why do you not propose them after one manner? do you practice to gull
your Reader presuming this legier du maine of yours shall not be discovered?

The Mayor proposition in both is all one I confess as touching each part,
both the middle term, and the greater extreme. But when the greater extreme
comes to be repeated in the conclusion, it is repeated in a far different
manner in our conclusion then in yours. For in the Mayor proposition of each
syllogism it runs thus, must of necessity come to pass, but in our
conclusion it is corrupted thus, must come to pass necessarily. But in your
conclusion it is mended thus, of necessity there must be contingency; which
is as much as to say, of necessity it must come to pass. I say in ours it is
corrupted; for whereas in these words must of necessity come to pass, the
word necessity is indifferently to be referred to that which goes before, or
that which comes after; and indeed ought to be referred to that which goes
before; in the conclusion it is put in the last place, so that it cannot be
referred but to the words come to pass. And it is mended in yours, for in the
conclusion it is put in the first place of the greater extreme, and so takes
away all danger of referring it to the last words, come to pass. As for
example, had our conclusion been shaped like yours as touching the majus
extremum which is the same in both, the harshnes of it had been qualified,
thus, ergo all things of necessity must come to pass, which has a fair, and
facile construction thus; though some things come to pass necessarily, and
some things contingently, yet all things as being decreed by God, must of
necessity come to pass, both those things that come to pass necessarily, and
those things that come to pass contingently. In like sort had your conclusion
been shaped by you as ours is, as touching the greater extreme, as indeed it
ought, the greater extreme being all one in both, then your conclusion would
have seemed as harsh as ours thus, ergo Contingency must come to pass of
necessity or thus some effects shall be contingent of necessity, for so
runs the Minor, God has decreed contingency, or that some effects shall be
contingent as well as some are necessary. And as for the consequences which
hence you make they are nothing contradictory to those extracts you made from
our conclusion. For all those impossibilities deduced from our conclusion, were
only secundum quid and upon supposition of Gods decree, which kind of
impossibility is always joined with a simple and absolute possibility to the
contrary, secluding Gods decree. For even those things which God decrees to
come to pass contingently as the actions of men, must necessarily by the
virtue of Gods decree come to pass, in such a manner as joined with a
possibility of not coming to pass, otherwise it were impossible they should
come to pass contingently. About which truth, namely that God decrees some
things to come to pass contingently, why do you faulter in this foul manner?
If you like it not, why do you not in plain terms contest against it, if you
do approve of it, why do you not plainly profess it, but carry your self in
the clouds of generality and ambiguity? As first, when you say, God has
decreed contingency, here a man might be apt to conceave, that you do believe
that God has decreed that some things shall come to pass contingently.
Especially if he understand that God decrees not only necessity, but also
that some things shall necessarily come to pass, which may seem to urge you
in like sort to mainteyne that God decrees contingency, so he should also
decree that some things shall come to pass contingently.

Most of all considering what here you seem to approve of in your additionall,
namely that Nothing can come to pass otherwise then God has decreed. Now the
case is clear that many things come to pass contingently, therefore it
follows that God also has decreed, that even those things shall come to
pass contingently; But I have had experience of your opinion to the contrary
in another treatise of yours, wherein though you confess that God has decreed
the necessity of things, and the things themselfes that necessarily come to
pass, and grant that it cannot be otherwise, yet on the other side though
you grant that God decrees contingency, yet you deny that God decrees the
things themselfes that do contingently come to pass. A most prodigious
opinion, as if God did bring to pass the contingency of a thing (which is but
modus rei, and contains no realitie different from the thing it self) yet
does not bring to pass the thing it self; for if he did he must decree it
also. And as directly opposite to the word of God, plainly testifying a
multitude of contingent things to have been decreed by God. The like
ambiguitie you content your self withal, when you say that God has decreed
that some effects shall be contingent, or as otherwise you express it, that
some contingent effects shall be, which seems manifestly to imply as well the
being or existence of them to be decreed by God as the contingent manner of
their being.

Yet I say, in another discourse of yours you fly of from this acknowledgement,
but withal deliver your self with as much confusion and perturbation, as any
adversary could expect in an opposite maintaining erroneous points, and crying
down the truth of God. Thus have I taken pains to answer your syllogism,
but as for the discovery of the fallacy of ours we have hitherto found nothing
tending thereunto: What is to come we are to expect. Yet hereupon as if you
had performed some great service, very gravely and magisterially you tell us,
that As ill weeds grow apace, so the late mentioned error once conceaved, was
quickly delivered of a second which derived the infallible certainty of Gods
foreknowing things future, from an infallible necessity (as they conceaved it)
laid upon them, (before they had being) by his immutable decree. But every wise
decree presupposes wisdom, and wisdom essentially includes knowledge. It
seems you think you have sufficiently discharged your self of that you
undertook, namely the discovery of the fallacy of our syllogism, you proceed
to the censure of another error, and that both obscurely and unsoundly
expressed. It is about the ground of Gods fore-knowing things to come. Now the
opinion you tax for an error, is the opinion of those that maintain that God
foreknowes all things to come, by seeing the determination of his own will to
the producing of every action. This you express after your manner thus, God
foreknowes them from an infallible necessity laid upon them by his immutable
decree. I do not think you can produce any Author of this opinion, that
expresses his opinion in this manner. Besides, it is notoriously untrue. For
the Authors of this opinion maintain, that God by his decree, lays
contingency upon some things, as well as necessity upon others. And that as he
will have the fire to burn, the Sun to enlighte^ necessarily, so he will
have, Angels and men produce their actions contingently and freely. Nay which
is more, even they that openly profess, that God does determine the will of
man unto every actio^ as touching the substance of the action; do withal
maintain that God determines the will of man and Angels to work contingently
and freely in all their actions, and consequently neither does he decree any
other wise to determine them, which doctrine maintaynes that Gods will and
decree does lay upon all reasonable creatures a contingent manner of operation
rather then any necessity. Yet upon supposition of Gods decree, they maintain
that of necessity such things as God has decreed shall come to pass, and
that after that manner as God has decreed it to come to pass, that is, either
necessarily as all the operations of natural agents, or contingently and
freely, as all the actions of reasonable creatures. But this opinion you
dislike, and upon what reason? Undoubtedly it seems they had need be weighty
ones, considering that this question has been abundantly canvassed, by the
most learned and subtilest among Schoole-divines. And indeed it is one of the
first points whereabout I have been acquainted with School divinity: Scotus
proposes this question, to wit; Now God does foreknowe future contingents;
for thus they in their wisdom thought fit to propose it, to wit, of future
contingents in special not as you do, of future things in general. And he
proposes two opinions hereabouts which he impugneth. The first, is the opinion
of Bonaventura, who maintained that God did foreknowe future contingents, by
the Ideaes of them in the mind of God. The second is the opinion of Aquinas,
who made the ground of Gods foreknowing of future contingents, to be Their
real existence in eternity. Both these Scotus impugneth with such excellent
arguments to my judgment at that time, and withal so clear, that as I
remember this brought me first in love with School divinity. The third opinion
is his own, which there he maintayneth, and that is this, which you invade,
namely, That God knows all future contingents by knowing his own will and
purpose to produce them. And as touching your objection that God foreknowes the
sins of men as well as their good actions, which yet undoubtedly he did not
decree to produce, his answer is, that this also is foreknown by God in as
much as he knows the determination of his will to produce every sinful act as
touching the substance of it, and to permit the obliquitie of it. The opinion
of Calvin maintayning no other ground of Gods foreknowledge of future
contingents but this, and that out of Valla is apt to be exposed to scorn now
adays, not only amongst Papists but amongst English Protestants also. But as
for Scotus who is known to maintain the same opinion, he is reputed to be of
sufficiency to bear the brunt of any adversary that in point of Metaphysicall,
and School divinity shall encounter him. Yet consider a little farther. The
Thomists and Dominicans who stand much upon the terms of defense for the
credit and reputation of their great Master Aquinas, they are apt enough to
meet with Scotus his arguments opposing his opinion in laying the ground of
Gods foreknowledge upon the real existence of all things in eternity. But
mark how Didacus Alvarer a great Schoole-man carries himself in this.
Aquinas says he did never deny Scotus his way of Gods foreknowing future
contingents, to wit, by knowing the determination of his own will. But
besides this he devised another, and that was by the real existence of all
future things in eternity. Again, in maintaining the opinion of Aquinas
concerning the actual existence of all future things in eternity, he first
presupposes the determination of Gods will for the producing of them, and
thereupon makes future contingents to have their real existence, and not
otherwise. So that for this opinion which you do very magisterially censure,
as an ill weed has not only poor Calvin for the patron of it, and Valla
alleged by him; but Scotus also the Father of the Realls, yea and Didacus
Alvarer a Thomist, a sect of Schoole-divines commonly opposite to the Scotists,
yet herein professedly concurring with Scotus himself, and avouching also
Aquinas himself to be of the same opinion. You had need therefore look well
to your tackling in opposing such who I tell you never were reputed Babies, but
tall fellows.

But yet I confess they were but men and may have their matches. But leave
your censures, and trust to your sword and dint of arguments, and do not
think that words or phrasos or figures (much less imperious censures) will
carry it.

And here it would be required, not only to argue your own Tenet, but to
make answer to their Arguments. But you Eagle like and as if they were but
flies keep your state, and will not fly at such inferior gain. Wherein your
proselyte shall be little beholding to you, when being possessed with your
opinion, he shall find himself left to himself to sink or swim without
any help from you to answer their arguments, that have maintained the
contrary; They had need be of Chrisippus temper, who was wont to pray his
Master to give him principles and let him alone to maintain them; Yet it may
be I am deceaved and it was not Chrisippus but Carneades. Yet with one
argument you are content to help your reader here. Belike it is some clear
demonstration, such as it is, this it is. Every wise decree presupposes
wisdom, and wisdom includes knowledge, and what of this? Nay if any man
desires to fare better in the endoctrinating himself in this point, he must
go to the Cooks, you have no better entertainment for him. A very short
dispatche (in a controversy of great moment) and a quick; Never was
Schooleman so simple as to doubt, whether wisdom includes knowledge or a
wise decree presupposes wisdom; yet never any one of them was found to
discern any such inference as you imply herhence, as if herhence it did so
evidently follow that Gods foreknowing of future things does not depend upon
the determination of his will. For you take no pains to clear this inference.
But let us examine this a little. When we say the foreknowledg of future
contingents depends upon the determination of Gods will, the meaning is,
therefore God foreknowes them because he purposes to produce them, so far as
they are good, or to permit them in case they are evil. Now you in opposition
to this, tell us, that Gods knowledge goes before his decree, and because you
do not specify what knowledge, we have reason to expound it of the knowledge
spoken of, that is of the knowledge of future contingents. In like sort because
you specify not of what decree you speak, we have reason to understand it of
the decree before spoken of, whereupon those divines, whom you impugn, do
ground the foreknowledge of things to come. So then your meaning must be this
in opposition to the Tenet which you censure for an error or weed in opinion.
Whereas some think that Gods foreknowledge of things to come is grounded upon
Gods decree, as if God ergo did foreknow them, because he purposes to produce
them. You are of a contrary opinion, namely, that Gods foreknowledge does go
before his decree, that is, first God foreknowes things to come, and then
secondly he purposes to produce them. For if you meant it of another decree,
then that which was spoken of, what an absurd thing is it for you not to
specify it, especially seeing you propose this by way of contradiction to the
former opinion? which unless it proceeds of the same things is no
contradiction. For if I say God does first decree to produce things, and
hereupon he knows them; and you shall as it were by way of opposition say; No
this is not so; but God does first foresee the actions of men, and thereupon
decree to save or damn them, here is no contradiction at all, but an unlearned
and foolish show of opposition, without any substance of contradiction.
Wherefore if you speak to the purpose in this, and that by way of opposition,
your meaning must be this; God does not first decree them and afterward
foreknowe them, but rather he first foreknowes them and then decrees them;
which is as much as to say, that God foreknowing that they will be, does
hereupon decree that they shall be. So that Gods decree of things future
contingent proceeds in this manner, Seeing they will be, they shall be. But to
consider your reason more closely, Every wise decree (you say) presupposes
wisdom. Now this being delivered in opposition to our opinion which maintain
that the foreknowledge of future contingents follows Gods decree; and you
saying plainly that wisdom rather goes before Gods decree then follows
after it, (which indeed is a truth, for God works all things according to the
counsel of his will) this discourse of yours (I say) does imply that this
foreknowledge of future contingents, which we make consequent to Gods decree is
by us accoumpted the wisdom of God. For otherwise here again were no
contradiction, though you make show of contradicting us; as whereas we say
foreknowledge of future things is subsequent to Gods decree, you as it were
contradicting us reply, Nay rather Gods wisdom goes before his decree,
otherwise it were no wise decree. So that herein you do manifestly suppose
that we by Gods foreknowledge of future things did understand the wisdom of
God. It seems you conceave it to be so, but as for us we take it to be so
foul an absurdity that we desire, though you please your own lips with such
lettice, yet until you have better ground for it you will not charge it upon
us. For even for a man to foreknowe what he means to do is no part of
wisdom. For the ve^yest fool that is may know and be privy to what he
means to do. Every man is privy to his own thoughts and purposes. No man
knows the things of man but the Spirit of Man. 1. Cor. 2. 8. So then the
spirit of man is well enough acquainted with the purposes of man. But the
wisdom that directs the will of God is that which the learned call Scientia
simplicis intelligenti^, whereby God knows what is most fit to be done for
the compassing of his proposed ends, which your self confess to be the part
of wisdom in the beginning of the former Section. Where also you made not the
least mention of any such part of wisdom as to foreknowe what one means to
do. Now Gods decree of producing future things in their season is a decree of
the, means tending to the end which God h^ intended, namely the setting forth
of his glory. For God makes all things for himself. And this wisdom
includes knowledge, it is Prove. 16. 4
true the knowledge of all means whereby his glory may be set forth, and God
makes choice of what he thinks fit, and all this knowledge is not the
knowledge of what shall be, but only the knowledge of what may be, or is fi^t
to be, which all the learned acknowledge to be scientia simplicis
intelligentiae. and they make it distinct from scientia visionis which is the
knowledge of what shall be. And these knowledges all acknowledge to be so far
different as that the one to wit scientia simplicis intelligentiae is
precedent to Gods decree, the other to wit scientia visionis is subsequent
which two knowledges in God, how judiciously and learnedly in the course of
your magisteriall censure you are pleased to confound let the Reader judge. But
to proceed, hereupon you betake your self ^o interrogatories.

The first is, Shall we then grant that Gods knowledge is antecedent, and his
foreknowledge consequent to his decrees? To this out of that which has been
formerly delivered may be answered. There is a knowledge goes before Gods will,
called scientia simplicis intelligentiae the knowledge of what may be, or is
fit to be, there is another knowledge called scientia visionis, that is the
knowledge of what shall be, and thi^ follows after the will of God; and I
know no tolerable divine that did deny it, until the opinion of scientia media
rose up; which the Authors themselves confess to be a new invent^on; And here
as if this opinion were both Law and Gospel unto you, you ^ise up in grave and
supercilious manner to censure the contrary.

Now as for the term of foreknowledge; I answer the knowledge of what may be,
or is fit to be, goes before the will of God, and so may be called the
foreknowledge of God; but the knowledge that things shall be, though it
follows Gods will, yet may it be called foreknowlege in respect of the event
of the things themselves. For the things exist in time, but God did know, that
they should be, from all eternity, like as from all eternity he did decree
the futurition of them. Your second interrogatorie is this, Or shall we say God
did inevitably decree the obliquitie of Iewishe blasphemy against his Son
because he did most certainly foreknowe it? You never showed your teeth till
now, by this I perceave what you aim at, which hitherto you have been ashamed
to profess in plain terms, namely, that future contingents which come to
pass in the World are not decreed. But what mean you to deny that, in this
cunning manner, which you durst not deny openly. For the syllogism you
proposed to answer contained this, in plain terms in the Minor thus, All
things that come to pass are decreed to come to pass: which if you had but in
plain terms denied, your solution had been plain and brief, whereas you
neglecting that course did fetch a great compass instead of answering to
requite us with another argument whereby to infer a proposition contradictory
to our conclusion.

Secondly though then you might have denied it, yet now you cannot without
contradicting your self. For you justified the truth of the premises in that
syllogism, in as much as all the exception you took against it was against
the form^ and not against the matter. For you told us, it was a fallacy, a very
simple one. Now every Scholar knows that where no other exception is taken
against a syllogism, but this, that it is a fallacy, this is as much as to
justify the truth of each proposition contained therein.

Thirdly, I give another reason why you have prejudiced your self from denying
this. For you have professed that Nothing can come to pass otherwise, then God
has decreed it to come to pass, Iewishe blasphemy against the Son of God
came to pass contingently and freely, therefore God has decreed, that that
very Iewishe blasphemy against the Son of God should come to pass
contingently and freely, etc. what follows hereupon but that therefore God
ordeyneth it to come to pass, for to come to pass contingently and freely, is
no terminus diminuens of coming to pass. You have nothing at all that I know
to help you at this dead lift, but to fly to the confused manner of expressing
that former proposition of yours, whereupon I take advantage, if so be your
heart serve you to take hold thereof, whereof I much doubt. For it is true
indeed that that proposition was not proposed categorically thus, Nothing shall
come to pass otherwise then God has decreed, it shall come to pass;
whereupon I have taken advantage against you; but disjunctively thus Nothing
can come to pass otherwise then God has decreed it shall or may come to
pass. If you will help your self with this disjunctive you may; but I will
be bold to tell you, it is like to prove a shameful help, and such as seems
to be thrust in only to charm the dangerous issue of it (whereof it seems you
had a glimpse) if it were left out. For consider, is it a sober speech to say
that God has decreed that things may come to pass? The possibility of
things is known to God before ever his decrees go forth. He knows what he
is able to bring to pass before he resolves what shall come to pass: And
therefore too too absurd it is, to make the possibility of any thing the
object of Gods decree. Stick rather to this, and say, that though God did
ordain, the Iewishe blasphemy against his Son should come to pass
contingently and freely, yet therhence it follows not that he did ordain it
should come to pass: Whereabouts when we know your mind e renata consilium
capiemus, we will think of a convenient answer, in the mean time I will
proceed. Therefore in the fourth place why should it seem so uncouthe that
God should decree this very blasphemy, as to be cried down at the very hearing
of it, especially by Christians who know and believe the oracles of God, and
acknowledge that passage. Act. 4. 27. 28. amongst the rest to be dictated by
the Spirit of God wherein the Apostles jointly profess in their meditations
unto God in this manner, Doubtless against thy holy Son Jesus whom thou
have anointed both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and people of
Israel gathered themselves together, to do whatsoever thy hand and thy
counsel had determined before to be done. Judas that betrayed him, the
Highpriests that hired Judas to betray him, the witness that testified
against him, the people that cried away with him, were of the people of
Israel; The soldiers that scourged him, crowned him with thorns, spate in
his face, crucified him, pierced him with a spear and were of the Gentlis, yet
all these together with Horod and Pontius Pilate, are avouched by the Holy
Ghost to have gathered themselves together to do what God had determined to be
done; and was there not both Jewish and Gentilish blasphemy against the Son
of God to be found in all this? and shall we fear to profess that they did
in all this what God had decreed to be done, when the Holy Ghost professes
that they did what God had determined to be done? Could you be ignorant of this
passage? and dare you in so apparent terms draw your Reader to contradict it,
as some blasphemous assertion, without taking any pains to interpret the
place, and so free your self from manifest contradiction thereunto, as at
first sight is obvious to every Reader, that will but compare this of yours
with that of the Acts? Had you ventured upon an interpretation, I would have
taken pains to consider it. I have shaken in pieces the rotten interpretation
of Bellarmine and Arminius, different each from other. I would have tried what
I could have performed upon yours also. And throughout the Scriptures we may
perceive how jealous God is over the maintaining of his providence throughout,
even in the most sinful things that come to pass, and that in such phrases,
which when they are used by us, they are cried down for blasph^my; but in the
mean t^me they consider not, that if they be the phrases of the Holy Ghost,
ere they are aware they are found to charge the Holy Ghost with blasphemy. And
the truth being rightly uttered, is far enough off even from harshnesse also,
as well as from error, yea from harshnesse unto men's affections, though never
so corrupt. As for example, what good soever there is found in such actions,
we acknowledge God to be the author of it, but not of the the malice or evil
that cleaves to it; yet that also we say God will have come to pass, but only
by his permission. For, Non aliquid sit nisi volente Deo, Not any thing comes
to pass (says Austin) but God willing Enchirid. cap. 95.
it; and he comprehends both good and evil, as appears by that which
follows, vel sinendo vt siat, as in case it be evil, vel ipse faciendo, as in
case it be good. But of both these he pronounces that not any thing comes to
pass but God willing it. The like may be manifested to have been
acknowledged by Anselmus, Hugo de Sancto Victore, and Bradwardine, yea and our
greatest adversaries. For Bellarmine even in the midst of his heat against us,
professes, that Bonum est esse malum, Deo permittente: It is good that there
should be evil by Gods permission: and if it be good, I pray you why is it
not lawful for GOD to will it, see^ng upon the same ground it was affirmed
long ago by St. Austin that God does Enchirid. cap. 96.
will it. But as for Arminius, never any man was known to be smitten with the
spirit of giddiness in opposing this truth more then he; for sometimes he
professes, It was Gods will that Ahab should fill up the measure of his
sins, and how I pray Exam. praed. Perk. page 162. Ibid. page 114, 115.
could that be, but by adding sin unto sin? Again, he professes that it
was Gods will that the Jews should proceed so far as they did proceed in
their ignominious handling of Christ; and every man knows that they proceeded
to a very foul degree of blasphemy and impiety therein. Last of all, it is
true that Aquinas and Durandus both oppose this, but herein Aquinas manifestly
opposes Austin, though he names him not. And again, I desire no better trial
of this truth then their oppositions. For if I do not make it appear that
their arguments are merely sophistical, and manifestly unsound, let me be
accounted a blasphemer in the maintaining of this Tenet. All which I have
already performed, and taken in Valentianus his more copious and frothy
exceptions also, but in another language. Lastly, yet were it tolerable if you
did only deny that sins of men were decreed by God; but you will have
nothing that comes to pass contingently and freely to be decreed by God;
contingency you say is decreed, but not the things that fall out contingently:
whence it follows that by your opinion, God did decree no man's faith, no man's
repentance, no man's obedience, but only did decree the contingency of this.
This is the mysterious iniquity of your doctrine which you conceal, and make
choice rather to give instance in sin and blasphemy, and to represent the
harshnesse of maintaining that to be decreed by God, only that you may the
better insinuate the approbation of your unlearned Tenets, into vulgar and
popular affections. Yet you give me cause to guess that you would have your
reader believe more herein, then you believe your self. You would have your
Reader believe that God did not decree the Jewish blasphemy against his Son,
but your belief is only that God did not decree the obliquity of it, and yet
forthwith you doubt whether the obliquity may be distinguished from the act.
Again, you would have your Reader believe that God did not decree the Jewish
blasphemy against his Son, but your belief here expressed is only this,
that God did not inevitably decree the Jewish blasphemy, implying that God did
decree it, but not mevitably. And not any of our Divines that I know ever said
any more, then that God did decree it.

You add another absurd error hereunto concerning Gods decrees; that forsooth
some of them are evitable, some inevitable. Now the meaning of our Divines in
saying that God did decree any obliquity, is only this; God did decree that
such an obliquity should come to pass by his permission, directly answering to
the prof^ssing of Austin; Non aliquid fit nisi Omnipotens fieri velit, vel
sinendo ut siat, vel ipse faciendo. Enchirid. cap. 95.
It is true, Arminius disputes, and that acutely as he thinks, that in some
actions the obliquity cannot be distinguished from the actions themselves. I
have dealt with him in this point; I am ready to deal with you also. But it is
enough for you to show your affection to Armenius his Tenets; as for your
sufficiency to maintain them, that you do dispense very sparingly, as if you
affected state in this. Further you tell us, to admit your former conclusion,
that the aeternall foreknows all things because he decrees them, or that they
are absolutely necessary in respect of his decree, (the disjunctive here should
be a copulative, for that which follows is not verified of either of them
disjunctively, but copulatively of them both,) were to imprison his infinite
wisdom in his selfe-fettered power, to restrain the Aeternall Majesty from
using such liberty in his everlasting decrees as some earthly Monarchs usurp
in causes temporal or civil. For the Pope never ties his hand by any grant,
which is a fault in him. But in that Holy One the reservation of such liberty
is a point of high perfection. A little before you told us very gravely, that
weeds grow apace, and the former error which you minced, as loath to declare
your mind thereon plainly, touching Gods decreeing all things, was soon
delivered of a second, to wit, the ground of Gods foreknowing things to come to
be the determination of his will. You rather think, that God foreknowes things
to come, before, and without the determination of his will. Whether this
opinion of yours be a tare or good corn, let the Reader judge. And of what
nature not a second is, but seconds are, whereof it seems you are soon
delivered, which now we come to examine. To say that God foreknowes all things,
because he decrees them, is (you say) to imprison his infinite wisdom in his
power. Why it is nothing so: for Gods decree is Gods will, not his power: yet
how is Gods wisdom imprisoned in his will, more then his power? For as God
knows more things possible to be done, and fit to be done then he does, so
he can do more then he does, and therefore his wisdom is no more
imprisoned thereby then his power. But besides this, you take your aim quite
amiss. For the foreknowledge of what things God will bring to pass, is no
part of wisdom. For, for a man to be privy to his own purposes, is no part
of wisdom, for it is incident even to silly creatures. Again, to know what I
mean to do, what a senseless thing it is to say that this is to imprison my
knowledge? and as like senseless a thing it is to say that Gods knowledge or
wisdom is imprisoned, by being privy to his own purposes? Again, how is
Gods power fettered by his will? Seeing the power of every creature is to be
ordered by his will without fettering of it? you signify that his liberty is
hereby restrained; wherein? in his everlasting decrees. A most senseless
speech. Is it possible that by making an everlasting decree, Gods liberty of
making an everlasting decree shall be restrained? Perhaps you may say, by
making it he cannot alter it. I answer, if he should alter it after he has
made it, this decree by way of alteration should not be everlasting: but you
suppose the contrary, namely, that Gods decrees are everlasting. Or if God
should for a while suspend his decrees, and not make them with the first, how
is it possible they could be everlasting? This savoureth strongly of an
affection to maintain that Gods decrees may be not everlasting with Vorstius,
though you are ashamed to profess it, and therefore hand over head you thrust
in the denomination of everlasting upon the decrees though quite contrary to
your intention. For you would have God still ind^fferent to decree this or
that, as the Pope is who by no grant binds his hands.

And why so? is it, that upon emergent occasions, God might decree a new as he
thinks fit? why but consider, all these emergent occasions were from
everlasting known to God. So that if God at th^s time were indifferent to
decree, he would decree no otherwise then he has from everlasting. For from
everlasting he knew all that now he does, and at this present his will is no
otherwise then from everlasting it was. For with him is no variableness nor
shadow of change. Iam. 1. 17.


The wilderness of your inventions, I well perceave, is not at an end. I wonder
whither the wantonness of our wits would bring us in the end. Neither are Gods
judgments yet at an end in giving men over to illusions to believe lies, and
that for not embracing his truth with love. And who can look for better from
them who shamefully oppose the grace of God. Is it marva^le if God infatuate
them?. As for the being of things absolutely necessary by reason of Gods
decree, this is your language, not ours, in the last period of your former
Section. We say, look what God has decreed, that of necessity must come to
pass, but how, not always necessarily, but sometimes contingently. Only the
works of nature do by the decree of God come to pass necessarily; but as for
the actions of men they come to pass by the decree of God contingently and
freely. But whether works of nature, or actions of men, they of necessity
must come to pass, if God has decreed them, and that after such a manner as
God has decreed them to come to pass, that is, necessary things necessarily,
contingent things contingen^ly.

6. As a man or Angel having free power to do this or that, by producing any
thing subject to the freedom of his will, does therewithal produce
contingency without decreeing it, (for in as much as he works freely the work
must needs be freely wrought, that is contingently,) In like so^t God being
free to produce any work without him, upon the producing of such a work does
produce contingency without decreeing it. For the work cannot be wrought by God
but freely, and consequently it must needs come to pass contingently.

To produce this or that, is the object of Gods decree, because he can choose
whether he will produce this or tha^; but to work contingently is no object of
Gods decree ^for it is not in Gods power to choose whether he will work
contingently or necessarily. If he does work at all ad extra he must needs
work freely that is contingently. For as it is of the perfection of the divine
nature to be necessarily, so it is the perfection of divine nature to work
not necessarily in the producing of ought without him, but freely and
contingently. But the divine nature differs from the nature Angelical and
humane, that he not only works freely, but also is able to create creatures
herein like himself, that can work freely as namely Angels and men; like as
he can and has produced other creatures that work in all things necessarily.

Again, considering that necessity and contingency are but modi rerum
certain manners of bringing things to pass, and therefore cannot exist without
the things themselves which are said to exist and to be brought to pass either
necessarily or contingently. Therefore it cannot be said that God does produce
the necessity or contingency of this or that particular, unless he produces
the particular it self; neither can he be said to decree the contingency or
necessity of this or that particular, except he decree the thing it self. So
that for God to decree the necessity or contingency of this or that
particular, is nothing else then to decree that this particular shall
necessarily come to pass, or such a particular shall contingently come to
pass.

Neither is it reasonable to affirm, that God does decree necessity or
contingency in general, but not the necessity of this particular, or the
contingency of this particular. For like as generals cannot exist but in
particulars, so neither can generals be otherwise produced then by producing
particulars. So it is impossible that God should decree the producing of
generals otherwise then by producing of particulars. Now there is a
contingency taken in another sense, which does not accompany the existence of
any thing but only the essence of it, and denominates it before it does exist,
as when we say rain to morrow is contingent, it is as much as to say it is
possible to rain, it is possible not to rain. So touching the actions of men,
of any action we may say it is contingent, for as much as it is in the power of
man to do it or no. Now this kind of contingency is not always the object of
Gods decree. For in this sense the continuation of the World is a contingent
thing; for it may continue or no. So before the World was made, it was possible
to be and not to be, and so the making of it contingent, but not by the decree
of God. For nothing is such by the decree of God but it might be altered, for
Gods decree is a free act. But it was impossible that the World should not be
of a contingent nature, like as it is impossible that God should not have power
to make the World, or not to make it according to his will. Nay the very works
of men and Angels in this kind of contingency are not the object of Gods
decree; for in as much as they are said to be possible to be or not to be, this
is not from the decree of God but rather from the nature of God, as all
necessary truths are derived therefrom.

Neither is it in the power of God to make that the works of men and Angels
should not be possible to be or not to be. But if the possibility were the
object of Gods decree, it might be otherwise. For Gods decree passes forely
upon every thing where upon it passes, so that if he decree them to be
possible, he might have decreed them not to be possible. Yet you seem to
speak of contingents in no other sense then this, as when you say, God has
decreed that some effects shall be contingent, although I confess it is so
obscurely delivered that a man can hardly discern your meaning. But for
farther discourse hereof you put us over to the article of creation. So
likewise for the contingency of humane actions as decreed by God; your
confirmation thereof we must expect, when you come to treat of man's fall. This,
thus by fetching compass expressed by you, I doubt will prove no more then
this, that God decreed to make man a free agent; yet you deliver it as if the
demonstration hereof did require, and promise some exquisite perfourmance. And
I am verily persuaded you have a reach at such a kind of freedom, as to make
it good, will surpass the perfourmance of any School divine that ever was,
from the days of Anselmus to the days wherein we live.

But of the nature of your perfourmances we have had reasonable experience. You
may remember what he said while he was shearing his hogs, Here is a great
deal of cry and a little wool. In the next place you dictate your parallells
Eliam.
wherein it seems you take great pleasure. That Gods wisdom is infinite we
nothing doubt; but to make it consist in knowing what he is able to do, we
take to be a very hungry description of it. For is either man or Angel any
thing the wiser for knowing what he is able to do? Gods immensitie consists in
filling all places which are but finite, neyth^r is it possible they should be
infinite, yet beyond things that are, this immensitie is not extended. And you
have already denied precisely that God is in vacuo. But as for Gods eternity
that does not only coexist with all time, but had existen^e before it actually
and that without all beginning. In a word Gods immensitie is not in respect of
any quantitas molis, quantity of extension, but only in respect of quantitas
virtutis. And what is this different from his infinite power. And indeed God is
not in place after the manner of being contained in any thing, but only after
the way of containing and supporting all things. And look by what quantity he
made all things, by the same quantity he supports all things, and that is the
quantity of his power.

A very weak amplification it is in my judgment of Gods incircumscriptible
presence, (which yet is nothing else but his immensitie) to say it is not
circumscribed by the coexistence of his creatures. For coexistence is of no apt
nature to circumscribe. For the thing circumscribed coexists with that which
circumscribes it, as well as that which circumscribes it, coexists with that
which is circumscribed by it.

As for your Mathem^ticall conceyts of center and circumscrence, I have already
discovered in their places the vanity of them. To say that eternity is more
then commensurable to time, is to grant that it is commensurable thereunto,
which is very absurd. And how is it possible, that should be commensurable to
a thing mensurable, which indeed is immensurable as being without beginning and
without end. You say it is in all durations; not as contained in them (I hope)
if as containing them, this also is untrue. For like as it is not Gods eternity
whereby he made the World but by his power, so it is not by his eternity that
he maintayneth the duration of it but by his power. What noone tide is we know
and acknowledge to be some thing, but as for fluent instants we know none. For
fluent is as much as succedent* and succession is not but in respect of parts,
and an instant has no parts. Yet if we give way to such imaginations, like as
sluxus puncti in Longitudinem is not contained in the line, but is the line; so
sluxus instantis is not contained in a set time, but is the very set time it
self. Nor is it a part of it as noone-tide is of the day; And a most absurd
thing it is to make the duration of the creature in respect of Gods eternity,
to resen^ble the proportion that is between the part of time and the whole
time, you may say as well the World is contained in Gods immensitie, like as
half the yard is contained in the whole yard. Your last position is more sober
in all the parts of it then the rest; the proportion of the least beam of
light, to the light of the World may be expressed; the proportion of things
that are, to the things that God is able to produce cannot, the first is
finite, this is infinite. Yet by your leave, there is no greater disproportion
between Gods wisdom manifested and manifestable, then between his power
manifested and manifestable. In a word, God has so far manifested his power
and wisdom, that we plainly discern both of them to be infinite; and do
you think God can so manifest either of them, or both of them, that we may
discern them to be more then infinite? And if his wisdom manifestable does
but so far exceed his wisdom manifested, as his power man^festable does
exceed that which is already manifested, etc. what meant you to say that Least
of all may his infinite wisdom be comprehended within those effects
produced. For if there be but a pa^ity of proportion, then no disproportion.
You proceed to amplify the wisdom of God above all that can be gathered by
this Universe, after your manner.

But I pray consider, was it possible for God to take a more wise and
convenient course for the salvation of the world then he has done? I am sure
Austin flatly denies it, Aug. de Trinit. lib. 13. cap. 10. Ostendamus non alium
modum possibilem Deo desuisse cujus potestati cuncta aequaliter subjacent, sed
sanandae nostrae miseriae convenientiorem modum alium non suisse, nec esse
oportuisse. I am apt enough to conceive, that God could have made and governed
the world after another manner then he has done, and that after as wise a
manner as he has done, but I dare not say that he could do it after a wiser
manner then he has done. Many other particulars might be instanced in, that
might stagger the course of your amplifications, which yet sometimes are
wondrous vulgar, as when you say, God knows what might have been and what may
be, as perfectly as he knows the things that are. Which is as much as to say,
God knows as well what he can do, as what he does. Now is this strange in a
silly man to know what he does, or what he can do? And it were a vain
exception to say that God knows as well things done by others as by himself;
seeing not only their power of doing is from God, but the very doing it self
is by you acknowledged to be by the concourse of God. As for the manner of Gods
concourse, if you conceit it to be upon supposition of Gods foresight of man's
endeavor first, you do not well to propose your errors or any other
Jesuitical paradoxes for principles and grounds to build upon.

7. The incomprehensible wisdom of God does appear more you say, in the
harmony or mixture of necessity and contingency. And this you say is most
conspicuous in moderating the free thoughts of men or Angels, and ordering them
to the certain accomplishment of his glory. In the fou^th Section you told us
that the parts of wisdom were two; the one in intending the right end, the
other in ordering right means. So then the prescription of right means is a
part of wisdom, but why it should affect the mixture of necessity with
contingency in accomplishing the end intended I see no reason. Nay rather I
find that wisdom always affects the most certain means that can be had
for the compassing of the end intended. As for example, all manual Arts do
express their wisdom by means used by them which are altogether of
necessary operation. In the art of physic also the means used by physicians
as all sorts of medicines do all work by necessity of nature. In the Art of
Oratory, the end is wholly conjecturall, and the means they use being
arguments of persuasion, there no necessity at all has place. No where do I
find that any wisdom affects the mixture of necessity with contingency,
as you speak. Come we to the consideration of the wisdom of God. How is Gods
wisdom seen in the contexture of a man's body, and every part thereof? Who
knows the breeding of young bones? says Solomon. I am fearfully and
wonderfully made, says David. Galen in consideration of the body of man
anatomized, was driven to acknowledge the Divine providence. Now what mixture
of necessity with contingency did God affect in this? The fashioning of the
body in the womb being merely an operation of nature, not of any free agent.
Yet even this necessary operation of nature is contingent I confess unto God;
for as much as he could either suspend the course of nature, or after it, or
set an end unto it. So on the contrary the most free actions of men do of
necessity come to pass in their kind and after their manner, as well as
works of nature in their kind and after their manner. For to abstain from
the breaking of Christ's bones was a free action of the Soldiers; so was
Iosiahs action in burning the Priests bones upon the Altar; so was Cyrus his
action in restoring the Jews unto their country; so was the crucifying of
Christ Jesus, and other foul actions committed against him by Jews and
Gentiles, yet were all these decreed and determined by God, as the Scriptures
plainly testify; and therefore as your self acknowledge, of necessity they
come to pass. Yet how God does moderate the thoughts of men and Angels, you
are not over hasty to communicate unto us. Solomon speaks plainly when he
says, The hearts of the Kings are in the hands of God, and he turns them,
etc. and both the preparations of the heart, and Prove. 21. 1 Prove. 16. 1 Prove.
29. 26.
answer of the tongue are from the Lord: and that many seek the face of the
Ruler, but every man's judgment comes of the Lord. But in what sense you say
God moderates men's thoughts, and ordaines them for the accomplishment of his
glory, you do not love to discover: and I doubt all this will desinere in
piscem in the end, and come to nothing. But although the means which man may
use may be successively infinite, yet the ends (you say) which God does
forecast in their creation shall by any course which they take be inevitablely
brought to pass; what these ends are which God did forecast in their creation,
you come very soberly to express, or rather leave to the Reader to collect out
of these words, the award of every thought is determined by Gods eternal
decree, that is to bring you to plain terms either Salvation or Damnation.
These then are the ways whereby they shall accomplish Gods glory in the end,
what course soever they take; And herein consists the infinite wisdom of God.

Now let us examine the sobriety of all this. First you told us of courses
infinite, by which notwithstanding all their varieties and inconstancies, Gods
ends should be accomplished. Now all these courses in reference unto the issue
of damnation or salvation whereby Gods glory shall be ^llostrated, (whereof you
speak as of the end that shall be accomplished.) I say al these courses in
reference hereunto are but two: good, and bad answerablely to Hercules his
bivium, and Pythagoras his Y; according to that of Esaias. Say ye surely it
shall be well with the just, for they shall eat the fruit of their works;
woe be to the wicked, it shall be evil with him, for the reward of his hands
shall be given him. Esa. 3. 10. 11.

Secondly, if this be all the fruit of Gods wisdom, wherein does this exceed
the wisdom of every Magistrate; who ordeynes rewards for the good and
punishment, for the wicked? Again what need is there of moderatinge men's
thoughts unto this end; whereas though he never moderates any man's thoughts,
yet his wisdom shall appear never a white the less in setting forth his
glory in punishing the one and rewarding the other.

Consider yet farther what I pray you, was the end of Judas, which God did
forecast in his creation? No doubt the setting forth of his own glory, but I
desire to know whether he did intend to set it forth in Judas his salvation, or
damnation. So likewise I desire to know what end God did forecast of Paul the
Apostle in his creation? his glory I doubt not, but whether in his salvation or
damnation. It seems by the genius of your Tenet, that God did neither intend
the salvation of the one, nor the damnation of the other in their creation; but
indifferently intended each of them should be saved or damned accordingly as
they departed this life, either in impenitency or in repentance. Now if God did
not intend the salvation of Paul, nor the condemnation of Judas at the time of
their creation. I pray when did he begin to intend it? Say what you will, it
follows that these intentions of God were not eternal, and consequently
neither the decrees of God are eternal; yet commonly you profess of Gods
decrees that they are eternal and everlasting. Yet here I confess you may
play fast and loose, and say they are eternal so far forth as they are
without end, but they are not eternal so far forth as to be without
beginning. But what mean you so directly to contradict the word of God, as you
do if this be your opinion? For the Apostle professes that man's election was
made before the foundation of the world: yea and touching the wicked, King
Solomon professes, that Pro. 16. 4.
God made him against the day of evil.

As for the similitude, you use to represent unto us the wisdom of God by
comparing of him unto a bird catcher, though you father it upon Austine, yet in
this case it is nothing worth. For though it be more then humane after many
birds formerly caught to catch them all again; yet for God it is nothing, who
is everywhere, and in whom every thing has that being, that life, that motion
which they enjoy. The hayres of our head we know are numbered; and therefore
nothing strange that our thoughts should be, considering that our thoughts
shall come into judgment, but our hairs shall not. And if we shall give an
account of every idle word, as Mat. 12. 26
our Savior has professed unto us, why not as well of every idle thought? He
shall make the counsels of the heart manifest, 1 Cor. 4. 5. but that the award
of every thought is defined by God, I cannot tell how to believe: my reason is,
because evil thoughts are not fit to be rewarded; and as for the evil
thoughts of Gods children, shall not they be pardoned as well as their evil
words and outward actions are, to wit, upon their repentance? For if we
acknowledge our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, 1
Ioh. 1. 9. And Peter signified as much to Simon Magus conceiving evil thoughts
also, when he said unto him, Repent of this thy wickedness, and pray unto God,
that if it be possible the thought of thine heart might be forgiven thee, Act.
8. 22.

8. Free it was for you to have done something the last year, which you did
not, and every minute thereof, in case every minute thereof you were waking.
For that a man has free will in his sleep I never heard. But how thereby the
whole frame of your cogitations or actions might have been altered, is a
mystery unto me. Yet I doubt not but the whole frame of your cogitations and
actions this year might have been altered. For actions free and contingent
could not justly be accounted free and contingent, were they not accompanied
with a possibility of being otherwise. And God you acknowledge to be the cause
of this alteration, and of every thought and deed thus altered. So then if
there had been another course of your thoughts and actions, God had been the
cause of it, and of every thought and deed. What think you of that course
which has been of your thoughts and actions; is God the true and princ^pall
cause of this also, and of every thought and deed of yours this year? I see no
reason to the conttary, but it stands you upon to justify this also, as well
as the former; and as of your self, so as concerning the actions of all other
both men and Angels: and if for one year, why not for every year from the
beginning unto this day? And so I see no color of reason why you should not as
freely acknowledge that all things are decreed by God; for if God has decreed
all the thoughts and actions of men, it will be no hard matter to grant that
God has decreed all things that in their times and seasons do successively
come to pass. And if God be the true and principal cause of them, did he not
decree that he would be the true and principal cause of them? that is, that he
would in due time indeed and principally produce them, not withstanding all the
evil that does accompany them? For I do not think that you take upon you so
much perfection as to avouch that amongst all your thoughts and actions for a
year together, there was no evil thought, no evil action among them. For if
you stand upon it that God cannot be the true and principal cause of any evil
thought or action, we must not yield unto you that God was the true and
principal cause of all the thoughts and actions that were conceived in you, or
derived from you that year or years wherein you were hatching this book of
yours, which I take to be a fardell of erroneous conceits both in Philosophy
and Divinity.

Neither if you did maintain that God is the true and principal cause of
every free action, would we object that then you make Gods will to depend on
ours; for there is no color for any such objection; there is color for the
contrary, as namely, if he be the principal cause, then his will does not
depend on mine, but rather mine on his: and consequently our liberty seems to
be infringed by making God the principal cause of all our actions. Yet you
take no notice of this objection, (much less take pains to answer it) but
go on desperately (in show and that against your own tenet) to maintain,
that our will is necessarily subject unto his. But whether you mean in
producing thoughts and actions, (which alone is to the purpose) or in some
other sense and respect you betray not.

Yet by the way what mean you to say that our will is contingently free;
seeing this is as much as to say, it is possible that the will of man should
not be free. But you give a reason and it is worthy our consideration if
perhaps thereby, we may perceyve to what issue of tolerable sense your present
discourse may be brought. And the reason is this: For unto every cogitation
possible to man or Angel he has everlastingly decreed a proportionate end: to
every antecedent possible, a correspondent consequent, which needs no other
cause or means to produce it but only the reducing of possibility (granted by
his decree) into act. For what way soever (of many equally possible) man's will
does incline, Gods decree is a like necessary cause of all the good or evil
that befalls him for it. I looked for an elucidation of a former assertion or
two of yours, namely, that God is the true and principal cause of every
action, and deed that has passed from you this year, like as he had been
the cause (as you say) of every thought and action that might have passed from
you, if the frame of your thoughts and actions had been altered.

The other assertion was that our will is necessarily subject unto Gods will,
which also is delivered in reference to the former assertion. I say I looked
for an elucidation of these by this following sentence wherein you pretend to
give a reason of the former. But this performs nothing less. If you had done
something the last year which you did not as you might, then the whole frame
of your thoughts and actions this year had been altered, and God had been
the cause of this alteration and of every thought and action therein. And the
reason is this, For unto every cogitation possible God has decreed, a
determinate end. But I pray you consider, are the thoughts and actions of men
this year the proportioned end of something that you did the last year? Or
are they correspondent consequents to our antecedent actions the last year?
Many man the last year was an opposite unto goodness, he is reformed this year
and become a proselyte. Is grace the proportionate end of the state of sin?
The last year many a man was a formal professor; this year it may be he is
turned Papist, or Turk, is this a correspondent consequent to that antecedent?
Yet many continue formal professors still, without any such alteration; some
have changed their formalitie into realitie. It may be some man the last year
has satisfied another silthy lust, and this year is advanced by it.

Call you this a correspondent consequent destined by God? Some have prospered
by impoysoning of others and proceeded in their sinful courses so much the
more, without control. In a word by the last Clause it appears that by
proportionate end, and correspondent consequents, you mean only the good and
evil, that do befall men according to their former works, according to that
God will reward every man according to his works. But by your leave this has
no proportion to prove that God is the Author of every thought and action of
man this year, which you made to be consequent to some thing done the last
year; and God to be the true and principal cause of every one of those
thoughts, and actions. For what? Are men's thoughts and actions this year, the
rewards and punishments of the same men's actions the other year? What a
ridiculous conceyte in this? Well; still we hold you engaged to maintain,
that, which you have plainly avouched, namely that God is the true and
principal cause of every action, and thought of man for a year together, yea
and of every thought and action of yours for the year past; which you have
delivered without any explication. I have manifested the incongruity of your
whole discourse, in general. In particular consider further: you say that man's
will is necessarily subject unto God; this we understood in respect of
operation in proportion to what you delivered in the sentence before going; but
you understand it in respect of rewards or punishments succeeding,
proportionably unto former actions whether good, or bad. But by your leave it
is not man's will, but his person rather that herin is necessarily subject unto
God. For no wise man uses to say that man's will is rewarded or punished, but
his person rather. Again, suppose God decrees not the actions of men, but the
rewards of them, yet you have not explicated how in this case Gods will depends
not upon the will of man, the true explication whereof that I know is only
this; that the execution of his will may depend upon man's will to wit in
rewarding, or punishing, but not the will of God himself: Yet if good or evil
actions of men be foreseen by God before he has decreed either to reward or
punish; neither have you offered to clear Gods will in this case from
dependence upon the will of man, neither are you able to perform it. Again it
is false to say that God has decreed a proportionate end to every cogitation
possible. For many cogitations are possible which shall never be; And it is
absurd to say God has decreed an end to that which shall never be. Again by
this proportionate end and correspondent consequent, you understand rewards,
or punishments; But it is false to say that God has ordained to every
cogitation a reward or punishment. For to the evil thoughts and words, and
deeds of Gods children he has ordained neither reward nor punishment to befall
them, but his purpose is to pardon them.

Again punishments for the sins of men are many times inflicted by the
sins of men; So Sennacherib that blasphemer of the God of Israel, was slain
by the sword of his own children; David's adultery was punished by the fil^hy
actions of his own Son Absolon deflouring his fathers Concubines.

If these were proportionate ends to former sins, and correspondent
consequents, and everlastingly decreed by God, what hinders but that in your
opinion, actions notoriously sinful may be said to be decreed by God? You
say the producing of these consequents and proportionate ends, needsno other
cause or means but only the reducing of possibility (granted by his decree)
into act: Which is plain gibrish; you instance in nothing for illustration
sake, not as if your discourse were so plain that it needed it not, but rather
it is so unsound, that you might well fear it: And darkness is fittest for
them that hate the light: I will give instance for you; Absalons deflouring his
fathers Concubines was a disproportionate end, and correspondent consequent to
David's defiling his neighbors wife; for God punished David hereby; and
Arminius acknowledges that this fact of Absolon Inserviit castigand^ Exam.
praedest. Perk. p. 162.
Davidi: Now this fact of Absolon by your doctrine in this place, needed no
other cause or means to produce it, but only the reducing of possibility
(granted by Gods decree) into act. Now what possibility do you mean? the
possibility of David's defiling Bethsheba? It is manifestly untrue: first in
general, that to produce a reward, and punishment, no cause is required but
the producing of the fact, which is to be rewarded or punished, Consequents
natural follow I confess upon antecedents natural, but it is not so with
consequents moral, such as are rewards and punishments. And in particular the
case is clear, that something else was required to Absolons defiling David's
Concubines, then David's defil^ng of Bethsheba. For both the counsel of
Achitophel, and Absolons corruption in yielding thereto, and the p^nishing hand
of God herein, were found in this; and none of all these was found in David's
sin.

Or do you mean this of the possibility of Absolons sinning as he did? so
that to the punishing of David no other thing was required but Absolons
reducing his power of defiling his father Concubines into act. Now this I
confess is a truth, but such a truth as might make any wise man ashamed to
accommodate himself to the grave profession of it, though he did not affect
any singularity of conceit therein* For it is as much as to say, that to defile
David's Concubines no other thing was required then to defile them; for this is
to reduce possibility granted (as you say) by Gods decree into act, and that is
enough. But by your leave, it is not enough to salve your credit, to say that a
possibility hereof was granted by Gods decree. For you have plainly professed
that God has decreed not a possibility of a proportionate end, or
correspondent consequent to every cogitation, but a proportionate end, and
correspondent consequent. And therefore if the defiling of David's concubines by
Absolon, was a proportionate end, or correspondent consequent to David's former
cogitations and actions, then by your doctrine this deiling of David's
concubines by Absolon his son, was everlastingly decreed by God, and not the
possibility of it. And how absurd a thing it is to say, that God decreed the
possibility of any thing, whereas all contingent things are possible in their
own nature without the decree of God, as the whole world was possible, and
that not by the decree of God? But it seems you have reference to the
possibility, not of the punishment, but of the time, for which correspondent
punishment is decreed, as appears by that which follows: as when you say, Did
we that which we do not, but might do, many things would immediately follow,
which now do not: which though it be granted you, yet herehence it would not
follow, that No other cause should be required to the producing of them, then
our producing of the antecedent. But by this you justify that upon David's
adultery, Absolon his defiling David's concubines; and upon Sennacheribs
blasphemy against the God of Israel; Ad^amelech and Sharezar his sons slaying
him with the sword in the Temple of Nisroch his god, did inevitably follow. For
these things did befall them, and those things which do befall you and us do
come to pass, as you profess in the next place, though not as absolutely
decreed by God, and in the first place, yet because he decreed them as the
inevitable consequents of some things which he knew he would do. By all which
it cannot be avoided but that Absolon defiling his fathes concubines in
special, and all the sins of man whereby God does punish former sins in
general, are by this your opinion decreed by God as inevitable consequents of
some things which God kn^w would be done.

Now let us examine this a little further. You speak indifferently of good and
evil that does befall men; And these indifferently you prosesse to be ordained
by God upon the foresight of some thing in man; So then like as the damnation
of any man is ordained by God not absolutely, and in the first place but upon
the foresight of some evil thing in the person damned; so the salvation of any
man is not decreed absolutely by God, and in the first place, but upon the fore
sight of some good in the person, saved or to be saved, which good must be
either faith or good works or both; or which is worst of all some thing which
is less evil (as suppose natural humility) in the state of nature. Yet you
will not seem to be an abetter of their opinion, that maintain election to be
upon the foresight of faith or works.

Yet let me have one bout with you more in the point of reprobation also. God
foreseeing some evil in man (say you) does purpose to condemn him: Now
because like as no evil can exist without Gods permission; so God could not
fo^see evil but upon presupposall of his purpose to permit it, it follows
that the decree to permit sin, is before the decree of God to damn for
sin, therefore permission of sin is in Gods intention before damnation, and
consequently it must be after it, in execution, as much as to say; God does
first damn men for sin, and afterward permit them to sin. Hereupon you
will refl^ct upon us with an interrogatorie saying; Will you maintain that God
did first decree to damn men for sin, and secondly to permit them to sin?
I answer; If I did maintain this, I should look to be confuted by reason,
and not to be cried down without reason, or contrary to all reason. Nay I had
rather maintain an harsh opinion according unto reason, then a plausible
opinion in contradiction unto manifest reason.

Secondly, I answer by negation; For I do not maintain either of these to be
subordinate unto other in Gods intention, but rather coordinate; because
neither of these things decreed is the end of the other, but both jointly make
up an integrall means tending to the manifestation of Gods glory in the way
of justice, according to that of Aquinas, who professes that reprobation
includes the will of God of permitting sin, and of inferring damnation for
sin. Now let us proceed to that which follows. It is absurd to say we have
a possibility to do what we do not; but rather you should say we have an
ability to do what we do not. For possibility is of a passive
signification, not active: And ability to obey God, I confess we had in Adam,
and in Adam we have lost it. That which you call the absolute necessity of
Gods decres, is not in respect of Gods act in (...). For his decrees are most
free, but in respect of the event ensuing upon supposition of Gods decree. So
then things freely decreed upon this supposition must necessarily come to
pass. Both that which should and that which does befall us flows alike (you
say) from the absolute necessity of Gods decree. Now because your present
discourse is not of Gods power, but of his wisdom that you might not seem
beside the text, you tell us in the close, that herein is seen Gods
incomprehensible wisdom, that nothing falls out without the circumference of
it; whereas that all things fall out as God has decreed, it is rather the
fruit of his power then his wisdom. And if you refer it to Gods knowledge,
yet it is no part of God, wisdom. For what wisdom is it to know what he
has decreed, or what he means to bring to pass, whereas any man though
simple may know what himself means to do? But to know what is fit to be
done for the setting forth of his own glory, and to direct all things most
conventently hereunto, herin consists the wisdom of God. You content not your
self with ascribing, a Circumference unto Gods wisdom, within which all
things fall out, but you call it actual, also as if there were two sorts of
circumferences, the one potentiall, the other actual.

9. It seems you do not please your self so well in this Argument of Gods
infinite wisdom, as in the former; neither is it your happiness to light upon
such quaint strains of invention, and expression here, as in the poinct of
Gods immensitie, and eternity: It may be the matter will not afforde it; For
if it did, why should not you that seek after it, be acquainted With it as
soon as another? Therefore, I guess, it is that you break forth into such a
profession: the Christian writers are more able and apt both to conceive right,
and to speak more consequently to what they rightly conceive concerning other
branches of divine absolute infiniteness, then concerning his infinite
knowledge. And because you are bold by a confident supposition to put this out
of question, (whereas yet I know no reason, save that you find no place in
this argument for such Chimaericall fictions as you vented in other points,
especially in the point of Gods immensitie and eternity) you take upon you to
give certain reasons hereof. Now because to my understanding Gods immensitie
and ^ternity are far more obscure to treat of then Gods wisdom, I am very
willing to weigh well the weight of these your reasons. They are in number two.
The first is this: All creatures are participant of Gods other attributes
besides his wisdom and knowledge; but of his knowledge and wisdom men and
Angels are of all his creatures the only participants: and those rules are
always the most clear and certain, and most easily gathered, which are
gathered from an uniform idenditie of particulars in variety of subjects: Those
universal rules are hardly gathered, or are less certain, which can be
experienced only in some one or sewer subjects. In this argument there is
little or nothing sound. For (as touching the maine) though creatures inferior
unto man do not work by wisdom and knowledge of their own, yet the
wisdom of God appears no less in their works then in the works of man,
even to the admiration of man himself.

What art, what industry is found in the little Be in the gathering of his
wax, in the fashioning of his combs, in the gathering of honey of diverse
sorts, every one following and plying his proper and peculiar flower, and
afterward tempering it, the liquid stuff brought in their bottles, with the
grosser stuff brought upon their thighs, and bringing it to that perfection
which we see and use both for dainty food, and wholesome physic: then their
government under one King as the Ancients conceived, but indeed under one Queen
rather, as later writers even of these days have elegantly observed, and the
exquisite manner of a common wealth among them. Is not the wisdom of God
observable in this? And as it was said of such as suddenly became Prophets, But
who is 1 Samuel 10. 12.
their father? so may we ask concerning these, Who is their father, or who
their Schoolmaster that instructed them, and bred them up in this occupation?
I say the wisdom of God does appear more in these then in the actions of
men. For we know by what means men usually attain to wisdom, as namely, by
instruction and by observation, but no such thing to be found in Bees;
therefore this wonderful work being a work of nature, must necessarily be
ascribed to the God of nature. But suppose the wisdom of God were to be
observed no where but in the actions of men, is not the world of men sufficient
to afford particulars sufficient for induction thereupon to conclude general
rules?

The wisdom of Arts and liberal professions are grown now adays to great
perfection, and all these what are they but the searching out, and by searching
the discovery of the wisdom of God, even in those creatures which are not
participants of the wisdom and knowledge of God?

The science of Astronomy, how has it displayed unto the world the wisdom of
God in the various motions of the heavens? and still they are searching, as
having not yet attained to the full discovery thereof. So likewise the natural
Philosopher in search^ng out the nature of the whole world; what is this but an
inquiry after the wisdom of God in the whole and parts of this Universe? and
albeit still there is enough to be discovered, yet that which is discovered, is
it not sufficient to draw us to adore the wisdom of God, and that so much the
more, because that though God has set the Eccles. 3.
world in man's heart, yet can he not find out the works that he has
wrought from the beginning to the end?

The Physician, what divine wisdom does he find in the contexture of the
body of man? Was not Galen hereupon driven to acknowledge a divine providence?
Then in searching after the nature of Herbs and other simples, and considering
the power and virtuous operation of them, both of each apart, and of severals
together in composition fitting for the cure of every malady and disease of the
body of man: what report can they make unto us of the wisdom of God even in
those things which are not participants of the wisdom and knowledge of God?
But come we to Arts manual, of man's invention, and wherein indeed we are
more apt to derogate from God, then to give him the glory of them; yet both
from the wisdom of man we may the better ascend to the contemplation of the
wisdom of God, and also the wisdom of man is from God, who as we are taught
instructs all, as well the mean husbandman, Esaias 28. 26. as the most curious
artificer, Exodus 31. In the Turkish History I read of a present sent to the
Grand Signiour Achmat that Turkish Emperor; all the particulars (save three
Birds of Paradise of rare and precious plumes, wonderful goodly to behold, and
valued at 800. pound sterling,) were handicrafts work, as namely, two vessels
of Cristall, wonderful rich and beautiful: four other vessels made of fishes
bones, whereas the art seemed miraculous in the graving: forty pieces of cloth
of gold of diverse colors; five pieces of silk; five of Damask; five of
silk watered and five plain; A staff of an Elephants tooth graven with
admirable industrye; A Parret set in a cage of Cristall so artificially done as
no man could discern the entry; And many fair and rich table clothes of
Holland cloth most part poudred with flowers to the life, and wrought in their
lively colors. The which (it is said) the Sultan did accept with admiration.
The Author adds in the close: All these things show sufficiently that the
Estates from the beginning, or soon after have raised handy works as well as
trafique and navigation to the highest point of perfection. This calls to my
remembrance the rich presents, which the same Estates presented the Lady
Elisabeth in her entertainment at the Hage, in her way out of England, unto
the Palatinate being most of curious handicraft. First a Carcanet enriched with
36. Diamonds all of facet stones. 2. Two great hanging pearls weighing 35.
Carals, and one grain. 3. A chain of pearls of 52. pieces, oriental water.
4. A gold needle enriched with a great Diamand, in form of a table, having 4.
Diamants round about, whereof the three out hanging were facet stones. All this
laid in a little trunk of cloth of gold, betwixt a perfumed cushion. 5. A
great looking glass enclosed in a silver quilted brimme enriched with fair
inlaid works. 6. Ten pieces of Tapestry of Francis Spierick, whereof two
pieces were to be sent after unto her highness. 7. Six pieces moreover of
Tapistry for a Cabinet of the same Master, whereof two were to be sent after to
her highness. 8. Diverse sorts of linen Damas works pacted up in cases, rated
numero. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. according to the works laid in every case. 9. Works
of Spanish wax made according to the fashion of the East Indies, whereof were
diverse particulars. 1. A cover of a bed standing on 4. pillars not plain but
round. 2. A Cupboorde. 3. A Table. 4. Two great trunkes, 5. A middle trunk. 6.
Five little trunkes. 7. Two casket standishes. 8. Four and twenty middle
dishes. 9. Nine and twenty little dishes. 10. Twelve fruit dishes. 11. Six
Saucers. But come we from the wisdom of Manual arts, to wisdom moral and
political. David was wise as an Angel of God. 2. Sam. 14. 17. Yet he feared
the wisdom of Achitophell, whose counsel was accounted as an Oracle of God
in those days. 2. Sam. 16. 23. And David prayed unto God to turn his counsel
into foolishnes, and the Lord heard him, and showed his wonderful wisdom in
making that counsel of Achitophell, (which had soon dispatched David if it
had binne followed) seem foolishnes in the judgment of Absolon, by the means
of Hushai sent only to cross Achitophel. Yet Solomon was wiser then they both,
and it was God that gave him a large heart, like unto the sand of the Sea
shore; So that his wisdom excelled all the wisdom of the children of the
East, and all the wisdom of Egypt. Wise heads there were, many it seems in
those days both in Egypt, and in the East, yet Solomon was wiser then they
all; And the Queen of the South came from the uttermost part of the earth to
hear the wisdom of King Solomon. Since there have binne men famous in this
kind, that have boasted. Consilijs nostris laus est attonsa Laconum.


Tiberius his governments had it binne matched with as much honesty as
wisdom it had binne admirable. It was wont to be said that the French got
more upon us by parle then by the sword: Yet Henry the IV, of France was wont
to say, he feared but two men in the World, and that was for their wits; the
one was (as he called him) the fox of the mountains; the other was the lack
an apes of the Isles. Yet some say the Spaniards herein outreach the French, and
the Italian the Spaniards. And that of all the Italians the Florentines have
been most cunning; and of all the Florentines the house de Medices. And indeed
Laurentius de Medices was accounted the chiefest ballancer of States in his
time, if News from Parnassus speak true. But the world of men (as you
complain) are not sufficient to give presidents of wisdom fit to raise us to
the contemplation of the infinite wisdom of God. Yet if you were acquainted
with all the wisdom of the world, you might find matter enough of admiration
thereat, and of adoration of the wisdom of God, that goes infinitely beyond
it.

But whereas you say that all creatures are participants of Gods other
attributes, in as much as they have some being, some power, some duration, some
quantity; and therefore the knowledge of them conferres something to the
knowledge of those attributes of God. Neither the antecedent is true, nor the
conseque^t sound. For what does the quantity of a gnat confer to the knowledge
of Gods immensity? or what does the duration of creatures that live but a day
or a year confer to the knowledge of Gods eternity? or the b^ting of a flea,
to the discerning of the power of God? Again, the antecedent is st^^ke false.
No creature that has quantity is partaker of Gods immensity. For the quantity
of a creature is quantitas ^^lis* quantity of extension; but Gods quantity is
quantitas virtutis, quantity of spiritual and immateriall perfection, and it
is impossible that one should be a part of the other: nay Gods immensity has
no parts, so neither has his eternity, nor his almighty power, and therefore
no creature can partake of any of these. It is true, God produces the being,
and maintains the duration of all things, but it is not by his essence he
produces their being, nor by his eternity he maintains their duration, but
all is done by the power and counsel of his will.

We come to your second reason; Why we cannot conceive and speak so right
concerning Gods knowledge, as concerning other attributes, and that is, say
you, because we want fit terms to express it. But how do you prove that we
have more fit terms to express Gods other attributes then this? you do not
once go about to prove this; the instance you give is in the praescience of
God, concerning which Gregory makes a question how it can be attributed unto
God; seeing nothing but future things are said to be foreknowne, and unto God
nothing is future, but all things present. And for the same reason Austine (you
say) would have Gods knowledge of things to come to be termed rather science
then praescience, seeing all things are present unto God. Now if this change of
terms will serve the turn to avoid incongruity concerning the right
apprehension of Gods knowledge, what cause is there to complain of the
unfitness of terms, when as with so little ado the unfitness we speak of,
may be corrected? It is like enough upon such conceits as these, some have
entertained an opinion that all things are actually existent in eternity, not
only things present, but things past also still are, and things future already
are existent in eternity: and you your self also have already manifested your
approbation of this Tenet in the Chapter of eternity: The more I wonder to
read you except against this doctrine of Gregory's and Austines, as neither
clear, nor accurate enough: And here first you tell us that we may not say,
nor did Saint Austine, or Saint Gregory think that God does not, or cannot
know a distinction between times past, present, or to come. Neither indeed do
I see any color why any man should entertain a conceit of any such meaning of
Austine or Gregory; neither do they deny that God knows all these things
and consequently the differences of them, one from another; Only Gregory makes
a doubt how the knowledge of future things in God should be called
prescience. And Austine (as you say) had rather call it Science. But then you
demand how it is said by Gregory that nothing to him is future, nothing past.
Your self have heretofore laid down that which may answer this; as when you
said all things are coexistent in eternity, but not in time: And therefore
God may know things to be so differenced in respect of such a course of
eternity. In a word, that God knows the things that are past, present and to
come, so called in respect of man who is measured with time, but not so called
in respect of God who is measured with eternity. But though they are
altogether present unto God, yet it follows not herhence that they are all
one (as you infer) much less that they are so in respect of Gods eternal
knowledge, as if Gods knowledge did make them one, which in themselves and in
their own natures are not. As God himself, so his knowledge is before all
worlds, as worlds do exist in time. But you may remember what you have
formerly maintained, that both all worlds which have an existence successively
in time, and time it self is actually existent in eternity, and so not only
present in respect of Gods knowledge of them which ever was, but also in
respect of their own existence (as you have accoumpted it) in eternity, which
Aquinas makes the ground of Gods knowledge of them. Then you dispute, and prove
that foreknowledge is to be attributed unto God; because he forknowes them
before they are, which is as much as to say, while they are yet to com. To this
I answer out of your own doctrine thus; Allbeit Gods knowledge be before
them, yet if the same also be to come, and that as much after them as before
them, what reason, why it should be called foreknowledge, rather then together
knowledge, or after knowledge.

But what knowledge soever we attribute to God, it can no more be said to be
past, than to come according to your doctrine page 77. your words are these.
Whatsoever can be more properly said or conceived to be past than to be yet to
come, or to be in every moment of time designable, can have no property of
eternity. And in very truth Gods knowledge is not altered, but one and the
same knowledge it is which God has of things without him, before they were,
when they are, and after they were. In the things themselves an alteration is
found, but not in Gods knowledge of them: And therefore the knowing of all
things that are, were, and are to come is commonly called Scientia visionis, in
distinction from Scientia simplicis Intelligentiae, whereby God knows all
necessary truths, and all things possible.

Your conclusion is, that God foreknowes, and Man foreknowes but with a
difference, such as, you say, is oftentimes not well expressed by Teachers, nor
duly considered by Readers; the identitie of the word whereby we express both
Gods foreknowledge, and man's foreknowledge making us apt to confound the
different meaning of them. Which confusion of things arising from communion of
the same term, you say is a fertile nursery of many errors in this Argument.
And is it not, I pray, as well in other Arguments as in this? But I bear with
you, for if you had professed so much, you had utterly broken the neck of your
second Argument. Yet we are like to be beholding to you in good time. For the
displanting of these errors. For you promise to endeavor this, and therein to
imitate Heralds, who give the same Coat to diverse parties, but always which
a difference.

Thus we have gained a flourish of allusion unto the pracctise of Heralds, and
with this Kickeshewes we must be merry till more substantial provision
comes. As for my opinion, I acknowledge no ex^stence of things in eternity,
nor coexistence with eternity until the time of their actual production
comes. And so accordingly their coexistence with eternity first was to come,
then is, afterward is past, and cease to be; and so accordingly
foreknowledge, coknowledge, and after-knowledge of the same things may be
attributed to God, all which are external denominatives attributed unto the
knowledge of God, from the various condition of things known by him, who
looks not out of himself for the knowing of any thing. For how could he,
before any thing was? yet then he knew all things that were to come, as well as
now he does, yet without any change: For with him is no variableness, nor
shadow of change. Iam. 1.


10. Here you enter upon the explication of the difference between man's
knowledge and Gods. Our knowledge (say you) of things to come is many ways
imperfect (and foreknowledge only) because the duration neither of our
knowledge, nor of our selves as yet can reach unto that point of time wherein
things so known get first existence. No soundness of truth in all this.

For first our foreknowledge of things to come, is not foreknowledge only,
save so long as the things themselves are to come; but when they come, we know
them never a whit the less, and after they are gone and past. As the Eclipse
of the Sun and Moon is known by us before it comes, when it comes, and
after it is past. It is true, before they come, the knowledge of things is
only foreknowledge, and not in man only, but God also. When they do coexist
with God, then Gods knowledge is no longer foreknowledge, but till they do
coexist with God, his knowledge of them is foreknowledge of them, as well as
ours. For it is before them, and only before them; for it is neither with
them, nor after them. Not with them, for then they should coexist with God, and
that from all eternity, which is most untrue. For if they did coexist with God,
then they did exist, and that from all eternity, which is most untrue. Much
less is it after them. For if so, then their coexistence with God were past,
but we suppose it to be to come. And impossible it is that the same things
should at once be both past, and also to come. And as for the duration of our
knowledge, whereas you say it does not reach to the things that are to come; I
say neither does the duration of Gods knowledge reach thither. For if the
duration of Gods knowledge did reach unto things to come, then Gods knowledge
should in this present coexist with things to come, which is untrue. For if
Gods knowledge did coexist with things to come, at this present, then things to
come at this present should co^exist with the knowledge of God, and
consequently they should exist, that is, they should be present, and not to
come. It is no way required to knowledge to coexist with things known. In like
sort neither does Gods duration at this present reach unto things to come any
more the^ ours. For if God did at this present coexist with things to come,
then at this present things to come should coexist with God; for coexistence
includes existence on both sides. But things to come do not at this present
coexist with God, for if they did coexist, then they should exist, and
consequently they should be said to be present, and not to come. And in a word,
to maintain that God coexists with all things to come, is to maintain by just
consequence, that the world did exist from all eternity. It is true, God shall
coexist with things to come, because his years cannot fail, they endure for
ever: but our years and days are as swift as a post, in comparison. But this
makes no difference in the point of foreknowledge. But with such like wild
conceits of yours as touching Gods eternity, we are now reasonably well
acquainted, they do so much the less move us, or trouble us. We have
continuance of being for a time, God has continuance of being for ever. God
has the continuance of his being from none, we have the continuance of our
being from God. But as God by continuing does not get continuance of being, so
neither do we. Only we have it so, as that God coulds^t an end to it every
day and hour; but it is impossible any end should be set to the continuance
of Gods being, because he is of necessary being. But this is it that deceives
you; we get many things by continuance, as growth and strength of body,
increase of knowledge, and grace, and this makes you affirm that we get
continuance. Whereas indeed we get not continuance, but we get something else
by continuing. Yet we may continue the same that we were; sure I am we shall
so continue in the world to come.

Sometimes again we lose by continuance both health and strength, and memory,
and so grow toward our graves; and this is Alteration, so that we are still in
motion. But God getts nothing by continuance, for there is no motion, no change
in God. And where motion and change is not, there time is not, but either Aevum
or Eternity. It is true, contingent things are not foreknowne by us; and
herein is a great difference between Gods foreknowledge and ours. But this is
a material difference only, but now we dispute of the form of foreknowledge,
whereof hitherto you have showed no sound difference. No question but God
precisely knows future contingents, we do not; And it is as true, that this
is just nothing to the present purpose. Yet now you are fallen upon it, we must
give due regard to your carriage in this. Of the ground of Gods foreknowing
future contingents questions, have been ventilated amongst Schoole-divines for
many hundred years continuance.

The most flourishing opinion at this day, and wherein the Sects in other
points very opposite of Scotists and Thomists do agree, is, that God
foreknowes them by seeing the determination of his own will, touching their
coming to pass; this you invade both elsewhere and here; how well and
scholastically you have carried your self herein hertofore we have considered;
now what else you have to ve^t against this tenent, we are ready to entertain
as it shall deserve.

But in the first place you fall upon it to my judgment very indecently, as
when you say: If we shall mould the manner of Gods foreknowglede of things
future in our own conceit or foreknowledge of them, we shall erroneously
collect, that seeing we cannot infallibly foreknow future contingents so
neither could they be infallibly foreknowne by God, if to him or in respect of
his decree they were contingent, and not necessarily predetermined. For first
the question only was, whether foreknowledge might be properly attributed unto
God in respect of things to come. Now I see no reason but it may, as well as it
is attributed unto man; which question is only about the formal denomination
of it, not at all as touching the extent of Gods foreknowledge in comparison
unto man's foreknowledge, or in respect of the ground of it.

Secondly, the comparison made by you has no congruity in the members of it.
For the first member is proposed absolutely, the second conditionally; whereas
in reason, either both should be proposed absolutely thus. Seeing we cannot
infallibly foreknowe future contingents, so neither could they be infallibly
foreseen by God: which is so absurd an Argument, that any sober man might be
ashamed to obtrude upon any adversary. (...).


If I would feine, I would feine things probable at the least. Or both should
run conditionally, thus: Seeing we cannot infallibly foreknow future
contingents, if in respect of our decree they be contingents, and not
necessarily determined, so neither can they be infallibly foreknowne by God, if
to him, or in respect of his decree they were contingents, and not necessarily
predetermined. Yet if the comparison had run thus, it load bin incongruous
enough; For Man's foreknowledge is not usually accoumpted in respect of things
determinable by his will, Sometime it may be, as I remember Erastus observes
that Bellantius Senensis prophesied of Savanarola his death, but it was after
notice was taken of him at Rome, as of an Heretic. So likewise I have read
that the fruits of the Gunpowder Treason was prophesied of in a certain
Liturgy, then of purpose prescribed for the use of Papists, but it was after
those English boute-feux were known to have been engaged in that conspiracy.

But usually man's foreknowledge of things to come is accounted in respect of
things natural, and such as are out of the power of the determination of his
own will. And as for such things as are subject to his will, it is an
undoubted truth, that he cannot infallibly foreknowe such things upon the
knowledge of his purpose to produce them; and that for two reasons. First,
because his will is mutable from within. Secondly, because his power is
resistible from without. But give we you leave to proceed.

In the next place you tell us, That some push our pronenesse to this error
forward, by another, not distinguishing between contingency and uncertainty;
who argue thus, That which is in it self uncertain, cannot certainly be
known. Every future contingent is in it self uncertain, Ergo it is not
possible that a future contingent should certainly be known. Thus another Hare
is started by the way, which hinders the pursuing of our first game, where we
might have experience of your performance in opposing the ground of Gods
foreknowing future contingents, laid in the determination of his will, whereof
God cannot be ignorant. And first you address your self to the removing of
this new rub, by a distinction of a two fold uncertainty, one formally
relative, another only denominative or fundamental. And, as if these terms
needed no explication, you proceed to a resolution thus; That which is
relatively uncertain, cannot be certainly known, for so it should be certain
to him, to whom it is uncertain: But a future contingent, as it is contingent,
does not necessarily or formally include this relative uncertainty, although it
usually be in part the foundation or cofounder of it. By relat^ve uncertainty
you understand uncertainty in relation to knowledge, in which sense to be
uncertain, is to be such as whereof there cannot be certain knowledge. In
which sense if the proposition proceeded, it were very idle, and indenticall,
as if it were expressed thus; That which cennot certainly be known, cannot
certainly be known: And they undoubtedly are very prone to error, that suffer
themselves to be pushed forwards thereinto by such arguments as these, and thus
interpreted. But we were wont to distinguish of Certitudo scientiae, and
certitudo rei scitae, or scibilis; and you intimate such a distinction. For the
relative uncertainty you speak of is the uncertainty of the knowledge, and the
fundamental uncertainty is the uncertainty of the thing it self, and indeed
the foundation of the uncertainty of knowledge. Now the argument proceeds
manifestly from the one to the other, and the Medius terminus man fests its
own meaning to be of fundamental uncertainty, whence it does infer
uncertainty of knowledge, for it proceeds thus: That which is uncertain in it
self cannot be certainly known. Now that which is uncertain in it self, is
not relatively uncertain, but rather absolutely. For whereas the most certain
thing that is may be relatively uncertain, that is uncertain unto some; yet
this shall never be called uncertain in it self.

So then the syllogism corruptly interpreted by you, and the truth of it
obscured by a preposterous distinction, take it in its proper vigor and force,
is thus; That which in it self has no foundation of certainty, cannot be
certainly known. But every future contingent has in it self no foundation of
certainty: therefore it cannot certainly be known. Therefore if you will
answer aright, show what foundation of certainty is found in future
contingents, if you please to deny the Minor; or if you please to deny the
Major, profess your mind plainly, and say, that That which has no foundation
of certainty in it self, may nevertheless be certainly known, which indeed
is your course. For you profess plainly, that future contingents cannot be
certainly known, of a sinite and imperfect knowledge, but they may be known
by an infinite knowledge; such as is the knowledge of God.

And thus you might have answered the former syllogism plainly, without the
help of your former distinction, in this manner: That which is in it self
uncertain, cannot be certainly known. It is true in respect of a finite
knowledge, such as is the knowledge of man; but it is not true in respect of
knowledge infinite, such as is the knowledge of God. But whereas you put it
indifferent to answer by way of distinction, either of knowledge finite and
infinite, or of knowledge fallible and infallible; herein you are very wide.
For a very absurd issue would be of this latter distinction, after this manner:
That which is uncertain in it self, cannot be certainly known by knowledge
fallible, but it may be certainly known by knowledge infallible: which were as
much as to says It cannot be certainly known by knowledge that may err in
knowing it, but it may be certainly known by knowledge that cannot err in
knowing it. And yet it will not serve your turn neither; For, though Gods
knowledge be infallible, yet it will not follow that God knows this
infallibility; because, though he infallibly knows whatsoever he knows, yet
perhaps this is a thing not knowable at all. for to know that such a thing
certainly shall be, which in its own nature is no more certain to be than not
to be, is not to know, but rather to err: and so the argument still holds
good, 'and no way' answered by you, but boldly outfaced by a mere begging of
that which is in question. Yet nothing possible shall be uncertain unto God,
for he knows it to be possible, and that most certainly. But with what color
can you infer, that because it is possible to be, therefore God most
certainly knows that it shall be? For, consider, is it not as well possible
not to be? and may not I by the same liberty of argumentation, which you
usurp unto your self, conclude, therefore God most certainly knows that it
shall not be? In a word, things must be to come, before they can be known to
be to come. But seeing future contingents are in their own nature only
possible, and indifferent to be to come, or not to come; I pray consider by
what activitie or operation, they have passed from the condition of things
possible, to the condition of things future? for if they have not passed into
this condition, they are not as yet knowable to be future; and no infallibility
of knowledge can make the knowledge extend to the comprehending of such things
as are not knowable. Possible they are, and are most certainly known of God
that they are possible. But as yet future they are not, (unless by some
alteration they have been translated from the condition of things merely
possible to the condition of things future, which it stands you upon to show,
if you maintain it,) therefore as yet they are not knowable to be future.

That which you add concerning the nature of Gods knowledge, as being without
succession, is nothing to the purpose. For though our knowledge be subject to
succession, yet this nothing hinders us from foreknowing things to come, so
they be knowable, whether by natural reason, or by divine revelation. On the
other side, though Gods knowledge be not capable of succession, yet things not
knowable he cannot know; things impossible he cannot know to be possible, and
things which are only possible, and not future he cannot know to be future.
And such a manner of knowledge, is no knowledge indeed, but error rather.

And as for your terms of interposed, and expiring acts, and interminable
knowledge; well they may serve to conjure your Reader from understanding you,
but they have no force either of illustration, or probation of ought. In the
close you acquaint us with a See Rogers upon the Articles or the Church of
England. the 17. Art.
new mystery, as if Gods knowledge were like the suspending of a man's
judgment, for as much as the act of knowledge in God does not expire. A vile
conceit and ridiculous, were it not concerning the nature of God. For what?
because Gods knowledge and judgment does not expire, but continues without
alteration, shall he therefore be said to suspend his judgment? Belike Daniel
was cast into the Lions den not by judgment, but by suspension of judgment;
For the Laws of the Medes and Persians were unalterable.

So likewise the judgment, and counsel, and purpose of God, concerning the
salvation of his elect, because it continues without expiration, therefore it
is suspended. In the same proportion of piety you say our ignorance resembles
Gods knowledge best, as heretofore you professed, that In respect of immensity
and eternity, nothing was so like to God as nothing. But it may be Ioverlash,
and upon better consideration, The imperfection of our knowledge or judgment
while it is in suspense is rather ignorance, (you say) than Error. And this
imperfection taken away it shall better resemble divine knowledge, than our
actual resolutions and determinations do. But then, I pray, what is this that
shall resemble the divine knowledge? is it our knowledge while it is in
suspense? why, but if I am in suspense, how am I said to know? O, but you will
have this imperfection taken away, but then I say, if the suspension be taken
away, how shall it be in suspense, which you suppose? Again, how can
suspension of judgment be taken away, but by resolution this way or that way?
but this you deny to be that which resembles divine knowledge.

The truth is, the sentence is so perplex, that I can divise no issue out of
it. Yet I have reason to conceave that your opinion is, that ignorance best
resembles the knowledge of God. For the comparison is between resolution and
the opposite thereunto? and you plainly signify that the opposite to resolution
does better resemble Gods knowledge, than resolution. Now what is opposite to
resolution but suspension of judgment; and this suspension of judgment you
plainly profess is to be called ignorance, rather than error. Wherefore
ignorance consisting in suspension of judgment by your doctrine in this place,
does better resemble the wisdom of God than our actual resolutions and
determinations do; yet out actual resolutions and determinations may be sound
both in knowledge natural, and knowledge Theological, whereas ignorance or
suspension of judgment is no knowledge at all. Only whereas you positively
affirm, that Without the interposition of some determining or expiring acts
there can be no error, I understand that plainly to be a notorious untruth.
For determining or expiring acts are no more required unto error, than unto
truth.

And if a man continue, as many do, to their lives end in Popery, in
Mahumetisme, in Heathenisme, their errors are never a whit the less.

It is true indeed that we can understand but one thing at once, and therefore
the consideration of one thing must expire before we can pass to the
consideration of another. This is the condition of Man's knowledge in general,
not of an erroneous apprehension in special.

11. What you discourse of knowledge conjecturall which man may have of things
contingent, cannot have of things casual, I leave it as I find it, I come to
the cause why we cannot foreknow future contingents, and this you say is
because our essence, and knowledge are but finite; so that things contingent
are not so contained in us, that if we could perfectly know our selfs we might
perfectly know them; Thus you are content to dictate at pleasure, without
affoording one mite of reason, for the establishing of your proselytes faith in
this. As finite as our knowledge is, we know contingents to be contingents. But
to know that a thing merely contingent which denomination includes only a
possibility of coming to pass, or not coming to pass, I say to know that
such a thing shall come to pass, exceedes the reach of knowledge infinite. For
infinite knowledge does extend no farther than to things knowable. But, for a
contingent, which both in his own nature, and from without does yet continue
indifferent to be or not to be, is not a thing, at all knowable, that it shall
come to pass. For it must be a thing future, before it can be known to be
future. But the contingents, you speak of, are supposed both in their own
nature to be only possible, that is indifferent to be or not be, and as yet
determined by no outward agent to be. In which case they still continue under
the condition of things n^eerly possible. And so far they are knowable, and
no farther. And accordingly so far they are ind^ed known by God, by that
knowledge which is commonly called Scientia simplicis intelligentiae. But the
knowledge of thigs future is called Scientia visionis. And things merely
possible, till some determination does come unto them from wihout, are not as
yet future, and consequently cannot be known, to be future, yet
notwithstanding you are bold to say, that In the divine essence, all real
effects, all events possible, whether necessary, casual or contingent, are
eminently contained; The perfect knowledge of his own essence, necessarily
includes the perfect knowledge, not only of all things, that have been, are,
or shallbee, but of all things that might have been, or possibly may be. A
most rid^culous amplification? For it is as much, as to say, that God knows
not only all contingent truths, but all necessary truths also. As if it were
a harder matter to know things necessary, than to know things contingent.
Whereas it is in the power of the Creature to know things necessary, and
perhaps all things that are of necessary truth; but to know those things whose
existence is only of a contingent nature, that belongs only unto God.

Now what is possible, and what is not, we have a general rule to know that,
as namely, whatsoever implies no contradiction is possible, that which does
imply contradiction is impossible. And were it a sober speech for a divine to
affirm; that God not only knows all things that have been, are or shallbe, but
also he knows what implies contradiction, and what does not? you seem to
fumble here at the novel doctrine of the Jesuits concerning Gods foreknowledge
of future contingents conditionate; and you do but fumble at it.

Secondly you say that in the divine essence all real effects are contained
eminently; Now hertofore you told us, that For all things to be in God, is no
more than that he alone can produce them. Chapter 4. number. 2. If this be your
meaning in this place, as it seems, when you say they are in him eminently,
for so we say that heat is in the Sun eminently, for as much as he does
produce heat in bodies capable; Then, I say, we deny not but all real effects
are in God.

But how does this agree with your tenet, seeing herhence it follows that God
can produce any act of Man's freewill, any casual thing and if he can so do,
what hind^h but that he could from everlasting decree to produce them? Yet not
alone as formerly you have interpreted what it is for things to be in God. For
it is impossible that God should produce the act of man's will without man. For
if without man, then it is not the act of man's will, which is an immanente act
of the will.

Thirdly, it is false to say that the perfect knowledge of Gods essence,
necessarily includes the perfect knowledge of all things that have been, are,
or shall be. It includes I confess the knowledge of all necessary truths,
and of all things possible; but as for the knowledge of contingent truths,
and of these to come, it includes not that; unless under the essence of God,
you comprehend the will of God. And so to distinguish as to say that all
necessary truths God knows by necessity of nature, but all contingent
truths he knows by the determination of his own will; which indeed is a
truth, but flatt opposite to your opinion. But that things contingent cannot
be known to be future, but upon the determination of Gods will, I prove thus.
Things cannot be known to be future until they are future; (for to apprehend
or conceive things to be future, when they are not future, is not to know, but
to err,) but contingent things, and only possible to be or not to be, do not
become future till the determination of Gods will has made them future.
Therefore contingent things cannot be known to be future but upon the
determination of God will.

The minor I prove thus: Of their own nature they are not future, but only
possible; and they cannot pass from the condition of things merely possible,
to the condition of things future, without a cause from without. And no cause
of this translation can be devised, but the will of God. Which I prove thus. If
some other cause, then either without God, or within God; not without God, for
these things were future from everlasting; but from everlasting there was no
cause at all existent without God; Therefore the cause hereof, if any where to
be found, must be found within God. We say it is his will; which if you deny,
you must show what else can be the cause: you commonly flee to Gods knowledge,
and the infinity thereof, but in vain, for already they are supposed to be
future before God knows them. And indeed it belongs to knowledge to know all
things that are to come, not to make them to be to come.

Fourthly, it is possible that Antichrist shall fall in the year 1630, it is
possible that he should fall the year before, it is possible he should fall the
year after: it was possible he should have fallen ten years ago; it is
possible he should fall ten years hence: all these being real effects
possible, must by your doctrine be found eminently in the divine essence, and
God knowing his divine essence, must know them all, and not only that they are
possible, but that they shall all come to pass: For in this sense you speak
of Gods knowledge of future contingents, namely, of knowing that they shall
come to pass, and when they shall come to pass.

Again, set we the fall of Antichrist at an hundred different points of time,
whereof let us suppose one to be true, and the other false; yet all in their
own nature alike possible: why should the fall of Antichrist in the true point
of time be included in Gods essence more then the other, all being alike
possible; and that very instante wherein the fall of Antichrist shall be, it
being as possible that it should not be, and that possibility also being
included in the essence of God, as well as any other? Perhaps you will say that
this being a truth is included in the essence of God, and not the others, being
untruths. But then I demand how this became to be a truth, that Antichrist
should fall at such a time, rather then at another, it being as possible to
fall out at any other time as at this, and as possible not to fall out at this
time as at any other, and all these possibilities equally included in the
essence of God I say again, how came this to be a truth, answer me, not of
its own nature, for the contrary hereunto is supposed on both sides, namely,
that of his own nature it was only possible: therefore you must assign some
cause from without; and because you like not to acknowledge the determination of
Gods will to be the cause hereof, you must allege some other cause. I see you
usually fly to the infinity of Gods knowledge, but in vain; for Gods
knowledge is to know truths, and not to make them.

Lastly, by this doctrine of yours it will follow that God knew the world would
be made, before ever God determined to make^^, to wit, by virtue of his
infinite knowledge. Now what a fair way this opens unto Atheism, let the
wise and learned Reader judge indifferently. Heretofore I confess you seemed
to maintain the existence of all things from everlasting in eternity; which if
it were true, then this might minister an apparent ground of Gods knowledge of
all things, be they never so contingent, for as much as they are supposed to
exist before him. But here you have assigned nothing for the ground hereof
hitherunto, but only the infinity of Gods knowledge. But in the next sentence
I think you cast about for this also. As Balaam did many ways to serve his
turn in the course of his divinations; and all is fish that comes to your net;
so it may serve your turn to oppose in this question, the determination of
Gods will. Well, thus it is: For as Gods essence is present in every place as
it were an ubiquitarie center, (for indeed if a body were infinite, everywhere
might be imagined a center: and you do much affect to compare the nature of
God to impossibilities, and sometimes prefer him so far, as to compare him
to just nothing,) so is his eternity or infinite duration coexistent to every
part of succession, and yet withal is round about. He it is that drives
things future upon us, being from eternity as well beyond as on this side of
them. We have been acquainted with these absurd paradoxes of yors heretofore,
so that now we cease to admire them. But first we do deny the comparative
coherence So, which has force of an argument by way of comparison: but it has
no force here, because there is no proportion betwixt the things compared. Gods
presence is in every place, no marvel; for all places do ex^st together. And
so if all times did exist together, God eternity should coexist with all times:
But it is impossible that all times should exist together, because time
consists in succession of parts: But as one time and the things therein shall
exist after another, so God shall coexist with them. So then Gods presence is
in every place, and Gods eternity coexists with every time, and that
indivisibly: but with a great difference: for God all at once coexists with
every place, but not all at once does he coexist with every time, but
successively; for as much as time does not otherwise exist then successively.
Nay the comparison is flat against you. For like as God not only coexisteth at
this present with every place that is existent, but shall coexist with a world
ten times as big, whenever by the will of God such a world shall have
existence, but for the present coexisteth only with the places that are: In
like sort God for the present coexisteth only with time present, and with all
things in time present, but shall by virtue of eternity coexist also with all
times to come, and all things therein ten times longer then the world shall
last, if so be that by the will of God the world should last ten times longer
then it shall: but for the present he does coexist only with the time present,
and the things contained therein.

Yet this a^seth not from any divisible succession in God, in whom as there is
no shadow of change, so there can be no succession; but only from the
divisible succession of things without God, both time and motion, and things
subject thereunto, with all which God does and still shall coexist in their
courses of succession, without succession in himself; Like unto a Pole fixed
in a river that coexisteth with several parts of water succeeding one another
it self being unmovable. Now that God does not coexist at once by virtue of
his eternity with all parts of time and the things therein, I demonstrate thus.
If God at this time present did coexist with all parts of time, then all parts
of time should at this present coexist with God, both time past and time to
come; And by the same reason, before ever the World was, you might say that the
whole course of time did coexist with God, And if coexist, then surely it did
exist; and so time had an eternal existence as well as Gods eternity it self.
It is true some have conceited that eternity does ambire tempus, but only in
this sense, that as it was before it, so it is after it; If they had said so it
shall be after it, it were tolerable. For we believe the World shall have an
end. But I never yet heard or read of any but your self that made eternity to
be round about it, so to make way for your circular duration: For in this sense
time shall not only have two ends but two sides also, or rather neither end nor
side as if it were round as a tennis ball.

In the prosecution of the same w^ld phrase, you tell us that God, by virtue of
his eternity, is as well beyond all thing^s to come, as on this side of them.
Belike as the Heavens are on either side of the earth, so eternity is on either
side of time. And indeed if the parts of time were coexistent as the parts of
heaven and earth are, it were to the purpose; but the succession of time in the
parts thereof marres the play and discovers the wildness of this fiction. That
which we call beyond in space of place applied to time is rather long before
then long after; and the reason is, because to be beyond, does suppose
existence either being as in place, or having been as in time. But as for
things that are to come herafter, they neither have existence at this present,
nor ever had. But let it be applied as you will, so you speak plainly, that
so we may encounter men and not shadows. Say that God is after all things to
come; I say this is false, and thus I prove it. To be after another is to
suppose the existence of that other thing precedent. But things to come have
not yet had ^hiero existence, therefore God cannot be said to be after them. It
is true to say that God shall be after all things to come in this World, for as
much as after they are come and gone, Gods existence shall continue.

It is true as you say, Though God should create other creatures without the
circumference of this World, they should be all within his presence. In like
sort though the World should last ten times longer then God has appointed it,
yet should God by virtue of his eternity coexist with it: Herein the
comparison holds with good congruity. But like as Gods presence is not with a
greater circumference till such a circumference does actually exist; in like
sort Gods duration does not coexist with any duration to come, until it
existeth. And in each case it is true that he gains not any new existence, but
only takes a denomination of coexistence with them; But not until they do
exist; for till they exist they cannot be said to have any existence with him,
which before they had not. And this your self make the ground of denomination
of Gods coexistence with them. We do not only acknowledge that things when
they come to pass, do fall within the Sphere of Gods actual knowledge, but
also before they come to pass, we say, they are known to God, and the precise
time when every thing shall come to pass. I have already showed the absurdity
of that conceit of yours of environing succession. Now I say it is directly
false to say that Gods knowledge is coexistent to every successive act. And the
reason is not far off but at hand. For if God or his knowledge were
coexistent to every successive act the^ every successive act were also
coexistent to Gods knowledge and to God himself; and if coexistent, then
existent; and so both time past and time to come and all things in them should
at this present be existent. And but erst your self professed that God takes
the denomination of coexistence with his creatures upon their existence in him,
which before they had not: which is manifestly contradictious to those wild
assertions which you have so often scattered, namely, that God is coexistent
with every successive act, and with all times.

Likewise in the next sentence you acknowledge that the creature gets
coexistence with eternity anew; therefore it had not always coexistence with
it, nor it with the creature: Gods knowledge is still the same, and therefore
not so much as in this respect is there any motion or change in God; and
consequently no succession, though the things that are known may succeed in
their coexistence to one another, and consequently in their coexistence with
God.

The Scripture without distinction professes that God both is, and was, and is
to come: which yet is not to signify any priority or posteriority in him in
respect of any things succeeding in him, but only in respect of things
succeeding without him. For as much as the things that are past did coexist
with God at the time of their being, and things long before them also were not
before God. In like sort things to come, whenever they come shall find God
coexistent with them, and whenever they vanish, shall leave Gods existence
still continuing the same behind them. It is true, Gods knowledge may be said
to contain our knowledge, in as much as he knows all that we know, and much
more: but it is absurd to say that his knowledge resembles ours; for there is
no likeness between them.

But whereas you touch by the way that things to come to us are only to come,
thereby you imply one of your well known paradoxes, that things to come are not
only to come unto God; the meaning is, that they are not only to come to him,
but present to him also. It is enough for you to dictate mysteries. By the same
proportion of truth, things past, which are only past to us, are not so only
to him, but unto him they are not only past, but present also; this is good
hobgoblin stuff, whether you count it Philosophy or Divinity. In the next
place you tell us that For us to apprehend a thing past as contingent, is not
impossible. About the coherence I will not question you; you take liberty to
discourse at pleasure. In the very next page you say that it is in our power to
make a thing necessary to morrow, which is truly contingent this day. As I take
it, it proceeds in congruity to that Maxim, Quicquid est quando est necesse
est esse. And therefore if once I do that which is in my power to do, when I
once have done it, it is necessary, whereas before it was contingent. (...) on
the contrary you will have it not impossible to apprehend a thing as contingent
after it is done and past, whereas this was wont to be held impossible to God
himself to make undone that which was already done. In a word it is held flat
contradiction. For to be contingent is to be indifferent to be or not to be.
But that which is, neither is nor possibly can be indifferent to be or not to
be. Yet herehence it follows not, that it came to pass necessarily there is
no color for any such inference. For what? does nothing come to pass but
necessarily? but whether it comes to pass necessarily or contingently, being
once come to pass the contingencie of it is at an end, and past irrecoverably.
For it is no longer indifferent to be or not to be. And your caution is very
idle that you put in, lest upon the passing of a contingent thing we should
conceive it to come to pass necessarily. Yet notwithstanding that which comes
to pass contingently in respect of the manner of existence, may of necessity
come to pass upon supposition of Gods decree, as the calling of the Jews, the
destruction of Antichrist which we look for. So the restoring of the Jews out
of the captivity of Babylon, the burning of the Prophets bones upon the Altar
by Josiah, the killing of Sennacherib by his own children, the taking of
Zedechiah and carrying him into Babylon, yet so as he could never see it, for
his eyes should be pulled out first.

Again, though they come to pass contingently, yet why should you deny, or
would not have us conceive that they fall out certainly? though uncertainly to
man, yet undoubtedly whatsoever comes to pass, comes to pass most certainly
unto God: yet no doubt but the production of it was contingent, yea and
sometimes casual in respect of second causes. The event is not necessary in
respect of the manner of producing it. But being produced, now it must needs be
produced, and it is impossible it should be otherwise.

Neither does our knowledge of any thing change the nature of it. Neither is
our knowledge necessary (though you say so) of things past or present but
merely contingent in the generation thereof also; Though as of all other
contingents, so of our knowledge also, it is true that when once it is, it is
imimpossible it should not be, or not have been at all. In a word upon the
existence thereof, the indifferency thereof, to be or not be, is utterly
vanished. But herhence to infer the like, not of Gods foreknowledge only but
of his decrees also, is a very wild inference. Yet we willingly grant that
Gods knowledge of things does no way alier the nature of them, or of the manner
of their ex^stence. No nor his decree neither. For though he decreed to make
the World, yet the World we say came to pass never a whit the lesle
contingently. And though God has decreed the fall of Antichrist, and that
Babylon shall be burnt with fire: yet these shall come to pass never a whit
the less contingently. For God decrees not only res ipsas, but modus rerum,
to wit that some things shall come to pass necessarily, and somethings
contingently. And so the effectual will of God in Aquinas his judgment is the
rate of all contingency. But yet notwithstanding even from the foreknowledge of
God there rises a necessity of consequence as thus: If God foreknowes such a
thing shall come to pass, then it is necessary it shall come to pass, though
perhaps he knows it shall come to pass not necessarily but contingently. How
much more does such a necessity arise from the decree of God as thus. If God
has decreed the World should have an end, it is necessary the World should
have an end, yet not necessarily but contingently. For as God did work freely
in making the World, so shall he work as freely in setting an end unto it. So
far are we from saying that Gods decrees take away contingency from any
thing, as that rather we aver that it does maintain it.

And you show either a great deal of ignorance in not understanding aright
your adversaries tenets which you impugn, or that which is a great deal worse
in dissembling and corrupting it. But I bear with you, it may be you fashion
it in such a kind as may best give way to some conceytes of yours, and very
few arguments. Yet by your leave the more infallible any knowledge is, either
of God, Angel or man, the more fit it shall be to found a necessity of
consequence thereupon thus; It is infallibly foreknowne, ergo it is necessary
that it should be. Here follows another extravagant of yours, for insteede of
opposing that opinion which maintaynes the ground of Gods foreknowledge of
future contingents to be the determination of his will, you leave that and
oppose the derivaiton of Gods infallibility from the absolute necessity of
the event. An opinion that I never knew any man patronize; but it seems you
would draw their opinion unto this, who maintain that God foreknowes all
things by seeing the determination of his own will concerning the futurition
of them. Now, I pray you, of those that take this course who ever said that the
events decreed by God were of absolute necessity? Yourselfe I have observed to
profess, that upon Gods decree touching the futurition of a contingent thing,
as namely, the apprehensio^ of a Traitor, the success of the means tending
thereunto is absolutely necessary as in this very chapter in the end of the
first Section. But never was I acquainted with any of our divines that said so
much. We profess that the producing of contingents is absolutely contingent,
only this contingent production they hold to be necessary upon supposition of
the will of God. And Durand wondereth that any should conceive things to fall
out necessarily in respect of the will of God, whereas on the contrary he
conceaves it to be a clear thing, that not only contingent things but even
necessary th^nges also (as we call them) do come to pass, all contingently in
respect of the will of God.

They that ground Gods foreknowledge of future contingents upon things without
God, do usually ground it not upon any absolute necessity of the events
themselves, as upon the causes producing them, which though they work
contingently and not necessarily, yet this they th^nke nothing hinders the
infallibility of God knowledge, because he is able to comprehend all failings
possible, and to discern in what case they take place, and in what not; which
in effect is to rest upon the condition of Gods knowledge in it self, as you
here do: and because it is infinite therehence to conclude that it is
infallible. An invention of late years, and brought in by the Jesuits,
together with their doctrine concerning scientia media.

For whereas before there was only a double knowledge found in God, the one
antecedent to his will which they called scientia simplicis intelligentiae,
whereby he understood his own essence, and therewithal all necessary truths,
and all things possible; the other subsequent to the will of God, which they
called scientia visionis, and hereby he knows all things past, present, and
to come, all which they acknowledge to be dependant upon the will of God; the
Jesuits have of late years devised a middle knowledge between th^se two, and
it consists in know^ng not things necessary, nor things contingent, that have
been, are, or shall be, but in knowing what would be in such or such a case;
as for example, what a man in such a case, thus or thus moved and induced unto
good or evil, would do or not do

And the ground hereof they make the infinity of Gods knowledge, as I remember
Vasquius expressly professes so much, and so (as well they may) make this
infinity of Gods knowledge the ground of knowing all future contingents. For
although Suarez takes upon him to confute Palatius, who as he has maintained
that God knows future contingents De absol. scientia fut. conting. l. 1 c. 5.
by reason of the efficacy of his knowledge, yet judge I pray, whether himself
differ from him when he come to prove his own opinion, which is this: In Deo
sola essentia ejus est sufficiens ratio cujuscunque cognitionis possibilis, cum
in virtute and efficacitate Ibid. c. 8.
intelligendi sit simpliciter infinita. In God his essence alone is a
sufficient cause of all knowledge possible, considering that virtue and
efficacy of knowing it is simply infinite. So Vasquez; Deus, quae sua est
infinitas, efficacitate sui intellectus omnia intelligibilia intellectu suo
penetrat: and again, Quia divinus intellectus infinitae virtutis est, quicquid
intelligibile est necessario debet amplecti and intelligere. Nam si aliquid ab
ipso infinito intellectu non posset intelligi, a quo alio posset? And indeed
were future contingents intellig^ble, there were no further question to be
made, but that his knowledge were sufficient to comprehend them. But it is
apparent that no such contingent is knowable as a thing to come, more th^n as a
thing not to come in its own nature, and consequently God can no more know
that it is to come, then that it is not to come; unless that which in its own
nature is only possible be determined this way or that way, and consequently
made future or not future.

This objection Suarez foreseeth and proposes: Sicut divina Lib. de scien fut.
conting.
potentia non potest facere id quod de se non est factibile, ita nec scientia
divina scire potest id quod ex se scibile non est, neque certum judicium far
de eo quod in se omnino incertum est: Nam neque scientia potest ferri extra
objectum suum, neque potest suo modo non commensurari illi in certitudine, and
infallibilitate, quia requirit adaequationem. And to this purpose he alleges
Thomas, saying; Scientiam non posse esse necessariam, nisi objectum sub aliqua
ratione qua attingitur, necessitatem habeat. Et hoc modo dici potest requiri ex
part objecti certitudinem objectivam, id est, talem modum veritatis, quae apta
sit, ut certum and infallibile judicium feratur, quod sane habet omnis veritas
hoc ipso quod determinata est. In which latter words he gives in brief a
better and fairer answer, then in the whole distinction following, if he be
able to make good what he says. For indeed every truth determinate is a
sufficient object of knowledge.

But I would know of him or you, how comes it to be true that such a
contingent shall exist, whereas in his own nature it is only possible to
exist, and indifferent as well not to exist as to exist. As for example, how is
it true that to morrow it shall rain, rather then that to morrow it shall not
rain, seeing in it self it is no more inclinable to the one then to the
other. If the one were true and the other false, then there were no question,
but God should know the one to be true and the other to be false. But seeing
there is no reason given by Suarez, why the one should be true rather then the
other; there is no reason why one should be known of God to be true more then
the other. And therefore Suarez lays for a ground that future contingents
have from all eternity a determinate truth, but shows not how they come to
have their truth; nor how things merely possible in themselves come to be
future, which as it is appare^t, could not possibly be without a cause. But had
he gone about this work, which indeed was most necessary, the truth would
soon have appeared in his colors. For it will soon be found that nothing
could be the cause hereof but the will of God. Which was the opinion as he
professes both of Ricardus, and of Scotus, and in effect of Cajetan and of
many of the Thomist; and that Alexander of Hales favors it.

Neither could he be ignorant that Alvarez maintaynes it to have been the
opin^on of Aquinas also. To the same opinion Durand not only inclines as Vasqu
us writes in 1. disp. 65. cap. 1. but to it only adheres as the same Vasquius
notes in the sa^e disputation, cap. 2. Durands words are plain; Not only Gods
prescience of a thing to come is joined with his will to have t^ come, in 1.
did. 35. q 3. number. 25. Deum prescire, A fore, coexigit. Deum velle, A fore.
But also that his prescience is built hereupon ibidem did. 39. q. 1. number. 10.
in these words. Repraesentatur res fore vel non fore per essentiam divinam, non
ut est solum essentia virtualiter rem omnem continens, sed ut est volens rem
possibilem sore, and quia libere vult rem fore. And Vasquius himself not only
acknowledges that from the decree of Gods will may sufficiently be gathered
the certeintie of knowledge which God has of future contingents, in 1. disp.
65. cap. 4. but also proposing the same objection that Suarez does above
mentioned, answeareth it not as Suarez does by saying, Things contingent have a
determinate truth, as touching their being for the the time to come, whereof we
nothing doubt, but shows whence they have it, which point Suarez declined
wholly tanquam praecipitium as a breaknecke to his own opinion.

But Vasquius deals more plainly, and professes that future things of merely
possible become future by virtue of the decree of God. Observandum est (says
he) futurum ita esse objectum scientiae Dei infallibilis eo ipso quod re ipsa
futurum In 1. did. 65. cap. 4. number. 22.
est, ut tamen nostro modo intelligendi supponat decretum Dei, tan quam causam
ante quam nihil intelligitur vere esse futurum. And again, Quia nulla res ex
se futura est, sed ex voluntate and omnipotentia Dei, ideo antequam
intelligantur futura, supponitur Dei voluntas ut causa illius non quidem
durationis ordine sed rationis, and number. 23. Sicut creatura nondum possibilis
est, donec Deus intelligatur esse, qui est primum omnium ens, sic etiam
creatura nondum est futura donec decretum voluntatis esse intelligatur, ex quo
ut ex causa futura est. Thus Vusquius mainteyning the infinity of Gods
knowledge to be the ground of his knowledge of future contingents, as well as
you do, yet does not make use of this his opinion to oppose the forgoing of
the determination of Gods will as you do. Yet what have you conferred to the
overthrowe of that opinion which you impugn, that deserves to be named the
same day with the least part of the meanest of those that have mainteyned it.
You only show your teethe, and proceed confidently in dictating what pleases
you without any evidence of reason to confirm what you so boldly propos^. I
long to come to an end of this.

In the next place you give some reason for your assertion. As when you say, We
are able by Gods permission to lay a necessity upon contingents and so to
foreknowe them, yet our knowledge still is but finite. Hence you seem willing
to infer that therefore God seeing his knowledge is infinite is able to know
future contingents without laying any necessity upon them, by the
determination of his will. I am very glad to hear you reason, because it is so
rare with you herein like to Hector Naevianus, Qui Philosophari volebat sed
paucis.

Henry the seventh of England was wont to say he desired to look his dangers in
the face: so I desire to know what my opposite has to say against the truth I
defend. I have been so long exercised in these points, and encountered such
champions, that I have no cause to fear your colors, nor powder and shot
neither: wherefore in the first place I answer, that the difference between
knowledge finite and infinite does not require that infinite knowledge should
extend so far as to know things unknowable, for that were to extend beyond
his object. But rather herein they differ, of things knowable, finite knowledge
takes notice only of some; infinite knowledge comprehends all. Now things
contingent till they are determined to come to pass, or not to come to pass,
are not knowable that they shall come to pass, nor are knowable that they
shall not come to pass; and consequently cannot be known that they shall come
to pass, or known that they shall not come to pass.

For if the understanding of man does apprehend a thing as future which is not
future, herein he cannot be said to know but to err rather. Now that which in
its own nature is only possible, cannot pass from this condition into the
condition of a thing future, without some cause. Now you have showed no cause
of this alteration, nor you list not to inquire into it, it is too hot for your
fingers. For by inquiry it would be found that no cause hereof can be
assigned, but only the will of God.

Secondly, I deny that God by determining things contingent, and in their
nature merely possible, making them future, does lay any necessity upon them,
but rather decrees a contingent manner of production unto them, answerable
unto their natures. For as he decrees that necessary things shall come to
pass necessarily, so he decrees that contingent things shall come to pass
contingently.

Thirdly, as touching your antecedent, I desire to know what things contingent
those are, whereupon we can lay any necessity, whereby to foretell them, for it
passes my imagination to divine. This may well go for your own. I have been
acquainted with many disputants in this argument, I never met with any argument
of any kin to this. Certainly there is some exquisite curiosity in it. For
you suppose men may doubt of this, and therefore you undertake to prove it: but
when? In your treatise of the divine providence, that I hear is newly printed,
we shall hear of it belike ere long, in case you do not forget what you
promised: and the reason why I may doubt hereof is this; In the end of the
fifth Section of this Chapter you told us that you were anon to intimate, that
the reservation of such liberty unto God himselse, (as never to pass any
decree whereby to bind his own hands) is a point of high perfection. Now this
anon of yours is yet to come, for hitherto since we parted from that section
we have received no intimation hereof. But be it, that you will be as good as
your word, what is that which you undertake to demonstrate? That some events
which are to day truly contingent, may by our industry become to morrow truly
necessary. But this needs no demonstration. For whatsoever I do, by doing it,
I make that necessary, which before was contingent. For every Sophister knows
out of Aristotle, and out of common sense also, that Omne quod est quando est
necesse est esse. But this is nothing to your purpose. For you speak of such a
necessity laid upon contingents, as whereby we might foreknow them. But by
doing things I cannot fo^^know them; for knowledge of things upon the doing of
them, is rather after-knowledge then fore knowledge.

And therefore though heretofore I thought of no other meaning of these words
of yours then this, yet now by pondering better upon it I conceive you have a
farther reach, and that of a mysterious nature: for as much as you are loath to
utter it, and give an instance of that which you deliver. Yet why should you be
loath to utter that which you presume no intelligent Christian will deny? This
makes me look back again upon your words, to try whether I can start the
mystery. And hereupon I discover other mysteries, though not the maine; as
when you say, We are able (after this necessity laid upon them by our selves)
infallibly to foreknow and foretell. Now this speech is mysterious and
imperfect: for you do not tell us what we may foreknowe and foretell whether
it be the things themselves whereupon we have laid the necessity spoken of, or
rather some things else; but neither of these things do you acquaint us with
here. For if you had I should make no question, but if we might foreknowe them,
whatsoever they be, we might without any more ado foretell them, if we were
not tonguetied.

Now no necessity can we lay upon any thing but by doing it, and such a thing
cannot be said hereupon to beforeknowne, therefore undoubtedly your meaning is,
that by doing something before contingent, and thereby laying a necessity upon,
it we may foreknowe another thing. Now this may prove nothing to your present
purpose; and yourselfe in this argumentation quite besides the cushion. For
Gods foreknowledge which you impugn is the foreknowledge of a thing
contingent, by willing it.

But this foreknowledge of man, shall be the foreknowledge of one thing by
willing and doing of another; now these are no more suitable then the hares
head and the goose gibletts. And to proceed a little further in my conjectures,
because your concealments put me to it, I say your concealment is most
unseasonable. For as much as you conceal that whereupon your argument depends,
like unto a Physician that giving a Medicine to his patient, he should tell him
there is one necessary ingredient more belonging to it, and he must suspend the
taking of it, until he goes to the East Indies to ferche it. In which case
his patient may have his green cap on his head before he return.

Suppose faith and repentance be those contingent things upon which I may lay a
necessity by beleiving and repenting; will you say hereupon I may foretell my
salvation? If this be it, this again is nothing to the purpose in a second
respect. For the assurance of my salvation is not so much built upon my faith
and repentance, as upon my perseverance in faith and repentance unto the end.
And I cannot hereupon foreknowe or foretell my salvation until I am dead,
which is not to foreknowe it, much less to foretell it.

Again my assurance of salvation depends not so much upon my faith and
repentance, and perseverance in both, as upon the revelation that God has
made, that as many as finally believe and repent shall be saved; and also that
if once I believe and repent truly I shall continue therein to the end; which I
have cause to doubt whether you believe. Again do you think indeed, that it
is by Gods permission only that men do believe and repent? and do you think
good to deny that God does effectually work them unto faith and repentance?
You must needs take this course. For if God be indeed the Author of faith
and repentance, the^ he did decree to give men faith and repentance, and so
contingents should be decreed by God, and God should foreknowe them by seeing
the purpose of his own will to bestow them.

Thus I have ventured to boult out the mysteries which you conceal. If I have
missed of the mark, I will aim at it no more and give it over with a
mysterium quaere, as Schoolmen sometimes when they have hunted themselves out
of breathe they have ended their discourse with a Responsionem quaere. Yet we
have not finished this Section. The very next sentence is a Crevecoeur unto me,
I can make no sense of it: Succession is a scroule (as we imagine it)
containing several columns of contingency or indifferent possibilities, of
which only so many or so much of any as in revolution of time take ink and are
unfolded become visible to men and Angels. Alas, what disaster has befallen
me, that I should divert from other studies wherein I fought the Lords
battayles against foreign enemies, and encountered with errors plainly set
forth nothing involved with affected phrases, or streynes of expression in
far fetched Metaphors, but strengthened with such arms as wit could afford
without Rhetorical painting, their manner of fight well known unto me, and in
confuting whereof I profited myself and gained increase of knowledge and of
ability in mainteining the truth of God. And now to be cast upon such
discourses the opening of the meaning, whereof in one sentence sometimes costs
me more pains then the answering of their best argument, and all this without
any profit redounding unto my self, my time wasted, my knowledge no whit
bettered: well, jacta est alea, we must proceed, and since our hand is put to
this plo^gh, though oftentimes I look back, and come to a parle about not
intermission only but interruption also, yet I must not break off. Succession
is as much as time, and this you compare to a scroule containing possibilities.
Out upon the shallowness of my wits, that can comprehend no analogy in this
comparison. For though all changeable things are said to be in time, yet
nothing like unto writing which is in a scroule, as in the subject of it. For
time is rather an antecedent to things durable, then things durable an
antecedent to time. But to say that time contains possibilities, is a wilder
speech then the former. For before ever any time was, possibilities were as
many as now, and more also. For the world was possible, and every part of it,
and every thing that since has been, or shall be, even before the world was,
was possible like as the world was. Aga^ne, the duration of possibilties has
no succession; for if it had, then time should have been before the world was.

By unfolding of these possibilities, I think you intend the bringing of them
into act, and this is to take ink, as you phrasifie it. Now I had thought the
scroule had contained only those things that are written in it, and so the
things brought forth in it, and not those things that are not written, and so
accordingly neither time is to be accounted to contain possibilities. Yet all
things that are brought forth, surely are not visible to men, howsoever they
are to Angels. So that when the painting with a great deal of intention of
spirit and consideration, is washed off, the face of the sentence is but this.
In time many things before possible are brought forth into act: what is mine
understanding the better for this, or my readers either?

Then you return to your former mad paradoxes, and tell us again, (to inure
us to your bugbeares, that hereafter we might be the less affrighted with
them,) that the Almighty looks on all things as well from that end of time
which is to come, as from that which is past; and that his infinite and
eternal wisdom does not only encompasse all things that come to pass, as the
circumference does the center, but penetrates the whole scroule of succession
from end to end, more clearly then the Suns brightness does the perspicuous
air. To this I answer, that it is indifferent unto man in the course of his
knowledge, to take notice of things that have been either from the beginning
of the world to Noah's flood, or from Noah's flood to the beginning of the world.
So likewise it is indifferent unto us to take notice of things done from this
day upwards to the beginning of the world, or from the beginning of the world
to this day.

As for things to come they are unknown unto us. But if they were known unto
us, as by revelation they may, it were as easy for us to take notice of them
successively from the end of the world, rising upwards unto this day, or
proceeding from this day unto the end of the world. As for notice of them all
at once, it is impossible to be taken by us, our nature disposes us to
understand things only successively one after another. Now it is without
question that all things are known to God that have been from the beginning
of the world unto this day, and that shall be from this day to the end of the
world. And therefore if God were to take notice of them, and that in a
successive manner as we do, it were indifferent for him to take into
consideration first the things that have been the first year of this world,
then those things that came to pass the next year, and so forwards unto this
present year, and so successively to take notice of what shall be the next
year, and so onwards unto the end of the world. Or otherwise he might begin to
take notice of those things that shall come to pass the last year of the
world, then what shall come to pass the year before it, and so upwards unto
this year, and thence proceed to consider what has been the last year, and
so upwards unto the first year of the world.

But albeit this kind of successive consideration be incident unto man, yet it
is not so with God. He has from everlasting known what from the beginning of
the world unto the end should come to pass, and that not successively but all
at once. For his whole knowledge and every part of it is everlasting. And
therefore it is absurd to say that God knows things from the beginning of the
world unto the end, unless in this sense, God knows all things, which things
come to pass from the beginning of the World unto the end, thereby denoting
the succession of things in the World, not in the knowledge of God. But much
more absurd is it to say that God knows all things from the end of the World
to the beginning of it: because this speech can admit no tolerable congruity
of explication, like the former, namely by applying it, not to any succession
in the knowledge of God, but to the succession of things in the World. For
albeit that we may well say that things do succeed in course from the
beginning of the World to the end; yet it were absurd to say that things do
succeed in course from the end of the World to the beginning. You may as well
say, A man's life has continued not only from the beginning to the end, but
also from the end unto the beginning, which is as much as to turn a man's heels
upwards, and place them where the head should be.

As for Gods incompassing of time as the circumference does the center
(whereunto you may add the circular duration formerly spoken of) and the
penetrating of the whole scroll of succession from end to end, wherein you so
much please your self as in rare notions, I take them to be no better then
sick men's dreams: we have nauseated enough upon them, you needed not to have
repeated them, yet you will have these conceyts of yours to be receyved for
precious truths, as Mountebanks commend their oils and balmes, and not so
only, but to be as clear as the Sun also. It is well that paper blusheth
not. Every man sees how the brightness of the Sun does pierce the air, does
every man acknowledge God to incompasse time by his eternity? Sure I am Durand
censures this conceit as absurd. Yet I deny not but that others might doat
upon it as well as your self, taking it upon trust without examination.

And the corruptnes of man's mind may appear in this very vanity, that he
pleases himself many times in such notions as he understands not. Again,
does every man that clearly sees how the same peirceth the air, as clearly see
how Gods eternity does penetrate all time both all that is past and that which
is to come, in such sort as indivisibly (for eternity is indivisible) to
coexist with it? For hitherto tends the reach of your me^ning. A most absurd
conceyte. For therhence it would follow that all parts of time past, and all
parts of time to come do coexist together at this present; For if eternity
does now coexist with them, then at this present they must needs coexist with
it, and consequently they must exist at this present, (otherwise how could they
coexist) whence it follows that both time past should be present, and also
time to come, As absurd and void of all reason is that speech of yours, when
you say that Gods finger has drawn columus of possibilities. God knows
things possible, I confess, but his finger has not drawn these
possibilities, no more the^ he has drawn himself and his own omnipotent
nature. For nothing is required to the denomination of the possibility of any
thing, but this, that God is armed with almighty power, whereby he is able to
bring it to pass. Now amongst possible things some are brought forth
immediately by God, some by second causes, whether by God or by second causes,
they are all known to God, and who doubts now adays of this? yet this is the
whole contents of your last sentence, which you have commended unto us so
embroydered with art, and with the needle work of quilting eloquence, as if
you travayled in childbirth to be delivered of words and phrases, which many
times vent untruthes, commonly deliver but vulgar sense, and sometimes end in
no sense. Yet when a man or ox or ass brings forth any thing that is
possible; you say it is like the embroyderer who fills the drawers obscure
pattern with conspicuous branches of silk, gold, or silver, which yet
notwithstanding is fulfilled in bringing forth that which is accoumpted the
eigth deadly sin among the Irishe; were ever quaint terms and silken
similitudes worse bestowed? by the way forgetting that the Embroiderer himself
is a second cause in bringing forth things possible into act, as well as a boy
does in playing at Top and scourge. And you may as well compare the Embroiderer
to a boy playing at Top and scourge, as a boy playing at top and scourge to an
Embroiderer. Turpe est difficiles habere nugas: If any man prove an ounce the
wiser for this, he may soon prove as wise as Paul's steeple. I remember in the
beginning you called this discourse of yours a paradise of contemplation, and I
confess I find many flowers of Rhetoric growing therein, and especially
pre^ty similitudes, but by applying them they are utterly cast away, for
commonly they serve either for the illustration of untruths, or very vulgar
truths. And great pity but they should find a place among the toys in London.

12. In the last place for a congruous explication of Austines and Gregory's
meaning, in passages before mentioned, you commend unto us certain
observations as necessary extracts of what has hitherto been delivered. This
necessity I presume was no impeachment to the liberty of your will in broaching
them, for my part I see no necessity at all of them, nor of this whole
discourse of yours. In like sort as little necessary it was that my brains
should be surbeaten so often in hunting after the involved sense of many
sentences, through the thickets of wild phrases and figures, and affected
obscure expressions.

As touching the perfection of Gods knowledge incapable of addition, therein we
argue with you. Your next position is worthy of consideration; As Gods
knowledge does not make things to be, so neither does the immutable or absolute
certainty of his knowledge make things so known by him to be immutable, or
absolutely necessary either in themselves, or in respect of his eternal
knowledge. To this I answer, first to the first member of your sentence, that
great Divines from Austines days to these days have maintained that the
knowledge of God is the cause of things. And the reason they give is th^s;
because the knowledge of God is scientia artificis, the knowledge of a
craftsmaster. Now the case is clear, that craftsmasters by their knowledge do
work and cause things. Yet I am content to help you with a distinction, if
you will be pleased to accept of it. That the knowledge of God which is the
knowledge of an artificer, is the scientia simplicis intelligentiae, whereby
he knows all things possible, and how to order all things most conveniently
to their ends. But the knowledge you speak of here proceeds of scientia
visionis, whereby God ever knew what should come to pass: and this knowledge
indeed is not the cause of things. But as for the later member of this your
sentence, it might have been^ so carried as to give your self satisfaction (if
I be not deceived) and us also: as thus, So the certainty of Gods knowledge
does not make things certain; or if you would add the word necessary we
could have bo^ with it, though it marreth the proport^on; which precisely is
this, As knowledge does not make things to be, so certain knowledge does not
make things certainly to be. But you leaving out the word certainly, take away
all evidence of proportion. Belike you would acknowledge that certain
knowledge does make things certainly to be. But I do not like the proposition,
and the genius of your argument drawn from proportion, if it has any force any
way, has force against it.

Now if I do not acknowledge that certain knowledge makes things certainly to
be, much less would I acknowledge that it makes things necessarily to be.
There is so manifest reason against it, considering that all those things that
fall our contingently, are as certainly known to God, as those things that
come to pass certainly. Yet you (as ^imorous men never think themselves sure
enough,) are not content with this, but clogge your inference with other
needless circumstances, as in saying, absolutely necessary, and that not in
respect of themselves, but of Gods knowledge also: whereas without these the
comparison was incongruous enough. And these circumstances I say are needless,
because I would grant what you desire without these. But by your addition of
these I perceive your meaning: for hereby you imply that it is necessary that
things known by God shall come to pass: for though knowledge does not make
them to be, much less to be necessary, yet upon supposition of Gods knowledge,
it follows necessarily by way of argument, that such things as God foreknows
shall come to pass. This is of an undoubted truth, which kind of necessity is
not any necessity of being in the things themselves, but only of external
denomination upon supposition of Gods foreknowledge. And you do in vain seem
to strive against this; For can you deny this argument? God foreknowes that
Antichrist shall be destroyed; therefore it is necessary that Antichrist shall
be destroyed according to the time foreseen by God, neither will it herhence
follow, that therefore it is absolutely necessary that Antichrist should be
destroyed, as you very weakly suppose. For necessity upon suppositio^ only,
commonly called necessity of consequence was never yet taken for absolute
necessity by any that I know. I meddle not with the term immutable, because
it is nothing congruous in the application. For applied to Gods knowledge, it
signifies that knowledge which havinge being cannot be altered, but applied in
this sense to the event that comes to pass is untrue. For no event,
especially contingent, after it comes to pass is immutable. If applied to the
manner of coming to pass, yet it is not congruous. For God knowing that it
shall come to pass in a mutable manner (that is in a contingent manner, for if
that be not your meaning, I know not what is) the immutability of Gods
knowledge does rather confirm the contingency of the event, then diminish it.

Yet you suppose some would infer the contrary: but I assure you I am none of
them, and that for the reason before mentioned. Yet still it holds good, that
if God foreseeth such a thing shall come to pass; It follows of necessity
that the same thing shall come to pass, albeit not necessarily but
contingently; when you say, Gods knowledge of things mutable (that is of the
futurition of contingents; give me leave to construe you so, that I may fayrely
understand you) is absolutely necessary, all Schoolmen I think that ever
write are directly against you. And for good reason; for like as it was not at
all necessary that such a course of contingent things should be in the world as
now is, so neither was it necessary, much less absolutely necessary, that God
should know this course; for if he had ordained another course of things (as it
was very possible) then he had also known another course. But your meaning
though incommodiously expressed I conceyve to be this: Upon supposition that
thing should come to pass, it was necessary that God should know those things.
For it is impossible that he should be ignorant of any thing that is to come:
And this is a truth. But you have marred it by adding the word, absolutely. For
to be necessary in the sense before mentioned, is to be necessary upon
supposition only and not absolutely. Thus you see I would feign have healed the
incongruity of your position, but it will not be healed.

Again you tell us, that It is most true which S. Gregory says that things
future do not come upon God, as they do upon us, that things present do not
pass from him or by him, as they do from us. That which you take to be most
true, I take to be most false, in the sense wherein you deliver it. For like as
they pass from us by ceasing to coexist with us, so they pass also from God
as ceasing to coexist with him. And as they come upon us by beginning anew to
coexist with us, so they come upon God also, as beginning anew to coexist with
him. The conforming of space of time, with space of place, does abuse your
understanding, and cast you into error ere you are aware, though you will not
be persuaded of it. In space of place it is true things both coming toward us
yet do not come toward God; and passing by us and from us, yet do not pass
by God or from God.

The reason whereof is, because God does coexist with all places, and fills
all but man does not. And no marveile. For all places do actually exist, and
God existing too, they are truly said to coexist together.

But as for all the parts of time they do not exist together, and therefore
consequently cannot be said to coexist with God, neither God at once to
coexist with them. But as they do exist by succession one after another, so is
God said to coexist with them, not by reason of any succession in God, but
only in the creature, and as we lose our coexistence with creatures that
cease to be, so does God. For coexistence is an external denomination
attributed unto God from the existence of the creatures. In which sense he is
said to be He that was, and is, and is to come; to wit, in respect of his
coexistence which was with things that are past, and which is with things that
are present, and which shall be with things that are to come, to w^t, when
they are come.

But besides this succession in man of coexistence with other creatures, there
is also a succession in man which is not in God. For he grows or diminishes
in the quantity of his body, he is changed and altered to and fro in the
qualities both of body and soul. In body sometimes hot, sometimes cold,
sometime fair, sometimes foul. In soul he has for a while a growth in
knowledge, afterward he (...) and decays in knowledge. As for the duration
of his essence, that is without succession, as the Angels are. And to continue
the same as God does, is not to gain ought, but to keep that which he has.
God is always; so are Angels since the time they have been. The manner of
Gods duration is indivisible; such also is reputed the duration of Angels; whom
Schoolmen acknowledge, not to be measured by time, but by Aevum as touching
their substance; only as touching their thoughts, whereof there may be a
succession, they have invented a discreet time to be the measure thereof. God
loses no existence by antiquity: man neither loses nor gets existence by
continuance. For how should the continuation of existence be the losing of it?
and how can he get that which he has already? Accidents are gotten and lost,
I confess, nothing so in God. Thus your fancies cast about to gain some
confirmation of your former erroneous conceit, of Gods coexistence with all
parts of time; but nothing serves your turn. If by continuance alone we did
gain any thing, which before we had not, God himself should gain something
which before he had not. For without doubt he has continuance. Times passing
(you say) exonerate themselves into the Ocean of his infinite duration without
enlarging it; Times coming incessantly flow from it without diminution of
it. No doubt you please your self in these expressions: To me they are worse
then Empedocles his Androprora were to Aristotle. There is no canting like unto
this. The waters that run into the Sea, are a part of the Sea; thence they
came, and thither they return, as Solomon tells us. And therefore no marvel
Eccles. 1^
if the Sea neither is diminished by their egresse, nor by their regresse
enlarged. No creatures duration is a part of Gods duration, as the rivers are
part of the sea. And how does our duration flow from Gods, but as an efficient
cause, and that equivocall, that is wholly different? but water does not come
from the Sea, as from an efficient, much less equivocall, but as a part from
the whole. Neither indeed does our duration proceed from Gods duration, but
from his will. For our duration is our existence continued, and this from the
will of God. For he works all things according to the Ephesians. 1. 12.
counsel of his will.

Thus we can devise how our duration comes from God, though far different
from the flowing of the water from the Sea: but how our durations do exonerate
themselves into God, or into his duration, it surpasses the sphere of my
imagination to devise. I do not think Paracelsus was ever able to interpret
this. Yet some say he heard the devil read a lecture through a grate in the
University of Toledo. Yet you have not done traversing your ground. Times
future (you say) are said to come upon us, or to meet us, because our duration
or existence cannot reach to future things whilst they are future. Your figure
Catachresis when will it be at an end? when we talk of reaching, we suppose
the thing to have existence whereat we reach, but time future as yet exists
not. Yet you think God does reach it by coexistence with it. Yet I mark of
late you forbear th^s phrase. Is it not because it does manifestly discover
the error of your conceit? For to coexist with things future, does imply that
things future coexist, and consequently exist, and so they are present, and not
future. The very Angels are not of so long standing to day as they shall be to
morrow. This I confess is something, but I would gladly know what inference
you make herehence.

Angels have had a beginning; God has not: if God had a beginning, as Angels
have had, every day he should be of longer duration then he was the former, yet
without any change, and consequently without succession. But will you infer
herehence, therefore God has coexistence with things future? A consequence of
no color of probability; and the consequent in it self implying manifest
contradiction as before I have showed. Till future things exist, we have no
coexistence with them; nor God neither. For if God did coexist with them, they
should coexist with God, and consequently exist, and so cease to be future, and
forthwith become present. Yet you labor to prove the contrary; and so you may,
and sweat too, and be never a whit the nearer to that you seek for. God is
every way before time, (you say) that is, not only before it, as we account
(he is before that which is to come and so are we also, but he was before all
Worlds) but after it and behind it also. For that which we account after or
behind time, you call before it; that so with the better grace you may
attribute it unto God. But we like plain fellows, love to speak plainly,
and to call a spade a spade. And in the like language we deny that God is after
time to come, and prove it thus. To be in duration after any thing is to be
while that other thing is past, or at least, the first ex^stence of it; but God
in this sense cannot be said to be after time to come, because time to come is
neither yet past nor yet existent. Yet at length when divinations will not
serve your turn, you think to have gotten a text of Scripture for it. Gods
duration you say is Yesterday, to day to morrow and the same for ever. It is
well you did not quote Scripture, least so your pen might have been censured
as Corruptor stilus for putting into the text to morrow, and that in small
letters suitable with the former. Perhaps you may say, why may he not be as
well said to be to morrow, as to be Yesterday. I grant the proportion of truth
in both; but where do you find it, to be said of God that He is yesterday.
Take heed of adulter sensus which may be as bad as Corruptor stilus. Not in the
Hebrews where it is only said that Christ is the same yesterday, and to day
and for ever. Not that he is Yesterday, nor that he is To morrow; but rather to
the contrary thus, He was, he is, and he is to come: But still the same in
opposition to alteration, more ways then you have expressed; nor to alteration
only, but to all possibility of alteration. For he is of necessary being. It Is
false to say, that In his duration all things are. It being neither true
formally as it is manifest (for time is no part of eternity) nor eminently. For
it is nor Gods eternity that produces things, or maintayneth the duration of
things, but the will of God armed with power and wisdom to do every thing. At
first sight, I thought to have made no exception, against the last sentence;
but upon second thoughts two members of the three seem to be as faulty as
any. For things future have no being at all in esse reali, as touching real
being, they are in esse cognito and esse volito, known by God and decreed to
come to pass in due time. So likewise things past have no being at all, only
they are known of, and were decreed by God, to be in such a time as now is
past. And how can they be said to be in God? Not formally as is manifest; nor
eminently, for he cannot produce things past. For that were to make them not to
be past. Yet you end in a truth, that Things present cannot subsist without
him. I would you had both begun, and continued so. Yet this you corrupt with a
needlsse amplification, That presence cannot subsist without him, which being
but a relation requires no distinct operation, to sustain it, distinct from
that which susteyneth the foundation.

In the end of the fifth Section you promised to intimate a certain point of
high perfection in God consisting in the reservation of his liberty; but since
that time we never heard of it more.

CHAP. IX.
Of Divine Immutability.

IN the first place you tell us that some Schoolmen mould immutability in the
same conceit with eternity, and that others make that the offspring of this;
but you conceal your Authors. I see no reason for either, but manifest reason
I have against the first. For if the conceit of eternity were one and the same
with the conceit of immutability, then no man could conceive a thing to be
eternal, but forthwith he must conceive it to be immutable. But this is most
untrue. For Aristotle conceived the heavens and elements to be eternal both
ways, without beginning, and without end; yet did not conceive them to be
immutable, for as much as he acknowledged them to be all under motion; and the
elements also, as touching their parts subject to corruption. Plato though he
maintained the world to have had a beginning, yet he acknowledged it to be
eternal one way, that is, without end, yet did not conceive it to be
immutable. The first matter was generally held to be eternal both ways, yet
none maintained it to be immutable. And no marvel. For mutation comprehends
all kind of motion, and consequently immutability excludes all possibility of
motion, but eternity signifies only continuance for ever.

Now like as continuance for seven years, or an hundred years, etc. does not
require that the same thing should be without all change for seven years or
an hundred years, etc. much less does it include the notion of immutability
for such a space of years in the conceit thereof: so neither does continuance
for ever include the notion of being without all change for ever in the conceit
thereof.

Adam was made immortal, and so had continued if he had not sinned, yet should
he not have been free from all change. The Angels are eternal; that is, such
as shall continue for ever, and so were made, yet neither are they now, nor
were they made immutable. Indeed there are diverse kinds of motions, some are
in quality, called alterations; some in quantity, called augmentation and
diminution; some in place, called local motion; some in substance, as
generation and corruption. Immutability in this last kind comes nearest to
the conceit of eternity, yet there is a difference. For eternity signifies
only an everlasting continuance which may be joined with a possibility of
not-continuance, as in Angels, and the souls of men, and our bodies also in
the world to come; but immutability cannot be joined with such a possibility;
therefore the conceit of eternity and the conceit of immutabilitie are much
different. And for the same reason immutability cannot be the offspring of
eternity, rather eternity is the offspring of immutability. I think both
immediately flow from the manner of his being, which is necessary. The like
judgment may be made of that you avouch in the next place, to wit, That the
true explication of the former contains the truth of this. If by the former
you mean eternity, as I think you do, (though some while I referred it to
your discourse immediately preceding of Gods infinite wisdom, which you
chiefly place in foreknowing all things, which is a good reason of the
unchangeable nature of his will.) In my judgment immutability rather confirms
eternity, then eternity confirms immutabilitie: and the knowledge of Gods
eternity is the offspring of the knowledge of his immutability, rather then on
the contrary; and that for the reasons before given, to wit, because
immutability inferres eternity, eternity does not infer immutability.

2. That God is unchangeable I nothing doubt, but in my judgment you do not
well to prove it from the infiniteness of his essence; First because this
consequent carries no evidence with it. That nothing can be added to that
which is infinite carries some evidence, but that nothing can be diminished
from it, does not. Some have maintained that God can make an infinite
magnitude, and a number infinite as Hurtado di Mendosa disputes. Secondly your
argumentation is rather a Posteriori then a Priori. For if by essence infinite
you understand infinite in duration, which is as much as eternity, I have
already showed that immutability better inferres eternity then eternity does
infer immutability. But as for the necessity of Gods being that does
manifestly and a Priori infer his eternal being, and that it is impossible
he should cease to be. And Bradwardine maintaynes that this attribute of God
ens necessarium is the first attribute, as whence all other perfections are
manifestly derived. For that a less perfect nature should have a necessity of
being, and a more perfect nature should have a contingent being is most absurd
and impossible. For so that which is more perfect should have his dependence of
being from that which is less perfect. Wherefore seeing God is of necessary
being, it follows manifestly that he must be most perfect. Yet I have cause
to doubt of your sincerity in affirming, that To infinite perfection nothing
can accrewe. It is well known what conceyt Vorstius intertayned hereabouts, as
namely that Gods decrees are not everlasting; in which case some new act of
will does accrue to God, which before was not found in him. And I fear you will
be found to be of the same opinion. And I pray what meant you in the former
chapter and 5. Section to maintain that it is a point of high perfection for
God, to reserve his liberty, and what liberty is this but of decreeing? Yet
in the same Section you style Gods decrees everlasting. But that denomination
comes in against the hair, as if it were only to choke your reader and h^nder
him from laying that to your charge which this reservation of liberty, (which
you attribute to God, as a point of high perfection) does manifestly import.

When you say, that From infinite perfection nothing can fall but must fall
into God, or into infinite perfection seeing that he is in being infinite, in
such a conceyt streyned so high, that it breaks into nonsense and flat
contradiction. For if it fall from him, it falls not into him; ^f into him, it
falls not from him. In like sort in saying that God is indivisibly and totally
in every space that can be imagined, you contradict that which formerly you
have delivered in the chapter of Gods immensitie. For hence it follows that
God is in vacuo which you in plain terms denied there.

3. In the next place you propose a difficulty, and that is this: How Gods
will or counsel should be eternally immutable, and yet everlastingly free. And
in stead of answer you tell us, You see not what appearance of difficulty can
present it self, at least to such as bear the two former principles before
mentioned level in their minds and thoughts. So then two principles will
serve the turn to clear all this, provided that we keep them level in our
minds and thoughts: otherwise woe be to the funambulus if he swerve never so
little awry. Now these principles you say are first, That God is absolutely
infinite in being, the other, That he is absolutely perfect according to all
the branches of being or perfection by us conceivable or more then all these,
perfection it self. If you will believe me, I assure you, I do believe all
this, and yet I am as far to seek for clearing of the former difficulty as
ever. If the reason be because I do not keep them so levill in my mind and
thought as I should, I assure you, I would willingly help this also if I knew
how. I would do any thing for a quiet life, and to clear such a difficulty
as this which in my opinion is a wondrous one, if rightly understood. But I
much doubt whether every one that proposes it, rightly understands it.

For I have found by experience that many talk of the liberty of Gods will in
proportion to our liberty; Now our liberty consists in an indifferency of
intertayning different acts of will. But we shall fowly err if we intertaine
any such conceyt of the liberty of Gods will. For the act of Gods will being
all one with Gods will, and Gods will being his essence, and his essence being
one most simple act, it was ever impossible that there should be any thing
found in God which now is not, or that any thing should not be found in God
which now is. You will say then was it not possible that other things might
have been decreed by God then are? Yes undoubtedly even Judas might have been
an elect, and Paul a reprobate. Yet other things thus decreed should not have
been decreed by any other act in God then now is in God, for the reason above
specified, and that for ought I know so received by School Divines, as denied
by none. And this is a mystery I confess, wherein we must content our selves
with the (...), and leave to inquire how this may be; for we are incapable of
that. Only we can prove that the course of things that now is, in whole and
part has no necessary derivation from God, but merely contingent, and
accordingly proceeded from the free will of God, yet everlastingly determining
this course of things that now we see; and having everlastingly determined it,
this will of God concerning this course of things, has everlastingly continued
immutable unto this day, and so shall for ever.

As for your principles how they confer to the clearing of this, I persuade
my self you are not able to manifest. And what need, I pray, of making a
difference between these principles which seem to be all one; and your self
have coupled them together, as all one in the former section, and in that
argument of yours whereby you proved the immutability of God. Yet these
principles must be helped with another supposition, that so they may do the
deed; that is, That absolute contingency, or possibilities aequipendent betwixt
many effects, may as truly be the object of Gods eternal decree, as necessity
in other works of nature.

Which supposition to raise your readers thoughts to an admiration of the
momentous nature thereof, you say, You have often promised, and once for all by
Gods assistance shall undoubtedly prove: whereas you might well spare your
pains in this, no man being so simple as to question it, were it not that you
do intoxicate your readers thoughts in the delivering of it with wild phrases,
in calling the contingency of things possibilities aequipendent. enough to
slagger a man at the very noise of such cracking of thorns. We maintain that
God decrees not only contingency, but things contingent; as namely Cyrus Es.
45. 13.
his restoring of the Jews, and giving them liberty to return to their own
country: the burning of the Prophets bones 1 King. 13 2. Act 4. 28.
by Josiah upon the Altar; yea and the crucifying of Christ Jesus, the Apostles
with one voice directly expressing so much, Act. 4. And such decrees of God
though free, continue immutable, and that from everlasting, as indeed being
from everlasting. And we say there is no reason why God should alter what he
has decreed, considering that he knows no more now then he did from
everlasting.

In that which follows we agree with you, that immutabilitie is a perfection,
and mutability an imperfection; likewise that to work freely is a perfection,
to work necessarily is an imperfection; and where both immutability and
freedom of operation meet, the perfection of that nature is so much the
greater. But this I find not so scholastically expressed, when you say, That
if man were as immortal as the heavens are, he would be more perfect then
they can be. This I say wants much of accuratenesse. For the heavens are not
immortal. Aristotle conceived them to be incorruptible, but not immortal. For
like as in case they were corruptible, yet could they not be counted mortal,
because they have no life to lose; so though they be granted to be
incorruptible, yet could they not thereupon be accounted immortal, and that
for the same reason, because they have not life, which alone makes a thing
capable of the denomination of immortal, and for want of life, the meanest of
creatures having life do in excellency surpass the heavens.

And if Aristotle had lived in our days to be acquainted with such
Astronomicall observations as we are, of so many Comets and blazing Stars in
the celestial Region, not only above the Moon, but even in the firmament it
self, and that of long continuance, and at length wasted and consumed; it is
more then probable that his opinion concerning the incorruptibility of the
heavens would have been changed, considering his apologies and excuses in his
books De Caelo, that the body of the heavens being so far remote, and
little certain experience (whereupon all natuall reason is grounded) to be had
of such things as might discover the nature thereof: therefore his discourse
thereof whatsoever to be taken in the better part, and extraordinary
performances thereabouts not to be expected from a natural Philosopher. And
concluding his discourse concerning the incorruptibilitie of the heavens, he
professes that all experience did justify his opinion in that point, for as
much as there was never known any alteration there. So then, had he known of
any alterations there, this might justly have altered the case with Aristotle,
and that no alteration was then known, was to be attributed to the weak
nature of Astronomicall observations in those days, whereabouts he was to
depend upon the credit of others in their professions, being no Astronomer
himself. In the next place you tell us, that Though freedom in it self be a
great perfection, yet to be free to do evil is a branch of imperfection,
which springs from the mutability of the creatures freedom. This deserves well
the scanning. Adam in his innocence was free to do evil was he not? Yet was
he made very good, and after the image of God, and no sin had yet estranged
him from the life of God, and therefore his state and condition deserved to be
accounted a state of perfection rather then of imperfection. Although I deny
not but there be greater perfections then this of Adam.

As the perfection of God is above the perfection of any, of all creatures. The
perfection of Angels is above the perfection of man. The perfection of men in
the state of glory above the perfection of man in the state of innocence. Yet I
see no cause why Adams state in creation should be counted a state of
imperfection, rather then of perfection. And for ought I see, freedom unto
evil is no more favoring of imperfection then freedom unto good, considering
that they both make but one moral freedom. For to be morally free to do good
quoad exercitium is to be free to choose whether a man will do good or no, and
quoad specificationem, is to be free to choose whether he will do good or
evil. So to be morally free to evil quoad exercitium is to be free to choose
whether he will do evil or no; quoad specificationem is to be free to choose
whether he will do evil or good. This discourse of mine has proceeded
according to your own phrase, that speaks of freedom unto evil, but to speak
in mine own phrase, I should not hastily speak of any freedom of the will of
man to evil. You may say as well that the will of man in the use of the eye is
free to behold either colors or sounds which he will, or in the use of the
ear is free to judge of sounds or colors as he will. There is a Common sense
within, I confess, whereby the will is able to judge of these, but by the eye
or ear she cannot.

The reason is, no faculty extends beyond his object. Within the compass of
his own object it may be extended to any kind or particular, but it reaches
not beyond his object; Now the object of the eye is only color, and the
object of the ear is only sound. And a man may look upon what colors he
will of many, that are presented unto him, so by the ear take notice of any
sounds that are, but neither the eye can behold that which is not colored, nor
the ear appr^he^d ought that is not of the nature of sound. In like so^ the
will within the compass of her own object, may settle upon what she will, but
beyond her object she cannot extend.

Now the object of the will is good not evil, and therefore she is of free
choice to settle upon what good she will, but not upon evil. But here some may
say how then can any evil be committed? I answer two ways: First by error
of judgment. For it is the nature of the will to follow the judgment of the
understanding, therefore it is called a reasonable appetite. Secondly, by
preferring a less good before a greater, as in making choice of doing
something because it is profitable, or pleasureable, or some way or other
advantageous for the present, notwithstanding that it is dishonest, and such as
will bring a far greater damage unto us for the time to come. Or thus;
because we make choice of something as before mentioned notwithstanding a
superior authority has forbidden it; both because an evil inclination maks
us prefer things presently pleasing and profitable, and withal proud that we
cannot endure to be in subjection to lawful authority, such as undoubtedlie is
the authority of God.

Hence it comes to pass, that we are said also to be free to good or evil,
which we may call a moral liberty in distinction from the former, which is
liberty natural, and consists in being indifferent to do ought that lies in
our power to be done, provided that it may seem convenient to be done. As for
that moral liberty, it scarce ever was to be found in the world. For it
consists in an indifferent inclination neither vicious nor virtuous. Now
where was ever such a disposition to be found? Not in man before his fall. For
he was created good and holy, and inclined only to delight in that which was
truly good and pleasing in the sight of God. Some will say, then how could he
sin? I answer, his sin was the actuating of his natural indifferency to
the doing of any natural thing. As to eat an Apple, or not eat it, or to
eat this or that, a thing meerelie indifferent, had not God forbidded it, and
in this case restrained his liberty: which prohibition of Gods, he hearkening
too much to the tentations of Satan, by the ministry of Eve, who before had
tasted of the forbidden fruit, without any damage discernable, and upon her
commendation of it inconsiderately transgressed. Since the fall of Adam a
vicious inclination has possessed all, which even in the regenerate continues
in part, though a supernatural virtuous or religious inclination has
possessed them, whereby it comes to pass that both carnal things are pleasing
to them as they are flesh, and the will of God is pleasing unto them according
to the spirit.

Still the natural liberty continues in all, to do any natural thing,
whether commanded or forbidden of God. For even in the regenerate there is a
power to do any natural thing, though God has forbidden it, and too great a
propension to the doing of it, (and that because God has forbidden it) in
respect of the flesh. And in the unregenerate a power also to do any natural
thing which God has commanded, and an affectation to do it also because God
has commanded it; but in the way of hypocrisy to further their own carnal
ends and courses, yet have they no religious inclination to honor God. How
freedom to evil is said by you to spring from the mutability of the creatures
freedom, I do not yet understand.

First, what mean you by the creatures freedom* Do you mean it of his
freedom to good, or freedom to evil, or such freedom as is neither to good
nor evil? I think your meaning is of the creatures freedom to good.

Secondly, what mean you by the change of this freedom of the creature? If
you speak of the creatures freedom unto good, how is it changed? or into what
is it changed? here is nothing to answer, but by saying, that his freedom unto
good is changed into a freedom unto evil. Which if it be your meaning, it
was very absurd to say, that his freedom to evil did spring from his change
into freedom unto evil. For thus the self same thing shall be both before
and after it self. Yet you say not, I confess, that this freedom to evil
springs from the mutation of the creatures freedom, but from the mutability;
that is, from the possibility of change. But that is as absurd. For change
cannot be said to spring from a possibility of change, but rather from the
agent that changes. Why did you not say plainly, it sprang from the will of
man disobeying his Creator? I see a reason of this. First because freedom to
evil does rather go before disobedience then follow after it. Why but then if
this state of imperfection came not from the creatures delinquency, whence came
it? The truth is, not freedom to do evil, but bondage unto sin proceeded
from the prevarication of the creature against God his Maker. And this is a
state of great imperfection indeed, or rather of great misery, as whereby all
mankind are borne children of wrath, and such as deserve to be made the
generation of Gods curse. And are you pleased to mince it thus, calling it
only a freedom to do evil, whereas if yet we are only free to do evil,
it must needs follow that we are free also not to do it; yea and free also to
do good, which freedom is now adays found in none but those whom the Son
has freed, according to that of our Savior, If the Son has made you free,
then are you free indeed. Ioh. (...).


But let us proceed with you. It was, I doubt not, the will and pleasure of God
to make his creatures mutable before they be immutably happy. But hence it
follows not, that this mutability was necessarily prerequired. For how can
that be said to be necessarily, which depended merely upon the free will and
pleasure of God, without specification of so much as a congruous end intended
by God, upon supposition whereof, this mutability of the creature might be said
to be necessarily prerequired before their happiness? Now what kin this is
to the immutability of God, or to the reconciling thereof to his freedom, let
the Reader judge. As also of the sobriety of that which follows; God in that
he is absolutely perfect is essentially immutable, essentially free and
immutably happy, because infinitely good. Then follows the order of
immutability and freedom; that the ground of this, this the perfection of
that. Yet many creatures are free without any such grown as immutability, and
where the one is wanting, the other cannot be the perfection thereof. And if we
speak of immutabilitie in respect of second causes, is it not in the power of
God to make the heavens, the Sun, Moon and Stars immutabl^ which
notwithstanding should not be any free agents. And undoubtedly, the
immutability of Gods will rather supposes the freedom thereof, then is
presupposed by it. But these are matters of no great moment, that which
follows is of more, though you do but touch, and away, like the dog at
the River Nilus, who fears the Crocodile, and it may be herein you fear some
bug-beare also. Freedom it self (you say) were no absolute perfection unless
it were immutably wedded unto goodness. Gods freedom then, you will have
wedded unto goodness. In what sense is this delivered? I am of opinion that
whatsoever God does, it is impossible it should be otherwise then good. For it
is impossible that God should transgress; As who has no superior to give
laws to him, but rather his will gives laws to all, yet in giving laws to
others he gives none to himself.

And if his will were a law unto himself, it were impossible he should
transgress it in doing ought. For as much as whatsoever he does, he does
according to the counsel of his own will. But you I doubt have some other
sense which Aephe. 1. 11
I will labor to start out if I can. You signify his freedom must be wedded
to goodness. When a man is wedded to his wife, he is restrained from all others,
and must keep himself only unto her.

So belike amongst diverse things whereunto Gods power does extend, his
freedom must not extend to all, but be confined to that which is good. As if
there were some rules of good and evil prescribed unto God, and he were
confined to the one, and restrained from the other. This is Arminius his
language, upon which occasion, I have been bold to encounter their (...) in two
digressions, who maintain that there is a justice tha^ does oblige the will of
God. If you would deal plainly in setting down your opinion, and
Scholastically, in taking pains to dispute for it, and not in some sorry manner
to beg the question, I should be ready with the help of God to enter into the
lists in this point with you also.

And at this time, had you named any thing that God cannot do in the way of
justice, which otherwise he has power to do, I would have taken the pains,
not to consider it only, but to confute it. For I hold that tenent not far
from blasphemy. And I do well observe that in expressing this your opinion,
you do not signify that Gods freedom must be wedded to his goodness, but
that freedom must be wedded to goodness. And indeed the freedom of men and
Angels is to be limited by the laws of God, who is their Creator, and may and
does give laws unto them. But as for any law of obedience that God is bound
unto, I know none, no not to his own goodness as being neither bound to
manifest it nor to communicate it: but by necessity of nature he loves it, that
is, himself, and by necessity of nature whatsoever he does, he must do for
himself, and for the setting forth of his own glory, as he shall think
good, and not to any other end.

He that is the supreme efficient, must necessarily be the supreme end of all
things. So from him and by him, and for Romans 11. 36.
him are all things. Much less is he bound to the rules of any goodness or
justice without him. But it may be of this we shall hear more from you
hereafter.

In the next place you return to show, how immutability and freedom may stand
together; and in stead of proving it you tell us, that we may easily conceive
it, provided that they be rightly joined or sorted. And hereupon you take
occasion to discourse somewhat at large of the ill sorting of them, and that in
such a kind as none would ever prove so mad as to sort them so; (yet that
serves for matter of your discourse,) but as touching the right sorting of
them, I doubt we shall never hear of in such a manner as you promise, to wit,
that our conceits shall easily comprehend it, no more then we have heard of
that reservation of liberty which you promised to intimate as a point of very
high perfection in God.

Well, the ill sorting of them seems to be the conceiving of God to be freely
immutable, and that you say implies contradiction, if not unto the nature of
immutability, yet unto the nature of absolute perfection, or to our true
conceit of infinite being. I know no congruity of this discourse of yours. For
freedom is only in resp^ct of operation, not in respect of being. For
freedom supposes being according to the kind and nature of the thing which
is said to be free. It were a very absurd thing to discourse that man is not
freely a man, or that he were not freely reasonable. And no less absurd is it
to tell us that God is not freely immutable. You might as well tell us that God
is not freely God. And yet if we list to walk along with you in the like
vanity of discourse, we might maintain that God is freely immutable, freely of
absolute perfection, freely of infinite perfection, if you take freedom in
opposition to coaction. For God is not immutable by coaction, nor of absolute
perfection by coaction, nor of infinite being by coaction. And to be that which
a man is freely, is better then to be that which he is by coaction.

To be freely immutable in your sense, is not a branch of imperfection, but
rather of impossibility. For it is neither possible to the Creator, nor
possible to the creature. But imperfections imply a possibility, rather then
include any impossibility. But suppose there were any such freedom in God, yet
it follows not, that it should put all those perfections which are contained
in his nature upon the hazard. For how improbable were it, that God by his will
should choose to be imperfect rather then perfect? Possible indeed it were upon
this supposition, but yet in respect of his wisdom and goodness, ^t were as
good as impossible he should will any such thing, though he were free to will
it. But God by necessity of nature is immutable, and impossible it is he
should be otherwise; and in this nature of his the will of God delghteth. And
accord^ngly we may judge of the nature of these your extravagant suppositions:
yet by your leave, mutability is not always charged with possibility of doing
amiss, but only in creatures reasonable, yet is mutability found as well in
creatures unreasonable, yea and without sense and life also, as in creatures
reasonable. But to proceed: as it is impossible God should be freely immutable,
so is it impossible he should be mutably free.

But why you should account it the period of perfection I know no reason, more
then to be immutably wise, immutably powerful, immutably good. Neither do I
like your inference herehence, namely that therefore God is unchangeable in
freedom, as in power, wisdom, or goodness; like as because God is immutably
wise, and powerful, and good, it is no good consequence to say therefore he is
as unchangeable in wisdom, power, and goodness, as he is in freedom. The
consequents, that is, the propositions themselves I approve, but I cannot
approve your deduction of the one from the other. Now because God is immutably
free, therefore he was, and is, and shall be eternally free, to exercise his
power, and to communicate his goodness. All this we grant, and by all which
you seem to go a birding, and if your tackling hold, you are like to catch
something ere long; and if I mistake not, the next sentence discovers the
mystery you hawked after so long: Free it is (you say) for him from everlasting
to everlasting omnipoten^ly to decree as well a mutability in the actions of
some things created, as a necessity or immutability in the course or operation
of nature inanimate. In which words by that time I come to the end of
transcribing of them, I find more then at first blush I dreamed of. For that
which you hunt after as now I perceive, is a soryconceit, and such as being
granted you, will yield your cause as much support as a bulrush; what need you
thus travel to be delivered of such a principle as no man thinks worth the
asking. Only you carry it in such a phrase of obscurity, as if you desired
your reader to conceive it to be some great mystery, whereas if ^t were plainly
delivered, and that in a sober sense, it is no more then this, God has decreed
that some things shall work contingently and freely, as namely, men and
Angels; like as he has decreed that other things, to wit, natural agents,
shall work necessarily.

And can you tell who is ignorant of this? or can you show that ever any was
found to call this into question amongst Christians? All Naturalists
acknowledge this difference between natural agents and voluntary agents; and
no Christian denies but all this proceeds from Gods inward decree, and outward
operation according to this decree. But what if you have a further aim then
this, and the obscurity of your expression in this particular serves only to
amuse your reader in that which is of no worth, that so in the mean time his
intention may oversl^p the observation of foul things broached by you in a few
words? For consider I pray, would you have your reader swallow sucha goageon as
this, that God is at this time free to decree this? Why do you not say as well
that God is at this time free to decree the salvation or dammation of any man?
For why should not one decree of God be temporary as well as another? and how
contradictious is this to your own often profession of Gods everlasting
decrees, and also to your present doctrine of Gods immutabilitie? For if he be
now free to decree this or that, then may some decree of God begin to be, which
before was not, and consequently there shall be a change in God. For as much
as some act shall be found in God which before was not. And if Gods decrees be
everlasting, and yet to this day he continues free to reverse these decrees,
then is God free to change. Perhaps you will say, Gods liberty is eternal,
(for otherwise I know not to what purpose you discourse here of Gods eternal
liberty.) I answer, God is still and ever shall be free, but in respect of
what? In respect of those things that are possible and indifferent to be done
by him or no. But that Gods eternal decrees should be at this time indifferent
to be made by him or no, is a thing utterly impossible. God alone cannot do
this, as Philosophers were wont to say, to make that which is done to be
undone, it being a thing implying manifest contradiction.

Again, the liberty of God is not like unto the liberty of his creatures,
whether Angels or men, which yet notwithstanding you very confidently confound,
manifesting no sense of so uncouth an assertion. Liberty in the creature is
unto different acts of will, as either to will this, or to will that; but no
such liberty is to be found in God. It was and is impossible there should be
any other act in God then there is, because God is a simple act, and that act
is his very essence, and as his essence cannot, nor could not be otherwise
then it is, so neither could any other act of will be in him then there is.
Gods liberty is only to different objects, not to different acts, though you
pass over this without any distinction.

Again, in the sentence going before you told us, God was free to exercise his
power, and to communicate his goodness; which is most true: but when in the
next place you tell us he is free to decree, this is nothing answerable to the
former. For to decree is no exerc^se of his power, nor communication of his
goodness. For if it were, then seeing his decrees have been free from
everlasting, from everlasting there should be an exercise of his power, and
communication of his goodness. Which is as much as to say that the world was
everlasting.

Your next sentence is as wild as the former, or rather more, not to speak of
the coherence of them. For it seems you have no more care of that, then as if
you were dictating proverbs. That the course of man's life, or the final doom
awarded to every man (though that must be awarded to all according to the
diversity of their courses) should be immutable, because they are foreset by an
immutable omnipotent decree has no more color of truth, then to say the
omnipotent creator must needs be black, because he made the crows and Ebony
black, etc. And this comparison you enlarge with multiplicity of instances, as
the course of your style is to exuberate in matters of no moment. You might as
well have said that there is no color of truth, why God that made a crow
should be a crow, or that made the swanne should be a swanne. And indeed there
is no color of truth in this. For indeed a painter makes a fair picture, but
it no way follows herehence that he should be a fair picture, or so much as
fair.

And though a pewterer makes a chamber pot, yet no color of truth, that he
should be therefore a chamber pott, or that because a Chimny-sweeper makes a
clean chimny, therefore himself should be a clean chimny. Never was any known
to be so absurd, as to devise any such inferences. Like as I think never any
before your self was known to affirm, that there was as little color of
truth in collecting, that things decreed by God should be immutable, because
his decree is immutable. For I pray, what proportion do you find in these? the
efficient cause that is aequivocall, is not of the same nature with the effect
produced, therefore the thing decreed is not immutable, by reason of the
immutability of the decree whereby it is decreed.

Let every Reader judge whether there be so much likeness between these, as
between a fox and a Fearne-bush. Yet you give no reason but the bare
proportion it self to bear it out. Now the former inference which you deny,
is drawn from the cause to the effect, the later inference which you deny is
drawn from the effect to the cause. Yet these inferences you make
proportionable. If you would make them suitable, after some such manner as
this, it should proceed. God makes crows black; herhence it follows not that
God himself is black, so God decreed to damn Iuda^ herehence it follows
no^, and what I pray? I am ashamed t^ follow the proportion of your inference
least so I should utter that which in modesty is not fit, or thus. God makes
Judas his damnation immutable; herhence it follows not that God is immutable,
or to help you with a proportioned case fitter for your turn. God makes Judas
his damnation mutable, herehence it follows not that God or his decree is
mutable.

This I say better serves your turn, but this is not the inference whereupon
you pass your denial, but rather quite came as we say; Gods decree is
immutable; herhence it follows not that Judas his damnation, though foreset
by God is immutable. Yet as for that inference proposed, which I said was more
fitter for your turn, who ever said that God decreed Judas his damnation to be
mutable, or the damnation of reprobates to be mutable? Who ever said that God
decreed the salvation of Peter or Paul, or of any one of Gods elect to be
mutable?

And indeed, it were very absurd to say so: For the mutability of a thing
supposes the being of a thing. Now has God ordained that the salvation of
Gods elect, after they have obtained it, or the damnation of the reprobates
after they suffer it, shall be mutable? Has he not rather ordained the
contrary both as touch^ng his elect, that they shall ever be with the Lord,
These. 4. Marc. 9. 44.
and as touching the reprobate that their Worm shall never dye, and their fire
never be extinguished? Yet I confess either is simply mutable, in respect that
God has power to alter it. But this kind of mutability is not the object of
Gods decree. For God does not decreec to take unto himself power to do this
or that. Yet it is true, that by virtue of Gods decree some things come to
pass contingently, and some things necessarily. But this is only in respect
of the agency of second causes, some of them being made by God, agents natural
working necessarily, some agents rational and free, working contingently and
freely: Not in respect of Gods own agency, for whatsoever God does work
outwardly, that must needs come to pass contingently or freely: for it is not
in the power of God to work necessarily; it is the perfection of God
unalterable, to be necessarily, to work freely. Now the doom of any man is
the work of God, and so is the condemnation both of men and Angels, and not the
work of second causes: and therefore the contingent being thereof is not the
object of Gods decree. God does not decree, that to fall out contingently, much
less does he decree that after it is, it shall be mutable: speak your mind
plainly, and tell us whether the damnation of Judas, or of the Angels that
fell, or of any reprobate that is departed this life is mutable. I presume you
dare not affirm this: and what is the reason? not because God wants power to
alter, but because his will is that it shall not be otherwise, and his will can
neither be changed from within, nor resisted from without, because it is
omnipotent. In this case therefore this consequence is good: God has decreed
the damnation of Judas, and his decree is immutable, and omnipotent, therefore
the damnation of Judas is immutable, to wit, supposing the foresaid decree of
God.

Now consider we the damnation of wicked men not yet departed this life; has
God decreed it, or no? if no, then his decrees are not everlasting, the
contrary whereunto you have hitherto professed in words, though I fear your
meaning is otherwise.

Again, if God has not yet decreed it, then hereafter he shall decree it,
(for he must first will their damnation before he damnes them) and consequently
there shall be a change in God, and something found in him which before was
not, contrary to that which you have delivered in this Chapter, sect. 2. in
these words, Unto infinite perfection what can accrue? If then God has decreed
it, and this decree or will of God cannot be changed, for you confess it is
immutable, nor can be resisted, for you confess it is omnipotent; will it not
necessarily follow herehence, that the damnation of such wicked men yet
surviving is immutable? This I speak in your phrase, but in mine own phrase I
say only that herehence it necessarily follows, that all such shall be
damned, which necessity is merely upon supposition of Gods decree: and
therefore not necessity simply so called, but only secundum quid, and upon
supposition,

So likewise concerning the salvation of Gods Elect, who are yet surviving, if
God has decreed it, seeing his will is both unchangeable, and unresistible,
their salvation must needs be immutable, to speak in your phrase, but to
speak in mine own phrase, it necessarily follows herehence that they shall
be saved.

There is to way to help this, but by maintaining that Gods decrees are not
absolute but conditional; but it seems you dare not venture upon this
assertion in plain terms, though the face of your tenet bespeaks such a
course: And in another Treatise of yours you talked of a certain disjunctive
decree of God. It were a commendable thing in you to deliver your self plainly
of your meaning; for otherwise you will be guilty of something else besides a
corrupt judgment. And indeed if you would deal plainly, and maintain that
God has decreed salvation or damnation to none absolutely, but to all
conditionally, and withal by sound arguments confirm it, there should be no
further question; we would willingly subscribe that no man's salvation should
come to pass immutably, as you speak, or necessarily, as we speak; no not so
much as in respect of Gods decree; if so be God has decreed salvation to no
man absolutely, but conditionally; and that in such sort as that he may be
either saved or damned as he will. But then withal you must maintain that God
has decreed to give no man faith and repentance more then another; but left it
indifferently to their free wills whether they will believe and repent or no.

For albeit God has ordained salvation to befall men upon there final
perseverance in faith and repentance; yet if God has withal decreed to give
some men faith and repentance, and final perseverance therein, and deny all
this unto others; herehence it will follow that God in effect has ordained
some men absolutely unto salvation, and not other; and it will necessarily
follow herehence, that as many as to whom God has decreed to give faith and
repentance, and perseveran^e, they shall be saved; and as necessarily, that all
others shall not be saved to whom God has decreed the denial of the like
grace, unless you will say that though God does not give any such grace, yet
they may believe and repent if they will, and therein persevere unto the end: I
see no reason to the contrary, but this must be upon your opinion, as before
has been specified, albeit you are not very forward in plain terms to
express as much. And in this place you scatter something that seems to me
directly contrary hereunto.

For consider, though Gods decree concerning the doom of every man be
immutable, yet you deny that hethence it follows, their doom shall be
immutable. Now this of a conditional decree is evidently untrue, as I presume
will appear of it self. For if God has no other decree concerning Peter's
doom then this; If thou beleevest, thou shall be saved, if not, thou shall be
damned; the case is clear that this doom is immutable, not salvation
absolutely nor damnation absolutely, but either salvation or damnation
disjunctively as elsewhere I have found you to discourse of a disjunctive
decree of God. Therefore seeing you speak of such a doom which you deny to be
immutable, it follows that you cannot understand it of a disjunctive doom,
as salvation, or damnation; but you must needs understand it of a single doom
by it self, as the salvation of Peter by it self, or the damnation of Judas
by it self.

And withal you do acknowledge this doom to be forset by the decree of God,
which is as much as to acknowledge that it is decreed by God. Now I say if it
be decreed by God, seeing his decrees cannot be changed, no^ his omnipotent
will resisted, it must necessarily follow that every one so destinated to
salvation shall be saved, every one so destinated to damnation shall be damned.
The best help you have against this, and whereupon this discourse of yours
does most run, is, that the object of Gods decree is contingency, or
mutability, (for so you are pleased to confound things that differ.) But you
are nothing wary to keep your self from contradicting your self. For when
you say that God decrees contingency, you do withal deny that God does
decre^ the thing contingent; as you have expressly professed in your treatise
upon Ier. 26. Did not Hezechiah fear before the Lord, etc. And withal to make
your meaning the more plain, you have professed that albeit God does not
decree necessity, but withal decrecing the things that come to pass
necessarily; yet in decreeing contingency, you deny that he decrees withal
the things contingent.

But in this place you have plainly signified that the doom it self of every
man is foreset by the immutable decree of God, and not only the contingency of
it; And no mervayle, For albeit as touching the actions of men, there may be
some color for the exempting of them from being the objects of Gods decrees,
yet the doomes of men being the actions of God himself, there is no color at
all for the exempting of them from being the object of Gods decrees. And
therefore this distinction of Gods decreeing contingency, or mutability, but
not the things contingent themselves, will nothing avayle you in this place.
For you plainly profess that the doom of every one is forset by the decree of
God: and it is impossible it should be otherwise. For God could not execute it,
unless he did will it. He cannot execute the salvation of Peter, unles he did
first will it, nor the damnation of Judas except he did first will it, and his
will was everlasting, otherwise there should be a change in God.

And seeing his will can neither change, nor be resisted, therefore it
necessarily follows, that whose salvation he did from everlasting will or
decree, they must be saved, and whose damnation he did from everlasting will or
decree, they must be damned. And thus much as touching the doom of every man
foreset by Gods decree. You add unto this, The course of every man's life, and
affirm, that it also is foreset by Gods decree; And this course of every man's
life you understand in respect of good and evil moral, as appears by this,
that you proportion men's doomes unto the courses of their lives: which can
bear no other interpretation then in respect of men's good and evil actions.

^w at the first I wondered what you meant to bring so unequal heyfers to plow
under the same yoke, considering that the courses of men's life's in this sense
are the actions or works of men; but the doomes of men according to their
courses of life, are the actions or works of God, much more have I cause to
wonder to read you professing them all indifferently to be foreset by the
decree of God. For as for the good, yea the most gracious actions of men,
according to your opinion, they are not foreset by the decree of God. For your
profession is (and that as of some singular subtilty and invention) that God
decrees contingency, but not the things contingent; whence it follows, that
as touching the most gracious actions of men, even faith and repentance (they
being only contingent things) that God decrees them not, but only the
contingency of them. How much less fit is it for you (according to the tenor
of your opinion) to join all the courses of men's lives, even the evil courses
as well as good with the doomes proportional, and to consider them as fore-set
by an immutable and omnipotent decree of God, as here you do* Yet I see how
some one in your behalf might plead for you, namely, that this is delivered by
you only by way of ^upposition, not positively affirmed; but I see no
likelihood that you would plead thus for your self, but rather give your self
to the emasculating of Gods decree by some frivolous distinctions. For you
acknowledge Gods concourse to every action.

And in the preface you make show not so much of excepting against the doctrine
of Gods decreeing all things, as against the manner of decreeing them. And when
you speak of the worst courses of men's lives, as of Jewish blasphemy against
the Son of God, and amplify the heinousness of their opinion, that
maintain it to have been decreed by God, you rather except against the manner
of decreeing it, to wit, ineritably, and that as touching the obliquity of it
only, then simply against the decreeing of it. Your words a^e these, chapter 1.
sect. 15. Shall we say God did inevitably decree the obliquity of Jewish
blasphemy? Which cautions whereunto they tend I know not, unless to make some
declination from ma^fest contradiction to the words of the Holy Ghost, Act. 4.
28. delivered with one mouth by the Apostles in their meditation unto God,
saying, Uerily against thy holy Son Jesus both Herod and Pontius Pilate with
the Gentiles and people of Israel, are gathered together to do what thy hand
and thy counsel had determined before to be done. And indeed it is nothing but
ignorance, or wilfulnes in some, and trafty perverting the state of the truth
in others, that makes those things seem harsh, which yet notwithstanding their
harshnes, are manifestly commended to us in the word of God. For what harshnes
I pray is in this: God determined that all the evil that was done to Christ
should be done by his permission? And none give better evidence unto this truth
ere they are aware, then they that with might and main oppose it, as Arminius,
who professes that the Jews proceeded so far in their ignominious handling
of Christ, as God would have them, and this he delivers without all temperament.

And Bellarmine prof^sseth, that it is good that evil should be by Gods
permission. And yet herein we say no more then Austin professed 1200. years
ago, saying, Non aliquid sit nisi quod omnipotens fieri velit, velsinendo ut
siat, vel ipse faciendo. Enchirid. cap. 95.
And your self in this place join the doom of every man with the course of
every man's life in good or evil, and suppose them to beforeset by the
immutable and omnipotent decree of God. Wherefore it is not for your positive
dictates and wild resemblances without all proportion that we do believe God
to be eternally and immutably free; yet we do believe he is so, not to decree
a new, (for Gods decrees are eternal, not temporary) but to do any thing that
is possible to be done, and to bring forth some creatures, agents natural to
work necessarily, others, agents rational to work contingently and freely.
As for the resemblance of Gods freedom and immutability, your talk of it is
like your other discourses; For what resemblance do you find of Gods freedom
in the mutability of the elements, in the generation and corruption of mixed
bodies? The best resemblance of Gods ^reedome is in the freedom of creatures
rational, which are to be found as well in the superior, as in this inferior
World. And why should any mutability be a resemblance of Gods freedom, who is
immutabile throughout? And as for the resemblance of his immutability in the
Heavens, to make that good you had need devise a quintessence first, and deny
all those apparances of comets, breeding and wasting in the Heavens, even in
the firmament, the acknowledgement whereof is now commonly received by frequent
observations.

Sure I am the Prophet plainly professes of the heave^s, that they all wax old
as does a garment, and as a vesture God shall change them, and they shall be
changed, but God is the same, and his years fail not. You may do well to
deny the Heavens motion also, and so you may the better free them from all
change, for as I take it, all motion is mutation, though all mutation be not
motion. That God is both immutable, and irresistible our opinions manifest, so
do not yours, but dangerously prejudice them both. But I know no reason why
his irresistiblenes should flow from his immutability. For if his immutability
be conceaved as free from al possibility of change from within, there is no
coherence at all between this and his irresistiblenes, which is in respect of
agents from without. The essence of spirits is immutable from within, and so
were the Heavens, if a simple essence, or quintessence as some call it; but
hence it follows not that any of these are irresistible from without. But if
immutability be spoken of in respect of freedom from all change as from
without, in as much as no outward thing is able to work any change in the
nature of God, then it is only immutability passive, but irresistibility in
God is in respect of his power active, able to bow and break all things
without resistance, so that in this sense also there is no coherence between
these two attributes, as if one could be said to flow from an other.

To the preventing of wise contrivances is required not only wisdom to
discover them, and means to prevent them, but also power for the execution of
this prevention. And that Gods contrivances are not prevented, it is a work of
his power, as well as of his wisdom.

As for the rule of Gods decree, I know no goodness of God to be the rule
thereof, but that goodness whereby he is inclyned to the setting forth of his
own glory, for He has made all things for himself. Prove. 1. 16. 4. And
seeing All things are from him and by him. Romans 11. ver. last. There is great
reason why all things should be for him also, even referred to his glory as to
the end. What other goodness you dream of, as the rule of Gods decrees, I know
not, neither do the Scriptures teach any other, but it is generally your
course to dictate much, and to prove wondrous little; Whether your ability that
way be the more in store and reserved for some special subject to show it
self therein, I know not.

CHAP. X.
Of the eternal and Immutable decree.

Upon this you enter with a fair promise of betteringe or rectifying our
apprehensions of Gods absolute and omnipotent decree. I hope we shall never be
unwillinge to learn of any, much less of your self. For why should we not
affect to have our apprehensions if they swerve from the the truth to be
rectifyed, and though in good propension thereunto, yet to have them bettered.
For though good be good, yet better is better, especially in so preciou^ a
point of divinity as about the decree of God. Most of all if it be true (as you
say) that in all ages it has been most difficult, and is so common in this,
that no divine can adventure upon any other service profitable, but he must
either enforce his passage thorough it, or come so high, as to do homage to
it. As for the difficulty you speak of, as you give me no edge to embrace it,
so I profess I have no edge to oppose it. But as touching the commons thereof
in such sort as in all profitable services to the Church, we must be driven to
take notice of it, and that with appropriation to this age above all ages that
went before possesses me with admiration. For what reason can be devised why
divines and fathers in former ages could handle diverse worthy points of
divinity without touching upon Gods decree, and our divines in this age can
not? I doubt your care in this sentence was to vent more phrases then truths.
Three attributes you give us of Gods decree, namely, that it is immutable. 2.
Irresistible. 3. Eternal. But the first of these you choke with strange
cautions, a manifest sign that you have some stitch or spleen against this
attribute. The first proviso is, if we take it in the abstract; and you give no
instance to explain your meaning. I had thought this word, the decree of God
had been an abstract, and of abstract signification alone, and not indifferent
to signification abstract and concrete also. Decretum, I confess in the Latin
is indifferent to signify either in the abstract Gods decree, or in the
concrete a thing decreed. But Gods decree in the English admits of no such
equivocation, but is of abstract signification only and not concrete.

Your other caution by way of exegeris and interpretation of the former is no
less strange, as when you say, Or as it is in God, implying that Gods decree
may be taken two ways, either as it is in God, and so it is immutable, or as
it is out of God, and so it is not immutable. Now I do not find it possible
that Gods decree can be any where but in God, it being an action immanent, or
intramanent, not passing forth of God, but abiding within him, such as are all
actions called elicite both in men and Angels, as the actions of their
understanding, and the acts of their wills. Yet (you say) it is not agreed upon
by all, either what a decree is or what to be eternal; at least the most part
do not perfectly bear in mind the true importances of an eternal decree.
With these differences which you intimate, I never was acquainted, but am ready
to be, as soon as you shall inform me of them. I had thought no man had
doubted what Gods decree is, as namely his purpose or resolution of will that
something shall be brought forth in time, either immediately by himself, or
by second causes and the agency of his creatures.

And as for eternity, I had thought that all had agreed in this, that to be
eternal is to be either without beginning or without end, or both; and as
applied to Gods decree, it signifies the being of it without beginning. But it
may be you travel in childbirth to be delivered of some subtilties, which you
call here the importances of an eternal decree. We are ready to entertain
them as soon as they come to light, with such consideration as becomes our
poor abilities, in Philosophical or Theological speculations.

First you tell us that to this purpose your former speculations concerning
eternity of Gods infinite wisdom, have been premised; that is to prepare for
the delivery of the child: you fore saw belike you were like to have an hard
labor of it, an hard bargain. Yet if a manchilde prove to be borne, this
hardness may well be endured, and will soon be forgotten. By the way it
seems the importances you speak of do concern as well the wisdom of Gods
decree; as the eternity thereof; and therefore it is that you have premised the
speculations of Gods infinite wisdom, as well as of his eternity. And all to
prevent a mischief, to wit, lest by the incogitant use of these and the like
Scripture phrases (God fore-knowes, or has decreed all things from eternity)
that slumber might creep upon the unvigilant and unattentive reader, with
whose dreams many deceived have spoken of Gods decree or predetermination of
things to come, as of acts already irrevocably finished and accomplished; and
by a consequent error, resolve that it is as impossible for any thing to be
otherwise then it is, will be, or has been, as it is to recall that again which
is already past. The child is born, but a monster, rather then a perfect child.
For the doctrine you propose savoureth strongt ly of making Gods decrees to be
of a revocable nature. Well, let us consider it piece meal. First, the
proposition, then the consequent deduced therfrom. You are jealous over your
reader, and that for his good as you pretend; and that is, lest Scripture
phrases should carry him too far through incogitancy, and unvigilancy, and
unattentivenes, whereupon a slumber may overtake him, and he may dream of Gods
decree, as of an act already irrevocably finished and accomplished. Well then
to conceive of Gods decree as of an act already finished or accomplished, is
but a dream as you censure it. And dreams have great liberty to err from
truth. Let us scanne this a little. First, does it like you to affirm that
Gods decrees are finished and accomplished, provided that they be of a
revocable nature, and may be altered? If this please you, what need you except
against the conceiving of Gods decree as an act past or finished? For though it
be past and finished, yet if it be of a revocable nature it will serve your
turn well enough. But if you deny it, positively and simply to be finished,
what meant you to put in irrevocably, which manifestly implies an
acknowledgement of the finishing of Gods decree, though not irrevocably, but so
as it may be revoked.

Again, as touching the word accomplished, that is very ambiguous. For like as
Gods promises which are not eternal but in time, and the significations of
Gods decrees may justly be said not to be accomplished until they be
fulfilled; in like sort Gods decrees may be said in a good sense not to be
accomplished until they be executed by performing that which God has decreed.
But you speak of the finishing of Gods decree actu interno, not actu externo.
For you oppose them that maintain that Gods decrees of things to come are
already (that is, before the things decreed do come to pass) finished. Now
never any man was known to dream waking any such dream, as to think or
affirm that Gods decrees were finished actu externo, that is in plain terms
executed before the things decreed were brought to pass.

Now lets examine your opinion cleared from ambiguities. I say the decrees of
God were finished actu interno before the World was made; And I prove it thus.
Every decree is finished actu interno when it is made and has existence. But
the decrees of God were made and had their existence before the World was
(otherwise they should not be eternal) therefore the decrees of God are not
only already finished but were finished before the World was made. And the
Major I farther prove thus. If before the World things were decreed by God,
then also before the World, Gods decrees were made and had existence, but
before the World many things were decreed by God, therefore before the World,
Gods decrees were made and had existence.

Again I prove that Gods decrees are already finished actu interno. Every
thing that has entire and full existence is to be accounted finished, but Gods
decrees already have their entire and full existence, even as God himself, and
so had before the World was; therefore Gods decrees are already finished and so
were before the World was.

Thirdly if Gods decrees be yet unfinished I demand when they shall be
finished or whether they shall for ever continue unfinished. If for ever they
shall continue unfinished; then Gods executions of his decrees shall be
finished before his decrees are; for they eternally shall be finished, these
upon supposition never shall. If one day Gods decrees shall be finished then
either before the execution of them, or with the execution of them, or after
the execution. If before the execution of them, then either for a certain
space of time before the execution of them, or from eternity before them. If
for a certain space before, name that space, and give a reason why such a
space of time, rather then a greater or a lesser.

Secondly show what has accrewed to Gods decrees whereby after a certain
space of time they are said to be finished, for want whereof they could not be
said to be finished before.

Thirdly it is manifest, this cannot hold, as touching the decree of
creation. For as much as there was no space of time before the execution of
that decree. And therefore if that decree were finished at all before the
execution of it, it was finished from everlasting before it. And if that decree
were finished before the World was made, then also all the decrees of God were
finished before the World was made. For all Gods decrees are alike everlasting
as your self (I think) will not deny. And here you propose not, this
doctrine of any decree of God in special, but of his decrees in general,
implying thereby that it is as true of one as of another, and consequently if
it holds not in any one, it fayles in all. If Gods decrees are finished from
everlasting before the execution of them, this is flatly contradictory to your
assertion: But if you think to say that Gods decrees are not finished actu
interne until they are executed actu externo; then they had not their full and
entire existence till the execution of them; and consequently they are
temporal, not eternal; and though man finisheth his decrees before he
executes them, yet God does not.

Secondly, if nothing does accrue to the constitution of Gods eternal decrees
by the execution of them more then before; then Gods decrees cannot be said to
have their full and entire constitution more at the time of execution then
before. But nothing does accrue hereby to the constitution of Gods decree. For
the execution is temporal, the decree eternal, but that which is temporal
cannot belong to the constitution of that which is eternal.

If they be not finished till after the execution, then God shall be said to
execute things before he has fully decreed them. Add unto this what Mr.
Rogers writes in his Analysis of the Articles of the Church of England, printed
by authority, and dedicated to D. Bamcroft Archiep. of Canterbury, upon the 17.
Article, propos. 2. Those wrangling Sophisters then are deceived, who because
God is not included within the compass of any time, but has all things to
come, as present continually before his eyes; do say that God he did not in
the time or age past only, but still in the present time likewise, does
predestinate. Thus I have considered your uncouth assertion, now I come to the
consequence you draw herehence; and that is this, It is as impossible for any
thing to be otherwise then it is, will be, or has been, as it is to recall
that again which is already past. But I say this consequence is unsound, and I
prove it thus: To recall that again which is past, is absolutely impossible,
as implying manifest contradiction; but the impossibility of a thing to be
otherwise then God has decreed it, is merely secundum quid, and
exsuppositione. And dare you deny that Gods decrees had existence at the very
beginning of the world; and is not that time long since past, though Gods
decrees continue like as God himself, for his will is unchangeable as well as
his nature? And supposing things to be decreed by God to come to pass, dare
you deny but it necessarily follows herehence, that they shall come to pass?
Yet I confess that of this consequence of yours there is some color, but that
which follows is as wild as ever entered into a sick man's brain to
conceive: as when you say, to make Gods decrees already finished, is to
involve, That God by his eternal and powerful decree, did set the course of
nature a going with an irresistible and irretractable swinge, and since only
looks upon it with an awful eye, as masters sometimes watch their servants,
whether they go the way they are commanded. Thus it pleases you confidently
to dictate, and positively without all reason, that which has neither truth
nor color of truth, as it may be made manifest in each member.

For as touching the first member; God does not only set the course of nature
going, but continues it going, and that not only in working necessarily, but
also contingently and freely, which manner of working is always joined with a
possiblity of the contrary, and that not only by way of resistance, but even
of natural propension also, as appears manifestly in all free agents, whether
Angels or men.

In a word, both course of nature, and course of free will is not irresistible,
as appears by the issue. For the most determinate course of nature has been
resisted, for the Sun Ios. 10. 12. 13. 2 King. 20. 10. 11. Ioh. 3. 13. Exodus
14.
and Moon has sometimes stood still; nay sometimes the Sun has gone
backward, and that ten degrees in the Dial of Ahaz; the river Jordan has
stood still, and the red Sea has been divided; and the fire it self has
been restrained from burning the three noble children cast into the Dan. 3.
fiery furnace. Only upon supposition of the will of God, it necessarily
follows that the course of nature shall have its course, or be restrained
from having his course without resistance. For who has resisted the will of
God? Romans 9. 19


As touching the second member, how absurd is it to infer that God only
looks upon the course of nature, if the will of God concerning it be already
finished. Whereas Gods will is for the continuance of the course of nature,
either with disturbance or without disturbance, not of it self, but by the
assistance, influence, and operation of God. For in him all things live, and
move, and have their being. Pater meus usque Act. 17. Ioh. 5. 17.
hodie operatur, and ego operor, says our Savior. So far are we from
denying that there is as much use of power and wisdom infinite in the
mannaging of it, as in the making of it. What odd conceits possessed you to
shape so absurd a consequence from this assertion, that the decrees of God are
already finished, that is, that already they have their existence? In the next
line you discover the original of this absurd fancy of yours, when you say,
And as he cease not to work, so does he never cease to decree. By this I
perceive, you would feign have your reader confound Gods working with his
deeteeing, as you do.

Indeed if we had said that Gods works are already finished; it would follow
that he should be a spectator only and not a worker for the time to come. But
we say no such thing, we say that his decrees are finished and that from
everlasting, we do not say his works are finished. Though you are pleased to
confound these to make unto you matter of extravagant discourse, yet I pray
give us leave to distinguish them: Yet here you seem to give a reason why God
does never cease to decree, and that drawn out of the Ephesians. 1. 11. He works
all things according to the counsel of his will: when I consider that which
went immediately before, I thought you had hereby gone about to prove, that God
cease not still to decree, which is as much as to make decrees; But when I
look upon the collection you make herhence, I find you have no such meaning:
For your inference is only this: So that albeit the counsel of his will by
which he works, be eternal; yet all things are not yet wrought by it. Now of
this no man makes any question.

But the question in present is not whether Gods works be already finished, but
whether his decrees be already finished. We say they are and were from
everlasting, because from everlasting they did exist. You say they are not, but
as God does not cease to work, so he does not cease to decree. Which in my
judgment is a strange assertion, and the comparison is without all proportion;
For Gods works are temporal, and God brings forth new works one after another
daily. But Gods decrees are eternal and therefore cannot he be said to bring
forth new decrees daily one after another.

And though all his works he brings forth according to the counsel of his
will, yet both this counsel and this will of his is eternal. Here you
propose a question, shall we say then, he has not decreed whatsoever does or
shall befall us? And you answer it affirmatively in a certain sense which is
this, He does not now first begin to decree them. Now I appeal to every
judicious Reader to determine, whether this interpretation of yours be not
plainly contradictious to the manifest meaning of that assertion which you
interpret. For if God does not new begin to decree those things that befall
us, does it not manifestly follow here hence that he has already decreed them,
rather then that he has not decreed them already? We willingly grant that Gods
decrees have no end but continue the same still, but you would have us think
that they are still in making.

As God himself was from everlasting and still continues unto everlastinge,
in like sort Gods decree or will was from everlasting, and the same will of his
continues still without any alteration or shadow of change. But albeit Gods
will continues the same without change and end, yet I find no example to
justify this phrase of yours, in saying God now decrees the things that
befall us; and you may as well say that God shall decree the things that do
befall us; and that by the same reason; for his decree has no end. And is it a
sober speech think you to affirm, that God does now decree the creation of
the World, or the fall of Angels, or the turning of Adam out of Paradise, or
Noah's flood, or the burning of Sodom and Gomorrah with fire and brimstone? You
say it is much safer to think on Gods decree as present to the whole course of
our life, then as it was before the World: for so we shall think of them as of
acts past and finished, more irrevocable then the laws of the Medes and
Persians. Well then you deny not that these decrees were before the World, if
this be as much as to be now past and finished, then also it is true, that they
are acts past and finished; which you deny; If to be before the world be not
to be past and finished, then to think of them as they were before the World,
is not to think of them as acts past and finished, which yet you say it is,
but without al reason in this case. And I pray what think you? are Gods
decrees, which you dare not to deny to have had their existe^ce before the
world, of a revocable nature? Certainly they are no more alterable then that
which is past irrevocable. But like as God cannot be said to be past, though he
was before the World: Because he still continues and shall continue for ever:
So the decrees of God cannot be said to be past, though they were before the
World; because the same will whereby he decreed all things, does continue
without all change and shall continue for ever, though the things decreed and
willed by him do change from things to come to things present, from things
present to things past. But the laws of men suppose liberty in the makers
while they are in making, which they utterly take from them being enacted. Very
well observed, and therefore let us think it fit to mainteyne that Gods decrees
are still in making, and none of them made, no not the decree of creation, nor
of redemption, nor of sanctification, of all the holy Patriarchs and Prophets
that ever were; lest otherwise we should spoil God of his liberty. By the same
reason let us maintain that God is a doing still, but never does any thing, lest
after he has done it he have no longer any liberty to do it or leave it
undone. These conceits have as much wisdom as sobriety in them, being
equally removed from both. For what sober man would make doubt but that
Methusaleh was as free and had as great liberty of will the last year of his
age as he was or had when he was but 10. years old, notwithstanding many
things had been done by him in the space of 900. years, which to do or not
to do in the last year of his age was not a thing indifferent unto him. And
were it not a mad thing to affirm that the longer a man lives the more he
loses of his liberty? or that the more idly a man lives, the more liberty
he keeps in store, and the more painful he is, the more his liberty
perishes?

2. Gods decrees are infinitely more unalterable then the laws of the Medes
and Persians. For God cannot change, man can change. Gods will cannot be
resisted, the will of man may be resisted, even the will of the greatest
Princes, by God himself, by his Angels, by men, by foreign enemies, by their
own subjects. The evils which by decrees are made either evitable or
inevitable, are either evils of sin, or evils of punishment; you will not
say evils of sin. For you acknowledge no such evils to be objects of Gods
decrees. If evils of punishment, it is false to say that Gods decrees do not
make them as inevitable as the decrees of men. For no decrees of men do make
evils of men inevitable, but upon supposition of transgression.

Now it is of an undoubted truth, that punishment designed by the decrees of
God, is infinitely more inevitable by transgressors then punishment designed by
the decree of men. For many malefactors escape the hands of men, but it is
impossible they should escape the hands of God. Of the wicked in respect of the
certainty of Gods judgments to overtake them, it is said, that sudden
destruction shall come upon them as travail upon a woman with child, and they
shall not escape. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3.
You are besides the truth when you say that wisdom has just warrant to make
decrees for men; this belongs to power and authority, not to wisdom.

The subject many times may be wiser then the Prince; yet has he not therefore
any authority over his Prince, to make laws to bind him, but rather the
Prince though inferior in wisdom, has power over him. But the wiser men
are, the fitter they are to govern, and the more willingly and joyfully should
others submit unto them, supposing the wisdom of the governor to be bound to
aim at the good of the subject. But no such obligation is found in God, who as
he is the Creator of all, so he made all things for himself. And good reason
that seeing all things are from him, therefore all things should be for him.
Qui dedit esse, quo sine essent habuit potestatem. Aug. de praed. and gra.
When you say that too strict obligement unto laws positive or decrees
unalterable, deprives both lawgivers and others of their native liberty and
opportunity of doing good, I find nothing sound in all this. For you confound
the liberty of nature, which is equally common to all, with liberty of
condition, which is greater by far in one then in another. Secondly, you
range God the supreme Lawgiver, with other lawgivers which have only power
deputed unto them; no obligement unto laws does deprive any man of liberty
natural. For whatsoever is forbidden any man, yet is he never a whit the
less naturally free to the doing of it then before, though in case he
transgress, he is subject to censure and punishment. And of this natural
liberty you speak of hitherunto, as being most proper for the nature of
decrees, that is, liberty from coaction and natural necessitation, though now
you divert from this unto civil liberty, which is only liberty from
subjection.

As touching the laws of men, it is fit there should be a Court of Chancery
for mitigation, because men cannot foresee all cases that may fall out, and by
too strict observation of laws, summum jus may prove summa injuria. But this
cannot without great absurdity be applied unto the decrees of God, who from
everlasting was ignorant of nothing, but foresaw all things that were to come.
And by the way, what do you manifest hereby, but a strange fancy, that in some
respects it were fit Gods decrees should be alterable, lest otherwise he might
be deprived of liberty, in taking opportunity of doing good: implying withal,
that God in course of time takes notice of something, whereof from everlasting
he was not conscious. And though the Pope in reserving to himself power and
liberty to send them forth or call them in again, does take upon him more
authority then is fit, because he has neither wisdom nor integrity
answerable to so great authority: yet seeing God wants neither wisdom nor
integrity, it seems fit in your judgment (as may appear by the tenor of
this sentence) that he should make decrees, and recall them at his pleasure.
And so though at the first entrance upon this discourse, and since also you
professed that Gods decrees were unalterable; yet here you plainly signify
that Gods wisdom and integrity may well bear him out in exercising such
authority as the Pope usurpes, to wit in making grants at pleasure, and at
pleasure to revoke them. Which I confess the Pope does with a great deal more
ease, then he does draw in the same breath, which once he has breathed out;
which if he does, yet certainly it is more then it is in his power to do at
his pleasure, unless he has some extraordinary device that I know not of. I
doubt your mysteries are not yet full; you seem to commend the condition of
mutability, as a condition befitting the wisdom and integrity of God; it
remains that you do as much disgrace immutability and count it an impotent
condition, that so with the better grace you may reject it, as unbeseeming the
nature of God. In the next sentence you utterly forsake your text, and whereas
in congruity to the precedent discourse you should show how alteration of
decrees is no sign of a fickle disposition, you nothing to the purpose tell us
that the alteration of awards is no sign of a fickle disposition. For by the
same decree may different awards be executed, without any revocation or
alteration of the decree. It was long ago the saying of Gregory, that Deus
mutat sententiam, consilium nunquam. But by the way you signify that the
former practice of Popes in making Greg. in Job. l. 16. cap. 6.
grants and recalling of them, is no sign of mutability. A manifest untruth.
Nay your self labored to justify such a change, as to make grants and to
revoke them as an apparent change: but you justified it by the opportunity to
do the greater good thereby, provided that wisdom and integrity be
answerable. So that though it be no vicious change as you would have it, yet:
apparently there is a change. But: the administration sometimes of rewards,
sometimes of punishments does argue I confess no mutability in decrees. One
and the self same laws of men do cause the different administration of
rewards and punishments to diverse persons, yea and to the self same persons at
different times, without all color of change in the laws themselves.

Of the coherence of that which follows with that which went before, I will
not enquire, for what do I know whether you purpose to write quodlibets. But
in my judgment you do not give a right reason why it is fitter to be grounded
by laws then by the wills of men. For the corruption of man disables him as
well from the making of good laws, as from governing well by will and
pleasure. But if men are to choose, the reason in my opinion why they will choose
to be governed by laws, is because by laws they may aforehand know what shall
be the execution of justice, and accordingly judge thereof, and if they like
and approve it, they may the better submit unto it. But if executions proceed
according to the will of a Prince absolute, they cannot judge of executions
before they come, because they know them not, they being left to the pleasure
of men, and after they are brought forth it is too late to remedy them, if they
prove evil. And the incorruptest and wisest man that ever was is fitter to
give laws and to execute just^ce thereby, then to be trusted with execution
of justice according unto pleasure; because such men come indifferent to the
making of laws, which may be particularly interested in the manner of
execution. For executions are only in particular cases, which particular cases
may in special cencerne them that have the execution of justice. As for
example, the malefactor may be a friend to the Magistrate himself, or a
brother, or near of k^nne, which is a shrewd tentation to provoke him (though
otherwise vncorrupt and fit enough to make: general laws) in this particular
case to strain a good conscience, and by partiality to corrupt the course of
justice.

Secondly, in case government is by succession; laws are most necessary,
because the most wise and incorrupt Prince is not sure to beget one like to
himself, or if he should yet is it not in his power to leave it unto him at
such a time as by ripenes of age and experience he shall be fit for government:
and by experience we find that many times good government in the father does
degenerate into tyranny in the son. And it is true that good Princes as true
fathers of their country and people, have sometimes remitted off their
absoluteness, the better to enjoy the hearts of their subjects (which is the
best maintenance of perpetuity) then by force to compel them. Yet by your
leave every Act, whereunto princes pass their consent does not restrain them
of their former liberty, or abate something of their present greatness. For unto
all acts of Parliament the King consents; yet in consenting to give him 5.
Subsidies in a year, or restoring and confirming unto him the customs called
runnage and poundage, I do not find that hereby he either remitts of his
former liberty, or abates any thing of his present greatness.

It is true the laws of men can have no greater perfection then men that make
them; and therefore they are said non cavere de particularibus; for it is
impossible that they should comprehend all occurrences, yet in this case there
is an help in Christian states having a court of chancery established for the
remedying of such inconveniences; without so much as taking any notice of the
Pope, as the Chancellor of Christendom. For if S. Peter himself were alive and
Bishop of Rome, yet what should he have to do with governing of States? Our
Savior would not meddle with dividing of inheritances, and professed his
Kingdom was not of this world, and Peter is commanded out of his love to his
Master to feed his sheep, not with any civil coerc^tive power and authority
to govern them. Yet Popes have laid title I confess to both swords: but the
unfittest that ever were to manage either, such abominable abuses and
corruptions have been found amongst them in the managing of both, as I think
are without example.

But that rule of the Canonists, Papa ^nquam sibi ligdt manus does much inamour
you, and great zeal ^oth inflame you to apply it unto God, to free him from
impotent immutability, as hereafter you call it, and that his decrees may not
oblige him, and indeed they do not; for how can he be said to be tied or
restrained that is confined to nothing against his will, but to every thing
according to his will? But to free God from an impotent immutabilitie, you
would have his decrees, not alterable, (for you dare not profess so much) but
something else, I know not what, which you call reservation of liberty, and to
be still as it were in making decrees, but not having decreed any thing till
the time of execution or afterward: mysterious inventions of your own brain,
which if perhaps you seem to understand your self, I assure you I do not:
but hence it is that you discourse so much of the Pope in this.

3. In this Section, you begin with telling us that God passes no act to the
prejudice of his absolute and eternal power of jurisdiction. This is a truth
and will nothing serve the turn of your reaches. By the way you deliver unto
us the object of Gods foreknowledge, and that you say is whatsoever will be;
and the object of Gods decree, and that you say is whatsoever may be, which
later is a most absurd position. Look we upon the decrees of men the wisest of
men, were they ever known to decree that a thing may be done? But rather
supposing many things may be done they make choice to decree the doing of such
courses, as seem most convenient. Things are possible without any reference to
the decrees of God, but only in reference to his power. That is possible unto
God which God can do, or which he has power to cause, that it be brought to
pass. As for example, before the World was made it was possible that the World
should be made, was this by virtue of Gods decree? Did God decree it to be
possible? If he did, seeing his decrees are free it follows that he might
have chosen whether the World should have been p^ssible or no.

Again, was not the creation of the World, is not the end of the World decreed
by God, the rewarding of the godly and the punishing of the wicked, are they
not decreed by God? What moves you then to make only things possible the object
of Gods decree, and the things that will or shall be only the object of his
foreknowledge? This wit of yours is able to make us a new World of Divinity
and Ph^losophy both, if it be let alone to run a wild goose race at
pleasure. Well, God passes no act to the prejudice of his absolute and
eternal power of jurisdiction. What of this? In the next place, you tell us
that, what grant or promise soever he makes cannot bind the exercise of his
everlasting liberty for a moment of time: they last no longer then Durante
been placito: seeing gracious equity, and only it, is his everlasting
pleasure. Be it so that gracious equity is his everlasting pleasure; and will
it not follow herehence that seeing all his promises do proceed from his
gracious equity, and this you say is his everlasting pleasure, and his grants
and promises must last you confess during his good pleasure, is not this
enough to assure us that whatsoever grants and promises God does make, they do
so far bind God to performance, that we may assure our selves they shall
stand good for ever and never be reversed? Only you discourse that they shall
last no longer. And what sober man would expect or desire that they should last
longer then for eternity? Or what wisdom is found in such discourse as
labors to prove that Gods grant, shall last no longer then during pleasure,
and withal confesses that his pleasure is everlasting. But no promise you
say, binds the exercise of his everlasting liberty for a moment of time: It
is fit to consider this. To my judgment Gods promises bind him as much, as
our promises bind us; the force of which obligation is not to bind our liberty,
but to keep our honesty: For what promise soever he makes, he is still free
naturally whether he will perform what he has promised or no; but if he
breaks his promise he shall be unt^ue. In like sort God if he should do
otherwise then he has promised, he should be untrue, though never a whit the
less free. And in doing what he has promised he is both true and never a whit
the less free.

For even men do freely keep their promises though not always willingly,
because when they promised they might be of one judgment and disposition, and
when they come to performance they may be of another. But all such change and
alteration is not to be found in God. Every honest Magistrate is free to
recompense every man according to his evil ways; for it becomes him not to
make any such promise that whatsoever he committs, he will not punish him. And
look what a good Magistrate resolves upon, when facts are committed either
good or evil; the like may God decree from everlasting. For no Mag^strate
knows so well what man has committed, as God from everlasting knows what he
will commit. And more then that, God knows how to keep man from evil
courses, or to expose him to evil courses, by having mercy on whom he will,
and hardening whom he will; which power and wisdom is not incident to a
creature. Besides all this, a Magistrate is bound by duty, to recompense every
man according to his works. But God is not bound by any such duty, to any such
course. He can pardon one and p^nish another; have mercy on one and deal
severely with another. Of many men taken in the same transgression he can give
repentance to some, deny repentance unto others. And if he has made any such
promise as this. If his children Psalm. 49. 30. 31. 32. 33. 34.
forsake my law and walk not in my judgments, if they break my statutes and
keep not my commandments; then will I visit their transgressions with the
rodd and their iniquity with strokes, yet my loving kindness will I not take
from him, neither will I falsify my truth; they to whom such promises are
made, may be assured hereby that God is bound to perform as much, bound I say
by moral obligation in such sort, as it is impossible he should do otherwise,
yet shall he perform it never a whit the less freely; First in respect that he
does it not by coaction and necessitation, and because he is as well pleased
still to do it as to promise it. For as much as look of what judgment and
disposition he was when he promised, of the same he is when he makes it good;
and consequently performs it as willingly as he made it.

It is not always so with man in the execution of his promises. If Gods one
and indivisibly everlasting decree without any variety or shadow of change
fitts all the changes, several dispositions and contingent actions of men and
Angels, as exactly as if he did conceive and shape a new Law for every one of
them; what moved you heretofore to profess that the reservation of liberty,
and that to make grants and to revoke them, is a point of so high perfection,
as that you would feign bestow it upon the nature of God? What mean you here
to profess that God cease not to decree, which to my understanding sounds as
if the meaning were, that God is still in making of new decrees. Gods decrees
continue I confess as God himself continues, and more unalterable then laws
of Medes and Persians. But neither could they be said in this respect not to
cease to make laws, so neither can God be said not to cease to make decrees.
For like as while laws are in making, they are not yet made; so to intimate
that Gods decrees are in making (as you do while you say God cease not to
decree) is to imply that Gods decrees are not yet made; which you do more
plainly signify in the words following, when you say, They are conceived and
brought forth as well befitting them as the skin does the body, which nature
has enwraped in it. Whereby you manifestly profess that Gods decrees are
brought forth in time, not only the executions of them, and thus howsoever you
flatter your readers ear with bestowing on Gods decrees the title of
everlasting, yet you plainly declare your mind that they are brought forth in
time, together with the execution of them.

And hereto properly tends that reservation of liberty which you magnified as
an high perfection, and the power of the Popes to make grants and revoke them,
as a power only fit for God. And to this purpose you seem to discourse of
eternal liberty, making use thereof to draw his decrees to a temporal
condition, lest if they were eternal, they should deprive God of liberty. Let
every indifferent reader judge whether this be not the language of your heart,
disclosed by the tenor of your discourses, howsoever you style Gods decrees
eternal; herein like unto boat-men, that look one way and row another.

Besides, by this discourse of yours you seem to acknowledge no other^d crees
of God then in rewarding them according to their works; for hitherto tends the
congruity of Gods decrees, which after your manner you amplify as no less
congr^ous to the actions of men, then the skin to the body. A very good
resemblance by the way, that as the skin does befit the body, so Gods
recompenses do befit men's works. Yet this you apply most incongruously to
Gods decrees (for thereof runs your discourse) and not to the executions of
them, and withal as touching the actions of men, though never so gracious,
though actions of faith, love, repentance, these I say are not objects of Gods
decrees in your Divinity; but only the rewards of them. No not Cyrus his Es.
45. 13. 1 King. 13. 2. Genesis 15. 14 Ex. 3. 20.
restoring of the Jews, nor Iosiahs burning of the Prophets bones upon the
Altar, nor the children of Isreal's coming out of Egypt, nor Pharaohs
dimission of them; and infinite the like, God decreed none of these by your
doctrine. He decreed only the contingency of these actions, not the actions
themselves.

Which doctrine of yours you are not willing to take notice of, when in the
next words according to your course of argumentation, you tell us, No man
living (as you take it) will avouch any absolute necessity from all eternity,
that God should inevitably decree the deposition of Elies line from the
priesthood, or his two sons destructions by the Philistims. For here you
seem to imply a grant that God decreed it, but not inevitably, and that upon
his decree there followed a necessity of his deposition, but not absolute. Now
it is well known that Solomon deposed Elies house in Abiathar freely, and the
Philistims by free actions of theirs were the death of Elies sons. And
therefore if God decreed them, the very free actions of men are the objects of
Gods decrees; and consequently no action by the freedom thereof is any way
hindered from being the object of Gods decrees. All which is directly contrary
to your opinion, who maintain contingency to be the object of Gods decree,
and not the thing contingent, as you have plainly expressed and professed in
another Treatise; and but erst you made the decrees of God to be brought forth
suitable to the actions of men, as if the actions of men were no objects at all
of Gods decrees.

Again, is it a sober distinction which here you imply, as if the decrees of
God were some evitable, some inevitable; well it may be accommodated to the
executions of Gods decrees, but most absurdly to Gods decrees, which being
everlasting as you confess, were before any thing could have existence to
avoid them. Yet we plainly profess that God decrees some things to come to
pass necessarily as works of nature, some things contingently as the actions
of men. Again, some things to come to pass inevitably, as the end of the
world, some things to come to pass evitably, as the judgments of God, which
may be avoided by repentance. But you desiring to speak home, tell us that no
man will avouch that it was necessary that God should decree the deposition of
Elies house. Indeed decrees are free, or else they are no decrees. Neither the
making of the world, nor the ending of the world was necessarily decreed by
God, but freely. Yet you come very soberly to this asseveration, and add very
cautiously (I take it) implying this ^o be your opinion, not daring too
confidently to avouch it to be the opinion of others. And as if you were
fearful lest you should deliver something unawares that might lie open to
exception, you propose it of absolute necessity; and so you think That no man
living (whether of them that be dead any have thought otherwise, that matters
not) will avouch that from all eternity there was an absolute necessity that
God should inevitably decree the deposition of Elies line. So that though a man
should say that it was necessary that God should decree such a deposition, yet
if he does not say that it was absolutely necessary; or if he does say it
was absolutely necessary that God should decree it; yet if he does not say
that this was so from all eternity, or though he should say this also, yet he
shall not contradict you, provided he do not say that God did inevitably decree
it.

And surely I cannot but commend your wary proceeding in this, and if you had
used the like wariness in every sentence, he had need rise betime that would
go beyond you in this k^nde of wariness and circumspection; yet to make all
sure, you give a reason of it, saying, For this were to bereave him of his
absolute and eternal liberty. And herein you say very true, for if it were
absolutely necessary for him to decree this, surely it were not absolutely
free for him whether to decree it o^ no.

Yet I find some in opinon have transgressed in this later, but never any in
the former. For Aristotle a great Philosopher has denied God to be a free
agent, and conceived him to be a necessary agent, yet never believed that it
was necessary for him to decree the deposition of Elies house, or ought else.
And therefore you do not well to prove a more plain thing by that which is
less manifest. We have as good stuff in the next. To say that before Elies
days God past any act that could constrain his eternal liberty of honoring
Elies family, as well as any others, were impiety, because it charge the
Almighty with impotent immutability. Herehence are certain Aphorisms to be
selected, worthy our consideration. 1. God is not to be charged with any thing
that is impotent; but there is a kind of immutability that is impotent;
therefore God is not to be charged with such an immutability. Now to att^bute
unto God that which does not become him, is a kind of blasphemy. The
contrad^ctorie hereunto does become God, and must be attributed unto him, to
wit, immutability. For mutab^lity and immutability are terms contradictorie;
and it is one of the most general principles that are, that one of two
contradictorie terms may be attributed to any thing, therefore if it be
blasphemy to say God is immutable, it is no blasphemy to say that God in some
cases at least is mutable. And in haec Amph^arae sub terram abd^tae? Old
Prophet Ma^achy do thou hear this, that have instructed us this to be the
voice of God, I the Lord am not changed? And thou James the Apostle, Mal. 3 6.
^ac. 1. 17.
how have thou deceived us in ll^, that with God there is no variableness nor
shadow of change? Yet now we are taught that it is no l^le then blasphemy to
say that God is altogether immutable, yea it is to ascribe impotencie unto him.
He must be mutable that he may be potent.

Well, let us consider wherein this impotent immutability does consist, to wit,
in not being able to reverse his own act: so then potent mutability consists
in being able to reverse his own act. Here by the way it is acknowledged that
Gods decrees are acts past, otherwise in doing contrary thereto there were no
color of mutability. Yet hitherunto it has been denied, that Gods decrees
were acts past. And by not passing of them there was conceited a reservation of
liberty. For so you thought better to discourse, then at the first to profess
any revocable nature of Gods decrees. But now that conceyte not fadging, and
your self as it seems not thoroughly satisfied, you plainly break forth, and
adventure to mainteyne that notwithstanding Gods decrees are acts past, yet he
can change them, and thus far he is mutable, and to say that God is immutable
herein, is to charge him with impotency.

From the first I looked for this, and at length the partridge is sprunge. But
you will say, otherwise his liberty is restrained. I answer, this is a vain
fiction, proceeding from the vain consideration of man's infirmities, and
attributing them unto God. For man after he has promised a thing, afterward
would feign break his promise, either because he made it improvidently, or
because he is of a fickle disposition; and therefore in performing his promise
he does it in a sort against his will. But no such improvidence is found in
God, no such fickle disposition is incident to him. And therefore his will
being the same still and that for good cause, his liberty is the same still.
For liberty extends no farther then to do what we can or will.

Now though God can do otherwise absolutely, yet he will not do otherwise;
and supposing that he has decreed to do this it is impossible that he should
do otherwise. For God cannot change his will, for as much as all change of
will in the creature, proceeds from such imperfections as are not incident to
the nature of God, as namely, improvidence, or forgetfullnes, or sicklenes or
the like, and yet do not we say that the deposition of Elies race, or the
death of his Sons were absolutely necessary.

But God had ordained them to come to pass contingently that is with a
possibility to the contrary, and upon supposition not only of their
miscarriage, but also of the will of God thus to punish their miscarriage. If
you rest your self upon such a decree of God, They that dishonor me them will
J^dishonour 1. Sam. 2. 30.
what need you trouble the World with such distasteful speculations, as to
affirm that to say God is immutable, is to charge him with impotency? But this
is an indefinite proposition, and if this be all the decree you acknowledge in
God, you must deny that the will of God to depose Elies line in particular from
the Preisthood, was eternal, and affirm thus it had its beginning by way of
reservation of liberty, but not to do it until Ely had dishonored God. And
such proposition as these undoubtedly are the best grounds for these your
extravagant speculations; and these do far better suite with your first
course, namely as touching reservation of liberty, and suspension of
resolution, then with revocation of his decrees considered as acts past.

But the common and general opinion of making Gods decrees eternal made you
to shuffle in that a long time; and at length plainly to fall foul upon the
liberty to revoke them lest otherwise, Gods liberty should be restrained. Of
Cicero Austin says, that dum homines fecit liberos, fecit sacrilegos. And you
to make God free make him immutable; and think to help it by giving us to
understand that some kind of mutability is potent, like as there is an
immutability which is impotent as you conceave.

4. In conclusion you tell us, that to think of Gods eternal decree without
admiration void of danger; we must conceive it as the immediate axis or center,
upon which every successive or contingent act revolves. And I profess I cannot
think on this which you deliver without admiration. And the object of my
admiration is, upon what axis or center your wit did revolve when you pleased
your self with this resemblance. Yet I think there is no great danger in your
meaning to make a man an heretic. For it had need be understood first. And
he deserves to be one of your worthiest disciples that understands you in this.
For like as he was a worthy Scholar that bid his Master give him positions and
let him alone to prove them; so no l^sse worthy a Scholar is he also, that
gives his Master leave to speak what gibrish he will, yet nothing doubts of
understanding him; In this Section hereafter you say that Gods eternal decree
is coexistent to each humane thought or action: But in what sense it is, your
axis or center whereupon every contingent act does revolve, you no where
explane that I know. As how every act (many of them being instantaneall) has a
revolution, or how the whole body of contingent actions being drawn into one
by aggregation may be said to turn round. As if time from the beginning of the
World unto this day did turn, and the change of things to come into things
present, and of things present into things to come, were a sphericall change;
or lastly how Gods decree is the center hereof, and yet coexist with every part
of the circumference; These are mysteries I confess which we cannot think upon
without admiration, yet no other danger herein do I find in have, besides the
wasting of precious time in the consideration of so wild and extravagant
speculations. Yet one word more of this before we part. Every contingent act
revolves you say upon the axis of Gods decree.

Now I demand whether these contingent acts are the objects of Gods decrees or
no. If not, what has Gods decree to do with them? or they with the decree of
God? let them rather be thought fit (if you please) to revolve upon the axis
of Gods knowledge, and that will be with far less danger unto your tenet.
For this revolution of contingent acts upon the axis of Gods decree, does
savor strongly of making them the object of Gods decrees. But this you may
remember is directly opposite to your tenent, who mainteyne that God decrees
contingency but not the contingent things themselves.

The next member of the first sentence in this Section had been very
mystical, had we not been already reasonably well acquainted with this
dialect of yours in the chapter of eternity. And upon my remembrance of that
your discourse, I take that, wherein the whole frame of succession and
contingency is fully comprehended, to be no other then that precious creature
called time, wherein all contingent things come to pass, and so are
comprehended therein as in the measure of their existence and duration. For of
such a comprehension (as I take it) you do discourse, not of substantial or
integrall comprohension; For I see no reason why the decree of God should not
be the axis of the whole body of contingent things as well as of any particular
of them, whereon to revolve. But you make a far greater quiescent to be the
axis of this, by which greater quiescent, I think you mean Gods eternity. For
that alone is it, as heretofore you have expounded it, which draws all the
successive parts of motion into an indivisible unity of duration permanent. I
am now almost grown as perfect in this canting language as your self.

But herein I had need of your help for satisfaction, as touching certain
points. As namely, why time should be accounted by you, an unconstant and
moveable sphare. Time I confess cannot be conceaved without motion, but it is
neither motion it self nor a thing moveable. Yet in the course of it to my
understanding it is most constant; for things never so different in constancy
or inconstancy are still measured with the same time; as whether motion be
uniforme or difforme, swift or slow, the same or different, yet the time
wherein motion is, is still the same.

But least of all do I see any reason, why you should accoumpt time a Sphere.
For a sphericall form is proper unto bodies, and such bodies moving round are
said to move spherically, but of sphericall time I see no congruity. Again,
why should you accoumpt eternity a far greater quiescent, then the decree of
God, you may as well say that eternity is a greater quiescent then God
himself. Eternity as it is duratio manens, without beginning and without end,
so it is of Gods decrees also.

Thirdly it is impossible that all the successive parts of motion should be
drawn into an indivisible unity of duration permanent. For motion can neither
be made indivisible nor permanent. Well it may cease, but it cannot be drawn
into permanency, or indivisibility. Again, duration permanent of indivisible
unity (if I understand the language aright,) is eternity. But motion cannot be
drawn into eternity, no more then eternity can be drawn into motion. To
swallowe up motion into a vigorous rest^ understand right well what it is, I am
pr^ty well acquainted with this language.

It is for a Sphere of Heaven to turn round in a moment, that is to turn so
swiftly, as to stand stock still. For to be where it was immediately before
this instant is to stand still. Yet if such a revolution should be in an
instant, then every part of the larger Sphere should have coexistence local
with all and every part of the lower Sphere under it, provided you understand
it aright, and so shall every part of the lower sphere have coexistence with
all and every part of the Sphere above it, without any pains more then
ordinary. And that whether it move swiftly or slowly; to wit, in an instant.
This is sober discourse, is it not? For if one body may move twice so fast as
another in an instant; then in half an instant it may move as fast as the
other in an whole instant.

In the next place you tell us, that Gods foreknowledge is included in the
conceyte of his eternal decree. And you speak of the foreknowledge of things
contingent. For of no other things but contingent have you spoken in reference
to Gods decree; hence it follows that contingent things are the object of
Gods decree; and that therefore he foreknows them, because he has decreed
them; otherwise how could the foreknowledge of such things be included in the
conceit of Gods decree? But that the foreknowledge of such things depends upon
Gods decree, is a thing which you impugned in the 8. chap. and 5. Sect. page
96. 97. Gods ubiquitary presence you have heretofore compared sometimes to a
center, sometimes to a Sphere. And there must be an analogy as here you
signify, between his decree and his ubiquitary presence, and therefore we must
believe the decree of God to be as the axis or center upon which every
contingent act revolves, but you do not infer that therefore it must be as a
Sphere also; yet analogy requires this as well as that.

Neither did you tell us that Gods ubiquitary presence was as a center whereupon
all things did revolve; though here you tell us thus much of Gods decree in
respect of contingent acts. The profitable nature of this admirable conceyte is
(you say) to free us from suspicion that his necessary foreknowledge should lay
a necessity upon our actions, or take away all possibility of doing, otherwise.
Now to prevent this suspicion, we have no need of these quaint fictions of
yours, as in conceiving Gods decree (or foreknowledge rather) as an axis
whereon every contingent act revolves. We say that by virtue and efficacy of
Gods decree, not only some things come to pass necessarily, as the works of
natural agents: but other things also come to pass contingently, that is,
with all possibility of being otherwise, as the free actions of men, only upon
supposition of Gods decree, we say it necessarily follows that such things
how contingent soever, shall come to pass: but how? not necessarily, but
contingently.

In like sort supposing Gods foreknowledge of things to come, (which
foreknowledge of God not only is to day, but was before the world was made,
though it continues in the notion of foreknowledge till the things are, and
afterward also with the notion of knowledge) it necessarily follows that all
such things shall come to pass; but how? not necessarily but contingently:
Here follows a list of what you will prove; when time serves: 1. That the
Omnipotent does eternally decree an absolute contingency in most humane acts. I
pray tell me, had not this decree of God existence in the beginning of the
world, and before that also? If it had, what mean you to say he does decree
it, as if this decree of God which yet you call eternal, had not existence
till now? why do you not or may you not as well say that God does eternally
decree the creating of the world, the turning of man out of Paradise, the
drowning of the world in the days of Noah; the destruction of Sodom, and the
like, for you have no color of reason to justify your phrasiologie herein,
but only this, that though (Gods) decrees be eternal, yet they still
continue. Now this is as true of the decree of creation, and the rest above
mentioned, as of any other decree. Secondly, what mean you to qualify your
assertion, by saying In most humane acts: as if you durst not avouch it of all?
Are not all humane acts of a contingent nature, and consequently have a
contingencie in them? and why should not their contingency be decreed as well
as others? It may be that herein you have reference to the Jesuits distinction,
of future contingents absolutely that shall be, and future contingents
conditional that should be, if and in case some condition were put in esse.
But how then will you prove, that the acts of men that shall be, are of a
greater number, then those that might or should be, in some case? For you
suppose that this absolute contingency decreed, is in most humane acts. I have
a manifest reason to the contrary. For the number of things that might be upon
supposition, is far greater then the number of things that are, have been,
and shall be; for in case the world had been made twice bigger then it is, and
twice as many men as there are, and should last twice as long, the number of
humane acts would be far greater then these are, wherein God has decreed an
absolute contingency.

Again, the Jesuits maintain that God has not only decreed contingencie in
humane acts, but the humane acts themselves, which you do not: we maintain
that God decrees the actions of men themselves, that they shall come to pass
contingently and consequently; decrees the contingency of them, but not that
only, but the actions themselves. As Pharaohs dimission of the children of
Israel, God decreed not only the contingency of it, but the act it self, that
it should come to pass in a contingent manner. Iosiahs burning of the Prophets
bones upon the Altar, God decreed not only the contingencie of this act, but
the act it self, to wit, to come to pass in a contingent manner. So Cyrus his
restoring of the Jews out of captivity, to their country, was an humane
contingent act, and God decreed not only the contingencie hereof, but the act
it self, to come to pass in a contingent manner.

2. The second Aphorism is, that Gods eternal decree does coexist to each
humane action throughout the whole succession of time. This we do not deny, no
more then we deny Gods coexistence with every action: but heretofore you have
professed, that God does at this present coexist with all things, not only
with all things present, but with all things that are to come: and this we
deny, because God cannot coexist with that which does not coexist with him:
and therefore seeing things past, and things to come, do not at all exist at
this present, and consequently do not coexist with God, therefore we profess
that God at this present does not coexist with them.

In the next place you say, that Gods decree does inspire them with contingency
in their choice. It was wont to be said, that praedestinatio nihil ponit in
praedestinato; rather the execution of his decree does bring things forth, then
his decree; for his decree was from all eternity, yet nothing was inspired
into man, till the creation, nor into us men, until we are brought forth, and
grow capable of inspirations. When you talk of contingency in our choice, you
might have spoken plainly and called it liberty in our choice. But does God
continually inspire this? It is too absurd: to inspire, is to bring forth
something anew: as when God does inspire good motions into us. You might as
well say that God does continually inspire a reasonable nature into us, as
liberty of choice; more congruous it had been to say, that God continually
preserves it as he does our natures. For as we are reasonable creatures we have
essentially a liberty of choice in all that we do: and he moves us so, as
that we may move our selves more ways then one. But when does he move us thus?
in the very time of doing ought, or before? and so does he move us by
persuasion only, or by mediate operation on the will? For all this whereabouts
alone there is question now adays amongst Divines, we have nothing but blankes
here: you are yet only upon the promise of performance, and not upon any
performance it self.

Yet whilst it moves them, it withal inevitably effects the proportioned
consequents, which were foreordained, to the choices which we make, whether
they be good or evil. That is, God does inevitably decree that they that die
in faith and repentance shall be saved, they that die in impenitencie shall be
damned. Wherein you nothing doubt to acknowledge an inevitable decree of God, to
wit, of an indefinitive nature, thus, Whosoever believes shall be saved,
whosoever believes not, shall be damned. But that these men in particular shall
believe, and repent, and so be saved; others shall neither believe, nor repent,
nor be saved, you will be wise and wary enough to keep your self from the
acknowledgement of any such decree, unless it be provided that God be not
charged with any such impotent immutabilitie, as not to be able to revoke his
decrees. For though the Pope wants wisdom and integrity sufficient to manage
such an authority and power as he challenges to himself, as namely, of making
grants, and again revoking them; yet God does not.

CHAP. XI.
Of transcendentall goodness, and of the infinity of it in the divine nature.

I Profess I have no desire to oppose ought in this, or in the Chapter
following; yet having begun this work of examination it is fit to consider
these also, if it be but to take notice of what you deliver, and rightly to
understand the meaning thereof.

They which fetch light beyond the Sun, must be content with Starre-light;
and they which cannot satisfy themselves with day light, but seek for
starre-light, they are well enough served if they go to bed darkling. We
commonly say, Life is sweet, and it is a truth, not because it is a principal
stem of being, in my judgment, (for reason is a more principal stem of
being then it) and yet is life as sweet to creatures unreasonable, as to
creatures reasonable. And you confess that the appetite of preservation, of it
self is natural unto all; yet it cannot be denied but that life is subject to
sour things as well as sweet: whereupon some have said, Non est vivere sed
valere vita. And (...). Better eye out then alwais akeing; and better once dead
then always dying. Nay the hope of a better state, without all others
consideration, may make this life of ours distastefull unto us, I desire to be
dissolved, says S. Paul, and to be with Christ, I am not of your opinion, in
your construction Phil. 1. 23.
of the Maxim, Omne ens qua ens est bonum, as if the meaning were, that it is
good it self, for that which is good, and that whereunto a thing is good,
should be rather different then the same, for the terms of relation, must be
distinct. Your instances, are very incongruous, you should say, that poison is
good to it self, not to the aspe, for the aspe is a different thing from his
own poison, and so is the Adders stinge, from the Adder. And as sure I am that
even of poison, good use may be made for the service of man; And the Scorpion
cures the wound, that is made by his own sting: And even of the Adders sting,
God the Creator of it, has a good use eve^ in stinging, and the heathen Man in
this kind observes the providence of God when he says: (...),
(...).


If natural qualities of contrary nature, do fight for the maintenance of
their own being, it seems being to them, Dionys. peri ego sive discriptio
orbis.
is as sweet, as life is to us, though life be a principal stem of being.
How transcendentall goodness, should be equally communicated by God to all, and
not equally participated, by all, I understand not: the contrary seems true to
my opinion, for as much as like as there can be no communication, where there
is no participation, so there can be no equal communication, where there is no
equal participation; And though a less vessel, may be as full as a greater,
yet there is no equal communication of water unto them both, and the
comparison is no way congruous, for as much as it is an easy thing, to
distinguish between the water and the vessel, filled with it, but not so easy
to distinguish between the thing, and the being of it. Rather thus. God does
sit every thing with qualities, or parts according to the being thereof, or as
it shall require, like as every vessel small and great are filled with water.
The being of a fly, of a man, of every thing is good in it self, and as it may
be, and is referred to the glory of God, for God made all things for himself.
Prove. 16. 4


But in the things that God has created, there are degrees of perfection, some
creatures have only being, some being and life also, some add sense unto them
both, some have reason over and above them all. The degree of entitative
goodness, cannot arise from the specificall nature of it, for so it should
arise from it self, for the degree of entitative goodness in any thing and
the specificall nature thereof is all one; Your other derivation of the degree
of entitative goodness is as bad or worse, as when you derive it from the
degree of their specificall nature: As if the specificall nature of a thing had
degrees, which is untrue, as I remember; Aristotle compares specificall natures
or forms of substances to numbers, that admit no intention or remission; three
flies are as truly three, as three Elephants.

The difference of individualls under the same species, is merely accidental
not essential; Thus, that one is not so happy as another, is an accidental
difference, not entitative or essential; It is true, sensitive appetites
cannot be satisfied all at once, yet I have heard of a Ruffian Englishman, that
in one night at Venico bestowed five hundred pounds, upon his five senses. It
is not the fruition of goodness incident to one sense that defeates another
for the time, of that it most desires, but rather want fruition thereof by your
instances. For if the belly be satisfied, it is free to delight in music also,
if pinshed with hunger not so, yet too much feeding I confess may bring a man
asleep, and make him unfit for taking any pleasure in the exercise, either of
body or mind. On the other side deep contemplation, as you say pines the
body, and is occasion of far worse accidents also sometimes; as in Archimedes
whole plodding upon his Mathematical operations, made him neglect the
Soldier that came upon him, and by neglect provoked him to set an immature
and bloody end to all his studies, to the great grief of Marcellus the
General, who had given chardge to the contrary. The gainving of Archimedes
safe into his hands, though by his art a most mischievous enemy to him, had
been more worth, to an ingenuous Conqueror, then the taking of Syracusa. I
have great cause to be sensible, of that of Solomon's, of making many books
there is no end, for I think if I should live Methusalehs years, yet I should
not make an end. Much study is a weariness unto the flesh, but by the
goodness of God I find this weariness, with a little refreshing quickly to
vanish, and I return unto it with as great vivacity of mind and Spirit, as
ever I did before. I desire to do the task, which God has appointed for me.
And if death prevent me, yet it is good to die doing something. I should put it
out of doubt that the more knowledge we get, the more is our reasonable desire
of knowledge satisfied, yet it is true I confess the more we increase in
knowledge, the greater is our immediate capacity of knowledge. For the more we
know the better is our understanding and judgment, enabled to proceed in
knowledge. And this capacity of ours will never be thoroughly satisfied, till
the enjoying of God himself, yet I see not how the nature hereof hitherunto
can be said to hinder the entire possession of our selves, whether
contemplation be vain or not vain, whether it be used as a pledge of a better
life to come or no, I see no reason why it hinders or furthereth the
possession of our selves, though it hinder or further our possessing of God.

Certainly that life to come is no part of our selves, like as eternal death
is no part of the damned selves. But eternal life is a condition that God
bestows upon us, and everlasting death is a just recompense, which God
inflicts upon others. Yet in what sense contemplation may be used (as you say)
as a pledge of a better life to come, I am to seek. The Spirit of God and the
fruits of sanctification, are the pledges and earnest penyes hereof, but
contemplations are not; How Angels are said entirely to possess their
angelical natures, and men not to possess their natures entirely has need
of explication. Angels have no bodies, and consequently are not capable of
augmentation as we are. In this sense I conceave how we by degrees attain to a
fulness of age, Angels doc not. There is a growth of our souls in knowledge
also, Ephesians. 4. 13. in grace, 2 Pet. 3. last. This fullness of age is not all at
once in us; you suppose it is so in Angels, but without distinction; for there
are Angels of darkness, as well as Angels of light. What think you of Angels
of darkness, do they entirely possess their Angelical nature, or no? I
should think they differ not in nature Angelical, though their accidental
condition be much different. As for the elect Angels, do you think they do
already possess all that may belong unto them, either in respect of knowledge
or glory? It appears Ephesians. 3. 10. that the very Angels themselves do increase
in knowledge, and that by the Church. It seems also, that though they are void
of sin, and so void of sorrow, in respect of themselves, yet that all tears
are not wiped from their eyes in respect of us; for if there be joy in heaven
for one sinner that repents, what is there in respect of the falls of Gods
children? No question but the nature of man at best is inferior to the nature
of an Angel. And on the other side, as little question is to be made (I should
think) whether man shall not be as happy in his kind as the elect Angels in
their kind: in the 20. of Luke, our Savior professes, that the time shall
come when we shall be (...), like unto the Angels.

Gods infinity is nothing pertinent to the comparison of men and Angels, from
whom Angels as well as men are infinitely distant, as the creature from the
Creator; yet this infinity of Gods joy is vainly amplified, by saying, he
wants no moment of time to enlarge or perfect it by continuance, whereas time
is no measure suitable with the being of God, no nor with the being of Angels.
Yet God has continuance, it cannot be denied, both without beginning, and in
respect of being, without end, which is an essential perfection of God, as
much as any, as being but the interpretation of his necessary being, whereas
all the being of a creature is merely by the free will of God, and yet
continuance to the creature adds no perfection. For will you say that the
Angels and Saints of God in heaven do grow more and more perfect by
continuance. In this world for a while we grow more and more perfect by
continuance. But then again it is as true, that by continuance we decay more
and more both in body and mind.

Aristotle has said, that Bonum non ideo melius quia diuturnius. But of the
transcendentall goodness of God (you say) you now entreat not, but of the
transcendentall goodness of the creature, which you make to consist in doing
good to others: and withal you deliver another maxim, namely, that amongst
visible creatures, the better every one is in its kind, or according to its
entitative perfection, the more good it does to others. And I confess this
latter stands in much congruity with the former. But I have already showed my
dislike of the former, and given reason for it, and I see no reason to embrace
the latter. A Lion is the king of beasts, but of more good he does to others,
then the inferior beasts whereon he preyeth, I am nothing conscious. An Eagle
is the king of birds, yet we commonly say, that a Lark is better then a Kite.
What creature more profitable then the Sun, yet I pray consider, does not a
Mouse, or an Emmet, or a Fly, in entitative perfection go beyond it? for these
are animate, the Sun is not, though God sends him forth as his most conspicuous
and goodly messenger every morning like a bridegroom bedeckt with light and
comelines, as you are pleased to expatiate or take the air, and breath your
self in a rhetorical flourish. God himself to the contemplation of whom the
Sun you say does invite us, though from the boundless Ocean of his internal
joy and happiness (as you say) sweet streams of perpetual joy and comfort
more uncessantly issue, then light from the Sun, to refresh this vale of
misery. Yet I hope you will not say, his entitative goodness consists in doing
good to others.

For before he made the world, he was no less good, then since the creation;
and though he had never made it, yet had he continued every way as good as now
he is. And in that dispensation of this his goodness, which proceeds not from
his joy and happiness, though you say so, but from the counsel and freedom
of his will; though as touching the comforts of this life, God makes his rain
to fall, and Sun to shine as well upon the wicked as upon the righteous; yet as
touching the dispensation of his grace, though he be most good, that way also,
yet it is but toward whom he will; for that Oracle of God, I will have mercy
on whom I will; and again, He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he
hardneth, must sway more with us, then any vain conceit or imagination of man
to the contrary. And why do you call this world a vale of misery? is it not in
respect of Gods jugements, as well as in respect of sin? which judgments of
God have their course as well as mercies, how then does perpetual joy and
comfort more uncessantly issue from him, then light from the Sun, to refresh
this vale of misery? Surely as the Prophet said, his song should be of mercy
and of judgment: so does God also sometimes mourn unto us, that we may weep,
as well as at other times draw us to dance after his pipe.

You conclude with telling us the causes why men are not so happy as they might
be. The one is, you say, That they do not believe the eternal happiness of
their Creator to be absolutely infinite, as his other attributes are. The
other, That they do not consider that the absolute infinity of this his
eternal happiness, is an essential cause of goodness unto all others, so
far as they are capable of it. As for the first of these, what Heathen
Philosopher, that acknowledged the making of the world, that acknowledged a
God, did ever doubt of his eternal happiness, and that as infinite as any
other of his attributes. As touching the other, does not Callimachus
acknowledge as much, when he says, (...)? Does not Aristotle acknowledge
felicity to be from God; and did this make them as happy as they might be? It
is true indeed, their goodness they conceived to be from themselves. Det vitam
det opes, animum mihi ipse parabo.


And do not you I pray concur with them in this, even in this place? For
although you carry it in general terms, when you say, he is the cause of all
goodness, yet by that which follows it is manifest that you limit this unto
the happy condition that follows man upon his goodness; as when you say, God
is a cause of goodness to all that are capable of it, and capable of it all
reasonable creatures by creation are, none but themselves can make them
incapable of happiness. And where is any mention of Christ Jesus in all this?
where any mention of the grace of God for the performing of this, which you
make sufficient to bring them unto happiness? It is true, God cannot be the
author of evil of sin, but God forbid that we should so maintain God to be no
Author of evil, as withal to deny him to be the author of good.

Speak plainly, do you believe that God is the author of faith, that God it
is who gives repentance, that works in us both the will and the deed,
according to his good pleasure? if you believe this, then you must believe that
God did decree to give men faith and repentance. But this is contrary to the
articles of your Creed, who profess that God does decree contingency, but not
things contingent. And who doubts but the faith of Peter, and his repentance,
the faith of Paul and his repentance, were contingents? and if God did never
decree them, surely he was not the author of them; for God does nothing in
time, but what he decreed to do before all time.

And in case you did truly acknowledge God to be the cause of all goodness,
we would not quarrel with you about the term essential, which with what
learning you deliver, I profess I know not; but I observe you are very
liberal of your words and phrases; we were never acquainted with any more then
four causes, can you tell us which of them is called by any essential,
unless matter and form be called essential, because they constitute the
essence of that, whose matter and form they are. But I hope you will not say
that God, in this sense, is the essential cause of all our goodness.

CHAP. XII.
Of the infinity and immutability of divine goodness, or as it is the pattern
of moral goodness in the creature.

I do not like this Title, the disjunctive argues, that Gods goodness
communicative as communicative, is the pattern of moral goodness in the
creature, I know no pattern of moral goodness, which we must imitate, but
that which is commended unto us in Gods Law, Gods communicative goodness was
exercised in making of the World, and us; Is this a fit pattern for us to
imitate? As touching his providence, whereby he governs the World, we are
called by our Savior, to imitate him in some particulars, as when he suffers
his rain to fall, and Sun to shine on the bad, as well as on the good.

But in most particulars we can not, in many we may not imitate him; He caused
two she bears to come out of the wood, and tear 42. children that mocked
Elisha, we must not 2. King. (...). Matthew. 5.
imitate God in the like, we must still bless them that curse us, and pray for
them, that persecute us.

The sense of imbecility and indigence in our selves, even in this corrupt
state of man, does only provoke us the more, to show pity unto others, in the
time of their calamity according to that of Q. D^do, Non ignara mali miseris
succurrere disco: But it does not breed it, for it is manifest that men little
exercised with the Cross, or not at all, may show more mercy, then such as
have been in great misery themselves. Yet these merciful natures having
tasted of misery themselves, will be the more provoked to show compassion unto
men in misery.

2. And this is true, not only in the corrupt state of man, but even in the
state of integrity, for is it not said of our Savior, Heb. 2. 18.
that being tempted himself, he knew how to succor them, that are tempted? It
is now a days without question, among divines, that mercy and pity as they
signify passions are not in God, but attributed unto him, per (...) as are the
members of our body also. But the will of Psalm. 107. 9. Math. 10. 20.
succouring creatures in their necessity, may with propriety enough be
attributed unto God, for he hears the cry of Ravens when they call upon him,
and not a sparrowe falls to the ground, without the providence of our
heavenly Father, how much more, is his love enlarged toward man, who when they
were sinners, sent his Son to die for them, and when they lay weltring in
their blood, said unto them, live, And washed them with water, yea washed away
their blood from Ezekiel. 16. 6. 9.
them, and anointed them with oil: Thus God has a will to succor man in
misery, and this will, and grace, and favor of God is in Scripture phrase,
called mercy. But he shows this mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he
hardens, I wonder Romans 9.
you should applaud that saying; Nemo sponte malus, which has no color of
truth; Save in respect of original sin, traduced to Adams posterity of which
original sin, the Author of that saying was utterly ignorant; And you in
another sense treading the authors stepps, seem to mainteyne it, not in
respect of any natural corruption that has sowred our natures, but in
respect, rather of the perfection of our souls, and their native inclination
unto good, for external things, you say, do so captivate the humane soul,
that she cannot do, as she would, but these strings, being cut, she follows
her native sway: And hereupon you come in with the approbation of this, Nemo
sponte malus, manifesting thereby, that you acknowledge the native sway of the
soul to be unto good.

But by the way you cast your self upon an erroneous assertion, convictable of
untruth, by the very light of nature; as when you say, that external things
do captivate the soul; as if the object had power to the will, which is a
conceipte contrary to all Philosophy and Divinity. And nothing indeed, but a
man's own corruption is it that captivates him unto evil. For let Joseph be
tempted with a wanton Mistress, yet if lust be mortified within him, her wanton
invitation, shall never captivate Joseph. No nor the ladies admitted to his
presence, could inflame Scipio Adricanus, though a man of war, with a
lustful appetit. Show a Lion grass he is nothing affected with it says
Decumenius, because it is not Decum. upon the parable of the sower that went
forth to sow. I am. 1. 14. 2 Timothy 2. last.
the diet of a Lion, but of an Ox; Show an Ox flesh, he has no appetite unto
it, for flesh is no diet for an Ox, but for a Lion rather; every man is
tempted, (says S. James) when he is drawn away by his own concupiscence and
entised. And by working upon this concupiscence, it is that the Devil leads
men captive, to do his will, no such matter could he find in our Savior.

And so much some conceaved to be signified, when he says: The Prince of the
World comes and sindes naught in me: Ioh. 14. 30
Yet cannot the Devil certainly prevail to every particular, nor to any
particular, so as to justify, that man does not that evil which he does
sponte; for even beasts do sponte whatsoever they do, and man even the worst
of men does not only of his own accord, that which he does but voluntarily
also, yea and freely too; And yet the Devil is none of those external things
you speak of, with far more color of reason did they proceed, who
mainteyned, that look what me^ did of passion, they did not voluntarily,
fetching the restraynt of doing voluntarily, not from things external, but
internal rather even from the passion themselves, but even this also is
learnedly confuted by Aristotle long ago. Eth. 3.


3. We must with patience expect and wait, till you come to your text, and
entreat of the theme proposed, to wit of the infinity and immutability, of
divine goodness communicative. The first sentence is not well stated; for
Sarah was old stricken in age, and it ceased to be with her after the manner of
Women, when hearing from the Lord, something concerning the conceaving of a
child by her, she said; After I am waxed old, and my Genesis 18. ^2
Lord also, shall I have lust? Lust, certeynly may be in old age and not a
sin, lust is one thing, inordinate lust is another thing, and where lust is,
why should it seem a Monster, in corrupt nature, for that lust to be
inordinate? And if a proud man be brought to a beggars condition, why should it
seem monstrous, if his moral condition be not altered, but he continue as
proud as ever? As Plato discerned a proud heart, thorough Antisthenes patcht
coat; And Diogenes might be as proud of his tubbe, as Alexander of his Crown;
And a man may be as proud of carrying a cloak bag beh^nde him, as Cardinal
Camprins, was of his sumpter horse, that followed after him; for pride though
it be more hateful in one then in another, as the wiseman speaks, yet it
disdeyns no condition, but accepts entertainment in every breast; how much
more in the breasts of Kings, and such may be found even amongst the wandering
planets on earth, otherwise called Roagues, and beggars. Certeynly men of a
shifting disposition, if they have gotten wealth thereby, it is nothing strange
if they continue their trade still, considering that Crescit amor nummi quantum
ipsa pecunia crescit: especially if they have prospered well by it. And yet I
confess, men sometimes give over their former trades, as horse leaches leave
sucking, when their bodies are full; but I do not think, they can so easily,
leave off their manners, neither do temptations, begett any sins, but rather
provoke our corruptions, to actuate themselves; as a man's corrupted will and
affection, to actuate it self, and bring forth actual sin.

And as the Apostle says, Sin not only provoked by temptation, Romans 7. 9*
but even taking occasion by the Commandment, does bring forth in us all
manner of concupiscences. It seems you are a very moral man your self, that
are so well persuaded of others* but in the mean time, you are little
thankful unto Gods grace; For this your morality, when you ascribe it to a
general inclination of nature, belike you are loath to be beholding to Gods
grace; for the morality of your nature, I wonder the less at the prodigious
blindness of your mind, mainteyning that he, who hates his brother, desires,
to deserve well of him, whereas S. John says, that he, who hates his brother,
is a manslayer, that the avaritious person, desires to be liberal, and the
(...) John. 3.
Hypocrite, desires to be upright, and the unmercifull to be compassionate, the
Extortioner or robber to be just, and the Niggard to be bountiful, which is as
much as to say, that the hot fire, desires to be cold as earth, and the cold
earth desires to be as hot as fire.

Why do you not proceed in expressing the good opinion you have of a natural
man, even of the worst of men, and say that they have a desire to repent, to
please God, to be holy, to be religious? Continuance in sin was wont to be
called altera natura, and secunda natura; and the Prophet justifies it, where
he says, Can a black Moore change his skin, or a Ier. 13. 23.
Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed unto evil.
The sight of Gods judgments causing fear, may restrain from evil, like as an
hedge of thorns, crossing a man's Hos. 2. 6.
way, may hinder him from finding his paths: But as for impulsions unto
goodness, in a man abandoned unto his lusts, and who, as the Apostle speaks,
commits sin with greediness, Ephesians. 4* ^8.
and is grown to (...), I know none. And Seneca seems to be your only Oracle
for this; a proper master for a Christian Divine to rely upon. And yet upon the
scanning, Seneca alleged by you in this place, I find pleades against you,
rather then for you, as who plainly professes, that They who err in matters
of life and manners, are delighted with their errors; every criminal person
is delighted with his crime, one sola^th himself in adultery, another delights
in overreaching others, and in theft. He says, that naughtiness is afraid of
darkness it self, which may restrain from evil, I confess, but this gives
no evidence of any impulsion unto goodness, no more then his last conclusion,
that naughtiness may be safe, but never secure. Which conclusion seves you for
a passage to the next Section.

4. It is very true, an evil conscience will not suffer a man to be secure;
for if a good conscience be a continual feast, surely Prove. 15. 15*
an evil conscience holds a man continually upon the rack. Occultum quatiente
animo tortore slagellum. The wicked slye when no man pursues him, says
Solomon; and, There is no peace, says Esa. 48* 22*
the Lord, to the wicked. It was one of the Judgments God threatened to his
own people, when they persisted in their obstinate courses against him;
namely, that the sound of a leaf Levit. 26. 36.
should chase them, and they should fly, no man pursuing them: but this is no
evidence of any impulsion unto goodness. And when Seneca says, Even in minds
drencht in the dregs of filthiness, there remains still a sense of goodness:
this is no more then that which the Apostle informs us of, when he says,
they have a conscience accusing them, by virtue of that law that is Romans 2.
written in their hearts: yet the Apostle does not extend this to them that are
drencht in the dregs of filthiness. He acknowledges elsewhere, that some
through the course of sin become past all feeling, and have their conscience
seared with an hot iron. And it is a proverbiall speech in the world, Nemo
senex metuit Iovem. Yet it is one thing to have a sense of goodness by the
conviction of their conscience, and a far Ephesians. 4. 18. 1 Timothy 4.
different thing to have an impulsion unto goodness.

Be it that the mind of man in that it is endued with reason, has the rules
of equity imprinted in it, is it not as true, that the rules of iniquity are
imprinted in it also? does he not know evil as well as good? Nay, has he not
more knowledge of evil then of good, at least as touching the compassing of it?
does not the Lord complain of this, where he says, They are wise to do
evil, but as touching good they have no understanding. If Yer. 4. 22.
this were so amongst men brought up in the Church of God, what was the
condition of those that were aliens from the common Ephesians. 2. 12.
wealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise? especially
considering what d^fference the Apostle puts between these, when he says, We
Jews by nature, not sinners of Gal. 2. 15.
the Gentiles.

And therefore if it belongs to the mind to seek to instamp her rules upon
inferior faculties, she shall be as forward to stamp rules of iniquity, as
rules of equity. And with what congruity I pray you may rules of equity be said
to be stamped upon faculties, that are not intellectual? appetites are guided
by rules, in their motions, not instamped with them. Rules of knowledge are
circumstant to appetites of doing, not inherent in them. And why should not
these rules of equity be stamped on the will, as well as on sensual appetites?
or if it be so, why should you reckon the will an inferior faculty in
comparison to the mind? whereas indeed the will rules in man as king, the
mind is but his privy Councellor.

To quash an exception that might arise against your tenet touching the
integrity of nature, as thus, If the mind have such good rules, and withal
seeks to instamp them upon inferior faculties, how comes it to pass that
there is so little love of virtue in many? your answer is, that this proceeds
from their disposition, being over-growne with sensual desires. But by your
leave this is a weak reason, for it only transfers the difficulty, but
answers not the doubt; for still I may demand, how it came to pass that these
rules of equity did not prevent the growth of these sensual desires, and
without grace what place is left for any goodness in the nature of man?
Philosophers had a love of virtue, but can you show they had any love of God?
their most virtuous actions in the state of nature, was not Austin bold to call
them splendida peccata, Aug. contra Iul. P^lag lib. 4. c. 3.
glorious sins? For the discerning of true virtue aright he gives us this
rule, Noveris non officiis, sed finibus discernendas esse virtutes. I am sure
they were not ordered by Gods word, nor referred to his glory, nor proceeded
from acknowledgement that all power of doing good was from God, yet they looked
for justification by them: and as for repentance and confession of sins, they
make that no part of their integrity. So that whether their knowledge were in
a mist, or out of a mist, it brought them never a whit the nearer unto God: as
the Sun, whether in a mist or out of a mist, was never known to set moist
stuff on fire, but ^st dries it, then fires it. And our Savior was bold to
profess, that Publicanes and Mat. 21. 31
Harlots^ntred into the kingdom of heaven before Scribes and Pharisees.

If the notions of the mind be ideall characters, you may, if it please you,
bestow the phrase as well on notions of evil, as notions of good; and if the
good have so slippery an impression upon the unse^led affection of youth, it
seems the bad are more permanent; yet these natural notions of good are far
distant from true notions of God, or of true goodness; A heart hardened with
vast desires, you say, (...) hardly cured; but I pray tell me, when one man
transgresser^ for an handful of barley, or a morsel of bread, another says,
Si violandum Ezekiel. 13. 19.
est jus impij causa violandum est, which of these is the greater hardness?
yet as a stone by losing somewhat of his substance may take another shape, so
you signify the hardest heart may be wrought into a new frame. I confess, to
make a Camel Mark 10. 25. Gal. 1. 11.
go through the eye of a needle, is not impossible unto God: and what natural
man has not a body of sins to be cut off by spiritual circumcision? but
that this you make to be a work of grace, you give not the least intimation:
nay you rather imply the contrary, when you say, that if hopes of supplies from
internals be intercepted, a work that may be done by course of nature, then
you say, the soul thus freed, becomes more fashionable to reason; a saying
that would become Seneca well, that knew no reason but natural; but full ill
becoming a Christian Divine: let desire be never so vast, as you speak, let
seven devils possess a man, yet the strong man Christ, by the power of his
grace is able to cast them out, and make even Ekron become as the Iebusite.

Without grace, will any man's morality commend him in the sight of God? As
Lebanon is turned into Carmell, so Zach. 9. 7.
Carmell becomes as the high places of the forest. And most moral men have
been as great enemies to Christianity, as any other; like as the Scribes and
Pharisees were greatest enemies unto Christ. Why you should call that a
superficial draught of reason, that endeavors to stamp the heart with
real and solid kindness. I know no reason; this in my judgment deserves to
be accounted a substantial operation. And when you tell me that Affability
consists in this, you go about to teach me more then ever I learned out of
Aristotle. I had thought affability might have place in all men, as a moral
virtue, whether they were enabled to stamp the heart with real and solid
kindness yea or no. This affability you grant to Epicures, but not temperance;
yet Epicurus, if my reading deceive me not, was known to be as temperate a
man in moderating his appetite, as most that then lived. And that because he
made man's happiness to consist in pleasure, the sense whereof was quickened by
temperance, and dulled by intemperance. And therefore little cause there is to
charge him with uncharitableness to his neighbors or brethren, either in time
of plenty, or time of scarcity. You do him the greater wrong, to charge him,
with sucking in cruelty as wine, and feeding upon the needy as upon delicates:
neither will your good phrases make him amends in words for the wrong you do
him in deeds; as for cutting morsels out of other men's throats; this is a
phrase incongruous for an intemperate man's diet: is fitter for a superstitious
Papist, that in case the Priest should vomit the host, thinks the people
bound to lick^ it up.

The close of this ninth Section complies with the beginning of the first;
between which, what suitable matter has occurred, let the Reader judge.
Though indigence be the mother of cruelty, yet herehence it follows not, that
it is not the mother of pity, for, Rara est concordia fratrum: Cleocles and
Polynicas both had one mother, yet there is a great difference in indigence, as
the cause of these. Indigence heretofore suffered, is made the cause of pity;
but indigence in present alone, is the cause of cruelty, and that only in case
it cannot be relieved but by cruelty.

5 Philosopher-like, or rather mere naturalist-like, you make error of
judgment the root of all evil: as the cause of covetousness you make to be
the opinion of want, either that is for the present, or may be for the time to
come. How far are you different from Aquinas, who maintains, that our wills
are more corrupt, quoad appetitum boni, then our minds, quoad intellectum
very: yet the Poet seems to have had another conscience in that of his, Video
moliora proboque deteriorasequor. Saint Paul, I think, was a man regenerate
when he made that profession, I see a law in my members rebelling against Romans
7.
the law of my mind, and leading me captive to the law of sin. It is true,
there are bosom sins (as we call them) like familiar spirits to particular
men, and so they may be dispensed withal in these, they will show themselves
very morrall in other points, and think it reason God should be merciful unto
them in breaking one commandment, so they keep the other nine. Herod heard
John Baptist gladly, until he touched upon the keeping of his brother Phillips
wife. Judas was content to follow Christ, so he might b^are the bag, and so
long as he could make best wages by his service; but thirty pieces of silver
moved him to give his master the bag, and to betray him. A man for judgment
able to arbitrate and void of exorbitant affections, which might expose him to
partiality or prejudice, no doubt is the fittest arbitratour. But if you ask
me whereto this running discourse tends, I cannot answer you yet, it may be
you may answer your self hereafter. Internal moderation mixed with outward
competency, is the only supporter of true constancy. I had thought, integrity
had made a man fit for arbitrament, not constancy, for constancy may be in
courses unjust as well as just; I presume, it proceeds from constant integrity,
That content is little commendable that depends upon sufficiency of estate,
not only competent, but more then competent. And to my thinking, even in the
course of natural morality, a virtuous condition should not depend upon
outward things; the exercise of virtue does, I confess, but not virtue it
self. Bias his saying was, Omnia meo mecum porto: but we are taught of a
better Master, that, Godliness is great gain with contentment, 1. Tim. 6. 6.
and that the righteous cateth to the contentation of his mind, which is
delivered without distinction of poor or rich, like as that which follows,
The belly of the wicked shall want: And that, a dinner of green herbs, and
love with it, is better Prove. 13. 25 Prove. 15. 17
then a stalled ox with hatred and strife. The meanest Christian has the love
of God with him, who answers to the joy of his heart; and the most glorious
King that ever was, professes that, A good conscience is a continual feast;
and David the father. Pro. 15. 15
a great conqueror, found no blessedness in any temporal state, but in that
which was incident to the meanest of his subjects, saying, Blessed is the man
whose iniquity is forgiven, and whose sin is covered. Blessed is the man to
whom the Psalm. 32. 1.
Lord imputes no sin, and in whose spirit there is no guile. The truth is,
if our pretenses depend upon outward things, they shall be as frail as those
are mutable; and who can give strength to resist the temptations of Satan but
God? As there is no being but from God, so no permanence of being but from God:
and till the time of temptation a man is not known; let the rain fall, and the
floods rise, and the wind beat upon the house, then it will appear whether it
were built upon the rock, or upon the sand. We know the Angels fell, we know
Adam fell; and how vain a thing is it to discourse of any natural permanency
in virtuous courses amongst natural men that knew not God. By the way, your
phrase of satisfying capacities is incongruous; of satisfying desires we
usually hear, but of satisfying capacities I never read of but in your
discourse. You proceed to discourse unto us of another root of unconstancy,
which you call contingency, which is a term of art with you and your peculiar
dialect: this root you will have to be, the infinite capacity of reasonable
creatures, conceits or desires, within whose compass their finite motions may
become eccentricke and irregular, as it were a star fixed in too wide a
sphere. And this applied to the fall of Angels, in whom we find a double
change or alteration; the one moral, to wit, a change from the state of
integrity wherein they were created, into the state of sin; the second
natural, to wit, a change from a blessed state, into a wretched and damned
condition; the first change was their own work, as wherein they sinned; the
second, the work of God whereby they were punished. Their inconstancy in not
standing upright, but falling into sin, is only pertinent to the present
purpose, and to enquire after the root of this, is to enquire after the cause
of their fall. Now the cause hereof, as it is plain, so if we please, we may
as plainly express it; for, as for their possibility to fall, that rose from
the condition of their natures, being made by God free agents, and so
accordingly, a law being given them by God, they might freely obey it, freely
disobey it: what need we strain our wits for obscure expression of so plain
a truth, as by referring it to the infinite capacity of their conceits or
desires, within whose compass, their finite motions may become eccentricke and
irregular? What need we affect such perturbation of speech, in confounding
conceits with desires, and placing finite motions within the compass of
desires, infinitely capacious; which motions undoubtedly were their desires
(for they sinned questionless in desiring somewhat) and comparing desires to
spheres, and again, desires to stars fixed in spheres, that so the sin of
Angels may be sinely phrasified, and called an excentrical motion; thus in
catching after a phrase, you obscure the sense of a sentence, which when all is
well scanned, is but this, the root of the Angels fall was this, that he might
commit an irregular motion, which might have been done, although the capacity
of his desire had not been infinite, that is, though he had not affected the
greatness of the divine Majesty; for this I take to be the meaning, and yet
this meaning is little congruous. For this infinite capacity you compare to a
sphere too wide, and the finite motion you compare to a star fixed in this
sphere, and to it you ascribe the irregular motion, not to the sphere, and that
very incongruously too; for the finite motion of Angels you speak of, was
their very sin; but the star sixed in his sphere, is not his irregular
motion. If ever Divinity and Philosophy have been frayed out of their wits, by
any man's discourse, it is your discourse that has done this deed. You suppose
the sin of Angels consisted in affecting Majesty infinite, whereof, you say,
he was more incapable, then a whirrie of an Arposies sail. But how I pray you
could such a thing be affected, without error of judgment? And was it
possible that error, and so Foul an error of judgment could be in an Angel
before his fall? Should not so poena be prior culpa? Hereupon it is that Scotus
maintains, there could be no affecting of any such thing, but only
complacentia simplex therein, not that he did affect it, well knowing it to be
a thing impossible. For my part, I do as little like that simplex complacentia
he speaks of.

No wise man (in this state of our corruption) will please himself, in
conceiting himself to be a King, much less to be a God, but reckons of such
fancies as most vain and frivolous: let us leave unto Clownes such conceits, O
if I were a King I would live like a Lord, I would eat fat beese, and glorry
porridge, and have a whip should cry slash. Dic mihi si sieres tu Leo qualis
eris. And what devise you should move all the rest of the mutineers to concur
with him in so unreasonable an affectation? Do you think the chief called in
Scripture the Devil, did sin in one thing, to wit, in affecting majesty
insinite, and the rest, called his Angels, in another thing, to wit, in
standing with him, and standing for him? I should rather think their sin was
one and the same: And I make no doubt but their sin was pride. Sure I am,
they were not subject to concupiscence of the flesh, or concupiscence of the
eye, but to pride, spirits may be subject as well as men. But wherein this
pride manifested it self, that is a great mystery; but if they did affect
divine Majesty, I should think it was in a way whereby they were capable of
it: and this is now revealed to be by hypostatizing. And there is no question
but that God could hypostatize an Angel, and as many as he would, as well as
man. But I do not say that they did affect it; I have no ground to conceive
that any such thing entered into their thoughts. But as God took a course to
put Adam and Eve to the trial of their obedience, so it is very likely God had
a course to put the Angels to the trial of their obedience, which became a
scandal to many of them, through pride and disdain to be in subjection, not
that they disdained to be in subjection unto God, but more likely to some
inferior nature, which was to be advanced to the throne of God. For as God
made this visible world for the service of man, so God might withal reveal
unto them what his purpose was, namely, to advance the nature of man unto his
own throne, so that all the Angels of God must worship him: Th^s I say might
be the rock of offense to them, of any more fit then this, I cannot conceive.

As touching the roof of man's unconstancy, you are nothing so curious, as
about the Angels. But that curiosity of yours tended not to the discovering of
any depth of truth, but merely to the involving of a plain truth, by most
wild expressions. The bitter fruit of Adams prevarication we all feel in a
general impotency unto that which is truly good, or to resist temptation unto
sin in a gracious manner. But yet I see no reason but a man may resist many a
temptation, without grace, but not in a gracious manner. For what think you?
is it necessary that as often as the Devil tempts a man to incontinency, to
murder, to theft, he should as often yield to the committing of any of these?
It is apparent that many natural considerations may restrain us: but in a
gracious manner, that is, in such a manner as is acceptable unto God, no man
can resist any temptation unto sin, without grace.

That maxim, Mora facilius moventur, has no proportion in the case whereto
you apply it, for it proceeds of the same individuals, such as Adam and his
children are not; yet by Adams yielding unto sin, through Satan's temptation,
all his posterity are made more prone to sin, then any man in particular is
made by the committing of any sinful act. For a sinful or vicious act, in
ordinary course, has no more power to habituate a man's inclination unto evil,
then a virtuous action has unto good: but far greater is man's pronenesse
unto sin, since and through the fall of Adam, then by any virtuous action is
our pronenesse unto good.

Touching your close, I say, to seek our own welfare with another harm, is
not to seek that which is good and right; yet in some cases another man's harm
may be sought, without any transgression. For undoubtedly the Judge sins not
in pronouncing the just sentence of condemnation upon a malefactor: no nor the
Israelites neither, in robbing the Egyptians; nor Abraham, in going about to
cut the throat of his own innocent child Isaac.

6. In the next place you discourse of the improvement of the force of
temptations, which you say is wrought by inequality, partly of our natural
propensions, partly of the means which minister their several contentments or
annoyances. Herein you propose a distinction, but I do not find you very
careful to follow it, and make it appear how you accommodate your self
thereto. Great means of annoyances are apt to breed great fears, and fear is
a strong passion hindering the course of reason, and of moral duty, according
unto reason.

Peter's confession of Christ at the very time when, and in the place where
Christ was in his enemies hands that sought his death, might have hazarded his
life; and the consideration hereof, being suddenly put unto it, either to
confess him or deny him, surprised him with fear; this fear exposed him to
deny his master. Sir Gervas Elvas moved to give way to the poisoning of Sir
Thomas Overbury, saw manifestly, that his refusal would have been an occasion
to bereave him of his Lieutenancy of the Tower, which he had bought with a
great sum of money. This temptation prevailed with him: we commonly say, The
greater is the temptation, the less is the sin. So where small means of
contentments are, the greater is the temptation to discontent, and to taste of
the bitter fruits thereof. But I do not find that the particular instances
following, do any way savor of this member of your distinction. You seem to
keep your self wholly to the prosecuting of inequality of natural
propensions; yet not that neither with such congruity as might justly be
expected. For first you prosecute the inequality of wealth and wit: Wit is a
natural faculty, I confess, I never heard it called a natural propension
till now. But as for wealth, it is neither propension, nor faculty natural,
nor at all natural. It is true, I confess, that some men's wealth gets the
start of wit, as he observed, that in a great audience sometimes said unto his
auditors, When I behold your wealth, I wonder at your wit; again, when I
behold your wit, I wonder at your wealth. I confess willingly, that to abound
in wealth, is to abound in temptations unto sin; that fullness of bread is
reckoned among the sins of Sodom, Ezekiel. 16. Deuteronomy. 32.
that when Jeshurun waxed fat, he spurned with the heel. But the temptations
herehence arising, prevail only on them that want wit, is an observation I
have not been acquainted with before, neither am prone to believe it. I never
read this laid to the charge of Sardanapalus of the Assyrians, or of Xerxes,
who (as I remember) it was that proposed a reward to him that could invent a
new pleasure; nor to Heliogabalus; among the Roman Emperors Nero was
luxurious enough, I never heard it proceeded from want of wit, for the first
quinquennium of his reign he manifested himself to be no fool: Hercules
servivit Omphale, was it for want of wit? That the Merchants son of whom it
is reported, that in one night at Venice he spent sive hundred pounds upon his
five senses, had his honesty been answerable to his wit, he had kept his
reputation with the best. And the Gentleman of the house of the Vaineys, that
in most luxurious manner wasted his estate and afterward turned Turk, I never
heard defamed for want of wit. Yet we commonly say, many men have good wits,
but they are in fools keeping. And indeed a fool in Solomon's computation does
usually stand for a knave. And it is most true, that such are most unwise, as
appears by the issue; for by such courses they shorten their days, and send
themselves with precipitation unto their graves, there to grow green before
their heads be gray; and after they are gone, their remembrance rots, and they
leave a very ill savor behind them.

But I should think, that dull fellows are neither so inventious of mad
courses, nor of so active spirits to prosecute them, as those whom God has
endued with better parts of understanding. I grant men of great wits have not
always revenues answerable: But I should think it is their pride, rather then
their wit, that instigates them to injurious courses. For when men cannot
subject their minds unto their fortunes but labor to carve unto themselves
fortunes answerable to their minds, this must needs expose them to lewd
courses. Yet a good wit, I confess, to maintain a bad cause, may animate some
more to molest and vex, and it is not the greatness of revenues will free them
from such exorbitant courses. Though men's bodies overgrow their souls, yet if
they have not a spirit answerable, they will prove but lubbers, though great
lubbers, as great as Gog-Magog, whom Corineus met withal at Dover, when that
great lubber like a timber log came tumbling topsie turvie, over and over. And
it is a common saying, that a short man needs not a stool to give a great
lubber a box in the ear: though he that is weak had need to be witty, yet it
is not always true, or for the most part, that weak persons are wily: and
where wiliness is found, it is a temptation strong enough without weakness,
to move men to practice unlawful policy, where grace is wanting. But to say
that wiliness shelters it self with craft, is as much as to say, it shelters
it self with it self; and if the distinction be put between the disposition
of wiliness that is within, and wily crafty courses without, well, something
else, to wit, men's private reaches and ends may be said to be sheltred hereby,
yet wilines cannot. For like as wisdom is not sheltered, but rather discovered
and laid open by wise courses, and folly by foolish courses, so also wilines
and craftines, by wily and crafty courses. I see no reason to justify that
saying, men love their wits more strongly, when they perceive them set upon
that which in it self is good. And I give a reason for my negation, though you
give none for your affirmation; for the more convenient the object is unto the
appetite, the more strongly does the appetite affect it; and the more
convenient things are unto us, the more we love our selves for affecting them.
Now it is manifest that luxurious objects are more convenient to a luxurious
appetite, then objects temperate; and avaritious courses more convenient to the
appetite of an avaricious person, then courses of liberality; and generally to
all men in the state of corruption, the pleasures of sin are more grateful
then the pleasure of righteous courses. Nay, a man regenerate may for good
reason seem not to be so strongly carried in his affections unto good, as the
wicked are in their affections unto evil; my reason is, because in the
regenerate there dwells a flesh lusting against the Gal. 5. 23.
spirit, which remits and qualifies the fervor of his affection unto good:
whereas on the contrary, in the wicked there is found no spirit lusting against
the flesh, to remit or qualify the fervor or fury, rather of their affection
unto evil; especially when they are fitted with most convenient objects to
allure them.

Again, to do good to the poor, is not good in it self (as you suppose,) we
were wont to say in the University, that Omnis actio est bona aut mala propter
circumstantias; and as I remember, it was a saying of Bernard, that vainglory
clotheth the poor as well as charity. And how can that be a good will to the
poor, that practices to coosen others for the gratifying of the poor? ^o may
he be said to bear a good will to Paul, that robs Peter to pay Paul; yet
that which he will leth is good to Paul, I confess, but it is no good will to
him that is such a pay master; neither is it necessary it should proceed from
any intention to satisfy Paul; it may well proceed from other intentions. No
man is bound in conscience to hinder any man's welfare, or his own either, no
nor the glory of God by ungodly courses; no nor does the obligation rest in
general, but it concludes in special, all good courses that lie in his power:
so to tender it, a man is bound and not otherwise. You have discoursed of
diverse enormities, in the close you open the cause of them unto us, and of many
other like and that you say is the infinite capacity of finite existence: this
you say is the cause, not why such enormities are, but of the possibility of
them. Now the possibility of such enormities is all one with the possibility of
sin and transgression. Therefore the infinite capacity of finite existence is
the cause why sin is possible. I thought it had been satisfaction enough in
this point, to conceive, that because we are in subjection to a Lord, who can
give us a law, and are free agents, therefore we may either obey a law given
unto us, or transgress it. And because, look what is the cause why
disobedience is possible, the same is the cause why obedience also is possible.
It follows, that the cause why obedience is possible, must be the infinite
capacity of finite existence. And because by finite existence you mean a
reasonable creature, your meaning a little more plain is this, The reason why
a man may sin, or abstain from sin, is his infinite capacity. We say, it
is the liberty of his will, being in subjection to a law which you cannot
deny, nor any sober man: herehence it follows, that this infinite capacity
you cant of, is but the liberty of man's will in subjection to the law of a
superior Lord. For man being free, may overcope, as you speak, that is, to
express in a small and still voice, without thundering, or fire, or mighty
wind, to do that which he should not. And thus having attained to your plain
meaning, we bid farewell to your mystical expressions of so plain a truth,
by comparing this infinite capacity you speak of, to too wide a sphere, and
finite motions, to a slarro fixed in that sphere, and thereby exposed to
excentricall and irregular motions, which I think neither Copernicus, nor Ticho
Brahe, were they alive, could well tell how to expound unto us, or to their
selves either. We have enough in finding out the cause why sin is possible, as
for the life and improvement of this possibility (for so you are pleased to
bestow the being, and life, and improvement upon it) by the inequality of
internal propensions, never fitly matching outward occurrences, that we
reasonably well understand, and have discoursed thereof what we thought fit,
enough, if not more then enough.

7 At length you are come to the house it self of your present discourse,
according to the title of this Chapter; hitherto we have been complementally
entertained in the porch. But, in God, you say, there is no place for
exorbitancy, he being an incomprehensible sphere, which has omnipotency for
his axis, ubiquity for its center: if you had added, and nusquam for his
circumference, the illustration, according to your former subtleties, had been
more complete. We say, that God in doing what he will cannot sin, because he
has no superior Lord to give him laws, to bind him; his own wisdom alone
can and does direct him, and it becomes his wisdom to manifest his own
glorious nature; and therefore whatsoever he can do, in case he does it, it
shall be wisely done, for as much as his power therein is manifested. You had
rather fetch the cause hereof from this, that his capacities cannot overcope,
though the Angels did. One branch of being in him you say, cannot missway or
overtop another: what your meaning is I know not, but look unto it that you
do not contradict your self, in maintaining, that God can do some things by
his omnipotency, which yet cannot be wisely or justly done by him, which is as
much as to say, that he can do that which is unjust. And if this be not to
acknowledge in God a possibility to overcope, I do not know what is. To say
that God possesses all things that possibly he can desire to have, is to say,
that he possesses nothing; for it is impossible that God should desire to
have any thing, for this implies a want of something belonging to the deity.
It is directly false and foul to say, that God is whatsoever possible can be;
for if it be true, then it ever was true, seeing this proposition depends not
upon the revolution of time, and consequently, before the world was, it was
true; wherehence it will follow, that God is an Angel, a man, and every vile
thing, as we account them amongst the creatures: for all these were possible
to be before the world was; neither will it salve this foul sore, to say, that
God is a man, or an ox, infinitely, for he is no bodily substance at all,
neither can any bodily substance be infinitely. We say, that God is all things
eminently, whereby we mean no more then this, God is the cause of all things;
and better thus in plain terms to express our meaning, then by affecting
curious strains, and forms of expression to expose religion and the glory of
our God to scorn and derision amongst atheists. God is of necessary being, and
therefore of himself eternal, without beginning, and without end. To perfect
himself, or to be greater or better then he is, is to suppose that he is
imperfect, and not Optimus maximus, which is a thing impossible, and therefore
not subject to, nor the object of Almighty power; nay, it destroys it, as one
part of contradiction destroys the other: for Almighty power were formally
destroyed, if it were imperfect, or less then Almighty. Therefore all outward
employments are for the good of his creature, but how? not as tending to the
good of the creature as Gods end, but both his employments for the creatures
good, and the creatures themselves are for God and his glory. Has not the
Apostle expressed thus much, that both from him and for him are all things: and
the Prophet also, God has made all things for himself, even the wicked for
the day of evil: and Romans 11. last. Prove. 16. 4 August. de praedest. and
gratia.
that for good reason, as many hundred years ago has been acknowledged in
these terms, Qui dedit esse, quo sine essent, habui potestatem. If Gods will
to have creatures when they were not, was but the influence or working of his
essential goodness, I pray what is his will to destroy them when they are?
The scripture tells us, that God works all things according to Ephesians. 1. 11.
the counsel of his own will; so he did when he made the world, so he does
when he sets an end to any part of it, so he should if he should set an end to
all, and return them to the gulf of nothing from whence they came. It is
false to say, that the continuance of being is desired by all, as the stamp of
Gods goodness: for continuance of being was as much desired by those atheists
that denied the creation, as by those Christians that do believe it. And as
for the making of the world, it is in holy Scripture (the language of God)
attributed to the word of God, to the breath of God, to the wisdom of God, to
the power of God, to the counsel of God; but never, that I know, ascribed to
the goodness of God. And it had need of explication, to show how Gods
goodness is communicated unto all, much more how it is communicated unto a
stone; yet the earth is filled with his goodness, in as much as God provides
for every thing that which is good for it; so that whatsoever we partake of for
our comfort, we call it Gods goodness, for as much as things which are good
to us, are derived to us from God, and therein we have a taste of his goodness
toward us, in that he does good unto us. Your last position I have heretofore
spoken of, and showed the incongruity of it. That which is good, and that
whereunto it is good, must be different; but the entitie of any thing is not
different from it self, and therefore it cannot be good unto it self, as you
affirm.

8. God is (...) serus irarum, slow to wrath, even against sinners that
dishonor him to his face. But to say he is never swayed to sudden revenge, is
a more bold assertion then sound. Did not Zimri and Cosbi perish in their
incestuous act, and give up both lust and ghost together, without leisure to
enjoy their sin, much less respite for repentance? Perhaps you will say
their persons were formerly forborne, notwithstanding former sins, though the
vengeance of God cannot be denied to be most sudden. So perished Herod in his
pride, and Balthazar in his revellings, and the Israelites in the wilderness;
while the meat was in their mouths, and the delicate flesh of Quails lay
between their teeth, the heavy wrath of God came upon them, and before they
could swallow their sweet morsels, sent them to the graves of lust to be
swallowed by them.

Again, Sodom and Gomorrah were consumed with fire from heaven; were not some
children in their mothers wombs, some hanging at their mothers breasts, some
newly come to the use of reason, all consumed to ashes, and made an example of
Gods wrath, and suffered the vengeance of eternal fire, as Inde speaks? Here
is no forbearance of diverse particular persons: so it was in the days of Noah,
so shall it be at the coming of the Son of man; for while they shall say,
peace and safety, sudden destruction shall come upon them, as sorrow upon
(...) These. 5. 2
a woman in travail, and they shall not escape.

The difference you make between man and God, I like well; man by forbearance
may bereave himself of power to execute vengeance, God cannot: and this is a
good reason of his forbearance toward the very reprobates; but toward his
elect, a power exercised in another kind, yet a power too, namely, to sanctify
the consideration of his forbearance, to bring them unto repentance; as also a
power to provide for satisfaction to be made for their sins, by the blood of
his Son. A sentence related out of the book of Wisdom. chapter 12. 15, 16, you
say is canonical, although the Author be not; a distinction that I never read
nor heard of before. And if the truth of a sentence be sufficient to make it
canonical, the canonical Scriptures shall be multiplied unreasonably, not out
of the book of Wisdom only, but out of the rest of the works of Philo the Jew,
and Josephus too, yea and out of Senecaes works, and Plutarchs morals; not to
speak of Plato, and Aristotle, or your Plotinus. But let us consider this
canonical sentence you speak of and weigh the truth of it in the balance of
the Sanctuary. I pray, wherein had our Savior Christ and the Son of God
deserved to be punished? And did not God (think you) think it agreeable to
his power to condemn him, notwithstanding his innocence, and his fervent
prayers to be delivered from that cup, but with submission to the will of his
Father? I pray consider the martyrdom of Gods Saints, were their punishments
according to their deserts? Nay, what think you? is it not agreeable to Gods
power to annihilate the holiest man that ever was? yet we do not say that God
condemns any man, that has not deserved to be punished, the Son of God and
our Savior only excepted. But the desert of eternal death is not only in
sin actual, but in sin original also, which Pelagius did not say,
Arminius does not, whether you do or no, I know not; the latter clause, which
is this, Because thou art the Prince of all, it makes thee to be gracious to
all, makes a show to plead for universal grace, I cannot tell whether you
lick your lips at this; yet the author of the book could not be ignorant what
a difference, as touching the participation of his grace, God had put between
the Jews and the Gentiles, for, He had showed his word unto Jacob, his
statutes and ordinances unto Israel: But he Psalm. 147. 19.
had not dealt so with every nation, neither had the Heathen knowledge of his
laws. And the Apostle, who undoubtedly was canonical, to speak in your own
phrase, has plainly professed, that God has mercy on whom he will, and whom
he will he hardens.

And as for the reason here used, drawn from this, that he is Lord of all, the
Apostle himself takes notice of it, but in a different manner, Romans 10. 12.
There is no difference between the Jew and the Grecian, for he that is Lord
over all, is rich unto all that call upon him: and who are they that call upon
him, but they that believe in him? for it follows, How can they call upon him
in whom they have not believed? Yet like as it is the part of parents, not
only to bring children forth, but after to provide for their bringing up: so
God does not only make things, but also preserves them: and for their
preservation causes the Sun to shine, and his rain to fall, as well on the
wicked as on the just; always provided that even this providence of God is to
be dispensed of no other right, but merely according to the good pleasure of
his own will. For what grace was showed to infants, either unborne, or hanging
at their mothers breasts, which perished in the flood, and in the destruction
of Sodom and Gomorrah by fire from heaven? and therefore though there were
sixscore thousand persons in Ninivie that could not discern between the right
hand and the left, and also much cattle, yet God was not bound to spare them.
And can you doubt, but as many as these, if not in Sodom and Gomorra, yet at
least, or rather many more, perished in Noah's flood. Yet by the way, this
sparing of the Ninivites was but as touching salvation temporal, not
spiritual.

You have but trifled a long time, now you begin to be serious, yet in
little or no congruity to the theme; you were more then half way over this
chapter, before you came to entreat of Gods goodness, and now you come to
inculcate it, not in the infinity or immutability of it, but in the generality
of it unto all, as whereby he wills and desires indifferently the salvation of
all. This is the voluntas antecedens that so many are enamoured with now
adays, and you as much as any, wherewith we are like to be acquainted much
more in your following chapters. And a chapter you have hereof expressly in your
book of Providence. But first you beat another bush where the bird is not;
only it seems to have a reach a far off to something that is of kin to
it; you demand, What lord would spoil his proper inheritance? what Architect
would disgrace his own work? implying, that surely, God will not. Now if you
had withal told us whom you do oppose in this, and in what particular point,
we might be the bolder to reply in knowing what to answer; which now we do
not because of your concealements. All creatures are the works of God, which as
by generation they are wrought, so by corruption they are defaced: What a
beautiful piece of work was Absalom? What a wise piece of work was Solomon?
What a strong piece of work was Samson? yet these works of God are all
defaced. And the defacing of them is the work of God undoubtedly, as well as
the making of them. And no marvel, for when that work, for which God has
appointed them, is at an end, to what end should he continue them, considering
that he made them but for himself? Nay, Kingdoms and Nations God has
raised, and made them glorious; then again, those glorious Kingdoms he has
defaced. Perhaps you will say, but the defacing of these is for sin. Be it
so, yet God could set an end, both to kingdoms and to the whole world, though
there were no sin: for Gods well-being depends not upon his work, the world,
as man's well-being depends upon his inheritance, yea, and upon the work of his
own hands: for the master of it could have no comfortable habitation without
an house, and every tradesman lives by his trade, and therefore it stands him
upon not to deface his work when he has made it. Again, only reasonable
creatures are capable of sin, yet all other creatures are the workmanship of
God, which he makes and defaceth at his pleasure, without any prejudice to his
wisdom or to his goodness. Yet there is another manner of defacing, and that
is by damnation; and herein I know no coulor of inveighing against any man,
unless it be in the behalf of infants, as many as perish in original sin;
wherein if it please you, or any man else, to show your teeth, or horns, we
will be nothing dismayed, by Gods assistance, but ready to encounter you. Yet
there is another defacing, and that is by sin; so we say the Devil and his
Angels defaced themselves by their free and voluntary rebellion against God: so
Adam defaced himself, by a voluntary and free action, hearkening to the voice
of his wife; and Eve to the voice of the Serpent; each voluntarily and freely
neglecting to hearken to the voice of God, and to maintain the consideration
thereof always before their eyes. Thus every man, even the unregenerate, yea,
and Devils themselves, do still continue voluntarily and freely to sin
against God: so that this defacing is not the work of God, but of the
creature, it being a thing impossible that God should be the author of sin,
because it is impossible that he should do any thing that he ought not, of
any thing in other manner then he ought. Again, it is impossible that he
should omit any thing, or in anyother manner then he ought. And no other means
can be devised to make any one become the author of sin. But it is enough for
you to propose your interrogatories at pleasure. And in the third place you
bring in another interrogatory, different from all the rest, which is more
suitable with your tenet; for the delivery whereof in good time, you seem
already to travail in childebirth, and that is this, Who would leave a good
foundation bare or naked, unless he be not able to rear it up without
injustice. I profess I wondered a long time, to what purpose the last clause of
this exception was pulled in by the ears; for if a man want means to finish an
house which he has begun, though he would be unjust, yet has he no
certainty to enable himself for the finishing of that work he has begun.
But by comparing it well with the sentence following, I seem to spring your
meaning. The foundation which God has laid, is the creation of our reasonable
natures, the finishing of this work, is the adding of salvation, or an happy
being to this natural being. Thus to finish the work in every one, it is the
will and pleasure of God, by your profession. This in another Tract of yours,
that yet has not seen the light of the press, you amplify, and call it, A
most earnest desire in God of the salvation of all, and every one, though he
much desire it, is, as here you say, because he cannot do it without injustice.
And why so? Is it because they are sinners? why, what then shall become of us
all, seeing we are all sinners? There be but two things that might be replied,
the one is, that though all have sinned, yet Christ has satisfied for the
sins of his elect, Romans 8. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
elect, it is God that justifies, who shall condemn us? It is Christ which is
dead, or rather risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes
request also for us. But I presume, this kind of answer is no lettice for your
lips, for that were to maintain, that God wills the salvation of none but of
his elect. 2. The other answer is, that though all are sinners, yet all do not
die in impenitencie. To this I reply. 1. That if Christ has made satisfaction
for all their sins, I see no reason why they should not be saved,
notwithstanding their impenitencie: for, what justice can require, that
damnation should be suffered for those sins for which full satisfaction is
already made. 2. God could give them repentance, if it pleased him, as he gave
to Israel, Act. 5. 31. Him has God lift up with his right hand, to be a Prince
and a Savior, to give repentance unto Israel, and forgiveness of sins. So
then, Christ gives not only forgiveness of sins to them that repent, but
he it is that gives repentance it self also: These be no Cabalismes, but the
plain testimony of Gods word. And as to the Jews, so to the Gentiles also,
Act. 11. 19. When they heard this they held their peace, and glorified God,
saying, Then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life. And
accordingly Saint Paul warnes Timothy, to carry himself gently toward them that
are without, waiting the time, when God will give them repentance, that they
may acknowledge the truth, and come to amendment out of the snare of the
Devil, by whom they were led captive to do his will. By this let every one
judge what strength there is in your illation, when you say, Wheresoever God
has laid the one (to wit natural being, it is to all that rightly consider
his wisdom, truth, and goodness, and assured pledge of his will and
pleasure, to finish it with the other. Why the truth of God is directly against
it, professing, that he has mercy on whom he will, and heardeneth whom he
will: and that the same word of God is, a savor of life unto life, to them
that are saved; he does not say, to them that are careful to prepare
themselves, and a savor of death unto death, unto them that perish, and a good
savor unto God in both; he does not say, to them that do not prepare
themselves. And by comparing that place with Act. 13. 48. it appears who the
saved are, even those whom God has ordained unto salvation; for they believed,
as there the Apostle professes, as much as to say, the word preached was a
savor of life unto life unto them, and wot you the reason hereof? Why surely
because they were ordained to salvation, like as Act. 2. 47. It is said that,
God added to the Church day by day, such as should be saved. You might with as
much modesty profess, that in as much as God has made every man, It is an
assured pledge of his will and pleasure, to give every man repentance, before
he drops out of the world. Gods gifts are without repentance; it is true of the
gifts of sanctification, but it is as true, that God repented that he made man.
That the current of Gods joyful benificence can admit no intermission, is most
untrue, for he dispenses it freely, so he continues it as freely; For he
works all things according to the counsel of his own will, that is, nullo
necessitatis obsequio, as Ambrose expounds it. Nay it does admit intermission
in this world. In the world to come, indeed, it shall admit no intermission, in
this it does, both in respect of blessings temporal, and in respect of motions
spiritual. For as touching blessings temporal, God shows the back
sometimes, and not the face, Ier. 18. 17. And as touching spiritual motions
and consolations, what moved the Lord to cry out upon the cross, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me, but the intermission of these? It is true,
sorrow to us has no other original then our own sin, yet no sin in Christ
could be found to be the original of his sorrow. And though the woman, by
reason of sin, has ever since conceived in sorrow, yet bruit beasts conceive
in sorrow, notwithstanding that they are incapable of sin. And albeit God be
an ocean of joy yet the dispensation of joy unto creatures, is merely according
to the good pleasure of his will. And though all sorrow proceeds from sin in
the way of a meritorious cause; yet all sorrow proceeds from God, in the way of
an efficient cause. He is the great Judge that inflicteth sorrow on some, as
well as he causes joy to others.

9. The comparison is most absurd. For illumination proceeds from the Sun, as
from a natural cause, working by necessity of nature; but to say that God in
such sort does communicate ought, or send forth any influence; is more
Atheistical then Christian. The devils belike have seeds of joy and
happiness, wherewith they were sown in their first creation; for undoubtedly
they were capable of them before their fall, as well as the Angels of light.
And all the influence that God sends forth, you say, is apt to cherish the
seeds of joy and happiness; whence it follows, that God at this day does by
his influence cherish the seeds of joy and happiness in the very Devils. And
seeing Gods concurrence to the actions of men and Angels, is a part of that
influence that proceeds from God, and one action of the Devils is their
assurance that they are damned spirits, without hope of recovery; in concurring
to this assurance, God does cherish the seeds of joy and happiness in them.
Besides this, with Devils and Men God affords his concourse to all their most
sinful actions, this your self have often acknowledged, and this concourse of
his is a part of his influence, and no influence (you say) can proceed from
him, but such as is apt to cherish the seeds of joy and happiness, wherewith
their natures were sown in their creation. Therefore this concourse of God
also to their sinful actions, does cherish the seeds of joy and happiness in
reprobate men and Angels also.

Now proceed we along with you: God, you say, does inspire all that are
conformable to his will, with desire of doing to others that which he has done
to them. This is a bone very well worth the picking. I am persuaded many a
sweet morsel will be found about it. You do not tell us that God does inspire
any man with a conformity to his will, but as many as are conformable to his
will, he inspires with other good desires; whence I pray then comes conformity
to his will, if not from the inspiration of God? do you make conformity to
Gods will to be the inspiration of the flesh? For I presume you make it not an
inspiration of the world, or of the devil. Yet S. Paul says, that it is God
that works in us both the will and Phil. 2. 13.
the deed, not by any necessary emanation, as light issues from the Sun, but
according to his own good pleasure. Again, this very desire of doing others
good, is it not a part of our conformity to the will of God? Now if God inspire
us with one part of conformity to Gods will, why not also with another? And so
why may we not run over all parts of conformity to the will of God, and find
as good cause to ascribe them all to the inspiration of God, as the cause of
them? The mystery of your meaning in this, the next sentence serves as a key to
open, when you say, that such as wilfully strive against the stream of his
overflowing goodness, or boisterously counterblast the sweet and placid
spirations of celestial influence, become creators of their own woe, and
raise unto themselves those storms wherein they perish. So then Gods influence
is to all, like as the light of the Sun; only the difference arises
herehence, that some resist it, others yield unto it. As good Arminianisme and
Pelagianisme as ever dropped from the mouth or pen of Arminius or Pelagius
himself. So then it is not God, that ex nolentibus volentes facit, but man's
free will. And in spite of St. Paul it shall be volentis and currentis, and
not miserentis Dei. For these spirations you speak of, can be no other then
exhortations, Romans 9.
whereunto some yield, and some resist. And I pray, who deserves to be
accounted the author of my faith, the author of my repentance? he that
exhorts me hereunto, or rather I my self, that do believe, and do repent,
though upon another exhortations? For exhortation may thus far be performed
by a reprobate: for such plead at the day of judgment, Have we not prophesied
in thy name? and S. Paul observed, that some preached Christ not chastely, but
upon pretense, Phil. 1.
and that with foul intentions, even to add affliction to Paul's bonds; yet
howsoever he rejoiced in this, that Christ was preached, which he would never
have done, if by their preaching none were likely to be brought over to Christ
by faith and repentance.

Again, to inspire them with good desires, and with conformity to Gods will,
this is no other in your language, then to exhort them hereunto. And thus it is
that God works in us both the will and the deed, according to his good
pleasure. Now this speech bewrays you as much as ever Peter's speech bewrayed
him; but with this difference, Peter's speech bewrayed him to be a follower of
Christ, but your speech bewrays you to be a follower of Pelagius, and as like
him as if you were spit out of his mouth; for thus did Pelagius discourse,
Operatur Deus in nobis velle quod bonum est, velle quod sanctum est, dum nos
terrenis cupiditatibus deditos futurae gloriae Aug. lib. 1. de gratia Dei,
contr. Pelag. cap. 10.
magnitudine and premiorum pollicitatione succendit, dum revelatione
sapientiae, in desiderium Dei stupentem suscitat voluntatem, dum nobis suadet
omnem quod bonum est. Now see to what acknowledgement of grace Austin puts
him, if so be he will be a true Christian. Nos eam gratiam volumus, isti
aliquando Ibid. cap. 11.
fateantur qua futurae gloriae magnitudo non solum promittitur, verumetiam
creditur and speratnr, nec solum reveletur sapientia, verumetiam and amatur,
nec suadetur solum omne quod bonum est, verumetiam persuadetur. Hanc debet
Pelagius gratiam consiteri si vult non mod^ videri, sed esse Christianus. Now
what follows upon this your doctrine touching the nature of election, namely,
that it must be upon the foresight of men's obedience to Gods exhortations and
persuasions, which here you call placid inspirations. Now because God exhorts
us to faith, repentance, and all manner of good works, the foresight of our
obedience hereunto must be it whereupon our election must depend, and so you
are ready to shake hands with the Apostle, not of fellowship, but to bid him
adieu, as who plainly professes, that Election is not of works, but of God
that Romans 9.
calls us; and he proves it by this, that before they had done either good or
evil, Jacob was elected, and Esau reprobated, which must exclude not only the
pre-existence of works, but the pre-consideration of them; otherwise he could
not therehence conclude that election is not of works; and the circumstance of
not being as yet borne does evidently exclude as well faith, as good works.
For a man unborne is as unable to believe, as to perform any other work. And
notwithstanding this foul injury, you offer unto God in robbing him so
shamefully of the glory of his grace, and absolute prerogative to dispose of
his creatures as he thinks good, in making whom he will vessels of mercy, and
whom he will vessels of wrath, yet you think to pacify him with an hungry,
base, and mere verbal amplification of the streams of his goodness, the
issue whereof is to injury him afresh in like manner, by robbing him, and
adorning man with the spoils of his glory. For increase of joy and happiness
shall be, you say, unto a man from the streams of life, proceeding from God as
a fountain of life, provided that man gives free passage to their current. And
what is this current, but Gods spirations formerly mentioned, whereby he
exhorts us to profit by the examples of his judgments on others, and also to
patience when we are injuried by others. Now if we do ye^ld to this, and do
profit by the consideration of Gods judgments upon others, and do patiently
bear the wrongs that are done us by others, then increase of joy and
happiness shall be unto us from the fountain of goodness, who as he has
some streams of life, whereby he exhorts us unto that which is good; so he
has other streams of life and happiness, wherewith he rewards us for our
obedience: so that whatsoever show you make of honoring God, the issue is to
bestow all the honor upon the obedience of man. So that the amends you make
herein for former injuries, is as if a man having given his neighbor a box in
the ear, should make show of making him amends by kind stroaking of him, and
in stead of stroaking him, give him another box in the ear, Thus Ioab took
Amaza by the beard as though he would have kissed him, but, indeed, stabd him
to the heart. You are willing to make God the author of glory, but by no means
can you be brought to acknowledge him the author, but only the orator of
grace: like to the Panims, who were wont to say, Det vitam, det opes, animum
mihi ipse parabo.
You are given so much to painting, that it is a hard matter to discern the
native countenance of your discourse, the proper face of your meaning. What
mean you by the current of life? Is it a gracious current, or a glorious
current? if gracious, that is the same with spirations before spoken of, and
these are exhortations and persuasions. But how I pray do^ these when they are
refused by some, the more overflow to others? They that hear the same Sermon,
have never a whit the more for others resisting it; they that hear it not,
have no part of it, though all resist it. As for the currrent of glory, how
has any man the more, for that others are wholly deprived of it? yet it is
true, that even the reprobation and damnation of some, tends to the increase of
glory to the elect, in contemplation of the mercy of God toward them in
comparison of others, and of the sorrows from which God has freed them, as
both the Apostle signifies, Romans 9. 22. And is maintained both by Didacus
Alvares, and Alphonsus Mendosa. But I do not find you have any such meaning.
But when you have taken up a metaphor by the end, you play upon it, and make as
good music with it as pigges do, in playing upon Organs.

What are the miseries which wicked spirits suffer, are unknown to us; we
read that they believe and tremble, Iam. 2. that they are kept in chains to
the judgment of the great Jude 6. Mat. 8. 29.
day. They ask our Savior whether he be come to torment them before their
time; they pray him not to send them into the deep. And therefore a man may
very well be ignorant of Luc. 8. 31.
any good which their miseries work upon us, seeing that their miseries are so
unknown unto us.

Yet as conceiving your self to have been somewhat free in^venting somewhat,
which alas is but a vain ostentation of some momentous matter, which has no
moment at all in it; you demand whether God may yet inspire these castawayes
with mischievous thoughts, seeing their mischievous thoughts work for our
good. A very vain objection; as if the devil and his Angels had need of any
prompting unto villainy, or as if prompting unto villainy were fit to be called
inspiration, which is never used, but either in the way of prophecy, or in the
way of some gracious suggestion. Yet as touching any thought or action of
Satan, your self dare not deny Gods concourse to the substance of the action;
and as for the manner of concourse, we are willing to undergo with you, or any
man else that breathes, any scholasticall discourse or inquisition hereupon: as
whether the will of the creature determines the will of his Creator, or whether
the will of the Creator determines the will of the creature rather.

As touching the evil it self, whether from our opinion can be inferred any
more then this, that Gods will is it shall come to pass by his permission; and
whether we cannot show better reason for this our tenet, then you or any man
else for the contrary. As for the intending of the creatures woe and misery,
as occasions or means of Gods glory, what sober man can doubt but that God is
the efficient cause of their woe and misery, as it signifies the misery of
punishment, and in inflicting punishment on transgressors, undoubtedly he does
advance the glory of his justice, yea and the glory of his Saints also, who may
see in others sufferings, what might have been their portion, if God had
showed no more grace unto them then unto others, and hereupon have cause to be
so much the more ravished with the contemplation of Gods goodness toward them.
As for the misery of sin, be the sin as great as the crucifying of Christ,
God determined it should be done, Act. 4. be it as great as the Kings giving
their kingdom to the beast, little less then the giving of their kingdoms to
the devil, yet God it is that has put into their hearts to do his will even
in this also: and even this undoubtedly shall redound to the glory of God, and
the good of his elect. For Rev. 17. 17 2 Cor. 11. 19.
both heresies must be, that they which are approved may be manifested, and
God raises tyrants up, to exercise the patience of his children, yea their own
sins redound to the profit of Gods elect. Utile est superbis in aliquod
apertum manifestamque cadere peccatum. But hereupon to make use of that August.
de civ. Dei, l. 14. cap. 13.
maxim, Gods will is the rule of goodness, is most absurd; for the rule of
goodness is Gods will of commandment; but the will of God, that signifies
his determination to have this or that come to pass, is far different:
neither I hope will you make question, in case God wills any thing to come to
pass, whether God does well in willing it; though that which he wills or
determines be the crucifying of Christ Jesus.

As for the will of commandment, that is only the will of God touching what
is our duty to do, or to leave undone, and accordingly called voluntas
approbans, for certainly he approves obedience unto his will, in whatsoever he
injoyneth us: yet this wide leap has cast your meditations upon this point,
to enquire forsooth whether Gods will be the rule of goodness. But as you
have entered upon it without distinction of will and will, so you carry your
self therein with miserable confusion.

CHAP. XIII.
In what sense, or how Gods infinite will is said to be the rule of goodness.

THe question was never before (that I know) proposed in this manner, viz. of
Gods infinite will, but only of Gods will. The Heathens painted Justice as an
assistant of Jupiter. Anaxarchus to comfort Alexander, cast down with
conscience of his foul fact, inmurthering his dear friend Clitus, devises an
interpretation of this pageant, suitable and serviceable to the consolation of
Alexander; and that was this, Jupiters actions must always be esteemed just.
So says the great Monarchs who are Gods on earth, their actions must be
accounted just. Anaxarchus is censured by Arrian, and justly, for his gross
flattery in the application of this unto Kings on earth, who, it is well
known, may degenerate into tyrants. But I hope you will not dislike this
interpretation as applied unto God: you will not make question, I trow, whether
God be righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works, much less deny
it, although he commanded Abraham to sacrifice his son, allowed Samson to
sacrifice himself, the Israelites to rob the Egyptians; though he send an
evil spirit between Abimelech and the men of Shechem; though he put a lying
spirit in the mouths of all Ahabs Prophets, to seduce the King, and to
persuade him to go up against Ramoth Gilead, that he may fall there; though he
sends to Pharaoh a commandment to let Israel go, yet tells Moses he will
harden Pharaohs heart that he shall not let Israel go; though that work of
the rending of the ten Tribes from the two, comprehending the defection of
people from their lawful King, he by open protestation takes unto himself as
his own work; like as touching the defiling of David's concubines, he tells
David to his face, that he would do this openly, saying, I will take thy wives
from thee, and give them to thy neighbor, and he shall lie with them in the
sight of the Sun.

2. Your comparison of Gods power with his goodness, I do not much mislike;
only your comparing of him with Monarchs in goodness, is not so fit; for alas
what prerogative have they of goodness above other men? They are to be borne
withal, though they are not so good as others, because they are exposed to
greater temptations then others, and the greater is the temptation, the less
is the sin. No great commendation to exceed Sardanapalus, or Heliogabalus in
goodness; yet we know there is a great deal of difference between the
goodness of God, and the goodness of man in the course thereof: for man's
goodness in the exercise thereof, is subordinate to a law, and they are bound
to exercise it toward all: Gods goodness is of no such condition, nothing
could bind him to the making of the world, or to the making of any creature at
all. They being made, he exercises his goodness toward whom he will: for
though in the course of his natural providence he causes his Sun to shine,
and his rain to fall both upon the just and unjust; yet as touching the
dispensation of his chiefest blessings, his spiritual blessings in heavenly
things, he has mercy on whom he will, yea and whom he will he hardens also.
And though ordinarily all Romans 9. 18
are partakers of his temporal blessings, yet sometimes he puts a great
difference even in the communication of them also. Am. 9. 7. I have withheld
the rain from you, when there were yet three weeks to the harvest, and caused
it to rain upon one City, and caused it not to rain upon another City; one
piece was rained upon, and the piece whereon it rained not, withered. Some dye
in their mothers womb, some hanging at their mothers breasts, some after a
long time are consumed with a lingering death: Romans 9. 13 In 1. disp. 85. and
8^. In opusc. de instit. commut. sect. 2. number 36.
neither is Gods love in Scripture phrase enlarged toward any save toward his
elect. Thus Jacob was loved, but Esau hated.

Again, what justice do you devise in God toward his creature? Both Vasquez
and Suarez concur in this, that the justice of God toward man does always
presuppose his will, and God may bind himself as he pleases by promise. But
Gods will (you say) is not the rule of goodness, because the designs thereof
are backed with infinite power. Your theme was to prove, that Gods will is not
the rule of goodness, when you come to prove it, you prove nothing less, but
only that the cause why Gods will is not the rule of goodness, is not, for
that his designs are backed with infinite power. This is not to disprove Gods
will to be the rule of goodness, but rather to confirm it, for, in saying
that this or that is not the cause why Gods will is the rule of goodness, you
do imply, that you maintain, that his will is the rule of goodness, though
not for this cause. Perhaps you may say, They which maintain Gods will to be
the rule of Gods goodness, do maintain it upon no other ground then this, to
wit, Because his designs are backed with infinite power.

But had it been so, you might have fallen directly upon the overthrowing of
such a foundation, without carrying it in such a manner as if you would bear
the world in hand, that your self in some sort hold Gods will to be the rule
of goodness, whereas you mean nothing less; and therefore in carrying your
discourse after this manner, you betray a faint heart in maintaining the maine.
Secondly, I say it is incredible that any should maintain Gods will to be the
rule of goodness, for this cause, because his designs are backed with infinite
power, as much as to say, because God can do what he will. This reason
carries no color of truth with it; for there is no reason why amongst men,
they that can do what they will in comparison to other men, should therefore
be honester men then other. But because God has infinite lawful power, that
extends to every thing that implies no contradiction, hence it follows, that
whatsoever God does is good; and whatsoever God can do, if it were done by
him, it should justly be done, otherwise he should have power to be unjust;
which power (in this case) should either be in vain, because it is not possible
that ever it should be actuated, or if actuated, God should be unjust.
Holiness (you say) does so rule his power and moderate his will, that the one
cannot enjoyne, or the other exact any thing, not most consonant to the
eternal or abstract patterns of equity. You take great liberty of discourse
throughout. What I pray, according to our understandings is the subject of Gods
holiness? is it not his will? And how can his holiness work upon his will?
Does the heat of fire work upon the fire? or the cold of water work upon the
water? Again, here we have power and will distinguished, and the act of
injoyning attributed to the one, and exacting to the other. Both are acts of
command: now I pray consider, does Gods power command? I had thought imperium
had been the proper prerogative of the will, yet both these, by your
discourse, are in subjection to the eternal patterns of equity; and equity
before you confounded with justice. Now I know no such justice in God,
different from his wisdom. And herein I am of the same mind with Aquinas,
Quest. 23. De voluntate Dei, Art. 6. where he disputes this question, Utrum
justitia in rebus creatis ex simplici divina voluntate dependeat. And there he
professes, that Primum ex quo pendet ratio omnis justitiae est sapientia
divini intellectus qua res constituit in debita proportione, and ad se invicem,
and ad suam causam. Now let any man name any thing that God can do, and then
let him answer me whether God be not as well able by the infinity of his
wisdom to do it wisely, as by the infinity of his power to do it at all.
And mark what in the same place (where he seems most to favor your present
Tenet) Aquinas professes, Quamvis in nobis sit aliud intellectus, and voluntas
secundum rem and pro hoc nec idem, est voluntas and rectitudo voluntatis: Deo
tamen est idem secundum rein intellectus, and voluntas, and propter hoc est
idem rectitudo voluntatis, and ipsa voluntas. Although in us the understanding
is one thing, and the will really another thing, whence it is that our will,
and the rectitude of our will is not the same, yet seeing that in God, the
understanding and the will are really the same, hence it is, that in God his
will, and the rectitude of his will are all one. But be it that his will is
consonant to the eternal or abstract paternes of equity, I pray, what more
eternal and abstract pattern of equity then this, that it is lawful for God
to make the world, if he will, and not to make it if he will; yea, and to do
what he will, and leave undone what he will. I hope the will of God revealed,
does as sufficiently warrant all our actions, if things are therefore good
because God wills them, as in case because they are good therefore God wills
them. Now the former of these is true, without all question, in most things;
for whether the world had been made sooner or later, bigger or lesser, more
Angels or less, more spheres or less, whether they had moved this way they
do, or the contrary way; whether they should have continued longer or shorter
time then they shall, all had been received as the good course of Gods
providence equally as now it is. But here you pass to a point of a far
different nature; for it is one thing to enquire whether Gods will be the rule
of goodness in this sense, whether whatsoever God brings to pass in the
world, is therefore good because God has done it, and a far different thing
to demand, whether Gods will be the rule of goodness in this sense, that
whatsoever God commands us in his word (for so I understand you when you speak
of Gods revealed will) it is therefore good because God commands it. And I
give a manifest reason of this difference, for before the revelation of Gods
word, and without that, all men naturally are able to discern between good and
evil, they knew impiety, idolatry, profane swearing, perjury,
irreligiousnesse, contempt of government, murder, uncleanness, gluttony,
drunkenness, theft, oppression, extortion, lying, to be evil, and the
contrary to these to be good, by the light of nature, and suggestion of
conscience, there being a law of good and evil written in the hearts of all,
their conscience bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing, or excusing,
Romans 2. 14. 15. And therefore it is false to say, that we know this or that to
be good, because Gods will revealed commends it to be such For undoubtedly, in
most points of morality, we know this to be good, and that to be evil,
without the revealed will of God, and by the very light of nature. Neither does
it follow, that because God wills nothing but that which is just and good,
therefore justice and goodness are the objects of his will; first, because we
have heard out of Aquinas, that Gods wisdom is his justice: secondly, it is
absurd to say, that justice, goodness, or wisdom are the objects of his
will. Again, if the goodness of Gods will consists in willing that which is
good and just, to wit, in things that are to be done by man, then the rectitude
of Gods will shall accrue to him from without, and shall not be essential
unto him, like as the rectitude of man's will, which is disproved by Aquinas in
the place before alleged. Whereas you say, unless this or that had been
good, God had not willed it, this may admit such an interpretation as nothing
serves your turn; for the wisdom of God may represent this or that to be
good, that is, such as is sit to be done in the way of congruity, so that if it
be done it shall be done congruously, yet not to be good, so as it ought to be
done in the way of necessity. Nay, mark what Bradwardine professes, suppose
the wisdom of God shall represent this to be more congruous to be done then
that, yet is not God hereby bound to prefer the doing of that before this.
Ratio praeponderans est, qua dictat quod melius esset facere hoc quam illud,
vel quod melius est, hoc facere Bradward. lib. 1. cap. 22.
quam dimittere, and talis ratio non movet, nec concludit voluntati divinae,
nec eam determinat ad agendum. Posset enim Deus facere meliora quam facit and
multa bona quae non facit. And concludes Homini tutum est semper ut conformet
voluntatem suam rationi praeponderanti. Deus autem non potest sequi per omnia
rationem praeponderantem, nisi faceret omnia possibilia, and horum quod libet
infinitum, quod contradictionem includit. Sufficit igitur sibi in talibus pro
ratione, voluntas, vel saltem ratio congruens and concomitans praelaxata. Yet
the will of God is always reasonable: but mark what is the ground of this
denomination, according to Aquinas, in 1. Quest. 19. Art. 5. Ad. 1. Voluntas
Dei rationabilis est, non quod aliquid, sit Deo causa volendi sed in quantum
vult unum esse propter aliud. Yet you would make the world believe that you
fetch your divinity from the fountain, they that think otherwise never taste
it but in trenches, yet where have you hitherto discovered the fountain from
whence you take it?

3 You proceed to free your tenet from exceptions; but alas, you propose but
one exception, and that a poor one, Seeing no thing can be without Gods will,
what can be good before God wills it? And your answer is by concession, That
goodness actually existent in the creature, cannot be without some precedent
act of Gods will, as much as to say, this exception is nothing to the purpose:
and so you undertake to free your Tenet only from such exceptions as are
nothing to the purpose. Now as touching goodness actually existent in God
himself, does that depend merely upon the will of God, or at all upon the will
of God? The manifestation of it, or the exercise of it depends merely upon the
will of God, for as much as this is performed only by outward works, and God
might have chosen whether he would have made the world, or any part of it,
yea, or no. But as for Gods goodness, we that taste of divinity but in
trenches, acknowledge, that the being thereof is as necessary as the being of
God himself, and depends not at all upon the liberty of Gods will: There is,
you say, a goodness objective precedent in order of nature to the act or
exercise of Gods will. What I pray? Is it any such as binds God to the willing
of any outward thing? take heed what you say, lest you fall into Atheism by
making God a necessary agent, or that he was bound in the way of justice to
make the world: whence it follows, that the world was everlasting. Yet this
goodness which you make the object of Gods will, savoureth of ditch water
rather then of spring water; for it is brought by you, as that which shows
Gods will, what is to be done. But every novice knows, it belongs not to
goodness to give direction, but to wisdom rather: and therefore Aquinas, as
I showed before, makes that whereupon depends the reason of all justice to be
the wisdom of Gods understanding. And I grant willingly, that the direction
of wisdom in God precedeth the operation of his will in order of nature,
according to that of Aug. alleged by Bradw. out of his answer to the 7.
question of Orosius. In Deo praeire voluntas sapientiam non potest, ergo prius
est rationabiliter sapere, qaam rationabiliter velle. Yet neither the wisdom
of God shall determine his will, unless it does so direct, as to show that
this or that ought to be done* For if it does only direct by showing what is
fit to be done, and of many courses which Gods wisdom can devise sit to be
taken, if it be left indifferent to Gods will to choose or refuse what he
list, it is apparent, that though before God choose, it was fit to be done,
like as many other courses were also, yet no necessity why God should prefer
this before an other: sure I am you have proved no such thing hitherunto,
neither out of the fountain, nor out of the trenches. Intellectus divinus
(says one) singulos modos operandorum possibiles circa creaturas considerat,
and omnes voluntati proponit ut libere quem voluerit exequi eligat, Henry.
quodlib. 8. Quest. 1. Aquinas professes, that whatsoever God is able to do,
that also he can wisely do, in 1. Quest. 25. Art. 5. in Corp. Divina
sapientia totum posse potentia comprehendit. And again professes, that the
order of things in the government of this world, does not adequate the wisdom
of God; as much as to say, he could have brought forth a world, and the
dispensation of his providence in as wise a manner as he has showed in this:
his words are these, Ordo divinae sapientiae rebus inditus in quo ratio Aquin.
de voluntate Dei. q. 25. (...). 5.
justitiae consistit: non adaequat divinam sapientiam. sic, ut divina sapientia
limitetur ad hunc ordinem. And he proves it thus, Tota ratio ordinis quem
sapiens rebus a se factis imponit a fine sumitur. Quando igitur sinis est
proportionatus rebus propter finem factis sapientia facientis limitatur ad
aliquem determinatum ordinem. Sed divina bonitas est sinis improportionabiliter
excedens res creatas: unde divina sapientia non determinatur ad aliquem ordinem
rerum, ita ut non possit alius cursus rerum ess^uere. Scotus in like 1. Did.
44. (...). unica.
sort, Nulla lex est recta nisi quatenus a voluntate divina acceptante statuta.
And he gives this instance of his assertion, Omnis peccator finalis,
damnabitur: quis autem dubitat Deum de potentia absoluta potuisse peccatorem
non damnare, sed annihilare? See also what John Gerson says to the same
purpose, Deus non ideo vult res ad extra fieri, quia bonae sunt, quemadmodum
movetur humana voluntas, ex objectione boni very, vel apparentis: Est e contra
potius, quod ideo res ad extra bonae sunt, quia Deus vult eas tales esse; adeo
quod si vellet eas vel non esse vel aliter esse, id quoque jam bonum esset,
propterea been enuntiavit magnus Ambrosius post Basilium quod voluntas divina
naturae primaria lex est. Yet of these you may say that they are but trenches.
Although your self has hitherto brought nothing for your assertion, either
out of fountain or trench, save only out of your own brain, which may be
the fountain of your invention, and yet inferior to these trenches. But come
we to the fountain, God is said to work all things according to the counsel
of Ephesians. 1. 11. Eccles. pol. lib. 1.
his own will. Mr. Hooker passes his censure upon those Divines that refer
all the reason of justice to the will of God. Calvin belike is one of those
divines whom he in his reprehension reaches at; who in his Institutions has
these words, Adeo summa est justitiae regula Dei voluntas, ut quicquid vult, eo
ipso quod vult, justum habendum. Yet Calvin says not, that in this respect it
is just; but only that in this respect it ought to be received as just. But
Mr. Hooker, though he acknowledges that there is a law of divine actions, yet
he professes that this law is to be resolved into the will of God, which is
somewhat more then Calvin professes, and as much as Perkins Perk. de praedest.
mod. and ord. cric. 2.
professes, when he says, Nothing is just to God before it be willed by him,
he speaks in respect of things to be done by him, and not of that justice
which is called by the Schoolmen, Justitia condecentiae, which dictateth what
may conveniently be done. For certainly, if a thing might not conveniently be
done, God would never have done it: but he speaks of justitia obligationis,
justice that binds to the doing of it; and maintains, that nothing binds God
to the doing of it, but only his own will and determination. And in this
sense have I elsewhere justified Mr. Perkins against Arminius. But as for
Calvin's saying, when he professes, that whatsoever God wills must be
received of us as just, is a most temperate speech. And to what purpose should
we trouble our selves to look any further, and to enquire after the reason of
it. Whereas we are given to understand, that of the wisdom and knowledge of
God there is such a depth as is unsoundable, O the depth of the riches of the
wisdom and knowledge of God; how unsearchable Romans 11. 33
are his judgments, and his ways past finding out? But upon the matter, we
may easily perceive how little difference there is between Mr. Hooker and
others, when he professes, that though this counsel of Gods will, according
whereunto he works all things, does signify a law of divine actions, yet
withal, such a law as is resolved into the will of God. Again consider, how
is it called the counsel of Gods will? not of Gods will giving counsel, for
that belongs to the understanding; but of Gods will accepting the counsel
proposed; and if many wise courses are proposed (as why should we conceive
that Gods infinite wisdom is limited to the devising of one course) then the
will does freely accept one rather then another. And thus Suarez interprets
it when ho says, Non ita operatur Dei voluntas secundum consilium ejus,
Suarez. relect. de lib. volunt. divin. disp. 1.
ut omnino a consilio determinetur, sed potius (si ita loqui liceat) ut ipsa
determinat consilium. In like sort Didacus Alvarez, though of a sect much
opposite to the Jesuits, yet concurreth with Suarez in this exposition, Hic ut
notavit Glossa, prius ponitur Alvar. de auxil lib. 2. disp. 17.
consilium, quod pertinet ad intellectum, deinde additur voluntatis suae, Ubi
significat quod intellectus divinus, seuscientia ejus, ut determinatur a
voluntata est causa rerum. You that pretend to fetch your divinity from the
fountain, have not brought so much for proof of your assertion as this place
comes unto; it is enough for you to dictate and say, There is a goodness
objective, precedent in order of nature to the act or exercise of his will. And
yet I willingly confess, it is so far good, as that Gods wisdom does
represent it as a thing that decently and conveniently may be done; but that of
necessity it must be done, and that thus divine wisdom represents it, your
self is so fat^e from proving this, that you do not so much as take notice of
this distinction. You proceed, and tell us positively, that Unto some things
considered as possible, this goodness objective is so essentially annexed,
that if it be his will to give them actual being, they must of necessity be
actually good, nor can he that can do all things, will their contraries. Never,
I think, was so vulgar an assertion so much honored, as to be brought in with
such state and pomp. As if any Scholar did make question, whether Ens and
bonum convertuntur; or any sober man doubted, whether the works of God must
needs be good. Whereas this is utterly beside the question: which is only
this, Whether because God wills any thing, therefore the doing of it be
just; or rather because it is just therefore God does it. So that the question
is not, Whether any entity produced by God be good; but rather, Whether the
producing of it be therefore good, because God wills it.

Yet your instance is more extravagant then your assertion, as when you add,
God might, had it pleased him, have taken life and existence from all mankind,
when he preserved Noah and his family. But to reserve them men, and no
reasonable creatures, was no object of power omnipotent. So God did reserve
diverse beasts at that time also; but to reserve them beasts, and not
unreasonable creatures, was no object of power omnipotent; as much as to say,
to reserve reasonable creatures, no reasonable creatures, and to reserve
unreasonable creatures no unreasonable creatures, was no object of power
omnipotent. For certainly God cannot make contradictories to be true: as for
the same creature to be both reasonable and unreasonable. And call you this the
objective goodness of a thing possible? or is this your definition of
goodness, to imply no contradiction. Then let evil be goodness, and
injustice goodness, and darkness light, Belial an honest man. For certainly
not one of these apart does imply any contradiction. Your exposition of this is
as bad as any of the rest. When we say things implying contradiction cannot
have any being, we understand it of things containing diverse notions, which
notions are contradictory one to another: not that they are contradictory to
the nature and essential goodness of God, as you expound it. For that which
is continual, to consist of points indivisible, we hold to be contradictions:
so did Aristotle: as also that a body existent should be infinite; or that
motion properly so called should be in an instant. But neither Aristotle, nor
any of his Peripatetickes, that I know, did ever maintain, that the
contradiction here spoken of, consisted in this, that the thing stood in
contradiction to the nature or essential goodness of God; more then in
contradiction to the nature and essence of an Angel, or to the nature and
essence of a man.

I do not find any reason why the making of the world should be esteemed more
consonant to the nature of God, then the not making of it. And whatsoever God
wills, if he wills it freely, he might forbear the willing of it, and that
without sin. I know nothing that God wills necessarily but himself; and it
is improper enough to say, that Gods nature is consonant to it self. But in
what sense a sphere of heaven, or a tree, or any vile creature shall be said
to be consonant to the nature of God, I am content to be ignorant. I know no
purity or holiness without the will of God, as that must be which is the
object of it. In a word, is it created purity and holiness which is the object
of the will of God you speak of, or increated? Increated it cannot be; for the
object of that will of God, whereof we speak, is such as God wills to have
existence: but God does not will increated holiness to have existence; for
that were to will himself to have existence, seeing increated holiness must
needs be God himself. But to say that God does will himself to have
existence, were to imply, that God as yet has no existence. If created purity
and holiness be the object of Gods will, you speak of, then God cannot but
will some created thing to be, therefore he must necessarily create the world.

A little before you told us, that God could not will ought contradictory to
his own nature and essential goodness, as in this particular; he cannot will
a man to be a man, and yet unreasonable. So then if he will have a man to be,
he must have him to be a reasonable creature: in like sort, if he will have a
beast to be, he must have him to be an unreasonable creature.

But what purity and holiness, or what consonancy to Gods purity and holiness
is to be found in all this, as namely in willing a man to be a reasonable
creature, a beast to be a creature unreasonable, seeing now you affirm, that
Gods will cannot pitch but upon that which is pure and holy? If I be not
deceived, you are now passing to another point, and do begin to apply the
terms of your assertion to Gods will of commanding; which makes me remember
what the Welsh Tailor said to his boy, in making a garment while the owner
stood by: for he cried out, Potherion, potherion, which afterward by inquiry
was found to signify, Wide stitches, wide stitches. At length you come to the
fountain whence you fetch your Divinity, whilst others taste it but in
trenches. And you tell us out of the book of Wisdom, that For as much as God
Wisd. 12. 15.
is righteous, he orders all things righteously, thinking it not agreeable to
his power to condemn him that has not deserved to be punished. God is
righteous in keeping his word; I hope you will not deny it: neither Philo the
Jew, nor the author of the book of Wisdom, does inform us of any other
righteousness in God. Sure I am, that both Suarez and Vasquez, other manner of
Scholars then Philo ever was, acknowledge no justice in God, in respect of his
creatures, but upon supposition of his will. Now God has promised, that every
soul that sins, it shall dye, and not that the sons Ezekiel. (...)
teeth shall be set on edge for the sins of the father. And yet I appeal to
your own judgment, whether thus to carry himself be to do that which is
agreeable to his power, or rather that which is agreeable to his
righteousness. God, you say, loves truth and sincere dealing, because he
himself is true and just. Yet when the devil testified of the Apostles
saying, These are the servants of the most high God, which show unto us the
ways of everlasting life, though it were a truth which they uttered, yet the
coming of it out of such a ones mouth, I think was as little liked by God
himself, as by his Apostle. Amongst the actions of heathen men, truth was
found, as well as other virtuous conversation; yet of their best actions Austin
was bold to profess, that they were no better then splendida peccata. Aug.
cont. Julian. Pelag. l. 4. c. (...)
And he gives this rule for the discerning of true goodness, Noveris non
ossiciis, sed sinibus discernendas esse virtutes. And as one blemish of their
best actions was this, that they were not performed in reference to his glory;
so another very suitable hereunto I take to be this, that they were not
performed in obedience to his will. For the horrible sin of the Jews in
offering their sons and daughters unto Moloch, is amplified thus in holy
Scripture, Things that never entered into Ier. 7. 38.
my heart to command them. And why should God regard that which is not
performed in obedience to his will? Many things may be done, and are done by
strangers living in far Countries, agreeable to the laws of this Kingdom;
but we ken them no thanks for this, because they do it not in obedience to
the laws in this kingdom. There is no likeness between the goodness of God,
and the moral goodness of the creature. For look what goodness is in God,
the same is in him necessarily; it is not so in man.

As for justice, I have often showed the consent of Suarez and Vasquez, and
that opposed by none that I know, that justice in God in respect of the
creature, does always presuppose the will of God. Then as touching the truth
of God, it is well known that God is a spirit, and has no tongue to be the
interpeter of his mind, as he has given unto man; only he has taken up the
hearts and tongues of his Prophets and Apostles, to deliver his oracles unto
his people. And though God is not bound to reveal himself unto any; yet if it
be his pleasure to reveal himself, he is not capable of any such inducement,
to deliver an untruth, as man is: man may advantage himself by untruth, when
by other means he cannot: it is not so with God, who needs not untruth.
thereby to advantage himself. But whereas you say that Gods veracity is
coeternall to his essence, in my judgment it is a very wild phrase. For
veracity has no place where speech is not; and seeing that God speaks not but
by his Ministers, it follows that before the world was, he never spoke at
all; and seeing he could have forborne the making of the world, he might have
never spoken at all; so far off from truth is it, that veracity, which
supposes speech, is coeternall to his essence. For if speech be not coeternall
to his essence, how can truth of speech, or truth in speech be coeternall to
his essence? Yet veracity taken fundamentally as a disposition in God to
deliver truth whenever he is pleased to cause speech, or to speak by his
Ministers, so it is all one with the nature of God, and no marvel if in this
sense it be coeternall to his essence. Intemperancy, and consequently the
opposite virtue of temperance and chastity is found only in bodies, not in
spirits; and as it is no commendation to the nature of an Angel to be chaste,
so neither is it to the nature of God.

You say, God could not give a law for the authorizing of promiscuous or
preposterous lust. Yet it is manifest, that promiscuous lust in bruit beasts,
in all sorts, has its course, without any transgression, and it being a course
of nature in them, it cannot be denied to be a work of God. And Suarez,
though he takes upon him to maintain a tenet like unto Suarez de legib. l. 2.
cap. 15.
yours, namely, that God cannot dispense as touching his moral law; yet he
professes that God may make it lawful for one man to have many wives. And I
pray you, why may he not as well make it lawful for one woman to have many
husbands, and what then I pray you will this want of promiscuous and
preposterous lust? It may be plurality of husbands to one wife, may bring a
greater inconvenience in the course of nature, as touching the corrupting of
conceptions, and hindering the course of generation, then plurality of wives;
but how in morality it should be more intolerable then the other, I know not.
And withal we read of Massalina, that notwithstanding all her luxurious
courses this way, yet not only brought forth children, but also those like
unto her husband also; and being demanded how that came to pass, made this
answer, Non nisi pl^na nave vectorem fero. For the brother and sister to know
one another carnally, we count it incest; yet unless Adams sons had married
with their sisters, it was impossible there should have been any propagation
of mankind. And in like sort Abraham is supposed to have been the Uncle of
Sarah; and do you think that holy Patriaroh would have continued in so
sinful a course after his calling, had it been such that God could not any
way have made it lawful?

You proceed and tell us, That to legitimate violence, or entitle oppression
unto the inheritance bequeathed to conscionable and upright dealing, is without
the prerogative of Omnipotency; and in stead of giving a reason of your
opinion, you express it in (...) double phrase, as if you would make up in
figures, what is wanting in argument; and say, It cannot be ratisied by any
Parliament of the Trinity; and indeed I read in Virgil of a Parliament
sometimes called in heaven by Jupiter: but I doubt you are of Ovids fault, who
as Seneca writes knew not when it was well. But you overdoe only in words, and
underdoe in argument: and as if you had not phrasified enough, you further tell
us, that The practice or countenancing of these and the like, are evil not in
us only, to whom they are forbidden, but so evil in themselves, that the
Almighty could not but forbid and condemn them, as professed enemies to his most
sacred Majesty. Thus to phrasifie with you, is to fetch Divinity from the
fountain, and not from the trenches; though you bring neither evidence of
Scripture, nor evidence of reason to justify it. That which you do bring such
as it is, is rather from reason then from Scripture. And if it be so manifest
in reason, as you seem to signify, the less need I should think there was
of forbiddng it: yet you say God could not but forbid it. And where I pray must
he forbid it, and by what law? Is it by the law revealed in his word, or by the
law of nature? As for the law revealed in his word, that was communicated only
to the Jews; and why God was necessitated to forbid it to one small nation,
and not to another, I can devise no reason. The law of nature I confess is
general, forbidding such things as are known to be evil by the light of
nature; but does it teach that God cannot legitimate any such actions? Iephte
thought otherwise, as appears by the message he sent to the King of Ammon,
Will thou not possess that which Chemish thy god gives Judge. 11. 24
thee to possess? So whomsoever the Lord our. God shall drive out from before
us, them will we possess. And it is observable, that whereas in other
particulars you have derived the absolute unlawfulness of such actions, from
the incongruitie of them to the nature of God; as namely, because he is true,
therefore he hates falsehood; because pure, therefore he hates lust, (whereas
to touch one thing more by the way that was omitted, it is well known that God
is as pure from lawful lust, as from lust unlawful) here in this place you
make no mention at all of any condition in God, whereunto the practice of
violence should be incongruous, but in place of reason, which you bring not so
much as in show, you make us amends with variety of phrases. Yet what more
violent act, then for the father to cut the throat of his most innocent child?
and you well know, God sent Abraham that holy Patriarch in such an Genesis 22.
Heb. 11.
errand as this. Samsons faith is commended by S. Paul; his first rising
against the Philistines, was as the subject rising against their Princes, as the
men of Judah signified unto him, saying, Know thou not that the Philistines
are rulers over us? and thereupon Judge. 15. 11.
they were content to deliver him into their hands, to manifest themselves to
be no confederates with him in this insurrection. Afterward we read how he
died flaming with desire of revenge upon the Philistines, and that for his two
eyes; Judge. 16.
and to the end he might be revenged on them, was content to be his own
assassinate; and all this in an holy manner performed, commending himself by
solemn prayer unto God. For he called unto the Lord, and said, O Lord God
remember V. 2^.
me, I pray thee, and strengthen me I pray thee only this once; O God, that I
may be at once revenged of the Philistines for my two eyes; and thereupon
taking hold of the two pillars of the house, he bowed himself, and said, Let
me die with the Philistines; V. 30.
and the house fell upon the Lords, and upon all the people that were within:
so the dead which he slew at his death, were more then they which he slew in
his life. What a strange zeal possessed Phinees, when he ran his javelin
through Zimri and Cosbi, Numb. 25. 8.
thus perishing in their incestuous act, and thus he as it were sending their
souls to hell, as well as their bodies to the grave. Yet God approves of it,
and seals hereupon unto him the covenant V. 12, 13.
of the Priesthood. The children of Israel expel the Canaanites, and destroy
them without all mercy, having nothing to justify them in these violent
courses, but only the commandment of God. The Israelites are said to have
robbed Exodus 3. 21, 22.
the Egyptians, in borrowing that which they never meant to restore, and the
Lord animates them hereunto, and foretells unto Moses that he would cause them
to march out of the land laden with the riches of Egypt; and a great part of
this was afterward consecrated to the service of the Tabernacle.

4. In the next place you tell us after your manner positively, that the
infinite goodness of Gods Majesty cannot wrest his most holy will from strict
observance of such rules of righteousness as he sets us to follow; and this
dogmaticall assertion of yours is ushered in with a great deal of state, by a
comparison forsooth of the contrary disposition of great men, for whom, to set
paternes of the morality which they require in others, is reputed a kind of
pedantisme or mechanical servitude; and why mechanical? forsooth because it
is like the setting of us copies, or songs, or teaching us some honest trade.
Yet I can hardly believe but that Sardanapalus or Heliogabalus both did think
it better becoming the Majesty of a Prince to give examples of honest
conversation, then to play the Scrivener or the Shomaker. Instruction in
morality, or in liberal Arts, may in some things have resemblance to
mechanical instructions; but is any man so sottish as thereupon to conceive
such moral and liberal instruction to be mechanical? An Ape may be like
unto a man, Simia quam similis turpissima bestia nobis, yet no fool conceives
him to be a man. Neither do I see any cause to wonder, that they who are
willing to give laws to others, are loath to have any laws given to curb
them. Well, though the garments of morality be too strait for great ones, yet
they are not too strait for God; he can be content to put them on, to wear
them, and they become him so well, that the infinite greatness of his Majesty
cannot wrest his most holy will from strict observance of such rules of
righteousness as he sets us to follow. As I remember in Cyri paedia there is
conceived such a good lesson becoming Princes, namely, themselves to observe
those laws which they make for their people. This law you have such a
transcendent conceit of, and of the goodness of it, that you think fit to
establsh it in the Commonwealth of the Trinity. God (say you) cannot wrest his
will. Consider, I pray, whether this be a sober speech. The corruptest man that
lives, the devil himself cannot wrest his will. First because the will cannot
be wrested: laws may be wrested by violent interpretations; men's goods may be
wrested from them by violent courses, but I never read nor heard that any man's
will may be wrested. For it is a received rule, that, Voluntas non potest cogi.
Secondly, because a man cannot wrest anything that he undertakes to wrest, but
by his will. Now in what congruitie can the will of any be said to wrest it
self? But take we your meaning, that God does strictly observe the rules of
righteousness, which he sets us to follow. Now the rules he sets us to
follow, ate partly such as are contained in the first table, and partly such as
are contained in the second. In the first we are commanded to love him, to
fear him, to put our trust in him. Are these the rules that God himself does
so strictly observe? does he fear himself? does he put his trust or
confidence in himself? In the second we are commanded to worship him according
to his word; has God a care to worship himself according to his word? God
sometimes does swear by himself, and I hold it impossible that God should do
any thing in vain, much more that he should take his own name in vain.

But as for the sanctifying of the Sabbath, whereunto we are bound, I cannot
well conceive, how that day, and the sanctification thereof should be observed
by God; unless you are of the Jews opinion, who think that God spends some
part of the day in reading their Talmud, and some part in lamenting Jerusalem,
and the desolation thereof; and the other part of the day he spends in playing
with Leviathan; and you desire to translate these celestial devotions to the
Sabbath. We are bid to honor our father and mother, God has none to honor.
We are forbid to kill any man, yet God did bid Abraham to sacrifice his son,
and allowed Phinees in slaying Zimri and Cosbi, and exposed his own innocent
Son to be crucified, and gives us power over inferior creatures, as Lords of
life and death. God made Adam after his own image and likeness; Adams
integrity was the image of his holiness; but when man by his fall lost this
his holiness, take heed you avouch not, that hereby he lost the image of God.

Our holiness consists in seeking the glory of God; and no creature can be
so zealous of Gods glory as God is of his own. But how to express our zeal
of Gods glory better, then by obedience unto his will, I willingly profess I
know not. As likewise what you mean by those ever living examples of
goodness, which, as you say, God expresses in his works; unless it be in
making his sun to shine, and his rain to fall both upon good and bad. For
unto this is the last precept which Matt. 5. 45
you mentioned, referred by our Savior. And yet I doubt not (nor you neither)
that God has contrary ways and courses, as namely, in making us to discern
between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serves God, and him
that serves Mal. 3. 18.
him not; and that in respect of demonstration of mercy to the one, and
execution of judgment on the other: Behold, my servant shall eat, and ye
shall be hungry; behold, my servants Esa. 65. 13.
shall drink, and ye shall be thirsty: behold, my servants shall rejoice,
and ye shall be ashamed: Behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart; but
ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and house for vexation of spirit. Yea, and
in making one piece rained upon sometimes, and not another: yet I nothing
doubt, but you Amos 4. 7.
will acknowledge God to be as holy in these ways as in any other; yea, in
causing two Bears to come out of the wood, 2 Kings 2. 24
upon Elisha his cursing in the name of the Lord, and tear forty two
children. Yea, in revenging Achans sacrilege, Ios. 7.
not only with his own death, but with his childrens also; and in destroying
suckling children, and children in the womb, both in the general deluge, and
in the conflagration of Sodom: and when for the sin of Saul, he caused
seven of his sons to be delivered into the hands of the Gibeonites, 2 Samuel
21. 8. 9.
to be put to death: for, God is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all
his works. And the equity of Gods courses, Psalm, 145. 17.
though sometimes discernable by man, as in the case you put out of Ezechiel
18. 25. yet not always so, but that we are driven sometimes to cry out with
the Apostles, Oh the Romans 11. 33.
depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are
his judgments, and his ways past finding out?

5 I confess, that if to dictate like a positive Theologue be to instruct us,
you have thus far instructed us, That those paternes of holiness or
perfection, which we are bound to imitate in him, are not to be taken from his
bare commandment, or revelation of his will, but from the objects of his will
revealed, or from the eternal practices which he has exhibited, as so many
express and manifest proofs that his will is always holy and just. The
paterns of holiness which we are bound to imitate, are not to be taken (you
say) from Gods bare commandment: I find what you say, but I had rather find
what you prove. When our Savior exhorts us to be holy as God is holy, and
perfect as God is perfect, he speaks it with a particular reference to a
particular course in Gods providence, taking thereby not an obligation to
imitate him, but only an inducement to be so much the more forward in doing
that which God commands us in loving our enemies. And unless we have a
commandment from God for the rule of our obedience, it is nothing safe to
imitate God. For what? shall Magistrates spare malefactors, because God spares
them a long time? Or because God causes the children to be put to death
sometime for the sin of the father, shall we do so too? Or because God makes
his sun to shine as well upon one as upon another, shall we therefore put no
difference between such as are of the household of faith, and others? We may
not imitate Elisha in cursing little children that mocked him; nor the zeal of
Phinees in killing Zimri and Cosbi in their lust; much less must we always
imitate God, who has greater power over men's lives then Elisha, or Phinees
had. Yet why you should call the works of God in the course of his providence
eternal practices, I know no reason, or color of reason. It may be that in
stead of eternal, it should be external practices. God no doubt is holy in
all his ways and works, but herehence it follows not, that we must imitate
him in all his courses, but rather we must have an eye to his commandments.
And what, I pray are those perfections whereof our general duties are the
imperfect representations? Our general duties are such as these, We must not
deal unjustly with any; we must deal justly with all, or we must be holy;
Holiness becomes thine Psalm. 93. 5^.
house for ever: and in the Priests forehead was wont to be written, Holiness
unto the Lord. Now, are these the perfections, Ex. 28. 35.
wherein God, as you say, is holy and just? Then it is as if you should say, God
is eminently and apparently holy in the perfection which is called his
holiness. God is eminently and apparently just, in that perfection which is
called his justice. Of all his moral commandments, not one there is, you say,
whose sincere practice does not in part make us truly like him: and we are
bound to be conformable to his will revealed, that we may be conformable to
his nature, without conformity whereunto, we cannot participate of his
happiness, for happiness is the immediate consequent of his nature. You
proceed to cut out work for your Readers, as many as are willing to Try the
spirits, and not hand over head to receive all for gold that glisters. That the
practice of Gods commandments makes us like him, is a plausible speech. And
it is true in the general: for as God is wise and holy, so our obedience to
his commandments, is that which mades us wise and holy. And as God does
nothing but that which very well becomes him; so in obeying the will of God,
we shall do nothing but that which very well becomes us. But as for
particular duties, there is little or no correspondency between the carriage
of superiors and inferiors. We have a God to worship by reverence and fear,
and by praying unto him; these are moralities no way incident unto God.

We have parents both natural and spiritual, and masters and magistrates
whom we must honor; God has none such to honor. We by our authority may
not take away the life of any, be he never so great an offender; God may take
away the life of any, be he never so innocent, without any blemish to his
holiness. Matrimonial chastity is a virtue commendable in a Christian; but
this virtue is of so base a condition, that the divine nature is not capable of
it, as who has no lusts at all to order; like as on the contrary, the very
Devils themselves, being Spirits, are no way obnoxious to unchristitie. The
like may be said of temperance, and intemperancie in the use or abuse of Gods
creatures through gluttony and drunkenness. It Is theft for us to take any man's
goods from him against his will; it is not so with God, who can send any man as
naked out of the world, as he brought him into the world, without any
prejudice to the repuration of his justice. And seeing he is not capable of any
manner of concupiscence, either of the eye or of the flesh, (for he is a
Spirit, Ioh. 4. 24.
and not a body or flesh) nor in the way of pride of life: the contrary
conditions cannot be in the way of any commendable virtues attributed unto God.
In a word, all the goodness that is in God, is essential unto him; our
goodness, whatsoever we be, is but accidental unto us: and therefore, 1 Pet.
1. 16 Matt. 5. 48
when we are exhorted to be holy as he is holy, and perfect as God is perfect,
it tends only to this, even to set before us certain actions of God, as
patterns and precedents to imitate him therein; and that only so far forth as
they are suitable and congruous inducements to the performing of Gods
commandments, not to affect any conformity of nature with the deity. For what
conformity can there be between the nature of a creature, and the nature of
his Creator? But Saint Peter tells us, we are made pertakers (...). 2 Pet. 1.
4.
I have observed some to have rendered this passage thus, We are made partakers
of a godly nature; and the godliness of our nature undoubtedly consists in
obeying the will of God; according to that of the Apostle, This is the will of
God, even your sanctification. And what godliness can be greater, 1 These. 4. 6
then for a man to obey the will of his Creator; and that is the will of Gods
commandment, though it may fall out to be contrary to Gods purpose. For we
are bound to pray for the life of our parents and princes, though it maybe, God
will not have either the one or the other to live. And God commanding Abraham
to sacrifice Isaac, he arose early about this business, though it appeared
afterward, that Gods purpose was, Isaac should not be sacrificed. But let it
be that we are partakers of the divine nature: in this sense I nothing doubt
but that it proceeds in respect of the holy Spirit, wherewith God has endued
us, and which he has given us Romans 5. 5 Romans 8. 11 1 Ioh. 4. 13
to dwell in us; and whereby God the Father, and God the Son are said to
dwell in us. But let us proceed inwashing away this painting, which makes
error appear with a face of truth. We are bound by the law of God, to forgive
our enemies, and to pray for them even to the last, as our Savior did, and
Steven did. But is God bound to forgive his enemies, and that always, as we
are? we know he may, and does sometimes forbear long (according to the
pleasure of his will) but, If once he whet his glittering sword, and his hand
take Deuteronomy. 32. 41
hold of judgment, he will execute vengeance on his enemies, and make his
arrows drunk with blood. Again, Magistrates must not suffer a witch to live,
being once discovered: God knows Exodus 22. 18
them when man does not, yet suffers them to live as long as he thinks good,
and sometimes very long. We are bound to have mercy on all according to our
power; God has mercy Romans 9. 18
on whom he will, and hardens whom he will. Lastly, we may not suffer any
man to sin, if it lie in our power to hinder it. But God suffers all manner
of all abominations to be committed before his eyes, and in all these he
carries himself without blemish to his holiness. Nos cer^e (says Austine)
Aug. cont. Julian. Pelag. lib 5. cap. 4
si cos in quos nobis potestas est, ante oculos nostros perpetrare scelera
permittemus, rei tum ipsis erimus: Quam vero innumerabilia ille permittit sieri
ante oculos suos, quae utique si voluisset, nullaratione permitteret; and tamen
justus, and bonus est, and quod praebendo patientiam dat locum paenitentiae
nolens aliquem perire. That we are bound to conform to Gods revealed will,
the Scripture teaches us; Secret things belong to the Lord our God, but the
Deuteronomy. 29. 29
things revealed are for us and our children to do them. But that therefore we
must be conformable to his will, that we may be conformable to his nature the
Scripture teaches not: and therefore give us leave to take this superfoetation
of yours to be but a revelation of flesh and blood. In the book of Judges Judge.
13. 17
we read that Manoah enquired after the name of the Angel Iunius and Pis at.
in Iudic. 13 Judge. 13. 18 1 King. 8. 12.
that appeared unto him; whom good Divines, upon pregnant circumstances, do
collect to have been the Lord: but he answers, Why ask thou after my name
which is secret? God verily dwells in the dark cloud: and though sometimes
again it is said, that he dwells in the light, yet forth with it 1 Timothy 6. 16
is added, that this is such a light that no man can approach unto. As
groundless is your following dictate, that, without conformity to his nature,
we cannot participate of his holiness, it being the imodiate consequent of his
nature. And what, I pray, will you make gods of us? or shall our glorification
in the kingdom of heaven be a deification? as it must be if it be a
participation of the divine happiness. But this is an usual liberty of
discourse which you take to your self. I hope you will not say, that formal
glory which God has provided for us, shall be a glory increated, though in the
way of an efficient cause it shall proceed from the increated glory of God,
but created rather.

And all created glory, I hope, be it never so great, is no part of Gods
happiness, which is, you say, an immediate consequent unto his nature; wherein
notwithstanding I doubt much, you speak as Peter sometimes did, when he spoke
he knew not what; as namely, in distinguishing Gods happiness from his nature,
as an immediate consequent thereof. You doubt of Lactantius his consequence, as
neither certain, nor authentic; as if it might be authentic, though not
certain in your opinion. Yet you embrace the same consequence applied to
another matter that serves your turn, and you swallow it with great facility,
it never sticks by the way like a Burre in your throat, as if consequences
were but ceremonies, and you the master of them. But you put a difference;
Lactantius his inference is sometimes doubtful, you say; but out of all
question, yours (if we may take your word) is not. But you take too great
liberty to your self, to put things at your pleasure out of question. We
should have a mad Church and a mad world, if you had power to put out of
question what you list. But let us consider your inference, God does bid us
unfainedly bless our persecuoors, therefore he does unfainedly tender his
blessings to such as persecute him in his members. This then belike is that
conformity to Gods nature which we must aspire unto. But by your leave I find
no conformity herein. Matt. 5. 44
For first, we are bid to bless our persecutors, not to tender our blessings
unto them upon condition they will admit them; but you do not say, God does
bless his persecutors; you only say, he does tender his blessings unto them.
Again, God bids us bless them that persecute us: you do not say, that God
does bless, or tender his blessings to them that persecute him, but to them
that persecute others, to wit, his members. Thirdly, and chiefly, God bids us
to bless all our persecutors.; for he exhorts us to be merciful unto all, as
you confess in the next words; but you dare not say, that God does bless, or
tender his blessings unto all; but here you lispe, and speak indefinitely,
saying, God does tender his blessings to them that persecute him in his
members; and that, He she weth kindness to them that are most unkind.
Indeed, he does so to some, but not unto all, but unto whom he will: for so
himself professes unto Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy,
and I will have compassion on whom I will have Exodus 33. 19.
compassion. And I pray consider, what blessing has God tendered Romans 5. 15
unto the Angels since their fall? So that albeit Gods charity toward some
infinitely exceeds the charity of man, yet man's duty is to be charitable
toward all; Gods duty is not to be charitable to any, but he loves whom he
will, and hates whom he will, and that before they are borne, as he loved Jacob
and hated Esau. Gods fidelity must needs be greater then man's, as being backed
with power to perform that he promises, the creature is not: nay, all the
power and readiness that the creature has to perform fidelity toward God,
proceeds merely from the grace of God.

But to compare the chastity of Virgins with Gods purity, is most absurd;
neither is there any correspondency in the parts of this comparison, and of the
comparison following, as betwixt the dross and corpulency on the one side, and
the sublimated spirits of the same body on the other side: for both the dross
and spirits you speak of are corporeal: no such proportions between the
chastity of Virgins, and the purity of God. The children of God, though in a
married estate, yet are they Virgins in the sight of God.

As for Virginity corporal, it has been found in Heathens, and is wondrous
base metal to be compared to the spiritual purity of God, in spite of all
preferment you give to the one above the other. That rule, Do unto every man
as we would be done unto, must be rightly applied, otherwise it will be far
from equity. For it becomes not a Magistrate to spare a malefactor, because if
himself were in the like case of danger and desert, he would be glad to be
spared. We must do that unto others, which in the way of justice, or equity,
or charity, we would have done unto our selves.

As for that, Him that honors me, I will honor, it is merely 1 Samuel 2. 3^
dependent upon the will of God. For all confess, that God can annihilate the
holiest creature that is, secluding his ordinance to the contrary, and in this
case should be nothing guilty of iniquity.

At length you come to the point, and demand, Whether God does intend thus well
to all? but because the nearer you come to the light, by a true stating of the
question, the more your deviations from the truth are like to be discovered,
therefore you forthwith obscure it. For whereas the conformity you spoke of
before, requires, that as we are bid to be merciful unto all, so should God be
merciful unto all likewise. And so the question, to come to an issue, should
be this, Whether God intends thus well to all, or no? You decline this; and
whereas the proper place of Gods liberty and carriage of himself according to
the mere good pleasure of his will, is not in designing destruction or
salvation unto whom he will, (for the case is clear, that God does not
determine, that destruction or salvation shall befall any, but according unto
congruous dispositions preceding, at least in persons of ripe years,) but
only in the dispensation of his grace and mercy, showing it toward whom he
will, and denying it to whom he will; you again decline this state of the
question, and propose it only of Gods wishing well to all, or destruction unto
some.

Nor do you content your self with this, but as fearing left this state of
the question be not safe enough to keep your shinnes whole, you propose it in
a most wild manner, Whether God does intend thus well to all, or destruction
to some, as it is a means of bliss to those whom he loves. You have courage
enough to dictate positively, but you manifest a very faint heart when you come
to be put to the proof. What meant you to complicate so many questions into
one? By your tenet God may intend thus well to all as you have spoken, to wit,
in intending his blessings, albeit he did will destruction unto some, to wit,
for the contempt or refusal of his grace offered. And a great deal of
difference there is between these two questions, Whether God intends
destruction unto any; and Whether he intends a man's destruction after this or
that manner; as namely, Whether he intends it as a means of bliss to those
whom he loves; and yet on this latter only you insist. And indeed you might
well despair of getting any credit upon the former points: the case is so
clear, that God in the dispensation of his grace does not carry himself
indifferently toward all, but has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he
hardens. As also that in his sentences of condemnation or salvation he
carries himself in due reference unto their former disobedience or obedience,
and so accordingly did from everlasting purpose to carry himself.

But consider we the third point, the only field wherein you have an edge to
show your strength. And first I demand, Who ever said that God did intend the
destruction of any as it is a means of bliss to them whom he loves? We
usually profess that God intends to damn no men but for their sins, and that
to this end, even to the manifestation of his glory in the way of justice
toward them; but withal we say, that God does intend also, by the
consideration of this their destruction, to illustrate his grace so much the
more toward the vessels of mercy, whom he has prepared unto glory. For when
they shall consider not only their own salvation, but also the damnation of
others, and that God might have made them also vessels of wrath as well as
others; how can it be but that their joy should be the greater upon this? and
if it be so, God must needs have intended it. And this not only our Divines
Romans 9. 23 Alvar. de auxil. disp. III.
have observed out of the Apostle Saint Paul, but even Pontifician Divines
also, as Didacus Alvarez, and Alphonsus Mendosa. Mendos. disp. 1.
Now let us consider the force of your arietation against this. If so he did,
say you, we might be exempt from that negative precept, of not doing evil that
good might ensue. We deny this consequence, and as for your reason, it seems
to be this, We may and must imitate our heavenly Father; and therefore seeing
he does evil that good may come thereof, so may we do too. To this I answer,
1. First, that the consequence is nothing true. For God intending the
destruction of any, does not therein do any evil, no nor intend any evil.
For God does intend only the destruction of impenitent sinners. But to intend
the destruction of impenitent sinners, I hope you will not dare to say that
this is evil. Thus may every one see how wide you rove from the mark in your
inconsequent consequences. 2. Secondly I answer, it is not lawful for us to
imitate God in all things, as before I have showed, and gave instance in diverse
particulars. Now I will add one more. If we repent, God not only spares us,
but forgives us; If we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins. 1 Ioh. 1. (...).
But Magistrates, when a malefactor is arraigned and convicted, and condemned
of some capital crime, though he does repent, yet may not they spare him. That
wherein our Savior exhorts us to imitate our heavenly Father, and to be
perfect as he is perfect, is in a particular case, namely, in loving not Matthew.
5. last.
only our friends, but our enemies. For so God not only loves his children
and his friends, but his enemies also, as appears in the pardoning of their
sins, and changing of their hearts, as many as belong to his election. And it
is false to say, that this is the only reason why we must love our enemies,
and not our friends only: for the commandment of God is another reason, and a
more chief reason; and we may not take inducements from Gods actions to
encourage us in the doing of any thing, unless in such cases, as when the
actions whereabouts we set our selves, are agreeable to the law of God. God
determined the crucifying of Christ, but neither Act. 4. 28.
Judas, nor the high Priests, nor Pilate, nor the people of Israel were the
more free from sin for this, while they determined to bring him to his
cross. God turns not only 2 Cor. 11. 19.
the evils of some to the good of others, but a man's own sins also to his own
good, according to that of Austin, Utile est superbis in aliquod apertum,
manifestumque cadere peccatum. De Civit. Dei l. 14. c. 13.


6. I wonder what glory of God does appear in the punishment of the reprobate:
not the glory of his mercy certainly; nor say I the glory of his justice. For
vindicative justice, whereof this is spoken, has only place in reference unto
sinners. It is absurd to say, that Gods dealings throughout are to be imitated
by us; and you have no ground for this but the saying of our Savior, Matthew. 5.
48. which is applied to a special case. And will it follow, that because we
must imitate Gods actions in a special case, therefore we must imitate his
dealings generally? To intend evil to some, before they have committed sin,
admits a double interpretation; either this, to intend that evil shall befall
some; in which sense it is manifest, that God does intend the evil of
punishment to befall none before they have sinned. Or thus, the very intention
of evil unto some is not until sin be committed; in which sense it is
notoriously untrue. For sin is not committed but in time; but Gods intentions
are everlasting. Of intending the destruction of any as means of others good,
I have already spoken that which is sufficient. Why should your tautologies
draw me to the like absurdity? The last clause is new, and therefore we will
consider it. If God did absolutely ordain some to eternal inevitable misery,
for the advancement of his own glory; we should not sin, but rather imitate
the perfection of our heavenly Father, in robbing Judas to pay Paul, etc.
Ridetur chorda qui semper oberrat eadem. This argument was in the close of the
former section proposed, and the inconsequence thereof discovered. The
consequence is this, God did ordain to punish some, therefore we may rob them;
God did ordain this to the advancement of his glory; therefore we may rob, to
pay our debts, No proportion is to be found in any part of this comparison.
For if God take away the life of any man, will it follow that therefore we may
do so also? It is well known ^od may do such a thing without all respect to
sin; but it is not in our lawful power to do so, though with respect unto
their sin. And what a senseless collection is this, that because God may do
this or that to advance his glory, therefore we may do the like thing for our
profit and advantage? We say, God intends to punish no reprobate, but for his
sin; yet I hope you will not say, it is in any private man's power to rob or
take any man's goods from him, by reason of his sin.

We are beholden to you for your counsel in the next place, when you teach us
to guess at the perfection of Gods Justice toward the wicked, and of his
bounty toward the godly, by the commendable shadow or imitation of it in
earthly gods. A proper course to search out the goodness and justice of God,
in the courses of heathen men. Yet it is a rule of State, Better a mischief
then an inconvenience. And by wars is procured peace, but is it without
intention of harm to any? Can wars be managed without harm? even as well
as the Friar could be satisfied with a goose livor, and a pigges head, albeit
nothing for him were dead. And in making Sodom and Gomorrah Jude 7.
examples of his judgments, did he not intend our good? and was this without
intention of harm to any? And though they of ripe years amongst them had
committed abomination, Ezech. 16. 50.
and God took them away as he thought good; yet what I pray became of
infants, some in their mothers womb, some hanging at their mothers breasts?
And will you challenge God for injustice in this, because we do not find the
like course in the commendable shadow or imitation of Gods justice in earthly
gods, as you are pleased to phrasifie it? In distribution of rewards upon the
obedient, and execution of punishment upon the disobedient, God fails not, as
he will manifest at the day of judgment. And as he executes, so he intends to
execute, and no otherwise. But God has a peculiar power, no shadow whereof
appears in man or Angel; and that is, of giving grace, of giving repentance:
and this he distributes to whom Romans 9. 18
he will, and denies to whom he will. You are content to leap over this; and
no marvel; for the grossness of your opinion would be too clearly
manifested to the world, if you should deal on this. Yet God, you say, draws
men to repentance by gracious promises of inestimable reward. And where I pray
are these herbs of grace known to grow, is it any where but in Gods word? And
was Gods word afforded to all in the days of the Old Testament? or is it so in
the days of the New? And where he does afford his word, is this all the mercy
he shows, namely, to persuade men to repent? or is this to give them
repentance? And does not Gods word manifestly Act. 5* 31. Act. 11. 18 2 Timothy 2.
teach, that repentance is the gift of God? Again, do we maintain that God
damnes any but impenitent sinners? It Is true, we say, if all the world should
believe and repent, all the world should be saved, notwitstanding all their
sins, and not Cain only. What more severe punishment then damnation? and
what precedent loving instructions or good encouragements to do well, were
afforded by God to all those infants, who perish in that sin which they drew
from the loins of their parents? And will you challenge God of unnaturalness
for this? or will you deny that any infants perish in original sin, as
Pelagius did? And what loving instructions does God minister to those Heathen,
who do not so much as know God, nor ever were acquainted with his word 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6.
and Gospel?

CHAP. XIIII.
Of Gods infinite love to mankind.

YOur theme runs in an indefinite current as touching the object of Gods
love; but it appears by your discourse ensuing, that you have a farther reach,
and do extend this love of God toward all and every one. For by the last
clause of the first section it appears, that you conceive the notion of love
infinite to bespeake as much, namely, that therefore it must extend to all and
every one. And this reason of yours is soon dispatched, in less then two
lines; all the rest of your first section is wide enough from the mark you
shoot at, and yet unsound enough in many particulars. First you maintain that
blessing and cursing both cannot proceed out of the mouth of God. Secondly,
that God is the author of being to all, and therefore loves all. Thirdly, that
in as much as he gives being to all, he loves all. For he hates nothing that
he has made. All these I will examine in their order.

Touching the first, you begin with the authority of St. James, Out of the
same mouth proceeds blessing and cursing, my Iam. 3. 10.
brethren, these things ought not so to be. And he does illustrate it with
similitudes drawn from natural things, as from a fountain that sends not
forth at the same place sweet water and bitter: and from trees, which bring
forth proper fruit only, according to their kind: Can the figtree bear Olive
berries, or the Vine figs? And you seem to conceive that these reasons of the
Apostle, as you call them, (which indeed are but illustrations) have more force
to prevail, then the Apostles authority; for thus you write, If the Apostles
authority could not persuade us to believe, his reasons would enforce us to
grant, that the issues of blessing and cursing from one and tho same mouth are
contrary to the course of nature, and argue the nature of man to be much out
of tune. Herein I am not of your mind. I am rather of Abraham's mind. If they
will not believe Moses and the Prophets, Luc. 16. 3.
neither will they believe, though a man rise from the dead. And yet a man
rising from the dead, were as fit to make faith of the state of the dead (in my
judgment) as these illustrations (secluding S. James his authority,) are of
force to prove, that it becomes not a man out of the same mouth to send forth
blessing and cursing. For fountains send forth water, and trees bring forth
fruit by necessity of nature: But man speaks by freedom of will; and as a man
may be induced to curse, so in case he curses, and be challenged for it by a
brother, he may answer as David did unto his brethren, And what have I 1 Samuel
17. 19.
now done? is there not a cause? For if all curses were causeless, Solomon
would never have told us, that The curse which is Pro. 26. 2.
causlesse shall not come. I never yet read of any that censured Elisha for
cursing the children that mocked him, saying, Come 2 King. 2. 23, 24.
up thou bald head, come up thou bald head; and indeed it is said, He cursed
them in the name of the Lord. And yet this curse of his had a very bloody
issue, two Bears coming out of the wood, and tearing forty two of them. And
in the book of Judges the Angel of the Lord bids the people curse Meroz.
Curse ye Meroz, says the Angel of the Lord; curse ye bitterly Judge. 5. 23
the inhabitants of Meroz, because they came not to help the Lord, to help
the Lord against the mighty. And as curses may have their due course, so
blessings may be causeless. For as for him that blesses himself in his
heart, when he hears the Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20.
word of Gods curse, saying, I shall have peace though I walk after the
stubbornness of my heart, herein he does but add drunkenness unto thirst,
and the Lord will not be merciful to that man. And if some do sin in
blessing themselves, how much more do others sin in blessing idols? We well
know that Esa. 66. 3.
out of our Saviors mouth came forth cursings sometimes, as well as blessings
at other times. For he cursed the figtree, and Matthew. 21. 19.
anon it withered. And therefore it were fit to distinguish between cursings
and cursings, yea and between blessings and blessings, lest otherwise we
confound truth and error, good and evil.

And to this purpose I think fit to distinguish between cursing as it
signifies only the pronouncing of a curse; and cursing, as it signifies
cursed speaking. And S. James, as I take it, speaks of cursing as it signifies
cursed speaking, and not as it signifies the bare pronunciation of a curse,
which may be done without cursed speaking, and in an holy manner, as when our
Savior cursed the figtree, and Elisha the children that mocked him, moved
undoubtedly thereunto extraordinarily by the Spirit of God. Like as when
profane persons bless themselves, and superstitious persons bless their
idols, their actions are unholy enough, and do bring the curse of God upon
their persons. For they shall multiply sorrow upon Psalm. 16. 4.
their heads that run after other gods. Now S. James uses fit similitudes to
illustrate this duty of blessed speaking, and to move them to refrain from
cursed speaking: considering that Gods Spirit is as a fountain of holy life in
their hearts; and therefore they should send forth nothing but sweet water, not
indifferently either sweet water only, or bitter water only, but sweet water,
and that only. And seeing they are trees of righteousness, of the Lords
planting, that he may be glorified: Esa. 61. 4
therefore to bring forth nothing but good fruit, but that of diverse kinds,
like unto that tree of life, that bare twelve manner of Revel. 22. 2.
fruits, and gave fruit every month.

And yet if sometimes they break forth into cursed speaking, it is the less
strong, considering they are in part carnal, Gal. 5. 23
and but in part, spiritual; and therefore in part out of tune, though nothing
like so much as they were in state of nature; when they sent forth nothing but
bitter water, neither blessing their brethren, nor God; no nor themselves
neither. Not one of these instances, say you, but holds as truly in God as in
man. He being the tree of life, cannot bring forth death. To cause the vine to
bring forth figs, were not so hard a point of husbandry, as to derive
cursednesse or misery from the fountain of bliss. For a spring to send forth
water sweet and bitter, fresh and salt, is more competible, then for hateful
and harmefull intentions, to have any issue from pure love. But God is love,
yea love is his essence as Creator. Why do you not speak plainly, and tell
us, that out of Gods mouth cannot proceed blessing and cursing? Yet the Lord
protests to Abraham, saying, Blessed shall he be that Genesis 12. 4. I will
bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee. Mal. 2. 2 Levit.
26 Deuteronomy. 28 Deuteronomy. 30. 19
blesses thee, and cursed shall he be that curses thee: And tells the Jews
to their face, that he would curse their blessings. Yea, that he had cursed
them already. And equally and indifferently, as God is made the Author of
blessing to the obedient, so is he made the Author of a curse to the
disobedient: and therefore calls heaven and earth to witness, that he has
set before them, life and death, blessing and cursing. So that death and
cursing is indifferently attributed to God, as the Author of them, like as life
and blessing; and both are in due proportion to the behavior of man, as it is
found, either in the way of obedience, or in the way of disobedience. And in
this respect perhaps you may say, that man is the cause of cursing, and not
God. To this I answer; 1. By the same reason, man is the cause of blessing
suitable to this cursing, and not God. 2. If in this respect, cursing be to be
derived from sin, it is only in the way of a meritorious cause; so does not
fruit proceed from trees, but only in the way of an efficient cause. God, and
none but God can be the Author, as of happiness, so of misery, as of eternal
life, so also of everlasting death. And as none is truly blessed, but whom God
blesses; so none is truly accursed, but whom God curses. Yet no man, I
think, that has his wits in his head, will say, that this cursing proceeds
from Gods love, but rather from his hatred. Gods love toward the creature is
essential, his love to the creature is not so, no more then to be a creator,
is of Gods essence. And love is no more of Gods essence as a Creator, then
hatred is of Gods essence as a revenger. And the blessing and cursing
attributed unto God in the Scriptures before alleged, belong to God only as a
Judge, to execute the one by way of reward, and the other by way of punishment.
Albeit there is another course of Gods blessing and of his cursing, though you
love not to distinguish, but to consound rather; as all that maintain bad
causes, love darkness rather then light. Ioh. 3. 19.


I come to the second point, wherein you insist, In that he is the Author of
being, he is the Author of goodness to all things that are. And this is very
true; for, God saw all that he had made, and lo it was very good. And as it is
very true, so it is nothing at Genesis 1. 31
all to the purpose. For when we enquire, whether Gods love be extended toward
all and every one, we presuppose their beings in their several times and
generations. And secondly, we speak of a love proper to mankind, which
consists not in giving them their being; for, God has given being unto
Angels, even unto Devils as well as unto men; and as to men, so to all
inferior creatures, be they never so noisome and offensive unto man. And it is
a strange course of yours, to magnify the love of God to man, in giving him
being, which is found in the basest creature that breathes, or breathes not. I
have heard a story of a great Prince, when one of the prime subjects of the
land, being taken in a foul act of insurrection, and yielding upon condition
to be brought to speak with that Prince, presuming of ancient favor, whereof
he had tasted in great measure, and which upon his presence might happily
revive, he found nothing answerable, but imperious ta^ts rather, and dismission
in this manner, Know therefore that we hate thee as we hate a toad. Yet you
magnify the love of God to mankind in as comfortable manner, when you say
that hoe has given us being, which we well know God has given to lions,
rigers, and beasts of prey; yea, to snakes and adders, to frogs and toads,
and fiery serpents.

Herehence you proceed to the third point, and do infer, That because he has
made us, therefore he loves us; for, He hates nothing that he has made, as
says the wise man: and to give the greater credit to the authority alleged by
you, you use an introduction of strange state; for you say, The wiseman says
this of him that is wisest of all, of him that can neither deceive, nor be
deceived, that, He hates nothing that he has made, But to what purpose tends
all this pomp? Is the sentence any whit of greater authority because it is
spoken of him that is wisest of all, and can neither deceive nor be deceived?
May not fools speak of him, that can neither deceive nor be deceived, as well
as wise men, and have their sayings any whit the greater credit and reputation
for this? If the author of that sentence had been such a one, as neither could
deceive nor be dedeceived, then indeed the sentence had been of greatest
authority, and infinitely beyond the authority of Philo the Jew. Or did you
presume that your Reader inconsiderately might swallow such a gull, and take
the author of it for such a one, as could neither deceive nor be deceived? If
you did, this were very foul play, and no better then a trick of conicatching.
Yet we except not against the sentence, but pray you rather to take notice of
an answer to this very objection of yours, taken from the same ground, above
two hundred years ago.

You shall find it in Aquinas his sums, where his first objection is this;
Videtur quod Deus nullum hominem reprobet. Aquin. 1. (...) 23. art. 3.
Nullus enim reprobat, quem diligit: sed Deus omnem hominem diligit, secundum
illud Sap. 11. Diligis omnia quae sunt, and nihil odisti eorum quae secisti.
Ergo Deus nullum hominem reprobat. It seems that God reprobates no man. For,
no man reprobates him whom he loves. But God loves every man according to
that, Wis. 11. Thou love all things that are, and hate nothing that thou
have made. Therefore God reprobateth no man. And the answer he makes unto this
objection follows in this manner, Adprimum dicendum, quod Deus omnes homines
diliget, and etiam omnes creaturas, in quantum omnibus vult aliquod bonum: Ibid.
non tamen quodcunque bonum vult omnibus. In quantum igitur quibusdam non vult
hoc bonum, quod est vita aeterna, dicitur eos habere odio velreprobare. To the
first is to be answered, that God loves all men, yea, and all creatures, for as
much as he wills some good to them all: but yet he wills not every good to
all. There-fore in as much as unto some he wills not this good, which is life
everlasting, he is said to hate them, or to reprobate them. And you might have
been pleased to take notice, not only of that wise man (though as wise as
Philo) who speaks herein of him that can neither deceive nor be deceived, but
of that wise God, who is wiser then men and Angels, and can neither deceive nor
be deceived, and affirms openly, that He has loved Jacob and hated Esau; as
also of the Apostle Saint Paul, who by the infallible direction of Gods Spirit,
applies this to the disposition of God toward them before they were borne. And
if to inflict the torments of hell upon these, or these for their sins be to
hate them; surely to intend to inflict the torments of hell upon them for their
sins, is to hate them. And seeing God from everlasting intended to do
whatsoever he does in time, it follows, that from everlasting he did hate
them.

Yet this truth you dare secretly to outface, without taking any notice of it.
But here you argue; well, let us consider it; For men to bless God and to
curse men, does argue a dissolution of that internal harmony which should be
in the humane nature: therefore for God to hate some men, and to love others,
would necessarily infer a greater distraction in the indivisible essence,
besides the contradiction which it implies to insinite goodness. This latter
clause is thrust in to make weight, and to turn the scale, but being nothing
save mere breath and air, makes it rather lighter. Like as when the Spaniard
to make his state weigh as much as the state of France, and finding that Spain
and other places News from Parnassus.
would not serve the turn, clapped in Millane and Naples into the balance,
whereupon it was found well the lighter. Yet I am content to consider that also
in its turn. But first of the argument. My answer hereunto is twofold: First,
as touching the antecedent; I say, and have already showed, that the passage of
James, whereat you aim, proceeds of cursing, only Iac. 3. 9.
as it signifies cursed speaking, not as it signifies the pronouncing of a
curse, which may be in an holy manner, it being clear, that both God and man;
both God the Father, and God the Son, may, and have pronounced curses in an
holy manner, without giving evidence of any dissolution of that internal
harmony which should be in them; and yet such a dissolution is to be
acknowledged to have its place more or less in the best of men in this world,
for they have flesh in them Gal. 5. 2^
as well as spirit, but neither is nor can be in God. Secondly, I deny the
consequence; for, it does not follow, that, because it is not lawful for man
to curse, therefore it is not lawful for God to curse. Are not Devils
accursed? At the day of judgment shall not our Savior pronounce that sentence
on thousands, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire? And why should this argue any
distraction in God, more then in a Judge that absolveth some, and condemns
others? So our Savior at the day of judgment will say unto some, Go ye
cursed into Matthew. 25.
everlasting fire: unto others, Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the
kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world. If you do not speak
of blessing and cursing in the way of execution of judgment and reward, what
mean you to walk thus in the cloud of generalities? If you speak not of
execution, but of intention: as God does execute judgments for sin, and
rewards of obedience; so does he from everlasting intend both the one and the
other, as it is impossible it should be otherwise. Your self acknowledging in
words Gods decrees to be eternal. And does it not become God from everlasting
to intend to proceed in the day of judgment, as before spoken of? As great a
divine as you are taken for, I much doubt you little understand the state of
the question, wherein you seem to oppose some body, for, I cannot be persuaded
you do wilfully dissemble it. But there is another course of Gods providence
in another matter, and far different from the execution of punishment and
reward, maintained by your opposites, and impugned by you: but you are loath to
be seen in your opposition therein, and to have your opinion known
particularly for fear lest the common voice should cry shame upon you, as upon
a professed Arminian, a manifest impugner of the sovereignty of God, in showing
mercy on Romans 9. 18
whom he will, and denying mercy to whom he will, and so hardening whom he
will. Now here you have no comparison to help your self withal, drawn from
the condition of man. For in man's power it is not, either to give grace, or to
deny it. But to the contrary we find, that Superiors have the dispensation
of favors and gratifications in their power, which they enlarge or restrain
at their pleasure, and extend to whom they will. How much more shall the Lord
of all take liberty unto himself, to have mercy on whom he will have mercy,
and to show compassion on whom he will show compassion; yea, and as to have
mercy on whom he will, so to harden whom he will also; and that I hope without
contradiction to his goodness, which you besides the word of God cast in, to
outface the proclamation of God himself. For as Gods goodness did not bind
him to make the world; so neither does it bind him to save the world. And as
when he made the world, he made as many creatures as he thought good; so in
saving the world, he saves as many creatures as he thinks good, both amongst
men and Angels, by giving grace to whom he will, and denying grace to whom he
will. When you say, that, To love the work of his own hands is more
essential to him that made all things out of his mere love, then it is unto
the fire to burn matter combustible. This speech of yours is a gross unsavory
speech, transforming God into a natural and necessary agent: for, it is well
known that the fire burns naturally and necessarily. And if God does more
essentially love his creatures, then he must naturally and necessarily preserve
them in being, and cannot destroy them And because it is out of the same love
that you derive the creation of the world, it follows, that God was
necessitated by the necessity of nature to make the world; and consequently
that the world was everlasting without beginning, and so shall continue without
end. Behold the flowers that grow in the paradise of your contemplation, fitter
for Aristotle's Physics, or Metaphysics, then for the meditations of a
Christian Divine, as being fit only to make a nosegay for the Devil. The love
of God toward himself is essential, toward his creatures is merely
accidental. He needed not to have made them, neither is it any whit necessary
that he should preserve them. And as creation and preservation are attributed
of extrinsecall denomination unto God, so is his love toward his creatures
also. Neither was it out of love to the creature that he made the world, but
out of love to himself, as who is the end of all. For, both Solomon
professes, that God Prove. 16. 4
made all things for himself: and Saint Paul likewise gives us to understand,
that as things are from him, so all things are for him Romans 11. last.
also. But Gods love is infinite, therefore, say you, it extends to all, seeing
all are less then infinite. A proper argument, and as well suitable unto your
text, which undertaketh only to show, that Gods love is infinite to mankind.
And this argument proves as well, that it is extended to frogs and toads; to
Angels and Devils, as well as to mankind. This is only to profess, that it
extends to all. Now this is a very improper interpretarion of infinite love:
for less love, and less liberality, may extend to more then greater love, and
greater liberality: for he that gives ten shillings to one person, is more
liberal, then that divides five shillings amongst threescore persons, in
giving them a penny apiece. Lastly, the fruit of this love can be but being: and
is it not a proper commendation of Gods infinite love toward mankind, to say
that he gives being unto all? And does Gods love to man appear more herein,
then to the vilest creature that is?

2 In the next Section you discourse at large after your manner of the
amplitude of Gods love in comparison, which is nothing at all to your purpose,
whose chief aim is to insinuae, that Gods love is alike to all.

Yet having proceeded thus far, my resolution is to go on, and to consider
what you bring. What think you of Adams love in the state of innocence, was it
perfect, or no? Though without sin awhile, yet he fell into sin: so did
the Angels before him, so should we, though as perfect as they, if God should
not uphold us. Yet our love in greatest perfection could not be so much as a
shadow of Gods love, there being no resemblance between them: our love being a
love of duty, Gods love to us of mere grace and mercy. Besides, between the
fruits of Gods love to us, and the fruits of our love toward God, no color of
resemblance. Man is bound heartily to desire the good of all; but God is free,
and has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens. Many widows
were in Israel in the days of Elias, when Luc. 4. 25. 26. 27.
heaven was shut three years and six months, and great famine was throughout
all the land: But unto none of them was Elias sent, save unto Sarepta a city of
Sidone, unto a certain widow. Also many lepers were in Israel in the days of
Elesaeus the prophet, yet none of them was made clean but Naaman the Syrian.
And if Gods will had been to do the best that might be, he could have cured
no doubt all other lepers as well as Naaman, and succored other widows as well
as the widow of Sarepta. Yet I confess, Gods good will exceeds ours, not
intensively only, but extensively also: for not a sparrow falls to the
ground Matthew. 10. 29.
without the providence of our heavenly Father: he saves both man and beast,
and hears the young Ravens that call Psalm. 36. 6. and 147. 9. and 145. 15.
upon him: the eyes of all do wait upon the Lord, and he gives them their
meat in due season.

And as touching the conferring both of grace and glory, therein he saves
more then we know, or are acquainted with. The number of the children of
Israel, is as the sand of the sea that cannot be counted for multitude. As
touching Hos. 1. last.
temporal blessings, all partake of his goodness therein, in their natural
preservation and consolation; therein we must imitate him in doing good to
all, as it lies in our power, though chiefly to the household of faith, yet not
to them only, Gal 6. 10. Luc. 10. 30.
but to others also. But though he causes his sun to shine, and his rain to
fall upon the just and unjust; yet pronounces not the sentence of salvation on
all promiscuously, whether they be just, or unjust.

And whereas all are equally corrupt in state of nature, yet he does not
equally show mercy on all, or bestow the means of grace on all; or where he
does bestow these means of salvation, he does not make them effectual unto
us. He blindes the eyes, and hardens the hearts of some, that they should not
see with Ioh. 12. 40.
their eyes, nor understand with their hearts, and be converted, that he might
heal them. Whereby it comes to pass, that the word of God, though it be the
savor of life unto life unto some, yet it 2 Cor. 3.
is the savor of death unto death unto others; and the Ministers of God are a
good savor unto God in both; even both in them that are saved, and in them
that perish. For God made all Pro. 16. 4.
things for himself, even the wicked against the day of evil. Mercy, you
say, is not restrained from ill deservers in distress, so long as the exercise
of it breeds no harm to such as are more capable of bountiful love and favor.

This is a consideration, which I confess has place among men sometimes, and
in some cases. Yet hardly can I devise how to suit with a fit instance. For no
states (for ought I find) do take notice of any such distinction of times,
wherein the exercise of mercy will not breed harm, and wherein it will, but
they execute condign punishment upon malefactors according to the laws, that
all may see, and fear to do the like; not be encouraged malorum facta
imitari, but rather eorum Deuteronomy. 17. 13.
exitus perhorrescere. God does not so. His patience and long suffering is
exceeding great; yet if he should give every man repentance in his death bed,
and save their souls, what one in the world should be the worse for this? And
though the wicked many times spend their days in mirth, and suddenly Job 21.
13.
go down to the grave; yet by the grace of God we shall be nothing the worse
for this, nor provoked hereupon to condemn Psalm. 73. 15.
the generation of Gods children. Yet what is it that makes one man more
capable of bountiful love and favor then another I know not: what makes him
more capable of love in the execution of reward, I know; but what makes him
more capable of love in the communication of grace, and in showing mercy
toward him, I know not. Sure I am, that woman who had many sins forgiven
her, loved so much the more, the ninety nine just persons that think they need
no repentance, Luc. 7. 47. Luc. 15. 7.
like enough love so much the less.

It is true, the laws of States take order for the just execution of
punishment upon offenders for the common good; yet by your leave, Kings on
earth, by their absoluteness do give pardons to whom they will, respecting
more their own pleasure then the common good. And withal I think Princes do
less offend (if at all offend) in refusing to pardon malefactors, then in
granting pardons unto them. As for God, to whom you say the execution of
justice is unnatural, he being the Father of mercy; I pray consider, if God
should give repentance to all on their deathbeds, and consequently save all,
what common good of mankind would be hindered by this? And as God is the father
of mercy, so is he also the Judge of all the world, and I conceive the
execution of justice punitive to be as natural to him, as he is Judge of all
the world; as the Genesis 18. 25
execution of mercy is natural unto him, as he is the Father of mercy. Yet you
seem to have a place of Scripture to prove a notorious untruth; as namely,
that the execution of justice punitive is unnatural unto God; and that is out
of Lament. 3. 33. He does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of
men. Thus you take Scripture hand over head to serve your turn. But I pray
consider, is it possible that God should do any thing against his will? men
may have reluctations, and conflicts in them, and do things volentes nolentes;
is such a condition possible to be found in the nature of God? Yet in this case
Aristotle has defined the action to be simply voluntary, Eth. 3.
and done willingly. If God be represented sometimes unto us as it were
fluctuating like men between different resolutions of executing either mercy
or justice, as in the Prophet, How shall I give thee up Ephraim, how shall I
deliver thee Israel? Hos. 11. 8.
how shall I make thee as Admah, how shall I set thee as Zeboim? mine heart is
turned within me, and my repentances are rolled together; like as he is
represented unto us, as well in the shape of the members of our body, as of the
passions of our mind; we have cause rather to take notice hereby of the
goodness of God in condescending thus far to our infirmities, to make us the
better acquainted with him, and the more sensible of his favor, then hereby to
take occasion to fashion God like unto our selves, either in body or mind. Yet
the meaning of the Prophet is plain enough, namely, that God comes not to
afflict his children, unless he be provoked by sin, and herein he differs
from earthly parents, who sometimes chasten their children for their own
pleasures; but God as he does not, Heb. 12. 10
but in case he is provoked; so he does it for our profit, as the Apostle
tells us in the same place. To do a thing willingly has the same
signification with the Latin phrase, animi causa, that is, when nothing is the
cause thereof but a man's own will, as Causabon observes out of Seneca de
beneficiis 4. whose In Characteres Theophrasti, page 172.
opinion was, Neminem adeo a naturali lege descivisse, and hominem exuisse ut
animi causa malus sit.

You further say, that Nothing can provoke good men to execute punitive justice
upon offenders, but the good of others, deserving either better, or not so ill,
which might grow worse and worse through evil doers impunity. I pray consider,
do parents chastise their children for the good of others, and not for the
good of the children themselves? God himself chastises his own children all
manner of ways, and is this for the good of others that deserve better, or not
so ill? and not rather for the good of those his own children themselves? No
chastising for the present Heb. 12. 11.
is joyous, says the Apostle, but grievous, but afterward it brings forth
the quiet fruit of righteousness to them that are exercised thereby. Mark I
pray, To them that are exercised thereby, he does not say that this fruit is
brought forth to others.

As for the torments in the world to come, who is the better for them, unless
they tend to the improvement of joy in those blessed ones, while they behold in
others that misery which only by the grace of God, themselves have escaped.
For as for any other welfare of the Saints of God, or any welfare at al of the
damned crew, or avoidance of grievances that is procured by the damnation of
the wicked, if you know, it is well, but I assure you it is more then I can
divine of. Yet do we not say, that God has pleasure in the torture either of
men or devils, but only in the demonstration of his own glorious justice
toward them, and in the magnifying of his mercy so much the more toward his
Saints.

You say, It goes against the nature of God to punish the works of his own
hands. A vile speech, and withal senseless; and no marvel if when men
prostitute all honesty and the fear of God in opposing manifest truth, they
lose their wits also, and fall upon most unsober meditations. For what a vile
speech is it to say, that any work of God goes against his nature, who as the
Apostle professes, works all things according to the counsel of his will.
Then again, what a senseless speech Ephesians. 1. 11.
is it to insinuate, that it were not so contrary to GODS nature, to deal thus
with those creatures which were not the works of his own hands; but being the
works of his own hands, you say, it is against his nature to punish them. A
wonderful assertion, and whereat the most barbarous people might be astonished
in the consideration of the impiety, shall I say? or the insulsity thereof, or
both rather, namely, that it should be against Gods nature to punish sinners.
For it is well known that God punishes none other, nor ever did; Christ Jesus
the Son of God only excepted. And what a field have you here to expatiate in
if you list to aggravate the unnaturalness of any action in God? And with as
little sobriety do you amplify that unnaturalness in God by the
consideration of man especially, as who (you say) is more dear to him then any
child is to his Father. So then to punish others, you are willing to grant not
to be so unnatural an action in God, as the punishing of man. And I pray what
are those other creatures? Are they inferior, as Oxen and Sheep, and all
these never sinned; yet is it not unnatural to punish them, if punishment may
have place (as being taken for the afflicting of them) where there is no sin.
For God gives us leave to wear them out, with plowing, carrying, riding, for
our necessity, for our d^light; yea to set one creature upon another, the
greyhound upon an hare, upon a dear, the hawk upon a partridge, or phesant,
or wild foul. No unnaturalness do we exercise in all this, such is the
liberty which God has given unto us. But yet to punish man, though a sinner,
(for he punishes no other) this how greatly (say you) does it go against the
nature of God? It seems you cannot tell how greatly; neither can I help you
herein. For I do not see how it is against his nature at all. But you seem to
give a reason, in saying that God is loving kindness it self. But I pray
consider, is he not justice it self also as well as loving kindness? and is
it against the nature of Justice to punish sinners? no nor against his loving
kindness neither. For I hope that no attribute of God is contrary to another,
though according to their different notions, some actions are more suitable to
the one, then to the other. And why man should have more special consideration
here then Angels, I know no reason. For if you say that God is the father of
man, in as much as he has created him, by the same reason he may be the father
of the ignoblest creature that is. To say that God is the father of man, in as
much as he made him after his own image, this is no more true of man, then of
Angels, even of the very Angels of darkness. And men also are borne the
children of darkness, and so continue until the time that God calls them,
and enlightneth them. Or will you say that in special sort he is the father of
man, by way of redemption; yet I find hitherto in your discourse no intimation
of this fatherhood. But will you say that all and every one have redemption in
Christ through his blood? you may as well say, that all and every one have the
Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14.
remission of their sins in Christ thorough his blood. For this is it which
in Scripture phrase is meant by redemption. Arminius who maintains that Christ
dyed for all and every one, professes plainly, that the immediate effect of
Christ's passion is but this, that God now may, his Justice nothing hindering
him, give pardon of sins and salvation, upon what condition he will. Which
upon the matter is all one, as if he should say, that seeing faith and
repentance are the conditions whereupon God gives forgiveness of sins, none
but such as believe and repent do obtain the forgiveness of sins, that is,
do obtain redemption in Christ, through his blood. Now consider, are not
faith and repentance the gifts of God? It cannot be denied but they are; the
Scriptures evidently Ephesians. 2. 8. Act. 5. 39. Act. 11 18. 2 Timothy 2. last.
give testimony hereunto, namely that faith is the gift of God, that repentance
is the gift of God. And does God give faith and repentance unto all? All
experience of the world does manifest that he does not; no nor so much as the
outward means unto all, whereby faith and repentance are wrought. I wonder you
blush not in setting down such incongruities; as first, in saying that God as
he is willing to be called the father of the sons of men, so he is ready to
do the kind office of a father unto them: and for proof hereof allege that
of the Psalmist, As a father pitieth his own children, so the Lord pitieth
them that fear him. In which passage, the fatherly love of God is not extended
unto all, but restrained to those that fear him. And yet I pray consider, what
father would torment his children with everlasting fire, though never so
unnatural toward him? or would not keep him from it, if it lay in his power,
without sinning against God? Yet God torments even those whom you call his
children, justly for their sins, in the torments of hell fire, that never
shall have end. We willingly grant the love of God the Father, and the love of
God the Son is such a love as passes knowledge; but it is enlarged only
toward Ephesians. 3. 19. Gal. 3. 26.
those that are his children by faith in Christ Jesus. This is the filiation
alone which the Apostle takes notice of; you take no notice of this at all. And
again, Because ye are sons, God has sent Gal. 4. 6.
the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father. Now is this
common unto all, as you make Gods fatherhood common unto all? So says the
Apostle in another place, As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the
sons of God. Romans 8. 14
Here is a description of that sonneship we have in respect of our heavenly
Father. And again, The Spirit of God witnesses Romans 8. 16
with our spirits that we are the sons of God. Of these passages I sinde no
account made throughout this whole discourse of yours. And toward these sons
of God, we shall willingly give you leave to extend and intend the love of God
as much as you think fit. But you still continue to extend the fatherhood of
God unto all, as it were in despite of all these passages formerly alleged.
Where do you find throughout the Scriptures, that the title of the sons of
God is attributed to the uncircumcised, or to the Heathen? To the contrary we
read both before the flood, that The sons of God saw Genesis 6. 2.
the daughters of men that they were fair: where we have a manifest
distinction opposite to your confusion: And after; for this is the message
which God sent unto Pharaoh, Israel is my son, even my first borne, -- and if
thou refuse to let him go, I will Exo. 4. 22.
slay thy son, even thy first borne. How much more under the Law? Is Ephraim
my dear son, or pleasant child? yet since I spoke unto him, I still
remembered him; therefore my bowels are Ier. 31. 20.
troubled for him, I will surely have compassion on him, says the Lord. Most
of all under the Gospel: Behold what love the Fathe, 1 Ioh. (...). 1.
has showed us, that we should be called the sons of God. What have you
here said of Gods love to man, that may not as well be said of his love to the
very Angels of darkness? For is it not true in respect of them as well as in
respect of us, that having given them being, he does much more love them, after
they are enstamped with his image. For he sowes not wheat to reap tares; nor
did he give life to Angels that he might bring forth death. God gave both man
and Angels life for the manifestation of his own glory; and for the
manifestation of his own glory does he punish transgressors amongst men and
Angels with everlasting death.

3. You would willingly draw Heathens to the acknowledgement of this fatherhood
in God toward all; though thinking it too narrow to comprehend all references
of loving kindnesses between him and demi gods, which demi gods you take to be
men. I think rather they were conceived to be inferior spirits; like as
Aristotle makes all inferior intelligences to depend upon the first mover. And
what reference of loving kindness is comprehended in this, that Jupiter is
said to be both male and female, you may at leisure dilate of when you please.
Gods affection to his children exceeds the affection of any mother toward the
fruit of her womb. For God was content to purchase his Church with Act. 20. 23
his own blood. Your next sentence contains mere non sense: I rectify it
thus; And as if his love could not be sufficiently expressed by these dearest
references amongst men, etc. he has chosen the most affectionate female, etc.
Thus I make sense of it; but the poorest sense that ever was vented in so grave
a matter of discourse. As if the greatness of place, or curiosity of education
did make mothers so little compassionate toward their children, that God is
feign to seek out for more proper resemblances. Thus you fetch about for
matter, as Balaam did for divinations; as if there were no women in the world,
but delicate Ladies, or such nice and curious dames, whose niceness has made
them so unnatural, that our Savior was driven to compare his tender affection
unto the affectionof a hen toward her chicken; which creature is magnified by
you (to hold up the jest) for the most affectionate female amongst reasonlesse
creatures: implying that reasonable creatures may in tenderness of affection
right well exceed the hen, and so you quite mar your own play. But where
do you find (if a man might be so bold to ask) that an hen is so
superlative a creature in her affection toward her chicken? I can hardly
believe that either Aristotle or Pliny has afforded you any such observation,
but rather your comment upon them, or upon the book of Nature. What? is an
henue more affectionate to her young ones, then a Pelican is to hers, who is
said to let her self blood to feed them? or then a Storke, that has her name
from (...), and in the Hebrew is called (...), which is a word near of kin
to (...), bowels of compassion, as which indeed are most tender in her. A story
whereof we have in the description of the Netherlands: namely, of a Storke,
that when the house was on fire where her nest was, kept the fire off from her
young ones with her own body and wings so long till she was burnt her self.

Still you proceed in amplyfying the love of God, nothing to the purpose. For
the question is not, how great Gods love is toward those on whom it is placed;
but whether it extend to all or no? You say, All the sweet fruits and comforts
of love, whether of fathers and mothers toward their children, or of husbands
towvrd their wives, or of brethren to brethren, sisters to sisters, or of one
friend to another (their sinfulness excepted) are but distillations or
infusions of his infinite love to our nature. We well know, the love of God
exceeds all this; bu^ I verily think your pen has run riot ere you are
aware, and you have written you know not, or you consider not what. For,
herehence it follows, that there is no act so abominable of the will of the
creature, but God may infuse it, the sinfulness only thereof excepted; which
yet is a very sorry exception. for sinfulnes is not a thing that can be infused
by God, Angel, or man. Of old is was determined by Austine, that sin has De
civit. Dei, lib. (...) cap. 7
not causam efficientem, but deficientem only.

And herein you manifestly contradict your self, as who maintain, that
whosoever is the author of the act, must therewithal be the author of the
sinnefullnesse thereof, for as much as sinfulness does result (relative like)
upon position of the foundation. And of this kind of argument I have found you
wondrous confident, in a certain treatise of yours, though a very weak
argument, and long ago proposed and answered by Capreolus, and whose answer
thereunto is again rehearsed by Soncinas.

But here I show only how you make no bones of contradicting your self very
handsomely, in saying, God does infuse an act which is sinful, though not the
sinfulness of it. The love of God (you say) though infinitely increased in
every particular, and afterward made up in one, could no way equalize Gods
love toward every particular soul created by him. Thus you steal up, without
all proof, the extention of Gods love to every particular; and that in
infinite manner. Whereas the Scripture professes as plainly, that God has
hated Esau, as that he has loved Jacob. And seeing Gods love can be but
infinite toward his elect, and toward his dearest Son, and toward
himself, you make it infinite toward the very reprobates, whether men or
devils: for every particular of them has been created by him. Is not this
good divinity, and very comfortable divinity? Yet no Arminian will say, that
God so loved the Angels that were fallen, that he sent his Son to die for
them. When you say, The creatures for fear do not so much good for their
little ones as they might; not so much for the model of their wit or strength,
as God for his part (though infinite in wisdom and power) does for the sons
of men. As he said of his Bore that was sent him, Noster te non capit ignis
conturbator Aper, so may I say of this your eloquence, that it passes mine
intelligence. I can neither construe your sentence, nor correct it.

To say that the creature cannot do so much for his young as God does for the
sons of men, is so vulgar a truth, that when you introduce it with such
pomp and state, I may well say', Tu pulicem Gaure giganta facis: yet the
adversative interposed (Though infinite in wisdom and power) has no
congruity to this sense neither; for Gods infinite wisdom and power is no
adversative to this I trow, but rather a coroborative thereunto. Be it that
God had done as much as could be done for his unfruitful vineyard, what is
this to prove, that Gods love extends to all? whereas the place it self does
manifestly restrain this love of God unto his vineyard. Yet what is there
mentioned besides the well husbanding of this vineyard; wherein he appeals to
their consciences, whether a better course could be devised then he had taken
for the well husbanding thereof. But I pray consider, does the work of grace
extend no further then to planting and watering? Is it not God that gives the
increase also? Is it not in Gods 1 Cor. 3. 6.
power to give faith, to give repentance? you that will have God to infuse that
love in carnal men, which is found to be sinful, and not to infuse the
sinfulness thereof, cannot endure that God should infuse faith and repentance
into the heart of man. But if God can do this, surely he can do more then
ought that is expressed in that song of God concerning ^s. 5. 1. etc.
his vineyard. Yet it is true, that in the way of outward husbandry, Gods
course was without all exception, neither could the wisdom of man devise a
better course for God to take, then was that which he took with them. And
therefore you have small cause to charge your adversaries with such sorry
shifts, so atheistical, as if we thought Gods serious protestations deserved
no credit with us. These are fictions of course, proceeding from an addle
brain, to supply the room of so and arguments.

And surely, did we not believe Gods serious protestations, why should we
regard his oath? For, amongst men, he that is found to be no man of his word,
is usually little regarded for his oath. Gods word, without protestation, is,
and ever shall be through his grace, sufficient ground of our faith in him.
Look you unto it that you hunt not after some other foundation, the tenor of
whose discourse in many places, and in this very place, treating of his
infinite love to all and every one, runs in a current of manifest opposition
against the word of God: though now and then you have a snatch at it, and away,
like the dog at the river Nilus, for fear of the Crocadile; and content your
self only with a superficial consideration of it, as in this place, like as
in the former. For what? is this spoken indifferently of all? of the Gentiles
as well as of the Jews? It is manifestly spoken of the house of Israel,
concerning whom the Lord asks this question, Why will ye die ye house of
Israel? And the whole proceeds by way of answer to their murmuring against
the providence of God, in saying, The fathers have eaten sower grapes, and the
childrens teeth are set on edge; and hereupon God proceeds to justify the
course of his providence unto their face. Now when God does not take men upon
the hippe, as soon as they have sinned against him, but spares them, and not
only gives them space of repentance, but uses means to bring them unto
repentance, by sending Prophets unto them to admonish them, to admonish them of
their sins, and to denounce the judgments of God against them; is not this a
manifest evidence that God is not delighted in their death, but rather in their
repentance, although he still reserves liberty to himself to bestow the gift
of repentance on whom he will? And therefore all this is only in respect of his
church, not in respect of those who are strangers from the common wealth of
Israel, and aliens from the covenants of promise. then concerning those within
the church, All are not Israel, that are of Israel, Romans 9. And though the
means of grace have their course withal, yet God intends to make them
effectual only with his elect, according to that, As many as Act. 13. 4^ Romans
9. 30
were ordained to eternal life believed; and whom he has predestined, them
has he called, and justified, and glorified. For as Austine says,
Quantamlibet praebuerit patientiam, nisi Deus dederit. Aug. cont. Julian.
Pelag. lib. 5. cap. 4. Ibid.
quis aget poenitentiam: And speaking of the Non pradestinatis. Istorum
neminem, says he, adducit Deus ad salubrem spiritatemque poenitentiam, qua
homo reconciliatur Deo in Christo sive illis ampliorem patientiam, sive non
imparem praebeat. Therefore we say, that as concerning the elect, though they
sin, yet God wills not their death, but wills their repentance, and their
salvation. But as touching others who are mixed amongst them, as tares amongst
the wheat, and are partakers of the same means of grace and invitations unto
repentance; in as much as he spares them, and gives them not only time to
repent, but admonishes them of their sins, and affords them the outward
means of repentance, it is sufficient to justify, that God does not willingly
bring judgment upon them, neither for their sins, because he comes not
hastily thereunto, but upon wilful despising of the means of grace, used to
reclaim them; like as before I showed in what sense God is said, not to
afflict the sons of men willingly. And as for this present place, your self
elsewhere has interpreted it thus, I will not the death of an impenitent
sinner, but that God wills undoubtedly the death of an impenitent sinner. To
quash this construction in this place, you say, this oath of God proceeds as
concerning those, who all their life long have hated him. Here I am persuaded
we shall find no little inconsiderateness.

To hate God all a man's life time, what is it but to hate him from the first
hour of coming to the use of reason, unto the last, even unto the moment of
death? now I pray consider, Will not God the death of such a one as dies in
impenitencie? The text I confess runs thus, I will not the death of him that
dies. But do you think indeed the meaning is, that as for such a man as now
dies, and has lived all his life time in the hatred of God, God will not the
death of such a one? Like enough you are content your Reader should entertain
such a conceit. But I cannot be persuaded you take this to be the meaning.
The text is manifestly against it; for it follows, But rather that he return
and live; so that it is spoken of a man living, and such as is capable of
repentance. And we know, the whole Chapter is to justify Gods providence in
afflicting men with his judgments: so that to die in this place, is to be
under the afflicting hand of God, and so in the way to death and to destruction.

Our living is reputed a continual dying; for as much as nature consumes and
wastes, as the Poet wittily expresses it; Childehood ends in youth,
And youth in old age dies;
I thought I lived in truth,
But now I die, I die; I see,
Each age of death is one degree*


Whereupon he concludes his resolution to correct his former phrase of speech,
saying, Farewell the doting score
Of worlds Arithmaticke:
Life, I Will trust thee no more;
But henceforth, for thy sake,
I Will go by deaths new Almanaeke.
-- For while I sing,
A thousand men lie sick, a thousand bells doring.


And would you know what is the difference between me and them; They are but
dead, and I dying.


So that I guess your meaning according to the articles of your own creed, is
but this; That Gods love is such to them that all their life past (not simply
all their life, but all their life past) have hated him, that, He will not
their death, but rather that they return and live. And I grant, that this is
true of many in most proper speech, namely, of all the elect of God, though it
be long ere God calls and converteth some of them. Of others also that live
in the Church, I have showed, how it may have course in the same sense, that
God is said, not so much willingly to afflict them for their sins, as for
refusing to repent and turn unto God after they have sinned.

When you tell us of infinite places more of sacred texts, and those most
perspicuous in themselves, and also that, The whole ancient Church, with some
small exception, which yet may be counterpoised, is ready to give joint
verdict for you, it savoureth hotly of Smithfield eloquence; Pessima quo vendas
opus est mangone perito
Qui Smithfieldensi polleat eloquio.


Yet it was an old observation, Multa fidem promissa levant cum before aequo,
Laudat venales qui vult extrudere merces.


If you had some about you to justfie you in cleanly manner by some pretty
qualification, it had been absolute. As the Gentleman who professed that he
had certain ponds wherein Carpes were taken as big as that Somer-pole which
he then rode by; and withal asked his man that rode with him, whether it were
not so. Sir, quoth his man, though they were so big, yet I am sure they were
nothing like so long: and indeed, the dimension of length is more suitable to
the proportion of an Eele, then of a Carpe. As Cicero answered him that told a
strange tale concerning the length of certain Eeles which he had seen: for
Tully handsomely to convince him of his vanity, made show of going beyond him
in his own element of tossing; and forthwith replied, saying, That is nothing
strange, for I know a place where Eeles are taken, of such a length that they
use to make their Angling-rods of them. And this assertion of yours may come as
here to the truth, as an Eele is to an Angling rod.

CHAP. XV.
What the Church of England does teach concerning the extent of Gods love: Of
the distinction of Singula generum, and Genera singulorum. Of the distinction
of Voluntas signi, and Voluntas beneplaciti.

WHat you mean by a course of Compromising contentions between some other
reformed Churches, in certain points of religion, I know not, neither am I
acquainted with any such course. I conceive our Church to be as absolute and
entire in maintaining the prerogative, as of Gods grace effectual to every
good action; so of his soveraignetie in electing whom he will, according to his
good pleasure, and passing by others, as any Church in Christendom; which I do
not speak upon, snatching of a clause here and there to be found in the
litturgie of our Church, whereunto I shape at pleasure an interpretation as I
think good (as your fashion is) but this I speak upon consideration of that
doctrine which is positively set down in the articles of religion, manifestly
containing the profession of the Church of England. Yet you would persuade your
Readers, the Church of England concurreth with you, in extending the love of
God toward all. But you manifest a faint heart in the maintenance of your
cause, by walking in the clouds of generalities; as if you feared to come to
the light, and had a purpose rather to circumvent your reader then to
endoctrinate him. You talk of Gods unspeakable love toward mankind, but you
define not in what kind, but keep your self a loose off for all advantages.

We acknowledge Gods love to all in respect of conferring upon them blessings
temporal, and that in an unspeakable manner. But the question only is, whether
God does bestow, or ever did intend to bestow grace of sanctification upon all,
or salvation upon all. If Gods love in these respects, in your opinion does
extend to all, say plainly that God has elected all with Huberus, and
predestined all. For predestination in Austines divinity is but praeparatio
gratiae and gloriae. Now the Church of England, in her public and authorized
doctrine; plainly professes, that God has predestined none, but those whom
he has chosen in Christ, as vessels of honor. If you say, that the reason
why God did not predestinate all, nor elect all in Christ, proceeds not from
the mere pleasure and free disposition of God, but that only upon the
foresight of the obedience of the one, and disobedience of the other he elected
those, and reprobated these (for hereunto the Genius of your Tenent carries
you, though you are loath in plain terms to profess as much) let any man
judge whether this be suitable to the seventeenth Article of religion in our
Church, whereupon Rogers in his Analesis thereof published by authority, and
dedicated to Archbishop Bancroft, observes in his fifth proposition, that, In
Christ Jesus of the mere will and purpose of God, some are elected and not
others unto salvation. And he just fieth it by holy Scripture, Romans 9. 11. that
the purpose of God might remain according to election, not of works, but of
him that calls, Ephesians. 1. 5. Who does predestinate us, according to the good
pleasure of his will, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Not according to our works, but according
to his own purpose and grace, Exodus 33. 19. Romans 9. 15. I will show mercy to
whom I will show mercy, Prove. 16. 4. The Lord has made all things for
himself, even the wicked against the day of evil, Romans 9. 21. Has not the
potter power over the clay, to make of the same lump one vessel to honor,
and another to dishonor.

But consider the Article it self, They which are endued with so excellent a
benefit (to wit, as election and predestination is) are called according to
Gods purpose by his spirit, working in due season; they through grace obey
their calling, they be justified freely, they be made sons of God by
adoption; they be made like the image of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ,
they walk religiously in good works, and at length by Gods mercy they attain
to everlasting felicity. Whereby it appears, that election and predestination
is made the fountain and cause of obedience, and perseverance therein even
unto everlasting life; whereas if God did elect and predestinate any man unto
salvation upon foresight of obedience and perseverance; our obedience and
perseverance should be the cause of our election and predestination, rather
then our election and predestination the cause of our obedience and
perseverance.

Again consider, these alone whom God has elected in Christ, and
predestined, are noted to be made in due time the sons of God by adoption.
But you make all to be the sons of God, and Gods infinite love in
unspeakable manner to be enlarged toward all and every one; even toward them
that have hated God all their life.

Lastly, only the elect are here noted to be those vessels whom God has made
unto honor; not that any others are made unto honor: which is nothing
answerable to your tenet. But proceed we along with you. You undertake to prove
that Gods love is extended to mankind, which no Christian ever called in
question; but your meaning is, that it extends to all and every one of
mankind, and that so far forth as to will the salvation of all and every
one, as appears by the sequel, and all this out of the public and
authorized doctrine of our Church. And yet you insist only upon certain
passages and prayers in the Liturgy of our Church. The Liturgy I hope is not
the doctrine of our Church, though it be not contradictory to our doctrine. But
therein we have been content to conform unto the practice of the Chuch, so
far forth as it might seem tolerable, and such as might be performed with a
good conscience, which yet if in any particular it be found dissonant from the
Articles of Religion, it is rather to receive correction from the Articles,
then the Articles to receive correction from the Liturgy.

But consider we what is that which you plead for your self. You enter upon
it after your course with great state, discovering unto us a wonderful
providence of God, in drawing those Articles; for you tell us, that No
National Council, though assembled for that purpose, could fit their doctrine
more expressly to meet with all the late restrictions of Gods love, then the
Church our Mother, even from the beginning of reformation, has done, as if she
had then foreseen a necessity of declaring her judgment in this point, for
preventing schisms or distractions of opinions amongst her sons. Here we
have a pretty Comedy toward, and you have a poetical wit for fiction. Had our
Church foreseen a necessity of declaring her judgment in this point, where I
pray was it fit that she should do this, but in the Articles of Religion? But
you find no place where she has fitted her doctrine to meet with the
restrictions of Gods love, but in the Liturgy and Catechism. Was that think
you a fit place to fit her doctrine for the preventing of schisms and
distractions in opinion?

Again, had she intended to prevent (as you say) distractions in opinion about
the extension of Gods love, would she not have done it rather expressly, then
only in such a manner as to leave it to others to draw conseque^s therefrom,
for the manifesting of her opinion about the large extent of Gods love to
mankind? Who would think that a sober man should be carried away with such
vain and frivolous presumptions, without all tolerable ground? But let us come
to the particular scanning of the places. All of them, I mark, are only the
expression of prayer for others. Whence it no way follows, that God will
therefore save them, because we pray for their salvation. The child prays
for his father, the father for the child, the brother for the brother; but
hence it follows not that God will save them; though we are bound to pray
for the salvation of one another.

Moses prayed God to wipe him out of the book of life, rather then to destroy
his people in the wilderness. God had no such resolution, and what sober
Divine could doubt, but that Moses knew well that this could not be, yet he
shows hereby what his desire was, secluding the consideration of Gods will to
the contrary, and what he would prefer, ^f he were left to himself, even
his own eternal confusion, rather then the glory of God should be obscured.
And who ever censured this prayer of Moses for sin? I am sure God does not:
so S. Paul could wish himself separate from Christ for his brethrens sake,
which were his kinsmen according to the flesh, Romans 9. 2. yet he well knew that
nothing could separate him from the love of God in Christ. Our Savior in like
sort well knew that the cup must not pass from him, yet nevertheless he
prayed earnestly that that cup might pass, if it were possible, and with
final submission of his will to the will of his Father.

The first place you allege, is that passage of the Liturgy, where we pray
unto God, that it may please him to have mercy upon all men. And for good
reason do we pray so: for is not every one bound to seek the salvation of all
men, as much as lies in his power? did not the Apostles labor for this in
their place? And is not prayer a special means for this? We are bound to pray
for them that persecute us, we are bound Mat. 5. 4^.
to pray for them that hate us. For what, if God will not save all, and we
know so much, shall that hinder us from doing our duty in seeking by all means
the salvation of all: specially considering we are not able to put a difference
and to discern who are elect, and who are not. S. Paul, though he saved 1.
Cor. 9. 2^.
but some, yet would he become all things unto all men that he might save them.
Yet he well knew that the word in his mouth was the savor of death unto death
unto many; yea 2. Cor. 2. 10.
to Israel in special manner, and yet notwithstanding his hearty desire and
prayer unto God for Israel wa^, that they might Romans 11* (...)
be saved. And albeit God should save all, and every one that live in some one
time or age, yet were this ^o prejudice to the doctrine of election. For the
number of Gods chosen, for all this might be but few in comparison to the
reprobate: And therefore we see no cause why you should upbraid your opposites,
as if they thought this practice of the ancient and modern Church had need of
reformation.

As for the restraint of the universal all men, in the place of Timothy, by S.
Austin unto genera singulorum, it is according to the usual Scripture phrase.
For Matthew. 3. 5. it is said that There went out unto John the Baptist Jerusalem
and all Judea, and all the region round about Jordan; what sober Divine does
extend the signification hereof any father then to give to understand, that
some from all parts of Judea, and of the region round about Jordan had resort
unto him? Matthew. 4. 23. it is likewise said, that Jesus went about all Galile,
teaching in their Synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, and
healing every sickness, and every disease among the people; and that his fame
spread throughout all Syria, and they brought unto him all sick people. Do you
think there was not one sick person left in all Galile and Syria that was not
brought unto him? Act. 10. it is said, that while Peter was in a trance he saw
in a vision a vessel let down from heaven, wherein was (...), every
foure-footed beast; who doubts but that the meaning hereof is no more then
this, that of all sorts some, or rather of most sorts some? 1 Cor. 15. 22. it
is said, that in Christ all shall be made alive; is this true think you of all
and every one? All flesh shall see the salvation of God; what sober man will
apply this to all and every man? Romans 5. 18. As by the offense of one man the
fault came upon all unto condemnation: so by the obedience of one,
righteousness came upon all men, to the justification of life: will you
hereupon extend the benefit of Christ's death to the justification of all men
unto everlasting life, like as all and every one are fallen into condemnation
by the sin of Adam? Romans 7. 8. the Apostle professes that sin wrought in
him (...), can this possibly be applied to every particular concupiscence?

But by the way, what do you mean to apply S. Austins restraint to this
universal in this place? whereas Austin applies it only to this universal
in the place following, where it is said, that God will have all to be saved.
And if no other place did afford us any such restraint of course, yet we must
(...) driven so to interpret it in this place, lest otherwise we be cast upon
denying the first Article of our Creed. For seeing all are not saved, and the
cause thereof is not because God will not save them; it necessarily follows,
that the cause thereof must be because God cannot save them. And it would have
becommed you well to have answered this argument, and not presumed to carry your
Reader to the embracing of your construction hand over head, in spite of so
manifest a reason to the contrary. Now if you had but accommodated your self
to make answer hereunto, I doubt not but we should have had good matter to
work upon; which I speak upon experience of another discourse of yours that
passes by tradition; but you were loath to intersert it there; and made choice
rather to pitch upon the universal in the former place; that so you might be
out of danger of that gunshot that must needs have rung a peale in your ears
from this place. Yet in this place alone S. Austine interprets the universal
according to the restraint mentioned, and not in the former. And therefore you
were content not to quote the place in Austin, but only to say that it is
somewhere; and indeed so it is; and that somewhere is in his Enchirid. cap.
103. And in the Chapter immediately going before, he professrth; Deo procul
dubio quam facile est quod vult facere, tam facile est quod non vult esse non
sinere. Hoc nisi credamus periclitatur ipsam nostrae fidei confessionis
initium, quo nos in Deum Patrem omnipotentem credere consitemur. Neque enim
veraciter ob aliud vocatur omnipotens, nisi quia quicquid vult potest, nec
voluntate cujusquam creaturae voluntatis omnipotentis impeditur effectus. That
look how easy it is unto God to do what he will, so easy is it not to
suffer that to be which he wills not. Unless we believe this, the very
first Article of our Creed will be shaken, whereby we profess to believe in
God the Father Almighty. For he is not truly called Omnipotent, in any other
respect then because he can bring to pass whatsoever he will have to be,
neither can the effect of will omnipotent be hindered by the wit of any
creature. So that herein we have both the authority of so great a Father, and
manifest reason also directly opposite to your discourse. To avoid the brunt
whereof, you juggle and consider his restraint there, where he does not use it.

And here you tell us magnificently, that if any man will lay this restraint
upon this place, the scanning of the words following, the fitting of the matter
contained in both, with the reason of the exhortation, and other real
circumstances, will shake off this or other like restriction, with greater ease
then it can be laid upon it. Here we have a great deal of cry, if the wool be
answerable, we shall speed a great deal better then he in Aelian that shore
his hogs. But the mischief is, S. Austin does use no restraint in this place;
but conceives the Apostles commandment to be this, ut oraretur pro singulis.
So that your pains is like to be well bestowed, in shaking of Austines
restriction from this place, whereupon he laid no restriction at all. It seems
you came to this discourse as a man should come to play at putfinger in the
dark.

We grant we are to pray for the salvation of no other then whose salvation we
are unfainedly to desire, and we are to desire the salvation of every man, of
what condition soever, or fort, or nation, provided that we know him. For do
you think it a sober course for me to desire and pray for the salvation of I
know not whom? If so, I see no reason but I may pray also for I know not what.
Any malignant and persecuting enemy of mine, I am bound to pray for, and I
shall be sure to take notice of such a one, for I shall be sure to feel him.
And as well for mean persons as for Kings, that I have any thing to do
withal: albeit I may have greater cause to pray for the conversion of Kings
then others, and that without accepting of persons: because by the good
affection of Kings to Gods Church, the Church of God is like to prosper far
better then by the conversion of mean persons. And the Apostle gives this
reason of praying for Kings, that under them we may live a quiet and peaceable
life, in all godliness and 1 Timothy 2. 2
honesty. And therefore I hope you will bear with me, if I pray with greater
devotion for Gods grace upon the Kings heart, and Gods blessing upon his head,
then for meaner persons: because the gracious disposition of a King is of far
greater importance for the advancing of Gods glory, in the liberty and
prosperity of his Church, then the gracious disposition of meaner persons. And
herein I hope I shall not be censured for an accepter of persons, a conceit of
yours quite besides the Apostles text you treat of. But yet the Apostle does
not command every congregation to pray for all kings (whereunto you drive it,
devising circumstances to fill the scale.) For what have I to do to pray for
the king of Bungo, if any such king or kingdom there be? or for the kings in
Terra Australis incognita, discovered by Ferdinand de Quit? yet his relations
are of so little efficacy, that hitherto he has made no men's mouths water
after them. It is enough for us to pray for the fullness of the Gentiles, that
it may come i^, so to make way for the calling of the Jews. But by virtue of
the Apostles exhortation, every Christian congregation is bound to pray for
their own king. Like as Darius, though an heathen Prince, desired the prayers
of Gods people that lived under him: Ezr. 6. 10. Let them have to offer sweet
odours to the God of heaven, and pray for the Kings life, and for his sons.
When I pray for the coming in of the fullness of the Gentiles, and the calling
of the Jews, I except none; as likewise when I pray for the ruin of
Antichrist, I except none.

I find, you do not much satisfy your self in the weight of this your
discourse, you are still casting about for somewhat more to make up the total
of your account, We must desire (you say) the spiritual good of all men, not
as they fall under our indefinite, but under our universal consideration. So
that belike you are still jealous, lest we draw all men to an indefinite and
not to an universal consideration. I desire to deal as plainly as you would
wish; name any man throughout the world unto me, try me whether I will not
pray God bless him, and convert his heart, and save his soul. And yet to my
thinking, you should not urge me to pray for one with whom I have nothing to
do, only I hear a relation of him, perhaps dwelling in the I Will of Iapan. For
though I am bound to love my neighbor as my self; and by neighbor I must
comprehend a Jew, although my self be a Samaritane, yet this is in case we
meet together, and I see him to have need to make use of my charity. Otherwise
to my judgment, general prayers should serve the turn, as I showed, for the
fullness of the Gentiles to come in, for the calling of the Jews, for the
ruin of Babylon. Neither do we find any practice of the Saints to the
contrary; and herein I assure you I except none. But because I see you travail
to be delivered of somewhat, and I take pity of you, tell me I pray, is not
your meaning this, that we must pray for all and every one that lives in the
world? If this be your meaning, and it did not satisfy you to say we must pray
for all, or desire the salvation of all; you do as much as confess hereby, that
to pray for all does not include the praying for every one; and consequently the
Apostle in exhorting to pray for all, does not exhort to pray for every one. I
would I knew once what form would satisfy you; for I am apt to entertain a
resolution to gratify you therein. But to say that we must pray for all, not
in an indefinite, but in an universal consideration, if you could make me
understand it, I would soon come to capitulation with you. In the mean time,
I appeal to your conscience, did you ever pray in this style, for all, and
signify that your meaning was to pray for them, not in an indefinite, but in
an universal consideration? I profess unto you, if God should leave me unto
my self and to follow mine own desires, I should desire not only that all
that now live, but that all that ever lived might have been converted and
saved, yea the Angels that fell might have been kept from sin; or having sinned
might have been brought to repentance, and saved. I see no cause why I should
desire the contrary. But considering the will of God, whereby the angels that
fell are bound in chains, and kept to the judgment of the great day, I dare
not pray for their salvation. And to pray that every one that now lives might
be saved, with submission to the will of God, I see no incongruity; but we have
better grounds of faith, and those sufficient to take up our thoughts
especially in these days wherein we live, whereupon to proceed in the ordering
of our prayers. And I would be loath you should put upon us any course or form
of prayer for all, which you practice not your self. And if I knew your
practice in this kind, I would soon give in mine answer whether I thought
good to subscribe to your form or no.

In the next place you tell us, that the reason why we are bound to desire the
spiritual good of all men universally considered, is, because we must be
perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect. Here again you bewray your
jealousy of the weakness of your own cause, as when you content not your
self in saying, we must pray for all men, but add hereunto, that we must pray
for all men universally considered; the opposite member whereto before you
signified to be this, To pray for all men indefinitly considered. Now the
Apostle is far from these scrupulosities. He simply exhorts us to pray for
all men; he does not add as you do, We must pray for all men universally
considered, and not indefinitely. Yet in no other sense you think it will serve
your turn.

That reason of yours drawn from the conformity to the courses of our heavenly
Father, whereon you so much insist, I have already showed how little it serves
your turn. Now I will show you how in another respect it is rather repugnant,
then consonant to your Tenet. For that example of conformity is only in an
indefinite consideration, thus; We must pray not only for our friends, and
them that love us, but also for them that are our enemies, and hate us, and
persecute us; like as God does good unto the just and wicked, and not only to
the just and good. To our desires you say we must add our endeavors, that
saving truth may be imparted to all. It seems you have not failed herein. Now
I would gladly know* what those endeavors of yours have been hitherto,
whereby you have endeavored, that saving truth may be imparted to the
inhabitants of terra Australis incognita, or to the Negroes, or to the
Tartarians, yea or the Turks, Saracens, or Arabians. Hitherto you have seemed
to dispute thus: God will have it our duty to pray for the salvation of all:
therefore God wills the salvation of all; but now you dispute in a quite
contrary manner, thus: God wills that all should come to the knowledge of his
truth, therefore we must desire and endeavor that his saving truth may be
imparted unto al. The consequence of your former argument is utterly untrue, as
I have already showed; and as Austin long ago discoursed, man's will in an holy
manner Aug. Enc^ cap. 101,
may be contrary to the will of God; and again in a most unholy manner may the
will of man be concurrent with the will of God. As it is the duty of the child
to pray for the life of the father, though God will have the father to dye, and
not live: On the other side, a wicked child wishes the death of his father in
an ungracious manner, yet it may be that herein he concurreth with the will of
God, supposing (as it may well be) that God wills the death of the father at
the same time that the son wishes it.

As for the second argument, we deny therein the antecedent, if you understand
it of all and every one. For the case is clear, that God does not bring all and
every one to the knowledge of his truth; not because he cannot; for doubtless
he could bestow his Gospel upon them that want it, as well as upon us that
enjoy it; therefore the reason must needs be because he will not. As he plainly
professes, he will bring a famine of his word upon a Land, Amos 8. 11. Behold
the days come, says the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land, not
a famine of bread, nor a thirst of water, but of hearing the word of the Lord.
verse. 12. And they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the North even to the
East shall they run to and fro, to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not
find it. So the Lord threatens the Church of Ephesus, to remove her
candlestick out of his place, Revel. 2. and long before threatened the Jews to
take his vineyard from them, and let it out to others that Mat. 12. 14
should bring him the fruit thereof in due season. And it is very strange that
these and such like judgments should come to pass, and God should not will
them. This is the reason whereupon Austin is moved to enquire into a commodious
construction of that place, left otherwise we should fall upon a direct
contradiction to the prime Article of our Creed; and therefore after he has
given two constructions of the place, the last whereof is this, which you
impugn, but not answer his reasons, which are two; the one drawn from the
analogy of Scripture phrase, as where our Savior says unto the Pharisees, you
tithe Mint, and Rue, and every herb: which phrase cannot be understood
otherwise, then of every kind of herb: the other reason is that formerly
spoken of; as if we say, That God wills such a thing to come to pass, which
yet does not come to pass; we shall thereby deny Gods omnipotency. Yet see the
ingenuity of this worthy father: he gives any man leave to give any fair
construction of the place, provided that God be not made unable to bring to
pass whatsoever he will have to come to pass. Et quocunque alio modo
intelligi potest, dum tamen credero non cogamur aliquid omnipotentem statutum
voluisse fieri factumque non esse: qui sine ullis ambagibus si in coelo and in
terra (sicut veritas dicit) qucunque voluit, fecit, profecto facere noluit
quaecunque non fecit. Let it, says he, be understood after what other manner
soever it may be construed, so that we be not constrained to maintain, that
the Almighty God would have something come to pass, which notwithstanding
comes not to pass. For, without fetching any further compass; if he has done
whatsoever he will both in heaven and in earth, as the truth witnesses,
certainly, he would not do whatsoever he has not done.

2 But you proceed to show, that both this duty of ours to pray for all sorts,
and for every man of what sort soever; and also that Gods will is, that all
without exception should come unto the truth and be saved, are expressly
included in the prayers appointed by the Church of England. And the Collects
whence you gather this, are in number three: they are, I take it, all appointed
for Good Friday. In the first, we pray, that God would graciously behold this
his family, for ^he which our Lord Jesus Christ was contented to be betrayed.
Now this family, being the present congregation wherein the prayer is made, it
is very strange, that hereby should be signified all sorts of men, and every
man, of what sort soever throughout the world. And what express signification
do we find here, that Gods will is, that all without exception should come
unto the truth and be saved?

To help your argument drawn herehence; as if you should reason thus, We must
pray for this family, therefore we must pray for every one throughout the
world. You tell us that, The tenor of this petition, if we respect only the
form, is indefinite, not universal: but being in a necessary matter it is
equivalent to an universal, as every logician knows. To which I answer,
first, that the tenor of the petition is not indefinite, but definite, (to
follow you in your own language) for therein we pray definitely for that
family which is before us. Now that family is a particular family; and never
any Logician was so simple as to think it law full to infer an universal
out of a particular. Again, here is no necessary matter in it. For to use such
a form of prayer is merely the arbitrary constitution of our Church.

Suppose God had bid us to pray in this form, to wit, for this family present;
yet this makes not the matter necessary absolutely, but merely upon
supposition of the will of God, and yet in this particular only. As for
example, Our Savior Ioh. 17. (...). and v. 20
prayed for them that his father gave him, and for all those that should
afterward believe through their word, will you infer herehence, that
therefore he was to pray for the world also? Again, God has expressly bidden
us to pray for them that 1 Ioh. 5. 16
sin unto death; and therefore, unless I may be assured, that there is none
in the world that sins a sin unto death, I have no reason to pray for all
and every one; though I were bound to do so, it would nothing pleasure and
advantage you. Hitherto I have followed you in your own most unlogicall
discourse, the absurdity whereof, every simple Logician may easily discover.

Where have you been taught, that petitions indefinite in a necessary matter
are universal: we were taught indeed, that propositions indefinite in a
necessary matter are as good as universal: but for petitions indefinite to be
counted universal in a matter necessary, is one of the absurdest notions that
ever I heard to proceed from the mouth of a Logician. You proceed to prove,
that the form of the petition is in the intention of the Church of England to
be extended to all and every one of the congregation present. But erst you told
us, the matter indeed was universal, but not the form, which you acknowledged
to be indefinite. Now the very form, you say, is to be universally extended:
this is not to extend, but to destroy. But this that you labor for in so
uncouth a manner, I never doubted of, namely, that by this family is understood
all and every one of the Congregation there present: only I deny, that
herehence it follows, that our Church binds us to pray for all and every one
throughout the world; and if it does, we must comprehend even those that sin
sins unto death, amongst the rest, unless we believe that there are no such
sinners in the world: and he had need be of a strong faith, and have some
extraordinary revelation that believes that.

So that your second place tending to no other end but to prove that which we
never doubted to be comprehended in the first, we need not trouble our selves
about any answer thereunto; save only this, though we are bound to pray, not
only for the congregation present, but for the whole Church and every member
of it; yet there is a great gulf of separation between the City of God, and
the city of the Devil; which makes me remember what Abraham answered Dives,
and therefore we can no way approve this consequence; We are bound to pray for
all Christians, therefore we are bound to pray for all Atheists and heathens.
We are bound to pray for Christ's members, and therefore we are bound to pray
for Antichrist and his members. Therefore you tell us, the third and last
prayer will clearly quit this exception, and free both the foremr petitions
from these and the like restrictions.

But in this last clause you overlash miserably; I see no reason but I may as
well say, that the restrictions in the former prayer will quit this latter
prayer, for its extension. Certainly two of the three prayers you proposed to
evince your Tenent are nothing to the purpose. Herein indeed we pray unto God,
to have mercy upon all Jews, Turks, and Heriticks; which in effect is no more
then to pray, that the fullness of the Gentiles may come in, and thereupon the
calling of the Jews. And whereas you desire to infer herehence, that it is
Gods will, that all these should come to his truth and knowledge, and be saved.
As the consequence you shall never be able to make good, so the consequent is
directly contrary to the word of God; for it is not, nor ever was it the will
of God that all this should be done together, but one after another, namely,
that the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in first, and after that the
calling of the Jews, Romans 11. Luc. 21. 24. Hence you conclude, That if God
will not the death of any Turk, Jew, or Infidel, because of nothing he made
them men; we may safely conclude that he wills not the death of any, but the
life of all, whom of men or infidels he has made Christians. In reading your
antecedent I wondered at your boldness, in supposing that which you are never
able to gain by force of argument; but when I view your consequence, I wonder
what giddiness possessed you, to take so wild a course in proving that which
no Christian will deny. For your conclusion is, that God wills not the death
of any, but the life of all whom of men or infidels he has made Christians.
Did ever any Christian deny this? Is this it you are to prove, that God wills
the salvation of all Christians? Have you not rather undertaken to prove that
God wills not the salvation of all sorts of men only (which was Austins
gloss, and which you set up here as a mark to shoot at, thinking by the power
of your discourse to bear down the authority and learned discourse of that
worthy Father hereupon) but that he wills the salvation of every man, of
every sort throughout the world? And this you would prove out of the doctrine
established in the Church of England, that is, out of their Liturgy: and three
prayers therein you insist upon, whereas the two first are apparently nothing
for the purpose; whereof your self seem to be sensible enough, and therefore
the third place (Triary like) was to do the feat, and to clear all: and the
conclusion herehence definit in piscem: being no more but this, that God
wills the salvation of all men whom he has vouchsafed to make Christians:
which no man denies or calls into question. May I not justly ask, and that with
admiration, Quid dignum tanto tulit hic promissor hiatu?
Parturiunt montes nascetur ridiculus mus.


But what should move you to carry your self so preposterously, and to balke
or blast rather so fair a consequence, and so beneficial unto your cause, as
your antecedent does bespeake? For if your antecedent be true, namely, that God
wills not the death of any Turk, Jew, or Infidel, will it not manifestly
follow, that God wills not the death of any Turk, or Jew, or Infidel? To my
thinking it should follow as manifestly, as to say, that if the Sun shines
it shines; though in my poor judgment this is identity rather then
consequence or concomitance; I say, I wonder what moved you to blast this
consequence with such a dash of your pen, in the very face of it, and the
addition of such a proviso as this, whom of men or infidels he has made
Christians. First, especially considering that no such qualification is in the
antecedent; and it is most unreasonable that any qualification should be
foisted into a conclusion that has no ground in the premises; especially it
being such a qualification as utterly marres your market, and that at the end
of the day, and you have a long time waited for a good penyworth, and now your
self are the man that cuts your own throat. Did the conscience of so foul a
conclusion as was toward, make you blush to put it in writing? that cannot be,
for you have it full and whole in the antecedent; though straining to proceed
most indecently, it fares with you as it does with the horse in the Poet:
Peccat ad extremum ridendus and ilia ducit.
Or by the way did your consequence suggest unto you that the argument drawn
from this prayer, proves no more but this, that God will save every Jew, Turk,
and Infidel, in case he be first made a Christian? If so, then the supposed
consequence in your antecedent, was made against your conscience; and therefore
by the consequence herehence made, you desired to strangle it, that so the
birth of it might be abortive. Yet because you carry some show of
argumentation in the antecedent, I will not trust to the corruptnesse of your
consequent deduced therhence, but I will take the pains to strangle it my
self, since the press has brought it to light: your antecedent is this, If
God therefore will not the death of any Jewe, Turk, or Infidel, because of
nothing he made them men. Now this includes such an Enthymeme: Of all Turks,
Jews, and Infidels it is true, that God of nothing has made them men;
therefore he will not the death of any Jew, Turk, or Infidel. Now I say this
consequence is notoriously false, and in stead of your proving it in any
manner, I disprove it in this manner. Of all Devils it is as true, that God of
nothing made them angels; shall I herehence infer, therefore he will not the
death of any devil? So likewise of all cats and dogs, horses and hogs it is as
true, that God of nothing made them such as they are; will it therefore follow,
that God wills not the death of any of them?

But perhaps some may say, that the Collect implies some such argument, for it
runs thus; Merciful God, who have made all men, and hate nothing that
thou have made, have mercy upon all Jews. I answer first, here is no such
argument employed, as to infer that God will not the death of any Jew, Turk,
or Infidel, but only it implies a reason why we pray God to have mercy upon
all Jews, Turks, and Infidels. But albeit we do thus pray for all, yet it
follows not that God will save every Jew, Turk, and Infidel that lives, as
before I have showed. For who doubts but the child is bound to pray for the
recovery of his fathers health, being cast down upon the bed of sickness, at
what time it may be, it is Gods will that his father shall not recover, but
dye the death. Secondly, the complete reason why we pray for all, signified in
this prayer, is not this, because God has made all men, and hates nothing
that he has made; for by the same reason we might be urged to pray for devils
as well as for men: This is only a part of the reason, not the whole reason.
The whole reason is this, Who have made all men, and hate nothing that thou
have made, nor would the death of a sinner, but rather that he should be
converted and live. And we find by manifest experience, that most wicked men
are converted, and God has revealed unto us, that the fullness of the Gentiles
shall come in, Romans 11. and that then shall be the calling of the Jews;
therefore we pray for the fullness of the one, and of the other; but with
submission unto the will of God, as touching the time of this, and the manner
how.

Thirdly and lastly; like as it follows not, that because we must pray for
all men, therefore we must pray for every man throughout the world; in like
sort it follows not, that because our Church prescribes us to pray for all
Jews, Turks and Infidels; therefore it prescribes us to pray for every Jew,
Turk, and Infidel throughout the world; and look what restraint may be laid
upon all men, the very same restraint of interpretation may be laid upon all
Jews, all Turks, and all Insidels. Yet you keep your course, and tell us that
as God made all things without invitation, (a pretty phrase for them that
affect eloquence beyond intelligence) out of mere love, made nothing hateful.
Apply this I pray to devils, and see whether we have not as good a ground to
pray for them as for others. Again, if sin has made them hateful, is there
not sin enough in the world, in Jews, Turks, and Infidels to make them
hateful? Wherefore though in case they were in the same state wherein God made
them, then they should not be hateful to God, and thereupon be thought fit
matter of prayers; yet seeing they are in the state of sin, and consequently
hateful to God; for the same cause, in just proportion of reason, they are no
fit matter for our prayers. Though a full measure only of enmity against God
exempt men from Gods love, yet will you deny that such a full measure is found
in many throughout the world? and will not this be sufficient to forbid our
prayers for all and every one? Sure I am, if there be any in the 1 Ioh. 5. 16.
world that sin a sin unto death, we may not pray for such an one.

3. From the authorized devotions in our Church, you proceed to the Catechism;
and ask what can be more clear then that, as God the Father does love all
mankind without exception, so the Son of God did redeem all mankind, not
only some of all sorts, but all mankind universally taken. And I think
indeed that the one is as clear as the other. Throughout the Scriptures show
me one passage wherein the love of God is expressed to Reprobates. If the Son
of God did redeem all and every one, then all and every one have redemption
in Christ, through his blood, and consequently the forgiveness of their
sins. For in Scripture phrase, remission Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14. 2 Co. 5. 19
of sins is that redemption which we have in Christ: so is reconciliation
also all one with forgiveness of sins. Sure I am, Christ professes, John
17. 9. that he would not pray for the world, but for those whom his heavenly
Father had given him, and for those that should believe through their Ioh. 17.
19. 20.
word. And for their sakes did he sanctify himself for whom he prayed; and to
what did he sanctify himself, but unto his death and passion, by the consent
of as many Fathers as Maldonate had seen, as the Jesuit himself professes on
that 17. of John: and he had seen very many, as there he signifies, namely,
Chrysostom, Cyril, Austine, Theodorus Mopsuestenus, and Heracleotes, Leontius,
Beda, Theophilact, Enthymius, Rupertus.

But to proceed; out of our Catechism you allege, that God the Father made us
and all the world; now the Church our mother has taught us, that God hates
nothing that he has made. The book of Wisdom says so indeed; but because
of the little authority that book has in matter of faith from God our Father,
therefore you charge us with the authority of the Church our Mother. Now you
are not ignorant, I suppose, whence the Church our mother takes this, which
has its course amongst Papists, as well as amongst us. And you know of what
authority Aquinas is amongst Papists; and what interpretation he makes of this
place, though received to be canonical Scripture amongst them, I have already
showed out of his Sums: God (says he) loves all things, in as much as Aquin.
in 1 q. 23. art. 4.
he wills unto them some good or other: but in as much as he wills not a
certain good to some, to wit, eternal life, he is said to hate them, and
reprobate them. And indeed God saves both man and Psalm. 36. 6.
beast, as the Psalmist speaks; and so he may be said to love them all; and
so the Apostle acknowledges him to be the Savior of all men, but especially
of them that believe. And to profess 1 Timothy 4. 10
ingenuously what I think, I see no cause of controversy hereabouts, if so be
the question be rightly stated. For when we say, Christ died for mankind, our
meaning is that Christ died for the benefit of mankind. Now let this benefit
be distinguished and considered apart, and forth with contentious hereabouts
will cease. For if this benefit be considered as the remission of sins, and
the salvation of our souls; these being benefits obtainable only upon the
condition of faith and repentance: As on the one side no man will affirm that
Christ died to this end, namely, to procure forgiveness of sin and salvation
to all and every one, whether they believe or no; so on the other side, none
will deny, but that he dyed to this end, that salvation and remission of sin
should redound to all and every one, in case they should believe and repent.
For this depends upon the sufficiency of that price, which Christ paid to God
his Father for the redemption of the world. But there be other benefits which
Christ merited for us also, even the very grace of faith and of repentance. For
all Gods promises are Yea and Amen in Christ; and amongst 1 Co. 1. 20 Deuteronomy. 30.
6 Esa. 57. 18. Hos. 14. 5.
these promises one is, the circumcision of the heart, the healing of our
ways, of our rebellions. These promises do include the grace of faith and of
repentance. Now consider ingenuously, did Christ die to this end, that the
grace of faith and repentance should be bestowed absolutely or conditionally?
Not conditionally, for before the grace of faith and repentance and
regeneration comes, there is nothing to be found in man but works of nature.
Now it is mere Pelagianisme to affirm that God bestows grace on man upon
the performing of a work of nature. And the Apostle clearly 2 Timothy 1. 9 Tit.
3. 5.
professes that God does not call us according to our works. Therefore it
remains, that albeit remission of sins and salvation are conferred unto us
conditionally, to wit, upon the condition of faith and repentance; yet the
grace of faith and repentance cannot be so conferred: and consequently they
must be conferred absolutely. If then Christ died for the purchasing of faith
and repentance to all and every one absolutely, it would follow herehence, that
all and every one should believe and repent. But this being found to be a
notorious untruth, it follows that Christ died for the purchasing of these
graces only unto some; and who can those be, other then the elect of God?
Accordingly as our Savior professes, that for those who were Gods, and whom
he had given unto Christ, or should in time to come give unto him (the rest
excluded) for those he sanctified himself, that is, offered himself upon the
Cross; which interpretation of Christ's sanctifying of himself, Maldonate
professes, was received by all the Fathers whom he had seen. In Johan. 17. 19.


Now to go along with you. Secondly, we are taught, you say, by the same
Catechism, to believe in God, who has redeemed us and all mankind. What I
pray is this more then to say, He has redeemed us and all men? Is all mankind
more then all men? and in the straining of this phrase we have tried your
strength; and the issue of all was to prove but this, that God wills not the
death of any, but the life of all, whom of men and Infidels he has made
Christians.

By the way I observe an incongruity. Of Infidels we are made Christians, as
whereby we cease any longer to be Infidels: but I hope of men we are not made
Christians so, as to cease any longer to be men. Yet you couple them together
under one yoke, though very unequal heyfers: you should have said rather, of
mere men we are made Christians. All that are redeemed are unfainedly loved;
but if all mankind signify no more then all men; and all men, no more then
all sorts of men, what are you the nearer to that you reach after? And you
know, I suppose, that this was Austins interpretation of that universality; and
he gives reasons for it; though you magisterially will have your own way, in
spite of the pie, without answering his reasons.

Again consider, whether to pay a price which is sufficient for the redemption
of all and every one, be not in a fair sense to redeem all and every one. And
what one of our Church will maintain, that any one obtaines actual redemption
by Christ without faith? especially considering that redemption by the blood of
Christ, and forgiveness of sins are all one. I would Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14.
you would speak plainly, and tell us what is meant by redemption, which, you
say, every one has in Christ, denying that every one has sanctification. So
that whereas the Apostle joins these two together, where he says, Christ is
of 1 Cor. 1. 2^
God made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption, you
divide them, telling us, that Christ is made redemption to all and every one,
but not sanctification. And truly I had thought that Christ had deserved the
one as well as the other, for all those for whom he died. And it is very
strange that God should be said to love them whom he never means to sanctify.

But I pray answer me, Does he unfainedly love the Devils? I think you will
say he does not; what reason have you then to say, that he loves all men,
though you will easily persuade your self that the most part of them are
reprobates, and whom he never will bring unto wholesome and spiritual
repentance, whereby a man is reconciled unto God in Christ, as Austine writes,
lib. 5. cont. Julian, Pelag. cap, 4. and whether you mean to contradict
Austine in this also I know not as yet: yet one word more with you before we
part; How long does God continue to love them? till the measure of their sin
is at full? it is your own oracle in the former Section. And then belike he
begins and continues to hate them. But I pray consider, how can this change,
this alteration stand with the nature of God, that his love, his will to save
them should be changed into hatred, into a purpose to damme them, considering
that Gods will is his essence? And the Lord professes of himself, saying, I
the Lord am not changed, and ye sons of Jacob are not consumed, Mal. 3. 6.
All that are baptized, in your opinion, are not sanctified: yet some others
much agreeing with you in other opinions maintain, that all that are baptized
are regenerate, and they allege a better testimony out of the book of Common
prayer, then any you have brought to serve your turn, namely, the profession
that is made by the Minister thus, Now this child is regenerate, and grafted
into the body of Christ's congregation. Yet that has been answered by a Bishop
of our Church, and that out of the doctrine of Austine. Yet I grant, baptism
is the seal of redemption, and of forgiveness of sins also, but to whom? to
none but such as believe: for God has not ordained, that the benefit of
Christ's blood shall redound to the redemption and forgiveness of the sins of
any man, unless he believes. For God has set him forth to be a propitiation
Romans 3. 25
for our sins through faith in his blood. But your inferences you conceive to
be as clear as crystal, so that the consideration of them makes you doubt,
whether such amongst us as teach the contrary to these, have at any time
subscribed to the book of Common prayer.

And no question is to be made of your subscription, which deny all them to be
sanctified that are baptized; though in plain terms the book of Common
prayer professes of every baptized child, that he is regenerate. And now you
have plaide your part so well in working our authorized devotions, as you call
them, and Catechism to serve your turn; you promise to perform as much
touching the book of Homilies; but we must expect your performance therein,
until you come to the article concerning Christ: in the mean time you will
give us space to breathe, and take notice of your concludent proof, as you
call it, thus. God wills the salvation of all that are saved, and all that are
not saved, therefore he wills the salvation of all and every one. Now the
second part of the Antecedent, which alone is called in question, is proved out
of that of Ezech, As I live I will not the death of him that dies.

I had thought you had done with this; but if it be your course to tautologize
in repeating former arguments, I may take liberty to repeat (without
tautologie) my former answer.

First therefore, I say, the words as they lie in proper speech are
contradictions to your tenent in two respects; First, because in another
discourse of yours, you maintain, that he whose death God wills not, is the
penitent; but here you profess, that God wills not the death of them that
are not saved, when they die; which as as much as to say, that God wills not
the death of impenitent sinners.

Secondly, there is a time you confess, in the former Section, when God hates
sinners, to wit, when the measure of their sin is full; and if then he hates
them, he may then as well be said to will their death and damnation, as he was
said to will their salvation, while he loved them. In the second place, the
words as they lie in proper speech, are contradictions to manifest reason; for,
seeing God is he that inflicts death and damnation upon them, he must needs
will their death and damnation, because whatsoever God does, he does it
according to the counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1. 11. Secondly, if God does
not will the death which he inflicts, then neither does he will the punishment
that he inflicteth, nor the chastisement that he inflicteth; and so indeed it
is said, Lam. 3. That he does not punish willingly, nor afflict the children of
men; which cannot be understood in proper speech; for then it would follow,
that God does afflict and chastise the children of men against his will.
Therefore I say, this must be understood by a figure of speech, to wit, by a
metaphor; and God said not to will or this or that, which he does, because in
the doing of it he is similis nolenti; as first when he does it not,
according to the Latin phrase, animi causa, for his pleasures sake, but being
provoked; and yet not hastily neither, though provoked, but after long
forbearance, and giving time of repentance, upon the despising of this
goodness of God, as Ezekiel. 14. 23. They shall comfort you when you see their
way, and their enterprises: and ye shall know that I have not done without
cause all that I have done in it, says the Lord God.

Secondly, when God does chastise, not as parents, for their own pleasures,
but with an eye to the good of those whom he chastises, Romans 12. 10.
According thereto is that of Augustine, Qui trucidat non considerat quemadmodum
laniet, Epist. 48.
sed qui curat considerat quemadmodum seret.

This is my answer, following the course of your own reading of the place,
whereas Piscator blames the vulgar translation in this place which you follow:
for, says he, in the Hebrew it is not, I will not the death of a sinner; but
this, I am not delighted in the death of a sinner. But says he, A man may will
that wherein he takes no delight: as a ficke man may will to drink a bitter
potion, wherein he takes no delight. For he may will to take it, not for it
self, but for something else, to wit, to recover his health. And so God
wills the eternal death of reprobates for his own glory, to wit, for the
manifestation of his just wrath in punishing of their sins. And Iunius reads
it and translates it in like manner: and with these accords our last English
translation, As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of
the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way, and live, Ezekiel. 33. 11. And
the 18. of Ezekiel does clear the meaning of the Holy Ghost, where the same
phrase is used, and in the same manner translated by our worthiest Divines, and
followed in our last translation, verse. 23. Have I any pleasure at all that the
wicked should dye, says the Lord God, and not that he should return from his
ways, and live? and verse 32. I have no pleasure in the death of him that
dies, says the Lord God, wherefore turn your selves and live ye.

Now in this chapter the Lord justifies himself against an imputation of
harsh, if not unjust, dealing, as if he punished the children for the sins
of their fathers, which in a proverbiall manner was delivered thus; The fathers
have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge; which might
occasion a desperate disposition in them, and provoke them to cast off all care
of amending their ways, and turning to God by repentance; because all was one,
whether they repented, or repented not, because the sour grapes which their
fathers had eaten, were enough to set all their teeth on edge: Against this the
Lord made a solemn protestation, that all souls were his, even the souls of
the children, as well as the souls of the fathers, and that the soul that
sinned, that should dye; and hereupon expostulates with them thus, Have I any
pleasure in the death of a sinner, to wit, so as to bring death upon him,
notwithstanding his repentance, because forsooth his father had eaten sour
grapes? No, no; the Lord has no delight in their death, but if they return
and live, he delights in that, and therefore concludes with exhorting them to
return unto the Lord, that they may live.

Now when you forsake the translation of our Church, and slicke unto the Vulgar
corrupt translation, to hold up your odd conceits; does it become you to make
question whether they that oppose you in your extravagant tenants and proofs,
have subscribed to the book of Common Prayer? Piscator proceeds further, and
says, that the meaning is not simply, that God delights not in the death of
the wicked, but in case he cease not from his iniquity; as appears, says
he, by comparing of it with that which goes before, and with that which
comes after: for otherwise God takes delight in all his works: like as Lyra
upon Ezech. 18. Punitio improbitatis been est a Deo volita quia justa. In
Proverbs 1. 26. thus we read, I will laugh at your destruction, and mock when
your fear comes. How are these places to be reconciled? Piscator answers,
God is not delighted in the death of man, as it is the destruction of the
creature, but is delighted therein, as it is the just punishment of the
creature: which is as much as to say, he delights in the execution of his own
Justice: like as we read, Ier. 9. 24. Let him that glories glory in this,
that he understands and knows me. For I am the Lord which show mercy and
judgment, and righteousness in the earth: for in these things I delight,
says the Lord.

4. Now as if you had made all sure on your side, partly out of our authorized
devotions, wherein you make choice of three prayers; whereof two are nothing to
the purpose, and the third, at your uttermost straining of it, does but
encourage you to conclude finally that God wills not the death, but the life
rather of them that of Infidels are made Christians; and partly out of the
Catechism, where you find that Christ has redeemed all mankind, which has
no coloutable extent further then all men; and without manifest opposition to
Austin, you find this phrase will not serve your turn; whom yet you oppose
so, as without answering any one of his arguments; one whereof was drawn from
analogy of Scripture phrase, another from manifest reason, professing
therewithal that your construction of this place contradicts the prime Article
of the Creed.

And last of all, driving the nail of your discourse home, with a concludent
proof depending upon a translation of the text quite different from the most
authentic translation of our Church, which yet must be without prejudice to
your conformity, having a sound heart of your own, and therefore some
peccadilies may be well borne withal, and you take liberty to question others
your opposites, whether they have subscribed or no to the book of Common
Prayer; such is the height of your imperious carriage, bearing down all before
you.

Now you come to enquire, By what will God does will they should be saved that
are not saved; and you demand whether God does will their salvation by his
revealed, and not by his secret will. As if this were our opinion; whereas
neither Calvin embraces it, nor Beza, nor Piscator, but all concur upon that
interpretation which Austin gave many hundred years ago, and which you
impugn; and how judiciously, we have already considered. Peter Martyr
proposes it amongst diverse others, but embraces it not; neither do I know
any Divine of ours that embraces it. Cajetan indeed embraces it, and
Cornelius de Lapide, and Aquinas amongst other interpretations.

As you doubt whether your opposites have subscribed to the book of Common
prayer; so if you take a liberty to put upon us the opinions and accommodations
of distinctions used by Papists, you may in the next place make doubt, whether
we have not subscribed to the Council of Trent. We plainly deny that God does
will the salvation of any, but of his elect. For to will to save, and decree to
save is all one, and election we say is the decree of salvation. And as God
has not elected all unto salvation, nor ordained all unto eternal life, so
neither has he willed to save all. For hence two absurdities do manifestly
follow; first, that the reason why many are not saved, must be, because God
cannot save them; which is the argument of S. Austin. Another is, that Gods
will shall be changed: for undoubtedly when God damnes any man, then he will
not save him; and therefore if before he did will to save them, his will is
afterward changed, both by changing his old will, which was everlasting, and
by entertaining a new will, which was not everlasting. Hemnigius, a great
patron of universal grace, interprets the place of S. Paul, 2 Timothy 2. 4.
Deus vult omnes homines salvos fieri modo fide oblatam salutem recipere non
recusaverint. Neither do I like Cajetans interpretation after this manner,
when he says, Est sermo devoluntate signi, qua Deus proponit omnibus hominibus
praecepta salutis, doctrinamque Euangelij; and that for two reasons: First,
because God does not propose his Gospel to all: Secondly, if God should propose
the Gospel to all, and bid all men to believe, this is no certain sign that
God will have them to believe, like as it is no certain sign that God will
give them grace to believe, without which they cannot believe; for it is
manifest that God does not give the grace of faith and repentance to all that
hear the Gospel, nor to a major part of them; but it is a sign, I confess,
that God will have it our duty to believe, by commanding us to believe. Gods
commandment is usually called his will, and the commandment of God Schoolmen
make to be one of the signs of Gods will. So he commanded Abraham to sacrifice
his son Isaak. This they call voluntas signi, but yet he was determined that
Isaak should not be sacrificed, as appeared by the event; this they call
voluntas beneplaciti. So he commanded Pharaoh to let Israel go, this was his
voluntas signi; but yet he told Moses, he would harden Pharoahs heart, that he
should not let Israel go; this they call his voluntas beneplaciti; the end
whereof was, that God might have occasion to show his power, and magnify
himself, in his plagues brought upon the Egyptians, to break those hearts
that would not bend unto him.

So that you are out in the interpretation of voluntas signi, The will of
sign, and the will of good pleasure.
and beneplaciti, as well as in the accommodation of it, as out of our opinion.
God proposes no signification of his good will to any man, as touching the
saving of him, otherwise then by faith and repentance: and plainly protests,
that without faith and repentance they shall not be saved.

You would feign have your adversaries grant, that God does will the salvation
of all men by his revealed will, or voluntate signi. Indeed if you may have the
fashioning of our opinion, you may soon be victorious, in conquering men of
straw in stead of real opposites. This distinction of yours is absurdly
applied to our opinion, in this case; who deny that God does at all or any
manner of way will the salvation of reprobates. For revealed will, and voluntas
signi, is the will of Gods commandment, and the objects of commandments are
only moral duties, and not the rewards of them, such as is salvation. Yet it
is truth, that what God is said to will by his will of commandment (so usually
called, though improperly the will of God) the same at once he does not will,
but rather the contrary sometimes, by his voluntas propositi, will of purpose
and decree, which alone is properly to be accounted the will of God, and which
none can resist, Romans 9. 19. And this we can prove, and have alreaby proved by
two instances; the one as touching the sacrificing of Isaak, commanded to
Abraham, but not determined by God that it should be brought to pass; as also
in the letting of Israel go, commanded unto Pharaoh, yet God resolving for a
long time to harden Pharaohs heart, that he should not let them go.

Neither will it herehence follow, that there are two wills in God, as you most
unlearnedly urge; but that God may command one thing, which yet he is resolved
shall not come to pass; so that the thing commanded may be contrary to the
thing determined by God, as when he commanded Abraham to sacrifice Isaak, but
withal determined that Isaak should not be sacrificed.

But Gods commandment, though it be usually called his will, yet it is
improperly so called; only the will of purpose and decree is properly Gods
will; according to that of the Apostle, Romans 9. 19. Who has resisted his will?
For the commandment signifies only what is our duty to do, it does not
signify what God has determined shall be done. For as for the crucifying of
the Son of God; Gods hand and his counsel had determined before that it
should be done, but he commanded none to crucify him; but rather commanded
all the contrary, namely in forbidding the shedding of innocent blood. Neither
shall there be a contradiction between the objects of Gods will which is one,
but only betwixt the objects of his commandment, and the object of his will
and determination, as in the instances proposed I have manifested. As for your
applications of the distinction of voluntas signi, The will of signification,
and the will of resolution.
and voluntas beneplaciti, to the salvation of mankind, I know none of our
Divines that embrace it. We plainly deny, that God wills the salvation of
any but of his elect. For Gods will we conceive to be all one with his decree,
and election we define to be the decree of salvation, or the ordaining of men
to everlasting life. So that we may well give you leave to run riot in your
fruitless argumentation. You on the contrary do apparently maintain a
manifest contradiction between the object of Gods will. For seeing God does
damn many, it follows that he did will to damn many, and that from
everlasting, though only for their sin: yet these whom from everlasting he
did will to damn, you maintain that out of infinite love he did will to save,
till the measure of their sin was full. So that at once he did will to save,
and will to damn the same persons by your opinion; thus the contradiction
fairly and fully lights upon your self, which upon a mere fiction of yours,
and that contrary to our professed opinion, you charged upon us. We grant the
will of God is but one, but we say his will properly so called, and his
commandment usually called also his will, though improperly, are two distinct
things. For by the one he shows what is our duty to do, or to leave undone;
by the other he determines what shall be done or not done, what shall come to
pass, or not come to pass in the world. Of what force and credit your words
are, when you talk of manifest contradiction upon our part, let the
indifferent consider and judge.

5. But you will seem to gratify your opposites, by not carrying your self so
rigorously critical, as to banish this distinction of voluntas signi and
voluntas beneplaciti out of the consines of Divinity. But therewithal you
continue your former fiction, in the stating of our opinion, as if we
maintained that God did will the salvation of all, by that will which is called
voluntas signi, but not by that will which is called voluntas beneplaciti:
whereas I know none of our Divines that do profess their opinion in that
manner, but rather they utterly deny in plain terms, that God does will the
salvation of all. And in my judgment, the application of this distinction in
this case, by some that are orthodoxe in the point of Predestination, as namely
by Aquinas and Cajetan, is most unseasonable, And therefore we have small cause
to fear the imputation you cast upon us, forsooth of canonization of
Jesuitical perjuries, and deification of mental evasions or reservations;
seeing it is only grounded upon a mere fiction of yours, fashioning our
Tenent at your own pleasure most unseasonably, and most incongruously, in
respect of our opinion, who grammatically and plainly profess, God wills not
the salvation of all men. And yet I am persuaded that in the end this
canonization of Jesuiticall perjuries, and deification of mental evasions or
reservations, will justly light upon your self, according to the laws of your
own making; and the tenor of your consequences, when you come to manifest
wherein this distinction of voluntas signi, and voluntas beneplaciti may have
place. Yet I purpose to consider well, how you carry your self in this
imputation you cast upon us.

You acquaint us with two Jesuitical equivocations, each consisting in part of
a protestation, and in part of a mental reservation. The first as touching the
protestation, is this, I do not intend the ruin of King or State; as touching
the reservation this, so they will become Roman Catholics. The second
protestation this, J know of no conspiracy against them; the reservation this,
with purpose to reveal it unto them. Now let us see how you make us to deifie
these or such like equivocations, upon your fiction of our opinion. You need
not trouble your self about putting any interrogatory unto God, it is enough
to prove that God by our opinion does make protestations of such intentions, or
express such speeches with such reservations. God protests, you say, that he
would not the death of him that dies; and we (you say) profess this to be
spoken with such a reservation, So he will repent, which J know he cannot do.
A second is this, God does not will the non-repentance of him that dies; the
reservation that we make, as you say, is this, with purpose to make it known
to him; however, according to my secret and reserved will, I have resolved
never to grant him the means, without which he cannot possibly repent, whereas
without repentance he cannot live, but must die. To each of these I answer
distinctly, and to every part of each.

First therefore I deny, that God professes any such thing in the place you
beat upon, as that he will not the death of him that dies, but only that he
delights not, nor has any pleasure in the death of him that dies. And not
only Piscator and Iunius do so interpret the place, but our last, and best,
and most authorized English translation does so render it. And we cannot but
wonder at your inconsideration, if you take no notice of it, or at your
boldness thus to proceed in despite of it, if you did take notice of it, and
yet question your opposites Archdeacon like at least, whether they have
subscribed to the book of Common Prayer.

Secondly, touching the reservation; I say it is your own interpretation, as I
have read in a manuscript of yours, namely, that he whose death God wills
not, is the penitent sinner. And in the end of the seventh section of this
Chapter you profess that God necessarily hates them that have made up the full
measure of their iniquity: whence it seems that when God says (according to
your translation) I will not the death of him that dies, it is to be
understood with this provision, provided that he fill not up the measure of his
iniquity.

Again, I say this supposition of repentance is no reservation, but plainly
signified by the tenor of the Prophets discourse, as appears manifestly both
by the consideration of the 33. chapter in Ezekiel, and especially by comparing
of it with the 18. wherein are found the same words, as I have already showed
in the end of the third section. So that we add not this by way of
reservation, as you impute unto us, but make it appear to be the meaning of
the Holy Ghost, by the tenor of the Text: and if Jesuits did in like sort
make their meanings clear unto us, we should never challenge them for
equivocation or reservation. We see by this what is the issue of your
imputation, which in great pomp you called out deisication of mental evasions
and reservations; as if you spent your strength in phrasifying. You seemed to
be sensible of your own weakness in justifying this your calumniation, and
therefore to give weight unto it, you have your additions, without all congruity
to the precedent, of Jesuitical equivocations, whereunto notwithstanding you
desired to conform our tenent; and rest your self wholly upon the odious
nature of that conformity, especially as being charged upon God by our opinion,
as you manage the matter. But your addition has no color of conformity
thereunto, but proceeds of it self without all respect of proportion. For the
Jesuit protesting he intends not the ruin of the King and State, with this
reservation, So they become Roman Catholics; does not add hereunto these
words, Which I know they cannot do; I do^ not doubt but they have a more
comfortable opinion of us then so.

Yet when you come to show how our opinion does deisie, as you speak, this
very Jesuitical trick, the greatest strength of your odious expression of our
Tenet, consists in such like addition, whereunto not any thing on the
Jesuitical equivocations part is conformable. Do you see how well you
perform the part of a disputant, and that in making good so foul a
calumniation as is the deisying of equivocations? As if you followed the
politicians counsel, who bids his disciples be bold to calumniate; for as
much as though a man might clear his good name, yet in such a case cicatrix
manet calumniae. Fie upon such shameless courses. And as for this addition of
A scarte remains.
yours, what tail of consequence soever it draws after it, it is like to fall
foul on your part, and not on ours. For you maintain, that there is a state
of man in this life, in respect of a certain measure of iniquity, wherein it
is not possible for him to repent. I know no such state, nor any rule that God
has given to himself to confine his grace. Nay to the contrary we read, that
neither continuance in sin, nor greatness of sin, does preclude the grace
of God; but that Gods grace as it can, so it does many times prevail over
both. But you love not to speak distinctly, but to carry your self in the
clouds of generalities. They that maintain a weak cause had need play least
in sight; we say plainly, that God well knows, no man can repent except he
gives the grace of repentance; the Scriptures in diverse places expressly
testifying Act. 5. 31. and 11. 18. 2 Timothy 2. last.
that repentance is the gift of God, though you love not to hear of that ear,
nor are well pleased, as it seems, with the music that rises upon the
touching of that string. On the other side, God knows that every man at any
time can repent, if God will be pleased to give him the grace of repentance,
yea and that he shall repent also; the habitual grace serves for the one, and
the actual and effectual motion of Gods Spirit is requisite to the other.

I come to the second parallel of Jesuitical equivocation, or rather the
deification of it, as you are pleased out of glorious spleen to calumniate
your opposites. The protestation is on Gods part, I will not the nonrepentance
of him that dies, the reservation, with purpose to make this part of my will
known unto him. But where, I pray, do you find any such protestation on Gods
part? Ezekiel has none such. In him it is said, I will not the death of him
that dies. But no where does he say, I will not the non repentance of him that
dies. This is a trick of your own device, as if you followed the counsel of
Lysander; and where the Lions skin will not reach, you are content to patch
it up with some piece of a Fox skin. We profess in plain terms, that as
God has mercy on whom he will, so he Romans 9. (...)
hardneth whom he will; and as he will give the grace of repentance unto some,
so he will not give the grace of repentance unto others. Notwithstanding that
he bid all in the ministry of his word, (I mean all those that hear it) To
repent and believe Mark 1. (...)
the Gospel. So he did bid the Jews, and that with great earnestness, to
keep the covenant, Deuteronomy. 30. 19. I call heaven and earth to record this day
against you, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing.
therefore choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live. By loving the Lord
thy God, by obeying his voice, and cleaving unto him, for he is thy life, and
the length of thy days, that thou may dwell in the land which the Lord did
swear unto thy fathers. 'Yet I hope you will not say, this could be done
without grace, though of the nature of grace, what you think, and of the
universal extention thereof, I should be very glad to understand, and that
therein you would speak your mind plainly.

As for the reservation here, it is most ridiculous, neither is any
equivocation of Jesuits, I trow, answerable hereunto: for by reservations, a
sense is raised, contradictious to the sense of the protestation; but by this
reservation, no contradiction arises to the former as it lies, but only it
denies a certain purpose to be joined with it: but, be it that Jesuits allow
such artifice, what Divine of ours does? Did we say, that God wills not the non
repentance of any; we would say, he wills it not, in as much as he
forbids it. And Gods prohibitions and commandments are usually (though
improperly) called the will of God. And here voluntas signi has proper place
enough.

Like as God commanded Abraham to sacrifice his son, yet his determination
was, that Isaac should not be sacrificed. Some may have said, that God wills
not the death of him that dies, in case he repent. But was ever any heard to
affirm, that God wills not the non repentance of him that dies, to wit, with
purpose to make it known unto him? What madness possessed you to ascribe so
incredible a thing to your opposites, so contrary to the rule of fiction,
(...), as Callimachus has set it down.

Your addition here likewise, which draws a long tail after it, has no
conformity to the pattern. And as for the substance of it, as touching Gods
resolution, never to grant some repentance, or the means of it (if thereby you
mean the Gospel) we acknowledge it to be truth: for the arm of the Lord is
not revealed unto all, neither does he give repentance, Esa. 53. 1.
or faith to all: but has mercy on some only, even on whom he will; and
hardenneth othersome, even whom he will; that is, denies them repentance, and
consequently, they cannot repent, which interpretation of obduration, your
self make in the seventh section following: and consequently they cannot live;
this I doubt not but you will acknowledge with us.

And therefore the vanity of your discourse is not at an end, you proceed to
talk of Gods oath in giving assurance, that he will not the death of them that
are damned; built merely upon a translation which you follow, different from
the most authorized translation of our Church; and that contrary to evident
reason: for seeing God does inflict death and damnation upon the impenitent, so
he must needs will it; for he does all things according to the counsel of
his own will, Ephesians 1. 11. And yet according to your reading of it, a good
construction may be given without all reservations, as plainly enough deduced
out of the word of God it self. And what God has manifested unto us in his
word, I hope is not to be accounted a reservation, but a revelation rather. I
am not of your mind to think, that the keeping of an oath is a branch of
perfection; or to keep a man's word either, which yet is a better point of
morality, then to keep an oath.

Such justice is to be found amongst heathen men; yet works of mercy go
beyond works of justice, yet no great perfection neither; but to be merciful
to our enemies, When Matt. 5. 4^
they are hungry to feed them, when they are thirsty to give them drink: this
is the perfection that our Savior calls us unto, and sets before our eyes
the goodness of our heavenly Father, in suffering his rain to fall, and his
sun to shine on the bad as well as on the good. And here withal, how well
your calumniation has sped, imputing to us the deification of Jesuitical
equivocations, let the indifferent Reader judge.

6 Here you proceed learnedly to distinguish between somethings determined by
oath, and somethings else, and in the accommodation of your distinction, you
tell us, that Voluntas signi, and beneplaciti, can have no place in things
determined by divine oath, but well it may in other things. What is the other
member of your distinction opposite to things determined by divine oath, you
express not, but leave to your reader to conjecture. Now because usually when
oaths are spoken of by way of distinction, the opposition is made between
oaths and bare words, therefore we conceive your distinction completely
delivered to run thus. Some things are determined by Gods oath; other things
are determined by Gods bare words. Now this distinction I take to be neither
accurate according to the form, nor sound in the matter thereof.

As touching the form. It is not right to say things are determined either by
Gods oath, or by his word, but rather by his will. For determination is the act
of Gods will. Words and oaths are but the signification and outward
protestation of the determination of his will. Then as for the matter, I see no
cause but that by what reason soever the distinction of voluntas signi, and
voluntas beneplaciti, has course in the one, by the same reason it may have
course in the other also. For Gods word undoubtedly is as certain as his oath;
albeit in condescending to our infirmity he is pleased to protest in solemn
manner, and by oath, for the strengthening of our faith. We commonly say that an
honest man's word is as good as his oath to bind him. Certainly as God cannot
break his oath, so is he (...), a God that cannot lie, and his will Ti^. 1. 2.
can neither change from within, nor be resisted from without.

When you come to explicate your meaning by instance as touching the
accommodation of this distinction, we will perhaps speak more of this. The
distinction you say of voluntas signi, and beneplaciti, can have no place in
their doctrine who make the bare entity and personal being of men the
immediate object of the immutable decree concerning life and death everlasting.
It seems you desire to speak enough, as if you could hardly satisfy your
self, no marvel if you do not satisfy your reader. Yet in my judgment it
is usual with you to over-doe. For the distinctions implied by you, of the
object of Gods decree mediate or immediate; and especially of Gods decree
mutable or immutable, may soon cast us upon wilde-goose meditations. By the
entity or personal being of man, I take your meaning is, (for you speak in
your own peculiar phrase) to express the pure mass of mankind. This (it
seems) you like not to be made the object of election and reprobation, but
rather the corrupt mass of mankind after Adams fall. Now because there was an
election and reprobation of Angels as well as of men, if you can devise how a
corrupt mass should be the object of Gods predestination, in the election and
reprobation of Angels, you shall perform such a piece of work as never any man
adventured on before you.

And as for the distinction of voluntas signi, and voluntas beneplaciti, I am
persuaded I shall devise a more commodious place for it, supposing the pure
mass to be the object of predestination, then you can upon supposition of the
corrupt mass to be the object of predestination. This I presume taking the
distinction of voluntas signi, and voluntas beneplaciti in that sense which
they take it that have been the devi^ers of it. But if you shall take liberty
unto your self, to put what sense upon it you think good, and make your own
grounds; as Aesop advised his master how to make his undertakings good in
drinking up all the water in the sea, to wit, always provided that all the
rivers that run into the sea were first stopped. For it were unreasonable that
as fast as he drank up, the rivers should power in, and that somewhat faster
too. And I perform my undertakings thus. To promise salvation upon obedience,
and to command obedience unto all, is in the phrase of Schoolmen to will the
salvation of all voluntate signi. But withal to determine, that by his
special grace heo will keep some from sin, and save them, but not others;
is not to will the salvation of those others voluntate beneplaciti, whose
salvation he is said to will voluntate signi. So that albeit to will and not to
will the salvation of one and the same man voluntate proprie dicta, which alone
is voluntas beneplaciti, be contradictions; yet to will the salvation of one
man voluntate improprie dicta, which is voluntas signi, and not to will it
voluntate proprie dicta, which is voluntas beneplaciti, is no more
contradictious then to will the sacrificing of Isaak by commanding it, and to
nill it by determining the contrary, is contradictious.

Again, if massa corrupta be the object of predestination, which is the more
common opinion of our Divines, this distinction in this sense (which I take to
be the only true sense of it) cannot be so well accommodated. For as much as
in that case, the only way left for salvation is faith and repentance; for
performing whereof there is no power in nature, as there was power in nature
for the performing of obedience before Adams fall. And you hold it ridiculous
to say that God wills the salvation of man so he repent, in case he cannot
repent, as but erst you signified.

But let us consider your reason why the distinction foresaid can have no
place, if the pure mass be the object of predestination. For (say you) the
entity or personal being of man is so indivisible, that an universal
negation, and a particular affirmation of the same thing (to wit salvation)
falling upon man as man, or upon the personal being of man, draws to the
strictest kind of contradiction. All this is but one proposition, but it
contains more then one fault. For first you make the affirmation and negation
of salvation upon the same men, to follow upon voluntas signi touching their
salvation, and voluntas beneplaciti touching their non salvation. Whereas no
such thing will follow. For although from voluntas beneplaciti, whereby God
does will the salvation of one man, it follows, such a one shall be saved;
yet upon the voluntas signi, whereby God does will their salvation, it shall
not follow that such shall be saved: like as from voluntas signi, whereby God
did will Abraham to sacrifice his son, it did not follow that Isaak should
be sacrified: yet you swallow this consequence without any chawing; but an
Estrich will sooner digest a tenne-peny nail, then any sober and intelligent
Scholar will digest this consequence. If you would deal directly, you should
profess, that to will and not to will the salvation of the same man is
contradiction; but that is untrue as well as the former. For unto contradiction
is required that it must be, ad idem, secundum idem, eodem modo, and eodem
tempore. Now these conditions are not found in this that we speak of. For we
do not say, that God does will and not will the salvation of the same man,
voluntate eodem modo accepta; for that he wills the salvation of this man, is
only voluntate signi; that he does not will it, is voluntate beneplaciti; and
this will which is called the will of good pleasure, is only the will of God
in proper speech, and that S. Paul speaks of when he says, Who has resisted
his will? Romans 9. 1^
the other, to wit, voluntas signi, is improperly (though usually) called the
will of God. It being indeed nothing else but Gods commandment; in which sense
he willed Abraham to sacrifice his son; yet who doubts but that it was Gods
will in proper speech, that Isaak should not be sacrificed. And because you
perceived how easily the show of contradiction might be washed off, if it were
proposed in this manner, therefore you made bold upon dame Logic, and without
her leave, and in despite of her, feign a contradiction under another form by
way of consequence, which indeed proves most inconsequent.

Thirdly, you speak in a strange language when you say that the affirmation
and negation of salvation falling upon the personal being of men, contains
contradiction; implying that it might fall otherwise then upon the personal
being of men, and in that case it would not prove contradictious; both which
are not only untrue, but absurd also. For the affirmation of the salvation of
man cannot fall otherwise then upon the person of man, and consequently upon
the personal being of man, whatsoever be the cause of it; which cause you most
preposterously conceive, to give unto man a being different from his personal
being, whereupon, and not upon his personal being his salvation should fall.

Again, no distinction of personal being and other being will serve your
turn, to save the affirmation and negation of salvation of one and the same
man from contradiction. I say of one and the same man, which is of principal
consideration in the course of contradiction, and yet wholly permitted by you
in this proposition, though therein you talk of the strictest point of
contradiction. Strain your invention while you will, you shall never be able
to free these propositions from contradiction; Peter shall be saved, Peter
shall not be saved. But to change the nature of these propositions, and of
absolute to make them conditional thus; Peter shall be saved if he believe and
repent: Peter shall not be saved if he believe and repent not; is neither to
affirm nor deny the salvation of Peter. For to affirm or deny the salvation
of Peter, is categoricall, not hypotheticall. What you want of force of
argument, you supply with devotion, as if you came to enchant your reader, and
not to inform him; as when you say, Far be it from us to think that God
should swear to this universal negative, I will not the death of him that
dies; and yet believe withal that he wills the death of some men, that die as
they are men, or as they are the sons of Adam. This is proposed by way of an
holy and confident asseveration; but consider how sottish it is, and most
averse from sobriety.

For first, what if God had not sworn it, but only said it, had there been
the less truth in it for this? Is not Gods word sure enough without an oath?
yet before we heard, that in things determined by divine oath, the distinction
of voluntas signi, and voluntas beneplaciti could have no place.

Secondly, where were your logical wits, when you said this was an universal
negative, I will not the death of a sinner? I pray examine your rules well, and
see whether it be not a singular? will you measure the quantity of a
proportion by the predicate, and not rather by the subject? Yet if you should
do so, it would not serve your turn. For both Aristotle of old has taught
us, that it is absurd to put an universal sign to the predicate; and here is
no universality added either to the whole predicate, which is, Nolens mortem
peccatoris, nor to any part of it (which you seem to confound.) For he that
dies, is a term indefinite. Neither is it in a necessary matter. For the most
holy Angel God could turn into nothing, if it pleased him. And in the 18.
chapter of Ezekiel it is apparent, that this is restrained to him that
repents, without any mental reservation, but by plain evidence of the Text
it self.

Thirdly, you harp upon a false string, and an erroneous translation, as it
were in spite of the most authorized translation of our own Church, and
follow the vulgar Latin herein. And withal in opposition to manifest reason
to the contrary; for seeing God does inflict death and damnation upon every one
that dies, and is damned; and he does all things according to the counsel of
his own will, Ephesians. 1. 11. it is impossible he should do any thing and not
will it, that he should inflict death on him that dies, and not will it.

Fourthly, be it as you will have it, that God does not will the death of him
that dies; will you herehence infer that God wills not the death of him
that dies as man, or as the son of Adam, implying that notwithstanding he may
will the death of him that dies in some other respect, without any prejudice
to his oath? what a senseless collection and interpretation is this? You may
as well say, God wills the life of him that lives, ergo, far be it from us
to say that he wills not the life of him that lives, as he is a man, or as
he is the son of Adam; implying that for all this God may be said not to will
the life of him that lives in some other respect. But I say that if God
wills not the death of any man that dies, (as you will have it, and to be
confirmed also with the Lords oath,) then in no respect can it be said that he
wills the death of any man that dies. For it is both ad idem, death is the
same in both; and it is secundum idem, for we speak of the same man in both;
and it is eodem modo, for we speak of the will of God in the same sense in
both; and it is at the same time, and must be; for Gods will is everlasting,
and therefore willing whatsoever he does everlastingly, he cannot be said at
any time not to will it. As for the cause of death and damnation willed by God,
we maintain, that God wills not the death of any man, or the condemnation of
any man, but for sin. But I pray what think you of infants perishing in
original sin? If Goth does not will their death as the sons of Adam, how
does he will it? Or had you rather shake hands with Arminius in this also, and
profess, that no man is damned for original sin only; but that all the
children of Turks, and Sarazens, and Jews, and Caniballs that die in their
infancy, are saved, and enjoy the joys of heaven, as well as the children of
the faithful?

You proceed in your devout asseveration, and will have it to be far from
us to think, that God should by his secret or reserved will recall any part of
his will declared by oath. We are so far from thinking, that God recalls any
part of his will declared by oath, that we do not believe that he does or
can recall any patt of his will that he has declared by his bare word. And
we think it equally impossible for God to lie, and to perjure himself; for
he is (...). Neither when he kept Abraham from sacrificing his son Isaac,
do we say that he recalled any part of his will, which he had formerly
declared by his word, although he commanded Abraham to sacrifice his son: for
Gods will of commandment, signifies only what God will have to be our duty
to do, not what he has determined to be done: though you confound these
usually, and that as wilfully and unlearnedly as Arminius himself, because it
serves your turn, and advantageth your cause to confound them. But look you
to it how you free your self from maintaining, that God does recall something
which he has properly willed and determined to be done. For that God wills
the death of no man that dies, you make to be the word of God confirmed by
oath, and you understand it of Gods will properly so called, and yet you
maintain, that God wills the death of him that dies, though not as man, and
as the son of Adam, yet in some other manner; which either is flat
contradiction, or else God does recall and change his will.

The last part of your devout asseveration is, Far be it from us to think
that God should proclaim an universal pardon to all the sons of Adam, under
the seal of his oath, and yet exempt many from all possibility of receiving
any benefit by it. Here you seem to show your teeth, but I had rather
understand your meaning: for to proclaim pardon to all is ambiguous; for it
may be done absolutely, as kings on earth grant pardons; and usually our kings
grant pardons at the end and conclusion of parliaments. I do not think this
is your meaning; for then all should be pardoned; for to proclaim pardon is to
signify his Majesty's pleasure that he does pardon them. But if
conditionally; it is true, God proclaims, that whosoever believes shall be
saved, this is a known truth, no man takes exception against it. And how do
we exempt any from all possibility of receiving it? You will say, that this we
do, in exempting many from all possibility of performing the condition, to
wit, of believing. I answer, that your own opinion is to be charged with this,
ours is not; for you maintain that Pharaoh after the seventh wonder, was exempt
from all possibility of repentance; and the like you avouch of all reprobates,
and such as have filled up the measure of their sin, which according to your
opinion, may be many years before their death: and in the seventh Section
following, you express it thus, Having their souls betrothed unto
wickedness: such undoubtedly was Ahab, that sold himself to work
wickedness, and many such like.

And in this case you profess in your own phrase, that the door of
repentance is shut upon them. But we like not this opinion of yours, we know
no measure of sin, nor continuance of sin that does prescribe unto the
grace of God, and forbids the banes of matrimony betwixt him and his Church,
but that in a due time the power of Gods grace shall break through all
obstacles, even through the furious idolatry of Manasses, in giving his
children unto Devils, and that sealed with blood, wherewith he filled
Jerusalem from corner to corner; yea, and through his sorcery and witchcraft
also, and through the rage of Saul, persecuting Gods saints, and making havocke
of the Church of God. When I speak thus, I am to be understood only of sins
of course, and* known sins, secluding the consideration of the sin. against
the holy Ghost, which is (...) secret.
And for as much as we maintain it to be possible for every one to believe
and repent through Gods grace, it is manifest, that we exempt no man from all
possibility of believing and repenting, to wit, in consideration of the power
of God. But in consideration of the power of man, we exempt not many only,
but all and every one, from possibility of believing and repenting by power of
nature. And dare you avouch the contrary? It is apparent that whatsoever you
think, you dare not openly profess thus much. And therefore are content to
hide your head, and lurk under generalities. So that the case is clear, that
you do us wrong in saying we exempt many from all possibility of repenting: I
say it is a notorious slander; for we exempt men from possibility of repenting
only by power of nature; and so we exempt not only many, but all and every
one from possibility of repenting. But perhaps you may say, that withal we
maintain that God does not purpose to give the grace of faith and repentance
unto all, but to deny it unto many, yea unto most; and upon this supposition we
exempt them from all possibility of repenting.

But I pray consider, to exempt some from possibility of repenting upon
supposition; is this to exempt from all possibility without supposition? For
you have delivered this without all supposition. And then the issue is to
enquire, whether God has decreed to give the grace of faith and repentance
unto all, or rather to deny it to many, yea to most. And dare you affirm that
God has decreed to give the grace of faith and repentance unto all? It is
apparent you dare not openly profess this, and therefore carry your self in
the clouds, without any clear and distinct proposing of your meaning. In S.
Paul's days there was a remnant amongst Israel which are called Gods election,
Romans 11. and these had obtained this grace of faith and repentance, as there
the Apostle signifies, but the roast were hardened. And if God has purposed to
give grace unto all, you may as well say God has elected all. But Romans 11.
the Holy Ghost witnesses, that many are called, and but few are chosen. Many
I say are called, not all neither, nor the Mat. 20.
most part; as all experience, and the histories of the world do manifest: and
therefore though God proclaims in his word pardon of sin to all that
believe; yet he does not proclaimethis unto all.

By the way I observe, that whereas you say, that God does proclaim an
universal pardon to all the sons of Adam under the seal of his oath; this
of Gods oath, which you add, does draw us to conceive that the meaning of
those words, As I live I will not the death of him that dies, contains this
sense in your construction, that God will pardon the sins of all, and since
these words (as you understand them) do not run conditionally, but
absolutely; herehence it follows, that according to your opinion God has
sworn absolutely to pardon the sins of all men, the absurdity whereof I
leave to every man's sober consideration.

7. Hitherto you have told us in what matters the distinction of voluntas
signi, and voluntas beneplaciti cannot have place. Now you tell us in what
matters it may have place, to wit, in matters of threatenings, or of plagues not
denounced by oath. And why not I pray in matters of promising, or of rewards
not denounced by oath. Now you have already signified, that look in what
matters this distinction may have place, there God may recall by his secret and
reserved will, what he has declared to be his will by bare words. For
therefore you professed that this distinction may not be admitted in matters
determined by oath, because, Far be it from us thus to think that God should
by his secret or reserved will recall any part of his will declared by oath.
Let the Reader mark it well, and the force of consequence therehence; which I
doubt not but you approve of, as we shall farther understand in that which
follows. Now we are so far from maintaining that God can recall any thing,
of that which he has sworn shall come to pass, that we stand in defiance of
any such opinion, as maintains, that God may choose whether he will be so good
as his word, and that he has liberty to recall ought of that which upon his
bare word he has testified shall come to pass. And it seems you are ashamed
to propose it in these terms, but keep your self in the general of voluntas
signi, and beneplaciti, the meaning whereof every one understands not; and the
best Divines take it in a far different sense from this of yours. And they that
do understand your meaning and explication, yet do not always consider it,
and therefore are the more apt so to be deluded by your generalities.

But proceed we along with you. God by his Prophet Jonas (you say) did signisie
his will to have Ninevie destroyed at forty days end; this was voluntas
signi: and he truly intended what he signisied, yet was it his voluntas
beneplaciti, his good will and pleasure at the very same time that the
Ninevites should repent and live. Now I do observe in all this, you do not
say God recals by his secret will, what he signisied to be his will upon his
bare word. Yet the reason why the foresaid distinction might not be admitted in
matters determined by Gods oath, you made to be this, because then God should
by his secret will recall that which he had declared to be his will by solemn
oath; permitting that God may have liberty to recall what he has determined
(as you speak) by his bare word. But here you forbear these expressions; you
decline this precipice. And justly. For if it be a part of Gods perfection to
keep his oath, as you have said, I see no reason but it should be a part of
greater perfection to be as good as his word. Secondly, I say that if Gods
intentions and Gods will be all one; for you to say that God at the same time
did intend and not intend that the Ninivites should be destroyed, is flat
contradiction. And you do as good as say so. For at the same time God did will
that they should be destroyed, you say; and also intended that they should
live, which is as much as to say he did intend they should not be destroyed.
And I prove it thus: To affirm and deny the same thing of the same subject, at
one and the same time, is flat contradiction; but you herein do affirm and
deny the same thing of the same subject for the same time; therefore herein you
speak flat contradiction. But you pronounce there is no contradiction in this;
yet in clearing your self, your carriage in words is very preposterous. For
whereas to purge your self you should say, there is no contradiction in this
speech of yours; you quite besides the cushion tell us there is no contrariety
between Gods will declared, which you call voluntas signi, and his good will
and pleasure, which you call voluntas beneplaciti; and forthwith you tell us
there is no contradiction in the object of his will, however considered. All
which is delivered very fumblingly, and so perplexedly, as nothing answering to
those logical brains and accurate Philosophy, the want whereof elsewhere you
pity in others, but not in your self. I say you speak contradiction, in
saying that God at the same time both willed that Ninivie should be destroyed,
and willed that it should not be destroyed.

As for contradictions in the objects of voluntas signi, and voluntas
beneplaciti, we maintain that such contradiction may have place without any
contradiction in the maintainer: As for example; The object of Gods
commandment to Abraham (which I call, and all Schoolmen with me call
voluntatem signi,) was the sacrificing of Isaak; but the object of Gods purpose
and determination (which I call, and all Schoolmen with me, voluntatem
beneplaciti) was the not sacrificing of Isaak. Which are terms contradictory.
Yet is it no contradiction for me to maintain that God commanded Abraham to
sacrifice his son; and yet resolved with himself that Isaak should not be
sacrificed.

Yet we must give you leave to take your course, and consider what a fluttering
you keep to unentangle your self of this contradiction, wherein you are not
taken as in a snare, but wilfully and with your eyes open cast your self
thereinto, presuming either by the finenesse of your wit to escape, or rather
by the perplexity of your discourse so to confound your reader, as not to
discover your fumbling to deliver your solfe.

You say the object of Gods will was not one and the same, but much different,
in respect of Gods will signified by Jonas, and of his good will and pleasure,
which not signified by him was fulfilled. And because you repeat this
distinction again containing the difference between voluntas signi, and
voluntas beneplaciti, I must needs tell you the exorbitancyie of it. Suppose
God had made known to Jonas, that he purposed upon this his preaching to give
them repentance, to save the Ninivites, had this been no longer voluntas
beneplaciti? If you think so, I think you cannot name one Divine in the world
that ever was of your opinion in this. If it ceased not to be voluntas
beneplaciti for all this, then you see how absurdly you make the difference
between voluntas signi, and voluntas beneplaciti to consist in this, that
voluntas signi is Gods will declared, voluntas beneplaciti is his will
concealed.

The resolution at length to free your former assertion from contradiction, is
this, One and the same immutable decree of God did from eternity award two
doomes much different unito Ninevie, taking it as it stood affected when Jonas
threatened destruction unto it, or as it should continue so affected, and taking
it as it stood upon the judgment threatened. All the alteration was in Ninevy,
none in Gods will and decree; and Ninevie being altered unto the better, the
self same rule of justice does not deal with it after the selse same manner.
The sum of all (were you pleased to speak plainly) would come to this: When
he signified by Jonah to the Ninevites, that Ninevie should be destroyed at
forty days end, the meaning was but this, that in case they continued in their
sins without repentance they should be destroyed; but in case they repented
they should not be destroyed. I find no fault in this as touching the substance
of truth; but I wonder not a little to see you fail in the accommodation of
it, both to the distinction of voluntas signi, and beneplaciti; as also in the
reconciling of your self unto your self, in respect of what formerly you have
delivered concerning the meaning of Ionahs message to the Ninevites. For you
do not tell us which of these doomes is Voluntas signi, and which of the
doomes is voluntas beneplaciti: or if both be voluntas signi, (as indeed they
are) what is left for voluntas beneplaciti to be distinguished from voluntas
signi in this place? It seems you distribute those doomes, and make one the
object of voluntas signi, and the other the object of vol^itas beneplaciti, in
which course there (...) no sobriety in comparison to your own dictates. For
you make voluntas signi to differ from voluntas beneplaciti in this, that
voluntas signi is Gods will declared, voluntas beneplaciti is his will
concealed. According to the tenor of which distinction, both these decrees are
to be accounted voluntas signi for God has declared this to be his usual
course; as namely Jer. 18. 7. I will speak suddenly against a nation or a
kingdom to pluck it up, and to root it out, and to destroy it. 8. But if this
nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their wickedness, I will
repent of the plague that I thought to bring upon them: 9. And I will speak
suddenly concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to build it up and to
plant it: But if it do evil in my sight, and hear not my voice, I will
repent of the good that I thought to do for them. Neither indeed can you in
reason maintain the one of the doomes to be the object of voluntas signi, and
the other the object of voluntas beneplaciti. For if Jonas had delivered his
message thus, God sees in what sinful courses you are, and has determined
that you continuing in the same your City shall be destroyed at forty days
end; they would never have doubted but that the Lords determination was, that
upon their humiliation and repentance, and turning from their evil ways,
Ninevie should not have been destroyed; and so each doom had been the object
of voluntas signi, and nothing (for ought I can gather out of your discourse)
should remain to be the object of voluntas beneplaciti.

Again, this elucidation of the doubt does contradict your former assertion,
when in contradictious manner you affirmed, that God at the same time did both
will that Ninevie should be destroyed, and also intend that Ninevie should not
be destroyed; whereas by the interpretation which here you make of Ionahs
message to the Ninivites, according to the two doomes by you mentioned, God was
so far from intending both the destruction and the not destruction of
Ninevie, as that he intended neither the one nor the other. For to determine to
destroy them, in case they continued in their sins without repentance, and
not otherwise, is to resolve neither one way nor other, but to remain in
suspense, which is a kind of reservation of liberty; which heretofore you have
so much magnified as a point of very great perfection, and therefore fit to be
attributed unto God.

But then I pray consider, did not God from everlasting know whether they would
repent or no? I think you doubt not, but that God knew they would repent. And
I pray what need was there then of any two such doomes as you have devised,
when one would serve the turn, and that absolute, to wit, that God from
everlasting determined they should not be destroyed, and thereupon took a
course whereby they might be brought to repentance.

By the way I am glad to hear you make the repentance of the Ninevites the
object of Gods will, which is called, voluntas beneplaciti, which we take to
be all one with Gods decree; but I have no cause to rejoice to see you thus
contradict your self: for you have in diverse places maintained, that no
contingent thing, especially no act of man is the object of Gods decree: but to
the contrary have professed, that God, though he decreed the contingencie of
things, yet he does not decree the contingent things themselves. You must be
driven to take the same course in respect of Gods promises of blessing, as well
as of his threatenings of judgment. But to distinguish herein as you do between
Gods word and his oath, is most out of season. For suppose God had sent Jonah
with the same message in this manner, say unto them, As I live, says the Lord,
yet forty days and Ninevie shall be destroyed, might it not admit the same
justification according to the doomes proposed by you thus, As I live, Ninevie
continuing in this sinful course, wherein I find it shall be destroyed at
forty days end, not otherwise.

Or if God should have been charged with perjury in saying this, As I live,
yet forty days and Ninevie shall be destroyed; should he not as well be
charged with untruth in saying barely thus, Yet forty days and Ninevic shall
be destroyed? Now whereas in the judgment pronounced by Jonah against Ninevic,
you never speak of any revoking the judgment threatened, though your tenent
carried you (as there I signified) so to speak, yet here (the case as you
profess being all one) you are bold to profess, that God may revoke the
blessing promised (and why (I pray you) may he not revoke his blessing
promised upon oath, as well as a blessing promised upon his bare word? for if
he may the one without breaking his word, why may he not do the other without
breaking his oath. Or if it be not lawful for God to break his oath, dare you
say it is lawful for him to break his word? Alas, do your wits carry you?
and whither would you carry us, if we should suffer our selves to be led by
you? You conclude with a qualification thus, Yet may we not say, that the
death or destruction of any to whom God promises life, is so truly the object
of his good will and pleasure, as the life and salvation of them is unto whom
he threatens destruction. This you say, but I had rather hear what you prove.

By the will of God, called voluntas beneplaciti, we understand no other thing
then Gods decree, or the determination of his will. And has not God as truly
willed the destruction of them that die in sin, without faith and repentance,
as he wills the salvation of them that die in faith and repentance. It is
true, God takes no delight in the destruction of any, considered in it self,
much less in their sins, whereby they bring destruction upon themselves; but
God delights both in the faith and repentance of his elect, and in their
salvation.

But this signification of good pleasure, is nothing to the purpose in this
distinction; for no Schooleman understands it in this sense. And I well know
Arminius, considering the usual acception of Voluntas beneplaciti, amongst
Divines professes, he had rather call it, Voluntas placiti, then Voluntas
beneplaciti. If such lettice like your lips, you may make your self merry with
them.

A second extent and accommodation of this distinction of Uoluntas signi, and
Voluntas beneplaciti, you allow of, applied to men after they have made up the
full measure of their iniquity, and are cut off from all possibility of
repentance. I had thought no man had filled up the full measure of his sin
until his, death; like as on the other side, no man has fulfilled the measure
of his obedience, until he has finished his course, as Revel. 11. 7. When
the witnesses had finished their testimony, the beast that came out of the
bottomless pit, made war against them, and slew them. You seem to speak it
of a certain measure, whereupon the door of repentance is shut upon them, and
thereupon excluded from all possibility of repentance; as here you say it was
with Pharaoh, especially after the 7. plague upon Egypt; whereupon you have
taken great pains to discourse at large in another Treatise, which I have well
considered, and examined your reasons throughout, and that following you (...);
yet there you confess that it must have been so with Pharaoh at Moses first
coming unto him, yea and was possible to have been so, when he was but 3.
years old. And indeed I do not see how it can be avoided, but that as many
as depart this life in their infancy are excluded from all possibility of
repentance.

But it may be you will apply this only to men of ripe years, but by your leave
such Pharaoh was not at three years old. And though God willed Pharaoh to let
his people go, and sent Moses and Aaron to him to that purpose; yet you say,
It was no branch of Gods good will and pleasure that Pharaoh should now repent:
Rather it was his good will and pleasure to have the heart of Pharaoh hardened:
though you restrain this to Pharaohs condition after the seventh plague, for
which I see no reason. So that in such a case you will have it lawful for God
by his reserved will, to recall that part of his will which he has declared
by his word or oath: and therefore as touching your holy asseveration mentioned
in the sixth Section, it must be restrained to them that have not yet filled up
the measure of their sin, as Pharaoh had after the seventh plague. For in
such a case God may will their death, notwithstanding his oath in show to the
contrary. For his meaning is this, As I live I will not the death of him that
dies, that is, I will not his death as a man, or as the son of Adam; neither
do I herein deifie Jesuitical equivocations or mental reservations; for I
take liberty to charge that upon mine adversaries, and therefore you may well
think I would not be so simple as to transgress in the same kind my self. And
I think so too, if God had not confounded your wits, but it is Gods course,
and most just, to strike with confusion those that build Babel; and he makes
the Egyptians to err in their counsels as a drunken man erreth in his vomit,
the issue whereof is to defile himself and his own favorites, even those
that sit next unto him.

In the same spirit you profess that God did punish Pharaoh for not letting
his people go; as though it had been free and possible for him to repent,
though indeed in your opinion it was not. But Pharaohs case was extraordinary,
you say, and not to be drawn into example. But by your leave if God did so but
once, it is no unjust thing for God to do so oftener; and therefore pray look
unto it, that whenever it is your lot to oppose your adversaries in such a
point, you do not lay to their charge that they make God to be unjust, if not
for conscience sake of the truth, yet at least for fear of contradicting your
self.

As for the Apostles intimation (you touch upon by the way) that it was an
argument of Gods great mercy and long suffering to permit Pharaoh to live any
longer upon earth, after he was become a vessel of wrath, destinated to
everlasting punishment in hell; I profess I am not so quick or accurate as to
observe any such intimation of the Apostle. What if you devised this to make
good some fictions of yours to that purpose, in another Treatise of yours,
which I have already weighed in the balance, and found them a great deal too
light of worth, to move any sober man to concur with you in opinion
thereabouts.

But whatsoever it be that the Apostle intimates, you seem to express strange
conceits, when you talk of Gods providence in suffering Pharaoh to live longer
on earth, after he was become a vessel of wrath destinated to everlasting
punishment in hell. I had thought every reprobate had been destinated to
everlasting punishment in hell before he was borne. For Gods destination of
them is the ordination of his will; and that I had thought you had not denied
to be everlasting. But you refer it to a certain time, as in special to
Pharaoh after the seventh plague; and in special to all after they have filled
up a certain measure of iniquity; and shall not men in like sort be
destinated to everlasting joies in heaven after they have filled up a certain
measure of obedience? And so a little after you tell us, that men do not
become reprobates, till a certain measure of iniquity be filled up; and so
in proportion men are not elect till a certain proportion of obedience be
filled up. Yet the Apostle plainly tells us, that the elect are elect of God
before the foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1. 4. and consequently so are
reprobates reprobated before the foundation of the world: for the word election
of some does connotate the reprobation of others. Yea Jacob was loved of God
before he was borne, and was not Esau hated also before he was borne? Romans 9.
Did God wait till the measure of Esaus sins was full, and the measure of
Jacobs obedience, before he did elect the one, and reprobate the other? And if
destination unto the punishment of hell, and on the other side destination unto
the joys of heaven, begin in time after the obedience of some, and
disobedience of others, what is the meaning of predestination? for what is
that, but the destination of some to the joys of heaven, and others to the
sorrows of hell? No doubt but if you proceed as you begin, we shall have a
world of new Divinity communicated unto us, to endoctrinate us in these latter
days.

To what end soever God plagued Pharaoh, for not doing that which he could not
do, all possibility of amending being taken from him, this action was just in
God, and so is the like, whersoever it be found to proceed from God. And
although Pharaoh could not repent without the grace of God, yet I make no doubt
but that he could have let Israel go, notwithstanding his obduration. And it
appears he did let them go after the ninth plague, which followed sometime
after the seventh plague. And so I doubt not but he could have refrained
himself from pursuing them when he had once dismissed them. And yet as for
not letting Israel go God brought ten plagues upon Egypt, so for pursuing
after them he drowned Pharaoh and his host in the red Sea.

Now in confidence of your performances in clearing your self from
contradictio^s in one point, you are as adventrous to fall upon another. The
Jesuits pretend they can equivocate without lying, and you take upon you to
speak contradiction without all contradiction: yet by your leave, if no body
else will, I will take care it may not pass without contradiction. There is no
contradiction (you say) between these two propositions; God from all eternity
did will the death of Pharaoh; God from all eternity did not will the death,
but rather the life of Pharaoh. In like sort we may say there is no
contradiction between these two propositions, God from all eternity did will
the salvation of Judas; God from all eternity did not will the salvation, but
the condemnation of Judas: and to proceed in the strain of your subtle
discourse, I go along by you step by step. For albeit Judas continued one and
the same man from his birth unto his death, yet did he not all that time
continue one and the same object of Gods immutable will and eternal decree.
This object did alter as Judas his dispositions or affections toward God or
his neighbor altered. There is no contrariety, much less contradiction
between these, God unfainedly hates sinners; God does not hate, but love the
elect, though they be sinners. For here the object of his hatred and love is
not the same; he hates sinners unfainedly as sinners, not having made up the
full measure of faith and repentance; but having made up the full measure of
faith and repentance, and good works, and having their souls betrothed unto
holiness, he loves them. His love of them as elect is no less necessary or
usual, then his hatred of them as sinners. But though he necessarily loves
them being once become elect, or having made up the full measure of good
works; yet was there no necessity laid upon them by his eternal decree to
make up such a measure of good works. No; to this sufficed the liberty of their
wills, both to perform such a measure of good works, and to carry themselves
like stout champions and patrons of this power of their free wills, and to
gratify the grace of God so far as to admit her activity, both to admonish
them aforehand, and upon their propension to that which is good to concur to
the performing of it.

He that walks in the Sun must needs be colored, and I have so long been
versed in the contemplation of your argumentive faculty, that I am grown
almost as sufficient to plead for the elects electing of themselves, as you to
plead for the reprobates reprobation of themselves; and which of us discharges
his part best, I leave it to the indifferent reader to consider; and I doubt
not but his sentence will be this; Et vitulo tu dignus and hic.

But let us run over the contexture of your discourse once more, and consider
it in it self. I say there is more sobriety in saying, God from all eternity
did not will the salvation of an elect, then that he did from all eternity not
will the damnation of a reprobate. For the only qualification of your saying
is this, He did not will the damnation of Pharaoh as a man; but the
qualification of my congruous assertion on the other side is this, God did not
will the salvation or life of an elect as a sinner. Now I appeal to any man's
judgment whether there be not greater congruitie between the terms in my
proposition, then between the terms in yours. The terms in mine are these,
Not will the salvation of an elect as a sinner; in yours they are these, Not
will the death of a reprobate as a man. Seeing it is well known, and Arminius
confesses it, that God can turn the holiest creature into nothing, without
any show of repugnance unto his justice, But to will the salvation of a sinner,
has some show of repugnancy to Gods justice.

But to deal with you closely, and upon a point. I deny that God did ever will
the salvation of Pharaoh; and I prove it by two reasons; If he did ever will
it, then Gods will is now changed; for certainly now he does not will his
salvation: But Gods will cannot change, He is without variableness or shadow
of change. If God would save Pharaoh, and did not, as it appears he did not,
then the reason why Pharaoh was not saved, was because God could not save him.
This was Austines discourse long ago. For a father desiring the saving of his
child, and not performing of it; who doubts but that the reason is because he
cannot. It is enough for us that Pharaoh continued the same man; for like as of
the same man it cannot be verified that both he shall be saved, and shall not
be saved; so neither can it be verified of the same man, that both God will
save him, and will not save him. Neither was Pharaoh ever in any other estate,
then in the state of damnation.

In like sort the contradiction is evident enough in those propositions which
you add to illustrate the contradictious nature (as you pretend) of the
former; as if you should say, Ask my fellow whether I am a thief, which is
nimis familiaris probatio. As if you should say, I unfainedly love such a man,
and yet I hate him; here is no contradiction: or as if a King should say, I
unfainedly love such a one, yet I Will hang him; yet this with more probability
may be saved from contradiction.

It is true, we may parcere personis, and dicere de vitiis, love the man, and
hate his qualities, and manifest my love in seeking to redeem him from his
lewd conversations, by prayer unto God, by persuasion toward the man himself.
But to say I unfainedly love him, and yet I hate him, and think to save it
from contradiction, by saying I love him as a man, and hate him as a lewd
person; is worse then for Adam to seek with fig leaves to cover his
nakedness.

To say God loves men as they have not made up the full measure of their
iniquity, is manifestly to imply that God loves a reprobate until he has
made up the full measure of his iniquity, and that this measure being full, God
ceasing to love him, God is changed; for Gods love is an act in God, and is
made to cease after a certain time by your doctrine, and be turned into
hatred. More probable it is to say that God hates all men, (seeing they are
borne and bred in sin) until they are regenerate and grafted into the body
of Christ. Yet this is untrue: For Gods love is an everlasting love, as without
end, so without beginning.

If you had distinguished of love as Aquinas does, 1. q. 23. art. 4. and said,
that God may be said to love all things that he has made, in as much as he
wishes some good unto them; but for as much as he wishes not unto them a
certain good, to wit, eternal life, therefore he is said not to love but to
hate some, your discourse had been more specious.

Touching a necessity laid upon them by Gods decree to fill up the measure of
sin, Arminius acknowledges, Deum voluisse Achabam mensuram scelerum suorum
implere, God would that Ahab should make up the full measure of his iniquity;
which is as much as to say that God decreed it; and the Scripture professes
that both Herod and Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles and people of Israel,
were gathered together to do what Gods hand and his will had determined before
to be done; so then in betraying, condemning, and crucyfying of Christ, they
did but that which God determined should come to pass.

And upon supposition that God will expose any man unto temptation, and leave
him therein destitute of his grace, all which it is but to harden him; we say
it is necessary that men shall go on in sin without repentance, as your
self acknowledge was verified of Pharaoh after the seventh plague: only we
say this is necessity only secandum quid, and not simpliciter, and hinders not
our liberty: for it is necessary that such a thing should come to pass, but
not necessarily but contingently and freely, like as upon supposition of Gods
decree to make the world; it is necessary that God should make it, but how? not
necessarily like a natural agent, but freely, like a voluntary agent.

Yet once again to take a view of your uncouth tenants obscurely delivered,
when you say, Pharaoh did not continue one and the same object of Gods decree.
It is a very strange speech; for was not the man Pharaoh the object of Gods
decree? If he was so, and continued the same man, does it not follow, that he
continued the same object of Gods decree; notwithstanding his person altered
much in the space of his life? You may as well say of one of Gods elect, as of
David and Paul, that neither of them continued the same object of Gods decree,
if the alteration of their natures made them become different objects of Gods
decree. Nay, much more may you say so, because far greater alterations are
found in the elect of God then in the reprobate: for in the elect there is
found an alteration from the state of nature, to the state of grace; no such
alteration is found in the reprobate: the reprobate only grows from bad to
worse; the elect have grown so too before their calling, but by their
effectual calling they are changed, and of the children of this world, they
are made the children of God. And after their calling, though after the
committing of one sin, they fall into another, as do the reprobate; yet
withal again, they return unto God by repentance; no such alteration is
found in the reprobates, but still prosiciunt in pejus, they grow worse and
worse.

Again, if because the person of a man alters, therefore the object of Gods
decree alters, seeing that a man's person alters not only in the course of
manners, but in the course of nature, from childehood to youth, from youth to
middle age, from middle age to old age, as also from health to sickness, from
sickness to health, therefore the object of Gods decree in this respect
alters also.

If you say the case is not alike; I say you might then have prevented this
objection by plain dealing, and told us not only in what case, but why, in
the case you mean, the object of Gods decree alters: whereas we are now
driven to fish it out as well as we can, and bring your opinion to light, and
set it forth in the proper and distinct lineaments thereof. Now the reason of
the difference I conceive to be this, to wit, because God does not will the
death of a man, according to his naturalls, but according to his moralls, and
considered in his moralls. As if you should say, God did not will the death of
Pharaoh, but of wicked Pharaoh.

But say I, Pharaoh did always continue wicked Pharaoh, from his birth to his
death, never altering from wickedness to goodness; and therefore even in this
respect he still continued the same object of Gods decree to damn him. Perhaps
you will further say, that Pharaoh, as wicked, was not the object of Gods
decree of condemnation, but as having filled up the measure of his iniquity.

But I say again, from the first time that he thus became the object of Gods
decree of condemnation, he still continued the same: for your self confess,
after once they have filled up a certain measure of iniquity, all possibility
of repentance is taken from them. The last refuge for you, is to say, that this
speech of yours in denying Pharaoh to continue the same object of Gods decree,
is to be understood not in respect of one and the same decree, but in respect
of different decrees, thus; Though Pharaoh were wicked all his life, yet he was
not all along the object of Gods decree of condemnation, but until he had
filled the measure of his iniquity, he was the object of Gods decree to save
him. For in the consequence you acknowledge, that God does unfainedly love all
men, until such time as they have filled up the measure of their sin. And
accordingly in another Treatise of yours you acknowledge, that men may change
from the state of the elect, to the state of reprobates. And immediately
before, you profess that God from all eternity did not will the death, but
rather the life of Pharaoh.

This you might have expressed in plain terms without faultering, but you
were loath, as it seems, to alienate men's minds with so foul a Tenent,
touching the change, not of the object of Gods will and decree only, but of
Gods very will and decree also; which manifestly appears by this opening your
Tenent, though in terms you profess Gods will is immutable, and would have
your reader conceive, that all the alteration is in the object of Gods will and
decree, not in the will and decree of God himself.

And over and above herehence it follows, that if Pharaoh had died before the
seventh wonder (for till then he had not filled up the measure of his sins by
your opinion) Pharaoh had been saved, though he neither had faith nor
repentance. For till their souls be betroathed unto wickedness, God does not
hate them; this is your dialect: whence it follows, that either all infants
of Turks and Saracens dying in their infancy are saved, or else all men as
soon as they are borne are betrothed unto wickedness, and consequently all
reprobates from their birth unto their death continue the same objects of Gods
decree without alteration.

And then again, I pray consider, if God hates them not, and wills not their
damnation, until by filling up the measure of their sin they are betroathed
unto wickedness (as you speak) then surely he did not hate them, nor will
the condemnation of them in their infancy, much less did he will it before
they were borne, much less did he will it before the world was made; yet you
have already plainly professed, that God willed the death of Pharaoh from all
eternity; and if from all eternity, then sure he willed it before the world was
made, much more before Pharaoh was borne, much more before Pharaoh had filled
up the measure of his iniquity. Yet I confess that though God from all
eternity willed the death of Pharaoh, and consequently before Pharaoh was
borne, and much more before he had filled up the measure of his iniquity. Yet
God did not will that Pharaoh should be damned before he had filled up the
measure of his iniquity, much less that he should be damned in his infancy,
much less before he was borne, much less before the world was. So that these
two propositions may well stand together without contradiction, God from all
eternity willed that Pharaoh should be damned; but God did not will that
Pharaoh should be damned from all eternity, or before he was borne, or in his
infancy, or before he had filled up the measure of his sins. But the
propositions which you take upon you to free from contradiction, are of a far
different nature, and indeed directly contradictious. God did from all eternity
will the death of Pharaoh; God did not from all eternity will the death, but
rather willed the life of Pharaoh. And for clearing it, you only tell us that
Pharaoh was not the same object of Gods decree, though he continued the same
man. A proposition both very obscure in it self, and void of all efficacy to
free your self from contradiction, neither do you take any pains to
accommodate it, but leaving that as a blanke for your propitious reader to fill
up after his own judgment or affection rather. And the issue of all is, to
profess that God did indeed from all etetnity will the life of Pharaoh, and
so continued to will it, until such time as he had filled up the measure of
his sin; and that from thenceforth he hated him, as he does all reprobates,
having once betrothed themselves unto wickedness: which assertion manifestly
betraying your opinion as touching the making of Gods will mutable, your desire
to satisfy your reader with calling Gods will immutable, and saying that the
object of Gods decree is not still the same: Sed quid ego verb a audiam facta
cum vidiam? You manifestly maintain, that Gods love and will to save, does
cease upon the filling up the measure of sin, and betrothing a man's self to
wickedness, and thereupon and from thenceforth he hates them, and wills their
death and damnation, whereas till that time he willed their life and salvation.
These propositions (God loves all men, God does not love all men) I say, are
contradictories. All rules of contradiction justify these to be contradictions.

And your self confess as much in effect; when going about to clear them
from contradiction, you quite alter the form of them, by shaping them thus in
effect, God loves all men till they have filled up the measure of their sins,
but when once they have filled up the measure of their sins, he loves them
not. Now these propositions are quite different from the former, neither do we
charge these with contradiction as we charged the former. But that wherewith
we charge these is this, they make the will of God mutable, contrary to the
express testimony of the holy Ghost, saying, I the Lord am not changed, Mal.
3. 6. And Saint James professes, that with the Lord there is no variableness
nor shadow of change, which you perceiving, are loath to speak your mind
plainly, but to avoid so gross an untruth, had rather cast your self upon a
manifest contradiction, in saying, God loves all men, and God loves not all
men; and to free your self from contradiction, betray your corrupt opinion
another way, in making Gods love to change into hatred after a certain time,
to wit, after the measure of sin is filled up: and the only shift you have
to charm it, is to confound the difference of time (which alone avoides the
contradiction) and expressing it thus, God loves all men as men, or as men
which have not made up the full measure of iniquity; but having made up that,
or having their souls betrothed to wickedness, he hates them.

But this will not serve your turn: for seeing this contradiction of making up
the full measure of sin, did not belong unto man from the beginning, but
only after a certain space of time; the difference specified must necessarily
resolve it self into a mere difference of time, thus God did love them till
they had made up the full measure of sin, but after that he hated them. And
this is further proved: For if the difference only consisted in respect of
different considerations at the same time; then the distinction should have
place as well after this full measure of sin is made up, as before. And so
Pharaoh after the filling up of the full measure of sin, might be said to be
loved of God as a man, and hated as having filled up the measure of sin: but
no where do^ you make use of any such distinction. Nay, much more should it
have use in this case, and indeed only in this case: for until a man has
filled up the measure of his sin, this distinct consideration has no place:
for a body may be considered as Ens, or Natural, or as Quantum, because he
is both Ens and Natural, and Quantum.

But a man connot be considered at any time as having filled up the measure of
his sin, but only after that time comes, he may be so considered; for to
consider him to be that which he is not, is not to consider him what he is,
but to feign him to be what he is not. Again, when you say, God loves all men
as men; What is the meaning of this? What do^ you denote by this love of God?
For we commonly say, love is not in God, Quoad affectum, but Quoad effectum;
at least, Quoad affectum, it is nothing at all different from Gods will. Now I
desire to know what that thing is which God wills to man as a man, or what is
the effect of this love: and I doubt not but when you say, God hates them as
having made up the full measure of their sin: your meaning is, that God wills
their damnation, and that for this measure of their sin. In proportion your
answer should be this, That God wills the salvation of all men as they are men;
yet here is very great disproportion; for when you say, God wills the damnation
of men having filled up the measure of their sin: I find herein a manifest
difference between the reprobate and the elect as touching the cause of
damnation, and that on man's part; namely, the making up the full measure of
their sin, which is found only in reprobates, not in the elect.

But when you say on the contrary side; God wills the salvation of all men as
they are men, I find no difference at all between the reprobate and the elect
as touching the cause of salvation, either on man's part, or on Gods part; for
as touching Gods will, that passes (you say) upon the salvation of all without
difference: then on man's part likewise there is no difference at all, if they
are considered only as men; for the reprobates are men as well as the elect.
To help this, you rest not in this consideration of them as men, but add a
clause unto it very inconfiderately as touching the form, thus, Or at having
made up the full measure of their sin. Now the disjunctive argues that these
two considerations are equivalent, which is untrue; for the first consideration
proceeds in abstraction from the second.

But I conceive the weakness of your cause urges you to take hold of all
helps, and thereupon you confound things that differ; for in some cases, the
first consideration usually has place; as when it is said, God hates nothing
that he has made: therefore he hates not man, true, say some, he hates not
man as man: and this distinction seems plausible to some, and therefore you
seemed willing to help your self with this by the way, for it might stir
some propitious effection in a pliable reader. But then finding this bed a
great deal too short to stretch your self thereon, you added by way of
disjunctive another consideration, which is this; As not having made up the
full measure of sin. And because you rest upon it, I think good to consider
it.

Now against this I have already excepted on the part of reprobates, and in the
particular of Pharaoh; and argued, that then Pharaoh had been saved, had he
died before the seventh wonder? for, till then in your opinion he had not made
up the full measure of his sin: yet we do not find, that Pharaoh before
this time had either faith or repentance.

Now I will propose another exception on the part of Gods elect. Paul never
filled up the measure of his sin, for if he had, then had he been a
reprobate; but he was an elect, therefore if he had died immediately after
the s^oning of Steven, he had been saved, though accessory to his death; For
he kept the garments of them that slew him, as himself confesses. In a word,
all the elect, though dying before ever they were called unto faith and
repentance, should notwithstanding be saved also.

My third exception is against the disproportion that nevertheless is found in
these propositions; for when it is said, God wills the damnation of them that
have filled up the measure of their sin, the filling up the measure of sin,
is noted here as the cause of their damnation; but in saying God wills the
salvation of all, not having filled up the measure of their sin, the not
having filled up the measure of their sin, cannot be noted as the cause of
their salvation. And therefore to mend this foul disproportion, the Genius of
your tenet, drives you in conscience to proceed, and profess plainly, that
God wills the salvation of all men that believe and repent: and accordingly
God wills the damnation of all that do not believe and repent, and such
indeed alone are they that fill up the measure of their sin. Now herein we
agree with you, namely, in justifying the truth of both these propositions.

But like as from the latter it follows not, that God wills the damnation
of all, but of some only, namely of those that do fill up the measure of
their sin, and break not off their sins by faith and repentance: so from the
former it follows, not that God wills the salvation of all, but only that
he wills the salvation of those that believe and repent. And if you please
further to infer that, because perseverance in sin of infidelity and
impenitencie, as they are the meritorions causes of damnation so they are the
meritorious causes of the decree of damnation also: I think I may with as good
reason take liberty to infer from the former, that seeing faith and
repentance, yea and good works also are the disposing causes of salvation,
therefore they are to be accounted the disposing causes of the decree of
salvation, that is of our election also: And so your opinion shall appear at
full and to life in his proper coulors, not an hairs breadth different, either
from the Arminian heresy of late, or from the Pelagian heresy of old.

8 The deductions you speak of in my judgment deserve to be called dictates
rather then deductions. As for modern Catechismes, you are not the first that
nibble at them: it is a point of imperious learning now a days from on high to
despise such performances. But to speak as a free man, the less they shall
consort with these your deductions as you call them, the less shall they
differ from the truth. As for your concurrence with Bishop Hooper in his
preface upon the commandments, which you glory of now a second time: In this
place it is hard, if not impossible to discern by your text what that passage
is of Bishop Hoopers, which you rest upon with ostentation of your concurrence
with him, as if your opinions were confirmed by his martyrdom. In the close of
the second Section of this chapter, you told us, That it was not every degree
of man's hatred or enmity unto God, but a full measure of it which utterly
exempts man from Gods love; and withal, that this was observed by Bishop
Hooper. But in stead of alleging any passage in him to this purpose, you
referred us there to the fourth paragraffe of this chapter, which is this
present section.

Yet concerning that sentence, I see a good construction may be made of it,
taking love, quoad effectum (as usually passions are in such sense attributed
unto God, and not quoad affectum) and the chiefest effect of Gods love is
salvation. Now it is most true, that nothing but final perseverance in sin
does bereave men of salvation, of glory; nothing but final perseverance in
sin, stands in opposition to the possibility of grace succeeding in the same
subject. Now albeit in that which follows it cannot be judged by your text,
what you borrow out of Bishop Hooper, and what you do not. Yet upon consulting
Bishop Hoopers Preface unto his exposition of the ten Commandments, I find,
that both this sentence following, Every man is called in the Scripture wicked
and the enemy of God, for the privation and lack of faith and love that he
owes to God; and all that follows hereupon to the end of this eighth Section
of yours, is taken out of that Preface of his: and I wonder not a little what
you meant, not to discover so much, neither by express profession, nor by
changing the letter, that thereby at least it might be taken to be another man's
discourse, and not your own.

Well, I am willing to consider what you allege out of him, and whether his
writings be so consonant as you speak to your deductions. First, you call
him, A learned Bishop, and blessed Martyr; Et quis Herculem vituperat? You
add, that this exposition of the ten Commandments made by him, Is a fit
Catechism for a Bishop to make. I am persuaded, the whole Church of England
has a reverend opinion of his learning, of his holiness, of his martyrdom;
and that this Catechism of his is worthy of a Bishop: but it follows not
herehence, that every Bishop in England does: neither do I think you your
self expect they should concur with him in every opinion of his expressed in
this book.

In his declaration of the ninth Commandment. Fol. 80. he justifies mendatium
ossiciosum, and professes, that it is required in some cases; Do you look
that all the Bishops of England should concur rather with Bishop Hooper, then
with Bishop Austine in this opinion.

Upon the eighth Commandment, Fol. 74. he complains, saying, A great pity it
is to see how far that office of a Bishop is degenerated from the original
in the Scripture, it was not so at the beginning when Bishops were at the best,
as the Epistle of Paul to Titus testifies, that willed him to ordain, in every
City of Creet a Bishop: and Fol. 79. *as sharply as closely censureth the
Bishops of his days, for arrogating to themselves so much wit as to rule and
serve in both states, in the Church and in the Civil policy; and to the
contrary professes, that one of them is more then any man is able to satisfy;
and that it is not possible that one should do both well, and that it is a
great oversight of the Princes and higher powers of the earth, so to charge
them with two burdens, when none of them, as he says, is able to bear the
least of them both. Do you expect that all the Bishops in England should be
of his judgment in this?

On the same commandment, Fol. 73. as touching those who have great Forests
or Parkes of Dear or Conies, which pasture and feed upon their neighbors
ground, or Columbaries whereas Doves assemble and haun^, and those feed on the
poores corn, he referres it to the charity of every man, whether the keeping
of such beasts be not against Gods laws, and man's laws, and whether it be
not suffered rather for a few men's pleasures, then for many men's prosit: Do
you think that either Church or State are precisely of his opinion, as it is
manifested by this?

Upon the seventh Commandment, Fol. 69. he maintains, that upon divorse in
case of adultery, it is lawful to marry another; and not so only, but that
the adulterous party ought to be put to death: Do you wish that the Church and
State of England would be of the same mind with him in this?

Upon the fourth Commandment he avoucheth, that although the ceremony of the
Sabbath be taken away, which appertained only to the common wealth of the
Hebrews, yet one day of the week to preserve and use the word of God and his
Sacraments, is not abrogated: and that therefore in this are two things to be
observed, the one ceremonial during for the time, the other moral, and never
to be abolished as long as the Church of Christ shall continue upon the earth.
Again, This Sunday, says he, that we observe, is not the commandment of man,
as many say, that would under the pretense of this one law, bind the Church of
Christ to all other laws that men have ungodly prescribed unto the Church: but
it is by express words commanded that we should observe this day (the Sunday)
for our Sabbath, as the words of Saint Paul declares, commanding every man to
appoint his alms for the poor in Sunday: the text says, in one of the
Sabbath: it is an Hebrew phrase, and it is as much as to say, in the Sunday: as
you may read the same manner of speech in Luke and John, of the women that came
to the Sepulcher to anoint the dead body of Christ. Luke says, In one of the
Sabbaths early they came to the Sepulcher: and so says John by the same words,
the which was the Sunday, as no man doubts; for it is our faith, that Christ
roso the third day.

I presume you will not prescribe to all the Bishops and Divines in this
kingdom to be of Bishop Hoopers opinion in this point. Now if in these
particulars it be lawful to differ from him in opinion, without offense of
Church or State; I hope we shall have as great liberty to differ from him in
other things also upon good ground.

Yet I speak not this, as if I found this godly Bishop to justify that Tenet
of yours, for confirmation whereof you make use of his authority. And that
Tenet of yours is this, that there is a certain time when the wicked have
filled up the full measure of their iniquity, though they live many years
after; and such you conceive was the case of Pharaoh after the seventh plague.
And that from that time forwards all possibility of amendment is taken from
them. And until that time God does unfainedly love them. But having made up
that measure, and so having their souls betrothed unto wickedness, he hates
them. That then they become reprobates, and not till then; and from thence to
their lives end it is not Gods will and pleasure they should repent, but rather
that it is Gods good will and pleasure that they should have their hearts
hardened. Your words are these in the precedent Section, page 180. God loves all
men unfainedly as they are men, or a^ men which have not made up the full
measure of iniquity: but having made up that, or having their souls betrothed
unto wickedness, he hates them. And again; He necessarily hates them being
once become reprobates, or having made up the full measure of iniquity. And
page 179. It was no branch of Gods good will and pleasure that Pharaoh should
now repent, or be willing to let Israel go. Rather it was his good will and
pleasure (specially after the seventh plague) to have the heart of Pharaoh
hardened. And a little after, God plagued Pharaoh for not doing that which now
he could not, all possibility of amendment being taken from him. My opinion to
the contrary is, that no man has filled up the full measure of his iniquity
till death. As touching the possibility of amendment, I acknowledge none in
man, without the regenerating grace of God, whereby he gives man repentance.
Neither do I know any time in the course of man's life wherein any man is
excluded from possibility of repentance by the grace of God. We know God gave
the thief repentance upon the cross. Our Savior gives us to understand, that
God calls some at the very last hour of the day. Paul admonishes Timothy to
carry himself gently toward them that are without; (...), if so be God at
any time may give them repentance, that they may come to amendment, out of the
snare of the devil, by whom they are led captive to do his will. Of old it
was wont to be said, Inter pontem and fontem; and the like is usual amongst
us: Between the stirrup and the ground,
Mercy I asked, mercy I found.


All this which follows, and which you have transcribed out of Bishop Hooper,
I find nothing that contradicts any of these assertions of mine, or that
justifies any of your opposite assertions, not in this which immediately
follows thus; Every man is in Scripture called wicked, and the enemy of God,
for the privation and lack of faith and love, that he owes to God. Et impij
vocantur, qui non omnino sunt pij; that is, They are called wicked, that in all
things honor not God, believe not in God, and observe not his commandments as
they should do; which we cannot do by reason of this natural infirmity, or
hatred of the flesh, as Paul calls it, against God. In this sense takes Paul
the word wicked. So must we interpret S. Paul, and take his words, or else no
man should be damned. In all this I find nothing to that purpose whereto you
allege it.

Yet by the way, I am not of Master Hoopers opinion, in saying, that They were
called wicked (meaning in holy Scripture) that in all things honor not God,
believe not in God, and observe not his commandments as they should, which we
cannot do by reason of this natural infirmity, etc. For all this is verified
of the very Saints and children of God here on earth; and I do not find that
the Saints of God in holy Scripture, by reason of their infirmities, not
honoring God, not believing in God, not observing his commandments in such
measure as they should (as God knows, and our consciences well know that in
many things we offend all,) are therefore called wicked. Especially considering
that the Greek word which Master Hooper aims at, and which he renders by the
word wicked in English, is (...), as appears by his reference to Romans 5. 8. In
this sense (says Bishop Hooper) takes Paul this word wicked, when he says
that Christ died for the wicked. Now this state noted by S. Paul in these
words, is not the state of grace, but the state of sin precedent to
justification, and the state of enmity against God, as appears by the two next
verses; Much more being justified by his blood, we shall be saved by his life.
10. For if when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his
Son, etc. Whereby it is manifest that the state of sin in which we were
when we were reconciled to God by Christ's death, was the state of enmity
against God. And indeed otherwise there were no place for reconcilement, which
consists in making them friends which before were enemies. Neither do I know
any Divine of master Hoopers opinion, in construing S. Paul in this manner, as
if these sinners (...), (which he calls wicked) for whom Christ died, were only
such as do not honor God, believe in God, and observe his commandments as
they should, which we know is incident to the very children of God, and to the
most righteous Saints that are on the earth, who yet are never accounted in
holy Scripture (for ought I know) the enemies of God. Yet such are they termed
for whom Christ died, and who S. Paul says are reconciled to God by the death
of his Son.

I willingly grant that Christ died to procure the salvation of none but such
as sooner or later should become the Saints of God, to honor him, believe in
him, and observe his commandments, though not in such measure as they should,
by reason of the flesh which they carry about them, still lusting against the
spirit; and this seems, by this place, undoubtedly to be the opinion of Bishop
Hooper, though he erreth in the interpretation of S. Paul, who in this place
considers not what shall be their condition sooner or later, for whom Christ
died, but only shows what was their condition when Christ died for them,
thereby the more to commend the love of God toward us, who sent his Son to
die for us, when we were sinners, and reconciled us to himself by the death
of his Son, what time we were his enemies. And I am persuaded your self are of
the same opinion with me in this, though I will not say that the evidence of S.
Paul's text seemed so plain unto you, this very way I have interpreted it, that
therefore you concealed S. Paul's passage, mentioned by master Hooper thus, When
he says that Christ died for the wicked; and in the margent referres us to
Romans 5. 8. all which you have handsomely left out, to what end I know not. But
hereby it comes to pass, that the reader may be to seek of that passage of S.
Paul, in case he have no other means to judge thereof, then your transcribing
it.

As for the reason of Bishop Hooper to justify this interpretation of S. Paul's
text, it is nothing consequent, as when he says, So we must interpret Saint
Paul's words, or else no man should be damned. If S. Paul had said, Christ died
for all the wicked, or for all sinners, then indeed we should be driven to
seek out some such interpretation of the word wicked, or sinners, or else none
should be damned. But S. Paul does not say, Christ died for all that are
wicked, or for all sinners, but for us sinners: his words are these, God
commends his love to us, that while we were yet sinners Christ died for us.
Now he writes unto Christians, and for such only he died, though they were
not Christians when Christ died for them, but rather in the state of enmity
against God. And thus to appropriate Christ's dying for mankind, does
manifestly appear to be master Hoopers meaning, as before I showed, albeit he
deviates from the right interpretation of S. Paul's Text, in the place mentioned
by him.

That which follows does in my judgment carry a greater show of justifying
your former assertions, and yet but a show neither; as when he says, Now we
know that Paul himself, S. John, and Christ damneth the contemners of God, and
such as willingly continue in sin, and will not repent. Those the Scripture
excludes from the general promise of grace. It may seem that The contemners
of God, and such as willingly continue in sin and will not repent, in master
Hoopers phrase, are the same in your judgment with those, whom you account to
have filled up the measure of iniquity. But what ground have you for that?
Master Hooper says not, that all such whom he accounts contemners of God, and
such as willingly continue and sin, and will not repent, have hereupon filled
up the measure of their iniquity, or that hereupon all possibility of
amendment is taken from them; these are your assertions, they are not master
Hoopers. Again, all contemners of God, and such as willingly continue in sin,
and will not repent, master Hooper says, the Scripture excludes from the
general promise of grace, and this he utters without any distinction, as well
he may, to wit for the present, and so long as they continue in this their
contempt and hardness of heart. For as much as the promise of grace, both for
the pardon of sin, and salvation of our souls, belongs to none but such as
break off their sinful courses by faith and repentance. But you distinguish
between such contemners of God, and presumptuous sinners, and tell us that
some of them have arived to the full measure of their iniquity, and that there
is no possibility of their amendment, such as Pharaoh was after the seventh
plague; others, though contemners of God, etc. yet in this their course of
contempt, have not filled up the measure of their iniquity, such as Pharaoh was
before the seventh plague, who undoubtedly was a contemner of God before that
time, and one that willingly continued in sin, and would not repent; and of
all such you profess that God does unfainedly love them.

Now there are no tracks or footsteps of such strange assertions as either of
these to be found in Bishop Hooper. Of all contemners of God he professes
according unto Scripture, that they are excluded from all promise of grace, to
wit, for the present; he does not say, God unfainedly loves any of them: but as
for the time to come, he does not affirm that all possibility of amendment is
taken from them. Had he thought so, then he should acknowledge them to be in
a desperate condition.

But he is so far from this, that he accounts Desperation to be a
principal let and impediment unto godliness, chap. 18. fol. 90. The first
let, says he, or impediment is desperation, when as men think they cannot be
saved, but are excluded from all mercy; and a little after, Of the contrary
nature (to presumption) is desperation, it takes from God his mercy: For when
they offend and continue in sin, they think there is no mercy left for them;
and that as in the next sentence he shows, specially because of custom and
long continuance in sin. Then he proceeds, saying, This discourse and
progress in that knowledge of sin bears him in hand that it is impossible
to return unto God: This is as much as in your phrase to affirm, that, all
possibility of amendment is taken from him.

But, does Mr. Hooper justify this? Nothing less, for this is a maine let or
impediment to repentance, which he desires to remove out of the way of sinners,
and to that he proceeds in this manner, Moses, says he, like a good Physician
teaches a remedy against this dangerous disease, and shows the way unto
God, declares that God is full of mercy, and ready to forgive; and begins
his oration in this manner, unto such as be afflicted and oppressed with
sin; When there comes upon thee all those things, when God has afflicted
thee for thy sins, and thou returnest unto him with all thy heart, he shall
deliver thee from captivity, and receive thee to his mercy again. Of the which
text learn this doctrine, that God will always forgive, how many and how
horrible soever the sins be, and learn to fear presumption, and to beware
of desperation. So that hoe acknowledges no just cause of desperation, no not
in respect of custom and long continuance in sin.

The next sentence in Mr. Hooper, transcribed by you in this eighth Section of
yours, conteines no more then that which we all acknowledge. Thou see, says
he, by the places before rehearsed, that though we cannot believe in God as
undoubtedly as is required, by reason of this our natural sickness and
disease; yet for Christ, sake in the judgment of God, we are accounted as
faithful believers, for whose sake this natural disease and sickness is
pardoned, by what name soever Saint Paul calls the natural infirmity and
original sin in man. This is something concerning the nature of original
sin, in the opinion of Mr. Hooper; nothing at all touching a certain state
of sin, wherein all possibility of amendment is taken from a man, to which
purpose Mr. Hooper is alleged by you in this place.

Yet because I do not know what reaches you have in this also; I answer, that
Mr. Hooper speaks of original sin, as it is found in the regenerate, and as
it is in them, he calls it only, A natural sickness and disease. And
indeed, when we are once regenerate, we are no longer dead in sin, no
longer estranged from the life of God.

But herehence it follows not, that Mr. Hooper was of opinion, that original
sin was even in the unregenerate to be accounted only A natural sickness
and disease, and not rather a death in sin; especially considering that the
holy Apostle acknowledges, A law in his members rebelling against the law of
his mind, and leading him captive to the law of sin, and calls it, A body
of death, crying out against it, and saying, Who shall deliver me from this
body of death? Romans 7. 1. The last clause, as I take it, makes more for your
present purpose, as when he says, And this imperfection and natural
sickness taken of Adam, excludes not the person from the promise of God in
Christ, except we transgress the limits and bounds of original sin by our!
own folly and malice, and either of a contempt or hate of Gods word, we fall
into sin, and transform ourselves into the image of the devil. Then we
exclude by this means ourselves from the promises and merits of Christ, who
only received our infirmities and original disease, and not the contempt of
him and his law.

This passage I confess is somewhat strange, and of my knowledge has troubled
some, conc^iving it as an assertion of yours, and not so much as dreaming that
it was delivered by Mr. Hooper. I answer therefore; First of all, that this
serves not your turn for the present, and that in two respects. First, you
distinguish the contempt of Godsword, and of his law, according to different
degrees; eithersuch as was in Pharaoh before the seventh plague, or such as was
in Pharaoh after the seventh plague. And notwithstanding the former contempt of
Gods word and his law, you profess, that God unfainedly loves all such, in
whom such a contempt is found, because for sooth as yet they have not filled up
the full measure of their contempt: And as for such in whom is found a farther
degree of contempt then this, all possibility of amendment is taken from them.

Now Mr. Hooper does not make any such distinction, much less does he cast
himself upon any such uncoth assertions as you deliver hereupon, as before I
have showed. Secondly, your doctrine of filling up the measure of iniquity,
proceeds of men in state of nature; but Mr. Hooper delivers that before
rehearsed of men in the state of grace. And in my judgment his meaning is no
more then this, that imperfections of faith and holiness, may and do still
consist with the ^ate of grace in this life; but contempt or hate of Gods word,
and transformation of our selves into the image of the Devil, cannot stand
with the state of grace; not denying but that all contempt and hatred of Gods
word, and the fruits of the image of the Devil in us, in case they are broken
off, and an end is set unto them by repentance, are borne by Christ upon the
Cross, and satisfaction made for them by the death of Christ, as well as for
original sin: nor affirming that any man once brought unto the state of
grace, does at any time break forth so far, as to contemn or hate Gods
word, or to transform himself into the image of the Devil.

But his meaning in my judgment is only this, that Christ has made
satisfaction for the imperfections of our faith and holiness, although we
continue therein until death: but he has not made satisfaction for the
contempt and hatred of his word, and for our transformation of our selves into
the image of the Devil (as h^ calls it) in case men do continue therein
unto death.

Imperfections may and shall continue, and still be pardoned, but contempt
must not. This has seemed to others as well as to my self, an harsh sentence,
and I have taken some pains to clear it: but how little it serves your turn,
to that purpose whereto you allege it, is easily discovered.

SECT. III.
That Gods will and pleasure is never frustrated, albeit his unspeakable love
take no effect in many to whom it is unfainedly tendered.

CHAP. XVI.
In what sense God may be said to have done all that he could for his vineyard,
and for such as perish.

I Have now waded through fifteen Chapters of these your Contemplations, and
should by this in reason be pretty well acquainted with the manner of your
discourse. But I find my self as much pus^ed in searching after the coherence
of the parts of the first Section here, as hitherto I have been in any part of
the Treatise. But it may be I do but labor to gather that which you never
strewed, and then no marvel if I labor in vain.

As in other parts so in this it may be your purpose was to write Quodlibets:
well, such as they are, I purpose to consider them as I find them. To sum up
the particulars; in the first place you discover unto us the causes of
conceiving difficulties, and of ignorance in assoiling them, and that is
because we extend this Maxim, (Both parts of contradictories cannot be true,)
not so far as we should, and the reason thereof is (you say) because we
extend our power to the utmost, yea farther then justice or goodness can
accompany it: To this you add (...) our nature is humourous and inconstant,
and therefore nothing can imply any constant contradiction to our nature, and
that look what is constant and still the same, that will at one time or other
contradict our humor. And humors, you say, enraged with contradiction arm
power against whatsoever contradicts them.

By the way you tell us, that the use of power in creatures sensitive is to
satiate their appetite of sense; in man, to accomplish his will and desire of
good. And that being corrupt, his power becomes an under-commander unto his
unruly appetites, as in voluptuous men; and that in men esteemed good, motions
of equity are so weak, that men yield their consents to such proposals, as
were they firm, they would offensively contradict them. And the reason why
they yield, is lest upstart appetites, which custom countenanceth, should be
enlarged by reluctance: But love, you say, is not alike set on diverse objects,
but divides itself unequally, when it comes to opposition between sense and
reason; our selves and friends or common equity: And the inconveniences whereto
the world and flesh exposes us are reducible to two heads, the blinding of the
judgment, and consequently the abusing of power and authority.

Then again you return to our unconstant humor, and upon the back of that
tell us, that though none does good, yet we may do less evil then others.
And lastly, that they who love equity, are hardly drawn to dispense with
injustice; and at last having sat long, you hatch an excellent Maxim, that
where judgment is infallible, and love to justice invincible, there ^s not
possible to transgress in judgment. All which when I compare together, and
with your theme proposed, How God may be said to have done all that he could
for his vineyard, it calls to my remembrance a certain mad fellows discourse,
when I was a Scholar at Winchester, that would talk of master Killigree, and
Abbey lands, fat venison, and such like uncoherences a long time together.

But let us examine them apart: Both parts of contradiction cannot be true; and
it is as true that both parts of contradiction cannot be false. But whereto
this tends, and how pertinent to your purpose in this place, I cannot devise;
Only you tell us that the not extending of this Maxim so far as we should,
is the cause why we conceive difficulties in your wild discourse premised, as
also of our ignorance in assoiling them. A strange conceit, and whereof I see
no color of reason, neither do you take any pains to explicate it, by
accommodation or instance, but let fly at random, as if you would employ your
readers in seeking after sense and reason where there is none to be found. And
if this were true, your self should have assoiled the difficulties conceived
in the points proposed, by extending this Maxim to the utmost, to serve your
turn; and showed, how by not extending it so far as is meet, difficulties
are conceived, and no means found to assoile them: but your self have taken
no such course: And who was ever known, not to extend this Maxim to the
uttermost? where can you find any limitation or confining of it? what do you
mean to abuse your readers patience with such incredible fictions?

Again, herehence it follows, that whosoever do extend this maxim so far
as naturally it would reach, they shall not be apt to conceive difficulties in
the points proposed, nor be touched with ignorance in assoiling them. For the
truth whereof I appeal to every man's conscience that reads your writings: of
whom I am persuaded not one of a thousand, if Scholars, does deny but that
this Maxim holds universally; yet you take upon you to give a reason why we
extend it not so far as naturally it would reach, and that you say is our
proneness to extend our own power to the utmost, even farther then true
goodness can accompany it. So then the honester men are, the more apt they are
to extend this Maxim to the utmost, and consequently less apt to conceive
difficulties in the points proposed, and less ignorant to assoile them: and
the reason why men do conceive difficulties in your writings, or are not able
to assoile them, is for want of honesty. And you in the mean time would not
be supposed to show any want either of wit or honesty in your discourses.
Well, this article of your natural Creed is observable, They that do things
unjustifiable, they do not extend this Maxim (Both parts of contradiction
cannot be true) so far as naturally it would reach, which is a mystery unto
me, and whereof I can devise no reason, neither do you give any. For although
our natures are humorous, unconstant, and we find contradiction, and are
enraged with contradiction, and arm power against that which does contradict
us, yet herehence it follows not that we limit or restrain the rules of
contradiction; unless out of some such curious sophistry and subtlety as
this, you dispute in this manner; We oppose them that contradict us, therefore
we do restrain the rules of contradiction: I doubt my reader would scarce
think me sober, if I should go about to dissolve this sophistry; yet the face
of your discourse looks no other way then this. And I confess the law of God,
and rules of good manners shall never fail to contradict him that is of a
dishonest disposition. And though passions turn commonly into their
contraries, yet notwithstanding all such inconstancy, true morality will
always be an opposite to him that is dishonest. But yet I find no propension
herehence to maintain, that both parts of contradiction are true, or both false.

Power, you say, is for the execution of will, and so is wit too, and no
marvel if sometimes both of them are in knaves keeping. This is stuff serving
to fill paper. And if S. Paul complained of a law in his members rebelling
against the law of his mind, and leading him captive to the law of sin, no
Romans 7. 23
marvel if natural men, esteemed good and sober, do sometimes yield to
things unfit: but that it is out of such mature deliberation as you speak, to
prevent forsooth the enraging of carnal appetites, (which why you should call
upstarts, I know not, unless you deny them to be as old as the fall of Adam)
I see no reason. I give a thief my purse, lest I should lose my purse, and
somewhat else also. But if I give over unto my passions my honesty, to be
defiled by them, alas what have we more or greater to lose? And let them rage
while they will, we can but lose our honesty, therefore in reason we will not
stop passions mouth at the first with our honesty, we will rather tugge and
pull for it, and keep more ado then Michah for his gods; Ye have taken away
my gods, Iud. 18. 24
and the Priest, and go your ways, and what have I more? The motions of the
flesh must needs offend the spirit, for they are lustings against the spirit.
But there is no proportion between Gal. 5. 17*
this contradiction, and that which is between pain and pleasure. For pain
and pleasure are not felt at once, as this contradiction is.

Love, as not alike set on diverse objects, is brought in by way of adversative,
whereas the sentence is no other then that which went before, touching the
contradiction between carnal desires, and virtuous motions. Yet to betray some
quaint strain of learning, by way of parenthesis, you make question whether
Love be one simple and indivisible quality, or an aggregation or cluster of
diverse inclinations rooted in one center: neither do you determine it, but
leave your reader to gaze upon it, as a child does upon a cluster of grapes
first ripe, and the more like to be first rotten: you might make the same
question of hatred also. For Quot modis dicitur unum oppositorum, tot modis
dic^tur and alterum. It was wont to be said of love, that it was as the weight
of the soul. Anima amore quasi pondere fertur quocunque fertur. But it has
different acceptions. For there is amor amicitiae, and there is amor
concupiscentiae. And this amor concupiscentiae is either ordinate or
inordinate: ordinate love becomes moral virtue, and inordinate, moral vice.
And S. John divides this inordinate concupiscence into three kinds;
concupiscence of the flesh, concupiscence of the eye, 1 Ioh. 2. (...)
and pride of life. And will you put all these into one cluster, or posie
rather, consisting partly of garden flowers, partly of stinking flowers of the
field? The two originals you speak of, if subordinate, they are not two
originals, there is but one; and the love of the world and the flesh carry men
on, even in despite of judgment and conscience to the contrary, into manifest
impi^ties, iniquities, impurities.

I do not find it strange that things seem not impossible to us, if they are
within our power, yet though they be within our power one way, I see no cause
but they may seem unpossible, and be unpossible another way. And be our
variousnesse never so great, yet I see no reason to justify you in saying,
that what cannot be admitted to day, will be allowed of to morrow. For the
vicious person, Qui non est hodie cras minus aptus erit,
to that which is good. And Absalom two years together watched opportunity to
revenge himself on his brother Amnon, and afterward continued as settled in
his course os aspiring 2 Samuel 13. 22, 23.
to the kingdom: And therefore herein certainly you reckon without your host.
Yet it is most true, that the better men are, the more hardly are they drawn
to unjust courses: this I say is as true, as that all this is nothing to the
purpose: yet hereupon you commend unto us by way of consequence, a truth in
great state, and scored in the margent as very remarkable, and yet you call it
an experienced truth, That if any man's judgment in matters of equity and
justice were infallible, and his love to justice constant and invincible, it
would be unpossible for him to transgress in judgment; and indeed if this
were not true, both parts of contradiction manifestly should prove true. For
it is unpossible to transgress but either by error in judgment, or corruption
in will: And therefore where judgment is infallible, and will incorruptible,
it is not possible for such a one to transgress. This is as true as one of
Euclides elements. But it depends upon such Ifs and Ands, that the world is
nothing like to profit either in wit or honesty by this information. Only in
this clause alone I find some coherence with the former, to wit, with the
first sentence of this Section: for that laid down the thesis, this delivers
the self same in hypothesis.

The conclusion is, that Gods ideall perfection in integrity and constancy
has no mixture of vice or humerous impotency. And our conceit of this
perfection in God, you say, is rectified thus, to wit, by experience of the
strength of unconstant humerous desires, and of the faintness of our love and
equity, as well as by the contrary virtues. Your wit has played his part here,
when you strained to derive the rectification of our conceits, touching Gods
integrity and constancy, from the contrary disposition in man.

Belike, if Adam had never fallen, our conceits could not have been so
rectified touching Gods integrity and perfection as now they are, neither shall
they be so well rectified in the kingdom of heaven, because there we shall be
acquainted with no such humourous inconstancy, or faintness of equity in man.

2 In the former Section you complained of not extending the maxim mentioned,
so far as naturally it would reach, and you discoursed unto us the dangerous
consequence of such an humor, and the cause of it. The consequence was partly
aptness to conceive difficulties in the points proposed by you, and ignorance
to assoile them. The cause was the extending of our own power too far. And
in this Section you endeavor to rectify our conceits hereabouts; now whereas
I was intent (as it is fit every Reader should be) to observe what was your
drift and scope in all this, in the end of the former Section, you fell upon
the rectifying of our conceits touching Gods ideall perfection, in the way of
integrity and constancy, as if that were the scope you aimed at: but neither
did your discourse in any handsome manner tend thereunto, though finally it
lighted thereupon, neither do I yet perceive whereunto this ideall perfection
of God, you speak of, is directed, as being nothing congruous, for ought I
discern, to the point in hand. I rather think, that was delivered (as many
other things in that Section) on the by, and that the immediate end you aim
at, is this here mentioned in the beginning of this Section, namely, the
rectifying of our conceits, touching the right extending of the aforesaid
maxim, which is the principal negative touching contradictories. Both parts
of contradiction cannot be true, (no, nor false neither) you had rather
express it thus, To make both parts of contradiction true (or false) is no
object of power omnipotent: Now we seem to have found the hare again, at
least the tract and sent of the hare, and desire to pursue, without making any
fault, as near as we can. Now the rule you give us for the right extending of
the maxim mentioned, is this, Many effects are very possible to power alone
considered, which imply contradiction to some other divine attributes. This
passage has seemed wondrous harsh unto me, and as it were, Iuterpretationem
commodam indignata, such as could not admit a commodious interpretation: and
the issue of searching into the meaning thereof, is not to justify it, but
rather to discover sundry incongruities involved herein.

In the former Section you complained of men, as extending their own power too
far, which you conceived to be the reason why they did not extend the maxim
there proposed so far as naturally it would reach.

But here you admonish us of extending the power of God aright, not considering
it at large, but rather as joined with other attributes of God.

Secondly, you complained, that men did not extend the maxim you speak of so
far as naturally it would reach, and therefore when here you come to give
rules for the extending of it aright, every man would imagine that you take a
course to enlarge it at full, whereas indeed you take a course to restrain
it, for you tell us here, that a thing is not to be accounted possible in
reference unto power, but in reference unto other attributes of God also, as
love, truth, goodness, and justice, which manifestly does restrain the
possibility of any thing, rather then enlarge it.

Thirdly, whereas the effect of power which you treat of in this place, is
only this, To make both parts of contradiction true, when you tell us, that,
Many effects which are very possible to power alone considered, do necessarily
imply contradiction unto some divine attributes. What do you but hereby give
us to understand, that this effect, to wit, of making both parts of
contradiction true, though it be possible to power alone considered, yet it is
not possible in respect of some other attributes divine.

Now I demand in the name of common sense and sobriety, whether this be a
decent thing to say, that to make both parts of contradiction true is possible
to power alone considered, whereas indeed it is no more possible, in reference
to any power to make both parts of contradiction true, then to make both parts
of contradiction false. Neither indeed is it in the power of God, as touching
any one part of contradiction, if it be not true, to make it true, or if it be
true to make it false. As for example, I am alive; it is not in the power of
God to make it false. He may take my life from me, but that is not a course to
make that proposition false. For it was true only for that time when it was
pronounced, not for the time to come when my life is taken from me. So when
Socrates is dead this proposition is false, Socrates is alive, neither is it in
the power of God to make it true: for though he can restore life to Socrates,
yet thereby he shall not make that proposition true. For that proposition was
true for that time only, when it was pronounced, not for the time to come,
least of all for that time when God had restored life to Socrates. But you will
say, the being of a thing is the cause why a proposition concerning the being
of that thing is said to be true, not on the contrary. And God is the cause of
the being of things.

This I confess is a truth in part. God is the cause of the being of things,
yet not of all things, but only of things contingent. God is not the cause of
that which has necessary being, such as he is himself. So that these like
propositions, God is eternal, omnipotent, omniscient, most simple, etc. no way
depend on the execution of God his power, which proceeds always according to
the counsel of his own will. But hereupon depends not the nature of God, nor
many other principles containing necessary truth: I grant many things are
denominated possible to the humane nature, which are not so in reference to the
divine. For the humane nature has power to transgress, the divine nature has
not. Yet if you mark it well, this which in this case is called power, will
finally be resolved not so much into power, as into impotency: For it is not to
be presumed that our Savior had less power then another man, because he could
not sin; or the Angels since their confirmation, then they had before, or
that men in their glorified condition shall be more impotent then before. And
indeed confirmation of integrity and innocence, does not abolish power, but
only rectify the use of it, and establish that rectitude in the use of power.
Yet there is a denomination of power attributed to man, and denied unto God, as
when we say man can transgress, God cannot: But the ground of this is not the
want of power in God, and a surplusage of power in man; but only this, that a
man is capable of restraint from a superior power, God is not. For to say,
that man can transgress, is as much as to say, that man can do that which he
is forbidden to do, or from the doing whereof he is restrained. But this
cannot be affirmed of God, as who has no superior power to restrain him.

Your next sentence is full of nonsense, as when you say, It is more shameful
then impossible for rich men to lie or coozen, or for Magistrates to oppress
and wrong their inferiors; albeit the ones riches or others power were
infinitely increased, without internal increase of their fidelity. For the
better opening whereof I will resolve it into its parts. And they are two,
considered apart without comparison.

The first is this, It is shameful for rich men to lie and coozen, for
Magistrates to oppress and wrong, albeit the ones riches and the others power
were infinitely increased, without internal increase of their fidelity. Now I
say there is plain nonsense in this, and that in diverse respects.

First in saying it is is shameful for rich men to lie and coozen, albeit
their riches be never so much increased: for the coherence by virtue of the
particle albeit, does imply, thatit is a shameful course for them to lie,
though never so much provoked thereunto. This I say should be the sense. But
your sentence has a quite contrary sense. For whereas according to the most
convenient sense it should run thus; It is a shameful course for a man to lie
and coozen, though he be never so poor, poverty indeed being usually a
provocation unto lying and coozening, as we read Prove. 30. 9. you pronounce
it in a quite contrary sense thus: It is a shameful thing for a rich man to
lie and coozen, though he be never so rich.

Secondly, your adversative is as unreasonable in respect of the latter part of
it, which is this, Albeit he be without increase of internal fidelity: As much
as to say, it is a shameful thing for a rich man to lie and coozen, though he
be never a whit the more honest for his riches: and it is like unto his speech
that said of a swine, It was a creature which though it was polluted yet it was
not clean, as if there were an opposition between being polluted, and being
not clean: so you imply an opposition between being never the more honest,
and doing that which was shameful. Whereas indeed he that does shameful
things, is hoc ipso never a whit the more honest.

The solecisme is the same applied to the Magistrate, as touching the latter
part, not as touching the former; because their power and authority may seem
to countenance them in dealing more hardly with inferiors, then if they were
not in magistracy would seem fit.

The second part is this; It is possible for rich men to lie and coozen, though
they were rich, and never a whit the more honest. -- It is possible for the
Magistrate to oppress and wrong, though they were never so powerful, and
never a whit the more honest. Here the solecisme is alike in both, as touching
the latter part. For you imply by the form of the sentence, that want of
honesty were some hindrance to lying and coozening, some hindrance to
oppressing and wronging.

But as touching the former part, the solecisme is most foul in the speech
concerning the Magistrate, as when you imply, that the great power the
Magistrate has, is an hindrance to his possibility of oppressing and wronging
his inferiors, whereas it appears manifestly, that rather it is a furtherance
thereunto.

But it is impossible for God to speak an untruth, or to do wrong. Before, I
have showed, that to have a power to transgress, is to imply a being in
subjection to a superior power that restrains him, and consequently such a
power is resolved into weakness and impotency. In special to speak untruth
implies less power then to speak truth; for to speak truth implies
knowledge of truth: And to know truth is a thing of more power, then to be
ignorant of truth.

But it may be you propose this of lying, which is to speak contrary to a man's
knowledge: but this is not power to do ought: For the speaking of this or that
is not the lying: but lying is a denomination of the act of speaking, arising
from the contrariety of the speech, to the knowledge or intentions of the mind.
So that if he speak the same thing in his dream, or if another delivers the
same words, yet is it no lying. In a word, power to do ill, or peccabilitas,
which is per naturam, does no more relish of true power, then impoccabilitas
per gratiam does savor of impotency and weakness. But God you say cannot
speak untruth. The truth is, God cannot speak at all in proper speech; for
God has no tongue to be the interpreter of his heart. But God does inspire his
servants with truth, and move them to speak it, or to write it: And it is Aug.
Ep. 174. Ille in servis sui loquitur.
impossible he should inspire with falsehood; man himself would never speak
falsehood, but always truth, if he might advantage himself as much with
telling truth, as telling untruth. Now though a man sometimes promotes his ends
by false courses, yet it is absurd to think that God needs false courses to
promote his ends, seeing he is almighty.

As for the doing of wrong, it is well known, that if he should command
Abraham to sacrifice his son, and see him execute it; or command Sampson to
sacrifice himself by dying with the Philistines, he shall do no wrong either
to the one or to the other; or by making Prince Job as poor as poor Job, in
destroying his substance, his children, and last of all striking his body with
a sore boil, yet shall he not do any wrong to Job. Nay were Job as innocent
as Adam was in his creation, or as the elect Angels are now in their
confirmation, and should deal so with them as he did with Job, yet should they
have just cause to say as Eli did, He is the Lord, let him do what seems
good in his sight. 1 Samuel 3. 1^


Arminius confesses, that the most innocent creature God Exam. praedest. Perk.
p. 107. In 12. q. 87. art. 8.
can annihilate without prejudice to his justice, yea to inflict the torments
of hell upon such a creature. Medina maintains, that God as Creator has such
power over his creature, Ex (...) omnium Theologorum sententia: yet do we
distinguish between potentia absoluta, and potentia ordinata; God can do that
by power absolute, which he cannot do on supposition that he will not do it:
for that were to change, and that were impotency, rather then power. And to
speak in proper terms; It is not fit to say that God cannot do this because
he will not; for there is no consequence in this, either in respect of God or
man: Such a one will not do this or that; therefore he cannot do it.

But supposing Gods will to do this or that, it is more proper to say, that upon
this supposition, it is impossible God should do otherwise, because it is
impossible he should change his will. For there are but two causes of the
change of the creatures will and resolution, the one fickleness of the will,
the other improvidence of the understanding, in not foreseeing all that might
come to pass. But neither of these is possibly incident unto God. So then if
God has promised ought, it is unpossible that it should not be performed, or
that God should provountrue. If God loves a man, it is as much as to say, he is
determined to doc him good, and it is impossible it should be otherwise then he
has determined. But to say that God in point of justice cannot perform that,
without performing whereof he shall be untrue, is a paradox of paradoxes. For
if in performing it he shall be true, then in not performing of it he shall be
untrue. And does Gods justice bind him to be untrue? you might as well say, it
binds him to be unjust.

Again, if God out of his love has resolved to do this or that good unto
man; shall his justice hinder the fulfilling of the counsels and
determinations of his own will? This is strange Divinity; yet you deliver
these uncouth assertions like a positive Theologue, without all proof, as if
they carried their evidence in their foreheards. Men are bound by rules of a
superior power to work after this or that manner; and therefore it is not
lawful for them to do many things, from the doing whereof they are restrained
by lawful authority, which commands them. It is not so with God, who does
what he will in heaven, and amongst the inhabitants of the earth, and no man
can say unto him, What do thou? In this sense you think you may say that all
before Christ were thieves and robbers. And though I think this interpretation
is very aliene from the true meaning of the Text you point at, yet I Ioh. 10. 8.
doubt not but that every one, Christ excepted, has been found in sin, and
thereby more or less found to play the thief, and rob God of that glory of
obedience which is due unto him.

I doubt not but the Angel of the Lord that discomfited the army of
Senacherib, might in like manner have smoakt away the army of the Romans, yea
and God might have done so to, even the one as well as the other, had it
pleased him, without any prejudice to his justice. For if it be justly possible
to him to pardon our sins, it is as justly possible to him to remove his
judgments. And both Suarez and Vasquez, though opposite in some specialities
about the justice of God, Disput. de just. Dei. In 7. disp. 86.
yet concurres in acknowledging that there is no justice in God in reference to
his creature, but upon presupposition of his will. It Is just with God to approve
a merciless war. And it is as just with God to approve a merciful peace:
neither is it disgraceful to God though by his long suffering and patience he
gives space for repentance, although his goodness were despised unto the end.

As many live prosperously in sinful courses unto the death and then obtain
(...), an easy departure at last, as Guiccia^dine observes in the particular
of Pope Alexander the sixth; and no marvel: for what is wanting in the condign
vengeance in this life, God can and will supply to the full at the day of
judgment. And the reason why God leaves some men's sins unrequited in this
world, is out of a special providence, as Chrysostom has observed of old,
namely to this end, that we may entertain some conceit of a resurrection,
(...). And though God does not afflict them with outward terrors, yet he has
inward terrors enough to exercise the wicked, and to keep peace as far from
them, as a guilty and tormenting conscience is near unto them, according to
that of Solomon, The wicked flies when no man pursues him. The Dear when he
is stricken, albeit Sylvas saltusque peragrat Dictaeos, yet, haeret lateri
laetalis arunde. O what an uncomfortable sentence do you edge this Section
withal; as if Gods infinite power could not save them that stubbornly abandon
the ways of peace, and wilfully neglect saving health, so often and lovingly
tendered unto them? For consider, did you never abandon the ways of peace, or
wilfully neglect saving health, lovingly tendered unto you? Were you never out
of the state of grace? For Austine has taught me, that Libertas sine gratia,
non est libertas sed Aug. ep. (...)
contumatia. Or were you converted at the first, or second, or at the third
sermon that you heard? Nay, when Gods children are converted, do they not too
often abandon the ways of peace, and wilfully neglect saving health? Did not
David in the matter of Vriah and Bathsheba? Did not Solomon in his idolatry?
Did not Manasses in his idolatrous fury, sealing it with blood? Saint Paul
exhorts Timothy, to carry himself 2 Timothy 2.
gently toward them without, (...), if at any time God give them repentance,
implying manifestly, that God can at any time give repentance to any man if he
will. Neither are we taught, that God has denied possibility of renovation
Heb. 4. 5. (...)
by repentance unto any, but such as sin the sin against the Holy Ghost.

3 You say, it had been unjust with God to strike the men of Sodom with
blindness, before lust had entered their eyes. A manifest untruth which yet
you deliver, satis magistraliter, as a dictate without any reason to enforce
it. In the ninth of John we read of one that was borne blind, is it not just
with God to deal with any one so as he dealt with him? You will not deny I
hope this work to have been the work of God; if you should, our Savior would
convict you of error, when he says, that he was borne blind, to the Ioh.
9. 3.
end the mighty work of God might be manifest in the curing of him. And this
work to this end could be no others but Gods work.

I had thought, to have been borne blind had been a judgment, yet you make
it to be a blessing, as whereby the Sodomites had been guarded from
temptations. And indeed, lust usually enters into the heart by the windows of
the eyes. Yet the Poet tells us also of one, Qui nunquam visae slagrabat amore
p^ellae.


So then it had been a mercy of God that their eyes had been pulled out of
their heads in your divinity. I do not deny, but the greatest temporal
blessings may be cursed unto Mal. 2. 2.
a man by the power of God, and the greatest temporal ^nrses, blessed unto
him. But I never heard or read before, that blindness should be considered
only as a mercy, and such a mercy as whereby we are guarded from temptation.
But were a man never so lustful, yet I think in just reason he should rather
desire to enjoy his eyes then to lose them, that so he might be partaker of
Gods word by private reading, which has more power to his salvation, then the
sight of any Cocatrices to his destruction.

And if Democritus had been acquainted with this word of God, I do not
believe he would have pulled out his eyes, in pretense as if they hindered his
meditations. Alas, what had the Sodomites been the better for the blindness
of their eyes, if God had not corrected the lusts of their hearts? Especially
considering that fancy can supply the want of sight, for the provocation of
lust in any degree upon any unknown object. For a man can fancy him as he
lusts. Say rather, God could not in justice change their hearts, seeing they
had wilfully contemned his goodness, and abused his long suffering and loving
kindness.

Yet this saying of yours should be far enough off from truth and sobriety?
Who has not wilfully contemned his goodness, and abused his long suffering?
All out of the state of grace do so; for, Libertas sine gratia non est
libertas sed contumacia. Aug. Ep. 89.
Yea and too often we do so in the state of grace also. Then again, a year
before, this sin of the Sodomites was not so obstinate, less a year before
that, and so the farther we descend to times passed, they were less and less
obfirmate. Why did no^ God then change their hearts; or if you will have this to
be a fruit of mercy, why did he not blind their eyes in mercy to keep them
from these temptations? But you put it out of question, that to have prevented
the Sodomites former contempt and abuse of his long suffering and loving
kindness, did imply contradiction to his goodness, and eternal equity. A
most unreasonable assertion. For I demand, Has God prevented your wilful
contempt of his goodness, yea or not? your abusing his long suffering and
loving kindness, yea or not? If he has not prevented it, then either your
self have prevented it without his grace, or you are guilty or have been
guilty of wilful contempt of his goodness, and abusing his long suffering and
loving kindness: which if it be so, what would become of you, if God should
deal with you according to these immutable and eternal rules, according
whereto you profess he deals with all? I persuade my self you have a good
opinion of your own sufficiency to prevent these foul symptoms of humane
corruption, otherwise you should make but a bad reckoning.

The reason you give to enforce this assertion, is in part nothing for you, in
part against you. For though all his ways are truth, yet this is nothing for
you, unless you can prove that in such a state of sin as the Sodomites, God
has determined to use no effectual means to the curing of them. But how will
you prove this? for hitherto you have not. You might as well say, God could not
cure ^he sin of those Jews, to whom our Savior said, It shall be easier for
Sodom and Gomorrah Mat. 10. 15
in the day of judgment, then for you: If this were granted you, yet herehence
it follows only, that God cannot cure them, because he will not, for he has
determined the contrary. But you undertake to prove, that God cannot do it in
point of justice, although he would do it out of his love to mankind.

But when you say that all Gods ways are mercy, that is directly rather
against you then for you. For mercy does rather incline to pardon sin, then
not to pardon it: and withal we are given to understand, that as touching the
execution hereof, God will have mercy on whom he will; and therefore surely he
can have mercy on whom he wll.

You talk after your fashion of an eternal rule of goodness appointing his
justice to debar the fruits of his mercy. But you are a mere talker, and
prove nothing. Who is not wilful in the state of nature in contemning Gods
goodness? Yet does not he by his grace and holy Spirit ex nolentibus volentes
facere? Does not Austin profess that God has converted Ep. 107. ad Vital.
not only aversos a vera fide, but adversus verae fidei voluntates also, and
binds it with a Novimus, we know it to have been so. Was it not so in Saul?
Does not God profess of his wilful and stubborn people, that he will rule
them with a mighty hand, and make them pass under the rod, and bring them
under the bond of his covenant, Ezech. 20. 37. Does he not call some at the
first, some not till the last hour of the day?

Neither can it be made good by any tolerable color of reason, that because a
creature cannot be impeccabilis from his creation, therefore God cannot cure
men's wilfulness in the way of his mercy toward them, as you most incoherently
discourse, as if you were in potting verses, rather then upon meditating a
coherent and methodicall course of argumentation: yet the maxim here
mentioned, though brought in with some state of self conceit, is very
preposterously contrived by you. We commonly say, a reasonable creature cannot
be impeccabilis per naturam, incapable of sin by nature; he may be
impeccabilis per gratiam, incapable of sin by grace, as the elect Angels are,
elect men shall be in the state of glory: but of being so some while after the
creation, and not immediately from the creation; of being so absolutely, and of
being so not absolutely, I know no sobriety in these conceits, neither do I
think you have any authority to countenance them. The Son of God I doubt not
but you will confess that he was impeccabilis from the first: So might Angels
have been, so might men have been by grace, had it so pleased God to make
them; I see no reason to the contrary; yet had not this been absolutely
impeccable, but merely upon the supposition of the will of God. Such is the
impeccability of the elect Angels at this present, such shall be ours in the
world to come. God indeed without supposition, and out of his own absoluteness
is no way obnoxious unto sin: If Angels are, or we at any time shall be free
from this obnoxious condition, it is and shall be by the mere will and good
pleasure of God; whereby yet I mean not to exclude all second causes in the
way of Gods glorious qualification of our natures: And therefore it is an idle
discourse to say that God intended to make us happy after a certain manner, to
wit, by way of reward of our obedience; therefore he could not make us
immutable at first. For thus to discourse, is to profess that God could make
them so upon supposition, to wit, upon supposition of such an end as was
incompatible with their impeccability. And this is not to prove that God could
not make them absolutely impeccable, but to prove that God could not make them
impeccable only upon a certain supposition. Such is the miserable incongruity
of your miscellaneous discourse. If to decline to evil, implies no
contradiction but only to omnipotent being, then seeing neither the elect
Angels for the present have, nor the Saints of God for the time to come, shall
have any omnipotent being, it follows that to decline from evil is neither
contradictorie to the present state of the elect Angels, nor to the future
glorified condition of the Saints of God: God is impeccabil^s per naturam, the
creatures some are and others shall be impeccabilis per gratiam, and to decline
to evil implies contradiction to them both. To say that to decline to evil
is possible to all creatures, is true only in men, in the confirmed Angels it is
not true. It was once of them also I confess, but now it is not: It is false
for the present of the Saints of God in heaven; it ever was false of the
manhood of Christ, which yet was and is a creature, yet i^ Christ as man more
like to his Creator, then either Angel or any other Saint of God. If restraint
of possibility in man to decline from good to evil, does cause him not to be
truly and inherently good, then either Christ as touching his manhood could
have sinned, or else he was never truly and inherently good. Further, if the
elect Angels from within few days after their creation have continued truly
and inherently good, notwithstanding their impeccability, from that time
forward, why they should not have been altogether as truly and inherently
good, if their impeccability had begun a few days sooner, even with their
creation, I see no reason. For did not God make them good, yea truly and
inherently good? Surely he did; therefore if immediately they had been
impeccable by grace, they had notwithstanding their impeccabilitie continued
unto this day truly and inherently good: Gods goodness is his happiness,
this happiness of his being increate, cannot be communicated unto us
subjectively, but objectively only.

Yet there is a goodness created, called Gods goodness, because it proceeds
from God, which is our happiness of grace, shall be our happiness of glory,
not the foundation of it, but it; save that the happiness of grace is the
foundation of our happiness of glory, but to this manner of foundation you
seem to have no reference.

Neither is there any color of reason to infer as you do, that therefore
Gods justice and loving kindness did remove all necessity from man's will,
because that had utterly extinguished that goodness wherein only it was
possible for the creature to express the Creators goodness manifested in
creation. And you may as well say, that Christ also might have sinned; for
necessity to keep him from sin would have utterly extinguished that
goodness, wherein only it was possible for his manhood (being a creature) to
express his Creators goodness manifested in his creation and assumption into
one person with the Son of God. Nay the truth is, if from the beginning we
had been necessarily inclined unto good, we had more lively expressed Gods
goodness, then now we do being freely good. For God himself is good
necessarily, not freely.

It is a senseless speech to say that man's goodness expresses Gods goodness
communicative: for man's goodness is Observe, communicative good ness is here
taken for the goodness of God which is communicable, and opposed to Gods good
nesse incommunicable.
the very goodness communicative of God. For Gods goodness communicative is
no goodness formally in God; but Gods formal goodness is uncreate, and
therefore incommunicable unto creatures. Therefore it must be goodness create
which is Gods goodness communicative; and that is the very goodness of man
it self. For God is the author of it, in genere causae efficientis. Create in
me a new heart, and renew a right spirit within me. And therefore the
distinction of the goodness of God communicative, and communicated is very
absurd: like as your similitude resembling it to a seal, and the stamp
thereof: Only the Son is the image and character of his Father, we are made
after the image of God. His Psalm. 51.
goodness increate is that which does communicate goodness unto us in genere
causae efficientis. And our goodness is the work of Gods goodness. But no
more proportion between them, then is between nature increate, and nature
create. But it is your usual course to affect similitudes contrary to all
sobriety.

Yet you have found out a proportion between Gods goodness and ours: but in
as disproportionable a manner as could be invented. For you compare Gods
working freely with man's being freely, most incongruously. God communicates his
goodness freely, that which duly answers unto this, is man's communicating
his goodness freely. But seeing Gods being good, is as a being necessarily, if
God had made us to be good necessarily, that is impeccable by his grace,
herein had we better expressed the manner of his goodness. And if otherwise we
could not be like unto God, it follows that the Angels now for many thousand
years have not been good like God, because they have been good by necessity,
and not freely. So neither Gods Saints in heaven are good like God, because
they are good by necessity, and not freely. It Is untrue which you add, that man
could not be confirmed in such goodness as he had, or translated unto
everlasting happiness, but by continuing freely good for some space. For
Christ was impeccable from the first moment of his conception, yet this never
hindered his confirmation in his goodness, or translation to everlasting
happiness. And it is a most absurd conceit to say that impeccability should
hinder confirmation in that goodness which man had from the beginning, even
from the creation. For if God made him good and withal impeccable, how was it
possible he should not be confirmed in that good wherein he was created? And
yet here you decline to the corrupting of the question, as when you oppose
impeccability to the doing of good freely. For I hope your self will not deny,
but that Christ was impeccable, and that what good soever he did, he did it
freely: For like as the wicked, in state of nature, cannot but sin in
general, that is one way or other; yet because they are not necessitated to
any particular sin, therefore there is no particular evil that they do, but
they do it freely: In like sort though Christ could not but do good in
general, so that whatsoever he did should be good; yet seeing he was not
necessitated to any particular good, therefore what good in particular soever
he did, did it freely. So do the Angels, so shall we in the kingdom of heaven.

Hitherto under color of consequence, which yet indeed was no tolerable
consequence, you did stride very wide from the matter you had in hand, (to wit,
of Gods obligement in justice to make men taste of the fruits of his mercy,
after their wilful contemning of it) into an aliene matter far removed,
touching impeccability.

Now you seem to return to your former discourse, but in such a manner, as if
you meant utterly to overthrow it: for here you give us to understand, that so
long as man does less evil then he might do, he may be confirmed in
goodness, and translated unto happiness. Now I pray, as bad as the Sodomites
were, yet were they not less evil then they might be? For if God had suffered
them longer, and left them destitute of his grace, had they not profited in
pejus, growing worse and worse? And yet I confess hereupon to be confirmed in
no better goodness then they had, had not been much, seeing this their
goodness had been never a whit: but you say not only this, that they that
do less evil then they might, may hereupon not only be confirmed in that
goodness which they have (which may be very far off from any goodness at
all) but also translated to everlasting happiness. Since man's fall (you say)
we are not capable of mercy, but by free abstinence from some evils.

Now I demand whether this free abstinence from some evils, be of grace or no?
If of grace, whether this grace be not a fruit of mercy? If so, then it
appears that before we abstain from any evil, we are capable of mercy,
thereby to obtain grace, to abstain from evil.

I know no state that makes a man incapable of mercy in this life, but only
the state of sinning against the holy Ghost. I do not like your distinction of
doing good, and doing it naughtily; for, whatsoever we do naughtily, therein
we cannot be said to do good, but evil rather: for therein we sin, and in
sinning we do not any good, but evil rather. Yet I confess, we may be said
to do good imperfectly, but not naughtily in my judgment. Though we do both
less evil, and the good that we do less naughtily then possibly we might
do, God still you say diminishes the riches of his bounty toward us. I
profess at first sight, I took this to be a notorious untruth, but when I
considered a claw of your sentence, which is this, less evil then possibly we
might do. I reverse my judgment, and find it to be a most vulgar and
despicable conceit, though in the way of truth. For the contrary proposition to
your supposition is a thing impossible. For how is it possible that a man can
do at once all the evil that he can do? Now if he does not do all the evil
that possibly he can do, there is some comfort in your paramutheticall
contemplations, and he need not fear lest God proceed to diminish the
riches of his bounty toward him. And so might the Sodomites comfort themselves
at the worst, for certainly they had not done all the evil that possibly they
might do. Now it was well worth the having, to hear you explain unto us,
what you understand by the influence of Gods gracious providence, which you say
God restraines, and by restraining suffers men to fall from one wickedness to
another, suffering the reins of our unruly appetites to be given into our
u^ieldie hands. Here be good phrases, which if you would be pleased to
interpret unto us in plain terms, I doubt not but we should find good
matter to work upon.

But to the comfort of all profane persons be it spoken, God does never deal
thus with any by your computation, but such as have done as much evil as
possibly they can do. To be capable of well doing is to be capable of Gods
mercy, and you have already told us to our comfort, that to do less evil then
possibly we can do, does make us capable of Gods mercy; yet here you say,
this cannot be done without Gods love and favor. Now to my judgment, no
person is so profane or impious, but that he does less evil then possibly he
might do; whence it follows, that to this state of impiety considered as
less then possibly might be, he is arived through the love and favor of God.
Yet what you mean by the love and favor of God I know not, and throughout I
find cause to doubt, that you mean nothing less then to advance the honor
of Gods grace, but only your scope to advance the power of man's free will.

And I wonder you consider not how you enterfare, and cross your own shinnes
in your discourse, when you conceive the love and favor of God as a means to
make us capable of the mercy of God; you might as well say, that the mercy of
God makes us capable of his mercy: for love and favor showed unto him that is
in misery, is in the way of mercy. So when you make a great difference between
withdrawing a man's self from the extremities of mischief, and the doing of
such good as may make a man capable of well doing, you contradict your self:
for to do less evil then possibly might be, what is it other, then to
withdraw from extremities of mischief? yet that is enough to make a man
capable of well doing, as you have signified in this very page more then once,
as namely, both in the first sentence, and in the third, yet this is wild
enough to say, A man must do good to make himself capable of well doing. By
the sentence following it seems that this good that is to be done to make us
capable of well doing, is to repent, and this you say cannot be done without
the attractions of infinite love; yet usually you make a work of nature to be
a preparation to grace, and sometimes you call that work of nature humility,
sometimes the doing of less evil then we might do. And what you mean by
the attractions of infinite love, I know not, for you make it incident to men
without the Church, who are not so much as drawn hereunto by the word, so
that, as it seems, it can be no other then Gods patience in sparing them, and
so leading them to repentance, that you mean in this place.

Yet see into what absurdity of conceit you cast your self, while you make
show to honor the grace of God; as namely, when you say, since Adams fall, our
love to sinful pleasures is so strong, that we cannot repent without the
infinite attractions of love, implying thereby that before Adams fall, we
could repent without infinite attractions of love. But I pray consider, what
need was there of repentance before Adams fall? Yet such obedience as then was
congruous to innocent and und^filed nature, could he perform without special
grace? Yes you think he could: this is a bit you can swallow easily, and
digest with as great facility.

And so belike your opinion is of the Angels, to wit, that the good Angels
stood by the mere freedom of their own wills, having no other adjutorium
gratiae then the reprobate Angels had: directly against Austin de Civitate Dei,
l. 12. c. 9. You begin to discover the mystery of your meaning, when you say,
that Many whom this infinite love does daily embrace, because they apprehend
not it, are never brought by the attractions of it, to true repentance. So then
the attractions of Gods infinite love are the causa sine qua non, but what is
the cause, qua posita ponitur effectus? O this is our apprehending of it. And I
pray what style do the learned give to that causa sine qua non? do they not
commonly account it causam fatuam? So then you make show to magnify the
attractions of Gods love, and the efficacy thereof, but it is only in a fatuous
manner, and you make but a fatuous efficacy thereof: but man's will alone, in
the apprehending of it, has the true efficacy of repentance in the course of
your Divinity. Now I pray what is this love you speak of, and what manner of
attraction is it, and wherein does it consist? and how are we said to apprehend
it? and wherein does that consist? By the place alleged out of Romans 2. 4. you
signify that this love of God is no other then that goodness whereby he
leads unto repentance, and that goodness there mentioned seems to be no
other then Gods forbearance and long suffering. Call you this the attractions
of his infinite love? Yet notwithstanding Austin was bold to profess,
Quantamlibet praebuerit patientiam nis^ Deus dederit quis Cont. Iul. Pelag. l.
5. c. 4.
aget poenitentiam? Though God affords never so much patience, yet who shall
repent except God gives repentance? your present discourse preaches unto us
another doctrine, to this effect; Quantamlibet praebuerit patientiam nisi homo
apprehenderit quis aget poenitentiam? Though God affords never so much
patience, yet who shall repent except he apprehends it? And I pray what is it
to apprehend Gods patience, or his leading of us to repentance by his goodness
and patience? Can it be any thing else then the taking of the opportunity
offered, and to repent indeed?

So then your meaning is this in plain terms, Many whom this infinite love of
God does embrace, (to wit, in leading them by his goodness and patience unto
repentance) yet are never brought by the attraction of it to true repentance,
and all because they do not apprehend it, that is, because they do not repent.

Is not this issue of your discourse very grave and Theological? yet when you
say the reason why by this love they are not brought to repentance, is because
they do not apprehend it, you seem to imply that they may apprehend it if
they will. Yet because the Text alleged by you is expressly against this,
therefore you are contont to nicke your former assertion your self, with a
cross blow, that so your self may have the first credit of contradicting and
confuting your self, as when you say, of whom speaks he thus, of sueh only
as truly repent? A mad question as ever was proposed, as if there were any
color that the Apostle should say of them that repent, that they despise the
riches of Gods goodness, leading them to repentance; yet that you may have
some matter to work upon, having erected an enemy of straw, you foil him most
valiantly, by answering, Nay, but of them who for hardness of heart cannot
repent. Not considering how fondly herein you contradict your self. Nay by the
way I note an aknowledgement of yours, to wit, that a man may despise the
goodness of God leading him to repentance, though through the hardness of his
heart he cannot repent at all.

4. You demand in the next place, whether the riches of Gods bounty were
fained, or whether he did only profer, but not purpose to draw them to
repentance which repented not? I answer, it was not fained, neither do I find
any thing that he proffered at all in this passage of the Apostles. But that
this is a mere fiction of yours, ut recto stet fabula talo, and that he did
truly draw them to repentance; but how? as by patience and longsuffering he may
be said to draw them, and no other goodness of God drawing them to repentance
is mentioned in this place. Like as opportunity is said to draw and invite men
to the doing of something in season.

In like sort the judgments of God invite unto repentance, the mercies of God
provoke unto* obedience, to thankfulness. But yet Austin was bold to say,
Quantamlibet praebuerit Cont. Iul. (...) Pelag. l. 5. c. 4.
patientiam nisi Deus dederit, quis aget poenitentiam? So that this is a tacit
exhortation and invitation to repentance by Gods works. And much inferior to
the power of the exhortations of his word: yet God does exhort by the ministry
of his word, many whose hearts notwithstanding he hardneth. As is apparent in
sending unto Pharaoh, and commanding him to let Israel go; yet withal made
known to Moses, that he would harden Pharaohs heart, that he should not let
Israel go.

And dare you profess this course of his, so plainly testified in holy
Scripture, to be no part of Gods protection, no fruit of that wisdom which is
from above, but a point of earthly policy devoid of honesty, a mere trick of
worldly wit, to whose practice nothing but weakness and impotency to
accomplish great designs, can misin^line man's corrupted nature? And the truth
is, in this course of God nothing is proffered at all, but only something
suspended, to wit, the execution of just vengeance. In his word something is
proffered, but what is that? Not repentance, as you misconceive, that rather is
required and commanded only upon repentance, remission of sins, and
salvation is proffered. And if repentance were proffered, I pray upon what
terms? you will say, in case they would apprehend it. This have I already
showed to be all one, as if you should say, In case they did repent; and of the
sobriety hereof let any man judge.

Again, you profess that this is proffered to such men as through the
hardness of their hearts cannot repent, and judge whether the same
incongruities which you charge upon our Tenet, are upon any other ground then
this, and while you maintain this, whether they do not reflect upon your
Tenet also.

Now on the contrary, whereas we object against you, that if God wills, and
so ardently as you speak, that all men should repent and be saved, how comes
it to pass that they do not repent? Considering that the Apostle professes
that Gods will cannot be resisted, and that it manifestly implies an impotency
or weakness in God, in not being able to bring to pass what he so ardently
desires. Now to the latter objection of these, you answer, by denial that it
implies any such impotency in God; yet Austin long ago did acknowledge this
consequence, Enchirid. 96. Deo quam facile est quod vult facere, tam facile est
quod non vult esse non sinere. Hoc nisi credamus, periclitatur, ipsum nostrae
fidei confessionis initium, qua consitemur in Deum Patrem omnipotentem credere.
Neque veraciter ob aliud vocatur omnipotens, nisi quia quicquid vult potest;
nec voluntate cujusquam creaturae, voluntatis omnipotentis, impeditur effectus.
Et cap. 27. In caelo and in terra non quaedam voluit and fecit: quaedam vero
voluit and non fecit, sed omnia quaecunque voluit fecit. Et cap. 98. Quis porro
tam impii desipiat ut dicat Deum malas hominum voluntates quas voluerit, quando
voluerit, ubi voluerit, in bonum non posse convertere.

And whereas you say, that man is not capable of endless joys, unless he
will be wrought by mere love, without the impulsions of unresistible power to
love him, to love God, the same insinite love which draws him unto repentance
in congruity leaving a possibility not to be drawn by it: This is a notorious
untruth. For was there any possibility in Christ to sin, or not to be drawn
to that which was good? I think you will not avouch it: And was he not
therefore capable of endless joys? And if Gods will be unresistible, as the
Apostle plainly testifies, shall not the operation whereby his will is
accomplished, be irresistible? And shall such a bug-beare deter us from
acknowledging God to be the author of repentance? and move us to give the glory
thereof to the will of man, who through the hardness of his heart cannot
repent, as the Apostle speaks.

Again, the Scripture testifies that whatsoever God wills, that he does
both in heaven and earth; whether it be by power resistible or unresistible is
nothing to the purpose. But you maintain, that what God ardently wills, is
not brought to pass, by reason that man wills not. Neither do w^e
maintain, that God in working whom he will unto repentance, does do this by
bereaving man of power to resist, (which alone denominates the operation of God
irresistible) but only by taking away the will of resisting, while ex
nolentibus volentes facit. And consequently we say not, that God takes away
all possibility of refusing to be drawn by it. For we maintain that God
brings to pass contingent things contingently, that is, with a possibility to
the contrary; though supposing Gods will to the contrary, this possibility
shall not be actuated. And so when God works a man to faith and to repentance,
nullum humanum resistit arbitrium, No man's will resists; and that the grace
which God gives, a nullo duro cord respuitur, is refused by no hard heart. So
that all this is done without all coaction. For neither can the will be
constrained, and God in making men volentes ex nolentibus, cannot without great
absurdity be said to constrain them, as you would fain insinuate, having no
sound argument for it, but such poor tricks to serve your turn withal.

And when God promises to circumcise the hearts of his people, and thereby to
make them love the Lord their God with all their heart, and with all their
soul, he does not say he will constrain them to repent, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. So when
he promises to take away their stony heart, and give them an heart of flesh,
and put his own Spirit within them, and cause them to walk in his statutes
and judgments, and to do them, Ezech. 36. 27. he does not signify that he
will constrain them. For God can change any man's will without constraining.
Nay in making them willing, it is contradiction to say he does constrain them
to be willing: for constraint is against the will: but it is impossible a man
should be willing against his will; yet this you obtrude upon your
adversaries, as though they maintained that God by his power did make them
repent against their wills.

Neither yet can we like that other extreme which you approve, that men must
first be brought to a willingness, and then God makes them repent. For to will
to repent, is to repent; for repentance is the very change of the will. Neither
can you in any sober manner expound unto us, how God is said to make men repent
after they are made willing hereunto. And yet the very will to repent is the
work of God, as who it is that works in us both the will and the deed,
according to his good pleasure, Philip. 2. 13. not by such attractions only
you speak of, though you are loath to betray your Pelagian Tenet, though you
express the threatening of judgment and thereby imply what you mean by
attraction of love, to wit, the promises of reward.

Now this apparently is not to work it: for this is only suadere, and suadere
is not to work it. And the case is clear, even by your opinion, that God does
not work it, as often as he does exhort unto it, which yet he should, if suadere
and hortari thereunto were to work it. And indeed suadere and hortari ut
resipiscamus; is only to exhort and persuade, that we would work our selves
unto repentance: And in this sense to interpret S. Paul, where he says, God
works in us both the will and the deed, according to his good pleasure, was of
old the practice of the Pelagians, as S. Austin has discovered long ago, de
great. Christi cont. Pelag. and Calest. cap. 10. For thus Pelagius played the
commentator upon S. Paul: Operatur in nobis velle quod bonum est, velle quod
sanctum est, dum nos terrenis cupiditatibus deditos mutorum more animalium
tantummodo praesentia diligentes, futurae gloriae magnitudine and praemiorum
pollicitatione succendit; dum revelatione sapientiae in desiderium sui
stupentem suscitat voluntatem; dum nobis suadet omne quod bonum est. And
therefore he urges Pelagius to confess another manner of grace then this, if
he will be accounted a Christian: Ibid cap. 11. Nos eam gratiam volumus isti
aliquando fateantur, qua futurae gloriae magnitudo non solum promittitur,
verumetiam creditur us speratur. Nec solum revelatur sapientia verumetiam and
amatur, nec suadetur solum omne quod bonum est, sed and persuadetur: han^ debet
Pelagius gratiam consiteri, si vult non modo vocari, sed and esse Christianus.

And thus to circumcise our hearts in causing us to love him, and to walk in
his ways, and to keep his statutes and judgments, and to do them; this I
hope is not to strangle us, yet here is no violent operation in all this. For,
Dum non mod^versas a vera side, sed adversas verae fidei voluntates convertit
and ex volentibus nolentes facit: it is so far from violence, that the will
rejoices that God has thus reformed it; we do but as Scriptures teach, when
we make the work of faith a work of power, 2 Thessalonians. 1. And shall not the
raising of men from the dead be a work of power? and is not the work of grace
such a work, Ephesians. 2. 2?

But you do ill, under color of magnifying the love of God, to dishonor both
his love and his power; his love, in confining it only to promises, and
threatenings, as if by these operations alone he moved us unto repentance; his
power, in denying that God brings to pass those things which he desires to
bring to pass, and that ardently. And this latter is Austins objection as well
as ours; and he makes the former to be mere Pelagianisme, as wel'l as we do.

In the next place you tell us, We are to believe that Gods infinite power
shall effect all things possible for them that love him; but constraines no
man's will to love him. But does he make man's will to love him without
constraint? why did you not express your mind on this point? you are willing
to acknowledge God to be the author of glory; but I do not find you so ready
to acknowledge God to be the author of all goodness, the author and finisher
of our faith, of our repentance, of our obedience. Did you acknowledge this,
there should be no difference between us. For we do not affirm that he
works faith and repentance in us, by way of constraint. And when the Apostle
prays that God would work in the Hebrews, Heb. 13. 21.
that which was pleasing in his sight; you shall never find in any of our
Divines, that the meaning of the Apostles prayer was, that he would constrain
them to do that which is good and acceptable in the sight of God: I know no
power in God but infinite, and seeing what work soever he works, is by the
exercise of his power, it cannot be denied, but that it is the exercise of that
power which is infinite.

Again, is man or Angel able to circumcise our hearts, so as to make us to
love the Lord our God with all our hearts; It is not, as I presume you will
confess; why then shall not this work of Gods love in circumcising our
hearts, and making us to love him, be accounted a work of power infinite? And
Austin diverse times professes, that God does convert our hearts, omnipotenti
facilitate, by an almighty facility, and when God regenerates us he quickneth
us and raises us from death to life, Ephesians. 2. 2. and is said to transform, us
as it were of beasts to make us become men, Esaias 9. and how can this be wrought
by less then power infinite, as when Bernard confesses of God saying, Bern^n
circumcis. Dom. Sermon. 2. Numquid non vere admirabilem experti sumus in
imitatione utique voluntatum nostrarum. As for Gods power to the immediate
parent of our love to God, it is no article of our Creed, but a Deuteronomy. 30, (...)
trick of yours to insinuate any thing on your adversaries part that may make
your own cause seem plausible: we rather conceive Gods grace and mercy to be
the immediate cause of the circumcision of our hearts, whereby we are brought
to love him. Neither do we say, that he works in us the love of himself
immediately, but rather by faith brings us first acquainted with the love of
God toward us, according to that of John, 1 Ioh. 3. 19. We love him, because
he loved us first; and to that of S. Paul, The end of the Law is love out of a
pure heart and good conscience, and faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1. 5. No other seed
of our love to God, do I acknowledge to be sown in our soul.

Yet I doubt you refer this to a seed of nature, and not to a seed of grace,
though you do not affect to manifest your meaning so plainly, as it were fit
you should. And no marvel. For they which do evil hate the light. As for
constraint; Ioh. 3. 2^*
we hold that infinite power cannot so work the will: Bodies may be
constrained to suffer the execution of men's lusts upon them, and may justly
breed loathing in the parties so constrained.

As for the will, that non potest cogi, cannot be constrained: And I wonder you
that take notice of so many choice points of philosophy and divinity, whereof
others do not, should not all this while take notice of so popular a Maxim as
this: though I confess your taking notice of it in this place had marred your
game; for the furthering whereof you are content to obtrude upon your
adversaries so unreasonable a conceit, as if they maintained, that the will of
man may be constrained: yet suppose the will were constrained by God to love
him, would this breed in God a loathing of him? Thus the foul and uncivil
resemblance you make transports you. Yet I have read, My soul loathed them,
and their soul abhorred me: but I never heard the contrary, My soul loathed
them, Zach. 11. (...)
and their soul loved me: for while we abhor God, as enemies unto him, yet
notwithstanding even then he loved us, Romans 5. 8. how much more when we love,
will he continue to love us, and not turn his love into loathing; as men's
lusts turn into loathing sometimes, as being satisfied, and disdaining to be
scorned by them, whose bodies though they could force to be subject to their
lusts, yet could not win their loves.

But God never makes us unwillingly to love him (it is a thing impossible) but
as Austine says, Ex nolentibus volentes facit. It Is true, God loves a
cheerful giver, but who makes this cheerfulness but God? and whose works
is it fit he should love but his own? Like as it is said of him, that Cor^nat
non merit a nostra sed donasua, he crowns not our works, but his own: And
where there is a willing mind, there it is accepted, not according to that
which a man has not, but to that which he has: but whose work is this
willing mind? Is it not God that works in us both the will and the deed?
And that God does not wrest any obedience from us, but makes us willing, and
ready, and cheerful in the performing of it, not only in the way of doing
what he commands, but in suffering what he inflicteth, or permits the
sins of others to inflict upon us. In so much that the Apostles rejoiced that
they were accounted worthy to suffer for the name of Christ. And if a father
prevail to work his child to dutifulness, though with much a do, yet in
the end masters his stubbornness, will he love his child, or his obedience,
or dutifulness the worse for this: yet God more effectually, and with a great
deal more case changes our hearts, even omnipotente facilitate, as Austine
speaks, and shall he love our obedience, our thankfulness, our repentance
the less for this?

5 Now we are like to receive something concerning the maine problem, to wit,
In what sense God may be said to do all that he can for his vineyard: All
this while you have been as it were in trimming your instrument, and it seems
not to be yet in tune: the first music is so harsh, and without all harmony,
I cannot devise a construction thereof to carry any tolerable sense. But the
sentence following seems to be of the same nature: where you call that
Revenue, which before you called Charge very incongruously, as if a man's
revenues were a burden unto him, whereof he did exonorate himself. Or if it
be spoken of Bursers accounts in Colleges, the incomes are not to them that
are charged, and put to exonerate themselves, but to the Colleges; this at the
best is but a gamboll, lets come to the naked truth. Though man's love to his
dearest friend, be in respect of Gods love to us, but saint, and his power
small, yet because his love to justice is much less, he^ ofttimes effects that
for his temporal good, which God, though infinite in power does not effect for
those whom he infinitely loves. I think I may be bold to say that this is
infinitely false: God loved Jacob, and hated Esau: now all whom God hates as he
hated Esau, he damnes; and all those whom he loves as he loved Jacob, he
saves; yet this love was but infinite: and what love of man or Angel, vicious
or virtuous, can effect the like? Yet God blessed both Esau and Ismael with
temporal blessings; and what friend by good courses or lewd courses was able
to equal it? what creature can equal that temporal good that God affords to
any reprobate? for he gives him his being and all that he enjoyes; nay, what
man or Angel can do ought for him, in the effecting whereof, God has not a
greater hand then the man or Angel himself? Yet you suppose that God
infinitely loves the very reprobates. It is familiar with you to suppose, that
God loved Esau, and that infinitely, of whom the Scripture professes, that God
hated him. Your suppositions are fat and well fed, but your arguments are more
lean and ill favored then the lean kine of Pharaoh.

Yet I will be content to help you a little in the way of argument: Gods love,
says Aquinas, is in respect of designing some good to his creature; now God
does will temporal good to the very reprobates, and that in such a manner as
cannot be supplied unto them but by power infinite.

In no other sense do I find, that it may be tollerably avouched, that God
loves them infinitely, though you are pleased to suppose it often.

It is untrue, that his grants made to man, must undergo the examination of
justice; for it is law full for him to do what he will with his own, to
bestow being, and gracious being, and consequently glorious being on whom he
will; for both grace and glory is executed on man in the way of mercy, and he
has mercy on whom he will. And though he has revealed unto us by what rules
he will proceed in pronouncing the sentence of salvation, or condemnation,
yet has he revealed unto us no rules, according whereunto he proceeds in
giving grace unto some, and denying grace unto others. And both Suarez and
Vasquez (though opposite in other points about the justice of God) concurrently
profess, that there is no justice in God toward man, but upon presuposition
of his will.

And those unchangeable rules you speak of, for confining God in the execution
of his power, according to his gracious will, are like Castles in the air that
have no foundations, and fit for nothing but to discover the new world in the
Moon, and to ease the man there of his burden, that traveled so long with a
bush at his back: God may convert whom he will, and consequently save whom he
will, as the Holy Ghost teaches us; this is no fiction, Quis porro, says
Enchirid. cap. 98.
Austine, tam impie desipiat ut dicat Deum malas hominum voluntates, quas
voluerit, quando voluerit, ubi voluerit, in bonum non posse convertere? Who
does so impiously dote as to say, that God cannot convert the evil wills of
men, whom he will, when he will, and where he will. Yet you say as much as
this comes to, when you tell us of unchangeable rules of justice, restraining
God from converting and changing the hearts of men, without all fear of
imputation, either of dotage or impiety: God you say loves justice more then
mankind: God loves himself better then he loves mankind, or all his
creatures; for he made all things for himself, Prove. 16. 4. But as for any
justice in God that limits his will, I know none, neither are you able to prove
any as I am verily persuaded. What you have hitherto delivered, I think I have
not suffered in any material part to pass unsaluted, unanswered.

CHAP. XVII.
The truth and ardency of Gods love unto such as perish, justified by our
Savior, and S. Paul.

I Would your propositions were only paradoxes; but indeed, we have weighed
them in the balance, and found them plain untruthes; yet what those
propositions are which you intimate when you say, These are no paradoxes, but
plain truth, I am to seek; neither can I tell whereto to refer it, but to a
point which you aim at and insinuate rather then express, as if you feared
plain dealing most. For, that which you undertook to show in the former
Chapter, was only this, In what sense God may be said to have done all that
he could do for his vineyard: yet your ensuing discourse throughout has very
little correspondency thereunto. But the point you aim at is to persuade, that
God does all that he could do for all reprobates, and that he does as much
for them as for his elect, and the difference between the elect and
reprobates, arises rather from their free wills, then from any different
dispensation of Gods providence, in giving that grace unto the one which he
denies unto the other. A most foul opinion, and therefore no marvel if you
are content to travail long in the delivery of such a monster, and seem to
desire that your Readers forwardness in understanding your meaning, should
deliver you thereof, and if his propitious affections should be as ready to
embrace it upon your weak suggestions, the whole business shall be very
preposterously carried.

Yet unless this conceit of yours be admitted, you tell us, We shall hardly
find any true sense or good meaning in Gods protestations of sorrows for his
peoples plagues, or in his expostulations of their unthankefulnesse, or in his
kind invitations of them to repentance which never repent, or in his tender
profer of salvation to those that perish.

Whenever you shall charge us with any of these like places; if a true sense
and good meaning of them shall be found by us, though hardly, without the
acknowledgment of your foul Tenets, we shall not fail to obtain
wherewithal to answer you.

Certainly, sorrow is not incident to God, no not for the plagues of his elect,
and therefore cannot be attributed unto him but, per (...), by conformity to
the nature of man. Sorrow may be incident unto Christ, for he was man as well
as God; and so man is subject to the law of God, which commands us to love our
neighbor as our self, and who is to be accounted our neighbor, himself
has taught us in the parable of a certain man that descended from Jerusalem to
Jericho, by the way as he went fell into the hands of thieves; and a fruit of
this love is well known to be compassion, whereby we rejoice with them that
rejoice, and weep with them that weep; yea, weep for them who weep not for
themselves.

And yet it is very strange to infer, that because Gods sorrows for his
peoples plagues, does infer that he has done all that he can for his people,
therefore God has done all that he can do for them that perish. Or, because
God does expostulate with his people for their unthankfulness, therefore he
does all he can do for the salvation not only of his people, but of them
that perish also. But it is true, in the ministry of the word, he invites
them to repentance that do not repent.

And it is as true, that if this be required to the doing of all that he can
do for the salvation of them that perish, then many thousands perish, for
whose salvation God does not all he can do. For many thousands have perished
that never enjoyed the ministry of the word to bring them to repentance. They
indeed that live within the precincts of Gods sanctuary enjoy this benefit,
though many thousands of them perish. Neither does it follow, that because God
invites them to repentance, he does all he can do for their salvation: For if
it pleased him, he could not only invite them to repentance, but give them
repentance, 2 Timothy 2. last, and Act. 5. 35. and Act. 11. and the 18. And as
Austine says, Quantamlibot Deus Cont. Iul. Pelag. l. 5. c. 4.
praebuerit patientiam, nisi Deus dederit quis aget poenitentiam; so may I say,
Quantumlibet Deus invitaverit ad rescipiscendum nisi Deus dederit quis aget
poenitentiam. And as Austine in the same place professes of such as God has
not predestinate, whether out of the Church or in the Church, Istarum neminem
adducit Deus ad salubrem spiritualemque poenitentiam, qua homo reconciliatur
Deo in Christo, sive illud ampliorem patientiam, sive non imparem praebeat.

And consequently though he profereth salvation upon condition of faith and
repentance (for no otherwise does he profer it to any) unto some of those that
perish; yet herehence it follows not, First that he profereth this unto all
that perish; or secondly, in profering it to any that perish, he does all that
he could do for the salvation of them that perish, as when he says, Esa. 65.
2. I have spread out my hands all the day long unto a rebellious people which
walk in a way that was not good; and herehence it follows not, that he did
all that he could do for their salvation: For this signifies only his
invitation of them, and readiness to embrace them upon their repentance, and
complaint of the hardness of their heart in not repenting.

But God could do more then this, he could take away their stony heart, and
give them an heart of flesh, and put his own Spirit within them, and cause
them towalke in his statutes, and to do them, Ezech. 36. 27. And therefore it
is a very vain discourse of yours, when you say, The unremovable rules of
eternal equity, will not suffer him to stretch out his hand any further then
he does toward the sons of men: for it is apparent that he does stretch them
further, to as many as in the course of his loving kindness he does convert;
and thus far he does stretch them out to as many as he transports into the
land of promise, as your self confess.

But whereas you say, The measure of their iniquity being accomplished, is an
obstacle to God, as whom his justice in this case will not suffer to stretch
them out so far any longer; this is one of the articles of your creed,
besides all text of Scripture, or Christian reason: for God calls some even at
the last hour of the day, as the Gospel preaches in the parable of the
laborers hired into the vineyard, end in the example of the thief upon the
cross, and the example of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2. sc. (...), if at any time God
may give them repentance: and the ancient saying is, inter pontem and fontem.
And S. Augustine counts it impiety and madness to think otherwise, Enchir.
98. Quis porro tam impie desipiat ut dicat Deum malas hominum voluntates quas
voluerit, quando voluerit, ubi voluerit, in bonum non posse convertere? And the
order of our Church in visiting the sick does justify this, in urging us to
visit all, to invite all to repentance, even to the last gasp. saving that
indeed no man's iniquity is at full till his death, and after death no calling
to repentance; for the wicked imediately upon their death are carried into
hell, as Dives was; and, Ex inferno nulla redemptio, out of hell no redemption.
At you say, that with sorrow he does withdraw his hands, so you may with as
good sobriety say, that with soraow he does punish the reprobate men and
Angels with eternal fire, and directly contrary to Scripture phrase, Prove. 1.
24. Because I have called and you refused: I have stretched out mine hand and
none will regard: 26. I will also laugh at your destruction, and mock when your
fear comes.

As for the love of God in stretching out his hands, I deny it not, because to
stretch out his hands in inviting unto repentance, is a special favor which
God denies to many thousands, and such as whereby many a reprobate may and does
profit, ad exteriorem vitae emendationem quo mitius puniantur, to an outward
emendation of their lives, that they may be punished more mildly.

But you make this love to reprobates equal to the love of God toward his
elect; for you maintain, that God does as much as he can do for the salvation
of the reprobates. And it it apparent, he does no more for the salvation of
his elect. Now this is an abominable opinion. And the stranger is Gods mercy in
electing you (whereof as I have read in some of your writings you make no doubt)
when you think you are not bound to render him more thanks for his goodness
toward you then a reprobate is: but though yet you do not, you may do ere you
die, and be pulled out of this abominable opinion of yours, as out of the fire
with fear. For as Paul was a chosen vessel of God, though for a while he
persecuted the Act. 9. 15:
truth of God, even unto blood, so may you be not withstanding your impugning
of it, though in a milder manner I confess: for your impugnation is not like
to do any great harm save only to your self.

Our Savior was the Son of man as well as he was the Son of God, and made
under the law, and therefore was Gal. 4. 4^
bound to be as compassionate to his people as Jeremy was, Ier. 13. 17. But if
you will not hear this, my soul shall weep in secret for your pride, and
mine eye shall weep and drop down tears, because the Lords slock is carried
away captive: So our Savior wept over Jerusalem, saying, Jf thou had known
even then a^ the least in this thy day the things which belong unto thy peace,
but now they are hid from thine eyes. Luke 19. 42. You ask, whether he spoke
this as man, or whether the spirit does not say the same? and I ask whether
your wits were your own when you made such a question? Who could weep and
speak but man, and how could man weep or speak this but as man? Has God any
heart to be filled with woe, or eyes to be filled with tears? yet the Spirit
moved him to speak this.

So if any Prophet had said it, as he might have said it, the Spirit of God
had moved him hereunto. And when Jeremy said, My soul shall weep in secret
for your pride, and mine eye shall drop down tears, the Spirit of God moved
him to utter this, for, Holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy
Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. 21. The truth is, the words are congruous to him, both as God,
and as man, but the sorrow of heart, and tears of eyes wherewith it was
uttered, are only agreeable to the nature of man.

How do you prove, that he that spoke this, spoke nothing but words of Spirit
and life; because our Savior says, Ioh. 6. 63 It is the spirit that
quickens, the flesh profits nothing, the words that I speak unto you are
spirit and life: will it therefore follow that all that he spoke was spirit and
life? Suppose it were so, would it herehence follow, that these words were not
spoken by him as man? Then belike, when he said I thirst, this also being words
of Spirit and life (as it needs must if all that he spoke were spirit and life)
he spoke not this as man likewise when he said, My soul is heavy unto death,
and on the cross, My God my God why have thou forsaken me, these words were
not his words as he was man: and though he spoke nothing, but what the Father
gave him in commandment to speak, yet herehence it follows not, that
therefore he spoke them not as man. For by just proportion of reason, if this
were admitted, it would follow, that he spoke nothing as man; no not that, I
have desired to eat this Passover with you; nor that, How was it that he
sought after me, wist he not that I must go about my Fathers business? nor
that, My Father is greater then I,

It Is true, His bowels of compassion were freely extended toward them in exact
conformity, not so much to the love of God (as you discourse at pleasure,
according to your own extravagant conceits of the love of God, equally
extended to the elect and reprobate) as to the will of God: for, being made
under the law, he was bound to the like compassion and commiseration, as to
pray for his persecutors, so to mourn for the judgments of God upon his
brethren, according to the flesh: yet one word by the way concerning this, Was
the measure of Ierusalems iniquity at this time filled up, or no? It seems it
should be so in your computation; for now its said, The things that belonged
unto their peace, were now hid from their eyes; When should the door of
repentance be shut upon them, if not at such a time, and in such a case as
this? If so, then by your own doctrine, Gods love cease toward them, as but
in the former sentence you signified; and consequently Christ's love and
compassion should cease also, if it were but in conformity to Gods love; but
rather it was in conformity to Gods law, as I have showed; God the Father
having made him in subjection to the law, and consequently was he bound to
mourn for them, as well as to pray for them: for he was by virtue of the law
to love his neighbor as himself. This incongruity (as it seems) of yours you
observed, and therefore as I guess, you added, that his bowels of compassion
were restrained also, by the same conformity, and though you tell us, that from
different motions and distractions, occasioned from the indissolvable union of
his divisible soul (this is your own language) with these two attributes of
the indivisible nature (to wit, love and justice) his tears were squeized out.

Yet neither do you tell us how his bowels of compassion were restrained, or
wherein; neither do you make known unto us what these different motions and
distractions in our Savior were: Neither does the story of the Gospel afford
us any discovery of any such different motions and distractions you talk of:
But to the end he continued in his bowels of compassion toward them, as it
appears by his prayers for them upon the cross: for indeed, his first
coming was not Ioh. 12. 47
to condemn the world, but to save the world. But in the old Testament, God
himself, as God, expresses his desires of his peoples obedience; O that my
people had hearkened unto me. This you will have to be understood in proper
speech: Piscator by a figure of speech, Talis optatio, says he, Deotribuitur
per anthropopathiam. Utri creditis. With Piscator concurreth Iunius also. And
we have reason for it, because whatsoever God wills, that brings he to pass
both in heaven and earth; how Ps. 135. 6.
much more what he desires, and that ardently. Yet you keep your course
contrary to reason and authority, in attributing desires unto God, of such
things which never come to pass, which Austine long ago professed to be all
one with the denying of Gods omnipotency.

And not content with this, you most ridiculously contradict your self, and
call it also an unquenchable desire, whereas your self have often professed,
that the filling up the measure of man's iniquity does quench this desire in
God; thereby making God not only impotent, but mutable also.

Israel might have truly said, Was there ever any love like unto this love
wherewith the Lord embraced me? But what Israel? even the true Israel of God
we say: but the true Israel of God cannot say so, the elect of God cannot say
so according to your Tenet, for as much as you make the love of God toward
reprobates to be as great as the love of God toward the elect, yet as if you
strained your words, you call it the excessive fervency of his loving
kindness, to wit, even toward them that perish: and add by way of
Parenthesis, that Gods will is infinite, as if you had a mind to infer
thereby, that his love toward them were infinite.

Now of Gods infinite will I never heard before: his power we say is infinite,
because he can do every thing that is possible to be done, his knowledge is
infinite because he knows all things that may be known, but God does not
will all things that may be willed by him: Nay, his power receives limitation
and restriction by his will, as touching the execution thereof; for he does no
more then what he will. Likewise we say Gods love is infinite in the way of
extention, for it neither had beginning, neither shall it have end. But such is
not Gods love toward them that perish, for it cease by your doctrine when
the measure of their iniquity is filled up: but such as it is, you say, it
lays no necessity upon their wills. A most ridiculous speech, as much as to
say, it does not make men repent necessarily; whereas concerning them that
perish, it is apparent that it neither makes them repent necessarily; nor
contingently.

And as for the elect, he gives them repentance, which he does not to the
reprobates; as Austine long ago professed, Istorum neminem adducit Deus ad
salubrem spiritualemque poenitentiam Cont. Iul. Pelag. l. 5. c. 4.
qua homo reconciliatur Deo in Christo, sive illis ampliorem patientiam sive
non imparem praebeat. Nyither do we say, that to whom God gives repentance,
he gives obedience, he makes them to repent necessarily, to obey necessarily,
but freely. For it is manifest that grace takes not away the power of
disobedience, but only prevents the act of disobedience, and that not in all
particulars neither: for the children of God sin too often. And as for those
which want this grace which God bestows on his elect, they have not only
liberty left them unto sin, but also this liberty turns into wilfulness,
according to that of Austine, Libertas sine gratia non est libertas sed
contumacia, Liberty without grace is not liberty but wilfulness. Ep. 89.


But yet we say upon supposition, that God will give any man repentance and
that at such a time. that man shall repent at such a time; and it is impossible
he should not repent; yet in repenting he shall repent freely, and not
necessarily Like as God ordaining Christ's bones should not be broken, upon this
supposition it was impossible it should be otherwise, albeit the soldiers
abstained from breaking of his bones, not necessarily, but deliberately and
freely. It is true the Lord says, Open thy mouth wide and I will fill it: but
his people would not hearken unto his voice.

And now the question is only as touching their obedience, whether God did any
otherwise will that, then by commanding it in respect of those that perish; we
say he did only command it in respect of such, we say he did not resolve to
give them repentance, to give them obedience, though he could have done this,
and does do this unto his elect, making Ezech. 20. 37.
them to pass under the rod, and bringing them under the bond of the covenant,
not only seeing their ways, but healing them also; Esa. 57. 1^ Hos. 14. 5.
Mic. 7. 19. Romans 16. 7 Act. 26. 18 Ephesians. 2. 2. Psalm. 51.
healing their rebellions, and subduing their iniquities, and treading Satan
under their feet: opening their eyes, and bringing them out of darkness into
light, and from the power of Satan unto God, quickening them when they were dead
in trespasses and sins, creating a new heart, and renewing a right spirit
within them: Do you but acknowledge this, as you must unless you will
renounce the Scriptures, and we will never quarrel with you for saying, God
does all this contingently, and not necessarily.

2 The Apostles move a question to our Savior concerning him that was borne
blind, Ioh. 9. whether he had sinned or his fathers, that he was horn
blind, this was in respect of judgment corporal, you apply this to a
judgment spiritual; that judgment was positive to be bereaved of sight,
which in course of nature is otherwise then only permissive, in suffering them
to be such as he found them. That was spoken in respect of some not common,
but extraordinary sin: for though there be sin common unto all, yet this
judgment is not; and therefore they might well think, if sin were the
cause, it must be some extraordinary sin, but our Savior signifies, that
it befell him in the course of Gods providence, not so much in respect of
sin, as in respect of a certain end whereto God had ordained it. But I hope
neither the Apostles, nor any sober man would imagine that some extraordinary
sin was required unto this, that God should leave men as he finds them,
without bestowing some supernatural grace upon them.

And in despite of sin, God does afford this grace to many thousands: for
God has mercy on whom he will; like as Romans 9. 18
on the other side, in despite of men's civility, and natural morality, whom
he will he hardens. Yet to the question by you proposed at pleasure you make
no answer, but add hereunto out of Ion. 2. 8. They that follow lying vanities
forsake their own mercies: as if you had a mind to imply, that there is
something in man, that makes a difference, why some are suffered to walk in
their own ways, some are not, wherein you do but corrupt the state of the
question after your usual manner.

For the question is not about the consequent of lying vanities, or not
observing them, but about the observing of lying vanities it self, or not
observing them; that is, how comes it to pass that some are suffered to go
on in the course of their lying vanities, some are not, but rather are taken
off from those ungodly courses wherein they have been brought up, as many
thousands were taken off thus in the Apostles days: we say it is the mere
good pleasure of God that puts this difference, having mercy on some, and
hardening others; you take another course, as when you say, in your familiar and
soliloquiall meditations with God; Never had thou given them up to their own
hearts lust, to treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, had they not
despised the riches of thy bounty: Here you mix different courses of God
together; for when you talk of giving them over to their own hearts lusts,
(Which scripture applies to Gods dealing with his own people Israel, upon the
despising of his grace, offered them in his word) but the rest, as this also,
being accomodated unto the heathens, you seem to refer to the despising of
the riches of Gods bounty declared to them in his works: for as for the riches
of Gods bounty declared in his word, the heathen were not pertakers of this,
until the days of the Gospel: and whereas by the phrase of speech used, you
seem to have an eye to that of the Apostle, Romans 2, 3. 4. the riches of Gods
bounty in that place is specified only to consist in patience and
long-suffering: And how did they refuse it, but in refusing to repent? For the
bounty there mentioned is noted to be a bounty leading unto repentance. So that
in the issue your meaning comes to this, that God would never have suffered
them thus to have walked in their own ways, and to treasure up wrath against
the day of wrath, if so be they had repented?

Now the question is, whether they had power to repent or no; you seem to
imply they had, but you dare not express so much, because you see how
manifestly contradictious that were to the text it self, where it is expressly
said, But thou after the hardness of thine heart, which cannot repent,
treasurest up wrath against the day of wrath. So that you, what by taking up
pieces of Scripture at pleasure, and leaving out pieces as you list, make up a
patcht coat contrary to the Scripture, which yet you commend unto us as
Scripture it self; Nay, what will you say if God did not so much as admonish
them to repent? Does not the same Apostle plainly signify so much, Act. 17.
30. where he says And God regarded not the time of this ignorance: but now
he admonishes all men every where to repent. Again, consider I pray you what
is to be accounted the time, when this ceasure deserved to be fastened upon
them, namely, of despising the riches of his bounty? It seems by your former
discourse, it is not till they have filled up the measure of their iniquity;
for till then Gods infinite love was toward them (according to your opinion)
and he did not give them over to their own lests. Now I pray consider, did
he not even before this time suffer the Gentiles to walk in their own ways,
according to the Apostles meaning, Act. 14. 16. although as the same Apostle
says, even at that time, He left not himself without witness, giving them
rain and fruitful seasons, filling (...). 17
their hearts with food and gladness.

And this you take hold of in the next place, and tell us, that, these were
unquestionable earnests of Gods everlasting love, and to prove it you add by
way of reason, for thou so lovedst the world, still holding up your deyout
Soliloquies, as if you would enchant your Readers with an affected strain of
devotion, that thou gave thine only begotten Son, that whosoever believes
in him should not perish.

If this be not like capping of verses, I do not know what is: for will it
follow by any Logical method, that because the giving of Christ for
everlasting life to all that believe in him, is an evidence of Gods love to
all; therefore the giving of rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, is an
unquestionable earnest of Gods everlasting love to all? Yet I grant it is an
evidence of Gods love as touching the preservation of their state temporal;
but you urge it as an evidence of Gods love, as touching the state of their
souls spiritual and eternal: otherwise your discourse were nothing to the
purpose. Yet to speak according to the Apostles drift in that place, he
proposes them not as witnesses of his love, but as of his providence, which
we know extends even to bruit beasts, and to the very lillies of the field.
Only man is capable of deserving this testimony of divine providence, and so
accordingly should be moved to seek the Lord, and to worship him as God, who
governes all, and provides for all, and not as a corruptible thing, thus we
interpret the Apostle, Act. 14. 16. according to the Apostle, Act. 17. 27. and
Romans 1. 23. and not at random as you do, fashioning his meaning in such a
manner as may best accord with your extravagant opinions.

Lastly, who sees not, that if these be unquestionable earnests of Gods love
toward them, then notwithstanding they have filled up the measure of their
iniquity, yet Gods love continues toward them the same still, and therefore
cannot be said to give them over to their own lusts, and to treasure up wrath
against the day of wrath. For these and the like temporal blessings they enjoy
still, and that in greater measure then is usually the portion of Gods own
dear children. To conclude this, we make no doubt but that if all and every
one should believe in Christ, all and every one should be saved by Christ.

But the question is, whether God gives faith to all: it is apparent he does
not, but only to those whom he has predestined, Romans 8. 30. to those whom
he has ordained to everlasting life, Act. 13. 45. to such as shall be saved,
Act. 2. last. Perhaps your meaning is, that though God does not give faith to
all, but only to some; the reason is, because some fit themselves for faith,
and others do not. And I verily believe this is your opinion, but it seems
you are ashamed to profess it and speak it out plainly.

Yet the texts mentioned are directly against you, which confine the giving of
faith not to man's disposition, but to Gods predestination; like as those other
also, Romans 9. God has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens,
and it is not of him that wills, or of him that runs, but of God that
shows mercy: and 2 Timothy 1. 9. the Apostle professes, that God calls us,
not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace.

To the prosecuting of every which place, and making it good against any
exceptions that you shall bring, I shall be willing to condescend, so long as
God affords me life and opportunity. But as yet you dissemble your Tenet, and
play least in sight, and discover your meaning only by insinuation. I know
there is no greater argument of Gods love, then the giving of his Son, whence
it manifestly follows, that unless Gods love to reprobates be as great as
his love to his elect, Christ was not given to the reprobates; like as our
Savior signifies, that, He sanctified himself unto his death and Ioh. 17.
9. 20.
passion; not for the world, but for those for whom he prayed, which were
partly those whom God had already given him, and partly those who hereafter
should believe through their word. Yet I confess you are audacious enough to
resist this argument, and openly to profess, that Gods love to the reprobate
is as great as his love to the elect, which no Arminian was ever yet known to
profess: yet you take upon you to prove, that this love was tendered to all.

A strange phrase, which I think was never heard of before, as if love were
like an ointment in a box, that might be offered and received if a man would.
Of tendering grace I have heard, to wit, the grace of remission of sins and
salvation upon our belief, but of tendering love I never heard.

And of the tendering of this grace in Christ unto all that hear it preached,
who ever doubted? For this is no more then to say, that It is tendered unto all
to whom it is tendered. And are you well in your wits to address your self to
the proving of this, with some notable argument, which should be like a
thunderbolt, and therefore no great marvel if some great noise preceed it.

But still I perceive your meaning reaches further then you dare as yet to
profess; for your meaning is to prove, that All that hear the Gospel and do
not believe it, seeing they shall be guilty of greater sin, and incur
greater condemnation at the day of judgment, therefore they could believe it
if they would. This is the point that sticks in your teeth, and which you dare
not openly and plainly profess, as indeed it is manifest Pelagianisme, and
which the Arminians dare not at this day openly avouch, but rather profess
that no man can believe or repent without grace.

Whereas yet, like as your self maintain, that no man in state of nature can
do otherwise of himself then sin, yet is he justly condemned for sinning,
none compelling him: in like sort, no man of himself can believe the Gospel,
yet he may be as justly condemned for not believing. For as for that natural
impotency unto that which is good, which is in all derived unto us from our
father Adam, that is of it self sufficient to condemn us, and therefore most
unsufficient to excuse us. And that impotencie being in all alike, the
condemnation therefore shall be unto all alike; but the increase of it by
actual transgressions which are freely committed, is not in all alike: for
neither does inclination natural, or tentations spiritual, or occasions
temporal hinder a man's liberty, in doing or refusing to do any act; so
likewise neither can it hinder the aggravation of his sin. But neither can
this natural impotency be cured in any part but by the grace of God
habitual, neither any good act according to this grace habitual he performed
without another grace, both prevenient and subsequent actual. If your mind
serves you to deal plainly in opposing ought of this, you shall not want them
that will be ready to enter with you into the lists, and scholastically to
encounter you. Yet I confess the providence of God, especially in ordering and
governing the wills of men, is a misterious thing, and the operation and
cooperation of his will, with the operation and cooperation of the will of man.

But I am a long time inured unto this, and now I fear no bugbeares, least of
all from your self, with whom I have been of old acquainted in our private
and familiar discourse on these and such like arguments, and to tell you
plainly my opinion, I doubt you have written so much, that you have had time
to read but little. And truly as for my self, as I have written little, so also
I have not read much. But in these points I have spent not a little time, in
searching after truth, and examining arguments.

As for the place of the Apostle, Act. 17. 30. it seems your meaning is, it
pleads for universal grace now after Christ's death: yet your self immediately
before profested, that only they that hear it and do not believe, are guilty
of greater sins; implying manifestly, that since Christ's death all do not
hear it. Yet if you have any other meaning, and will deal roundly in
propounding it, I will be ready to consider this or any other place that you
shall be able to produce to what purpose soever, if orthodox in my judgment
to subscribe unto it, if otherwise, to do my best to confute it.

3 In the next place you are so far from maintaining universal grace, that
you undertake to give causes why all men in the world have not heard of this
love of God in Christ. But these causes to be assigned by you are put off till
hereafter, and that not of certainty neither: you only say, They may be
assigned. It Is your usual course to feed your Readers with expectation, as it
were with empty spoones. If you do not gull them in putting them off to
expectation it is somewhat the better.

The reason you give why many might have heard of Christ, which yet have not
heard of him, and might have been partakers of his death, (I think you mean
of the benefit of his death) which yet have not been partakers of it, is
stark naught. For that evil courses of men cannot hinder them from the
participation of Christ's death, appears by the calling of the Gentiles, and
casting off of the Jews. For were the deeds of Babylon (think you) better
then they of Sion? We Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles, says
the Apostle, Gal. 2. 15.

The Apostle in diverse places, puts no difference between them that are
called, and them that are not, as touching their manners before grace, 1 Cor.
6. 11. Ephesians. 2. 23. Tit. 3. 23. God sindes us weltring in our blood, when he
says unto us, Live, Ezech. 16. and Saul was taken off from his bloody courses
to be made a member of Christ.

And your doctrine to the contrary tends shamefully to the obscuring and
disparaging of Gods grace, and to the advancing of the power of nature, and
liberty of will; the trick of the Pelagians of old, of whom Austine professed
thus, Inimici gratiae Dei latent in commendatione naturae, The enemies of Gods
grace welter themselves under the commendation of nature. And Austine
professes it to be impiety and madness Cont dua^ epist. Pelag l. 2. c. 1.
Enchir. 9. 8
to deny, that God can convert any man's will, when he will, and where he
will. And you blush not to profess in another discourse of yours, that
humility is the disposition, which prepares us for grace. I doubt you will
find little comfort in such humility, and that at the day of judgment, such
humility will be found abominable pride.

What you mean by pledges I know not, you love to walk in clouds, and in the
dark: if you mean the fruits of Gods temporal blessings, how will you prove
that these were evidences of that love which God man fested in the death of his
Son? And if it were so, then this evidence should be manifested to all of
ripe years: for all are partakers of Gods temporal providence, even they that
have filled up the measure of their iniquity. Yet then you usually profess,
God withdrawes his love from them: but how can that be if he afford them the
unquestionable earnests thereof, as before you called these pledges: whereas in
the close you say, that many are not acquainted with this manifestation of Gods
love, and that out of mere mercy, it may well pass for one of your paradoxes.
I never doubted but that it was a mercy to know Christ, and the love of God to
the world in him; but that it was a mercy to want Christ, I never read nor
heard till now. Neither is it necessary that men, though reprobates, should be
enraged to evil by the Gospel: for God can make even reprobates to profit by
it, ad exteriorem vitae emendationem qua mitius puniantur, To the outward
emendation of their lives, to the end their punishment may be the milder. And
we find by experience that all were not enraged against it.

CHAP. XVIII.
Want of consideration, or ignorance of Gods unfeigned love to such as perish, a
principal means or occasion why so many perish.

FRom Gods love to his Vineyard, you have proceeded to discourse of his
infinite love toward them that perish; and because in the issue they are never
the better for it: and Solomon says, that open hatred is better Prove, 27. 5
then secret love, which some understand of fruitless love: therefore to salve
this inefficatious nature of Gods love as you shape it, (though yet you count
it infinite and ardent, and excessively fervent) you here take upon you to
discover unto us the reason why it proves so inefficacious, and that without
prejudice to the love of God; and that is, you say, on man's part, to wit, Want
of consideration, or ignorance of Gods unfeigned love toward them.

Yet we do not say, God is made any looser by the damnation of so many
thousands, both men and Angels: for the glory of God is indifferently advanced,
as well in the condemnation of them that perish, as in the salvation of his
Elect. And the Apostle in this case professes, saying, 2 Cor. 2. 15. We are
unto God the sweet savor of Christ in them that are saved, and in them that
perish: But you proceed and tell us, That God has from eternity infallibly
forecast the entire redemption of his infinite love, which unto us may seem
utterly cast away. And of men, if many die, the fault is their own, or their
instructers.

But by your leave, I see not how Gods infinite love (if there be any such
toward them that perish as you plead there is) is redeemed from being utterly
cast away; for surely, they that are thus cast away, are never a whit the
better for it. God I confess is never a whit the worse for their damnation:
but if Gods love were such toward them that perish as to will their salvation,
surely God is much the worse for that in two respects; First, because his
omnipotency is hereby shaken, in as much as that is not brought to pass which
he would, and ardently desired (as you speak) that it should come to pass. In
which case it follows, that God is not omnipotent; as Austine long ago
discoursed, and thereupon was driven to give such commodious interpretation of
that place (whereupon you only insist in your own sense, notwithstanding the
analogy of Scripture phrase is as directly against that construction of the
place, which you lay for a ground of your present discourse as for it) as might
not enterfare upon Gods omnipotency: for by experience we find, that
whatsoever we desire to bring to pass, we always do bring to pass, if it
lies in our power to bring it to pass: and if we do not effect it, it is a
manifest sign that we are not able to effect it. Secondly, God is the worse
for it in another respect; for this love and will of God to them that perish,
you make to cease, as soon as they have filled up the measure of their
iniquity, how much more after the time of their damnation is come? And this is
to make God mutable, and his will and love to be of a changeable condition.
But God is so perfect as to be without Iac. 1.
all variableness or shadow-of change.

And by the way I observe, you are apt to discourse of Gods infinite love
toward them that perish amongst men, but of any such love toward them that
perish amongst Angels, nor a word: yet it is as evident, that if any perish
amongst Angels, it is merely their own faults also: Nay, much more evident is
this in the nation of Angels, then in the nation of men. For many thousand
infants perish in original sin, for no personal original fault of their
own, but for the transgression of Adam, and in that corruption which is
naturally derived unto them from the loins of Adam, after that by his actual
transgression he fell into the state of that corruption, which since from him
is become hereditarie unto us all. As for that miscarriage which makes all men
obnoxious unto the wrath of God, and unto condemnation, we hold it impossible
to be prevented.

For original sin and Adams transgression is it, which you well know, cannot
be prevented: Only God may have mercy on whom he will, even in despite of
any actual miscariage (which you dote upon as an only hinderer from grace)
like as on the otherside he hardens whom he will, in spite of all civil and
moral good carriage found in the best of heathen men.

This I speak according to the doctrine of Saint Paul; I confess, I speak it
not according to the doctrine of Silius Italicus, nor according to the doctrine
of Sozimus, as sound at heart for true heathenisme, as Silius was for his life.
And that Sozimus amongst other reproaches he casts upon Christianity, this is
one, that we offer Gods free grace of pardoning all manner of sins, to all
manner of men that believe in Christ Jesus. And to touch by the way, if it be
the fault, or may be the fault only of their instructors that many perish,
then it is not their own fault.

Yet certainly it is their own fault that Angels perish: yet we see not any
pains you take to show, How God has infallibly forecast the entire redemption
of his infinite love toward Angels that are cast away: belike he never
entertained any love toward those Angels at all. But Silius Italicus
himself, that knew this, and considered this, and preaches it unto others,
what did he fare the better for it, was he saved by it think you?

Nay, how many thousands knew this amongst heathen men, as well as Silius, that
Mite and cognitum est homini Deus, and that he delighted not in the sacrificing
of the blood of men, which yet were never a whit the nearer unto salvation for
all this: Much less so near as Abraham, even at that time when he traveled
three days journey to the sacrificing ofhis son Isaac. Yet we confess, his
love is unfainedly extended to all that call him Maker; for in that he made
them, and a world for them, and by giving rain and fruitful seasons, does
fill their hearts with food and gladness, he may Act. 14. 16
be said to love them, but herehence it follows not, that he loves them
unto salvation.

And yet how many are so far from having their hearts filled with food and
gladness, that sometimes they perish for want of bread? But in stead of
arguing you turn to prophesying, and tell us, that Had the doctrines which
those divine oracles (God is love and would have all men to be saved) naturally
afford, been for these forty years last past, as generally taught, and their
right use continually pressed with as great zeal and fervencie as the doctrine
and uses of Gods absolute decree, for electing some, and reprobating most in
that space have been; the plentiful increase of Gods glory and his peoples
comfort throughout this land, might have wrought such astonishment to our
adversaries, ^as would have put their mutinous mouths to silence.

I commend your wit in this; for I profess of all inartificiall arguments, I
never heard any answerable unto this. Now if you had added an artificial
argument, unto this inartificiall which you might have had the hap to have read
in Southwell, it had been most complete; and I had not easily devised what
could have been added hereunto. And the argument is this, Suppose God the
Father had written this, and that with the pen of his Spirit, dipped in the blood
of his Son, would you not then have believed it? I presume you would, why
then believe it now, for the difference is not in substance, but only
circumstance.

It is the only thing I remember in that book of Southwell; and this argument
of yours I may perhaps remember when you have forgotten it. But I pray
consider, what sect is there in the world that might not use the like? Perhaps
you will say, they might use it, not so truly as you do. But then I pray
consider, what evidence have we for the truth of it on your part, but your
own confidence, and your bare word expressing it? And I hope you will give
every sect leave to be as confident of the truth of their own way, as you are
of yours; and as liberal in proving their bare words for it as your self.

I have read in Chaucer (to betray unto you what use I can make of him, as well
as you of Silius Italicus) of somo rhyme that is called rhyme dogrell, and if
there be any Logic dogrell, I think this is it. But I do not mean to let
your grave discourse pass thus; those Oracles, God is love, and would have all
men to be saved, you suppose do naturally afford your doctrines, to wit, that
Gods infinite love extends to all and every one, as that he will that all and
every one should be saved.

But no such things do these oracles afford, either expressly, or by any just
consequence. And of the first (God is love) it is apparent that it contains
no such thing expressly; and as for the deducing of any such consequence
herehence, your self never yet adventured, nor yet do; you may as well deduce
herehence, that he will save all Angels, as well as all men, yea the very
devils. And as for the second, you think that does expressly signify as much;
but that is untrue; the Scripture phrase does use that universal sign
frequently in another sense, as when it says of the Pharisees that they did
tithe omne olus, which cannot be meant of every herb in particular, but of
every sort of herb in special, as Austine himself 1200. years ago observed.
So Peter is said to have seen a vessel let down from heaven, wherein was
(...), which cannot be meant of every particular, but only that of every sort,
or of most sorts, or of many sorts some one. So it is said, that all Jerusalem
and all Judea went forth to John, the meaning whereof can be no other then
that of all parts of Judea and of Jerusalem, some went forth unto him.

As for the plentiful increase of Gods glory and the peoples comfort, which
you promise upon the preaching of your doctrine; this is only upon your word,
which unless you take upon you to be a Prophet, and be received also for such
a one, is of no force.

But suppose it had been preached, and not received nor believed by the
hearers, I pray what then? Had the peoples comfort been any whit the more
increased? And for you to presume, that upon the preaching of it, it had been
received, is to take upon you too much; the Gospel it self when first
preached, the Jews told S. Paul when he came to Rome, it was every where
spoken against: Yet I confess, the more erroneous Act. 28.
a doctrine is, especially if it be plausible to the judgment of flesh and
blood, the more apt it is to be entertained by flesh and blood.

But I pray, what comfort is this you speak of, is it comfort in things
spiritual, or comfort in Gods blessings temporal? I grant willingly, that
the truth of God is more apt to breed comfort spiritual, then errors in
matters of faith. Now first you must prove your doctrine to be true, and then
we will nothing doubt but it shall be comfortable. You take too much upon you
to prophecy that it shall be comfortable and therehence infer that it is
true. But if you speak of comfort in respect of blessings temporal; as I
guess by comparing this with what you delivered in the Epistle dedicatory, we
have but your bare word for this also. But suppose it would prove so, shall we
from the temporal comforts we may enjoy, conclude, that therefore our
religion is the true religion?

Alas, what comfort in outward things had christianity in the first three
hundred years? why may you not as well conclude, that the Synagogue of
Antichrist is the very Church of Christ; and our Churches which we call
reformed, are no Churches of Christ; seeing for many years God has humbled us
under their hands, and given us over into the Ezech. 2^. 31.
hands of beastly men, skillful to destroy, and still sends serpents and
cokatrices amongst us, that will not be charmed? Ier. 4. 17.
Well, this we see is the comfort you afford us in these heavy times; you give
us to understand that it is Gods just judgment upon us, for preaching so much of
Gods absolute decree of electing some, and reprobating most,

And yet the Lutheran Churches preach as little of this as you do, and yet
wherein have they fared better then their brethren the Calvinists; witness the
Marquisate of Baden, the land of Brunswick, the land of Hulst, the land of
Pomerania and Meckelburgh. And the whole kingdom of Bohemia, wherein it is
well known, the Calvinists were but few in comparison to the Lutherans. In the
days of King James, a restraint began of preaching the doctrine of
predestination. Did the peoples comforts, or the comforts of this kingdom
increase any whit hereupon? Within these four years space books savouring of
Arminianisme, such as youas, have had the press open unto them with far
greater liberty then their opposites, yet how do the comforts of the people,
and of this kingdom increase?

Yet this is an old trick of Satan, who is therefore called by one (...), a
circkling Dragon: For in Saint Austines days, when the Empire began to be
invaded by the Goths, the cause of this was by the heathens alleged to be the
embracing of Christian religion, whereupon it was that Austine was moved to
write his two and twenty books of the City of God. Why may not we as well
say, that the cause why we taste so little of the grace of God is, because
there are so many risen up with might and maine impugning the grace of God. And
it is well known, no reformed Churches prosper so well as the Hollanders,
though no doubt they have as rank sins to be found in them as others; yet
this they have to their singular commendation, that they suppressed
Arminianisme, that Canker-worme of Gods grace, and of his soveraignety over his
creatures, and banished the greatest patrons thereof out of their territories.

This inartificiall argument of yours I thought deserved the canvassing, and
therefore I have spent so many lines in discovering the rottenness of it.

Now to proceed; you ask, Who would not be willing to be saved, if he were
fully persuaded that God did will his salvation in particular? When we read
this, I muse at the contrariant disposition of our adversaries: for, when we
discourse of election absolute, the Arminian party cries out against us; as if
hereby we took a course to make men most careless of their salvation; you,
though you shake hands with the Arminian party, oppose in a direct contrarious
manner, and say, Who would not be willing to be saved (which is as much as to
say, Who would not be careful of his salvation) if he were fully persuaded,
that God did will his salvation in particular. Your meaning is, every one would
be careful of it. So then, all that are of your mind, are most careful of
their salvation: so that it is opposite to the Arminian Tenent, to harden
himself, or humor himself in any profane course, or lewd course of life.

All such must needs turn Saints here on earth, which if it were true, it is to
be feared they would be accounted Puritans, and then their opinions would be
liked so much the worse for that. Touching Gods protestation that he will not
the death of any, but the repentance of all, we have said enough, and showed
how you vary from the most authentical translation of our Churches. And it is
apparent, that God neither gives repentance nor life to all; and to say that
God wills any thing (otherwise then by his will of commandment, which is
improperly, though usually called his will) which comes not to pass, Austine
long ago professed, was as much as to deny God to be omnipotent.

How sorily you have performed the justifying of your doctrine in this
particular, by the authority of the Church of England, we have likewise
showed in its proper place. And if it be true, that if this doctrine of yours
were believed, all would unfainedly endeavor with fervent alacrity to be
truly happy, then it must needs be that like as your self do, so every
Arminian does, unfainedly endeavor with fervent alacrity (words enough) to be
truly happy: So that a profane person like Esau, that sold his birthright for
a mess of pottage, is not likely to be found amongst the Arminian generation:
And I doubt not but a part of your own unfeigned endeavors, with fervent
alacrity in this kind, consists in writing such books as these, containing so
many blasphemies both against the nature and against the grace of God.

For proof whereof I appeal to the consideration and judgment of every
indifferent Reader, that shall peause the answer of mine thereunto. You tell
us, Gods love and goodness is so great. that he cannot pass any act, whereby
any of his creatures should be debarred, either from being like him in love or
goodness. Thus you dictate magisterially, more like a Prophet then a Pastor of
Gods Church. But though you bring no reason for what you say, I will try
whether I cannot bring something against it.

And because it is proposed of his creatures in general, I will begin with the
Angels. If this be true, then the Devils are not excluded by any act of God
from being like him in love and goodness. What hinders then, but that they may
be like him in love and goodness if they will, and that they may will it? for
is not their will as free as man's, in the state of his corruption? Secondly,
God has decreed, that all that are descended from Adam, shall be born in
original corruption; also he has ordained, that many thousands of them shall
die in their infancy, as well out of the Church as within the Church. Now let
any man judge, whether by virtue of these decrees of God, they be not utterly
excluded from being like unto God in love and goodness, after an ordinary
manner, whereof alone you speak. Again, all that shall be damned, God has
ordained unto damnation. Now let any man judge, whether by virtue of this
decree, and upon supposition thereof, it is not impossible that such should be
saved. Of those who are not predestined unto life, God brings none unto
wholesome and spiritual repentance; If God brings none of them Aug. cont. Iul.
Pelag. lib. 5. c. 4.
unto true repentance, then he has decreed to bring none of them unto true
repentance; and by virtue of this decree they are debarred from being like unto
God in love and goodness, which I prove thus, None can be like unto God in
goodness without true repentance, and none can repent except God gives
repentance: therefore God having decreed not to give them repentance, by virtue
of this decree they are debarred from repentance, and consequently, from being
like unto God in goodness.

You close this Section with an, Alas, the effect whereof is, that by your
opposites doctrine, a mispersuasion is wrought in most men of his goodness
toward them; and consequently your meaning is, they grow careless of their
salvation. Because as before we heard from you, carfulness of salvation is an
herb that grows only in the gardens of Arminianisme. And what is this
dangerous doctrine? Surely it is very pretily expressed by you, to wit, in
teaching that God does oftentimes dispose his blessings of this life, not as
undoubted pledges of a better. Well then, to say, that God does dispense his
blessings of this life unto Turks and Sarazens, not as pledges of a better, is
in danger to make Christians conceive that God is not good to them.

But perhaps you mean it only in respect of those who partake of these
blessings. Now I profess I never read any of our divines make use of any such
consideration in this argument: you love to shape opposites opinion after your
own fancy: And yet the truth is, that according to Scripture evidence,
temporal blessings are so far from being generally the pledges of a better
life, as that they are noted out unto us in Scripture to be the character of
the wicked, namely, to have their portion in this life. Woe be to you rich
(says our Savior) Luke 6.
for you have received your consolation. And they are the poor of this world
for the most part that God has chosen. Iac. 2. 5. God has chosen the poor of
this world, rich in faith and heirs of salvation. And on the other side, the
prosperity of the wicked is such as has been a scandal to the children of God,
as we read Ps. 73. David himself took offense at it, until he went into the
sanctuary of God, then he understood their end, verse. 17. Surely (says he)
thou have set them in slipery places, and castest them down into desolation,
how suddenly are they destroyed, perished, and horribly consumed.

So likewise Jeremy desired to dispute with God hereabouts, O Lord (says he)
if I despute with thee thou art righteous: Ier. 12. 1^
yet let me talk with thee of thy judgments: Wherefore does the way of the
wicked prosper? why are all they in wealth that rebelliously transgress, 2.
Thou have planted them, and they have taken root: they grow and bring forth
fruit: Thou art near in their mouths, and far from their heart. 3. But thou,
O Lord, know me, thou have seen me and tried my heart toward thee: pull
them out like sheep for the slaughter, and prepare them for the day of
slaughter.

Now to my simple understanding, the Prophet herein discovers unto us that
particular of Gods providence which you impugn; when he sees the prosperity
of the wicked, he is scandalized, but when he sees that this prosperity of
theirs is but like the fatting of sheep and oxen unto the day of slaughter, he
is satisfied. For as Solomon says, Ease slays Prove. 1. 32^
the foolish, and the prosperity of fools destroys them. And look in what
sense God does make men's tables to be their snares, Psalm. 69. 22. may he not,
or does he not in the same manner make their prosperity be their snares? how
can it be otherwise if God does not bless their prosperity, but rather curse
it?

And is not this in Gods power? Nay, is it not found to be practiced in the
course of his providence? I will send a curse upon you (says the Lord) and
will curse your blessings; yea, I have Mal. 2. 2.
cursed them already. And if it be lawful for God to make Christ to be a
snare, and a rock of offense unto many, how Esa. (...). 14.
much more may it well become him to make temporal blessings to be snares unto
them, wherein they shall be taken unto destruction? As S. Peter compares some
to bruit beasts, borne to be taken and destroyed, 2 Pet. 2. 12. And that Christ
was made by God a snare unto many, you may learn out of your Forerius (whom I
have heard you commend not a little) upon that in Esau 8. 34. And he shall be
as a sanctuary, to wit, unto some, but unto others, a stumbling stone, and a
rock to fall upon, and as a snare and a net to the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
And old Simeon prophefied as much of him, saying, Behold, this child is
appointed for the fall and rising again of many in Israel, and for a sign
which shall be spoken against, Luke 2. 34. Even heathen men have observed, that
in the course of Gods providence, wicked men are exalted to their greater shame
in their ruin. Tolluntur in altum, ut lapsa graviore cadant. And Claudian.
if it be a base mind in any man to bestow gifts on others, hoping thereby
for advantage in the way of his commodity: shall it not be lawful unto God to
give the wicked their hearts desire, which is only set on temporal
prosperity; and to expose them unto temptation, and abandon them, leaving them
destitute of his grace, for the distribution whereof he is bound to none; to
advance his glory in making them examples in the way of his justice, punishing
their pride, unthankfulness, lusts, and intemperance?

What can you say to that of Solomon, God has made all things for himself,
even the wicked against the day of evil, Pro. 16. 9. and that of the Apostle,
Romans 9. 21. Has not the potter power of the clay to make of the same lump,
one vessel to honor, and another unto dishonor?

But you keep your course in the way of your own invention, without
reflecting your eyes upon these sacred oracles, as if you meant to broach unto
the world a new Law, and a new Gospel. As for the love of the reprobates, God
cares not for it. It is in his power alone to work his love in the hearts of
men, by the circumcision of them, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. and that he will do in whom he
will, for he has mercy on whom Romans 9. 1^
he will, and whom he will hardens.

2 As for sinister respects, they may be found in the creature; they may be
found in man, they cannot be found in God. He must respect, and cannot but
respect himself, and the manifestation of his own glory as the supreme end
of all. For, as all things are from him, so all things must be for him, Romans
11. last. And accordingly, He made all things for himself. Prove. 16. 4. And
his glory is as well seen in the heardening of whom he will, as in the
comiserating of whom he will.

And for all the good wit that you and others have learned, to take good
turns, and not to be taken by them; There is a wisdom of God that will be
sure to take them, for whom he has laid snares; and make their wisdom, and
cunning, and pride, and insolency, and wilfulness, tend to the praise of his
glory, in what kind soever pleases him, either in the way of his justice in
their just condemnation, or in the way of his glorious grace, in the pardoning
of their sins, and saving their souls.

As for your rules of observation, touching the natures of men, I might let
them pass: I am no professed student in such like; yet I find yours shallow
enough. I see no reason but such as are worldly wise may meet with their
matches, that may know when to trust them, and when not, and work out their
own advantage either way.

Why mistrust should make an honest man the worse, I know no reason; as for a
knave, whether he mistrusts others or no, what becomes he the better? A silly
conceit it is in my judgment, to think that any man should be moved to
justify an others ill opinion of him, by doing evil, unless that evil be
pleasing to him, whose good opinion he affects for his own advantage. For as
he that refraineth himself from evil, makes Esa. 59. 15.
himself sometimes a prey; so a man must, audire aliquid brevibus Gyaris and
carcere dignum si vult esse aliquid. And there never want some knights of the
post, and such as will prostitute their conscience to serve any turn for
advantage. No faithless age can make any good rules of morality out of date of
truth, though out of date of practice. Yet I have heard a story of a French
Gentleman in the wars of France, when certain Freebooters were unawares entered
within his house, saved his own life, and his family from spoiling, by mere
confidence, and was bid at parting, to thank his own confidence for speeding
so well.

It is always true, Ipsa sides habita (in good ground) obligat fidem^ it is
sometimes true, procurat fidem. Themistocles found it true, when he offered
himself to the king of the Molossians, who formerly had been his enemy: and
many generous Generals deal never a whit the worse with them that cast
themselves at the foot of their mercy. Yet God is true, and every man a liar.

Let us be bold to trust in God, and desire to fall into his hands, and keep
us from falling into the hands of men: yet if God calls us thereunto, to
commit our selves unto God, when we do cast our selves into the hands of men.
Because in Gods hands are the hearts of kings, and he turns them whither
soever it pleases him; certainly, They that put their trust in the Lord shall
want no manner of thing that is good, even at such times when Lions want and
suffer hunger. Yet by your leave it is not the nature of God that is the ground
of our confidence, but the revealed will of God. For whatsoever Gods nature is,
he works freely in the communicating of any good thing unto us: but he has
revealed, that he will never fail them that put their trust in him. And this
is that loving kindness of God, as much as to say, his loving and gracious
will and pleasure revealed to us, which excites the sons of men to put their
trust under the shadow of his wings. It was improbable that there should be
any motive from the creature, why God should give them a being; neither was it
his love to the creature that moved God to make the creature, as you
superficially use to discourse, but merely the love of himself. For he made
all things for himself. Prove. 16. 4


And the creature before God made him was just nothing, neither was there at
that time any distinction between King Alexander and his horse Bucephalus. It
is a strange conceit to say, that the being of the creature is like unto Gods
being, who is the Creator. For what likeness is there between an apple and a
nut, between an horn and a bagpipe, an harp and an harrow.

Ens has no univocation in the comprehending of all created entities, much
less as by denomination it comprehends both the Creator, and the creature.
Certainly all do not love God whom he loves; for he loved us when we were his
enemies, Romans 5. 8. But if all did so love him, as all shall either sooner or
later, it will not follow that all should be saved. For only such as Jacob
are loved of him in Scripture phrase, and such as Esau are hated rather.

And though you will not be beaten off from that uncoth assertion, That they
whom God wills to be saved are not saved, yet we had rather abhor so foul a
sentence with Austine, as denying Gods omnipotency, then concur with you in
boldness to the embracing of it. The apprehension of Gods love to us, is the
cause (moral) of our love to him: though God it is that by the circumcision of
our hearts works it, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. But if loveliness in the object be the
cause of love; how dare you profess God loves the reprobate, and that
ardently, and with excessive and infinite love. Is there any loveliness in
them in the state of their corruption, and not rather unlovelinesse throughout?

Neither will it serve your turn to say, that he loves them as his creatures:
For if this be sufficient to qualify the business of the object which he
loves, you may as well say that he loves frogs and toads; yea, and the Devils
and damned Spirits.

3. I make no question but an unregenerate man may love his friend and
companion in evil, as brethren in evil do love one another: and our Savior
has taught us as much, Matt. 5. 49. If ye love them that love you what reward
shall ye have? do not the Publicanes even the same? I never heard nor read
before that condemnation was dispensable. The doing of things otherwise
unlawful, in some cases may be dispensed with, but punishment was never known
to be dispensed with; it may be remitted, but that is not to dispense with it.
I take your meaning and leave your words, you think belike that infinite mercy
cannot free the world from condemnation. I no way like such extravagant
assertions, though frequent in your writings; as if you would innovate all both
natural reason, and divinity.

I know no sin which infinite mercy cannot pardon; neither do I know any
sin beside the sin against the Holy Ghost, and final impenitency, which
God will not pardon in his elect. Much less is man's dull backwardness to love
him unpardonable. For though as it seems you were never conscious of any such
dullness in your self, yet I cannot easily be persuaded until I find cause,
that any Christian in the world entertaines such a conceit of himself, as you
do of your self. Be God never so lovely, yet if a man know him not, how can
he love him?

And do you think it is natural for a man to know God? Suppose we do know
him to be most wise, most powerful: yet if he be our enemy, how should this
move us to love him, or put our trust in him? If we know him to love us, and to
be our friend, yet are not the best backward enough from loving him, when we
are easily drawn to sin against him? And are all sins of this kind
unpardonable? what an uncomfortable doctrine is this, and how prone to carry
all that believe it into desperation? God regards not our love unless we keep
his commandments, Ioh. 14. 5. Again, what is the love of God? Is it not to
love him above all things? even above our selves? as Gerson expresses it, Amor
Dei usque ad contentum sui. Is this natural? long ago Austine has defined it
to be supernatural: And if any dull backwardness be found in us to this
love of God; if we are loath to lose our lives for Christ's sake, is this sin
unpardonable? You are a valliant Champion, I hear you are ready to dye in
maintenance of your opinions, but I cannot believe you are any whit the readier
for that to die for Christ.

But, alas, what should become of poor Peter, that for fear of some trouble
upon confessing himself to be a follower of Christ, denied that he knew him,
and that with oath and imprecation? Yet Christ looked back upon him, ^s before
he had prayed for him, that his faith might not fail; and Peter looked back
upon himself, and went forth and wept bitterly; and within three days after
the Angels take special order, that Peter by name should be acquainted (with
the first) with the comfortable news of Christ's resurrection from the dead;
that as he died for his sins, so he rose again for his justification. The
infinite love of God becomes known only to the regenerate, who take notice of
it chiefly, as touching blessings spiritual. As for temporal blessings, Gods
love therein to man, how can it be known to a man unregenerate, seeing it can
be known only by faith? Those temporal blessings you speak of in the
judgment of flesh and blood, coming to pass only by course of nature.

But that his intention in bestowing temporal blessings upon the wicked, is to
bind himself to instate them in the incomprehensible joys of endless life,
which he never means to perform, is one of your incomprehensible paradoxes.
To the children of God there is no such obligation: for it is not the blessings,
but the sanctified use of them, that is a pledge and assurance to them of the
favor of God unto salvation; and so the sanctified use of Gods temporal
curses, are no less evident a pledge and assurance to them of the same favor
of God: For by chastising diverse and sundry ways with crosses and afflictions,
he manifests unto them, that God receives them for his sons, and so esteems
of them, and not as bastards, Heb. 12. 8.

I am glad to hear you acknowledge, that, Of all the motions of our hearts and
souls God is the sole author and guide. For such acknowledgements are most
rare with you; and which you cannot embrace without manifest contradiction to
your self, and overthrowing all your discourse touching Gods decree, which as
you say, decrees contingency, but not the contingent things themselves.

But the motions of the soul and heart are contingent things, and these must
needs he decreed by God, if they be produced by God: And if God be the author
of them, he must needs produce them. So that the whole tower of your discourse
touching Gods decree is suddenly overthrown by your self, and that with the
blast of this one sentence. Besides, when you acknowledge God to be the author
of all the motions of our hearts and souls, you therewithal acknowledge him
to be the author of evil motions as well as good: For you do nor say, he is
the author of all good motions, but, of all whose motions (in reference to our
hearts, our souls, our strength) God is the sole Author and guide: yet we
dare not avouch that God is the Author, much less the sole Author of all our
motions, without manifold distinctions. And to my thinking, it became you to be
very cautulous of such assertions, who are so apt to charge your opposites with
making God the Author of sin.

Of every action of man that is free, we maintain man to be the author as
well as God; but man we make in operation subordinate unto God, the second
cause unto the first. This is true as touching actions naturally considered,
and as touching good actions, but with a difference; man in working any
natural action we make him subordinate unto God in respect of influence
general; in working good actions, we make him subordinate unto God in respect
of influence special.

But as touching evil actions there we make man alone to be the author of
them as they are evil, without any subordination unto God in respect of any
influence, general or special. And cannot sufficiently wonder what
improvidence has overtaken you, to out-lash in so strange a manner. But even
in this we acknowledge a providence of God confounding the wits and longues
of them that build up Babell. I remember what the Prophet says of the
Egyptians, The Lord Esa. 19. 14
has mingled among them the spirit of errors: and they have caused Egypt to
err in every work thereof, as a drunken man erreth in his vomit: and how is
that, but in defiling himself; and that which is before him. o^ his own
favorites that sit next unto him. Christ's yoke is easy and his burden light
to the regenerate: but is it so unto natural men? do they not account it
coards and bands? Psalm. 2. Does not the Apostle tell us, The affections of the
flesh are not subject to the law of God, nor can be? It seems you are a very
morrall man, you do so willingly Romans 8. 7.
fall upon this theme, of advancing the power of man's natural morallity. But
I remember withal what Austine sometimes said, Malo humilem peccatorem quam
superbum innocentem. And arrogancy is a special fruit of pride: And you
discourse in such sort of the nature of man, as if it had never been corrupt
in Adam.

4 If our love of God be raised from the belief of his loving kindness to
us, then our love to God is not the first conception or plantation of true
happiness, but rather our faith, as the Apostle plainly testifies, 1 Timothy 1.
5. saying. The end of the law is love, out of a pure heart, and good
conscience, and faith unfeigned. And neither the one nor the other is the work
of nature, but of Grace; nor the work of God neither by influence general and
natural, but by influence special and spiritual.

As for the conclusion you deduce herehence, it is well known that life, and
sense, and reason we obtain by course of nature, and natural generation of
natural and reasonable parents. And to know that God gives all this, and
maintains natural generation by the counsel of his will, that he it is that
fashioneth us in the womb, is not known by light of nature: for the greatest
Philosophers knew not this but by light of grace, and so the moanest christian
comes acquainted with this mystery. But herehence to infer that God has a
purpose to give me with them whatsoever good things my heart, my sense, or
reason can desire, is a very loose inference. God has no purpose to give his
own children whatsoever good thing they do desire, much less what they can
desire. Paul desired 2 Cor. 11.
and prayed thrice to be delivered from the buffetings of Satan, but God
granted it not unto him. Moses desired to go Deuteronomy. 3. 25
over Jordan to see the goodly mountain, and Lebanon, but it was denied him.
Abraham desired that the blessing might be conferred on Ishmael, but could not
obtain it. And no marveyle. For God knows what is better for us then our
selves; the child prays for his Fathers health says Austine, but it is Gods
pleasure to take him away by death. God has not promised to give us all that
we desire, much less that sense desires; but has promised that all things
shall work together for our good. even poverty as well as riches, sikenesse
as Romans 8. 28
well as health, and adversity as well as prosperity. For every creature of
God is sanctified unto them that believe and know 1. Tim. 4. 3
the truth. This is the faith only of a child of God, who is Romans 4. 13
the heir of the World by faith in Christ. But to say of all and every one,
hand over head that God has a purpose to give them all eternal life, is your
common error, that now is like an hereditary sickness unto you: driving you
to maintain two foul tenets; the one, that God is not omnipotent, as
purposing to give that which he never performs, a manifest sign that he is
not able to perform it; as Austine many hundred years ago disputed Enchirid
95. Deus noster in caelo sursum, in caelo and in terra omnia quaecunque voluit,
fecit. Quod utique non est verum, si aliqua voluit and non fecit, and quod est
indignius, ideo non fecit quoniam ne fieret, quod volebat omnipotens, voluntas
hominis impedivit. And Enchirid. 96. Deo procul dubio quam facile est quod vult
facere, tam facile est quod non vult esse, non sinere. Hoc nisi credamus
periclitatur ipsum nostrae fidei confessionis initium qua nos in Deum Patrem
omnipotentem credere consitemur. Neque enim veraciter ob aliud vocatur
omnipotens, nisi quia quicquid vult potest, nec voluntate cujusquam creaturae,
voluntatis omnipotentis impeditur effectus. The other tenet as foul as the
former is this, that God changes. For undoubtedly at this time he has no
purpose to save the Devils and damned souls of men: therefore if ever he had
any such purpose it is now changed; and consequently God is changed himself,
You have no way to avoyde this, but by saying that Gods purpose you speak of,
is not absolute but conditional as before you upbraided your opposites for
maintaining Gods decree of electtion to be absolute. Yet the Arminians at the
conference of Hage utterly declined the maintenance of Gods decree of election
to be conditional,

Yet the shifre will not serve your turn, being too narrow a leaf to cover
the shameful nakedness of your assertion. For to purpose conditionally is no
more a purpose of salvation then of condemnation; which is no way an evidence
of Gods love to any man in particular, the issue whereof is indifferent to be
condemnation as well as salvation. But you hitherto in this respect have
insisted upon the maintenance of Gods love to all and every one.

The beginning which God found out for mankind was a being indifferent to stand
or fall, which indifferency fitted him no more for salvation in case he stood,
then for damnation in case he fell; save that God was withal resolved to
provide him of a Savior upon his fall, that should be as tabula post
naufragium, but to whom? only to these whom he loved as he loved Jacob, not
unto those whom he hated as he hated Esau. For as he made all things for
himself, so also he made the wicked against the day of evil, and ever that
for himself also. Pro. 16. 4:
Why Gods love in respect of creation, should be accoumpted his infinite love,
I know no reason, considering, that the meanest creature was partaker of that
love as well as man.

And as he gave being unto all things, so he maintaynes being to Devils and
damned men and ever will do. We are knit unto God by faith as well as by love
and of the two, faith is the more noble as being the Fountain and cause of
love. If God out of love be said to make us what we are; it may as well be said
that out of love he made all other creatures what they are. If you reply, that
they were made out of his love to us, for as much as they were made for our use
and service: In like sort I answer, that it was out of love to himself that
he made us, for as much as he made us for his own use and service; yea and all
things else that were made. For he made all things for himself. In like sort
if God made us what we are because he was lovinge to us: he made also all
creatures what they are because he was loving to them. Yet by your leave, He
made all things for himself.

And this is the four and twenty Elders acknowledgment Revela. 4. 11. Thou art
worthy o Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power. For thou have created
all things, and for thy wills sake they are and have bin created. You say
true, where faith and love is found there is assurance of Gods favor toward
us to set both his wisdom and power on work to make all things work together
for our good, and so to preserve us to his heavenly Kingdom.

But the question is whether this faith and love be the works of nature, and
whereof all are capable by power of nature or whether they are the mere fruits
of Gods grace, afforded to some denied to others according to the good pleasure
of his own will, as who has mercy on whom he will and whom he will he
hardneth.

CHAP. XIX.
How God of a most lovinge Father becomes a severe and inexorable judge.

NOw because you cannot but perceave how this pincheth sore upon the
unchangeable nature of God. Therefore you spend two chapters in the clearinge of
this difficulty; wherein if you satisfy your self it is well. As for my part I
am so far from receaving satisfaction that I am utterly to seek in
understandinge the course you take to give satisfaction. Whether anger, hate,
or jealosie, have any seat in the omnipotent Majesty is little to the purpose.

But to show how God of a most loving Father becomes a severe and inexorable
judge, without any change, this alone is to the purpose. For the very manner of
proposing it does imply the ceasing to be a loving Father which he was, but
becomes a severe and inexorable judge, which he was not. For to be a loving
Father and a severe judge all at once, is not of a lovinge Father to become a
severe judge. And though this were granted you; yet it is not congruous to your
tenet to maintain that God was an inxorable judge to any, before the measure
of his iniquity be full. And as then he first begines to become an inexorable
judge, so it is requisite that then he cease to be a loving Father. And
albeit you are loath to acknowledge this because it does so manifestly imply a
change in the nature of God; yet you must be driven hitherto whether you will
or no unless you maintain, that still God continues a most loving Father
unto the Devils and ever shall be both unto them and to all damned persons
notwithstanding the wrath of God continue upon them to everlastinge damnation.

And it is a very strange dialect to acknowledge that God is a most loving
Father unto damned persons: especially considering that in Scripture phrase we
are said to be the Sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus. Gala. 3. 26. And
indeed if you can make good, that to inflict everlastinge damnation, does
consort with infinite mercy; then you shall obtain, not that God of a most
loving Father does become an inexorable judge; but that at once he is both a
most loving father and a most inexorable judge also.

As for anger whether it be in God or no, or whether Lactantius has carried
himself well or no in this Argument, it is nothing at all to this present
business. The question is whether God ardently desiring the salvation of any
man does at length cease to desire it, or whether still he continues to will
and ardently desire a man's salvation notwithstanding that he purposes to
inflict or actually does inflict upon him condemnation. For this seems to be
the intended issue of your discourse as when you undertake to illustrate, how
extreme severitie may stand with the fervency of fatherly unfeyned love. As
much as to say, that God loves the Devils and loves the damned; and continues
the fervency of fatherly unfeyned love toward them, notwithstanding that he
does inflict everlasting condemnation upon them, and because this love you
accoumpt all one with mercy and that it is infinite; in like sort infinite
mercy may consort (as before you speak) with extreme severity.

Hence it follows that all are vessels of merey, the reprobate as well as the
elect, only here is the difference, the elect are only vessels of mercy, but
the reprobate are both vessels of mercy and vessels of wrath also. Now I
demand what is the fruit of this love, and of this mercy of God toward the
damned. Can you devise any fruit of this but the preservation of them in
being? And may you not as well say; that he loves at this day every creature,
in as much as he preserves them? And consider I pray do you call this
fatherly love and do you accoumpt this the fervency of fatherly love? And does
either Scripture or Eclesiasticall phrase allow you in this? Yet speak your
mind plainly, and say that Gods will to preserve his creatures may stand with
extreme severity used toward them, and no man will contend with you at all in
this.

But then consider, whether you are well in your wits, when you enter upon the
proof of this as of some rare notion; when the issue of your meaning falls
upon a most vulgar conceyte and explication. And whether this be to prove that
God of a most lovinge Father becomes a severe and inexorable judge, when the
only fruit of his love is the holding of his childrens noses unto the
grindstone of his wrath, and inplacable displeasure. Yet let us take notice of
your illustration.

2. Here we have a large discourse of Manlius Torquatus and his severe
execution upon his own Son, for transgressing the commandment of his
General; therefore Martial law was executed by the father (being at that
time General) upon his own son. But were it all true that you discourse in
justifying that fathers severitie upon his child; Yet you miserably forget your
self, when you say, That excessive love which he bare unto his person, whilst
his hopeful beginnings did seem to promise an accomplishment of his Martial
virtues, turns into extreme severity and indignation after he proves
transgressor. For this is not to show, how extreme severitie may stand with
the fervency of fatherly unfeyned love; but rather to show how fatherly love
cease and severity and indignation comes in the place thereof.

This is rather answerable to the theme proposed how a most loving Father
becomes a severe judge, and answerable to the former discourse of Gods
withdrawing his goodness from those that have once filled up the measure of
their iniquity. But because in this manner it cannot be applied unto God
without acknowledging mutability in the nature of God, as well as in the nature
of men: Therefore as I conceave your pretense was to illustrate how extreme
severity may stand with the fervency of fatherly love; though indeed you
perform nothing less, but rather show how that fatherly love ceased as being
turned into extreme severity and indignation. Yet it seems you did but forget
your self in this.

And that your drift was to show how notwithstanding his love toward his son
continuing the same, yet in a greater love of Martial dicipline he caused his
head to be stricken of. But this also will nothing serve your turn. For
notwithstanding this, we see a manifest alteration. For Manlius conceaved not
any such indignation against his son till now, never entertained any will to
cut him off till the noise of his transgression came unto his ears. All which
cannot be said of God (as it must be if the case be alike) without
acknowledging as manifest alteration and innovation in the nature of God.

There was a time wherein Manlius desired his sons life and prosperity; there
was a time when he willed and commanded him to be put to death. It was
impossible that both those should be at once in Manlius as implying flat
contradiction: Yet you place them both in God either at once and so imply
contradiction, or successively and so introduce alteration into the nature of
God: Manlius his purpose and will was changed upon the fact of his son, and
his son was consumed by it.

But God is the Lord and is not changed, and therefore the Mal. 3. 6.
sons of Jacob are not consumed. So Selencus never intertayned any thought or
purpose of pulling out his sons eyes til he was found guilty of adultery;
this cannot be said of God without subjecting him to variableness and somewhat
more then shadow of change. And therefore though Manlius and Selencus be
justified in their courses and God justified in his, as no man makes question,
whether God be just in that which he does: yet this proves not that God is
exempt from alteration one way, in making a will to damn a man succeed in God
his will to save him; or your self from contradiction another way, in making
God at one and the same time both to will a man's salvation, and at the same
time to will the same man's condemnation, yea and to inflict it also. And look
by what reason God may at one, and the same time will both the salvation, and
condemnation of the same man, by the same reason he may at the same time both
damn and save the same man.

For if you say he wills to save him as he is a man, and wills to damn him as
he is a sinner; by the same reason you may say that he can both save him, as he
is a man, and damn him as he is a sinner. For the contradiction is as manifest
in the one, as in the other: Yet there is a great deal of difference between
the course of Manlius Torquatus and the courses of God. For Manlius did not cut
of his sons head, but for an actual and personal transgression of his
son: but God causes many thousand Infants to perish in original sin,
through no actual and personal transgression of their own. What place can
you find for that fervency of Gods fatherly love toward them?

Again God has power in the course of his graciouse providence to keep men
from those transgressions, which make them incur condemnation.

Now let any man judge whether Manlius would not have kept his son from
transgression in this kind if he could. Thirdly Manlius was not able to
provide that the strictness of Military discipline should not be remitted, by
relaxation of the punishment of his son; but God is able to procure that no
discipline shall be the more remitted by reason of his shewinge mercy on whom
he will. Nay there is mercy with thee says the Prophet that thou may be
feared. Ps. 130. 4.


Lastly Manlius had no power to pardon whom he would without partiality: but
God has power to have mercy on whom he will, yea and to harden whom he will
and that without injustice or partiality. Yet I am content to consider the
course you take in justifying Manlius.

First you acquaint us with your persuasions and lay them for grounds, a very
proper course of argumentation. And these are that few had taken the like care
and pains to trains up their children in the most commendable qualities of
that age.

Secondly, that None would have adventured his own person further to have
rescued his son from the enemy, or justified him in any honorable quarrel;
and this is very ponderously amplified by comparison with a tender hearted
Mother whom notwithstanding all her tenderness, the imbecility of sex would
not suffer to go so far. Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici? Most
frivolous conjectures and serving to no purpose. For no man doubts but that it
might well be, that the love and care of maintayninge Martial discipline
prevayled above the love of his son.

I say it might well be so, I do not say it was so. Now give me leave to say
something against Manlius and the like Manliana imperia as you have spent many
wastfull lines in pleading for him and them. Consider what Livy observes
hereupon; in his return homewards victoriouse, the fathers only went forth to
meet him: the youth of Rome both then and ever after hated and abominated him.
Before this we read of Aulus Posthumous a famous dictator, of him Livy writes
thus: Egregiae dictaturae tristem memoriam faciunt Livy. dec. (...) lib. 4.
qui silium ab Aulo Posthumio, qui occasion been pugnandi captus, injussu
discesserit praesidio, victorem securi percussum tradunt, nec libet credere:
and argumento est quod imperia Manliana non Posthumiana appellata sint quam qui
prior author tam saevi exempli foret, occupaturus insignem titulum crudelitatis
fuerit.

After this L. Papirius Cursor nothing inferior in care of Martial discipline
to Manlius Torquatus, as whom the Romans had destinated as fit to oppose
Alexander the great, had he invaded Italia, in the like case pardoned Q
Fabius, upon the intercession of the people; who yet was no son of Papirius.
Consider the case it self. No laws of men are so strict but may admit
temperantum aliquod, because man's providence is so shallow, as cannot foresee
all particular cases. Lex non cavet de particularibus. For a stranger to go
upon the walls of the Town in some places has bin Capital, yet when the
enemy has bin in skalinge the walls, and a stranger seeing it has encouraged
himself to advance, and beat down the enemy, this fact of his has bin
deemed rather meritorious of reward then of punishment.

Manlius the young Gentleman was provoked by the proud speeches of Metuis the
Captain of the enemy. To endure his braving, had bin to suffer the reputation
of cowardice, and enough to have discouraged his own troop and made his
enimyes insolent. As Goliahs defying of Israel struck fear and terror into
the hearts of the Isralites and lifted up the hearts of the Philistines.

Neither do I comprehend how any rank was broken or disordered by this
single fight or any inconvenience might redound by this fact of his. But the
end being victoriouse and all the damage redounding to the disgrace and
dishonor of the enemy. I fear something else possessed the carnal heart of
Manlius the Father besides care of Martial discipline. Why might he not
disdeyne that the glory of his son already equalling the glory of his
father, might shortly blemish it? at the best a dogged and pertinaciouse
adherence to the maintenance of his own imperiouse course might quench all
natural affection in him. For could no other punishment serve the turn but
death?

And might not discipline be maintained unless in so extraordinary a case, the
Consulls son trasgressing, were adjudged to the same punishment that the
basest cowarde deserved? Observe what issue the like severity of Papirius had;
and whether it had not bin likely to have marred all, had not he in time
tempered it with mildness and gentleness. For the enemy understanding of such
like strict commaundes, whenever the Dictator was absent, then would they
stir most, knowing that the Roman Soldiers durst not stir, yea the Levy.
dec. 1 lib. 8.
hearts of his own Soldiers began to forsake them, that they had no courage
to fight.

Yet consider how Papirius carried himself toward a Captain of Praeneste (not
his son) and that when he had played the coward. Praenestinus Praetor per
timorem segnuis ex subsidijs suos duxerat, in primam aciem, quem cum inambulans
ante tabernaculum vocari jussisset, victorem expedire securim jussit. Ad quam
vocem examine stante Praenestino. Agedum lictor, excide radicem hanc, inquam,
incommodam ambulantibus: perfusumque ultimi supplicij metu, multa dicta,
dimisit. By the way I cannot but take notice of an inconsideration if not
altogether ridiculous passage of yours, as when you say of this Manlius, that
the more desirous he was to make him like himself in religiouse observance of
Martial discipline, and practice of justice toward the enemies, the readier
he was to do justice upon him for doing the contrary. Why was the cutting off
of his head a fit course to make him like himself in religious observance of
Martial discipline, and practice of justice toward the enemy? I profess, I
see no reason for it, it might rather make him the moro desperate, because now
he had no more heads to loose. Yet I confess he taught him effectually herby
never to spare any in the like transgression.

As for the rest, I esteem it but frothe, I have no cause to trouble my self
or others with any farther consideration thereof.

3. God you say must enjoy liberty or privilege of loving himself best. Your
form in expressing this I do not so well like: For I had thought this had
rather bin a necessity then a liberty; And privilege is of signification too
base to be applied unto God. For privileges are granted from superiors to
inferiors. But who shall privilege God? In a word God loves himself only as
the end of all other things, and all other things which he loves but as means
tendinge to that end. For he made all things for himself; and of Israel he
professes that he has formed him also for himself. Here you conclude Es. 43.
21*
that he loves equity and justice better then he does any man; but what meant
you to leave out Mercy? did that stick in your teeth, especially considering
that forthwith you acknowledge him to be the eternal pattern of mercy as well
as of justice? And if he be equity it self, is he not justice it self also?
And if he be justice it self, is he not mercy it self also seeing you make him
the eternal pattern of the one as well as of the other? And give that as a
reason why he must love justice better then any man? Yet I no way like your
divinity in this. For I do not acknowledge the nature of God to be the
pattern which we must imitate in the first place, but rather the law of God;
and we are to imitate his nature only in those things, the performance whereof
is allowable by Gods law, God might allow the Israelits in robbing the
Egyptians, Abraham in sacrificing his son, Sampson in sacrificing himself;
we may not allow any in the like: God has power to expose men unto sin, to
harden men's hearts, we may not take any such courses; but rather do all we can
to keep our brethren from sin.

Now from your discourse it no more follows that God cannot be unjustly
merciful, then that he cannot be unmercifully just, especially toward those
whom he loves more dearly then any man does himself as you speak. And if you
would be pleased to take notice by the way of the oracles of God, and not
follow still the course of your own inventions you might find that God has
mercy on whom he will, and hardneth whom he will. Yet is not he either
unjustly merciful in the Romans 9. 18
one, or unmercyfully just in the other; Neither should he be, though the case
were altered, and he were merciful to those whom now he hardneth, and hardened
those whom now he comiserateth satis contraria fata reponens.

But let us go with you along the coast of Barbary. Gods love (you say)
extends it self unto our nature so polluted with corruption. It is true and
that not only in respect of corruption by sin orginall but by sin actual.
For he gave his son to die for us, when we were his enimyes, and when we were
dead in sin and walked after the Prince of the air, and fashions Romans 5.
of the world, he quickened us. Ephesians. 2. 29. The effects of this love you say
are limited toward men by the correspondency, which they hold or loose with
that absolute goodness, or with those rules of equity, in which his will is to
have man made like him. This manner of limitation is unsound, and fowly
unsounde; as that which apparently excludes our correspondency to Gods
goodness, and unto Gods love, out of the number of the effects of Gods love;
as much as to say that faith and repentance, thankfulness and obedience are no
effects of Gods love, but merely works of nature, as if it were not God that
works in us both the will and the deed according to his good pleasure. Phil.
2. 13.


As if regeneration were but the imagination of a vain thing; For I presume,
you will not say, it is in the power of man to regenerate himself. And how can
it be a work of God if not an effect of his love, and correspondency unto Gods
goodness you make to prevent the effects of Gods love. Again the effects of
Gods love the Scripture teaches us are limited according to the good pleasure
of God, both as touching graces of edification (for he distributes to every one
as he will. 1. Cor. 12.) and as touching the graces of sanctification. For he
has mercy on whom he will. Romans 9. And according to his purpose and grace he
has saved us and called us not according to our works. 2 Timothy 1. 9. And of his
own will has he begotten us, etc. There is a condition Iac. (...)
of moral goodness, which God does accept to reward with glory; but there is
no condition of moral goodness which God does accept to reward with grace:
For then grace were of works, and consequently no more grace. And then God
should call us according to our works which he expressly denies. Tit. 3. 5.
and 2 Timothy 1. 9. There is no condition of moral viciousness that excludes
Gods mercy in calling men unto faith and salvation.

Austine coumpts it impiety and madness to think otherwise, as I have often
alleged him. Enchirid. 96. He calls some at the first hour of the day, some
at the last. And what absurd conceyte is it to require some mitigation of
sin or moral good qualification to make correspondency unto mercy in
pardoning sin and curing it? As no disease of the body is uncurable by God;
so no disease of the soul or simfull course is unpardonable or uncurable by
the mercy of God the Father, the merits of God the son. For each are
infinite; but the sins of all the world are finite. God himself may limite
the demonstration and exercise of his mercy as he thinks good. Now as touching
the limitation hereof nothing is revealed unto us, but only this, that the
sin against the Holy Ghost shall not be pardoned and cured no small
infidelity and impenitency.

All other limitations are merely revelations of flesh and blood, and the
inventions of idle Brains; that impugn the prerogative of Gods grace, and in
the place thereof advance the operation of nature, as that which first commends
us in some sort unto Gods grace; you are apt to discourse of Gods inviting men
unto God, and of the riches of his bounty that way; but of Gods working men
unto God, and of the riches of his bounty, that may never any Arminian or
Pelagian spoke less then you. Yet the despising of Gods goodness showed
either in his word or in his works shall indoubtedly increase men's
condemnation. But God can break of these their contemptiouse courses in whom
he will, and when he will, and where he will, as Austine professes with such
confidence, as that he censureth him of impiety and dotery whosoever he be that
denies it.

A silly course it is, to infer that vicious courses do exclude men from
Gods mercy, because God hates filthiness or uncleanesse. For God undoubtedly
hates all manner of filthiness and uncleanesse whether the measure of it be
filled up or no; For did he not hate Manasses his idolatry and his bloody
courses, and his using them that were given to sorcery and witchcrast? Yet all
this excluded him not from the participation of Gods mercy. And if for this
reason, to wit because God hates filthiness, men are excluded from Gods
favor, so as to be incapable of his mercy; then every man should be a
reprobate and incapable of mercy; and abandoned as a vessel of wrath unto
everlasting condemnation.

And you consider not, that to be incapable of mercy is to be incapable of Gods
love; even in your own discourse; whence it follows, that God must after a
certain time cease to love them; as in reason it should be acknowledged by
you, according to the tenor of your opinion; and that when the door of
repentance is shut upon them, as your self have phrasified it, most of all
when God condemns them to everlasting torments in hell fire, he must needs
cease to love them. And consequently you must necessarily admit mutability in
the nature of God, which is directly contrary to the perfection of God
delivered unto us in holy Scripture. I the Lord am not changed and you sons
of Jacob are not consumed. Mala. 3. 6. And with God is no variableness nor
shadow of change. Iac. 1. 19. This rock you have in your eye and labor to
keep your Tenet from dashing it self desperately against it. Wherein how well
you have carried your self we are to consider in the next place.

CHAP. XX.
Whilst God of a loving Father becomes a severe judge, there is no chang or
alteration at all in God, but only in men and in their actions. Gods will is
always fullfilled even in such as go most against it. How it may stand with
the justice of God to punish transgressors temporal with torments everlasting.

THe objection that by your Tenet the nature of God is made subject to change
and alteration, your self proposed in the former chapter; but you address
your self to make answer thereunto in this yet not without fetching a great
compass which inclines rather to a work of circumvention then of
satisfaction. Love you say is the Mother of all Gods works and the fertility
of his power and essence; that is the fruitful Mother of all things, and the
power and essence of God by love becomes the fruitful Mother of all things.
Yet to show how apt you are to forget your self (which usually falls out
when men discourse quicquid in buccam venerit) in the 8. chap. and page 91. you
told us as a quaint conceyte that we may conceave wisdom to be the Father and
power the Mother of all Gods works of wonder; and I think you accoumpt few or
no works more wonderful then the creation.

And yet that which you say here, I prefer before that which you had formerly
expressed there; because the love of God has stricter sociation with the will
of God then either wisdom or power. But you have not discovered unto us, if
love be the Mother what is to be accoumpted the Father. Or if you refer this
to the loving will and affection of God, why this should be accoumpted the
Mother rather then the Father of the works of God.

Again we have earthly parents as Father and Mother, which are indewed with
wills and loves and other affections, and it is out of all course to say that
their love or their will is the Mother of their children; especially
consideringe that will is found in the Father, as well as in the Mother, yea
and love also; if not in greater measure. But I deny not but that God made the
world out of love; but out of love to whom? to the creature? Nothing less I
should think (as before I have showed) but rather out of love to himself, as
Prove. 16. 4. God made all things for himself. And great reason, God who is
the sovereigne Creator of all things, should be the supreme end of all things.
But let this pass. Your next sentence is more serious and ponderous, but very
preposterous, and unsound. First it contains a general proposition with the
reason of it; and then a qualification or limitation thereof (by way of
exception) unto a certain time. The proposition is this: No part of our nature
can be excluded from all fruits of his love. Now the fruits of Gods love you
make to be not only grace and glory, but our temporal being also and the
preservation thereof. For you make creation to be a fruit of Gods love.

Now this proposition so general to my understanding is utterly untrue. For
not only God is not bound to give grace and glory unto any. (For they are
merely gratuita dona, and it is lawful to do what he will with his own, in
bestowing it on whom he will, and denyinge it to whom he will. And therefore
the Apostle testifies that He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will
he hardneth.) But more then this as God was not bound to create any, so neither
can any thing (save his own will) bind him to preserve any thing in being.
But as he deals with other creatures so could he deal with men, even take
their temporal being from them, without any purpose ever to restore it, and
not only the being of their bodies, but of their souls also, turning both
into nothing. Yet thus could God deal with men and Angels were they never so
innocent, never so holy as Arminius confesses.

But let us consider the reasons whereupon you ground this. Now these are two,
the one because God has created our natures: Now the unsoundnesse of this
reason appears by this, that God has created other things as well as man; Yet
who will conclude herehence, that God must needs preserve them, and not
exclude them from this fruit of his love. Your other reason is because, God
cannot change and this is as weak as the former. For like as God though at one
time he gives us life, another time takes life from us; yet all this is done by
him without any change in himself, like as in course of nature, though he
causes changes and alterations in the seasons of the year in the wether, in
the heavens, in the earth, in the Sea, in the states and Kingdoms of the World,
and in the bodies of all creatures, yet without any change at all in himself;
yea though he set an end to this visible World, this can infer no
variableness in God, so if he should take all manner of being from men and
Angels, and so exclude them from all fruits of his love: Yet should all this
come to pass without any shadow of change in God.

Yet you have a third reason, which is this; Love is the nature of God as
Creator: You could not be ignorant that God did freely create the World, and
therefore that it was not natural to God to create it; therefore you say that
Love is the nature of God as Creator, the sense and meaning whereof I
comprehend not. And I have made it already appear that though God creats a
thing, yet is he not thereby bound to preserve it any longer then he sees good;
and what other sense you imply when you say, Love is Gods nature as a Creator,
I discern not. You make creation to be a fruit of Gods love; it is very
incongruous to say that this love of God, whereby he creats any thing belongs
unto him as a Creator: But rather creation of things belongs unto him as he
loves them. For fitter it is that the effect should be thus modified by the
cause, then the cause by the effect in denominating any subject. Who ever said
that a man was rationalis quatenus risibilis and not rather risibilis quatenus
rationalis?

But let us proceed to the limitation of this your proposition; and that is
this: No part of our nature can be excluded from all fruits of his love, until
the sinister use of that contingency wherewith he endued it, or the improvement
of inclinations, naturally bent unto evil come to that hight, as to imply a
contradiction for infinite justice or equity to vouchsafe them any favor.
First touching your meaning in this, then touching the manner how you express
this meaning; your meaning in brief is this. No part of our nature can be
utterly excluded from all fruits of Gods love: until men have filled up the
measure of their iniquity. Of this your opinion I have spoken often; I hope it
shall be sufficient now to consider the reason whereupon you ground it. And
that is this, Such an hight of sin implies a contradiction to infinite
justice to vouchsafe them any favor.

Now of this proposition of yours I see no reason. Nay I seem to observe
manifest reason to the contrary. For justice consists in giving to every one
his own; Now seeing the wages of any sin is death even everlasting death;
Not to condemn him that has deserved to be condemned, seems as contradictory
to justice as not to condemn him that is come to an hight of impiety.

And which is more, many thousand infants perish in Original sin, and yet we
believe that Manasses who unto Original sin added many abominable sins,
was notwithstanding all this, saved; and will you say, there was any
contradiction unto Gods justice in all this? And I wonder you so much beat
upon the contradiction unto Gods justice and take no notice of Gods mercy,
whereas we do not consider the pardoning of sins as an act of Gods justice
but rather as an act of his mercy: and without quest on it is not contradiction
to Gods mercy to pardon any sin.

And God is merciful as well as just; and it is very absurd in my judgment to
say that God in performing an act of mercy contradicts his justice, as well as
to say that in performing an act of justice he contradicts his mercy. And the
reason is because it is indifferent to God to exercise either his mercy in
commiserating whom he will, or his justice in hardening whom he will. And
therefore when the Apostle proposes such an objection, against his former
doctrine of election and reprobation as this; What shall we say then, is there
any injustice with God? He answers it by this, that God is free and has a
Romans 9. 14
lawful power to exercise mercy and compassion on whom he will. God forbid
says he we should think so; For he says to Moses, I will have mercy on him
to whom I will show mercy, and will have compassion on him, on whom I will
have compassion. v. 15.


And yet I pray consider, what color of contradiction to Gods justice in
pardoning the sins of them, be they never so many never so foul; for whom
the son of God (as you say) has suffered the sorrows of death, and thereby
made full satisfaction for all their sins; unless you will say, that Christ
dyed to make satisfaction for original sin only and not for sins actual,
or for some of their actual sins and not for all; to which strange and
uncouth opinion: You seem to incline in the end of your 15. Chapter, where you
say, that Christ only received our infirmities and original disease, and not
the contempt of him and his law. I have cause to suspect that you concur with
Arminians in maintayning, that all Infants, the very children of Pagans, Turks
and Saracens that perish in their infancy are saved. For how can it be
conceaved that any improvement of evil inclinations is made in them unto such
an hight as that it should imply contradiction to Gods justice, to show them
any favor?

And where such an hight of impiety is not, you profess they cannot be
excluded from all fruits of his love. Yet I confess their souls have a being
and that eternal; and if this be a fruit of Gods love, then though the hight
of impiety be never so great, yet is no man or devil excluded from this
fruit of Gods love: For they shall continue for ever and that to their
everlasting woe. As touching your manner of expressing your meaning, this
increase of sin, you call the sinister use of contingency that God has
bestowed upon them, your meaning must be the sinister use of the liberty of
their wills: which in your phrase is the sinister use of contingency, whereof I
am persuaded you can give no example.

And by the way I observe you suppose in every natural man, a power to use the
liberty of his will, either will or ill. I had thought and do still think
there is no power in carnal man to use their natural liberty well, but only
to use it either in this or that subject, but so as still the use of it shall
be evil. For the affection of the flesh is not subject to the law of God nor
can be, says the Apostle, and every man is dead in sin till Romans 8. 7.
God quickneth him. Ephesi. 2. 2. And a dead man can perform no action of life
natural, if dead naturally, no action of life spiritual, if dead spiritually:
But whether natural inclinations unto evil may be thus far improved in the
children, by their Forefathers on no, (you say) is disputable but in another
place: that is, it is a disputable question, whether children may not by the
sins of their Father be so far corrupt, that it implies contradiction to
Gods justice to show them any favor.

You might as well say it is a disputable question whether there be any God or
no; For that there should be a God, and yet not able to cure the natural
corruption wherein any man is borne is contradiction. And if he were, then sure
he were able to show them no small favor. And as for contradictions to Gods
justice, there is so little color hereof in the saving of Infants, that on the
contrary, there is nothing (the condemnation of the Son of God alone
excepted) wherein the justice of God is more obscure, then in the condemnation
of Infants. I think you have little mind to come to an accoumpt, how you do
accommodate this your doctrine unto Infants; yet you must be called hereunto
whether you will or no, unless you clippe the wings of your general
propositions, as when you say: None can be excluded from the fruits of Gods
love until the improvement of inclinations naturally bent to evil come to
that hight of impiety as to imply a contradiction for infinite justice or
equity to vouchsafe them any favor. Yet by the way you put in an exception
concerning Infants, and that is in case there be a neglect of duties, to be
performed to them by their Elders; why do you not speak plainly and say,
saving in case they are not baptized? And what think you in this case? Are
they damned? I cannot believe you think so; yet the face of your discourse
looks this way. I say I cannot believe it; and that for two reasons.

The one is, because the tenor of your tenet caryeth you rather to maintain
with the Arminians, that all children dying in their Infancy though they dye
without the Church, are saved. My second reason is, because herein you should
directly contradict the discourse King James had with certain Divines a little
before his death, and his apparent profession to the contrary; not as his
private opinion, but as the opinion generally of our Divines, whom he had
learned in his younger days to have censured Austine for his opinion to the
contrary, as one that was Durus Pater Infantum. Now I am so well persuaded of
you, that I think you would not willingly enter upon so flat a contradictio^
to such a discourse of King James in the days of King Charles, and that so
soon after his death.

If you write only concerning men of ripe years, you must have a care to limit
your propositions accordingly, and not to give them longer wings then is fit.

In the next place you touch upon a distinction much talked of, and as much
advanced by some as cried down by others. Yet both Scotus and Durandus give a
tolerable, and Aquinas with the Dominicans after him, an orthodoxe
interpretation thereof, though neither suitable to the mind of Damascen
commonly reputed the Father of it. Yet look what in this kind is wanting in
them is supplied by Arminiensis, who gives both an orthodoxe construction
thereof, and that also in conformity to the opinion of Damascene, of whose text
he gives a very sound and orthodoxe interpretation and the more orthodoxe the
more opposite to their constructions, who with great cry of words draw it to
the countenancing of their Arminian Tenets without cause, Love you say is the
fruit of Gods antecedent will, wrath and severity are the proper effects of
his consequent will. Fruit and effect you make all one (as with good reason
you may.)

Now what, I pray you, is this effect which you call love? You seem to
intimate, that they are the effects of creation, as when you say, Every
particular faculty of soul or body is a pledge undoubted of Gods love. Yet
faculties of souls and bodies are found in beasts, but Gods antecedent will in
Damascene is referred wholly unto men. Neither does Damascene at all refer it
to the work of creation; but makes it to be that whereby God will have all to
be saved.

Liberty of will is proper to man in distinction from beasts, but who sees not
that this indifferently makes him obnoxious unto damnation as well as capable of
salvation? Then when you say wrath and severity is the effect of Gods
consequent will, what do you mean by wrath? Is it either a resolution to take
vengeance, or the execution of vengeance it self? I think you take it for the
execution of vengeance it self. Now there is an execution of reward also
properly opposite unto this which whether it be the same love you speak of, it
became you to express so much, or whether you conceave it to be different, yet
it were fit you should take notice of it, and acknowledge that this is a fruit
of Gods consequent will, as well as wrath; that as effectually presupposing
obedience, as this disobedience: and that love in rewarding is every way as
infallibly consequent to the obeying of Gods will revealed, as wrath is of our
neglecting and despising it. A full explication of this distinction you promise
in good time, how well you perform it we may in good time consider with Gods
help.

Next you enter upon another form of the same distinction (as you pretend) and
you suffer it to fly with one winge; For you talk of Gods absolute will,
(which you seem to confound with Gods antecedent will) but as touching the
member congruously opposite, you leave us to seek for that. But as it is we
are to consider it; Gods absolute will was (you say) to have men capable of
Heaven and Hell, of joys and miseryes immortal. This cannot be understoode of
Gods consequent will; for this absolute will is indifferent to end in the
bestowing of reward or punishment, and is immediately terminated only in making
man capable of either; but his consequent will is not so indifferent. For the
only effect thereof you mention to be wrath and severity, and this presupposes
rather then causes capablenesse.

Neither can this absolute will be the antecedent will of God according to
Damascens meaning. For the antecedent will in Damascene, is only referred to
the will of God, whereby he wills man's salvation: but this absolute will is (you
say) to have men capable of Heaven and Hell. To help this you tell us: That
this absolute will (whose possible objects are two) is in the first place set
on man's eternal joy. But you do not proceed to show on what it is set in the
next place, as if by such like incongrueties you desired rather to confound
your reader, then to satisfy him.

Yet by the tenor of your discourse you leave it to us to guess, that in the
second place to wit upon the dispising of Gods love, it is set upon a man's
damnation. So that by this your doctrine, both Gods antecedent will and
consequent will is all one, and that is Gods absolute will. But no such thing
is found in Damascene, from whom such as you are, do usually take this
distinction of will antecedent in God, and will consequent: And indeed you do
well to make one as absolute as another; for like as wrath, the fruit of this
will of God in the second place (as you imply) has not its course but upon
presuppositio^ of disobedience; so in like manner, the proper opposite to wrath
on the other side the fruit of this will of God in the first place, has not
its course but upon presupposition of obedience.

And that you may know what this fruit I speak of is; I say as wrath is taken
for the execution of vengeance; so the proper opposite herunto must be love as
it is taken for the execution of reward; And let any man judge whether this
does not every way presuppose obedience, as well as the other presupposes
disobedience. And thus shall God as truly be said absolutely to wish a man's
damnation as his salvation, and no more conditionally will the one then the
other. And like as if God be absolutely said to will a man's salvation, it shall
not herhence follow he shall so will it, as to contradict himself by
frustrating the contrary possibility, which unto man he had appointed: so
though God be said absolutely to will a man's damnation; yet it will not follow
that God does so will it as to contradict himself by frustrating the contrary
possibility which unto man he had appointed: Only it is absurd to call this
possibility a contrary possibility. It is I confess a possibility to the
contrary, but not a contrary possibility. Like as liberty unto good and liberty
unto evil are liberties unto things contrary in the way of manners: but yet
they are no contrary liberties; so the possibilities of obtaining salvation or
damnation, which are consequent upon the use of this liberty, though they are
possibilities to contrary things, yet are they not contrary possibilities. And
as Gods anger signifying the execution of vengeance does never rise up, but
upon the dispising of his love alluringe unto good; so Gods love signifying the
execution of reward, does never rise up, but upon the embracing of his love
alluring unto good.

But if you take Gods wrath for his will to punish. I say that look by what
reason Gods wrath, as it signifies his will to punish, does not arise in God
but upon foresight of man's disobedience; in like sort the love of God, as it
signifies his will to reward, does never arise in God but upon foresight of
his obedience. And look in what congruity Gods will to punish for sin
deserves to be called reprobation: in the same measure of congruity Gods will
to reward for obedience, is to be called Election, if so be we will make
Election and reprobation congruously opposite, as it is fit we should. Neither
can it be avoided, but that the turning of tender love and compassion into
severity and wrath must imply manifestly an extreme change in God. For like as
when man's obedience is turned into disobedience, this cannot be without change;
so when Gods fervent love is turned into severe wrath, this cannot be possibly
without change. Which I further prove a priori thus, where that which was,
cease to be, and that which formerly was not, begins to be, there must
needs be a chang, and that more ways then one: But where tender love is turned
into severe wrath and that inexorable (as before you have expressed) there that
which was, cease to be, and that which was not, begins to be: therefore
there must needs be change, and that more ways then one, to wit a change from
some thing, and a change into another thing.

The minor is prooved; For if the same tender love did still continue, it could
not be said to be turned into wrath, but rather it should be said to consist
with wrath. Likewise wrath formerly was not in God; for as much as you make it
arise out of the ashes of his love despised, whereby that phrase (the ashes of
Gods love) does manifestly argue that you will have Gods love as it were
consumed to ashes; therefore it must needs cease toward those that have thus
despised it.

Neither is it true but a bold affirmation without all truth, to say that the
changs is wholly seated in man's deviation, which you avouch without any color
of proof: But I have already prooved that this Tenet of yours maintaynes a
change in God, unavoydable by all the wit of man.

It seems you would reason thus, the cause why the love of God is turned into
wrath, is wholly seated in man; therefore the change is only in man. But this
is so inconsequent that it seems common modesty would not suffer you expressly
to insist upon it.

Though we sin, yet can we not make any change in God; I the Lord am not
changed: therefore ye Sons of Jacob are not Mala. 3. 6.
consumed. To touch this by the way; Adam I confess deviated from the good
course of obedience, which he might have taken: but I deny that any natural
man has liberty, to take any good course of obedience, till God has renewed
him; yet such Pelagian acknowledgements are so frequent in your discourse, that
they are found in every hedge.

2. The Sun indeed never changes with the Moon, nor without the Moon,
saving from place to place, and so he never changes, one time only excepted in
the days of Iosuah.

But what mean you to say, that it is one and the same heat, that is with us
in the spring time, and with them that travail in the sands of Affricke? Can
it be one and the same accident in so not different only but distracted
subjects. Yet it is one in kind but not in degree; like as grace and glory in
the Saints of God is the same kind though different in degree; and produced in
them all by one and the same love of God, that neither differs in kind nor in
degree. The same heat of the Sun enflames matter capable of cumbustion not
other matter. So God the same and without all change does refresh the good, and
consume the wicked. We nothing doubt of this; but then we must not say, his
love is turned into wrath. For like as the heat of the Sun could not be
turned into cold without change in the Sun; so neither could Gods love be
turned into wrath without alteration in God himself: God consumes the wicked,
but not by love. God saves his Elect, but not by wrath; Yet his will is one and
the same in both, though the effects be different, and no marvnile; For his
will is free, as whereby he has mercy on whom he will and whom he will he
hardneth; and as the one tends to the salvation of some, so the other tends to
the condemnation of others.

It is true, there is none but has bin partaker of Gods blessings one way or
other. It is true, the measure of his wrath is equal to the riches of his
bounty despised thus far. The more riches of his bounty we despise, the
greater will by the measure of his wrath, of we continue in impenitency. Yet
there is a subordinate difference, according as the same riches of Gods bounty,
may be in greater measure despised by one then by another. You are pleased
needlessly to phrasifie this over and over again insteede of affoording better
matter to satisfy your reader; but you are very liberal of words. But by the
way you foist in a false dye as thinking, that in the multitude of words it
might not be perceaved, as truly I was like to have overslipped it. As when you
say, the only rule for measuring sin or transgression right, must be taken
from the degrees of man's opposition to Gods delight or pleasure in his
salvation. Wherein you manifestly contradict your self; For before you said it
was to be taken from the degrees of mercy despised; But now you say it is only
to be taken from the degrees of man's despising it. Which indeed is the righter
of the two. So then the measure of Judas his sin is to be taken from the
degrees of his opposition unto grace; which you in a strange manner express by
the delight that God does take in his salvation; Why what mean you by this? Is
Judas saved think you or shall any reprobate be saved and not damned rather?
what moved you then to talk of Gods delight in the salvation of them, that
are or shall be damned?

Is it possible that God can take delight in that which never was, nor is, not
ever shallbe? You may as well say that God takes delight in a multitude of
other worlds of men and Angels, which were and are possible.

Yet as if this conceyte of yours were a principle of credit you tell us
demurely, that not a dram of Gods delight or pleasure can be abated not a
scruple of his will, but must be accomplished, to wit of that delight in Judas
his salvation, which you do very gravely attribute unto God, and so
consequently, Gods will you speak of, which must be accomplished, is his will
of Judas his salvation.

And this must be accomplished, and indeed so it had need, before God can
take any delight and pleasure in it. But how or when shall Gods will of Judas
his salvation be accomplished? Will you give me leave to read this riddle out
of your intimations? You seem to me to imply that this will of God is
accomplished in Judas his damnation. Because look in what measure of love, God
would have saved him, in such a measure of wrath, he does damn him and so
accordingly, look in what measure, Gods delight would have bin in Judas his
salvation had he bin saved; in the same measure God does delight in his
damnation he being damned. Vous avez; thus have you the interpretation of this
riddle.

And by the same reason, you may proceed to make other riddles, and ask how
is the will of God as touching Peter's damnation, and Gods delight and pleasure
therein accomplished to every dram and scruple; and answer that this is
accomplished in his salvation. For look in what measure God would have
delighted in his damnation had he bin damned; in the same measure God now
delights in his salvation, he being saved.

And thus the delight and pleasure that any man takes in his childs salvation
may be said to be accomplished in the delight and pleasure, which he shall take
in his childs condemnation. For the Saints shall judge the World, even the
Godly Father join with Christ in pronouncing the sentence 2 Cor. 6.
of condemnation upon his ungodly Son, etc. God delights in our obedience and
in our repentance when it is; but where there is no repentance or obedience how
is it probable he or any should delight in that which is not. 1 Samuel 15. 22.
Has the Lord as great pleasure in burnt-offrings and sacrifices as when the
voice of the Lord is obeyed? Perhapps you will say, yet his will is that all
should repent; I answer his will commanding, is so to all that hear it; but
his will decreeing is not that all shall repent that are commanded to repent.
For then all should repent: To say, that God will have any thing come to pass
which yet never comes to pass, Austine has long ago professed to be as good
as to deny Gods omnipotency. And whereas repentance is the gift of God, as the
Scripture plainly testifies, it is apparent that God does not give repentance
Act. 11. 1^. 2 Timothy 2. last.
unto all, and therefore neither did he will or determine to give repentance
unto all. God is said to love persons in as much as he wills good things unto
them. God may be said to love things moral as repentance and obedience, in as
much as he will reward persons for their repentance and obedience.

Neither of these loves is accommodable to punishment, no more then unto
reward. Yet look in what respect God may be said to love the one, so may he be
said to love the other; And the Apostle professes of himself, and his fellows
that they were the good savor of the Lord even in them that perish. And every
man knows reward to be a fruit of justice 2 Cor. 2^
remunerative, as well as punishment is of justice vindicative; and each
presupposes the will of God, as well one as the other. For God is not bound to
punish sin, he may pardon it. Nay how is he not bound to pardon all sin, of
all men, if so be Christ has made satisfaction for the sins of all?

And with these Tenets of yours you are grown so far in love, that because
some school points do not bear such fair wether toward them as might be
wished; you would put the maintayners of them upon some better explication of
such Tenets. The Tenet is, that God does punish sinners in the life to come
citra condignum. The Modern divines (as it seems) by your margent are Calvin
and Zanchy that maintain this; against whom you oppose Coppenius, a Lutheran I
guess, I do not think he is a Papist. Sure I am, Bradwardine and Gerson
maintain the same; and as I remenber it is And Aquinas 1. 9. 21. Art. q. ad.
(...)
most generally received amongst the Schoolmen. And as for Coppenius his
reasons; when he demands whether God does remit ought for Christ's satisfaction
or no: I answer it is not for Christ's satisfaction; but merely according to
the good pleasure of his own will.

And when he urges that of James, Judgment mercylesse shall be to him that
shows no mercy: I answer that like as when 2 Timothy (...)
the Apostle prays for Onesiphorus that he may find mercy at that day, his
meaning can be no other then this, that his sins might be pardoned and his
soul saved: so likewise in just proportion they may be said to taste of
judgment mercylesse, whose sinners are not pardoned and whose souls are not
saved. As for your reason it is grounded merely upon a fiction of your own,
that subjecteth the delight of God unto degrees, (whereas his simplicity
freeth him as well from composition of degrees, as from any other kind of
composition,) as also unto change even there where you undertake to clear God
from change: If Judas had bin saved and Peter damned, God had still bin the
same and no other then now he is, as touching will and delight, and every
thing that is in God. But by the way let me tell you, you corrupt the state of
the question in supposing that by this Tenet, which you dislike, the punishment
of reprobation is less then divine justice exacts. For they maintain no such
thing, but rather the contrary that no degree of punishment is exacted by any
justice in God, but left indifferent to the determination of Gods will; And
therefore Bradwardine distinguisseth between meritum actuale and meritum
potentiale. Meritum actuale is in reference Bradward. lib. cap. 39. page 360.
to such a degree of punishment or reward, which the will of God has
determined.

But meritum potentiale is in reference to any degree of reward or punishment
which God might have determined. And Gerson professes that when a sin is
committed, it is merely in the good pleasure of God to inflict what kind or
Gers. de vita spiritualli anima lect. 1. Coroll. 8.
degree of punishment he will.

2. Your text is to prove that Gods nature admits no change, albeit of a
loveing Father he becomes a severe judge; albeit his tender love be turned into
wrath. And for proof of this you think it enough to say that the change is in
man: and that Gods wrath kindles not but out of the ashes of his love despised.
To this you take on an other point (nothing at all to the purpose) that Gods
wrath is in proportion to men's sins, neither less nor more; and this you
prosequu^e a whole leaf and more, that what you want of solid answer, you may
supply by silling men's eyes with an idle discourse. Well we have considered
what your discourse has bin on the by, touching this, that men's punishments
are not less then their deserts. Now let us consider your following
extravagancy, in showing that men's punishments are not more then their deserts.

And here you tell us that to think God should punish sin, unless it were
truly against his will, or any sin more deeply then it is against his will
and pleasure is one of those 3. gross transformations of the divine nature
which Saint Austine refutes. For thus to do, is neither incident to the divine
nature, nor to any other imaginable. I would we were worthy to know 3. things.
First who they are whom you oppose in this: Secondly what those 3. so gross
transformations are, which you speak of out of Austine. Thirdly, to what end
tends all this, on which you spend so many words.

But to take it as we find it. No Christian I think ever doubted, but that all
sin is (...), a transgression of Gods law, and accordingly contrary to the
commaundment of God, which is usually called the will of God. But that any
sin should be committed contrary to the will of God, as it is taken for the
decree and determination of God, I had thought no sober man would have
affirmed. Austine I am sure plainly professes that Non aliquid sit nisi
omnipotens feri velit, vel sinendo ut fiat vel ipse faciendo. And albeit
Aquinas seems concealedly Enchirid. cap. 95.
to oppose Austine in this in q. 9. 19. art. 9. Yet notwithstanding concludes
thus: Deus igitur neque vult mala fieri, neque vult mala non fieri, sed vult
permittere mala fieri: Ibid. ad tertium. Yet I willingly grant that every
sin is against Gods will and pleasure, as it signifies his pleasure what
shall be our duty to do; which is nothing else but his commaundment. And it is
as true that herein are no degrees, every sin is equally against the
commaundments of God.

And the will and pleasure of God whereby he will have this or that to be our
duty to do or leave undone, has no degrees. For Gods simplicity freeth him as
well from composition of degrees as from any other composition. But yet some
transgressions are greater then others in as much as God may be more or less
wronged by us, or our selves, or our brethren. It is neither incident to the
divine nature nor to the humane, to punish any more then it is ones will and
pleasure to punish. But to a man it is incide^t to punish for those crimes
wherein themselves take delight. For a man may be condemned and punished for
adultery by them who are adulterers themselves; as appears in those that
brought unto our Savior a Woman taken in adultery. For when our Savior said.
Let him that is amoungst you without sin cast the first stone at her, the
text says herupon being accused by their own conscience, John. 8.
they went out one by one beginning at the eldest, even to the last. John. 8.
7. Wherefore you do overlash in not contenting your self to affirm this of
the divine nature, but extending it to every nature imaginable.

Again, what mean you to call that a way wardnesse of men, whereof you
profess the humane nature is incapable; as namely to be offended at that which
does not offend them? What is a wild manner of discourse, if this be not?
Nothing inferior in absurdity is that which follows, as when you say, that
To punish any which do not contradict their wills, is an injustice scarce
incident to the inhabitans of Hell. If the Divills punish any, as you say they
do; do they punish them for sins committed in contradiction to their wills?
And how many Magistrates do punish even such sins, whereof themselves are
guilty? They are bound by law to punish profane swearers, to punish drunckerds;
is it necessary that every such Magistrate should be free from such sins
themselves? But the Divills themselves you say do not vex the wicked but the
Godly; this being a most absurd conceyte at first sight, you have taken a
course to charm the absurdity of it by adding, concerning the wicked. Till
Gods justice overtake them; might you not as well add concerning the Godly,
Till Gods will and pleasure is, and so far as his pleasure is, the Divill
shall vex them; as appears in the example of Job? But ordinarily in the
course of Gods providence; who are more vexed by the Divill, the godly or the
wicked rather?

Now because it it apparent that in your opinion the Divill torments infernally
the damned and has no power over the Saints of God; though they are more prone
to vex the godly then the wicked as you think: therefore you put your self
to devise a reason why the Divills torment the damned, whereas the sins of the
damned men were committed only in following the will of the Divill too much.

But the reason you give is of the wildest and most contradictious nature that
ever any I think was heard of. For the reason you give is this: Therefore the
Divills cease not to torment them, because they can find no ease in tormenting
them: Whereas if they could find any case in tormenting them, then (you say)
they would be less displeased with them, and consequently torment them less;
which if it were true the Divills should be as arrant fools as ever lived; as
namely in ceasing to do that, by the doing whereof they should find ease, by
this supposition of yours.

And in the mean time you represent unto as a proper model of Gods
providence, while you conceave, the tormenting of the damned to be put over by
God to the will of the Divill; as if the dispensation of the degrees of
punishment, thereby to justify Gods proceeding, were remitted to the discretion
and equity of those Angels of darkness. And who I pray shall be the
dispenser of that punishment, that in justice belongs to the Divills
themselves? Yet as if you had performed some great exployte against some body,
you demand bravely; Whether they did not rather dream then think of God,
that some times write, as if it were not as much against Gods will, to have men
dye, as it is against man's will to suffer death. In writing this, you think,
they did rather dream then think on God in writing of the former, sure I am
you did if not dream yet think of the Divill.

But which writing yours or theirs, be like unto a sick man's dream, let not
the indifferent only, but the unindifferent also judge. For you show as little
sobriety in the impugning of these, in their writing concerning the will of
God, then in inventing your former fancies concerning the Divill. Is it not by
the will of God appointed that all must dye? And is it probable then, it should
be against Gods will that any should dye? O but you speak belike of the second
death, I answer; Is it not as well appointed by the will of God that all that
dye the first death in sin, shall dye the second death of everlasting sorrow;
as it is appointed by the will of God that all shall dye the first death? And
will it not by the same reason follow; that look in what sense it is
impossible that any should dye the first death against the will of God, in the
same sense it is impossible that any should dye the second death against the
will of God? and if they suffered death (as you say) to this end, that Gods
will may be fullfilled in their suffering; how is it possible that this their
suffering of death should be against the will of God? which yet you boldly
affirm and that with such confidence as to break out into a censure of them
that think the contrary, as if they did rather dream then think the contrary.

And yet when you break forth in avouching manifest contradiction, would you
have your reader conceave your self to be in a sober discourse waking? or in a
dream sleeping? Yet this is usual in your writings.

4. The main point proposed: (to wit how God without change of a loving Father
becomes a severe judge) you dispatched in a few words saying, the change is
wholly in man; and therein giveing us your word for it; and afterward served
your self with certain illustrations nothing to the purpose. And to refresh
your spirits and get some breath you turned aside, to the consideration of the
proportion of men's punishments to their sins; points merely extravagant. And
now you take liberty to maintain your extravagant discourse by inquiring, how
it stands with Gods justice to inflict eternal punishments for temporal
sins. We must be content to follow you in your wild goose race; For seeing
we are in, we must go thorough and get out as we can. Yet you acknowledge the
doubt proposed nothing pertinent; but to make matter of farther discourse you
tell us, it were pertinent, if the immortal happiness whereunto the riches of
Gods bounty did daily lead them here on earth, had not farther exceeded the
pleasure of this life, then the pains of Hell do those grievances which
caused them to murmur against their heavenly Father. You are very bold to
acknowledge, God to be the heavenly Father of the reprobates. Whereas the
Apostle professes that we are all the children of God by faith in Christ
Jesus. Gal. 3. 25. And if sons then heirs even heyrs of God and coheyres
with Christ. Romans 8. Much more bold, if because our Savior Christ exhorts the
Apostles to be like their heavenly Father, therefore you will acknowledge him
the heavenly Father, even of reprobates also.

This is by the way, I come to the maine: and say first; were it so as you
speak, yet this doubt were nothing pertinent to this place, of clearing God
from innovation and change of nature, as often as his tender love is turned
into feirce wrath. Secondly, your argument contracted being this. Immortal
happiness does more exceed the pleasures of this life, then the pains of Hell
exceed the grievances of this life: therefore it is impertinent to make a doubt
how Gods justice does appear in inflicting eternal punishment for temporal
sin. I see no just consequence at all in this. I will draw it to the best
form I can devise, in congruity to your meaning which I desire to pick out as
well as I can. And that is this; Their obedience should be rewarded with
infinite joy: therefore their obedience may be justly punished with infinite
sorrow: and no doubt is to be made hereof. And this I confess is more
suitable, speaking of the protension and duration of each then of their
intension as you do. For though the joys of Heaven were never so great
beyond the degree of sorrows of Hell.

Yet if they were not everlasting the comparison would not hold. Because there
could be but a finite difference between their intensions; for joys of man
cannot be infinite in degree. But if the one were everlasting the other not;
there should be an infinite difference in this. And albeit the joys of Heaven
were but of equal degree, in proportion to the sorrows of bell; Yet the
argument would every whit proceed as well upon supposall of inequality, and
that of exuberancy on the part of joys.

Now I will show, what exception may be taken against this. First no laws of
the World (the execution whereof are reputed just) do or can proceed after
any such proportion? Let a man take a purse upon the high way, or kill a man he
shall dye for it; Let him give tenn times as much to the poor; let him save
ten men's lives, they neither do, nor can reward, in proportion to the
punishment; Let the greatest honor or any other kind of rewards be heaped
upon him; all are inferior to his life. For all that ever a man has, he will
give for his life.

But then you will say, if it be just with man, to punish with Job. 1.
death; though they cannot possibly administer rewards in any proportion
thereunto; how much more is it just with God, to punish with eternal death,
seeing be can and will reward obediency with eternal life? And I nothing doubt
but that it is just; but the question is wherein consists this justice? For it
seems that justice in this kind should stand in reference to the work, and
not be measured by any aliene consideration. Especially considering that the
question may be revived on the part of the reward. For how stands it with
justice to reward with everlasting bliss a temporal obedience, so that still
we shallbe to seek of the right measure of justice in this kind.

Again, if a Master shall say unto a servant; do such a thing and I will give
thee an hundred pound; it will not herehence follow, that for his disobedience
the Master may make him pay an hundred pound. And the reason is because it is
manifest, that like as a man may give what he will freely; so he may reward as
liberally as he will. But it is not so manifest that God himself may do what
evil he will unto his creature, and accordingly afflict what punishment he
will for the transgression of his creature.

And therefore the reason that you give for justifying God in this is unsound;
and you seem to be sensible of it, when you desire to help your self with
the consideration of men's multiplied contempts of grace, all which
nevertheless do make up but a short continuance in sin. Besides that, this
consideration has no place in such infants as perish in original sin. You
cannot find any neglect in them, much less often, and yet to say, and barely
to say That often and perpetual neglects turns slames of eternal love into
an eternal consuming fire, is to please your self in your own dictates, but
to prove nothing. The same song you sing still; when you tell us, the oftener
God pardons a man, the greater is his wrath against impenitency; save that the
prosequution of it is more absurd then the former; For it has reference rather
to the intention of his wrath, which is greater or less according to the
qualities of men's sins, not to the protension and duration of it, which is
equal to all.

But by the way, where I pray does it appear, that God does often pardon the
sins of reprobates or that he does at all pardon them? Does God pardon any
sins without repentance? Or are the reprobates at any time brought by God
unto repentance? I am sure Austine professes the contrary, where he says,
Istorum neminem adducit Deus ad salubrem spiritualemque Contra. I^lia. Pelag.
lib. 5. cap. 4.
poenitentiam, qua homo reconciliatur Deo in Christo, sive illis ampliorum
patientiam sive non imparem praebeat. But to return to the point; with far
more reason do they discourse, that considering the infinite nature of God
against whom sin is committed, do therhence infer the desert of infinite
punishment, and because a creature being but finite is not capable of infinite
punishment in intention, therefore make him liable to infinite punishment in
duration. Though I well know also, this is excepted against; and therefore
Miranrandula whom you mention makes choice to reply on this, that as many as
dye in sin, their sins, being never broken of, continue with them in
infinitum, and therefore do justly expose them to infinite punishment in
duration.

Yet I very well consider what just exceptions may be taken against this also,
and the less we can satisfy our selves in the reason hereof, the more cause
have we to refer all to the will and pleasure of God; until such time as the
wonderful wisdom and congruity of his actions shall be more clearly
discovered unto us.

5. As for Lactantius I am not apt to quarrel with him about any incommodious
speeches; but willing to accept any convenient interpretation of them; In
anger, as it is in man, we all know there is something material as the
kindling of the blood about the heart, and something formal, which is the
desire of revenge.

But as diverse other passions do include imperfection in the very formal
part of them, so does anger, for it supposes grief: Yet some passions in the
formal part of them imply no imperfection as love and joy. And accordingly the
rule that Aquinas gives is this: Cum nihil horum Deo conveniat secundum illud
quod est natural in eis: illaque imperfectionem important; etiam formaliter
Deo convenire non possunt nisi metaphorice propter similitudinem effectus: Quae
autem imperfectionem non important de Deo proprie dicuntur ut Amor and Ga^dium,
tamen sine passione, ut dictum est: 1. q. 20. art. 1. ad 2. And in another
place, Ira non dicitur in Deo secundom passionem animi, sed secundum judicium
justitiae: prout vult vindicta facere de peccato. 12. q. 47. art. 1. ad. 1. God
you say is more deeply displeased with sin then man, as if Gods displeasure
and man's differed only in degree, and not rather toto genere.

Neither are there any degrees of displeasure at all in God properly, but
attribuuntur Deo secundum similitudinem effectus, as anger is, when God
punishes; so he shows a grenter anger when he punishes more severely, and a
less anger, when he punishes Iesse severely. You make God unchangeable in
word yet not so always neither, as where you discoursed of an impotent
immutability. But if you maintain that God did for a time will the salvation
of any man before he had filled up the measure of his iniquity, and not
afterward: or that his tender love is turned into severe wrath, it cannot be
avoided but you must make change and innovation in the nature of God.

6. It is true that love includes no imperfection in it, as touching the
formal part thereof, unless it be considered as a passion, but anger does, in
as much as it supposes grief. But take love as it signifies a will to do
good, and anger as it signifeth a will to take vengeance on them that do
evil; and the one is as natural unto God as the other. The truth is, neither
of them natural, but free; Gods love to himself is: natural and nessary, but
his love to his creatures is not, no more then his mercy, and he has mercy on
whom he will. He is neither tied by any natural inclination to make the World,
nor being made, is he bound to maintain it, but as he made it according to the
good pleasure of his will, so he does maintain it. Every love of God to his
creatures is not suitably opposite to his anger. (...) ^he anger of God being
the will of punishing, nothing is congruously opposite herunto but his love,
as it signifies the will of rewarding, and rewarding presupposes obedience,
as well as punishing presupposes disobedience; but the will of doing the one
or the other presupposes neither.

You might as well say that justice is not so natural to God as mercy; and I
wonder at your unreasonable declination of this comparison in this place;
whereas in other places you insist so much on Gods justice, as to take little or
no notice of his mercy. Yet if it be true, as you have hertofore discoursed,
that there is a justice before the will of God, by which the will of God is
ordered; how can you make that doctrine conformable unto this? It is true, God
condemns no man but for sin; and it is as true that God rewards no man but
for obedience; only here is the difference. The best obedience of man's is no
meritorious cause of his salvation, but only disposing thereto: but man's
disobedience is not only a disposing cause, but meritorious of his condemnation.

It is untrue that compassion come naturally from God; it comes freely ^so does
punishment also, not naturally, much less unnaturally, but freely: For he
could pardon sin in allof it pleased him, and does pardon it in all his
elect. (...) God when he punishes, relinquisheth the exercise of his merciful
nature, but undoubtedly he exercises his vindicative nature. Now indeed the
exercise of his merciful nature is proper to his own people, as whom he has
made vessels of mercy, and for whom Christ has made satisfaction upon the
cross.

And therefore when he proceeds to punishment against them, he may be said to
exercise alienum opus, and is represented unto us loathe to come unto it. How
shall I give thee up. Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, Israel? how shall I
make thee as ^os. 11. 8.
Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? Mine heart is turned within me, etc.
Gods anger is seen and felt by the effects of it, but to whom? only to those
that know God to be the Author of the things they suffer.

But the Angels and Saints of God do otherwise see God in the joys of
Heaven. In this world the manifestation of Gods wrath does not always hide God
from men, but rather is many times a means to make God known unto them; yea a
better means then continual prosperity, which makes men grow proud and say,
Who is the Lord? If anger and hate are Pro. 30. 9
not in God, but upon supposall of sin, then they cannot be said to be in
God, but only by eternal denomination attributed unto him, least otherwise we
should introduce a manifest innovation into the nature of God.

And indeed anger says Aquinas is often attributed unto God propter
similitudinem effectus, and so as often as he punishes: and not till then is
he said to be angry. But if you take it for voluntas vindicandi, this must
needs be as everlasting as Gods will; and if you deduce any cause hereof from
the creature you were as good to derive from the creature the cause of Gods
will, which Aquinas professes never any man was so mad as to do. And Gods
hatred of Esau, is in Scripture v. q. 23. art. 5.
made suitable to Gods love of Jacob, and if this love be the will of election,
then hatred must be the will of reprobation. And if the everlasting purpose of
God to give both grace and glory; be deservedly accoumpted Gods love, why
should not the everlasting purposu of God to deny unto others both grace and
glory, be as deservedly accoumpted Gods hatred? You undertake to show how, Love
and anger being passions or linkt with passions are rightly conceaved to be in
God; but I hope you will not attribute them unto God, either a^ passibus, or
linkt with passions. For albeit love and joy man's formally be attributed unto
God, because they include no imperfection, yet not as passions says Aquinas in
the place lately alleged out of him.

CHAP. XXI.
How Anger, Love, Compassion, Mercy or other affections are in the divine
nature.

II is true some Schoolmen think that distributive justice may be properly
enough attributed unto God but not commutative; not because this includes
rationem dati and accepti, but rather because it includes, aequalitatem dati
and accepti. Yet others are of opinion that justice distributive can be
attributed unto God with no greater propriety, then justice commutative: as may
be seen in Vasque 1. in 1. part. disput. 86. Likewise I know none, that
think, mercy is more properly to be attributed unto God then anger. For
voluntas vindicandi as properly and formally belongs to God, as voluntas
miserandi: that being as easily abstracted from grief, as this from compassion.

As for revenge there is no color why that should not in greatest propriety be
attributed unto God like as also reward. To say that affections or moral
qualities may be contained in the divine essence eminently, is a very poor
justification of them to be the attributes of God. For to be eminently in God
is no more (as your self heretofore have explicated it chap. 4. sect. 2.) then
God to be the Author of them, and produce them. Now in this sense you may
attribute the name of any body or beast unto God, and say God is such, or such
a thing is God, to wit eminently. But who can doubt but voluntas miserandi and
voluntas vindicandi are in God not eminently but formally. Yet notwithstanding
the very will of God is infinitely different from the will of man. No passion,
as a passion is in God though that name which signifies a passion in man, may
be truly verified of Gods signifying the nature of God in a certain reference
unto his creatures without all passion.

So there is a will and understanding in God, but nothing like to the will and
understanding of man: For will and understanding in man are accidents they are
not so in God. Our anger at the best, as being displeased only with such things
that displease God, though in some little thing it be like Gods anger; yet in
many things it is very unlike: For it is a passion in us, not in God, it rises
in us which before was not no such innovation in God. Gods anger is vindicative
ours ought not to be so, but only in case we are his ministers. For vengeance
is mine I will repay says the Lord. I cannot justify you in so speaking, when
you say that mercy is more real, and truly affectionate in God then his anger;
For taking them sequestered from their imperfections, each is formally
attributed unto God, though not as passions, and not eminently only as you have
delivered it.

As for the execution of each more or less, that receaveth moderation merely
from the pleasure of Gods will. For he has mercy on whom he will, and whom he
will he hardneth; and far more has he made vessels of wrath amongst the
nation of men, then vessels of mercy, though it be reputed otherwise amongst
the nation of Angelis. Mercy consists in pardoning sins, and saving sinners
and no passion at all is required unto this in the nature of God, but passion
enough, even unto death upon the cross in the nature of man, and person of the
Son of God. The better use men have of reason, the less are they subject to
perturbation, but no whit less do they participate of affection, for virtues
are not (...) or (...) as Aristotle has taught us; but the right ordering of
them. Christ's soul was heavy unto the death, at the approaching of his
passion, and wept often before this; yet had he never a whit the worse use of
reason; For all this. But no passion at all can be in God; for passions rise
and fall upon new occasion, but no such alteration is incident unto God. I know
not what you mean by devouring affections. They may be concealed or restrained
not in a virtuous manner, but vicious; only to keep the rankor of their
hearts from discovery, 2. Sam. 13. 22. 25.
as Absolon a long time said nor good nor bad to Amnon after he had defloured
his sister Thamar, he was not any whit the more charitable in that, but played
the fox in waiting opportunity to do mischeife. Likewise, when Haman saw
Ester. 5. 9. 10.
Mordecai in the Kings gate that he stood not up nor moved for him then was
he full of indignation at Mordecai. Nevertheless Haman refrayned himself,
though he had plotted the destruction both of him and all his nation. To say
that passions are moderate in matters, which men least affect is as much as to
say, that affections are moderate in matters which men least affect. And
indeed affections must needs be moderate, when they are least in motion.

But perpetual minding of a thing should argue strength of passion, in my
judgment rather then moderation. To my thinkinge, now you are in a vain of
writing essays: Yet I find no great substance of truth in them. How secret
cariages can be violently opposed I conceave not; For if opposed then no longer
secret. And the more cunning men are, the more notice (I should think) they
take of violent opposition, unless they do apparently, see such opposites are
like to overshoote or come short; which is a very race case and comes ofter
into a scholars fancy then into real practice. I find no great passion in
Achitophel; but rather as Caesar came soberly to the ruinating of his country.
So Achitophel proceeded soberly to the destroying of himself. To have the
mastery of his passions like enough is a great point of policy, undoubtedly
to have a gracious mastery of them is true Christianity; not always to
restrain them, but even profusely to enlarge them whatsoever the World thinks
of them.

As Moses in the cause of God was moved so far as to break the tables of
the law, and calling others unto him to fall upon the massacring of the people,
yet this testimony is given of him that, he was the meekest man on the earth.
I do Number. 12. 3
not dislike your allowance of men to be passionate, in the promoting of Gods
glory; I hope you will give like allowance to men to be passionate in the
defense of Gods truth. I have no great edge to make Christians contend in
passion, with worldly men how wise soever.

Yet well I wot, that David (one of the worthyes of the World amongst
Martialists) his eyes did gushe out with rivers of water, because men kept not
the law of the Lord: and holy Psalm. 119. 136. 2. Pet. 2. 7
Lot did vex his heart with the unclean conversations of the Sodomites. These
moral essays of yours have a foul issue; as when you infer, but most
inconsequently (as arguing from the nature of man to the nature of God) that
passions are in God, nor so only, but even such affections as essentially
include perturbation; you were as good plainly profess, that God is not exempt
from perturbation.

Neither is, to be zealous or compassionate, to be like God in wisdom, but
rather in affection. Yet zeal and compassion are accidents in man, not in God;
arise in man never without alteration, but no alteration, as your self have
made show to maintain, is incident unto God. Yet I do easily grant you, that
the vehemence of man's passions does as significantly represent the want of
passion in God; as the swift motions of the Heavens does represent Gods
immutability; Like unto him that presenting an unsufficient person to his
degree, and being demanded what he meant to prostitute himself to such
profanesse; made answer he might do it with a safe conscience; For he
undertook for him, but tam, quam, tam moribus quam doctrina, and he thought
him as good one way as the other, though indeed good at neither.

And now if your self be arrived after all this unto a rest (I do not say
vigorous least that might prove the emblem of greater motion) from your
passion; I pray consider how these do agree: First to say that Gods wisdom
does not exempt him from passion; and then to acknowledge a want of passion in
God.

2: I see no reason why you should complain of the barrenness of your
imagination, in illustrating the attributes of God; to my judgment it has bin
more fruitful then all that ever went before you; who I dare say were never
able to discern that lively resemblance you speak of between the swift
motion of the Heavens and the immutability or vigorous rest of God, as also
between the vehemence; of men's passions and the vacuity of all passion in God.
Your Mathematickes (though I profess my self a very sorry scholar in that
science) I do reasonablely well understand; as namely that a circular figure
is, as it were (...), and of all figures of equal circumference the most
capacious, and that all other figures the nearer they draw to a circle, and the
more Angles they contayn of equal circumference are the more capacious. I
expect your mysterious and profound explication.

3. The Analogy spoken of between sides and Angles, as found in circles and
other figures does fitly express (you say) that analogy which Schole divines
assign between wisdom, science, love, hatred, goodness, desire, as they are
found in God and man. Your theme was, how Anger, Love, Compassion, mercy or
other affections are in the divine nature: of all these there is but one found
in this latter enumeration of yours, and that is love; and whereas you proposed
to speak only of the affection, and to show how they are in God. Yet here you
mention wisdom, science, goodness; which never were accoumpted affections.
No name or title of affection can (you say) be univocally attributed unto God.

And this is true, and as true of habits and powers of our souls, that they
cannot univocally be attributed unto God. For whatsoever is in God is mere
essence; and therefore such titles as signify accidents in us, cannot
denominate God secundum nomen and nominis rationem. But as we love by an act of
passion: so God may love by an act, which is his essence. Our wills and
understandings are accidents; yet does God as truly will and understand as we,
by his very essence; not by any act which is really distinguished from his
essence, Gods love, Gods wrath, are merely his will, to do good or to revenge
evil, as they signify any thing within God. But if they be used as external
denominations, so, when God punishes us, he is said to be angry with us; when
he does us good, he is said to love us.

And in the like sense may every name of any affection, be attributed unto God,
provided it does not essentially imply any imperfection, as fear does, and
desire does, which cannot be attributed unto God but metaphorically. The fruits
of love and compassion proceed from none so freely, so plentiously as from
God, and therefore he may justly be said to be most loving most compassionate,
but to whom he will. In like sort the fruits of wrath and a revenging will,
proceed from none more powerfully and more heavenly then from God. Psalm. 90.
11. Heb. 10. 13. Who knows the power of thy wrath? Psalm 90. It is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of God. Therefore may he justly be
accoumpted a most severe regenger of iniquity, but on whom he will; For he can
pardon it and cure it in whom he will, these being but the fruits of his mercy
and he has mercy on whom he will. But to say he is wholly love and wholly
displeasure, is a wild expression in my conceyte. For to say, that he is wholly
love, is as much as to say, that whatsoever he is, is love; whence it follows
that seeing he is displeasure also, as you say his very displeasure is love;
and consequently by the same reason, his very love is his displeasure.

The truth is, affections in us belong only to the will; and so translated unto
God they should only denominate his will. Now his power, his understanding, his
will are very distinct notions; though in God they are not really distinct: yet
so far distinct as that it seems absurd to say, that his power is his will,
or his wisdom, or that his wisdom is his will or his power, or that his will
is either his power or wisdom. So you speak truth, we are content, you take
what liberty you think good in the illustration of it, and to satisfy your
self with your illustrations, though your readers you do not. I find you are
much pleased in the commodious illustration which a circle does afford you, or
which you divise in a circle, which you call the true emblem of eternity.

Some I confess have professed that eternity does ambire tempus, but I never
observed that they compared it to a circle; but only I conceave their meaning
was, that at this present it was not only before all time, but after all time.
You add unto this, and will have this comprehension to be circular; and
elsewhere have called it a circular duration. Yet as for this conceyte of
theirs, Durand has long discovered the absurdity thereof, and confuted it. And
as great a Mathematician as you are, I do not like your interpretation of
(...) and (...), which you render, as if it signified all sides and all angles;
I rather take it to signify, all angle, all side, as if it were an angle
throughout and one side throughout not all sides and angles.

Ant it is apparent the circumference is but one that encloseth this figure,
and angles arising from inclination of lines in the circumferenc, there is a
perpetual inclination, not the least part that may be designed and imagined,
but has an inclination of parts. When you say, the sides are angles, and the
angles sides if not essentially yet penctratively the fame. You speak gibrish,
you may as well say, in any right angled figure, that the angles and sides are
penetratively the same; the sides are lines, and in the predicament of quality
the angles, are the beginning of figures, as points are of lines, and so in the
predicament of quality: of which figures, lines are the determinations and
outward limits.

This I speak but upon remembrance of my old philosophy; and the angles arise
from the inclinations of lines one toward another. What liberty you take in
saying that a circle is of equal sides and of equal angles, whereas indeed
it is but a side, throughout, and an angle throughout, let the reader judge.
Yet it contaynes the space of any other figure of equal circumference and
somewhat more: and so vertually it may be said to conteyne them even their
sides and angles, in as much as it does conteyne the space of them. So
whatsoever the power, habits and affections of men do signify (always
provided that you take their signification as touching the perfections in them
severed from their imperfections) they are in God, and much more.

And thus touching your theme proposed how Anger, Love, Compassion, Mercy and
other affections are in God, your resolution may be this, if you think good,
that all perfectio^s are contained in him, not tanquam trigonum in tetragonon,
but tanquam triganon and tetragonon and pentagonon, and all angled figures in
circulo; but then they must be of equal circumference, which limitation has
no place in the comparison between God the Creator and his creatures. If your
meaning be no other, then that these, which we call passions, are in God
eminently the resolution of the question proposed had bin as easy as it is
vulgar, for to be in God eminently is by your own exposition, no more then God
to be the Author of them. And no Christian doubts but that as God is the Author
of our bodies and of our souls; so he is the Author of our natural affections
also.

4. The Diameter I confess is the measure of a circle; that being known all
is easy to be known, I mean in the point of measure: but as for the
proportion, you speak of, between that and a man in reference to the World. I
leave to every one to judge of that. Who they be that are the Authors of such
proportions, I willingly confess I know not. In these kinds of proportions
you are very excellent, although you complain of the barrenesse of your
imagination that way; as when you tell us, that man's nature incorrupt did
include such an eminent uniformity to all things created as the eye does unto
colors. I profess you stone me with these resemblances of yours, and make me
wonder at my dwarfy capacity, that is so overcoped (to speak in your own
phrase) with these your tall inventions. For it were strange you should not
understand your self; that were like the Nun at Delphos, to give out oracles
to set others on work to understand, that which she understood not her self.

And first I cannot devise, what that uniformity should be, which you say the
eye has to all colors; you seem not to understand it of the moral
constitution of the eye; for that is different as colors are different, but
rather of the formal constitution in respect of the discerning faculty it
has. Now the uniformity between this is no other then between any faculty
and his object.

So then the uniformity runs this way; like as the eye of man judges of all
colors; so man was in his innocence to all things created; here I was about to
add, for the completing of this sentence, I know not what; but on a sudden I
remembered what erst you proposed, namely, that man was like the diameter in a
circle, the measure of all things. The meaning whereof I conceaved to be this;
as by the knowledge of the diameter the circle is easily known: so by the
knowledge of man, which conteynes the nature of all things created, the nature
of all created things may be known. In like sort touching this last uniformity
you speak of. Like as the eye judges of all colors; so by the knowledge of
man we may judge of all other things created. I need not trouble my self in
taking exception against these illustrations; I doubt not but I shall perform
a meritorious work in gratifying your reader so far a^ to blanch your
meaning, and of the congruity or incongruity to leave it unto him to judge.
Thus was man the true image of God for his essence; and in this properly bears
a true shadow of the divine prerogative. For like as all perfections are
contained in God: so all created things are contained in the nature of man;
save that they are eminently contained in God, in such sort as he is able to
produce them; but so created things are not contained in the nature of man: Yet
as the eye judges of all colors; so man participates of all other natures,
and by the knowledge of him men may judge of them.

If the divine nature contained less perfections then the perfections of all
things, then indeed it were something strange, it should be the measure of
all. But seeing perfections in him are infinite, there was no reason, that you
should bring man's acknowledgement, that his essence is the measure of all
perfections; with an (allthough) in reference to his measurelesse perfection.
Yet I profess I am to seek how to conceave Gods essence to be the measure of
created perfections; seeing mensura and mensuratum ought to be in the same
kind, as it was wont to be said. But all this may be helped with saying he is
the measure of them eminently; and indeed he is the Author of them; For he made
all things in number, weight, and measure.

And indeed ere I was awarre, I find you fall upon this in the very next
sentence, where you say. All the conditions or properties of measure assigned
by Philosophers are as truly contained in the incomprehensible essence, as
sides or angles in the circle, but far more eminently. Upon this I look for
an enumeration of the conditions and properties of a measure, and the
application of them unto God; and particularly that, that a measure must be
that which is better known then the thing measured.

And it is of use to bring us acquainted with the things measurable. Now God is
not better known to us then any other thing. To himself I confess he is as
well known as ought else. But he has no need of any measure, whereby he
should arise to the knowledge of any thing; though in knowing himself he
knows all other things, nor looks out of himself to be acquainted with
ought. But you I perceave are willing to ease your self of this burden; you
tell us what a measure he is not, as when you say, the Divine essence is a
measure not applyable to measurables, for kind or quantity much different,
according to diversities of parts; as who has no parts: but insteede of
telling us what measure it is, you say that the nature, essence, quality, and
quantity of all things are applied to it, in that they have actual being.

So that for God to measure all things, belike is as much as to say, God has
created all things. Now if to be created is to be applied to God; then to
create is to apply. And so Gods creating and application active, in order of
nature was before their creation and application passive. You say it is
impossible the Creator should be fitted to any thing created. And is it not I
pray alike impossible that the thing created should be fitted to the Creator?
Yet before you said that God is a measure not applied to things created, but
whereunto things created are applied, in as much as they have their actual
beings. God is immutable and eminently conteyneth all things in his indivisible
essence; but to say that he eternally and immutably, site all the possible
varieties whereof contingency it self is capable. I doubt, will prove non
sense in every particular. For first contingency is not capable of such variety
you speak of: The things contingent themselves are various indeed, but not
the contingency of them. Things are very various, but the modi rerum are not.
There are but two modi rerum; the one we call contingency, the other necessity.
You may say necessity is capable of variety as well as contingency. And indeed
there is far greater variety of agents necessary, then of agents voluntary.

Again what is it to fit varieties, other then to produce them? For if you
meant of fitting them after they were produced, it is like you would have told
us, whereunto God does fit them. Thirdly it is absurd in a Philosophers phrase
to say God does produce varieties; for variety is no fit object of production,
it being a relation, which indeed results upon the producing of the
foundation, rather then is produced. But suppose you understand it of the
things produced in all possible variety: Yet this is directly untrue. For it is
possible for God undoubtedly to produce things in greater variety then he does.

Neither is this production eternally wrought, or the things you speak of
fitted by God; for surely this fitting of varieties, as you speak, began not
till the world began. And what you mean in saying that God does immutablely
fit them I well understand not, God I doubt not is immutable, but the things he
fits are not, especially contingency, which includes mutability you say God is
fitness it self; but either you consider not, that fitness is a word of
relation, or if you did, you were to blame in not telling us, in what respect
this fitness is. With great pomp of words filling up eleven lines you tell
us, that God fitteth all things better by eternal immutable, and incomparable
fitness, then it could be by any other measure fitted.

And do you think any man doubts whether that fitness, which is measured by
incomparable fitness, should be better then that which is measured and ordered
by any inferior measure of fitness? And what is all this, if we speak
plainly, but to say, that rewards of obedience, and punishment of disobedience
are so well fitted, as they cannot be amended. And this plain and vulgar truth
is expressed in terms as obscure as those Paracelsus was wont to discourse in.
Not only rewards and punishments which are chiefly reserved for another world,
but every thing in this world we believe to be so ordered, that the wits of men
and Angels were not able to mende it.

But yet whether the infinite wisdom of God might not exceed this, the
Schoolmen in their disputation herupon, as I remember do generally deny. He
is eminently all, in as much as he produces all; but you may be pleased to
except relations, such as contrariety and equality. For they are not termini
producibiles but such as do usually result upon position of their foundation.
When you say, As of his other attributes one truly and really is an other, so
in respect of man his measure is his judgment, etc. You seem to reckon
amongst the attributes of God a strange one, which you call his measure; and
this you say is not only the rule whereby he rewards or punishes, but the
reward and punishment it self. Rewarding and punishing are kinds of Gods
working. Now if we would know by what rule God works, the Apostle plainly
informs us herin, when he says, God works all things according to the
counsel of his own will. Ephesians. 1. 11. But when you say that his retribution
of rewards and punishments is his measure; I pray of what? for measure is a
term of respect; but you speak in a dialect of your own making; and if we
had a dictionary too of your own making for the opening of your own dialect,
perhaps we might understand you better then we do.

There is no composition in God, such as is between the subject and the
accident, which founds the destinction of abstract and concrete. We admit God
to be bounty it self, love it self, mercy and compassion it self, but to
whom say you? only to those who are touched with the sense of their own
misery; or only in soliciting men to repentance? As you would feign steal up
your Arminian Tenets and cunningly obtrude them upon the faith of a credulous
reader, of a weak reader. We say his mercy and love and bounty chiefly
appears in causing man to be touched with the sense of his own misery, as
also in giveing repentance and not only in soliciting thereunto, not only in
being gracious unto them that repent. A great deal of froth of words you
spend, in amplifying the goodness of God in rewarding our repentance, when in
the mean time you endeavor to drown all consideration of Gods goodness unto
sinners, while they lie weltering in their sins as in their blood, and draw
away the minds of your readers from taking notice thereof, as if humility and
repentance were a work of nature, not of grace, a work of flesh and blood and
not of the spirit of God.

And all the way no touch of faith, your discourse savoring of the humor of a
naturalist throughout, rather then of a Christian. To them that are sanctified,
he is you say felicity and salvation; but what is he to them that are not
sanctified? belike to them damnation. Yet the holy Apostle has taught us, that
God has made Christ to be unto us, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification,
and redemption. 1 Cor. 1. 30. And that God is he that justifies the ungodly.
Romans 4. Alas, how often has the best despised his bounty, love, mercy, grace,
and salvation; yet is not he justice, indignation, and severity unto them, but
bounty still, love still, mercy, and grace and salvation still, and at length
overcomes them, and bringes them from the power of Satan unto God. When for
their wicked covetousness he was angry with them, and has smitten them: he
hid himself and was angry, yet they went away, and turned after the way of
their own hearts: Yet after all this, He has seen their ways and has
healed them. Es. 57. 17. 18. Yea he rules them with a mighty hand and
outstretched arm, and makes them pass under the rod, and brings them under
the band of the covenant. Ezech. 20. 37. He takes away their stony hearts and
gives them an heart of flesh, and puts his own spirit within them, and
causes them to walk in Ezech. ^6. 27.
his statuts, and keep his judgments and do them. I am sorry to find so little
evidence throughout your discourse, that your self have need of this.

What did the heathens understand by their Nemesis? God? or a creature? If
God, surely he is not more powerful then himself. If a creature, is it
strange that the power of a creature should be inferior to the power the
Creator? When the Apostle says, God shall be all in all, he speaks only of
his elect, to fill them with the joys of Heaven, and with God himself. Will
you take boldness to apply this presence of God to the very divills and
reprobates? It is true we look for the coming of the mighty, God, who shall
be glorified in his Saints, and even then shall he show himself from Heaven
with his mighty Angels, in slaming fire rendering vengeance to them 2 Thessalonians. 1.
that do not know God, as also unto them which obey not the Gospel of the
Lord Jesus Christ: which shall be punished with everlasting perdition from the
presence of the Lord and from the glory of his power: When he shall come to be
glorified in his Saints, and to be made marveylous in all them that believe
(and because his servants testimony toward us, was believed) in that day. Then
shall the Heaven depart away like a scrolle, when it is rolled and every
mountain and isle be moved out of their place. And the Kings of the earth,
and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty
men, and every bond man, and every free man, hide themselves in dens and
among the rocks of the Mountains; and say to the Mountains and to the
rocks, fall on us and hide us from the presence of him, that sits on the
throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. For the great day of his wrath is
come, and who can stand? Anno Dom. 1629. Aprilis 30.

FINIS.
The Errata.
IN the Epistle to the Reader. page 7. lin. 24. for (page, 1. read (page 642. In
the Praeface. page 4, lin. 30. for which (...) with. p 6. l. 13. r necessity
and contingencie. lin. 31, for your sweet, r. the sweet, p, 10 l, 32 for si
antea; read sint ea.

1. Sect. p. 1. 2. l. 14 for good r. God^ p. 20 l. 7. for Salumy, r. Salmuth.
p. 23. l^ 22. for kight sh^s, r. kickshewes. p. 25. l. 25. r. of things that
do appear l. 29. r. omnis causa est principium, and omnis causatum est
principlarum. p. 30. l. 24. r. to be some 12 or 13 inches. p. 31. l. 4. for
(...), r. (...). p. 50. l. 3. r. and as we all confess. l. 32. r. finite or
infinite. p. 63. l. 17. r. If you say a true being p. 74. l. 18. r. are life
and power.

2. Sect. p. 92. l. 27. for is not only r. it is not only. p. 99. l. 16. for
motis, r. molis. p. 102. l. 29. for most unlike, r. most like. p, 104 l, 1. for
motis, r. molis. p. 1, 18. l. 21 for quia et, r. quia est. p. 119. l. 24. for
and so they are, r. so they are. p. 123. l. 28. for the paradoxes, r. your
paradoxes. p. 125. l. 2. for diaculetion, r. ejaculation. p. 126. l. 7.
competi, r. competeret. l. 23. dare; r. dari. p. 127, l. 8. for, return to, r,
return from. p, 128 l. 4. for, numerably. r, numerable. l. 5. for, notting, r.
nothing. p, 130: l, 15. for, Sincet: r Snicet. p, 131: l. 31: for, mutili: read
iuhtili. p, 133. l. 30: for properby, r, properly. l, 32, for motis r, molis.
p, 135. l, 29: for persitum, rea per situm. p, 141, l, 23,, for maxim, r:
matter p, 142, l, 4 for tertium, r, tantum. page 143, l: 12 for liberal, r,
litterall. p, 144, l, 26, blot out so. and l, 28 they draw it from. leave out,
it, and in the place thereof interline; their existence and continuance of
being from that which did every way exist before them, I know not: how much
less how they draw it. p, 145, l: 33, for sect: r, section. l, 36 for spear r,
sphere. p, 146, l: 15, for what such move, r, what should move. l, 21, blot out
the first word of the Greeks there, and read instead thereof, earum p, 147, l,
18 for what I ever, r, what ever. p, 148, l, 15, for cortune, r, continue. p,
149, l, 8, r, entertain time that wasted. p, 150, l, 9, r: some things move
more or less. p, 152, l, 31: r, move any way. p, 153, l, 5, for and shall be,
r, it shall be. p, 155, l, 7, r, and the miserablest. p. 156, l. 17. for
Dorphiry r. Porphiry. page 157. l. 1, r. or of being what it is, l. 10. for
hactens r. hastens l, 16. for Times, r. Time is p. 158, l, 8. for be not
stored, r. be not scored. p, 161. l, 3. r. several branches of time, l, 9. r.
is impossible. p, 162. l, 7. r. is diversified. l, 8. r. one is sick, l, 11.
for cross, r crasse. p, 163. l, 11. r then that being, p, 164. l, 3. for even,
r, aevum. l, 34, r. in that hope. p. 169, l, 4. r. with out beginning. l, 28. r.
but eminently, p, 172. l, 2. r. I know not: the, l, 31. r. diminution in
quantity, p, 177. l, 35. r. to his power. p, 182. l, 9. for form, r. forms.
p, 148. l, 13. r. world does truly. p, 191. l, 9. 10, 11. to all things that
have been and is and shall be, coexistent to all that shall be) is most absurd.
read the sentence thus. to all things that have been; has been and is and
shall be coexistent to all things that are; has bin and is and shall be coexistent
to all things that shall be) is most absurd. p, 192. l, 3. r. that is your
meaning. p, 195. l, 10. r. as it is and was. l, 14. r. that diverse such. p,
205. l, 7. r. coexist. p, 208. l, 17. at everlasting, r. an everlasting. p,
210. l, 6. for what r, where. p, 211. l, 30. for fist, r, first. p, 213. l, 14.
for how should, r. so should. p, 218. l, 12. for nor points of instance, r. nor
time of instants. p, 221 l, 1. for the wonderful, r. your wonderful. p, 222.
l, 16, 17, 18. beginning at. To this] should be of the same letter with that
which follows. p, 235. l, 7 and 8. r, rather then in the wisdom. p, 237. l,
28. r you overlash. p, 248. l, 37. r: so much of these things p, 249. l, 27. r.
professed: page 293. l, 14: for frarius, r. Sua^ius. p, 265: l, 20. for more r.
snares. p. 269. l: 35. between the words pass and now, put in, may be annexed.
p. 27^. l, 18 r: as God decrees. p, 276. l, 23. r, within School, l, 24 r.
how God does. p, 297. for conceiving, r, concerning. p, 3^6. l, 7, r. whereof
as yet. p, 309. l, 6. for quilted, r. g^ilded, l, 11. for pacted, r. packed. p,
^18. l, 23. for indenticall, r. identicall. p. 320. l, 1. for infallibillity,
r. infallibly p. 330. l. 3. r. existence with him p. 332. l. 26. for rate, r
root. p. 334. l. 33. for as he has, r. (as he sath.) p. 348. l. 20. r. it is
untrve, p 351. l, 30. r. figure Catechresis. p. 356. l. 33. r. is such a
conceit. p. 356. l, 34. r. natural reason, 364. l. 13. for growns, r. ground,
p. 379. l, 29. for commons, r. commonesse. p. 380. l, 9, for ive, r. give, l.
17. r. exegesis. p. 383. l. 12. for eternally, r. certainly p. 392. l. 3. for
grounded r. governed. p. 400. l. 23. for And in, r. Audin. p. 402. l. 18. r.
mutable. p. 403, l. 1. r. the axis. p. 408. l 25. for mediate, r. immediate. p,
409. l. 35. r. (...) p. 410. l. 5^ r, good to it self p, 411. l, 26. r, want
of fruition. p, 418. l, 33. r, power to cativate the will. p, 419. l, 2. r,
Africanus. p, 425. l, 16, r, Eteocles and Polynices, l, 28. r, yea the Poet. p,
426. l, 36. for praetences, r, virtues. p, 428. l, 13, r, your meaning. p, 329.
l, 32, for roof, r, roots. p, 434. l, 9. for hinder, r, tender. l. 11. for
concludes, r. includes. p. 435. l. 10. r. bestow the being. p. 436. l. 5. r.
possibly. p. 443. l. 20. r. an assured: p, 446. l, 37. r. suadet omne quod, p,
451. l, 13. r. (says he,) p, 459. l. 31, r. it is a most, p, 474. l, 6. r. and
that always, l, 21. r, rei cum ipsis, p, 475. l, 32. r. persecutors, p, 486.
l, 7. for the creature, r. himself, p, 489. l, 35. for divine, r. divine, p,
491. l, 17. r. that as all things are, p, 493. l, 7. r. effectual unto all,
l, 21. r. suit it with, p, 504. l, 25. r, a paenitent, p, 513. l, 11. for
there, r. here, l, 32. r. hindered by the will of, p, 508. l, 18. r. bidden us
to pray, l, 21. r. though if I were, p, 531. l. 31. for s^ret, r. s^cet, p,
547. l, 37. r praetermitted, p. 569. l, 35. r. you desire, p, 575. l, 22. r.
Austine in opinion upon this point, p, 578. l, 12. r. In all this which
follows.

3. Sect: p, 593. l, 37. r. principle, p, 603. l, 7. for descend, r. ascend, p,
605. l, 35: r: It was once true of, p. 607: l, 29: r. is his being necess^rily,
p, 610. l, 23. r. your scope is to advance p, 613. l. 11. r. Now by the way: l.
35. r. withal he made known, p. 615. l. 3. r. impie p. 617. l, 28. r.
nolentibus nolentes, p, 618. l 3^. for imitatione, r. immutatione, l. 37. r. to
be the immediate p. 619. l. 37. r. when we love him, p, 62^. l, 3^. for
^rimming, r. tuning, p, 625. l, 9. r. sive illis, l, ^9 blot out and, p, 628.
l, 15, and 16. r. that ye sought after me, wist ye not that, p. 630. l, 31. r.
gives repentance, gives obedience: p, 634. l, 270. r. capable of discerning, p,
638. for welter, r. shelter, p, 643. l, 20. for proving, r. pawning, p, 653. l,
26. for business, r. loveliness, p, 654. l, 28. for contentum, r. contemptum,
p, 660. l, 3. for but becomes, r. and becoming, p, 666. l. 2. r. temperamentum
aliquod, p. 667: l. 3. r. which he loves, he loves but as means: p. 670. l.
8. for no small, r. not final infidellity, l. 17. for that may, r* that way,
p: 686. l. 31. for take on, r. tacke on, p. 687. l. 27. blot out in, q. 9. 19.
art. 9* and put in, 1. q. 19. art 9. p. 689, l. 33. blot out then, and put in
as, p. 696. l: 1^. r: external: l: 34. r: love and joy may sormally be
attributed, l: 26. r: verrified of God: p: 699. l. 20. r. rare case.

FINIS.

