THE PICTVRE OF a true Protestant: OR, Gods House and Husbandry: wherein is
declared the duty and dignity of all Gods children, both Ministers and People.

EPHESIANS. 2.19.20. Now therefore ye are no more strangers and forreiners, but
Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of God.

And are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief corner stone.

Written by THOMAS TVKE.

LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OAKS; and are to be sold by Thomas Archer in Popes
head Palace, near the Royal Exchange. 1609.

TO THE RIGHT worshipful Master Gabriel Armestrong Esquire, and to the
virtuous gentlewoman Mistress Margaret Armestrong his loving Wife.
RIght worshipful, many, large and admirable are the benefits wherewith the Lord
has honored us these fifty bypast years together. He has borne us, as an
Eagle does her Birds upon his wings, Deuteronomy. 32.11
and walled us in with his love. He has given us his Word, and his Sacraments
of grace; he has sent us his Prophets, and Ambassadors: he has compassed us
with peace and prosperity, making us to eat the fruits of the fields, and
causing us to suck honey out of the stone, Deuteronomy. 32.13
and oil out of the rock. He has set most noble Governors over us: he has
filled our hearts with the joys of victories, and has put the songs of
deliverances into our mouths.

But lamentable is the entertainment, which his love has found amongst us,
who (like those ancient Israelites) have corrupted our selves toward him by
our vice; Deuteronomy. 32.5 15.21.
a perverse and tortuous generation, who being laden with fatnes, have spurned
with our heels, and provoked his Highness with our vanities.

For first, if we consider the transcendent profanenes and affected ignorance
of the multitude, and the flagitious irregularities of many desperate Atheists,
Epicures, Nullifidians, as infestant as the frogs of Egypt, Ex. 8, 3.14.
which made the land to stink; it may be truly said of them (ungrateful
wretches) that they cast the filth of their feet in his face, they recompense
his grace with gracelesnesse, and press him with their sins as a Cart with
sheues not Men, but Monsters, which (like Moles) dig groueling in wickedness
(as in the ground) and cease not till they have cast up a Mountain of
hateful enormities against the heavens.

Secondly, if we call to mind and seriously perpend that pestilent and
prodigious Powder Plot, Nouem. 5. An. 1605.
and some other execrable and unnatural attempts and machinations of some of
our Italianated Catholics in special, and the incorrigible obstinacy of
them all in general, (like the Sycamore, which the more it is moistened, the
drier it waxes) it will appear impossible for the^ to purge themselves of
palpable ingratitude and disloyalty; being adversaries to his truth, settled
upon the lees of their own feculent opinions, adoring the Idols of their own
distempered brains, polluting his worship with superstitious aditions, and
bearing no good will unto his people.

Thirdly, if we do well observe the preposterous and disastrous studies of many
schismatic and refractarious spirits, their heat, their violence, and
uncharitableness, how unnaturally they do reject and revile their Mother, how
passionately they do blaspheme the Church, which God has planted with his
own hand, and with what morosity they have ab-alienated themselves from their
Brethren; they can by no pretext acquit themselves of great undutifulness unto
God, being so turbulent in his House, so disobedient to their Mother, and so
far exorbitant in all their courses; not much unlike to mothes, that fret the
cloth, wherein they breed; to water-boughes, which hurt the tree, from which
they sprang.

And finally for the more hopeful and ingenuous, if we do but consider the
remissness of too-too many, the retraits, the standings, the distractions, the
doubts, that are too common, too conspicuous (arising partly from the
corrupted fountain of our nature, which is not drained dry till death; and
partly proceeding of the vicious ensamples and scandalous d^meanure of
hypocrites and profane extrauagants; and partly also through the differences of
opinions, and the vnbrotherlike hanging-off and flying off of many Romanists
and other Separists, al Nouelists) if these things (I say) be well considered,
we cannot but confess that we are behind in duty, and have not made such use
of Gods mercies, as we should have done.

What remains for us then to do? Surely we should all repent, all, All
without exception. We should examine our selves, rectify and settle our
judgments, and turn the current of our hearts and lives, and sue for pardon,
bewaring that we be not (like Bowls) ouerswaied with the wrydrawing Byas of
our own conceitednes and homebred concupisence; lest the Lord being
exasperated against us, our day be turned into darkness, our light into night,
our fame into shame, and so be made the spectacle of his wrath, and scorn of
the world.

We are Gods House, 1. Cor. 3.16.
and the Receptacles of his Spirit, which is the author of holiness, and the
source of perfection: we are his Fleld, his Vineyard and Garden of delight; our
duty therefore is to cleanse and adorn our hearts to be fair and fruitful,
pleasing and not offensive. The Sun of righteousness has shone long amongst
us with exceeding brightness (in the Gospel) and with his heat has moulten
the Clouds above us, which have emptied themselves like bottles upon us; and
therefore to testify our pleasantness and fertility for the remo^stratio^ of
our gratitude, we should abound in grace, increase in knowledge, and perfume
the air about us with our fragrant sauors, and not poison it with filthy
fumes, like stinking dunghils.

To further this both deserved and desired duty, I have penned, and now am bold
to publish this Tractate following, which I have presumed to dedicate and
present unto your Worships in this plight you see, (partly for that great
respect, which you have ever had of Gods faithful Ministers) wishing it may
find but quiet house-roome in your hearts, and so I shall enjoy my wish, and it
no mean reward.

Now the very God of peace sanctify you both throughout, 1 These. 5.23
and so honor you with his grace, that having finished your race in this
world, you may rest and reign for ever in the world to come.

London, October 28. 1609. Your Worships in Christ Jesus, THOMAS TVKE.

To the godly Reader.
THere are at this day nine sorts of book-readers to be found amongst us, and
but one of them to be commended.

The first and worst are they, that read to see, and see to carpe and cauil;
like the Curre, that takes most delight in biting and in baulling; or not
unlike the flesh-flie, that delights always in sucking blood, or sitting on
the sore.

The second are they, that account more of smoke then fire, and of a foming
wit, then of solid wisdom, affecting nothing in a manner but novelties and
new conceits; how rotten, vain, idle and scurrilous they care not, so they
feed their fancy, and procure meriment; like the cow, that had rather drink
puddle then pure water.

The third are they, that will read things indeed, which may stand them in
some slead* but they use to read by snatches, here and there, every where and
no where; like the Dogs of Nilus, that drank running, taking here and there
a lap as they went: Or if they read without skipping, it is then with such
fury, like Iehues marching, as that they swallow down their books without
chewing, and so let their good digesting.

The fourth are they, that prefer the shell before the kernel, and the dish
before the meat, regarding the sound rather then the sense, and the outward
shape of the work more then the inward substance; as if a man should delight
more in the color then in the corpse: and not much unlike to children, that
turn over their books, but please themselves best with the painted Babies in
them.

A fifth kind there are, that read much, but practice nothing; as if a man
should take meat into his mouth to please his taste, but let none go down into
his stomach to comfort nature. Or if they do practice any thing it is worse
then nothing, base and sinful; like a filthy Channel, that receives the sweet
light and heat of the Sun, but affoords nothing but stinking fumes and
infectious smells.

The sixth are they, that had rather read natural or humane and civil
histories, and treatises of arts and sciences liberal and mechanical, then
Ecclesiastical and divine discourses; it seems esteeming more of the Maid
then of the Mistress, of humanity more then of divinity, and of the body more
then of the soul; like Aesops Cock, that set more by a barley corn, the^ by
all the gemmes and jewels in the world besides.

The seventh are they, which read to talk, and talk to show themselves (and
yet we know that empty barrels and the hollow Drums do make the greatest
sounds) as if they read for nothing but to know to talk, and that by talking
they might be known; regarding more (it seems) the floating knowledge of the
brain, then the soundness of the heart and life, and affecting rather to
seem to be, then to be indeed; usually dealing with their books as ful-fed
children do with their bread, which either play with it, or cast it to the
Dogs. So all their religion is placed in their tongue, and their substance is
but shows and shadows, like that counterfeit of Samuel, and stuffed up with wind
like a bladder. Though they devour whole books, yet are they (like Pharoahs
kine) as ill favored, and as lean and lank for true grace (as by their lives
appears) as they were before, and worse the^ many of the heathen, which never
truly knew what Christian virtue meant.

There are others, that read much and profit nothing, but cast up their
morsels like a crazy stomach. They come to the well without their pitchers, or
else with riuen vessels, having their thoughts distracted, and their head
fraught with impertinent studies; like Table-bookes, which ^eing written full
already, will receive ^o new letters, till the old be razed ^ut in whole, or in
part. Or else it is because they run on, and neither look back, nor mind
their way (but only labor to rid ground) nor show their cadde, nor call on
God for ^is benign assistance; which of all ^en ought in all holy enterprises
to be desired with earnest suite upon the ^^nces of their souls.

The ninth, which are the only good, are they that read attentively,
thoroughly and discreetly, to reap some good, whereby they may do good to
themselves and other also, as occasion and their calling serves, and to these
I do propose this book.

If thou would behold the office of Gods Workme^, and the honor which of
duty ought to be performed to them: if thou would know the resemblance
betwixt the Church and a Field and House: if thou would see the office and
honor of all her children, or would learn how thou may be rich in the
fruits of righteousness, and how to give the Lord such entertainment, as is
well pleasing to ^im; thou may, if it ple^se thee to read, reuolue and
ponder these few instructions, which were summarily not long since delivered to
a few by word, and now more largely published to the common view of all by
writing Wherein I do profess plain dealing and the profit of the simplest,
rather then obscure and curious exactness; ever judging it better to walk in
the open air, then to run inuisibly in the clouds, and to leave some milk in
the breasts, then to suck them dry, or press them till they bleed.

The God of heaven and earth make them profitable to th^e, that walking by the^
in this vale of misery, through the wilderness of this woeful world, thou
may one day come, and that in season, into celestial Canaan, the Land of
promise, and rest upon his holy mountain. Amen,

Amen.
Thine in Christ, THOMAS TVKE.

(...) Ambrosij Fisheri.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
^allere narramus 2. Cor. 11.2.
Colubris, Chedia. 1^.
seruare Ministrum:
Autorum la^inus n^mpe minister agit.
Findicat Aegypto Moses, dat clara 2. ^^g. 18.
Mehushtan
Iumina, sic anima^ Iordanis vnda lauat.
2. Paulus
^nsif^r ipse serit, rigat and facundus Apollo,
Quemlibet imbri-^oten sruge maritet agrum.
Ne^ vult ang^licis molem sibi surgere templi
Malleolis: vafer hanc condit Iesse. 1. Salamo.
Iesse satus.
Ambrosius Fisher.
GODS HOUSE And Husbandry.
1. Cor 3.9. For we together are Gods Laborers: ye are Gods Husbandry, ye are
Gods Building.
CHAP. 1. The drift of the Apostle is declared: Gods mercy is exemplified: We
must neither presume nor despair: Our judgment concerning sinners, must be
very sparing.
THE Apostle having reprehended the foolish and factious estimation of
Ministers (a disease dangerous and not dead.) he does in this verse show what
they are, and how they are to be esteemed, to wit, (...), such as labor with
God, for God, and under God, in the tilling and husbanding of his Ground, in
the planting and dressing of his ^ineyard, and in the building and repairing of
his House or Temple: And having briefly dispat^hed this, he does also briefly
show what those Christians are, which be not of the Ministry* and what they
are to be reputed; to wit the Field and House of God. And thus he has showed
himself a faithful Shepherd, and an honest Surgeon. He does not only seek
to preserve his Sheep from danger, but he brings them into their walk and
pasture. He does not only let his Patients see their soar, but he gives them a
salve. He does not only tax their fault, but he does also teach the^ their
duty. Thus we see the meaning of the text in general; it remains now to
discuss it in the particulers: and first we will treat of the office and honor
of Ministers, contained in the former words; We together are Gods Laborers;
And afterward of the duty and dignity of the people enclosed in the words
ensuing: Ye are Gods husbandry, ye are Gods building.

Paul for one, who sometimes persecuted the people of God, and like a wild
Boar out of the Forest made Acts. 8.3.
Havoc in his Vineyard, annoying the Vines of his own planting; I, even I,
that persued the faithful, like a Partridge on the mountains, as Saul did
David, and would have pierced them through with the spear of persecution; Even
I Saul, I Paul am a (...), an Adiutour, a Minister, and Laborer of the Lord,
against whom I labored with might and maine before. Whence we may, (as in a
mirror) behold Gods endless mercy to him, in making him of a persecutor a
Preacher, of a Foe to become a Friend, of Satan's slave, his own 1. Tim. 1.12.
Servant, a labourer in his harvest, a builder of his house, a rearer and
repairer of his Temple, a planter and pruner in his Vineyard, which once he
thought to supplant and Gal. 1.13.
wast.

From hence we are first taught, not to despair of Gods mercy, (say not that
thy sins are greater then can be forgiven,) seeing so great a sinner obtained
so great mercy: for Paul was not only made a Convert, but also a Conuerter: he
was not only called by Gods grace to be a partaker of grace himself, but
Gal. 1.15.16.
he was also called by his grace to be a Preacher of grace unto others. He was
not only taken out of the wrong way, and set in the right, but he was also set
as a Mark in the way to direct and give aim to others. He was not only made
a Sheep of Christ, but also a Shepherd under Christ to feed and guide his
sheep. In a word, he was made a Member and a Minister of the Church, not a
Plant only, but a Planter also; a Vine and a Vine-dresser. Yet we must not
presumptuously in hope of mercy, either persecute Gods people: (for they that
touch them, Zach. 2.8.
Touch the apple of his eye:) or addict our selves unto any other known
enormity: For Paul persecuted but 1. Tim. 1.13.
Of ignorance, and not of malice, as Julian: and David (a man of Gods own
moulding) prayed that GOD would Ps. 19.13.
Keep him from presumptuous sins. And as we read in holy writ, of one
notorious Persecutor, who was converted and greatly graced, that no man might
despair: so again we read but of one, that no man might presume. It is
transcendent iniquity for any man to sin in hope of pardon.

Secondly, we learn to suspend our judgments of those that now run the race
of wickedness, and are led captive of the Devil to fulfill his will with
greedines. When Paul 1. Tim. 13 Acts. 9.1.
blasphemed, persecuted and threatened, who could then have saved: who would
have thought that he should ever have bin so changed, as of a Lion to be made a
Lamb, of a Scatterer a Gatherer, and of the Devils limme, Gods faithful
labourer? Quifecit reficere potest: He that made them can mend them. God that
formed them, can reform them. He can turn the stream of their sinful
affection: He can cleanse them with the purging water of his Spirit, and cast
the metal of their souls in a new mould. As by the strength of his arm he
brought his people out of Egypt, and set the^ in their way to Canaan: so he can
as easily (if he please) bring these men forth of spiritual Egypt, from
servitude under sin and Satan, and set, yea and settle them in the kingdom
of grace, the Suburbs and Highway to the kingdom of glory. And who knows
the secret will of God? His council is unsearchable and his Romans 11.33.34.
Ways past finding out. Indeed we must: deplore their present condition; but
we may not despair of their future conversion. We may dislike and reprove
them; but we may not deem the^ Reprob^^es: For Gods Is. 50*2.
arm is never so short that it cannot save, neither can the fountain of his
grace be drained dry. His will is all, which is constant as himself, and known
only to himself.

CHAP. 2. Ministers must not contemn one another: seven reasons are rendered
why they should not behave themselves proudly and scornfully one to another.
Paul makes Apollos one of Gods helpers or laborers as well as himself; and
yet no doubt there was great odds betwixt them, not only in eminency of place,
but also in excellency of grace. Paul was not called Gal. 1.1.
Of men, as false Apostles are, and use to be: nor By men, as ordinary
Ministers are, and ought to be; but by Jesus Christ immediately to be an
Apostle, even a Minister in the highest calling within the Church, to say
nothing of his learning, wisdom, fortitude; constancy and other notable
endowments, wherein he did excel, as if he had bin the very Center of Gods
graces. They therefore, that are any way qualified or advanced above their
brethren, must beware they do not di^daine and scorn them.

For first, 1. Cor. 4.7
What have thou, that thou have not received? Promotio^ Psa. 75.6.
comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South, but from
God that deiecteth one, and erecteth another. Riches and 1. Chron 29.12. Job.
32.8. Iam 1.5.
honor, wisdom, learning, and knowledge are of the Lord, who gives and takes
according to his will.

Secondly, Prou. 29.23. Mat. 23.12 James. 4.6.
the pride of man shall bring him low; but the humble in spirit shall enjoy
glory. Whosoever will exalt himself, shall be brought low, and whosoever will
humble himself shall be exalted: for God resists the proud, and gives grace
to the humble. And as we see the highest hills have the shortest grass: so we
see that the haughtiest hearts are the most barren of saving grace. Pride and
piety cannot rule in one house, and reign in one kingdom. Neither is it
Christian prudence to procure thine own grace by the disgrace of thy brother.

Thirdly, his one talent may increase to ten, whereas (it may be) thy two shall
not exceed four, and perhaps wast away to one. And better is small wine that
is fresh and lively, then stronger which is become dead and musty. Thou may
stand at a stay, as the Josh. 10.13.
Sun did in the days of Ioshuah, or else go backward as the shadow did in the
Isay. 38.8
Dyall of Ahaz; whereas he shall increase and proceed as the day does in light
and brightness til it be noone* And it is more honor to rise then fall, and to
go on, then to stand still, or give back.

Fourthly, pride procures hatred, contention and schisms, and is an utter
enemy to fraternity, peace and unity; and he that scorns most, is scorned most:
for Mat. 7.2
with what measure ye meat* (says Christ) it shall be measured to you again.

Fifthly, God may bless him in his poor place, and make his one talent more
profitable to the Church then thy two: yea then thy ten: for it is 1. Cor. 3.7
God that gives the increase.

Sixthly, humility, meekness and modesty, are comely and commendable in men of
all other callings; therefore the holy Ghost says: 1. Pet. 5.5
Submit your selves every man, one unto another* deck your selves inwardly
with lowliness of mind. Much more then in Gods Ministers, who ought to be (as
Peter speaks) (...) Patterns to the people (not only facienda docentes, but
also docenda facientes) and as books for them to read their lessons in; like
that star which went before those Matthew. 2.
Wise men, and conducted them to the place where Christ was laid.

Lastly, they are the Ministers and Adiutors of God, as well as thou that have
greater ornaments, whether in respect of gifts or of glory. Silver is metal
as well as gold: and the poor man may be as true a subject as the rich: And if
all good ministers have one Lord, and work in one building, though they have
not one standing, and the same measure of skill, what reason is there that one
should malign and vilipend an other? Paul forbade the 1. C^r. 16.10.11.
Corinthes to despise Timotheus, because he wrought the work of the Lord, as
he himself did. This reason therefore should sway with those that are
Ministers themselves, and stay them from insulting over one onother, as if they
were not fellow laborers, and brethren in one office, because of some
diversity of place, or inequality of gifts. The Sun excels the Moon in
glory: yet both are stars, and one contemns not another. The tallest Cedar
will suffer the lowest Shrub to grow by it without disdain. He that received
Mat. 25.
Five talents did not contemn him that had but two* but one. The foot is a
part of the body as well as the face, though not so fair: and the hands as
well as the head, though not so comely, or as the heart, though not so worthy;
yet they have their use, and there is no contempt betwixt them. The eye is more
excellent then the ear, and the ear more commodious them the eye, yet they
stand both in one head without the least disdain or envy. And the strings of
an Instrument, though differing in sound and quantity, are nevertheless all of
them strings* and can agree well together. So, even so, though thou surpass
thy brother, yet despise him not, disdain him not, provoke him not, but rather
Gal. 5.13.26.
serve him, by love: for he is Gods labourer as well as thy self, he works
under God, by God and for God, in his Field and building as well as thou that
art of parts more excellent, or in place more eminent.

CHAP. 3. God has ordained that man should teach man, the reason hereof is
fourefold.
1. Cor. 4.13.
Refuse and Of-scouring of the world, and reign ^ot like Princes and
Potentates even we men, we despicable and poor men are Gods ministers: even
we despised wretches do labor with him i^ his Temple. Us he has selected and
called to help forward his Harvest, and to serve him in the building, purging,
polishing, and repairing of his house. Whence we learn these two lessons.
First* we see that it pleases GOD, that man should instruct man, and that his
Church (which is his Tabernacle, and Garden of delight) should be built and
husbanded by men. As in the natural body one member helps another: and as in
the political body, one man ouerseeth and governs an other: so in the
spiritual and Ecclesiastical body, God has wisely ordained that some of the
members should direct, relieve, instruct and nourish the rest, provided
always, that they subject themselves unto their King Christ Jesus, that they
govern by his Laws, and by the Scepter of his word, and feed them with food
prepared out of it; and not with the dregs and drugges of man's invention,
which may be sweet sometimes in the mouth, but are always bitter in the maw,
hurtful unto the soul, as pills of poison are unto the body though drenched
in sugar.

Now the Lord has thus ordained: First because we are weak and timorous,
unable to bear the majesty of his voice, and the glory of his presence. When
the Israelites had seen and heard those maiesticall things, (but terrible to
flesh and blood) which were showed at the promulgation of the Law. Exodus
20.18.19.
They fled, and stood a far off, and said unto Moses: Speak thou to us, and
we will hear; but let not God speak unto us least we dye. They were men as
well as we, and we are the sons of men as well as they. Some of them, as some
of us, were good, and some bad: yet all were afraid, all fled; the good as well
as the bad came to Moses, that God might speak no more unto them.

Secondly, God has appointed this order for the manifestation and trial of
our obedience, as he proved the faith of Genesis 22.1.
Abraham, by commanding him to sacrifice his Son Isaac: so he proves our
obedience and humility in commanding us to hear men like ourselves, (or
perhaps inferior) and to stoop unto their ministry, as to himself. And as
he said unto Abraham: Genesis 22.12.
Now I know that thou fear God, seeing for my sake thou have not spared
thine only son. So may he say to us, if we show our selves obedient to his
ordinance; Now I know that ye fear my name: yea rather we may assure our
selves that we do t^uly fear and obey God, if we do from our hearts submit
our selves to this order, and listen to the voice of his Prophets attentiuly,
as Act. 16.14.
Lydia, and with that Luke 8.15.
Honest and good heart, which none enjoy, none can possess but good Hearers,
and Gods faithful Obedientaries.

Thirdly, God has thus disposed that he might testify his Philanthropy and
good will toward his Ministers, in consecrating their mouths and tongues
(being but sinful and silly wretches) unto himself, so as that his voice
shall sound in them, and his Spirit work by them to the founding and erecting
of his own kingdom, and to the confounding and ruinating of the Devils.

Lastly, 2. Cor. 4.7.
We have this treasure in earthen Vessels, that the excellency of that power
might be of God, and not of us. Seeing we are called and converted by sinful,
mortal, and mean men, we are now stayed from ascribing the glory of our
conversion to man, and taught to confess that the Romans 1.16
Gospel is the power of God (and not of man) to salvation; whom it has
pleased by the 1. Cor. 1.21.
foolishnes of preaching to save them that believe Therefore we must not with
the Swenchfeldians expect secret revelations of the spirit: neither must we
look that either God or an Angel should preach unto us; but we must be
content to hear his voice in man, and to obey his Gospel sincerely preached
by man; which is so certain as that we may not Gal. 1.8.
believe an Angel preaching a Gospel diverse or contrary to it.

Secondly, we see the wonderful wisdom of God, who chooses the 1. Cor. 1.21.
Foolish, weak and vile things of the world to confound the wise, mighty and
magnificent: and we see plainly that God bestows not his greatest offices
always upon the greatest p^rsonages: neither does he (as worldly Princes use
to do) appoint the mightiest and wisest men for worldly might and wisdom, to
attempt and atchieue his hard and weighty works. He took David from the Ps.
68.70
sheepfold, and changed his shepherds staff into a kingly Scepter. He took
Amos from the Amos. 7.15.
flock, and made him his Prophet. He made Mat 4 19.
Peter and Andrew of Fishermen to become fishers of men. Paul says that he and
his 1. Cor. 4.9.13.
Fellow-Apostles were the gazing stock of the world, and as Filth and
Ofskouring; yet were they the Lords 2. Cor. 5 20.
Ambassadors: God had chosen them to be his Laborers, and had set them about
an honorable and weighty piece of service: he had 2. Cor. 5.18.
given them the word of Reconciliation, he set them to plant his Church, to
supplant the Synagogue of Satan, to collect the dispersed sheep of Christ, to
dispell the Wolves which sought to kill them, and to save them from the Foxes
which did annoy them.

CHAP. 4. Gods Ministers should be able to say; We do now labor for the Lord.
Two sorts of Ministers are taxed.
Have been: nor, We shall or Will be, but we Are. It is good for all men, for
all Ministers, especially in good things, to be always in the Present tense.
The love of our calling must not vanish like a leame of lightning, Our zeal of
Gods House must not be like the Morning deaw. It is no praise to say we have
been Gods Laborers, and not to be so now, through the peruersenes of our
spirits, or the witching inticeme^ts of the world. The world must not draw us
from our calling, as it did 2. Tim. 4.10.
Demas from Paul. The footstool must not be set upon the head. We may not
worship Mammon, and bend our knees unto the world. Gods Temple may not be
forsaken for her Tent, neither must we be so wedded to our wills, and so far
in love with our luxurious humors, as that we will rather go out of the
field, and leave our colors, and forsake our warfare, then we will endure to
be let blood, and tied to good orders. It is an excellent thing to be able to
say with Paul truly; We are Gods Adiutors: We are now Gods Workmen: we are in
Gods service: we labor for him in his field and Temple. He therefore is to be
condemned, whosoever he be, that shall forsake this so holy and so worthy a
calling, for the painfulness of it, or for that it is not in this base age of
the world so duly regarded, as in conscience and common reason it ought to be:
or for that the world with her amorous dart, has struck through his liver,
and wounded him with her love; what pretext soever he shall make for himself.
In like manner also those are to be reproved, that shall suffer themselves to be
transported with the impostures of heretical and schismatic Spirits, or
shall sooth up themselves in their own conceits so, as that rather the^ they
will alter their courses, and be divorced from them, they will leave Gods field,
and forsake his plough they held, and give over building in his House, to which
they were called by him. Lamentable is the practice of too many, that having
bin entertained into GODS House for workmen, do lay down their tools, and
fall to play, to pleasure, and aim at nothing more, then at their private
profits. There are many that will labor hard, till they have hit the mark they
shot at; but then they lift up the heel, they tread the furrows at their
leysures, and give themselves to ease and idleness. Others there are, that
either through discontentednesse by reason of their contempt and poverty, or
through their ambition and arrogant ouerweening of themselves, or else by
reason of their spiritual lunacy and affectation of innovation, or through want
of fortitude and discretion to confront with, and to stand undaunted at the
scandales, and enormities of the time, or else by reason of their preposterous
zeal, irresolute disposion, coueteous inclination, or ungrounded devotion, do
leave the scaffold, forsake their station, cast off their burden, give over
their charge, and either follow that Babilonish harlot, or worship the fancies
of their own conceiving. Me thinks it is strange that a man should leave the
service of a Virgin, to serve an Harlot, and change Jerusalem for Babylon,
Canaan for Aegipt: or that any man should forsake a Vineyard planted with noble
Vines, because many noisome weeds do grow, too boldly with them. But the horse
does often cast the rider. The sun is dark to a blind man. Some make their
lust the rule of reason. And some for want of judgment, can put no difference
betwixt place and person, betwixt an whorish garment, and a garment as an Whore
has usurped or got on; as if a Virgin should therefore cast her coat away,
because a Strumpet has got the like. But wisdom will be justified of her
children. The wise will discern between a disease and death, between a
bleare eye and a blind, between a City and her walls, a face and her
freckles. It is a leaud son that will deny his mother for her clothes, and an
ill servant that will forsake the loyal and chaste wife of his master, to
follow one that is divorced from him for adultery. It is no wisdom for thee
to contemn the house in which thou first drew breath because it is not covered
or glazed to thy mind, and no good dealing for thee to discharge thy self of
that charge, which God has charged thee withal; to neglect or leave thy
place, thy calling, whether it be through the love of the world, the
drowsinesse of thy sluggish nature, or the pertinacious entertainment of thine
own novel conceits. If thou have ever been Gods workman, be so still, and
that not in title only, but in truth: let all be able to say with S. Paul: we
are Gods Adiutors. Better it is, not to have been such, but now to be, then to
have been, but not now to be, through our own default.

CHAP. 5. The Office of a Minister is painful.
WE are Laborers together) If Laborers together, then Laborers: (...), then
(...), if coworkers, then workers. But what? not imperant, but obsequent: not
masters simply, but simply ministers, not equal to God, but servants of God.
God is the only absolute Architect, and they are his selected instruments; not
physical and life-lesse, but vocal, voluntary, and living. Hence we learn
that Gods faithful Ministers are Laborers not Loyterers. The calling of a
Minister, is a calling of labor, and not of laziness; therefore the Apostle
says 1. Tim. 3.1.
He that desires the office of a Bishop, desires a worthy work. The office of
a Minister is (Tam onus, quam honos) not more honorable then painful,
exacting diligence as well as affoording dignity. Beneficium postulat officium,
a benefice requires a duty. He that has his living from the Church, and labors
not for the Church, is a robber of the Church. The property of a workman is
(operari, non ociari) to labor, and not to loyter. The Minister is a workman,
God has hired him to work in his Vineyard. He must hold the keys of his
kingdom in one hand, and the Ephesians. 6.17
sword of the spirit, (which is the word of God) in the other hand; and all are
heavy, all are weighty, and hard to weild aright. He must help to bear the
Church, as the 1. Chron. 15.2.
Levites did the Arc. Government is laid upon his shoulders, and the souls
of men are committed to his charge. If any under him do Ezeck. 3.20.
perish by him, God will require their blood at his hands.

CHAP. 6. Ministers must have a warrantable calling.
NOw in a Labourer, these seven things are required. First, a Lawful calling:
for it is against all right and reason, that any man should gather his
neighbors grapes, or thrust his sickle into his corn without his leave: and so
it is as unjust for any man to presume to labor in Gods Vineyard, to build in
his Temple, or to work in his Harvest, without his leave and liking. Who dare
draw his sword and smite, who dare meddle with his keys, to open or shut
ministerially without his license? Who dare sit in Moses his chair, unless he
have set him in it, and put his Law-booke into his hands to unclasp and
explicate it unto his people? The laborers in the parable wrought not in the
Mat. 20.
Vineyard till the Lord thereof had set them on work. b Vzzah was slain
because he laid his hand upon the Arc without a calling. Noah meddled not in
the building of the Arc, till God had given him direction: neither did the
Carpenters enter upon that work without vocation and approbation from Noah:
and they which built the Temple, had license and command first from Solomon,
who had his warrant also from above. Wherefore then should any meddle with the
building of the Church, which is God's Ark and Temple, without sufficient
authority, either immediately from God, or mediatly from those that have
commission from him to prove and admit men to labor for him? Heb. 5.4.
No man takes this honor upon him, but he that is called of God, as Aaron
was. Christ shows that it of right belongs to the Lord of the Harvest, to
choose and appoint Laborers, in that he bids his Disciples Luke 10.2.
pray the Lord of the harvest, to send forth Laborers into his Harvest. For how
dare men cut down, or bind up, and bring in without his bidding and
authorizing? Romans 10.15.
How shall they preach except they be sent? The Lord complains of some
Prophets, that Ier. 23.21
ran unsent, and prophesied unspoken to by him. Aaron, and his sons, were
ordained by God to assign the Number. 4.19.
Koathites every one to his office and to his charge: so God has ordained the
Governors of the Church to call and consecrate Ministers, and to set them to
their work. It is an Anabaptistique conceit to think that any man of learning
may preach without Ecclesiastical ordination, upon his own private motion or
voluntary pleasure. The glory of God, the honor of the Ministry, the security
and solace of their consciences, and that the people may know that they have
lawful Ministers, and may thereby be moved to obey their ministry: all these
claim a calling, and argue the necessity of lawful ordination.

CHAP. 7. Ministers must be wise: their doctrine pure, and their life upright.
SEcondly, a workman must be wise, that he may behave himself without
offense. Ministers must (...) and (...).
Discretion is required in a Minister, that he may please his master, that he
may be an example to his fellows, that he may lead his life without offense
to any, and so gain credit to his place and person. It is meet therefore,
that his doctrine should be pure, and not parti-colored, and that his
conversation be correspondent: and so he shall show himself truly wise, even
godly wise. Paul writing to Timothy, says: 2. Tim. 2.15.
Study to show thy self approved unto God, a workman that need not be ashamed,
dividing the word of God aright. And to the Corinthians, he says of himself
and of his fellows, We 2. Cor. 4.2.
have cast from us the cloakes of shame, and walk not in craftines, neither
handle we the word of God deceiptfully; but in declaration of the truth, we
approve our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God. 2. Cor. 1.12.
Our rejoicing is this: the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and
godly pureness, and not in fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God we have had
our conversation in the world, and most of all to youwards. 2. Cor. 2.17.
For we are not as many, which make merchandise of the word of God: but as of
sincerity, but as of God in the sight of God speak we in Christ. 2. Cor. 6.3.
We give no occasion of offense in any thing, that our Ministry should not be
reprehended: but in all things we approve our selves as the ministers of God,
In like manner, he wills his son Timothy to keep the 2. Tim. 1.13.
true pattern of the wholesome words which he had heard of him, and to fly
from the lusts of youth, 2. Tim. 2.22.
and follow after righteousness, faith, love, and peace: and shows that every
Bishop must be 1. Tim. 3.2.3.
unreprovable, temperate and modest. Ministers (says Prosper) must not only
instruct the people with the example of a good life, but should also show them
by preaching boldly, both the penalty which abides the rebellious, and the
glory which belongs to the obedient. The Doctor of the Church (says
Chryostome) by teaching and living well, In Mat. 25.
teaches the people how to live well: but by living wickedly, teaches God how
to condemn him. Aaron was appointed to wear Thummim on his breast plate upon
his heart, and Exodus 28.30.36.
a plate of pure gold upon his forehead, whereon was graven, Holiness to the
Lord. So every Minister should have the Thummim of an upright heart, and carry
the golden plate before him of an holy life.

The Arc was commanded to be Genesis 6.14
pitched within and without with pitch: so should every minister be pitched
with grace on the inside of his heart, and on the outside of his life; and so
he shall be better armed, against wind and water. The Snuffers of the
candlestick for the Exodus 35.38.
Tabernacle, were commanded to be made of pure gold: those that snuff others
should be pure themselves. Turpe est doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum: It is
a shame for a man to correct another, and not to direct himself, or to weed
his neighbors corn, and to suffer the weeds to choke his own. It is a shame
for a Physician, to proffer Physic to others, and yet to see and suffer
himself to rot with diseases. Physician first cure thy self. Pluck Mat. 7.5
forth thine Own moat, thine Own beam first. He that admonishes another of
that, wherein himself remains wilfully faulty, does give him the clear
wine, and keeps the dregs to himself; resembling a Dial or Watch, which
profit others by showing how the day passes, but themselves nothing at all.
They which teach well, and live wickedly, confute their doctrine with their
deeds, and condemn their practice by their preaching, and so make them selves
abominable to God and man. For unto the wicked God says: Ps. 50.16.17.
What have thou to do to declare mine ordinances, that thou should take my
covenant into thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my
words behind thee? And speaking to some corrupt and ungodly Priests, he says;
Therefore Mal. 2.9.
have I also made you to be despised, and vile before all the people, because
ye kept not my ways, but have been partial in the Law. A good Reu. 3.1.
preacher living lewdly, may have the name of life, as the Angel of the church
at Sardis had, yet he is dead in himself. He may by Gods blessing benefit
another, but he is his own bane; like a post set in the way, which rots it
self, whiles it stands to direct others. Let us therefore look well to our
selves.

The Exodus 27.20.
lamps of the Tabernacle were to burn always, and therefore God commanded,
that their oil should be pure olive beaten. Ministers are, or ought to be
Lamps to the people; therefore that they may shine always to give them light,
their oil must be pure, they must strive to be perfect. Ps. 93.5. Isay. 52.11.
Holiness becomes Gods House for ever. Be ye clean, that bear the vessels
of the Lord. Be holy like your Master. Ps. 25.14
For he reuealeth his secrets to the^ that fear him, and walk before him. The
weights and measures of the Sanctuary were twice as big as the other: so the
virtues of the Ministers of the Sa^tuary, should much exceed other men's. They
ought to be Glasses, to admit and transmit the Sunbeams of Gods graces;
therefore they should be bright and clear. The Stars are free from elementary
corruption. Ministers are as Stars to give light unto the sons of men; let them
therefore be free from worldly pollution. They labor to present the Church a
pure Virgin unto Christ her Husband: let them therefore labor against
impurity in themselves. Gregory Bishop of Nisse says of Basil the great, that
he desired* (Per puritatem appropinquare Deo) to draw near to God by purity.
It is said of Bucer that he brought all men into such admiration of him, that
neither his friends could sufficiently praise him, nor his enemies in any
point, find fault with his singular life and sincere doctrine. A godly life and
good doctrine, should be wedded, without divorce in every minister. Mar. 10.^.
Leuit. 6.13.
That which God will have coupled, let no man put asunder. The Priests kept the
fire burning upon the Mat. 5.16.
Altar continually, and never let it go cut. So we that are Ministers, should
keep the fire of Gods graces, continually burning upon the Altar of our hearts
within us, and the lamp of a virtuous life shining always without us, that men
may see our good works, and glorify our father in heaven. A licentious life
robs the tongue of her liberty, and disgraceth the Teacher; but an honest heart
accompanied with a religious life does commend the owner, and makes him bold,
as a Lion, and undaunted in delivering the truth. Ministers are the Mat. 5.13.14.
Salt of the earth; therefore they must be both sauoury t^emselues, and also
season others with the salt of wholesome doctrine and of an holy life. They are
the Light of the World to give light unto others by their life and learning
They are called Presbyters (Priests) or Elders; therefore they should cast off
all youthful lightness, lusts, and i^constancy, and attire themselves with
such sanctimony and Christian gravity, as may procure them reverence and
authority with the people; like the highest Planets, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars,
that are of the slowest and most regular motion. Ministers should be like Eccl.
5^.6.7.10*
Simon the son of Onias, who was as the morning star, and as the Moon at
her full, as the bright beams of the Sun, and as a fair and fruitful Olive
tree. They should shine and glister in Gods Temple, and show themselves live
olives, fruitful in good works, and godly exhortations. Sincere doctrine and
virtuous conversation are as two shoulders or Pillars* whereby they are to
bear up Gods Church, God's Ark. He which preaches soundly, and conuerseth
loosely (coetum aedificat voc^, infernum vita) edifieth Church by his doctrine,
but Hell by his deeds. An evil Pastor (says Augustine) destroys as much
with his wicked conversation, as he builds with his doctrine. On the
contrary, a godly life is a good sermon, though not vocal, yet visible and
real. Herod reverenced John Baptist, because he was a Mar. 6.20.
good man, not because he was a good Minister. The people respect the life
more the^ preaching: and think it better to do and say not, then to say and do
not. Therefore the Apostle wisely exhorts Timothy to show himself 1. Tim.
4.1^.
a^ example in word, in conversation, in love, faith, and purity. Charitas a
seipso: Love begins at home. He that neglects himself is not fit to take
care of others. An evil servant seldom proves a good master. A bad Disciple
seldom makes a good Doctor. He that does not instruct himself is unmeet and
unworthy to instruct others. Therefore Paul advises the Ephesian Elders to
look to themselves first; Act. 20 28.
Look to your selves, and to the whole flock And to the 1. Cor. 9 27. (...).
Corinths he says; I beat down my body and bring it into serui^ude, (for the
body, like fire and water, is but a naughty master) lest by any means after
that I have preached to others, I my self should be reproved. To say well
(says ^eda) and to live badly, is nothing else then for a man to damn himself
with his own voice, in Ps. 18. Thou art (thou say) a guide of the blind, a
teacher of the unlearned, and a light to them which sit in darkness. It is
well: Romans 2.2^.
Thou therefore which teach another, teach thou not thy self? Thou that
preachest a man should not steal, do thou steal? Thou that say a man not
kill, will thou starve the soul by withholding the food, that is convenient
for it? Thou that say a man should not commit adultery, do thou commit
adultery? Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit sacrilege? D^rest thou
practice that thy self, which thou preachest against in others? Thy state is
lamentable. Lu. 12.47.
He that knows his masters will and does it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes: and Iam. 4.17
to him, that knows how to do well, and does it not, to him it is a sin.
And thy condition without repentance is like a Candlestick, that sees nothing
it self, but caries a candle for others to see by. Thou may be a means of
grace unto others, and perish for lack of grace thy self. Thou may help
to build others, and rot in thine own ruins; like the Carpenters, that built
Noah's Arc, which saved him and others, and were drowned themselves in the
flood. And besides, thy wicked life is very scandalous and hurtful unto many,
that make examples their laws, and the practice of their Superiors to be as
precept^ and patterns for them to follow. An^ if the root be rotten, what may
be thought of the branches? If Ministers be profane themselves, who like roots
should convey piet^ to the people, what can be exspected at their hands
besides profaneness and Atheism, unless God in mercy do restrain, and guide
them? For the wickedness of Ministers (is serpens malum) does creep like Iuy,
and spread like a leprosy, and is as pestilent and infectious as the Plague.
Therefore the Lord says; Ier. 23.15.
From the Prophets of Jerusalem is wickedness gone forth into all the land.
Wherefore let every Minister behave himself in Gods house discreetly. Ier.
23*28.
He that h^th his word, let him speak it faithfully, let him handle it
sincerely: and withal let his life be honest. For other wise (as Nazianz^ne
teaches,) He reaches that with one hand, which he raketh away with the other:
he both abuses his place, and dishonoreth his Master. If ever he mean to do
good, let him be good. As the fire must be hot, before it can he^te the stander
by: so if thou desire to make other men religious, be religious thy self: be
first hot thy self, and thou are likely to make thy neighbor, that stands by
thee, and looks upon thee, fervent and hot also.

CHAP. 8. Ministers must have skill, as well as will, to discharge their office.
THirdly, a Workman must have skill to perform his work. So should a
Minister. For what should he do with Gods sword, tha^ knows not how to use
it? It is Heb. 4.1^
sharp and piercing; it is fit therefore that he which is to handle it, should
have skill to use it* that he may know when to shake it, and when to sheath it;
when, whom* where, and how deep to strike with it.

Ministers are to we^re the ke^es o^ Gods kingdom at their girdles. Les^
therefore they should lock, when they ought to loose, and open; when they
ought indeed to shut, they mus^ be men of knowledge, and not nou^ces, void of
good understanding an^ dexterity to perform their duty 1. Tim 3.2.
Paul requires that a Minister should be apt to teach. If he be not ((...))
able and apt to teach, 2. Tim. 2.24.
how shall he b^ ((...)) a teacher, as every ministe^ ought to be? If he be,
((...)) unlearned, how shall he be ((...)) a scribe able to interpret the
Oracles of God learnedly? The 2. Tim. 2
Minister of God must ((...)) divide and cut out the word of truth aright
unto the people. But how shall he be able to divide it rightly, when he cannot
((...)) divide at all, because he wants the knife of knowledge, wherewith he
should divide it? What though a man have a plough, if he know not how to plow?
What if he have a net, and know not how to cast it? What though he have a
salve, if he know not how to apply it? And what though a man have an axe, if
he have no skill to use it? So what can that man do, that has the word of God,
which is as a plow, a net, an angle, a salve, and an axe, if he have no
abilit^, no actiuenesse and skill to use and handle it?

The Math. 6.22.
eye is the light of the body: if it be blind, how dark is that body? Mat.
5.14.
Ministers are the light of the world, and as the Eyes of the Church. Now, if
they be destitute of light and sight, the world must needs be dark, and that
Church must needs be blind: or else God the Iam. 1.1.
Father of lights must confer sight and light, and illuminate them
extraordinarily. Isay. 50.4.
Esaias says that the Lord gave him the tongue of the learned, that he might
know to minister a word in due season to him, that is weary. Good shepherds
and thriuing merchants had need to have knowledge and experience. Ministers are
the Shepherds and Merchants of Almighty God; therefore they should have skill
(as well as will) to keep his sheep, and husband his wares, that his gain
may be the greater, and his fold the fuller. This is the note (says that holy
Martyr of God, Bishop Hooper) to know the Bishops and Ministers of God from the
Ministers of the Devil, by the preaching tongue of the Gospel. The Mal. 2.7.
Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, says the Lord. It is a precept, and
not a promise. And the people were enjoined to seek the law at his mouth.
Therefore in reason he should be skillful in the law. It is labor lost to
seek a thing, where it is not. In vain do men g^ to a Well, that has no
water in it. Now if the Priests in the time of the Law were by Gods appointment
to be men of knowledge, is it fit that the Ministers of the Gospel should be
ignorant; especially there being so much knowledge in the world, as there is at
this day? Ministers are Gods Nurses: but if their breasts be dry, how shall
his children thrive, that are committed to them: Jeremy writes of a calamity,
which befell the Israelites, wherein the Lam 4.4. Lam. 2.11. 12.19
tongue of the sucking child did cleave to the roof of his mouth for thirst,
and in which the children and sucklings did swoone in the streets, and for
hunger died in their mothers bosom. A very pitiful and sore distress.
Verily, as lamentable is their condition, which Pro. 29.1^
never have the bread of Gods word broken unto them, and the sweet milk of
wholesome exhortations and instructions powered out before them to feed upon.
Ministers are Gods Mal. 2.7.
Messengers; therefore they should have knowledge to deliver their message
discreetly. They are seers and ouer-seers; therefore they should have eyes to
see and ouer-see. They should be able to discern between vice and virtue,
between light and darkness, between truth and falsehood, between Sarah and
Hagar, between a Judas and a Jonathan, lest they take the one for the other,
as Ixion did the cloud for Juno. And if the Mat. 15.14.
blind do lead the blind, both of them are like to fall into the ditch.
Those ministers then that cannot teach the people in some competent manner, are
too defective; not much unlike a cipher, which fills a place, and increases the
number, but signifies nothing: and something like to Players, which do
sometimes represent the persons of Princes, but are not so themselves. Xanchius
says, that they only are called of God unto the Ministry, which besides their
godly conversation, are able to deliver wholesome doctrine unto the people. Quos
enim eligit, ac vocat* for those whom God does elect and call to any function,
he does also endow them with such necessary gifts, as are meet for that
function.

CHAP. 9. Ministers must be faithful and painful
FOurthly, a labourer must be diligent, faithful, and industrious. And such a
one must every Minister show himself to be. It is required in the 1. Cor. 4.2.
disposers of Gods secrets (as Ministers are, that a man be found faithful.
Preach the word (says the holy Ghost,) 2. Tim. 4.2.
be in stant, in season and out of season* Cursed is he, Ier. 48.10.
that does the work of the Lord negligently. If we be diligent in our own
affairs, how much more diligent should we be in Gods? Pro. 27.23.
Be diligent (says Solomon) to know the state of thy flock, and take heed to
the herds. Must men look to their cattle with diligence, and shall not
Ministers look diligently to the souls of men? Idleness for a time may be
pleasing, but in the end thereof it will bite like a Cockatrice, and hurt like
a Serpent. If men be careful to save their sheep from dogs, wolves an^
foxes, if they be diligent to preserve their corn from being cropped and wasted
with birds and beasts, and to keep their houses from being burnt with fire, or
beat down with tempests; how faithful and laborious should all the Lords
Ministers be to preserve his corn from being eaten up or trodden down? How
careful should they be to defend his house from the fire of contention and
schism? And if fire have taken hold on it* how painful ought they to be in
^^aking of it, and hindering it from proceeding further? If the Devil Job. 1.7.
compass the earth to and fro, and like a ramping and roaring 1. P^t. 5.8.
Lion seek whom he may devour; If the Mat. 23.15.
Pharisees would compass sea and land to make one Proselyte, one of their
faith and faction; And if Popish priests (whose faith and alleagiance is
pinned, upon Antichrists back) do venture life and liberty to subvert the
true faith, and to increase the number of Romish Catholics; what pains
should the Ministers of Christ Jesus take? what labor should they refuse to
maintain the faith, to save the souls of men, and to increase the number of
true Believers, true Catholics, orthodoxall Christians? They look for hire,
therefore they ought to labor: no work, no wages. Pro. 27.18.
Indeed he that keeps the fig tree, shall eat of the fruit thereof: and he,
that waits upon his office, is worthy maintenance: but he which 2. These. 3.10.
will not labor (and can labor) must not eat, though he would eat.
Possidonius writes of Augustine Bishop of Hippo, that he taught and preached
privately and publicly, in the house and in the Church; resembling the practice
of Paul, who (like a faithful Teacher) Act. 20.20.27.31.
kept back nothing, that was profitable, and in three years space revealed
all the counsel of God (behold his diligence) teaching openly, and throughout
every house, and by the space of three years ceased not to warn every one
both night and day with tears: behold his fidelity, industry, and
compassionate affection. Chrysostom says, that the Minister of the word ought
to be diligent as an Husbandman, and careful as a shepherd. As diligently
(says Latimer) as the husbandman plougheth for the sustentation of his body,
so diligently must Prelates and Ministers labor for the feeding of the soul:
both the ^loughes must be st^^l going, ^ most necessary for man. And again:
The Scripture calls it (the preaching of the word) meat, and not
Strawberries that come but once a year, and ^^r^ not long, but are soon gone.
But ^t ^^ meat, it is no dainties. The people must have meat that must be
familiar, con^inuall, and daily given then to feed upon This was the judgment
of that ho^^ Martyr: and his practice was not different. For (as M. Fox says)
he preached for the most part every Sunday twice, yea when he was 67. years o^
age, and had received a bruise by the fall of a tree. Like was the practice o^
Ambrose Bishop of Millain, who^ Augustine heard (as he does report) preach the
word of truth soundly (Omni Dominico) every Lords day. This was the practice of
those blessed Saints. This is the will of God, and the duty of al godly
Ministers; as does evidently appear by the consideration of Paul's exhortation
to the Elders (or Ministers) of the Church o^ Ephesus. Act. 20.28.
Take heed (says he) to all the flock, whereof the holy Ghost has made you
overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with that his
blood.

First, let us consider that we are the Ministers, not of man, but of God
omnipotent, who will kindly reward all that come unto him, and labor for him
with an honest heart, and a good intention, 1. Pet. 5.4.

Secondly, let us also remember that we did not thrust our selves into his
service, but that he chose and called us; and therefore our labors are not
arbitrary, but at his disposement and dispensation. Thirdly, we are not called
to live in idleness, but to attend, to ouersee and feed.

Fourthly, our labors are not spent upon beasts, but upon men like our selves,
and not about earthly things, but heavenly. Fifthly, our pains belong properly
and principally to Gods Ephesians. 4 12.
own people, even unto such as his Son has redeemed with his own blood,
his best blood, his hart-bloud. 1. Pet. 5.2.
If Jacob was consumed in the day with heat, Genesis 31.40.
and with frost in the night; if he endured such hardness for Sheep, for
beasts, yea for his Father in laws sheep; shall we take no pains for men?
Shall we neglect the Sheep of Christ Jesus? Shall we bestow no pains upon the
people of God, who is our most gracious father, and more tender hearted then
our natural fathers are, or can be to us?

Sixthly, we should consider, that these about whom we labor, are subject to
many dangers. Satan and his Angels, the world and their own corruptions are
all of them mortal and most pernicious enemies unto their souls. And our
labors are through the operation of the Spirit very helpful and commodious
both to preserve them from evil, and to conserve and strengthen them in that
which is good, yea and to pull them out of the jaws of the Devil, and out of
the briars of wickedness. And therefore we should take the greater pains, and
think no time nor travel misspent, which we shall spend this wa^.

Seauenthly, we preach against the idleness of men in all other callings, and
that not without good cause: for it was Ezekiel. 16.49.
one of the sins of Sodom, and is unprofitable to all states. Wherefore we
ought in no case addict our selves to so base a sin. For otherwise we shall
weaken our own credits, and expose our selves to shame and obloquy. A black
spot is soon espied in white paper: Ministers are much marked: and few
travelers there are, if any at all, which would not have their ways as fair
as their Neighbors. Moreover, the Scripture calls us Pastors. But Pastors
must Pastoris est pascere, n^n deglubere.
feed their sheep, and not forsake, nor flea them, nor starve them through
indiligence and oscitancy. The flock must be more regarded then the fleece.
Paul sought 2. Cor. 12 14.
them, and not theirs: the men, and not the money. And, 1 Cor. 9.17
Woe unto me (says he) if I preach not the Gospel. He was exceeding 2. Cor.
11.23.
toylesome in his Ministry, in labors abundant. Jude says, that he gave
Jude. 3.
All diligence to write of the commune salvation. The Reu. 2.2.
Angel of the Church of Ephesus was by Christ commended for his works and
labor. The ancient Prophets, and those worthy men of God, which he raised up
for the revealing of that man of sin, and the restoration of the truth, as
Luther, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Bucer, Calvin, Martyr, Jewel, etc. were
exceeding diligent and laborious. It is said of that blessed Martyr of God
Master Bradford, that he preached the time, that he remained prisoner in the
Counter twice a day continually, except sickness hindered him.

Being therefore compassed and covered with such a cloud of painful
Ministers, let us break through all obstacles, and run the race of our
glorious calling, performing whatsoever does appertain unto us with all
patience, diligence, and fidelity. All, even all is little enough, and too
little. Honor is set before us: the Spear of vengeance is shaken at us: the
Cannon of Gods wrath is planted against us: the Constitutions of the Church do
call upon us: the Commandment of the great God does urge us: and the holy
Scriptures do spur us to the quick, and afford many firm and invincible
arguments to provoke and persuade us to the vigilant, faithful, and laborious
execution of our office; Let us therefore respect and tend it, and behave our
selves like Laborers, that need not be ashamed.

Solomon says, He that withdraws the Pro. 11.^6.
corn (which is the food of the body) the people will curse him; and shall we
think that he can escape a curse, which refuses to preach, and so
withholds the corn and the food, wherewith the soul should be sed? But as
blessing shall be upon his head, that sells corn: so he that preaches the
word of truth, and brings forth like a good Steward, both new and old out
of his treasure unto the people, and breaks unto them that bread, that does
relieve the hungry soul (if he do it with care and conscience, and with a
purpose to glorify God and to benefit his Church) he shall without doubt
receive a blessing both from God and Man. The Lord from heaven shall bless
him, and his people shall applaude and laud him. And as Pro. 27.18.
Solomon says that the servant which waits upon his Master, shall come to
honor: even so surely they, which attend upon their Ministry, shall be
advanced. They shall have honor in the hearts of the people. And if God see
them fit for further honor, they shall not want it. Let them therefore be
watchful and industrious. And indeed, there is no time since the light of the
Gospel brake out unto us, wherein greater diligence and fidelity is required
at the hands of all Gods Ministers, then now. For Probitas laudatur, and alget:
virtue is commended in word, but contemned in deed. Learning is little
respected: Vice flourishes, wickedness increases: Papisme sprouteth afresh:
Atheists and Epicures swarm like the Exodus 8.24.
flies of Egypt: and of Act. 20.30.
our own selves do many men arise speaking perverse things, to draw disciples
after them; being ready to say with those in Esaias; Isa. 65.5.
Stand aloof, come not near me: for I am more holy then thou; being
selfe-conceited, and distracted with fantastic questions, and impertinent
affairs, and possessed with an erroneous, turbulent, unstable and blind spirit;
leaving Jerusalem in stead of Babel, even their mother that brought them forth
and bare them; because, they say, she is clad with a Babylonish garment, and
not with one of their spinning. Wherefore greater diligence and attendance
should be given, least Gods house be fired over our heads, least his plants be
spoiled, least his vines be broken down, least his flowers be rooted up, and
his garden be defaced and ouergrowne with weeds. For howsoever Atheists,
Papists, and Schismatiques be loose in their heads, yet are they tied fast
together by the tails (like Judge. 15 4.
Samsons foxes) with a firebrand of mischief in the midst to spoil and
burn up Gods corn, and to set fire on his rickes, if they be not with great
care and labor prevented.

Note.
But yet, though every Pastor must be painful, it does not therefore follow
that they should all be equal in pains. For there are diversity of gifts,
variety of ages, distinction of places, and difference of strength and
ableness. But if they do that, which is fit for them, and which God claims
of them; if there be 2. Cor. 8.12.
a willing mind to perform that, which they can, it is accepted with him, who
accounts the good will for the work it self. Neither is all labor the same
labor. There is hand-labour as well as lip-labor. And he, that sits at the
helm, may labor as wel^ as he that is upon the hatches. But let no man
flatter himself. For Gal. 6.7.
God is not (neither will be) mocked. He Ier. 17.10.
searches the heart, and recompenseth every man according to his works. Thou
do but dance in a net, and delude thy self. His eyes are never shut, and
Heb. 4.13
all things are naked before them. There is not a Job 42.2,
thought hid from his knowledge. Fig-leaues, frivolous and feigned excuses,
subtle and sophistical euasions cannot serve thy turn, they cannot cover
thee. He will find thee out: and Heb. 10.31.
it is a fearful thing to fall into his hands.

CHAP. 10. Ministers must be cheerful in discharging their office.
Fifthly, a Labourer should be cheerful and alacrious in his business,
delighting to see his work go forward. And this alacrity must be in all Gods
Ministers. 2. Cor. 9.7.
God loves a cheerful giver: even so likewise he loves a cheerful
workman. Men must not give their alms grudgingly or of necessity: so Ministers
should not grudge the Lord of their labors, but be free of them. Christ dyed
freely for his sheep, without the least constraint; why then should not his
Ministers feed them freely without compulsion or grudging? To feed them is
far less then to dye for them. David and his subjects offered 1 Chronicles.
29.6.9.
willingly to the building of a material Temple for the Lord; why then should
not we labor willingly, that he may have a spiritual Temple to dwell in? yea
by how much the spiritual is more excellent the^ the material, even so much
more willingly we ought to labor that the building thereof may go forward. Every
man is willing to receive wages, then let him be willing to work. Paul says,
that 1 Cor. 9.17.
he has a reward if he preach the Gospel willingly. Men are usually very
cheerful about their own affairs, as in seking worldly promotion, profits
and pleasures; and is it seemly for Ministers to be liue-lesse and
leaden-spirited about spiritual and celestial labors, as in building Gods
Temple, and in bringing men to promotion in heaven and to the perpetual
pleasures of that blis-full paradise? Shall the Devil labor alacriously to
seduce and pervert men, and shall not they strive as stoutly and as cheerfully
to convert and save men? The wicked are very forward to commit the works of
wickedness; and shall they be backward to sm^te down wickedness, and to
practice the works of godliness? Shall wickedness be Job. 20.12 Prou. 4.16
sweet to the wicked? Can they not sleep, except they have done evil? Does
their sleep leave them, except they cause some to fall by them? Are they so
cheerful in evil? And shall not we be as cheerful in the works of our
calling, that we may make some to rise from sin, and surcease from
wickedness, and come out of the pit-fall, and snare of Satan? Why should not
our labors be sweet and pleasing to us, seeing they be commodious,
commendable, and commanded? A man will gladly save his Oxen from perishing, and
his sheep from rotting; and shall not we labor as gladly to save men from
destruction, and to keep the sheep of Christ Jesus from rotting in their
sins? Will thou willingly help thy sheep out of the ditch, and save her from
drowning; and will thou not as willingly labor to draw forth one of Christ's
sheep out of the ditch of iniquity, that it be not drowned with the waters of
wickedness, and be stifled with the mudde of sinfulness? A man is very nimble
and ready to preserve his fields from spoiling, his house from burning, and his
children from pining; and shall not we be as nimble, as alacrious, and as ready
to preserve Gods field from being wasted, his house from being burnt, and his
children from perishing and pining away sor want of food to comfort and uphold
them? Willingly will every faithful shepherd feed and govern his flock,
which is committed to him. And so Peter speaking to the shepherds of that
Arch-pastor Christ Jesus, exhorts them to perform their duty with alacrity.
1. Pet. 5 2
Feed the flock of God, which depends on you, caring for it not by
constraint, but Willingly: not for filthy lucre, but as of a Ready Mind. Act.
2^.24.
I pass not at all, (says Paul) neither is my life dear unto me, so that I
may fulfill my course with joy.

CHAP. II. Ministers must be valorus, not timorous.
Sixthly, a labourer ought to be courageous and hardy. No discourageme^t,
nothing at all must daunt him, nothing must fray him from his work, and put
him out of his right byas. And they, that are to contend and encounter with
that roaring Lion, had need to be Lyon-like, valorous and vndauntable. The
Neh. 4.17.
Builders of the ruined walls of Jerusalem did their work with one hand, and
with the other held a sword. Even so those, whom God has called to repair
Jerusalem the praise of the world, should build with the armor of the Spirit
about them, being full of Christian zeal and fortitude, and wise to prevent
the stratagems and assaults of all Sanballates, Arabians and Ammonites. They
were not cowards that built those walls: neither should they be cowards that
work in this building. For here want no enemies: here is both fraud and force.
Ephesians. 6.12
We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against Principalities, against
powers, against worldly Governors, the Princes of the darkness of this world,
against spiritual wickednesses which are in high places; even against Satan
and all the Yeomen of the black Guard. And therefore we had need to be full of
spirit, and spiritual valor. Jeremy was forbidden under the pain of death to
Ier. 1.17.
fear their faces, to whom he was to Prophecy. And the Lord speaking to
Ezekiel says; I have made thy forehead as the Ez. 3.9.
Adamant, and harder then the flint. Fear them not therefore, neither be afraid
of their looks. By which we see that God would not have his messengers
out-faced, but that they should boldly deliver their message to his people. He
which winketh at false doctrine, and reprehendeth not the sins of the time and
place wherein he lives, and dares not for fear of contempt or disgrace
admonish the persons that offend, is unworthy and unfit to be a Minister: who
ought to be zealous and courageous, dreading Ier. ^.8.
no man's face, but should speak, exhort, and Tit. 2.15.
convince in all authority, and show the people their Isai. 58.1.
enormities without fear or partiality. Yea he, that wincketh at wickedness,
and heretical doctrine, and does not oppose himself unto it, is guilty of it:
and is in mind a Fugitive, though he move not from his charge in person. Quia
tacuisti, fugisti: tacuisti, quia timuisti: Thou have fled (says Austen)
because thou have held thy tongue. Veritatem negat, qui eam non libere
praedicat: He denies the truth (says Chrysostom) which does not preach it
boldly. Although (says Austen) he live well, and yet be either ashamed or
afraid to reprove them, that live ill (cum omnibus, qui eo tacente pereunt,
perit.) He perishes with all those, which perish whiles he sees and says
nothing. Aug. grad. 1. Abus. I am full of power by the Spirit of the Lord
(says Micah) Mich. 3*8.
and of judgment and of strength, to declare unto Jacob his transgression, and
to Israel his sin. Eliiah told Ahab to his Kin. 18.18.
face, that it was he, and his fathers house, that troubled Israel. Michaiah
likewise boldly told him, that he should not return in peace from fighting
against the Syrians, though his speech vexed him. 2. Sam. 2.9.
Nathan told David plainly of his uncleanness and murder, and that without
fear. Isaiah says, that he had Isay 50.7
set his face as a flint. And so it seems: for he paid them home, he feared
no colors, but was as bold in taxing, as they were in offending, Isay 50.6.
He gave his back to the smiters, and his cheeks to the nippers, and hid nor
his face from shame and spitting; reproving (notwithstanding all disgraces)
both the Princes and the People with great feruency and boldness of speech.
This was the practice of John Baptist: Christ* Paul, and of all the holy
Prophets, and ought as occasion serves, to be imitated For sheep man be driven
to the ^acks: but Lions must be fed at the staves end, lest ^hey feed on them,
that would ^^ed them
wisely of all the Ministers of God.

This serves to condemn the coldness and fearfulness of those face-fearers,
that dare not rebuke sin, especially in the audience of the sinner: and which
teaches the truth through fear (as it were) in riddles, ambiguously and in
the clouds, running (as I may say) between the skin and the flesh. But such
fear is not the fear of God, but the fear of Man. And (as Bishop Jewel
speaks) accursed be that modesty, that drowneth or hides the truth of God.
And accursed (I say) be that fear, which makes a man silent, when he ought to
speak: and dumme, when he should Isa. 58.1
lift up his voice, like a trumpet, and show the people their sins. Yet here
we must all remember that our zeal be directed by knowledge, which should
always go before and make way, and that wisdom and pity go with our valor,
that all our reproves and admonitions be performed in love and in the Gal.
6.1. 2 Timothy 2.25.
spirit of meekness, with long suffering and patience, without rage and
rankor. Esaias might cry, but not roar. We our selves are men, and may err. And
if we stand, when others fall, it is by Gods grace, and not through our own
goodness. Neither is it lawful to rebuke sin with sin, and to make our
selves sinners by disorderly taxing of sinners.

CHAP. 12. Ministers must persevere in the faithful execution of their
function.
Seventhly, a labourer must be constant, and not give over, till his task
enjoined him be fully finished. So the Minister of God should continue constant
in his labors for God. The love of the world must not make him leave his
labors. He must not leave without the leave and liking of his Lord, that
called him. His own conceits must yield unto his calling: and his fancies
must not make him craze his faith. It is better to beat them, as Abraham beat
the Genesis 15.11.
Birds, that hindered him, then by bending to them, to break lose from his
calling, or to be beat from his business, as being unworthy of it, or unfit
for it. And in a word no fear must fray him: no terror must amaze him: nothing
must make him fly often of the hooks. Shall the obstinacy of the people?
Although (says Chrysostom) I be not ignorant that I speak in vain, yet will
I not give over: for so doing I shall be excused before God, although no body
would hear me, in 3. Chap. Ioh. And it may be with continual shewring upon
them, their hearts will at length relent and wax soft. Shall their rage, their
choler? The frantique (says Augustine) will not be bound, neither would such,
as are troubled with a lethargy, be roused: but charity perseuereth to
castigate the frantique, to stir up the lethargique, to love the^ both. Both
are offended, but both are loved. Both of the^ being molested, so long as their
disease continues, does take it ill that you should so trouble the^: but both
of them being cured they do rejoice. Shall threats and disgraces? Shall the
malice and envy of the wicked? was not Christ disgraced, maligned, calumnized,
and evil in^reated? Were not all his Apostles hated and persecuted? Shall
poverty drive thee from thy calling, or make thee to faint in thy calling? Was
not Christ poor to Man, that he might make thee rich to God? And were not his
Apostles poor? Gloriosa in sacerdotibus Domini paupertas: Poverty (says
Ambros^) is glorious in the Priests of God. A cross it may be to them, but
not a curse. Paul was a man of much affliction, yet says he, 2. Cor 4*1.
Seeing we have this ministry, as we have received mercy, we faint not. Non
fecisse, sed perfecisse virtutis est: To work is not so commendable, as to
continue constant in working, till the work be brought to perfection. Ministers
must be like the salt waters, which having once begun to flow, continue
flowing, till they come to their full sloud. A candle being once lighted,
burns on so long as it lasts, except it be put out with violence. Even so
they (as candles) being once lighted, and set in the church, as in a
candle-sticke, to give light unto the people, by holding out the lamp of
light, that is, Psa. 119.105.
the word of God, they should burn bright continually; Aliis inseruientes,
semet^psos consumentes, spending themselves, like lamps or torches, in serving
and shining unto others. Solomon left not building of a temple for the Lord
made of lifelesse stones, until it was built up. So should they continue
constant in building his temple made of 1. Pet. 2.5
living stones, till it be brought to perfection, if in this life it were
possible. They should do their best endeavor, and languish not. Ovid.
Vt desint vires, tamen est laudanda voluntas. Paul labored constantly in his
calling, till God called him away by death. Possidonius says that Augustine
preached the word of God constantly (Vsque ad ipsam suam extremam aegritudinem)
unto the extremity of his sickness. Fox says of Bradford that preaching,
reading and prayer was his whole life. These are good patterns, and worthy
imitation. Peter says that he ought in equity 2. Pet. 1.13.
to put them in mind of their duty, whiles he continues in his earthy
tabernacle. The Minister and his Ministry should cease together, and not one
before another. Paul commands 1. Tim 4 13.15.16.
Timothy to exercise himself in, and to ad^i^^ himself unto reading,
exhortation and doctrine, and to continue in learning. If we would duly
consider that by preaching the covenant of grace is revealed, that Gods oracles
are explained, and his dispersed sheep brought home and nourished, that faith
is thereby wrought and confirmed, and the children of God begotten and
conserved, that his house is builded, his field is eared, his scepter erected,
his throne established, his kingdom augmented and Satan eiected; undoubtedly
it would move us to a continual and constant execution of our office, without
either fainting in it, or forsaking of it. The Sun (we see) never cease
moueing all the while his course is unfinished. The Laborers in the parable
wrought unto the Mat. 20.8.
evening, even till their Lord set and sent his Steward to call them from their
work. So we, that are the Lords laborers appointed by him to work in his
vineyard, and set in the Church, as the Sun in the heavens, to give light
unto his people, must labor constantly and move continually till our course be
finished, and our task be ended; we must not give over till our houre-glasse
be run out, till our Sun be set, and the Evening of our life be shut in, or
until our Lord and Master shall call us from our work, or send a Messenger
to fetch us. Solomon says; In the morning I Eccl. 11.6.
sow thy seed, and in the evening let not thine hand rest. All men ought to
be constant in their labou^s, and never be Gal. 6.9
weary of well doing; much more therefore Ministers, whose labors are most
excellent and commodious, and who ought to be to al other men, as that cloudy
Nehe. 9 12.
and fiery pillar was unto the Israelites, which led the^, and let them see
their way to Canaan God commanded that there should be Ex^ 27.20.
Light always shining in the Tabernacle.

The Church militant is Gods spiritual Psalm. 15.
Tabernacle. Ministers are the Light, that must shine unto all the members of
the Church, yea to those, that yet sit in darkness and in the shadow of death;
and that constantly, always and without intermission. The Lord required a
sacrifice of 2 Lambs to be offered day by day Ex. 29.38.
continually And it were not unfitting, if ministers did daily in their prayers
present and consecrate their people (like those Lambs) unto the Lord. Their
duty consists not wholly in preaching to them, but also in praying for them,
and for the prosperous estate of the whole Church. Isa. 62.6 7.
I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem (says the Lord) which all
the day and all the night continually shall not ce^se. Ye tha^ are mindful of
the Lord keep not silence, and give him no rest, till he repair and set up
Jerusalem the praise of the world. Luke 9* 62.
No man (says Christ) that puts his hand to the Plough, and looks back,
is apt to the kingdom of God. He is in truth neither a fit man for the
kingdom of grace, nor a fit Minister for the Gospel of the kingdom. The Lord
has put the sword of his Spirit into our hands. He will have us to hold it
constantly, and to shake and brandish it continually never ceasing to kill the
sins of the people with it, and causing them continually to die an everlasting
death to sin in this world, that they may live an euelasting life from sin in
the world to come; and that being covered with the Canopy of Gods grace in this
life, they may be clothed with the robes of his glory in the life to come.
Finally, the Lord has put his Book into our hands. We must upon all just
occasions open and expound it. We must constantly hold it up, and out unto his
People. We must not lay it aside, nor cast it into corners. Our hands in
holding it must never faint, least the enemies of God and his Church should
prevail and conquer. And so much for the properties of a good workman.

CHAP. 13. Ministers ought to be peaceable and loving to each other: but yet
the refractarie must be bridled.
Laborers together.) Seeing that we work together with and for the Lord:
seeing all faithful Ministers are the Lords Laborers, appointed by God to
husband his field, and to repair and build up his House, we should all agree
and love one another entirely, that our work may go the faster forward, and
that so we may receive greater comfort and joy. The Psalmist describing the
wicked, says, that Psalm. 94.4.5.
they smite down Gods people, and trouble his heritage. Psalm. 5.9. Psalm. 10.7.
Their throat (says David) is an open sepulcher, and their mouth is full of
cursing. Is. 59.8.
Destruction (says Esaias) is in their paths, and they know not the way of
peace. But these things do nothing beseem the Ministers of God, who are, or
ought to be (Praecones pietatis) the preachers of peace and piety, and not 1.
Tim. 3.2
fighters and strikers, but meek, gentle, and studious of concord and amity.
Tit. 1.7.
The Word, and not the sword is committed by the Lord unto them* the word of
grace, the word of reconcilement, the sword of the Spirit, and not the sword of
Revenge. If his workmen fall to wrangling, how shall his work go forward? God
has hired us to work, and not to wrangle, praedicare, non praeliari. If any
man lust to be 1. Cor. 11.16.
contentious, we have no such custom (says Paul) neither the Churches of God.
It is merry with wolves and foxes when the shepherds are together by the eats
one with another. Lamentable are those flocks, miserable are those sheep. We
should rather bend then band, and bow rather then break, Ferentes non
ferientes, bearing one with another, and not biting or beating one another,
lest we be devoured one of another. If the builders and plowmen quarrel one
with another, their work must needs be hindered. If a kingdom (says Christ)
Mar. 3. 24* 25*
be divided against it self, that kingdom cannot stand: or if an house be
divided against it self, that house cannot continue. Even so Gods kingdom
upon earth cannot but be much weakened, and the rearing of his house much
hindered, if Ministers (which either are, or ought to be his chiefest
instruments to build his house, and to propagate and uphold his kingdom (be
divided one against another in factions and hostile manner. Divide, et regna:
Divide and reign is no rule for us to practice amongst our selves. It was not
the true, but the counterfeit mother of the child, that said, 1. king 3.26
Let it be neither thine, nor mine, but divide it. If the builders of old
Jerusalem in the days of Nehe. 4.
Nehemiah had contended one against another, it had been easiy for their
enemies to have destroyed both them and their building. So if the Builders of
new Jerusalem, of spiritual and mystical Ierulem, do fight and biker one with
another, they do without doubt expose themselves and their building to the
danger of the enemy, that takes all opportunity to work a mischief. Divide a
ship, and how shall it sail? Divide the Church, and how shall she hold out
upon the waters, and not be drowned? There is little got, but much lost by
contention. Nimium altercando veritas amittitur: Ouer-hot contention loses the
truth; and ouer-great dissension amongst the sheepheards scatters and
disquieteth the sheep. The dissension of the Josephus
captains was the destruction of Jerusalem. But (pace florent omnia) true
peace (like April shewers) makes all things flourish. Vires vnitae sunt
fortiores. A threefold cord is hardly cracked asunder. A sheafe of arrows is
hardly broken. Thorefore as Laborers of one Lord, as Builders of one House, as
plowers of one field, as shepherds of one fold, as keepers of one garden, as
dressers of one vineyard, as workmen in one harvest, as watchmen of one city,
as soldiers of one captain, as servants of one master, and as sons of one
father, let us all agree one with another, being coupled fast together by one
spirit, like linkes of one chain, and as if there were but one temperature of
all our bodies, and but one soul within them all. And accordingly let us
(vnitis viribus, ac toto conatu) jointly labor with might and maine, that Gods
work may go forward, that the powers of darkness may be shaken, that the
gates of Hell may be flung from their hinges, and that (sin and satan being
dismounted from their thrones) the scepter of Christ Jesus may be set up in the
hearts of his people? If we must love 2. Tim. 3.24.
all men, and if we must be gentle toward all men, is it seemly for us to
hate one another? Shall we be spiteful and crabbed one unto another? God is 1.
Ioh. 4.8. ^. These. 5.22.
love, and the wellspring of true peace: and the Devil is the father of
hatred and enmity; therefore it behooves all the Ministers of God to be
peaceable and loving, that so they may be like the Lord, and unlike the Devil.
If we should labor to Romans 12 18.
have peace with all men, how earnestly should we strive to have it amongst our
selves: Ovid.
Nec minor est virtus, quam quaerere, parta tueri. Are all men bound to Romans
12.16.
be of the like affection one toward another, and is it fit for us, that are,
or ought to be lights and guides unto others, to be of a contrary affection one
to another: Ought not the Romans 15.1.
strong to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please themselves:
Wisdom and lenity will say so. And ought not the weak labor to see their
infirmity, and to wax weary of their weakness, that so there may be a
simpathy, and no antipathy, peace and not passions, concord and not hostility?
It is one thing to be weak, and another thing to affect weakness. It is one
thing to show weakness, and another thing to shroud and shield it. It is good
to confess it, but bad to profess it. There is a strong weakness, and there
is a weakness, that is weak indeed. All weakness is vncomme^dable, but
affected and sturdy weakness is intolerable. This is the peace-breaker, and
he must be bridled. Easy salues are for easy soars: b^t gangrenes must be
pared off, and fisiulaes must be bitten. The Leper mus^ keep his house. And
he, that has the plague about him, must not come abroad. Melius est vt pereat
vnus, quam vnitas. It is better to want one, then lose all. It is better to cut
off a finger, then to lose the hand. And an honorable war is better then a
servile peace. We must defend our heads, and maintain our free-holds. 1 kings
21.3.
Naboth would not part from his vineyard. He is another Esau that will part
with his birthright for a mess of pottage. As we must be Mat. 10.16. Tit. 1.8.
innocent as Doves, so we must be wise as Serpents, and stout as Lions, and
beware that too much patience make not the enemy proud and raging. But to
return from whence we have digressed, shall Paul pray for the Romans, for
other men, that GOD would Romans 15*5.
make them to be like-minded one toward another, and shall not we pray for our
selves, and labor by all good means, that we may our selves be so affected
one with another? Members of one body are at peace with themselves. The Church
of God is a Ephesians. 5.23
Body, even the mystical body of his son Christ Jesus. Now faithful
Ministers are Members of this body; therefore they ought like fellow members to
embrace and agree with one another, Ephesians. 4.3. Gal. 5* 26. Ephesians 5.27
endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit, in the bond of peace, not
provoking and envying one another, but being subject to one another in the
fear of Christ. It were a prodigious sight to see the Pillars of a Temple
remove, and rush one against another. The Church is Gods spiritual Temple: and
godly Ministers are as Pillars to bear it up. Therefore they should stand
peaceably one by another, and not iustle one with another. The ministers and
instruments of Satan can conspire together against God. Wherefore then should
not the Ministers of God concord and agree together for God? Luke 23.12. Act.
4.27.
Herod and Pilate, the Jews and the Romans, could join against Christ: why
should not we then consent and labor together for Christ, that the Gospel
might flourish in the Christian world, and that Christian religion might
spread throughout the whole world? As Romans 15.6.
Paul wished the Romans one heart, that they might with one mind and one
mouth praise GOD: even so should we that are Ministers, tune all the strings of
our sinful souls, and labor for the sweet concent and harmony of all the
affections of our hearts, that with one mind and mouth we may celebrate and
preach the Lord, and proclaim the glad tidings of salvation to the sons of
men by Jesus Christ. Neither is it enough if some of us be thus affected: but
we must all (all without exception) put on this mind. In an Instrument we
see that one or two strings out of tune mar all the music: and that in a
Quire of voices one or two being out of order, do spoil the melody: One
iangling bell marres the whole ring. Even so a few factious, turbulent and
combustiue spirits, that (like Salamanders or Fireflies) delight in the fiery
flames of contention, and are in travel with their homebred conceits, till
they have thrust them out (which are something like thorns in a dogs foot,
which never leaves licking till he have got the^ out) I say, a few such
disorderly and unquiet spirits, are able and apt (if they be not turned or
taken quite away) to mar the music of the Church, and to kindle a fire in
it. For by nature we are too like to Gunpowder or Tinder; a few sparks are
able, and would set us all on fire, if neither Gods grace, nor severe laws and
strength of authority did prevent and hinder us. And that I may conclude this
point, if ten men did carry a great and weighty burden, and if some of them
should kick or buffet one another, their pace would be slakened, their
business hindered, and their burden endangered to fall unto the ground. The
Church of God is a weighty burden, and Ministers are appointed by God, to
bear it upon their backs. Now if they beat and spurn at one another: or if
some of them shall contemn kick or busset one another, though others behave
themselves discreetly and orderly: their business must needs be hindered, the
Church is like rot only to shake and totter, but in danger also to fall and
break. Morbida s^la ^ecus totum ^orrumpit oui^e.
One scabbed sheep may infect a flock, a little fire may make a great flame,
a little leaven does leaven a whole lump of dough, and one Fox may mar a
fold. Either therefore let all agree, let all that bear the burden, con^aine
themselves in order, or let them that trouble the rest, be thrust out by
order. Better it were that nine did bear it alone in peace, th^n with a ten^h,
(though his shoulders were as good as Miloes, as strong as Sam^ons) that were
quarrelous, tr^ublesom^ and unquiet.

As we therefore desire the peace of Sion, and the we^fare and prosperity of
Jerusalem: as we would that the works of the devil should be dissolved, his
power weakened, and his kingdom lessened: as we love to see Gods corn to
thrive, his vines to flourish, and his building to go forward; let us Mark.
9.10.
have peace amongst our selves, and let us tie our hea^ts fast together with
the linkes of love. It is an Psa. 133.1.
amiable thing for brethren to dwell together in unity. It is a lovely sight to
see Ministers (br^th^en by adoption, and brethren by offi^e: brethren in regard
of Gods grace and place) to live together in love, as it were in a wedlock of
love. Then should they be known to be Ioh. 13.35.
Christ's disciples, then should God be glorified, his people more abundantly
edified, his kingdom enlarged, his enemies scattered, and their own joys
increased. We conclude therefore, Virg.
Nulla salus bello, pacem te poscimus omnes.

CHAP. 14. God is the Architect, Ministers are inferior Agents.
OF God) For as much as Ministers are the Lords Synergi, his Coworkers, his
Helpers, or helping instruments, elected by him, not for any necessity (as if
he were not able of himself to save me^ without their assistance) but of his
free pleasure, for the manifestation of his wisdom, power, grace and
authority, and for the trial of our obedience, faith and humility, from hence
we learn these lessons.

principal Husbander of his field, and the only Architect of his building. My
John. 15.1.
Father (says Christ) is the Husbandman. And he that builds Heb. 3.4
all things is God. Paul planteth, and Apollos waters, but God 1 Cor. 3.6.
gives the increase. It is the Lord that calls men to his work, and
directs the^ in his work, and gives good success unto their work. Psalm.
127.^1.
Except the Lord build the house, they labor but in vain that build it. 1
Cor. 15.10.
I labored (says Paul) more then they all: yet not I, but the grace of God,
which is with me. Hence it is that 1 Pet. 5.10
Peter commends the founding and establishing of the faithful unto GOD. And
look what GOD founds, Satan shall never confound. The Word preached sincerely
is not like a physic medicine, which has virtue in it by nature to cure a
disease: but is as a Conduit-pipe, by which God the fountain of grace
conueieth his grace into the cisterne of our hearts, when as he pleases.
Neither are Ministers to be reputed as principal Agents, or authors of man's
salvation, but as the lively instruments of God, to whom he has committed the
2 Cor. 5.19.
word of reconciliation, and the sword of his spirit, to cut down the sins
of his children, and to slaughter their carnal lusts and corrupt affections
through the mighty working of his spirit, accompanying their ministry. And
though Paul take unto him the name of an 2 Cor. 2 15.16.
Architect or master work man: yet he does not mean that he is so indeed
simply and without comparison. But he was an Architect in regard of inferior
Ministers: or because he laid the first stone amongst the Corinths, and
planted Christian religion amongst them, as there he shows.

CHAP. 15. Godly Ministers may assure themselves of Gods protection.
Factors under a Merchant) they may well expect his divine protection in the
faithful performance of their office. A Lord will maintain the lawful
quarrel of his Laborers; specially if it arise of the diligent and honest
execution of their duty, by him enjoined. A puissant and magnanimious Prince
will defend his Ambassador so long as he carries his message discreetly. And
shall we think that the Lord of Lords, and Prince of all Princes will not
defend and protect his faithful servants and Ambassadors? Yea he will both
protect their persons (as the eye of his wisdom shall see fit) and prosper
their message in the thing, that Isa. 55.11.
pleases him, either to the mollifying of men's minds, as the fire does wax, or
to the hardening of their hearts, as the Sun does clay; so as that they are
unto him the sweet savor of Christ, 2. Cor. 2.15.16.
in them that are saved, and in them that perish: unto these the savor of
death unto death, and unto the other the savor of life unto life. And this
protection and blessing of God his faithful Ministers in all ages have ever
received according to his benign admeasurement, who aymeth always at his own
glory which is the utmost mark of all his thoghts. Esaias being assured of
divine protection says; Isa. 50.7.
The Lord will help me; therefore shall I not be confounded: therefore have I
set my face as a flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed. And the Lord
encouraging Jeremy to speak his word boldly, says, Ier. 1.8.18.19.
I am with thee to deliver thee. This day have I made thee a defenced city, and
an iron pillar, and walls of brass against the whole Land. They shall fight
against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee. Behold (says the Lord
to Eze. 2.3.^. Acts 18, 9.10.
Ezekiel) I have made thy face strong against their faces, and thy forehead
hard against their foreheads. The Lord has promised that he will not leave us,
Josh. 1.5. Heb 13*7.
nor forsake us: so that we may boldly say; The Lord is mine h^lper, neither
will I fear what man can do unto me. If we did seriously consider the
undaunted courage of Paul and Luther, their great dangers and deliverances, and
the admirable good success of their labors, we may see sufficiently, how the
Lord graced and guarded their persons, and watered their Labors with a flood
of blessings. Now the Lord is the Heb. 1.12.
same, that ever he was; as potent, and as gracious. For ^am 1.17. Isa.
46.10.11.
with him there is no change. His counsel shall stand: and whatsoever he has
determined, it shall be done: his purpose cannot but be performed. Therefore we
must not be fainted-hearted, but confident in his mercy. He will cover us with
the wings of his grace, and carry us upon the back of his power over all our
enemies. He is our Buckler, and Shield of defense; why should we fear? What
need we dread? If God be on our side, who can, or who dare be against us? Psa.
84.12
O Lord of Hosts, blessed is the man that trusts in thee.

CHAP. 16 Faithful Ministers shall be well rewarded
Reward from him, if we discharge our office with care and conscience as in his
sight. A good king will reward and honor a good Ambassador: and a kind
Master will not be unkind unto his fairhfull servant. Even so undoubtedly, the
Lord (that has both heaven and earth at command) will honor, countenance and
kindly reward all his servants, all his Ambassadors, that execute their
office, and carry their message wisely, sincerely, and in love unto his
Majesty. Their reward is with God, they shall want no recompense. 1. Cor. 3 8
Every one of them sha;ll receive his wages according to his labor. They that
turn many unto righteousness shall shine as the stars for ever and ever. Dan.
12.3.
I have fought a good fight (says Paul) I have finished my course, 2. Tim.
4.7.8
from henceforth is laid up (in store for me) the crown of righteousness: not
a crown of gold, but of glory, of immortal glory, and of glorious
immortality, purchased by the righteousness of Jesus Christ, and promised by
the righteous God in mercy, but performed in justice, having past his word to
give it. Peter says that good Ministers shall receive ((...)) an incorruptible
crown of glory: Pet. 5.4
a Garland that shall never wither, a Crown that shall never be corrupted. He
that Mat. 10 ^1.
receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward.
By which it is evident that faithful Prophets shall not go unrewarded. And if
they that entertain a Prophet, because he is a Prophet, shall not miss a
reward, then there is little reason to think that the Prophet himself
(behauing himself as a Prophet of God ought to do) shall not be rewarded. The
Laborers in the parable received their Mat. 20.8
wages of the Lord of the vineyard, wherein they wrought, so soon as the
evening came, and were called from their work by the steward. In like manner
so soon as the Lord does send his Messenger ^eath to fetch us out of his
vineyard, and to call us away from our work, he will faithfully pay us our
wages; I say not, which we have deserved (for merita nostra, misericordia
Domini) but which he of his mere benignity has from all eternity decreed to
bestow upon us.

The consideration hereof teaches us to be diligent, and cheerful in our
calling. Our labor is not lost: a reward will come: we shall have wages for
our work: we shall have pleasures for our pains. All our water shall be
turned into wine: and our sorrows into solace. Our Lord is loving, and will not
forget the labors of our love, and the toil which we take for him. We have
his favor, and we shall see his face: we do now enjoy his grace, and we
shall one day be pertakers of his glory.

CHAP. 17. Ministers are greatly obliged unto God: and therefore they should be
thankful unto him.
2 Cor. 3 9.
new Testament) and has given unto us the 2 Cor. 5.2 18. Act. 20.28. 1 Cor.
12.28
Ministry of Reconciliation: seeing (I say) that God has made us Instruments
for him to labor for him in his House and Vineyard: seeing we are become his
laborers, his servants that is the Lord of all creatures, both Men and Angels;
we are every one taught, ingenuously to confess our selves to be greatly
indebted to him. It is no small favor that an earthly king shows, when out
of his whole kingdom he chooses some few to be his principal Officers: or
shall take one out of many, and make him his Ambassador. And shall we think it
a small honor, when God that heavenly Monarch and King of all Kings, shall elect
us ( Job 25.6
Worms in respect of himself) and make us his chief Officers in his Church,
and his Ambassadors to carry the joyful message of redemption by Jesus Christ
unto his people? Is it not exceeding great favor, when he that Isa. 57.15
inhabiteth the eternity, swayeth the scepter of the whole world, shall make
Job 33.23*
one of a thousand his Messenger and Interpreter, to declare unto man his
righteousness, and to the sons of men their happiness, to call them out of
the kingdom of darkness, and to lead them the way into heavenly Canaan, a
land that flows with milk and honey, with joys unspeakable* with pleasures
innumerable, yea with all the good things, and with greater then any man does
comprehend.

^his his kindness unto us, undeserving it, deserves the gratitude o^ our
hearts demonstrated to him both in word and work. Psalm. 116.12.17.
What sh^^ I render unto the Lord (says David) for all his benefits toward
me? I will offer a sacrifice of praise, and will call upon the name of the
Lord. I Psa. 145.2.
will bless thee daily, and praise thy Name for ever and ever. Ps^. 4.3.8.
Teach me to do thy will: for thou art my God: let thy good Spirit lead me
into the land of righteousness. So should we meditate: so should we purpose:
and so we ought to pray. God has honored us: let not us dishonor him, but in
all things let us seek his honor, and set forth his praise; neither
committing, nor admitting anything which we know to be derogatory to his glory,
and disgraceful to our glorious calling. 1. Sam. 2.30.
Those that honor me (says the Lord) I will honor, and they that despise me,
shall be despised. If we will not fear to dishonor God, we may justly fear
that he will honor himself by us, although it be to our great dishonor. For
as Moses said to Aaron, upon the death of his two sons for offending God;
Leuit. 10.3.
This is it, that the Lord spoke, saying: I will be sanctified in them that
come near me, and before all the people I will be glorified. And who come so
near to GOD as Ministers, who are his Watchmen, his Stewards, his Nurses, his
Obstetrices, the wayting-men, and dressers of his dearest Spouse; unto whom he
has committed the keys of his treasure, the dispe^sation of his secrets, the
promulgation of his promise, the interpretation of his Oracles, and the
administration of his Sacraments? They therefore of all other should be most
careful to honor him, and most fearful to dishonor and offend him.

CHAP. 18. Ministers should be like the Lord their Master.
^^ke him in skill. The child labors to be like his father: the hand-mayd
strives to be like her Mistress: the servant will follow his Master as soon
as any man: and the Scholar studies to imitate his Teacher: yea and the
Instruments of the Devil are very like him: wherefore then should not all Gods
Ministers labor to be like him? He is their Father, their Lord, their teacher,
and their Master. It is no shame to resemble him: it is no disgrace at all
(but glory rather) to be said to be like him. He is over all and under none;
his perfection is absolute: his skill is admirable, and the depth of his
wisdom cannot be sounded.

All Christians are bound to Ephesians 5.1.
follow God: therefore much more all Christian Ministers, who in all things
ought to show themselves Tit. 2.7 8.
Examples of good works, with vncorrupt doctrine, with gravity, integrity, and
with the wholesome word, which cannot be condemned, that he which withstandeth
may be ashamed, having nothing concerning them to speak evil of.

Do we not see how the world is followed of the me^ of this world? Do we not
see many men imitate great persons in their vanities? Do we not see how one
country follows another in foolish and newfangled fashions? Why then should
not we that come near to God by ^ur office, strive to draw near unto him by
goodness and ve^tuous moralities? Why should we fly far from him this way,
that come so near to him that way?

The Ministers of Satan are far differing from the Lord our Master:
therefore if we will not be like them, we must strive to be like him. And
undoubtedly, if Ministers would carefully labor to resemble their master in
patience, pity, charity, truth, righteousness, holiness, gentleness,
goodness, and in such like properties, they should not only please him, and
feel comfort in their consciences, but also win greater estimation to their
calling, and lessen their contempt in the world.

CHAP. 19. The chiefest care of a Minister ought to be, to study how to please
the Lord.
1 These. 2.2.3.4.
all things we must approve our selves unto God: and our only care must be to
please his Majesty (who has entertained us into his special service)
contending by all possible means within the lists and limits of our calling,
that his affairs committed to our faith, may above all earthly and outward
things whatsoever, proceed and prosper. Pastoris est pascere, non piscari: a
shepherd should not be fishing, when he ought to be feeding his sheep. Hired
Laborers must not hinder their masters business to further their own. He
that undertakes to help a man, must not absent himself when he should be
present: and when he is present, he ought to mind that chiefly, for which his
presence is required. 2 Timothy 24
No man (says Paul) that warreth, entangleth himself with the aff^ires of
this life, because he would please him that has chosen him to be a Soldier.
An honest and discreet Soldier will not cumber himself with those things
which may make him unserviceable to his Capt^ine, and unfit for military
labors. Ministers are Soldiers: God is their grand Captain: his Coats they
wear, and under his Banner they fight against the black Prince Ephesians. 6.2* and
2.2
that rules in the air, and against all his troop. The weapons of their
warfare are not carnal, but 2 Cor. 10 4.
mighty through God to deturbe the fortress^s of the devil, and to ruinate the
Castles of iniquity, and the Turrets of all sublimious and transcendent
imaginations. Therefore they ought to live like Soldiers, minding their
warfare (for their enemy is very puissant and politic, full of stratagems and
wiles) and above all things laboring to please their General, that great
Commander of the world, inta^gling themselves with nothing, which may let their
faithful service to him. The Apostles thought it not meet to leave the word of
God Act. 6.2
to serve the tables. Master Tindall says, that to preach Gods word is too
much for half a man: it requires a whole man. Age quod tui muneris est: Do
that (says Valentinian to Ambrose) which belongs to thy office. Verbi es
Minister, hoc age: thou art a Minister, mind that: let thy principal care be
fixed upon thine own calling. If many yrons be in the fire at once, some are
in danger to be burnt. A calling that is so high, cannot endure that he which
is called to it, should (like an Earth-worme) carry his nose unto the ground,
and addict himself to the things that are so low. For Aug.
Amor rerum terrenarum viscus est spiritualium pennarum: the too much minding
and the love of worldly things, are as Bird-lime to the wings of the soul,
that a man cannot mount up to heaven, and execute the works of this heavenly
office, as he ought to do. Let us hear, what Musculus says. Vis cognoscere
verum Christi Ministrum: Will thou (says he) know a true Minister of Christ?
Then see if he be so utterly severed from all other business, that he does
meditate, work, or live in none other thing whatsoever, but in preaching and
making manifest and plain the Gospel of Christ, and serve therein by all
strength and power whatsoever, that is in him.

Note.
But yet no man must from hence conclude, that all ca^e and government of secular
affairs is utterly forbidden unto Ministers. Indeed they may not usurp
authority: neither may they be careful, and yet they must not be careless.
They must care, but they may not carke. Only it is required that their secular
affairs hinder not their constant care of the Church, and the faithful and
alacrious performance of their office. For 1. Tim. 5.8.
if their be any that provides not for his own, and especially for them that
are of his own family, he denies the faith, and is worse then an infidel.
The Ioh. 21.3*
Disciples used their nets sometimes, after that Christ had entertained the^ to
be his followers. And did not Christ himself sometimes handle the Mark. 6.3.
Axe? Paul forgot not his 2. Tim 4.13.
cloak, which he left at Troas: and as necessity urged, sometimes Act. 20.34.
wrought with his own hands. It is required in a Bishop, that he do not only
care for the Church of God, but also that he be able 1. Tim. 3.4.5.
To rule his own house honestly. Ministers are men: they have not only souls,
but bodies. Samuel was a faithful Prophet, and yet was able besides his
prophesying to do somethings else without impeachment of his credit, or
disgrace unto his calling. Yet let us always remember that the edification of
the Church by our Ministry (whether gubernatiue or operative) is the
principal work, which we ought all to follow, the hiest mark, at which we
ought to level.

CHAP. 20 Sundry reasons are alleged against the peoples factious and
irregular conceits and fancying of their Ministers, in diverse places.
all faithful Ministers do labor for the Lord, it is a thing both unequal and
inconvenient that the people should contemn or neglect any of them through
their preposterous and ungrounded conceits, and so addict themselves to some,
as that they nothing or little respect others, though their doctrine be found
and their conversation blameless. This was one of the faults, for which the
Corinthians were reprehended Secondly, this sin is a makebate: it causes
contention, and stirs up strife among brethren. The fire is great enough
without this brand, these bellows. It were better to cast on water, then to
pour in oil. Thirdly, this sin is an enemy to Christ, and his Gospel, and
argues self-love, and weakness of judgment. Fourthly, it gives the Devil
advantage, who is very vigilant and industrious to work a mischief, and is
glad of the smallest opportunity: ever ready to take an Ell, when ^n Inch is
but given him. Fifthly, it scandalizeth many weak ones, and increases the
number of Mocke-gods. Sixthly, it is a means to make those to faint, which are
contemned, unless their courage be the greater: and an ocasion to puff up the
other, if their humility and wisdom be no better then their factious and
unorderly followers. And lastly our sin will be the rather increased, if we will
be tainted with it, seeing we know that it was taxed as a weakness in the
Corinthians. Let us therefore be wise, and wisely beware of all preposterous
and unequal opinions of the Ministers of God. They do all of them work under
him in his harvest, there is no reason therefore that any of them should be
despised. Amongst many builders, sowers and reapers, none that are discreet and
diligent, are contemned or basely reckoned of, though there be greater
dexterity, skill, and hability in some the^ in others. Candles that give good
light are not cast away, though they be not so great, and cast not so much
light, as some others do. A Lamp is serviceable, though it blaze not so much as
a Torch: neither is there any metal contemned, though all metal be not gold.

CHAP. 21. The people should love, honor, and pray for their Ministers.
Adiutors (for so the Con^er the 1. Cor 3.6: with Phil. 2. 25 and 4.3.
Greek word signifies, as the learned know) all men are taught to love them,
to pray for them, and to honor them. We beseech you (brethren) 1. These 5 12.13.
to know them, which labor among you, and have the over sight of you in the
Lord, and admonish you, that ye have them in high reputation, in love for their
work. The Apostle having commended his brother Epaphroditus to the
Philippians, he commanded them by his Apostolical authority, to Phi. 2.29.
receive him in the Lord with all gladness, and to make much of ((...)) or
honor and highly to prize such as he was. The Minister of the Church (says
Chrysostom) ought to be honored of thee, because he prays for thee, because
he ministers spiritually unto thee, visits thee, exhorts and admonishes
thee, and comes to thee, if thou call him, at midnight. Ex. 20.12
Honor thy father, says the commandment. Ministers are our spiritual
fathers. They do 1 Cor. 4.15. Philem. 10.
beget us to God in Christ by the preaching of the Gospel. They are our
Priests. For by the word of God, as by a sacrifising knife, they kill our sins,
and offer us up to God (upon that their high Altar Jesus) as a sacrifice of
sweet savor, and acceptable to him. They are Gods mouth to us: and our mouth
to God. They pray for us; wherefore then should not we pray for them? Paul
requesteth the Romans to strive wi^h him Romans 15.31.
by prayer to God for him, that he might be delivered from the unbelieving
Jews, and that his service might be accepted of the Saints. And he wills the
Ephesians. 6.19.
Ephesians to be instant in their prayers, that he may open his mouth freely to
utter the secrets ^f the Gospel. Col. 4.3.
They are our Pastors appointed by God to feed us with the word of truth, our
heavenly Manna, and to refresh our thirsty souls with the sweet and clear
waters of the gospel of life.

They are our Isa 62.2.
Watchmen and Act. 20.^8 Heb. 13.17
Overseers, ordained to watch over us, to view us, and to care for us. They are
the Lords Trumpeters, sounding in our ears continually the two Trumpets of his
Law and Gospel* and a warlike Defiance unto all our spiritual enemies. They
are his Champions: they fight his battles for us against Satan and Sin, two
mighty Princes, and too potent for us. They are his Mal 3.1. Reu. 1.20 2. Cor.
5.20.
Angels and Ambassadors to declare his will unto us. Worthy therefore are they
in these regards to be respected and highly honored of us. If the Ambassador of
an earthly Prince, be worthy honor; how much more honorable then are they,
that are the faithful Ambassadors of Jesus Christ, that heavenly Prince Reu*
1.5.
and King of all Kings of the earth?

The Elders that rule well (says Paul) 1. Tim 5.17.
let them be had in double honor: especially they which labor in the word and
doctrine. The Galathians did so entirely honor and affect Paul, as that they
received him as an Gal. 4, 14.15.
Angel of God, yea as Christ himself, and would have plucked out their eyes,
if it might have been, and have given them unto him. Eusebius writes, that
Constantine judged the Ministers which he called to him ( semper honor
praecipuo dignos:) worthy always of singular honor, and that he did reverence
them (Omni officio) with all dutifulness, and omitted no point of kindness or
courtesy (nihil benignitatis aut humanitatis) toward those that were devout
and godly. Syracides would have us to Ecclus. 38.1.
honor the Physician of the body: much more therefore should we honor the
Physicians and Chirourgians of our souls. And we shall leese nothing by our
love. For (as our Savior says) He which Math. 10.41.
receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive the reward of a
Prophet, Now look what Christ (who is Ioh. 14*6
truth it self) does affirm in word, he will also (being Tit. 2.13.
Might it self) confirm in deed. Heaven and Earth shall rather fail, then
his word shall fall, and not be fulfilled.

Now this honor, which is due to Gods Ministers (of what place or style
soever) may be performed six sundry ways. First, by reuerencing their persons:
secondly, by obeying their Ministry: thirdly, by imitating their virtues:
fourthly, by concealing their infirmites: fifthly, by countenancing and backing
them: and sixthly by maintaining their estates. And of all these we will briefly
speak, and in order, as they lie.

CHAP. 22. Ministers must be reverenced of the people.
FIrst then, it is fit that Ministers should have all seemly reverence due by
desert to so sublimious and reverend a calling. And it must begin in the heart,
and be testified in the life by reverent behavior, by comely gestures, and by
temperate and good language both of them and to them. Men must Tit. 3.2.
speak evil of no man, but must be moderate, and show all meekness toward
all men; therefore they should in no case speak ill of Gods Ministers, but use
them kindly, and with all courtesy. Courtesy showed to a Minister, as he is a
Minister, is showed eue^ to Christ himself, whose Minister he is; and it is so
reputed. Jeremy accompteth it one of their plagues, that their Lam. 4.16
enemies reverenced not the face of their Priests. The Lord esteems a
disgrace done unto his faithful Ministers, as done unto himself. Princes, we
see, take to themselves those words, or works of dishonor, which are spoken or
done despightfully to their Agents and Ambassadors, for delivering their
message truly, as it was given them in charge. When David's Messengers which he
sent in courtesy to Hanun King of Ammon, were dishonorably entreated, and
misused of him and his people; the story says, that 2 Samuel 10
they stanke in the sight of David for abusing them so vilely. Even so do they
stink (as loathsome carrions) in the nosthrils of the Lord, (be they what they
will be) that disgrace and abuse his Ministers whom he kindly sends to them
to preach his will, and to proclaim his Son to be their king. God took the
reproachful and railing language of Senacherib against Isay. 37.22.23.
Jerusalem and Hezekiah, as spoken against himself. They which misuse a
servant of a noble man, as he is his servant, dishonor the noble man himself.
Christ makes the Math. 23.37.
killing and contemning of Gods Prophets, the highest staire of rebellion. And
undoubtedly God will be revenged on those that disgrace and abuse his Ministers
(unless they do repent maturely) as David was of the Ammonites for disgracing
his Messengers. We know how by two 2 King. 2.24.
Bears he did destroy two and forty children* for mis-calling the Prophet
Elishah: and he is as just and terrible now, and as ready to punish sin as ever
he was. For with him there is no Iam. 1.17 Psa. 68.21.
variablene^s; he will wound the head of his enemies, Psa. 58.10.
and will wash his feet in the blood of the wicked.

CHAP. 23. The people must obey the ministry of their Ministers.
SEcondly, the people honor their Ministers when they submit themselves unto
their Ministry. Reverence without obedience, is a ceremony without substance,
a body without a soul; a stick without strength; and not unlike the common
complements of this age. Heb 13 17.
Obey them (says the Holy Ghost) that have the oversight of you, and submit
your selves. Paul looked that the 2. Cor. 2.9.
Corinthians should be obedient to him in all things. And in truth men cannot
better commend their Ministers, then when by being obedient unto their
Ministry, they live religously, and are fruitful in good works. When a child
does thrive well, and is strong and lusty, the praise redounds to the nurse:
and it is a real commendation of a Shepherd, when his sheep are fat and
sound. Even so shall we greatly commend and honor our Ministers, if we shall
submit our selves unto their voice, and shall by that means grow in grace,
abound in knowledge and true zeal, and shine by our virtuous lives among men.

But this our obedience and submission must be in the Lord; to wit, so long as
they keep themselves to the Law and to the Testimony, to the word of God:
which is the Touchstone of truth, the rule of teligion, the squire of faith,
the line of love, the Met-wand of obedience, and as a Salomons sword to decide
a controversy. For to Gods word alone were the Ier. 1.17. Ez. 33.7. Mat. 28.20
Prophets and Apostles tied by their commission. What I shall command thee,
that shall thou speak. Ye shall teach whatsoever I have commanded you. He
which then hears them, hears God and he which dispiseth and disobeyeth
them, despises and disobeyeth God that sent the^, and Act. 7.52
resists his Spirit speaking by them. The Lord reckons this among the Ez.
33 3^
sins of the Israelites, that they sat before his Prophet, and heard his
words, but would not do them. Zach. 7.12 13. Pro. 1.28.
Zachary says, that because they would not hear the voice of God in his
Prophets, therefore he would not hear them, when they cried to him. And
because the Israelits mocked Gods 2. Chron. 36.
messe^gers and despised his words delivered by the^, and misused them, he
brought upon the^ the Caldean king, by whom he scourged their contempt and
rebellion with four fearful judgments. First, he permitted him to kill
both old and young without pity. Secondly, he let him rob them of their goods,
and carry away their treasure. Thirdly, he suffered him to burn their Temple,
and to break down the walls of Jerusalem, and to fire her Palaces. Fourthly,
he was content that he should make slaves of them in his own country, that had
escaped his sword. As we therefore Ier. 6.19 Ier. 7.13.15
dread the judgments of God, and would not have him count us misusers of his
Ministers, and despisers of his message, let us reverence their persons and
regard their Ministry.

Object. 1.
Yea but will some say; I would willingly hear my Minister, but that he is
prophan^ and vicious, and so pulls that down with the left hand of his bad
life, which he set's up with the right hand of his good doctrine.

Sol.
The more lamentable is his ease, and the greater is his sin, if this be true
thou speak; like the Cow that spils the milk, that before she gave: and
like a Mule, that carries costly things for others, and none for her self.

But what is this to thee? Gal. 6.5.
Every man shall bear his own burden: and that Ez. 18.4
soul shall die, that sins. Shall Kin. 17.6
Elijah refuse his meat because a Raven brought it? Shall Sampson Judge. 13.
refuse his drink, because it came out of the Iaw-bone of an Ass? And will thou refuse the Nectar and Ambrosia o^ thy soul, thy spiritual food, thy
celestial Manna, because it is brought unto thee by Judas, or by one that is
of wicked conversation? He surely is not very hungry that re^useth his meat,
because an uncleanly Seruitor brings it to him. That thy Minister teaches
well, it is of God: that he lives ill, it is of the ^iuell, and of his own
corruption; therefore embrace his doctrine, but eschew his deeds: follow his
preaching, but avoid his practice, and pray for his amendment. Insult not over
him: be not high minded but fear: God may convert him, and he may stand, when
thou thy self shall fall. For thy nature is as ill, as his: it is grace alone,
that makes the difference, This was our Saviors counsel to his disciples.
Mat. 23.2.3.
The Scribes and Pharisees sit (says he) in Moses chair: all therefore,
whatsoever they bid you observe (out of Moses) that observe and do, but after
their works do not; for they say, and do not. So long as they teach the truth,
they must be heard. Thy Ministers wickedness must not make thee wilful: his
folly may not make thee froward. Balaam must hear his Ass speak, because God
ruled her tongue, and made her speak unto him.

Object. 3.
Why, but if his conversation be profane, it is in vain to hear him, because
it pleases not God to work effectually the graces of his Spirit by the
Ministry of wicked men.

Sol.
Not so: for then Judas, who was a wicked wretch, should not have been heard.
Water, which comes through a woodde^ pipe, may moyste^ the ground as well as
that which runs through a pipe of lead, or silver. A seal of brasle or iron
will make the same impression upon wax, that a seal of gold will, if the mark
be alike. Not the honesty, but the skill of the Physician cures the Patient.
It is not so much, the virtue as the Judgment and cunning of the Counselor,
which relieues the perplexed Client. The grace of God (says Chrysostom)
works by the unworthy, not for them, but for those who are to be helped. And
again; God works (per omnes) by all (salutem populi moliens) seeking the
salvation of the people, (non illorum intuens merita) not regarding their
deserts. Even as light (says Augustine) is not defiled though it pass by
filthy places, and men enjoy it void of all defilement: so it is in the
Ministry. Men may receive benefit by the pure word of God, though it come out
of an vnpure mouth. Neither is good doctrine defiled by bad manners: neither
does God confer grace, because the Minister is a godly man: nor disdain to
give it, because he is profaine. It were indeed to be wished, that all
Ministers were holy, as their Master: but nevertheless we know, that it was
not the holiness of those shipwrights which built Noah's Arc, nor the good
life of a Surgean that heales a wound.

Object. 3
Yea, but he teaches false doctrine oftentimes, and is full of foolish and
frivolous fables.

Sol.
What then? We are not Apostles now, that we cannot err. The best are but men,
and subject unto erour. Humanum est errare: indeed, Belluinum est perseuerare:
Gods word ought (I confess to be preached truly without error, and purely
without mixture. Iul. Scal.
(Nam purum est, quod nihil habet alieni:) and it is their sin, that do corrupt
it, or handle it unseemly. But if some tares or cockle, some dust or darnell
come with the good seed, thou must let the^ go (like things unprofitable and
fit for the fire) but thou may not contemn and cast away the good for the
evil. Thou must not refuse the corn for the chafe, but rather sift and
winnow them. A wise man will not cast away good meat for a few moats. Thou will not cast away good silver, because there is some dross in it, or some
copper pieces amongst it. Thou will not contemn a bag of gold, because there
is some counters in it; wherefore then should thou reject profitable
instructions, and wholesome doctrines and admonitions, because they come with
some unsavory stuff, and are mixed with some vanity? Hearken to the counsel of
Saint Paul, whose pen was guided by Gods own hand: 1. These. 5 20.21.
Despise not prophesying, says he. Now because some might say, that the
Prophet may mix some of his own leaven with Gods dough, and so make sour
bread, and preach linsi-wolsy sermons; he does therefore immediately add: Try
all things, and keep that which is good. We must not be like a bottom-lesse
bag, that holds nothing: nor like the scuttle, that holds both the wheat and
the chafe together: nor like the Cernicle, or Boulter, that lets the fine
flower go, and keeps in the branne: but we should be like the Skrie, that
seuereth the good from the badde. We should be wise to discern betwixt true
doctrine and errors: and we should have our wits exercised to judge betwixt
good and evil: and when we see the difference between them being both
objected to us, we should wisely elect the good, and reject the bad.

CHAP. 24. The people ought to imitate the godly virtues of their Ministers.
THirdly, honor is exhibited to Gods Ministers by imitating their Christian
virtues, which do shine within them as the Lamps did in the Tabernacle, and
do (as the candle out of the lant-horne) give light to those that love the
light. It is one way, whereby we honor those that are departed in the faith,
when we resemble them in those heavenly graces, (which like the stars of
heaven) did shine within them, while they were alive. And indeed we do perform
an act of honor unto any man, when we strive to imitate his good conditions,
and to walk exactly in his footsteps. This honor the holy Ghost gives to
all godly Ministers, when he exhorts us saying: Hebr. 13.8.
Remember the^ that have the oversight over you, which have declared unto you
the word of God: whose faith follow. And Saint Paul claims it of the 1 Cor.
11.1. Phil. 3.17. 1 These 1.6. 2 These. 3.5 1. Pet. 5.3.
Corinthians, where he says: Be ye followers of me, even as I am of Christ.
Ministers ought to make themselves Ensamples for us to follow: and when they do
so, we shall both dishonor them, and displease the Lord, if we do not labor
to be like them. Their good examples should be as spurs in our sides to make
us run more lively in our Christian race: and they should be as sauce to make
us affect and digest our meat the better. And if we will not study to resemble
them, we shall both manifest a perverse and illiberall disposition, and make
our selves the more inexcusable when God shall judge us. Therefore as the
Painter does draw an image in his head first, and then with his hand according
to the pattern set before him, and conceived in his mind: so should we set the
virtues of godly Ministers before our eyes, as patterns for to follow; and
having conceived and entertained them in our heads and hearts, we should
express them in our lives by the actions of our hands, and in the continual
current of our conuersations. And so shall we commend our selves without one
word of commendation: so shall we honor and animate them: so shall we dignifie
our profession, and glorify him that ordained Pro. 16.4
all things for his glory.

CHAP 25. Men should wisely conceal the infirmities of their Ministers, and
not blaze them abroad.
FOurthly, Ministers are honored, when their infirmities are not published (in
Gath) to their dishonor, but buried by love in the grave of silence and
oblivion. Iam. 3.2.
In many things (says James) we sin all. The purest gold has some dross
within it. Nulla facies sine ruga: The fairest face is not without a wrinckle,
a mole or freckle. The clearest glass is subject unto soyling. There is no
soul without some sin, Eccles. 7.22.
no man without a fault. And therefore as we ought to bear with one another,
and patiently pardon all slips of weakness ( Pro. 10.12.
for love covers a multitude of trespasses) so especially ought we to
conceal and forgive the infirmities of Ministers, in their words, works and
gestures. And so we shall show our selves the children of wisdom, the
followers of peace and amity, true lovers of God and his children, faithful
and good scholars, and unlike many wretches, that are even heart-merry when
they can spy a moate in a Misters eye, or an hole in his coat, at which they
may mock and jest: ungodly Genesis 9.22.
Chams; that discover and sport at their fathers nakedness.

CHAP. 26. Ministers are to be countenanced and maintained.
Fifthly, men do honor the Ministers of Christ, when they countenance them, and
take part with them against their malicious and wicked enemies, and when they
labor to defend their credits and good name against all their back-biters,
traducers and maligners, and are not ashamed to acknowledge and assist them,
notwithstanding the greatness or the multitude of their ungodly adversaries
which set themselves against God and all goodness. And this all men ought to do
for their Ministers (ever remembering that they pass not the precincts of their
calling, and be not transported with a preposterous zeal, and a vain conceit
of enmity and hostile persecution, when there is no such matter) that so they
may confirm their love unto them, which they do in show profess, and
encourage the^ to go on constantly in their ministry, that they may be
faithful in Gods house, as Heb. 3.^
Moses was: and finally, that they may manifest their zeal to God house, and
their love of his worship, and might show themselves enemies to the Devil and
his wicked Instruments, which conjure and band themselves against Christ and
his kingdom.

Sixthly, honor (and true love the scaturidge thereof) is showed to godly
Ministers, when their estates (in respect of their places, persons, and
dependants) are well maintained. They are the 2 King. ^ 12*
Chariots and Horsemen of Israel* therefore are they worthy to be maintained.
They are the Lords warriors, and standard-bearers. They fight for the Church,
they bestow themselves upon the Church; therefore it is very fit, that the
Church should keep them. It is a thing honest and acceptable before God, for
children to 1. Tim. 5 4.
recompense their fathers and progenitors. Ministers are our spiritual fathers;
In Christ 1 Cor. 4.15.
Jesus says Paul, I have begotten you (to God) through the Gospel. In which
respect we owe even our selves unto them: as Paul shows in a speech to
^hilem. 19.
Philemon his spiritual son. How much more then owe we them our worldly
pelf to maintain and relieve them? Have they by their ministry procured our
spiritual life, and shall not we provide for their natural life? Religion,
right and reason claim it, and require it of us. The Lord has ordained that
they 1 Cor. 9 13.14.
which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. They which wait at the
altar, are partakers with the Altar: and they which minister about holy things,
eat of the things of the Temple. Luk 10.7 Mat. 10.10
The Labourer is worthy of his wages: The workman is worthy of his meat. The
Oxes mouth that Deuteronomy. 25 4.
treads out the corn, must not be muzled. He that planteth a Vineyard, is
worthy to eat of the grapes: he that keeps the Vine, may drink of the wine:
1. Cor. 9.7.
and he that keeps the stock, may drink of the milk. Deuteronomy. 12 19.
Beware (says God) that thou forsake not the Leuite so long as thou shall live
on the earth. Much less then are the Ministers of the Gospel to be forsaken.
For their ministry is far more excellent. Gal. 6.6.
Let him (says Paul) that is taught in the word, make him that has taught
him, partaker of all his goods. It is a precept and not a bare permission. If
they have sown to us 1. Cor. 9
spiritual things, is it a great matter if they reap our carnal things? If
they bring us to the pleasures of heaven, is it much for us to bring them of
the profits of the earth? If they lead us the way into Canaan, and conduct us
into the land of promise, the land of the living, a paradise of perpetual
pleasures, and pleasing perpetuity, what a matter is it, if we maintain them,
whi^es we walk and wander with them in the wilderness? If they provide for our
souls, why should not we provide for their bodies? If we must Gal. 6.1^
do good to all men, how much more to our Ministers, by who^ we are brought 1.
Cor 3.5.
to believe, by whom we have been converted from our sins to serve that God
that made us, that Lord that saved us, and that spirit which does revive and
fine us? Chrysostom would that Ministers should have necessary maintenance,
Iu* 1. ad Fin.
that they might work spiritual things, and have no (distractiue) regard of
secular affairs. And he says also: A necess^ry living ought plentifully to be
ministered unto the Teachers, lest they should be discomfited, and that they
might not deprive themselves and others of great things by being busied about
the smallest. They have great labors (says Latimer) and therefore they ought
to hauge good livings. Paul 1. Tim. 3.2.
would have them hospital and harborous: and therefore it is fit that they
should have good maintenance, whereby they may show hospitality, and procure
the love of the poor by alms deeds, and courteous entertainment. Here then
two sorts of men are to be reproved. First, they that will Tenaces.
part from little or nothing toward the maintenance of the ministry. Four
hundred false 1. King. 18.19.
Prophets were provided for at Iezebels table. And the age before us could
maintain many Monks and Friars, and other superstitious persons, which
preached and prophesied heretical and hellish doctrine, proceeding wholly from
the forge of man's brain, and coined upon the anuill of their own invention*
yet the most in these days can with patience endure the learned and faithful
Ministers of Christ Jesus to want sufficient maintenance. The very slaves of
Antichrist fared, and yet fare in some countries, far better then the most
faithful servants of Christ do amongst us in many places of this Island. Yea
that may be as truly said in this present case, of many thousands in this
Nation, which Job. 24.11.
Job speaks of some in his time: that they which make oil between their
walls, and tread their wine-presses, do suffer thirst. Lamentable is the
poverty of many painful and godly Ministers that tread the wine press of Gods
word unto the people continually, and afford the^ the oily drops of the
Gospel, and the wine of divine instructions, counsels, comforts and
exhortations. I say, lamentable is their want and without compassion beheld of
many. But their reward is with God, their labors shall retire into their own
bosoms, God will show the greater mercy to them in the end. Many men are
frank and lavish in keeping Vt nil asperius nddam
Hawks, Hounds, Horses, and in maintaining Players, and making belly-cheere,
and vain attire, but as sordide and illiberall, when they should impart any
thing toward the maintenance of their Pastors and Preachers. Which argues
their base, thanklesse, and earthly disposition: If the law (for the Lord they
regard not) did not constrain many men to give, their devotion is so cold, and
their ingratitude so great, as that they would contribute nothing at all this
way, except it were for very shame, or for some by-respect. So hard frozen are
their hearts, and so fast wedged into the earth. Whereas common reason shows,
that they which spend themselves like lamps to give light to others, and
labor for the common good of all, should be maintained of the common stock by
all. Ministers are commanded to 1. Tim. ^.13.15.
give attendance to reading, teaching, and exhorting, and to addict themselves
unto them; therefore it is convenient, yea and necessary that all (which are
able) do give toward their competent and all-sufficient maintenance, that so
they may employ themselves in their calling without distraction, and husband
their talents to the greatest advantage of their Master.

Secondly, those are to be condemded, which do Rapapes.
rob the Church of her right, and do sacrilegiously (whether it be by fraud or
by force) deteine from, or deprive their Ministers of that, which in all equity
is due unto them, even by the Law. There are too many ready now to say with
those in the Psalm; Psa. 8^.12.
Come, and let us take the houses of God in possession. Men were not of old so
ready to give to the Church, but they are as ready now to ache away.

The Israelites were so liberal in contributing toward the Sanctuary, as that
Ex. 36.9
Moses caused a Proclamation to be made to stay the people from offering.

But now men are so forward to defraud their Ministers, and to strip them of
their due, and so backward to contribute unto the maintenance of the worship of
God, as that there had need be more then a proclamation to stay the
forwardness of the one, and to remove the backwardness of the other. And many
never reckon of it, if they can sl^^y beguile them of their tithes, and n^^ be
perceived; forgetting that God Hebr. 4. P^o. 15 1^ 2 Cor. 5 10. Pro. 21.15
beholds them, and sees whatsoever is done in corners, and will bring them to
an account, and render unto them according to their deeds.

But destruction shall be unto the workers of iniquity, how cunningly soever
they carry the matter before me^. The good Call. 4.15.
Galatians could have found in their hearts to have plucked their very eyes out
of their heads, and to have given them to Paul, if they would have done him any
good. But alas, alas, the devotion and love of this age is so extreme cold, as
that we will hardly part with that, which we are tied to part with; yea a many
of us are ready to pull from them, what we can pull by hook or by crook. It
is written of Hanun that he took 2. Sam. 10.4.
David's Messengers, and shaued off half their beardes, and cut off their
garments in the middle.

So their are a number of sacrilegious wretches in this rotten age of the
world, which pill the Church, and curtaile the maintenance of their Ministers,
and are even heart-glad, when they can prove a custom, how corrupt and
senseless soever it be, to hold back their tithes. Which argues a spiritual
dropsy, or else a baseness of mind, and intolerable unthankfulness for the
Gospel. The Lord by Malachy told the Israelites, that they Mal. 3.8.9.
spoiled him, because they paid not their tithes truly: yea he told the^
further, that they were cursed with a curse for so doing. Are not the faithful
Ministers of the Gospel as worthy to be maintained, as the Priests were under
the Law? Are they not as worthy of plentiful provision, as they were? Yea no
doubt in many respects. How then do they spoil and rob the Lord, that do not
pay these tithes and offerings truly unto his Ministers, but deceiptfully and
untruly? Let them look unto it, and that before it be too late. Let them
either forsake their sacrilege, or expect his curse. For without doubt the
Lord does abhor such wickedness: and he will not always wink at it. The
Lord is not so slow, but he is as sure. Lento gradu ad vindictam ira diuina
procedit, sed tarditatem supplicij grauitate iudicii compensat. Though it be
long before he strike, yet he strikes home, when he does strike, and
recompenseth his slacknesse with his sharpness It will not serve their turns,
when they have committed sacrilege, to wipe their mouths with the adulterous
woman, and to say; Pro. 30.20.
We have not committed iniquity: or to think with those in the Psalm. 10 11
Psalm; God hides away his face and will never see. For the Lord regards
all that is done. Pro. 5.21.
His eyes are upon all the ways of men. Psalm. 11.4.5
His throne (says David) is in the heaven: his eyes will consider: his
eie-liddes will try the children of men. The wicked, and him that loves
iniquity does his soul abhor. Wherefore (brethren) be now admonished with
all lowliness and truth of heart to reverence your Ministers, to obey their
Ministry, to imitate their virtues, to countenance them, and pray for them.
And rob them not of that, which in conscience is their right: but rather
strain your selves that they may not lack, but have sufficient maintenance to
mainetaine their estates, to the credit of their calling, which is most
honorable and holy. And so doing you shall animate and incite them to walk
diligently in their office: you shall remove many troubles and impediments from
them: you shall adorn your high calling: you shall declare your love to the
Gospel, and your subjection to the Word: you shall stop the mouths of the
wicked, and show your selves unlike to them, and like to the godly devout of
former ages: you shall demonstrate your honor and honorable conceits of Gods
honorable and holy Ambassadors: finally, you shall draw others on to do their
duty by your Christian ensample; and so glorifying God, you shall be glorified
of God with that glory, which of his grace in Christ he has from all eternity
prepared for his Saints.

This shall suffice for the office and honor of Ministers. It remains now to
speak of the office and honor of the People, contained in the words ensuing.

Trin-vni Deo gloria.
1. COR. 3.9. Ye are Gods Husbandry: ye are Gods Building.
CHAP. 1. The words are explained: and their sense declared.
THE Apostle having showed the Corinthians what he was, with the rest of his
fellow-ministers, he does in these words show them also what they themselves
are. Now before we weigh anchor, and launch forward with our vessels into the
deep, it will be first convenient for us to break the ice and by the
explication of the words to prepare a way for the collection and application of
the doctrines.

Ye) Even ye Corinthians, ye that are not Jews, but Gentiles; yea ye that are
ouer-carnall, and something factious; of what sex or sort soever.

Are) Ye are now Gods Husbandry, and Building, notwithstanding those
infirmities which I reprehend and dislike in you.

Gods) The word (God) used properly, is sometimes taken personally; as in John
3.16. for God the Father: in the Acts 20.28. for God the Son: and in the
Acts. 5.3.4. for God the holy Ghost. Which three, are 1. Ioh. 5.7.
not three several Gods, but three distinct persons subsisting in the Godhead.
For Deuteronomy. 6.4. 1. Cor. 8.4
there is but one God in number. And sometimes also this word is taken
essentially: as in John. 4.24. And so it may be very fitly taken (as I think)
in this text. And so by God, we may understand all the three persons, to whom
the Godhead does in Vt res suis modis, qui sunt in re.
common without inequality, division, and transmutation, appertain. For the
Scriptures plainly teach, that we are an house belonging to them all. We are
the Fathers house, Ephesians. 2.22. And the Sons house, Ephesians. 3.17. Heb. 3.6. And
the holy Ghosts. 1. Cor. 3.16. and 6.19. All things whatsoever (that are not
merely wicked) belong unto them equally, by virtue of their absolute Lordship
and dominion over all.

Husbandry) The original word ((...)) translated hu^bandry, does properly
signify a field, or piece of ground tilled, husbanded, and wrought upon: or a
field, on which the husbandman bestows his work and labor. Building) the
Greek word ((...)) translated Building has three distinct significations in
the new Testament. First, it signifies the action of building in a
metaphorical signification, as in the 2. Cor. 10.8. And in Ephesians. 4.12.
Secondly, it signifies the things which do build, or edify spiritually, as in
the 1. Cor. 14.3. Thirdly, it signifies a thing builded, or an house: as in
Mat. 24.1. And in the 2. Cor. 5.1. And so the word is used in this text.

Now the Church of God (for this speech of Paul is not exclusive, but includes
all faithful Christians in all other Churches besides, as appears by
comparing this place with Ephesians. 2.21. and 1. Tim. 3.15. and 1. Pet. 2.5.) I
say the Church of God may be compared to a field and H^use, for the proportion
and congruity that is betwixt them; which is manifold.





by some man. For no field can make it self; especially no plowed-field There
must needs be a man to make it, and to appoint it to such an use. And as Hebr.
3.4.
every house is built by some body; so is the Church. God has taken her in out
of the vast wilderness of this wicked world, he has imparked her with the
pales of his mercy, he does fence her in with the quickset hedge of his
gracious protection, he does separate her from al other grounds and make her
the field and garden of his own delight. And the same God also does build and
rear her up to be an house or temple. The Psalm. 147.2.3.
Lord (says the Psalmist) does build up Jerusalem, and gather together the
dispersed of Israel He heals those that are broken in heart, and binds up
their sores. As by him we receive the life of nature: so likewise by him we do
receive the life of grace. He breaths into us the breath of life corporal and
spiritual. He is the fountain of all living waters, and the root, from which
the iuce of true Christian life does issue, and proceed unto us. And as we are
made men by him: so are we also made new men; and therefore Paul calls us his
Ephe. 2.10.
workmanship. For he does hew us out of the rock Christ Jesus. He cuts us and
squares us out. He reares us up, and ioynes us together by the bond of his
Spirit, and by the links of true love, as it were with pins and with lime, and
soulder. And whosoever builds, if he prosper not their building with the
presence and proppe of his grace, their building is in vain. Nothing can
stand: all will fall, and tumble down again like the stone of Sisyphus, or
like a wall that is dawbed with untempered mortar. Therefore we pray with 1.
Pet. 5 10.
Peter, that he would make you perfect, confirm, strengthen, stablish, and
((...)) found you,

of the rest. Even so the Church is husba^ded, builded and kept by many.

Many labor within her and about her. God is the principal Agent. He calls the
rest: he directs and rules them. He puts his word into their mouths, and
prospers it, as it pleases him. It is his Arm, whereby he does translate men
out of the kingdom of satan into the kingdom of his Son, out of darkness
into light, out of Aegipt into Canaan, out of hell into heaven. It is his
Hammer whereby he does beat down our pride: it is as a Wedge, whereby he does
cleave us: his Axe, which hewes us: and his Rule, which measures us. It is also
his Plough, which breaks us up: it is his Cylinder, which smoothes us, and the
seed which he sowes in us. And all the good success proceeds from him. Not
unto us, not unto us, but unto God belongs this honor. It is he that Phil. 2.13
works both the will and the deed: it is he that 1. Cor. 3.6. Phil. 1.6.
gives the increase: it is he that begins and makes an end.

The Ministers of the Word and Sacraments, are his Instruments or servants, Ephesians
4.11.12.
ordained for the reparation of the Sancts, and for the edification of Christ's
body: that is to say, to work in Gods house and vineyard, to labor in his
Church, that his people may be converted, comforted, confirmed and instructed,
till they attain to the perfection of grace, and fullness of glory with their
Head and Husband Christ Jesus in the heavens. In which respect the Apostle tells
the Corinthians, that they are 1. Cor. 9.2.
his work in the Lord.

Fifthly, every house is founded upon some foundation: so is the Church of God.
And her foundation is twofold: principal, and ministerial. The principal 1.
Cor. 3.11.
foundation is Christ: and therefore he is called (Lapis fundamenti) the Isa.
28.16
foundation stone, and ((...)) the 1. Pet. 2.6
Bottom-corner stone. He is that Mat. 16 18.
Rock, whereupon the Church is built. He is the author of our goodness, and
the procurer of all our glory. He has merited for us the pardon of sin, the
perfection of happiness, and the perpetuity of all our welfare. And as God did
create us Ioh. 1.3.
by him in regard of nature, so he does create us again Ephesians. 2.10
in him in regard of grace, and will one day finish us fully for him in regard
of glory. Here is a good foundation; a foundation that is firm and and not
false, sound and not sandy. Whatsoever is built upon this foundation firmly,
shall never be cast down wholly. The top shall fare the better for the bottom.

The Ministerial foundation is the preaching of the doctrine of salvation,
contained in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles. Therefore Paul says
that we are built Ephesians. 2.20
upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets. And Saint Ambrose says
accordingly, that the Old and New Testament is the foundation of the Church.
And hence it is that the city of God is said to have Reu. 21.14.
twelve foundations, in which were written the twelve names of the Apostles of
the Lamb. And thus Peter, James and John, and all faithful Pastors may be
called Pillars of the Church, to wit, so farrre forth as by their Ministry
they do sustain and maintain the Church of God, and the true profession of
the true faith: Christ Jesus only being the Ephesians. 2.22
chief corner stone, who only does properly and energetically support and
hold up all the building.

Bees about her. And as we see chafe and wheat mingled together in one heap,
and both fish and frogs enclosed in one net: so shall her members be mingled
together with the wicked so long as she makes her aboade on the earth, so long
as she lives in the Wilderness, and until she receive her inheritance in
celestial Canaan.

has an inhabitant, and one to who^ she does belong, and for whose use she
serves. So the Church has her use, owner, and inhabitant. 1. Cor. 3 16.
Kno^ ye not (says Paul) that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of
God dwells in you? Yea 2. Cor. 6.16.
you are the Temple of the living God; as God said; I will dwell in them, and
walk in them. The Lord is her owner and inhabitant: he has ordained her for
his own glory: and for his use she serves.

gate and the door, by whom we enter into the Church: and if we do not enter
in by him, we shall never enter so into it, as to be truly of it. The Gospel
of Christ is an ordinary outward means or way, by which we are brought into
the Church and made her members: and Baptism is a sign of our entrance and
admission into it.



the cost and labor which is spent upon them. There is not the same influence
of heavenly graces descending from above, upon them all alike. The Sun of
righteousness does not send down the beams of his effectual operation equally
upon them. And the great Husbandman bestows not his pains alike upon them
all. In like manner the Church of God as a sumptuous and stately building,
receives and entertaineth many into her. God is the principal and commander
of all the rest. And all the faithful (which being simply by themselves
considered are exceeding many) are his household Ephe. 2.19.
servants, which abide and live in her, and are all maintained and provided for
by the Lord that great house-holder. And as houses are ordinarily made of
diverse things: or if there be an house built all of stones, yet one stone
differs from another, either in quantity or in quality, color or situation.
So in Gods house which is made of 1 Pet. 2.5
living stones, one stone one part, differs from another. There is a
fundamental and chief corner stone, which is Jesus Christ, that 1 Pet. 2.4
Living stone; even Life it self, and the Wel-spring of all our life: and
there are also upper stones, which are of less importance. And of these some
are better colored then others: some are larger, and some are lesser: some
exceed others in grace, and shall excel them also in glory. Again, some are
cut out of the Rock before others, and put into the building first: and many
which the builder medleth with last, may be made more comely and glorious, then
some others which were hewed out, and set in the building before them. For all
their preferment, all their comeliness is at the free disposement of their
Architect.

does call and take us to be a field unto himself, out of the barren heath,
and wide wilderness of this sinful world; and before he sowes the seeds of
his graces, and sets the pleasant plants of true christian virtues in our
hearts, he prepares and fits us ordinarily by the ministry of his word,
joining therewith sometimes also crosses and aflictions, and some other things,
which he has prouidently prepared and wisely directs for our good. And even
as wood, stone, brick, lime, and such like things* as concur to the making of
an house, must be fitted and laid together, before the house can be made: so
the Lord does prepare and unite the faithful together, that they may be one
indiuidual and entire building. And until they be all collected and compacted
fast together, Gods house shall not be fully finished. And as stones in an
house cannot without mortar be laid fast and firm: neither can the posts, the
beams, and spires be well and surely joined without pinnes, nails, or bars
of iron: even so the living stones of Gods house, the true members of his
Church, cannot be closely coupled, and strongly knit together without true
Christian charity, and his most holy Spirit. Believers. And as all the parts of
a field, the variety of herbs, the diversity of fruits, and the comely orders
and ranks of plants, do greatly commend and set forth the field in which they
are: even so the Church which is Gods field, is greatly beautified and adorned
through the multitude and great diversity of her members, which are (as it
were) sundry sorts of sets or herbs; as also by reason of that comely order,
which he (the Husbandman) has set among them.

it by degrees at several times, in that order and manner, which in his wisdom
he sees most beseeming, and which before all time he did with himself
decree. In like manner also, as no house is built up all at once, but by
degrees: so is the Church in general, and we that are her particular members,
erected and perfited by peecemeale, and in process of time. And we do not
attain to our full perfection whiles we live here. Eccles. 7.22.
For there is no man just in the earth, that does good, and sins not. The
clearest river has some mudde in the bottom, and the healthiest body has
some corruption in it. So the purest soul is notwithout some sin. Regeneration
does not in this life wholly extirp original corruption, but only weaken,
abate, and wast it by degrees. For while we live, sin shall not die: but death
that received life from sin, must be the death of sin. Our sins and we shall
dye together. And when the thread of this momentany life is cut asunder by
death, and a dissolution or diuorcement made betwixt those two parts of man,
which God did at the first unite and wedde, to make a perfect man; the one must
for a time return unto the earth, and the other shall be taken up into heaven,
thereto receive both perfect grace and perfect glory: and when God shall after a
time repeal and end the separation, and reunite them, then they shall jointly
receive both holiness and happiness in all perfection without future alteration,
in the paradise of God, Psa. 16.11
In whose presence there is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are
pleasures for evermore.

It is true indeed that we are perfect in this life in two respects. First, in
regard of the perfection of parts, because (like in^ants) we have all the parts
of a christian: God has given us all his graces: though we have the^ not in
their full perfection. And secondly we are reputed perfect in Christ our head,
being clothed with his perfect righteousness. And for this cause the Cant. 4.1
Cant. 6.3.8 9.
Church is said to be fair, beautiful, comely, undefiled, and pure; to wit,
because she is invested in the spotless and pure robes of Christ's absolute and
most meritorious holiness and obedience, which is imputed to her, and accepted
as her own. But if we speak of the perfection of sanctification or of
inherent holiness, we must needs confess that we are not perfect, but that
we arise like a house by degrees, and do Ephesians. 2 21.
grow till we be complete. Which shall not be till death, which ends the
battle betwixt the flesh and the spirit, utterly consuming all the corruptions
of our corrupted nature.

Psa. 94.5
Psalmist says, that the wicked smite down Gods people, and trouble his
heritage. And Saul Act 8, 3.
before his conversion is said to waste the Church of God. And there is in ou^
hearts (that are her children) many sins, which are not as yet exi^e^, being
noisome unto us, as weed and stones are to a corn field. And again, as there
is no house, that is not obnoxious to some danger, either by violence of fire,
or by the inundati^n of waters, or through inflammation by lightning, or else
by reason of impetuous winds and stormy tempests, besides the subjection,
wherein it is of it self to fall to ruin, being composed of things that are
corruptible. Even so Gods Church on earth, is subject in herself (being Cant.
1.4
black with sin, and vnmundified here in part) to ruins and rotten errors,
both mental and moral. Besides, she is subject to many perils from without.
Satan with his instruments play their parts against her continually. Sometimes
he sallies upon her by force like a Lion, raising up cruel tyrants to
persecute and vex her. Sometimes he sets upon her by fraud like a Leopard,
approaching to her either with his Syrenian songs, or with his Crocodilian
tears, or with a treacherous kiss, as Judas did unto his Master; assaulting
her with the subtle and sophistical inventions and engines of Heretics, and
attempting to violate her chastity by the pleasing allurements, and witching
enchantments of the world; who with her whorish eye, and two naked painted
breasts of pleasures and profits, does seek to inueigle our hearts and make us
yield unto her.

Thus Satan meets her upon the stage of this world, and enters combat with
her, using all means to prevail against her; sometimes pursuing her with the
floods of persecution, sometimes kindling in her the coals of contention,
sometimes seeking to overcome her with secret machinations, and with fair
speeches, and fraudulent persuasions, and sometimes also striving to daunt her
with the dreadful menacies of the great men of the world, and never cease
practicing against her; but all in vain. For Mat. 16, 18
the gates of hell (says Christ) even satan and all his strength and
stratagems shall not prevail against her to vanquish and subdue her.



in it: even so God does set the plants of his Spirit, and sow the seeds of his
sanctifying graces in our hearts which otherwise would never spring up within
us of themselves, and by the virtue of our nature.

Cant. 4.16
blow upon her, that her spices and her fruits might flow out and come forth
abundantly. In like manner also, as every house stands in need of some shilter
and reparation, so does Gods house. For we lie open to wind and water, and have
the ruins of our depraved nature still remaining in us. And as the Householder
brings many thing into his house which he finds not in it: even so the Lord
inspireth many good things into our hearts, which he finds not in us, and which
we want by nature. And as some things may be in the house which are not of the
house, as rats, mise, weasils, yea and treacherous and theeuish persons. Even
so (if we consider the outward appearance and name of the Church, which is
Gods house) some may be in it, which belong not to it, and are not truly of it.
Therefore Ioh. 2.1^.
John says; they went out of us, but they were not of us. Antichrist that man
of sin and son of perdition, sits in the Temple of God, but not as a member
of it, but as a cruel and proud Tyrant, tyrannizing in it; as a Thief in a
true man's house, as a Pyrate in a Merchants ship, or as a Wolf and Fox in a
sheepfold. And in a word, as some things may be brought into a field, and
planted in it, which as yet are not: and as some may be brought into an house
and made servants in it, which for the present are not: even so some may be
brought into Gods Church, which is his pleasant field and the palace of his
pleasure, and may be made her true members and faithful houshold-seruants,
which as yet wander abroad and are not effectually called home. And thus we
see the resemblance, that is betwixt a field or house, and the Church of God.
Now she is called Gods Husbandry and Gods building, because he has taken her
to himself and enclosed her, he does husband and order her: he does build and
repair her: he does possess and keep her: and because he does inhabit and
work within her. And albeit she may be fitly compared to a field and house in
the forenamed respects, yet in other regards she is unlike unto them. For God
is her only Lord and owner, and for his honor only he has ordained her. And
whereas houses and fields are bought with money, she was purchased neither by
gold nor silver, but by the Act. 20.28. 1 Pet. 1.18 19.
blood of God, even by the precious heart-bloud of that immaculate Lamb Christ
Jesus, who is true Rom 9.5.
God and true 1 Timothy 2.5
Man in one perfect person. Thirdly, all houses and fields are subject to utter
and final desolation. And the day shall come, wherein the 2, Pet. 3.10.
earth, and all the works therein shall be consumed with fire. But the Church
of GOD shall stand for ever. And when all the glory of the world shall vanish
quite away, like a flash of fire: and when all her desperate, malicious and
irreconciliable enemies shall utterly be destroyed, then shall she shine as the
Sun, and obtain her perfect glory, and live for ever with the Lord in all
ease and happiness, free from all sinful and earthly miseries whatsoever.
Fourthly, whereas all other fields and houses are material, outward and
earthly: this field and this house is mystical, celestial and 1 Pet 2, 5,
spiritual: and may be so called in all these regards ensuing. First because
the Spirit of God does husband her and dwell in her. Secondly, because her
whole frame is spiritual, and her chiefest ornaments are inward and invisible.
Psa 45.13
The kings daughter is all glorious within, says the Psalm.

Thirdly, the means which God uses for her building, repairing, trimming,
flourishing and c^^tinuing, are not earthly but spiritual, and of a nature far
differing from worldly helps, and humane inventions. Fourthly, the service and
worship, which ought to be performed in her, is spiritual. And lastly all the
good works, which she does, are spiritual. All the good works, which we, or
any of her faithful members do perform, are merely good so far forth as they
do proceed from the Spirit of God, who is goodness it self, and the author of
all our goodness. And the evil which is in them comes from our own
homebred corruptition, which is not in this life cleansed clean away, unless
it be because it is forgiven us, and not imputed to us.

And to conclude; the Church is said to be a field and an house, not fields and
houses. For the Church is but one body, one perfect house, and one entire and
absolute field. She has but one Lord, one Architect, one Redeemer, one
absolute Husbandman and Inhabitant, one common salvation, one religion, one
Head, one Husband, one way to heaven; according to that of S Ephesians. 4.4.
Paul, There is one body, one Spirit, one faith, one Lord, one baptism, one
God and father. And this has also been the doctrine of former ages.

Theodoretus says (quest. 44. in Number.) As the Unicorn has one horn, so the
people truly religious adoreth one only God. And for the unity of her head, In
Ps. paeni^
Gregory says, that The whole holy universal Church is on Body, set under
Christ Jesus as her Head. For Christ with his whole Church, both militant and
triumphant, is one person. Nazianzene says; Orat. in d. Eu, Vbi supra.
There is one Christ, one head of the Church. Thirdly, concerning the unity of
the Spirit, Gregory says that, As there is one soul, which does quicken the
diverse members of the body, so one Holy Spirit does quicken and illustrate the
whole Church. Fourthly for the unity of faith and outward confession, Eucherius
says that, In l. Reg.
As a bundle is bound with bands, so all the company of the Saints are bound
together with one and the same faith, hope and charity, and compassed with one
muniment of divine protection.

And as Leo teaches, Sermon. 3. de ^^iun. 7. ^ens.
there is one orison, and one confession of the whole Church. Finally touching
the unity of Baptism; There is one faith (says Hierome) and one Baptism. And
so withal for the unity of her God, Justinius says, There is one true God of
all, which is acknowledged in the Father, Son, and holy Spirit. Our faith
(says Cyril) receives no number of Gods, ^n cap. 4. ad Ephe.
but there is one God the Father, and to the same unity pertains the Son
and the Holy Ghost.

Having now opened the words, and given the sense, let us see what lessons we
may learn out of them.

CHAP. 2. The Church of God is Gods house and husbandry.
Believers) is Gods House and Husbandry. This is plain by the text, as also by
other like places of Scripture. 1 Cor. 3.16.
Know ye not (says Paul) that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of
God dwells in you? And speaking to Timothy he says; 1 Timothy 3 14.15.
These things I write, that thou may know how to behave thy sefe in Gods
House, which is the Church of the living God. And plain reason shows as
much. For it is not her own: she is not the Lady of her self. 1 Cor. 6 19.
Ye are not your own (says Paul) for ye are bought for a price. Neither is
the Church a tenement or possession belonging to any Angel, or to any Man,
excepting only the man Christ who is the Mal. 3.1. Ephesians. 5.23 Jude. 4,
Angel of the covenant and her only Lord and Head. She is not the field of the
sluggard, which Pro. 24.30.
Solomon speaks of. She is not the house of wickedness and sin. For Ephesians.
5.26. Reu. 1.5.
Christ gave himself for her, that he might make her holy, and purge her from
her sins with his blood. Therefore he says unto her; Cant, 4.7.
Thou art all fair, my love, and there is no spot in thee. Neither is she the
house and field of the Devil. For Christ has purchased her Ephesians, 5.27.
unto himself. Therefore she says; My Cant, 2, 16, and 7, 10,
well-beloved (meaning Christ) is mine, and I am his. I am my welbeloueds, and
his desire is toward me. And Christ speaking unto her* calls her his Cant, 4, 1
9,
love, his sister* and his spouse; therefore surely the Liuell has no interest
in her, and no title to her. The conclusion then remains firm, that as the
Temple of Jerusalem was dedicated to be an house unto the Lord alone, even so
the Church is built and consecrated unto him only, that she may be his House to
dwell in, and as a field to husband and dispose of, as he in his wisdom sees
most convenient. Thus much for the doctrine, let us now se how we may apply it
for our benefit and edification.

CHAP. 3. Sundry uses are made of the consideration of these two titles
together.
THe uses, which we ought to make of the former doctrine are of two sorts Some
arise from the consideration of these 2 titles (given to the Church) together:
and some from them being considered apart by themselves. Use. 1.
Of the former company are these that follow.

First, we have here one of the roialties and royal privileges of the
faithful. For they, and they only (to speak properly) are Gods house and
husbandry. For the Father has elected them only: the Son has redeemed them
only: the holy Ghost does regenerate them only. God (the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost) does dwell in them only, in regard of the presence of his special
grace, and efficatious operation unto eternal life. For as concerning the
Reprobates, they are the very sinks of sin, the dens of the Devil, and the
quagmyres of iniquity, Pro. 16.4
predestined to eternal destruction. Some of them (I confess) may think
themselves to be of Gods house, and to belong unto his field: but their
imagination is like the fond and false conceit of some Melancholique persons,
that have thought their bodies to have been made of glass, and that every
fair house was theirs, which they passed by. Yea they may persuade themselves
so thereof, as that they may conceive a kind of joy therefore in their hearts,
and yet for all they are deceived. Some that have suddenly fallen into a swoone
have imagined that they saw goodly sights: and many frantic persons will sing
and hallo, as if they were in a very good condition whereas indeed their case
is pitiful. Even so some of the Reprobate may fall into such a fit of
spiritual swoone and fantastic frenzy of the mind, as that they may both
think better of their estates then they are indeed, and rejoice also within
themselves, as if they were right good men and happy; being nevertheless in
truth the very Refuse of mankind, the Objects of Gods wrath, and (as it were)
the Center of his judgments. Yea further they may so carry themselves
outwardly, as that they may seem unto men (that do not see the heart) the
true members of the Church, and as plants in Gods fi^ld. But blazing stars
are not true stars, but fading meteores: a foot of wood is not a foot indeed:
and painted fire is not fire. Even so what show soever they make, yet are they
not indeed her members, they are not GODS plants indeed. They may be in Gods
house, but they are not of Gods house: they may be in his field, but they are
not of his field. Goats and sheep may be together in one fold, though they be
not of one flock. Cockle and good come may be in one Barn; Thieves and True
men may be in one field: strangers and servants, guests and children in one
house. And all is not that which it seems to be. All is not grass that
looks green, nor all blood that is red. Satan can transform himself into
an Angel of light: 2 Cor. 11.14
all is not gold that glisters: hypocrites may seem religious, and men of
woluish dispositions can for need walk like sheep, in sheepe-skins. When the
great Goldsmiths shall come to try them with his Touchstone, he will find
them copper, and not good gold. When the winds shall blow hard against them,
when the floods shall come and dash against them, they shall fall flat down
to the ground, because they are not as living stones founded upon the rock
Christ, but weakly built upon a weak and sandy foundation. And a day will come
when the Husbandman will view his field, and will separate the corn of his
own sowing (and carry it home into his barn) from the tares of the enemy, how
fair and fresh soever they seem to be, and will bind them in a bundle, and
cast them into the fire.

Now this prerogative is not merely tit^lar and ve^ball, but very commodious,
comfortable and excellent. For Christ Cant. 8.13.
dwells in this field: the Spirit of God dwells in this house Isa* 33.24
and they that dwell therein shall have their iniquity forgiven. And whosoever
are of this house, of this field, shall continue so for ever. For the Ier. 32.4
covenant of God made with them is everlasting. The Romans 11 29.
gifts and the calling of God are given without repentance: and he will 1 Pe^.
1.5
preserve and guard them by his power through faith unto salvation. And their
mother also, Gal. 4, 2^
which is the Church, shall always be the palace and paradise of his delight.
He will carry her upon his back like an Eagle, he will shadow her with the
wings of his grace, and will continue constant in his love for ever. For his
Ier. 31.3 Psa. 136.1,
love unto her is everlasting, and his mercy endures for ever.

Secondly, Use 2.
seeing the Church is Gods House and Husbandry, she must acknowledge no Lord,
no Head, no King but God. Her obedience, her homage, her loyalty, her virginity
belongs to him, as to her sovereign Lord and only absolute Husband. She is
not her own; therefore she must glorify God, to whom of right she does
pertain.

Thirdly, Use 3.
Ministers ought to be the more diligent, faithful and alacrious in the
execution of their function. For the labor which they take, and the pains
they do bestow, are bestowed upon Gods House, upon Gods plowed-field. They
labor not in men's fields, not in the house of men, but in the house and field
of almighty God (who is able to recompense the faithful, and to punish the
unfaithful:) therefore they should be the more careful, circumspect and
laborious in their calling, taking heed what seed they sow, what plants they
set, and both what, and how they build.

Use 4.
Fourthly, seeing the Church of God is his field and house, we ought all to
labor to be assured that we are of it. For out of it there is no salvation.
And when we are in it, we must keep our selves in it, and not straggle out and
leave it. Men take grear delight to dwell in fair houses, and to walk in
pleasant fields. The Church of God is a goodly house, and a pleasant and green
field. Cant. 1.15
My well-beloved, behold, thou art fair and pleasant: also our bed is green:
the beams of our house are cedars. Cant. 4.10. and 8.13
Christ delights and dwells in her. Let us therefore like her, and love to
live within her. They that leave her, leave him. For he is her Husband and
Inhabitant: therefore she calls him her Can^. 7.11
Welbeloved: and he calls her his Spouse: Cant. 4.12.
My spouse is a garden enclosed. And she crying out unto him says thus: Cant.
8.13. Cant. 4.15
O thou that dwell in the gardens. O fountain of the gardens, O well of
living waters! So then he which forsakes her, forsakes him, He which leaves
her, leaves his garden: and he which leaves him, leaves her fountain: even the
welspring of her life, and the scaturidge of all true comfort. Let us therefore
keep our selves within the borders of the Church, lest we walk in the valley
of death. We must needs be either in Gods Temple, or in the devils Synagogue:
either in Gods field or in the devils field. And whenever we see the face of
a true Church in any place, let us take heed that we do rend not our selus from
her, and leap out. For this were (so much as lay in us) to run out of Gods
field, and to run away from Christ, who frequenteth the Cant. 1.6.7.
flocks of his sheep, and delights to be in the assemblies of his people.
Let us therefore be wise, and not forsake the fellowship (or Heb 10.25. (...).
aggregation) that we have among our selves, as the manner of some is: but let
us exhort one another, and that so much the more, because ye see that the day
(of Christ's second coming) draws near. Jude makes it a property of those
that were fleshly and had not the Spirit (what show soever they made) to be
Jude, 19.
makers of sects; men of a schismatic and contradictorious spirit, that like
not the beaten way, but love to walk in a way by themselves, though it be full
of mud and mire.

Use 5.
Considering also that the Church is Gods house and husbandry, it were a work
beseeming the honor of Princes and all Potentates, in all their territories
and dominions to defend and foster her: that so they may verify that ancient
prophec^ recorded by the prophet Esaias, that Isa. 49.23
kings should be her nursing fathers, and that queens should be her nurces.
Yea it beseemes us all to be kind unto her, and to honor her. For she is our
mother. She is the house in which we are bred, and borne, and brought up. She
is the field in which we are planted and receive our growth. Men love the house
wherein they were borne, and trained first up, and the place in which they drew
their first breath, and led the beginning of their life. Let us therefore love
the Church of God: let us desire and seek her welfare. Psa, 122, 6 7.
Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: let them prosper that love thee. Peace be
within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces. Isa, 62, 7.
Give the Lord no rest till he repair Jerusalem the praise of the world. For
my brethren and neighbors sakes (says Psa. 122.^ 9.
David) I will wish thee now prosperity. Because of the house of the Lord our
God, I will procure thy wealth. Isa. 49.22.23
Behold (says the Lord) I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up
my standard to the people; and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and
thy daughters shall be carried upon the^r shoulders: kings and queens shall
worship thee, with their faces toward the earth, and lick up the dust of thy
feet. But we are of the G^ntiles: let us therefore in our several places
labor to make good this prophecy. We are all careful to keep our own fields
and houses in good case, and shall we neglect the Church, which is the Lords?
Shall we dwell in our seeled houses, and see his house lie wast without grief
of heart? We look to our own gardens and orchards; let us not therefore cast
off al care of Gods, but let us rather labor to the utmost of our power
(keeping us within the precinct of our calling) that they may flourish and
prosper in the world. And so doing we shall testify our love to God and his
Church: we shall show our selves to be true natural sons and not bastards:
servants and not slaves: faithful friends, and not fawning flatterers and
false-hearted foes.

Use 6.
Sixthly, seeing the Church is Gods field and house, we may be sure that God will
husband and repair her. He will till and dress her: he will pluck out her
weeds and make her fertile: he will manure, and water her with the first and
latter rain of his gracious benediction. He will cause the North Wind to blow
upon her, which shall purify the air about her, and pinch the luxuorious
humors within her, and cool the pride of her heart, and the excessive heat of
her spirit. He will also send out the South Wind to comfort her with his warm
blasts, and to water her with his sweet shewers, that she may be fresh and
fruitful. Psa 147.8
The Lord (says the Psalmist) covers the heaven with clouds, and prepares
rain for the earth, and makes the grass to grow upon the mountains. Even so
the Lord covers the Church with his love, he causes the clouds to break, he
powers down the rain of his blessing upon her; he moystens her with the dew
of heaven, and makes his graces to sprout up and flourish within her. Yea he
makes her (like dry ground) to thirst after the waters of life: and teaches
her to cry out and say; Cant. 4.19.
Arise O North, and come O South, and blow upon my garden, that the spices
thereof may flow out. And for so much as she is his house, we may know for
certain, that he will in time remove inbred ruins and rottenness, and will
repair and polish her, til he have made her perfect and glorious in all
respects. And albeit he do often suffer her faithful and true members to bring
forth the weeds of sin, and to fall into the ruins of wickedness; yet it is
not through his negligence and oblivion, or bcause he has cast them off: but
it is to teach them to distaste their pride, and to confess that they can
easily fall of themselves, but are unable to stand, or rise up without him. The
husbandman sometimes lets his ground lie as if he had forsaken it, and can be
for a time content to see it grown with weeds. But he has a purpose to break
it up with his plough, and to bestow more cost upon it, that it may be more
fruitful, then before. He will not see it ouer-grown with weeds: he will not
permit the^ to suck out the heart, and to make it altogether barre^* and good
for nothing. So likewise we see many men suffer their houses to decay, and for
a while to fall to ruin: but their intent is to build them fairer, and to make
them stronger then they were before. And thus God sometimes deals with his
faithful servants, as with David, Hezekiah, Peter and others. For he is tied
by no law to preserve any man longer then he list. And so great is his grace
unto us, as that if he suffer us to fall, yet he will not let us fall quite a
way, but will in due season restore and lift us up again. For Semel et semper,
Once and ever are all one with God: whom he has embraced once, he will embrace
Ier 32.40
for ever.

Moreover, Use 7.
considering that the Church is Gods house and husbandry, we may be sure that
he will patronize and protect her against heritiques, tyrants, and all that by
fraud or force do labor to subvert and wast her. Zeph. 3.17
The Lord thy God (says Zephany) in the midst of thee is mighty: he will
save, he will rejoice over thee with joy: he will quiet himself in his love.
Isa. 49.36
He will feed them that spoil thee, with their own flesh, and they shall be
drunken with their own blood. For the Lord is Ier. 3^.19
great in counsel, and mighty in work. His eyes are open upon all the ways
of the sons of men, to give to every one according to his ways, and according
to the fruit of his works. And Psa. 129.5
they that hate Sion, shall be all ashamed, and turned backward. But as the
mountains are about Jerusalem, ^sa. 125.2
so the Lord is about his people from henceforth and for ever. Whom shall we
then need to fear? What danger need we dread? For God Ioh. 10.29.
that is greater then all, is on our side: he is our shield and tower of
defense: and his al-seeing eye does watch continually for us. For he Psa. 121.4
that keeps Israel does neither slumber nor sleep. Are our enemies great and
mighty? The Lord is high Psa. 113.4 Psa. 147.5. Psa. 115.3.
above all nations, and his glory is above the heavens. Great is our Lord,; and
great is his power and he does whatsoever he will. Are they politic and
subtle? Fear not. God Job. 5.13,
takes the wise in their craftiness, and the counsel of the wicked is made
foolish. Their mischief shall return upon their own heads, and their cruelty
shall fall upon their own pates. For the Lord is omnipotent and his Psa. 147.5.
wisdom is infinite. He has pleasure in his people, and he will make the
meek Psa. 149.4.
glorious by deliverance. Are they watchful and laborious to work thy ruin? Be
not dismayed. For the Lord, that guardeth thee, will not slumber. The Psa.
121.3.5.
Lord is thy keeper: he is thy shadow at thy right hand. Do they menace and
trouble thee? Be not discouraged; for Psa. 34.15
the eyes of the Lord are upon thee. Great are the troubles of the righteous:
but the Lord diliuereth him out of al. 19.
But malice shall slay they wicked: and they that hate the righteous, shall
perish. 21.
Do they traduce and disgrace thee? Hearken unto me (says the Lord) ye Isa.
51.7.8 11.
that know righteousness, and in whose heart is my law. Fear ye not the
reproach of men: neither be ye afraid of their rebukes. For the moth shall eat
them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat the^ like wool^l I, even I am he
that comfort you. Who art thou, that thou should fear a mortal man, and
the son of man, which shall be made as grass? Yea but satan that roaring
and hungry Lion does assault thee, and seek to devour thee. Be nothing
daunted, for Christ Jesus, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, is stronger then he.
Reu. 1.14 15.
His eyes are as a flame of fire, able to discern his stratagems: his feet are
like unto brass, able to tread him down and tame him: and his good will is so
great unto us, as that Ioh. 10.28.
none shall pluck us from him, and destroy us. Are we disturbed with
temptations? Does the flesh contend against us? Do false teachers labor to
pervert us? Yet let us not leave our order, and leese our courage. For these
may war against us, but they shall not win: they may contend, but they shall
not conquer: they may disturb us, but they shall not de^urbe us. For God will
Cor. 1.8
confirm us unto the end: he will not suffer us to be Mat. 24.24.
seduced: he will not permit us to be tempted 1. Cor. 10 ^1.
above our power. Howsoever we may be weakened, yet he will not suffer us to be
wholly wasted, but with the temptation he will vouchsafe to give us an happy
issue. Premip^t^st Ecclesia, non opprimi: oppugnari potest, expugnari non
potest. The Church of God may be pressed, but it cannot be oppressed. Satan
may besiege her* but he cannot batter her to the ground, and sack her. He may
fight against her, but he cannot Mat. 16.18.
vanquish her. For the Lord will defend and guard her. He will never Heb. 13.5
leave her, nor forget her. Can a Isa 49.15.16.
woman forget her child, and not have compassion on the son of her womb?
Though they should forget, yet will not I forget thee. Behold I have graven
thee upon the palm of mine hands. I^^. 31.3 Isa. 49.8.
I have loved thee with an everlasting love, and I will preserve thee. Psa
146.1^.
The Lord shall reign for ever for the preservation of his Church. He has
laid her upon a firm foundation, and Psa. 14* 1^.
has made the bars of her gates strong. Careful and good husbands have a
special regard of their grounds and houses. We are Gods ground, we are his
house; and therefore we may persuade our selves that he has a very singular
care over us to preserve and save us. He is the 1 Timothy 4.10
Savior of all men* but especially of those that believe. He forsakes not his
Saints (says David) they Psa. 37.24.28.
shall be preserved for evermore. Though they fall, yet shall they not be cast
off, for the Lord puts under his hand to lift them up again. Men, when they
see their houses weak, and exposed to wind and weather, do use to underprop
them, and to plant trees about them to defend them. Even so undoubtedly the
Lord being privy to our weakness does support us with the props of his grace,
and does enuiron us with the tall and strong Cedars of his power. For Psa.
147.11.
he takes delight in them that fear him, and attend upon his mercy. He will
never turn from them to do them good. Ier. 33.11.
Yea (says the Lord) I will delight in them to do them good. We may not think
that God will be careless of his house, if forgetful man be careful of his.
In like manner also wise and thrifty husbands seeing their fields subject to be
wasted with cattle, and their corn to be trodden down and eaten up, do use to
compass them with pales or other fences, and to ouersee them. Even so the Lord
does enclose his Church, and ouersee her for her good, and is exceeding
viligant over her. He takes the Foxes, which mar his vines: he kills the
Boares: he drives out the beasts: he mendeth her hedges: he repaireth her
ditches. and has a special care that his corn, his vines, and plants be not
tooted up and spoiled. If men respect their fields so diligently, it were
horrible wickedness for any man to imagine that God will neglect his;
especially considering that he paid so dearly for it as he did, and
considering also he is able to keep it safe without toil or weariness, and
is not subject to forgetfulness.

Eighthly, Use. 8.
seeing the Church is Gods field and house, we ought in no case to wrong her
nor any of her members. For the injury that is offered unto her, does redound
unto him, and he accounts all the wrongs as done unto himself, which are
done by their enemies unto them. Isa. 63.9.
In all their troubles he is troubled: and Zach. 2.8
they that touch them (to do them harm) do touch the very apple of his eye. It
were a dishonest and wicked part in any man to spoil his neighbors field, or
to pull down or set fire on his house; what horrible wickedness then is it
for any man to fire Gods house, and to waste and make hauock in his field? If
1. Cor. 3.17.
any man shall destroy the Temple of God, him shall God destroy. For the Temple
of God (says Paul) is holy, which ye are. The Church of GOD is a city Isa.
62.12.
sought out, and not forsaken of the Lord. He has clothed her with the
garments of salvation, he has covered her with the robe of righteousness; and
as a bride does tire her self with her jewels, so does the Lord adorn her
with his graces, and put the golden chain of immortality about her neck. Now
dare thou oppose thy self against her, on whom God has bestowed so great
cost? Will thou malign her whom he does love, and in his love has chosen to
himself? Will the Isa. 60.16.
Lord make his Church an eternal glory, and shall she suck the breasts of
Princes; and ^ilt thou hate and disgrace her or any of her children? Did Paul
persecute Christ Act. 9.4.
himself, because he persecuted his members? So Christ from heaven told him.
Now will thou be reputed a persecutor of Christ Jesus? Have thou none to
persecute, none to malign, none to trouble but him, that dyed that thou
might live and not dye? What none? If thou will needs persecute and spoil,
then persecute thine own corruptions, spoil them, make havoc of thy lusts,
1. Pet. 2.11.
which fight against thy soul, and labor to subdue thee. Trouble not the
Church of God, do not persecute his people, touch not his anointed, and do his
Prophets no harm. Indeed Psa. 37.12
the wicked practices against the just, and gnasheth his teeth against him;
but will thou be so wicked? Look well to thy self. For Psa. 75.8.
in the hand of the Lord is a cup, and the wine is red: it is full mixed, and he
powers out the same: surely all the wicked of the earth shall wring out and
drink the dregs thereof. Pro. 29.27.
He that is upright in his way, is indeed (as Solomon teaches) an abomination
to the wicked; but shall he be abominable unto thee? Will thou be that wicked
man that will detest and abhor him? Look well about thee. For Psa. 7.10.
Psa. 145.20
the Lord presert^^ upright in heart: but he will destroy all the wicked: Psa.
11.5.
the wicked, and him that loves iniquity does his soul h^te. Indeed the
wicked trouble Gods heritage, and Psa. 94.5.2^.
smite down his people with the fist of wickedness. But he will recompense,
them their wickedness, and destroy them in their own malice, Job. 21.17.18.
How often shall the candle of the wicked be put out? They shall be as stubble
before the wind, and as chafe that the storm carries away. Therefore partake
not with them in their sins* lest thou be partaker of their punishments.
Trouble not Gods people, do not annoy his field, take heed thou persecute not
his Church. For she shall be a cup of poison unto all that hate her* and an
heavy stone to all her enimes. All that lift it up shall be torn; though all
the people of the earth be gathered together against it, God will not suffer
his Turtle dove to be taken, his Church to be destroyed. Therefore as Mat. 27
19.
Pilats wife sent word unto him concerning Christ, saying; Have thou nothing to
do with that just man: so say I to thee concerning Christ his Church, and, all
her members; Have nothing to do with them to persecute and wrong them. For she
is Gods field, and they are his seed and his sets she is GODS house, and they
are his household servants and his children. He loves them dearly, and keeps
them very carefully. It were a bold part in a mean person to make spoil in a
kings house, and to waste his grounds, and to pull up his plants, and to tread
down his grass and corn. What boldness were it then for us, that are but
Job. 25.
worms and wretches, to make spoil in Gods house, and to sp^ile or annoy the
plants of GODS own planting, who is the king of all kings, who has laid the
foundation of the earth. and spanneth the heavens with his hand? Many men in
pity will not spoil a ground or garden for the plants that are in it, because
of their goodness and comely order. The Church of God is as a field or garden.
Her plants are as an Cant. 4 12.13.
Orchard of Fomegranats with sweet fruits, as Camphire, Spikenard, Saffran,
Calamus, and Cinnamon Cinnamon with all the trees of incense, Myrre and Aloes,
with all the chief spices. God has greatly graced al her members, and has
set al her plants in a comely order; let us therefore spare them, and not spoil
them: let us not harm and annoy them. The Church is a fair and sumptuous
building: yea she is a Isa. 62.3.
crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal diadem in the hand of
her God. And dare man malign her? Shall the son of man whose breath is in
his nostrils, seek to fire her, or pull her down? Let them beware they do
not. For otherwise the Lord will fan them, the wind shall carry them away, and
the whirlewind of his wrath shall scatter them: they shall be burnt with the
flames of their own fire, and compassed about with their own sparkles. If a
man should break into thy fields, and make spoil amongst thy corn: or if he
should beat down thy house, or fire it over thine head, may thou not justly
be offended, and sue him at the law for his injury done unto thee? There is no
question to be made: the case is clear. And shall we think that God will be
silent and say nothing to those, that would spoil his field, that tread down
his corn, that cut down his plants, that break open his hedges, that annoy
his house, and feeke to fire it over his head? Undoubtedly except they repent
and alter their course in time, the Lord will arrest them, he will arraine them
at the bar of his justice, he will plead against them, and condemn them.
For if the sentence of death shall be pronounced against the^ Mat. 25.
that showed no kindness to his servants; what can we think shall be the end
of those but death inevitable, which have been malicious, cruel and injurious
unto them? Let us therefore take heed that we do not hate and persecute the
Church of God, nor any of her children. She is Gods field: she is Gods house:
this is reason sufficient to dissuade us from all secret and open machinations
against her, though we had no other reason in the world besides.

Use. 9.
Ninthly, seeing that the Church is Gods house and husbandry, we need not
marvel that the devil does so malign and molest her. For because he does
hate the husbandman and the housekeeper, therefore he does also hate and
persecute with mortal hatred and hostility his servants and all that belong
unto him, to whom he does in special manner confer and manifest his grace. And
hence it is also that she has in all ages received hard measure of the world,
and that the wicked of the world do persecute and storm against her members;
even because she is Gods field and habitation, and therefore is not of the
world, but a stranger in the world, belonging to another kingdom and
commonwealth. It is the fashion of Dogs to bark at strangers; it is no
wonder then that the Dogs of this world do bark at her and fly in her face:
it is no marvel though they bite her children, and baulle at them. For they
are strangers to them. They are not of them, but among them. They are not cast
in one mould together, nor made of one metal. Foxes are by nature given to
murder Lambs: and Boares are naturally carried to make havoc in a vineyard,
and to spoil the vines. The wicked through the perverseness of their corrupted
nature are violently bent against the godly. Beasts are given to break hedges,
to leap over ditches, and to spoil young plants, and to tread down corn.
Even so these (like unruly beasts) are carried hedlong by their drouer, and
through the strong stream of their inbred ma^ice to break into Gods field,
to knopp^ his tender plants, and to make wast amongst his corn. Yea they
malign and spite them, because God does countenance and grace them, because he
does repair and husband them, and because they see that they are not so full of
weeds and ruins, as they themselves are, Isa. 41.14.
But fear not, thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel. I will help thee,
says the Lord. Psa 55.22
Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee. The wicked that are
strangers and enemies unto his Church from the womb, Psa. 58.23
he will surely punish. He will break their teeth, and crack their jaws. They
shall melt like ice, and cons^me like snailes. He will carry them away, as with
a whirlewind in his wrath. Psa. 55.23
Thou, O God, shall bring them down into the pit of corruption: the bloody and
deceiptfull men shall not live out half their days.

Use 10.
Finally, seeing we are Gods field and building, we are al taught to love one
another. We are not two houses, but one: we are not two fields, but one. And
therefore as one, we ought to love and embrace one another. It were a prodigious
sight to see one stone in a building to iustle with another. We are as 1 Pet*
2.5
Living stones in Gods spiritual building: let us therefore by love lie close
by one another: let us not iustle one another. If an house be divided against
it self, how shall it stand? We are Gods house and houshold-seruants:
therefore we must not be divided against our selves, lest his house fall down
upon our heads. Division is a forerunner of destruction. Therefore as one stone
in a building bears up another, sometimes a little one bearing a greater, and
sometime the greater bearing a lesser: even so let us bear up and bear with
one another: let us not fly out of the wall: let us not stomach and envy one
another, always remembering that we are the stones of one building, and all
laid by one Maister-mason. Corn in one field, plants in one Orchard, trees in
one wood, flowers in one garden, and vines in one vineyard, do grow together
without molesting and hindering one another. They stand together without
coffeehouse: they shroud and harbor one another. We are the corn of Gods
field, the plants of his orchard, the trees of his wood, the flowers of his
garden, and the vines of his vineyard: and therefore we should stand together
without contempt and discontentme^t: and we ought to shroud and shilter one
another. Now Col. ^.8.12.
therefore as the elect of God, holy and beloved, put on the bowels of mercy,
kindness, humility, meekness, long suffering. Put away wrath, anger, malice,
cursing: and hate not one another. 1 Ioh. 7 11.
For he that hates his brother, is in darkness. But let us love one another,
for 1 Ioh. 4.7.
love comes of God, and every, one that loves, is borne of God. Would
thou know that thou art in the state of life? Then love thy brethren. We know
(says Ioh. 3.14
John) that we are translated from death to life, because we love the brethren:
he that loves not his brother, abides in death. Would thou know that thou
love God? Then love the children of God. For 1 Io^. 5.1
every one which loves him, that did beget, loves him also, which is begotten
of him. Would thou abide in the true light? Then love thy brother. For 1
Ioh. 2.10
he that loves his brother, abides in the light, and there is none occasion
of evil in him. Would thou be like the Lord that did beget thee? Then love;
for 1 Ioh. 4.8.
God is love: Would thou be obedient unto God? The^ love thy neighbor; for
his Mat. 22.39.
commandment is, that thou should love thy neighbor as thy self. Finally,
would thou show thy self a true disciple of Christ thy Savior? Then love
thy fellows For Ioh. 13.35.
by this shall all men know (says Christ) that ye are my disciples, if ye have
love one unto another. Let us therefore affect one another with true love. We
are the sons of one father, the children of one mother, the temple of one God,
the field of one husbandman, the house of one inhabitant, the branches of one
vine, the stones of one bilding, and the plants of one field; let us therefore
keep peace with our selves, and embrace one another in the arms of amity. So
shall Gods house continue, his throne shall endure, his field shall prosper, we
our selves shall flourish, our ioys shall be increased, and our enemies shall
be defeated of much advantage.

Thus much concerning the instructions which arise out of the consideration of
these two titles together. It remains now to set down those that may be
gathered from the^, being distinctly considered by themselves. And of the
former first.

CHAP. 4. We must keep our selves wholly for God. We must be content with his
husbanding. We must strive to be fruitful in good things. They are to be
dispraised that are barren.
FIrst, for so much as we are GODS field, Use 1.
we must beware that we give not our selves to any from him, We are not our own
to dispose of as we list our selves, but his that has bought us, and taken us
in for himself. Let us therefore take heed that we suffer not our selves to be
sown with corrupt seed, and to be set with the plants of wickedness. Let not
the devil sow the tares of wicked errors and filthy sins within thee. Thou
art Gods, keep thy self clean and pure for God.

Use 2.
Secondly, seeing we are Gods field, let us be content with his husbandnig of
us. The ground does patiently bear the Plowman and his Plow, the sower and his
seed without the least resistance. So let us be content to bear with
meekness, Gods plough and his ploughmen, his seed and sowers. Let us endure
all things, which he has in his wisdom ordained to break us up, and to make
us fair and fertile; his Word, his Sacraments, his Ministers, his Orders. Let
us not repine and storm against them, but subject our selves, and bear them
meekely without resisstance. Use. 3.


Thirdly, we are taught to be fruitful unto God in faith, love, repentance, and
obedience. The good ground, which receives good seed, is very profitable to
the owner, sending forth plenty of fruit. Eue^ so we being sown with the good
and wholesome seed of Gods word, we ought to bring forth fruit abundantly,
that our owner may have a plentiful crop. It is a cursed ground that receives
seed, and yet affoordeth either nothing or naught but weeds. We are Gods
field, and therefore we should not be like the field of the Pro. 24.31.
sluggard, that is ouergrowne with thorns and nettles. If a field be broken up
with the plough, and if good seed be not sown therein, it will bring forth
more store of weeds, then if it had lain vnplowed. So if the seeds of
Christian virtues be not sown in our hearts, and fructify in our lives now
that we have been broken up with the plough of Gods word, we shall more abound
with the stinking weeds of wickedness, then if we had never felt that plough.
Let us therefore look to our selves, and labor to be fruitful in good thing,
Pro. 23.12.
Apply thine heart to instruction, and thine ears to the words of knowledge.
Pro. 21.21.
He that follows after righteousness and mercy, shall find life,
righteousness, and glory. Now that we may be fruitful, we must perform these
duties following.

First, we must root those sinful weeds out of our hearts, which oppress
and choke them. Ier. 4.4
Break up your fallow ground, and sow not among the thorns, Be circumcised to
the Lord, and take away the foreskin of your hearts.

Secondly, we must labor to be partakers of Gods word, hungring and thirsting
after it, as after food. It is the Plough, that must break us up: it is the
beetle that does beat our clotty hearts: it is the seed that must be scattered
upon them: and it is the rain also, that makes the seed spring up and grow: It
is the means; indeed the blessing is from the Lord. Pet. 2.1.2.
Wherefore laying aside all maliciousnes, all guile, simulation, envy, and all
evil speaking, as newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye
may grow thereby.

Thirdly, when the seed is sown, let it find room within us. Let us give it
liberty to root and spread it self in our hearts. As a ship cannot sail
without sea-roome: so the seed cannot grow without earth-roome. We must
therefore give the seed of Gods word room in our hearts: we must yield unto
it, we must give it passage in us, we must lock it up in the closet of a
faithful heart, and believe it. The word has been Heb. 4.2.
unprofitable to many, because it was not mixed in them with faith.

Fourthly, we must not only hear the word, but we must let it work in our
lives, we must express it in our conuersations. Be ye doers of the word, Iam.
1.22
and not hearers only only (says Saint James) deceiving your own selves. For
if any man hear the word, and do it not, he is like unto a man, that beholds
his natural face in a glass. For when he has considered himself, he goes
his way, and forgets immediately what manner of one he was. He that hears
and does not, is like him, that eats and thriues not.

Fifthly, because the blessing comes from above, we ought therefore earnestly
to beg a blessing of God upon the knees of our souls, that his word may take
deep root in our hearts downwards, and bring forth fruit plentifully in our
lives upwards; and that as the Sun does whiten cloth, resolve the snow, melt
the hardest ye, and give light unto the world, so his word may melt our
hearts, and whiten them; and so dispell the darkness of our minds, as that
we may repent of all our sins, and see the riches of his grace, and may have
light to come out of the ways of darkness, and to walk before him in the
ways of life.

Sixthly, we should set before our eyes that great reward, which God will bestow
upon all such as are fruitful in good works, and abound in the fruits of the
Spirit. They shall have heaven, and earth, and all things whatsoever are
needful and fitting for them. And the more they do exceed in grace, the more
they shall excel in glory.

Seventhly, we ought to consider diligently the examples of Gods children, dead
and alive, that have been and are full of good fruits, good deeds, and who
shine in Christian graces before all other men: and having their patterns set
before us (as scholars have their copies) we should stir up ourselves and study
to resemble them, yea and go before the^. Many me^ think skorn that any should
go beyond the^ in foolish fashions, and vain attire; wherefore then should we
be content through our dronish and heavy disposition that any should strip us
in the race of Christianity, and be more plentiful and rank in bearing the
fruits of righteousness, then we our selves are? especially considering that we
have the plough of Gods word, the seed of wholesome doctrine, and the sweet
shewers of heavenly counsels, exhortations, admonitions, and dehortations, as
plentifully among us, as they have amongst them, and more plentifully too it
may be. One man strives to have as good corn as another: why then should not
we labor to be as rich in grace as our brethren?

Lastly, if we would be fruitful, we must beware of the cares of the world,
that they do not like thorns choke the seed that is sown in us, and
ouershadow it. We must also take heed that it be not washed away with the waters
of afflictions, and skorched with the burning heat of persecutions. And finally
we must take heed of the examples of the wicked, and that satan and the birds
of hell do not steal it from us, and pick it out of our hearts.

Fourthly, those are to be condemned, Use. 4.
that take upon them the name of Gods field or husbandry, and will needs be
reputed his servants; and yet are either barren as an heath, or fruitful in
nothing, but in the unfruitful works of darkness; as drunke^nesse, ignorance,
covetousness, malice, envy, swearing, pride, idleness, and uncleanness. Heb.
6.7 8.
The field that receives the rain, that falls often on it, and brings forth
herbs fit for the husbandman, receives a blessing of God: but that which
brings forth thorns and thistles, is reproved, and is near a curse: and the
end of that field is burning. We are Gods field: his plough has been amongst
us fifty years together, always going upon us. His seed has been continually
scattered upon us all this time. He has watered us richly with the rain of
heavenly instructions, and the Sun of righteousness has all this time shone
upon us with his most glorious Gospel. Now if we shall bring forth nothing (as
too many do) but the thorns of iniquity, the thistles of ungodliness, the
nettles of fleshly lusts, and the noisome weeds of wickedness, what can we
look for but a curse? What do we else deserve, but that he should make us
desolate as a desert, and burn us up with the fire of his wrath? The Lord said
concerning his vineyard in Judea, that because he bestowed much cost upon it,
and it brought forth nothing but wild and sour grapes, Isa. 5.5.6.
he would take away the hedge thereof, and break down the wall. Yea, says
the Lord, I will lay it wast: briars and thorns shall grow up: it shall not be
cut nor dug: I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon
it. We are Gods Vineyard here in England: he has hedged us about: he has
built a tower, and made a wine press amongst us: he has sent his workmen
among us: he has environed us with many outward blessings: he has set
watchmen to keep us: and he has long expected good grapes, and a fruitful
vinetage. But alas, our grapes are generally sour and wild: our grapes are the
grapes of gall, and our clusters are bitter: our wine is the poison of Dragons,
and the cruel gall of aspes. Our ingratitude is great, our enormities are
horrible, our wickedness is abominable. We walk according to the
stubbornenesse of our hearts: we have made our brows of brass, and our
foreheads of marble. We draw on sin as it were with cart-ropes, and add
drunkenness unto thirst. Our dealings do testify as much to our faces. All the
toil that has been taken with us, does seem to be even lost in the most. The
bellows are burnt: the lead is consumed in the fire: the founder melts in
vain. The word of the Prophets is not regarded: the rain of their
exhortations runs by us* and is not received. And although we be continually
dressed, and daily pruned by the word of God as by a sprittle or pruning knife,
yet are we full of superfluous branches, and our fruit is rotten, sour,
unwholesome, and unpleasant. What may we now expect of God, if he shall deal
with us, as we have dealt with him, but that he should pull down his hedge,
break down his wall, and lay this vineyard waste, and bestow his pains upon a
people, that will bring forth better fruits? Let us therefore repent before it
be too late: let us labor against our barrenness unto good, and against our
unfruitful* fruitfulness in that which is evil. Shall we labor that our
soil may be good and fertile, and shall we with patience see our souls
sterile and unfruitful? Can we not endure our gardens to be ouergrowne with
weeds, and shall we suffer our hearts to be defaced with sin, which is more
stinking and infestant then any weed is, or can be? Shall we desire God to give
us the first and the latter rain to water our grounds, and shall we not pray
him also to water the dry ground of our hearts with the sweet shewers of his
graces, and to moisten and soke us with the water of his Spirit? Shall we desire
God to show kindness unto us in giving us the timely fruits of the year, and
shall we be unkind unto him in keeping from him the timely fruits of our
hearts? Do we dislike slerility in our grounds, and barrenness in our sheep
and kine, and shall we not as well dislike the barrenness of our hearts, and
the spiritual sterility of our souls? If we would show our selves to be
indeed the field of God, and would not shame his husbandmen, let us strive
against our barrenness: let us lay aside all the unfruitful works of
darkness: and let us labor to bring forth fruits in abundance beseeming
repentance, and those that profess themselves to be the field of the living
God. And thus much for the first title.

CHAP. 5. We ought to trim up our selves. We may be sure that God will keep
house within us.
THE uses, which we ought to make of the consideration of the second title, are
especially two. Use. 1.


First, considering that we are Gods house, we are taught so to dress up our
selves, as that we may be pleasing to him, and not offensive. To this end we
must remove those things which are displeasing, and deck our selves with such
things as he does delight in. We must therefore tune the disordered strings of
our sinful souls, and labor for a sweet concent in all our affections, that
they may be jointly fixed upon good and not on evil, and that there may be as
little discord and iarring in the^ as is possible, whiles we continue in these
houses of clay. We must yet proceed a little further, laboring with all our
power to cleanse our souls and bodies of all filthiness of sin. We must kill
the spiders of a poisonfull and rancorous spirit. We must brush down the
cobwebs of proud and haughty imaginations, which are mounted up into the
turrets of the head, and cleave (as it were) to the seeling of the brain. We
must by true repentance sweep out of our hearts the dust of wickedness, as
covetousness, worldly cares, and such like, and cleanse out all uncleanness
of fornication and fleshly desires. We must let out the smoke of iniquity, and
purge our selves of al our sins by true remorse, by godly sorrow, and unfeigned
mortification. Ier. 4.14
O Jerusalem wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved! How
long shall thy wicked thoughts remain within thee? Wash you, Isa. 1.16
make you clean (says the Lord:) take away the evil of your works from
before mine eyes, We must not make our selves, who are Gods house, to be the
dens of sins, which like Thieves rob him of that honor which is due unto
him. Therefore as good 2 Chronicles 34.33.
Josiah, took away all the abominations out of all his countries: so let us by
true repentance remove al our sins, which are al abominable, out of all the
corners of our hearts. And as the 2 Chronicles 29.16.18.
Priests and Leuits cleansed all the House of God, and brought out all the
uncleanness, and threw it into Kidron: so let us which are spiritual Reu.
1.6.
Priests in Gods spiritual Temple, cleanse the houses of our hearts of all
uncleanness of our sins, and condemn and cast them into the pit of hell,
that sulphirie lake, from whence they came; that so the works of the devil
being dissolved and himself eiected, he may be past all hope of future
entrance and recovery of his former hold; that howsoever he may look in at the
door, or peep in at the window by his tentations, and dart in a wicked
thought, yet he may find no room swept up and furnished for him to rest in,
and make his mansion. Neither is it sufficient for us to cleanse our selves of
that which does defile us: but we must: also deck and adorn our selves with
those things, which are neat and comely* We should therefore strew our hearts
with the fresh flowers of Gods graces. We 1 Pet. 5.5.
should deck our selves inwardly with the lowliness of mind. We should hang
our souls with the rich arras and costly tapestry of holiness, innocence and
sincerity. We should perfume our hearts with coals of Juniper and with the
frankincense of Gods Spirit. We should set open our windows, that the blessed
Sun of righteousness may shine into us, to warm and enlighten us. We should
set open the gates of our hearts that the king of glory may come in. And
finally we should present our selves unto him, as a living and holy sacrifice.
We should prepare the banquet of an honest heart and a good conscience for him.
And we should give him the best entertainment, that we are able, in all
respect. And so doing we shall be pleasing to him, and shall reap exceeding
comfort to our selves. And therefore al those are to be reproved, which profess
themselves to be the houses of the living God, and yet wallow in their sins, as
hogs in the mire, and are full of the dust of wickedness, giving themselves
over to ignorance, profanenes, worldliness, drunkenness, epicurisme, and all
uncleanness. These are not the Temples of the Spirit but the tents of the
devil. These are not the houses of God, but the tabernacles of wickedness,
the sinks of sin, and the cabbins of unclean spirits; having not only the
fire of sin within them, but being indeed also compassed about with the flames
thereof on every side. And let them in time take heed and come forth. For sin
is a fire that burns to destruction. It works both a confusion in the
soul, and the confusion of the soul. The wages thereof is the eternal death
both of soul and body. Romans 6 23.

Use. 2.
Secondly, seeing we are GODS house, we may assure our selves that he will
reside and dwell within us. The Lord will be in his temple for ever. Now what a
singular comfort should this be to us always, in that we have the great God of
heaven and earth residing in us? What an honor is it to us that the king of
kings should keep his court continually in us? Let us be thankful to him for
this favor. Be not like the thanklesse swine, that swallows down the fruit,
but looks not to the treee from whence it fell. And so much for the first
doctrine.

CHAP. 6. Men may be Gods House and Husbandry, though they be not so holy as is
meet.
Corinthians (who were factious, fleshly, litigious, and something too
disorderly) Gods field and building; I conclude that me^ professing Christ, as
they did, must not for some enormities be by and by reputed abiects, or men,
that are not in grace with God, or as men, that are fallen from God, and cut
off from Christ. David, Solomon, Hezekiah and Peter sinned grievously, but yet
they were never wholly forsaken of God, nor void of true grace; though for a
time it was cast as it were into a swoone, and lay obscure, as fire in ashes,
or as the act of reason in a man that is stark drunk, or fast asleep. Though
thou favor of the smoke of sin, and be up to the wayst in iniquity, yet if
thou labor to come forth, and do purge thy self by penitency, thy case is
not desperate, it is not damnable. If thou be weak and fleshly, as these
Corinthiant were; yet if thou will war with thy flesh, and contend against
thy weakness, if thou do labor constantly to subdue thy lusts, and do
truly repent of thy sin so soon as thou do epsy it, then despair not,
but assure thy self that thou art in Gods favor, and that thou art one of his
plants, and a living stone of his spiritual building: and enjoying his favor
in this life, thou shall also see his face to the solace of thy soul in the
life to come. Amen.

Morning prayer for the Family.
O Eternal Lord God, who art great and fearful, and show mercy to them
that love thee, and keep thy commandments: we have committed iniquity, and
have done wickedly before thine eyes, we have rebelled against thy Majesty, and
have transgressed against thy laws, we have bin unmindful of thy mercies, and
do continually sin against thee, so that to us appertains open shame, and
confusion of face for ever: yet compassion and forgiveness is in thee, there is
mercy with thee that thou may be feared. Have mercy therefore upon us, we
humbly pray thee, and according to the multitude of thy compassions put away
our transgressions. Incline thine ear, O Lord, and hear. Look upon us in thy
Son Christ Jesus, and in him be reconciled to us. Give us the feeling of thy
grace, and an assurance of thy princely pardon. Put thy Spirit into our hearts
(we beseech thee) and cause us to walk in thy ways. Break our marble hearts
asunder, take away their stoninesse, and mollify them with the oil of thy
grace. Cause us to hate and leave our sins, and to war with all our lusts.
Draw us; and we will run after thee: convert us, and we shall be converted.
Incline our hearts unto thy testimonies, and keep us in thy fear. Teach us, O
Lord, to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. Thou art
our creator, forsake not the work of thine hands. Cause the light of thy
countenance to shine upon us, and let thy tender mercies come unto us. Direct
our steps in thy word: stay us, and we shall be safe. Leave us not unto our
selves, but sustain us by thy grace. Prosper the works of our hands, and give
success unto our labors. Let our going out and coming in be blessed, and
cause thine Angels to protect us. Thou art our Father, provide thou for us, and
preserve us. Thou have wedded us unto thy self as an Husband, suffer us not to
go an whoring from thee. Thou have been beneficial to us, thou have given us
thy Gospel, thou have sent us thy Prophets, thou have honored us with peace
and prosperity, and have given us great deliverances: our health, our friends,
our liberty, all our being and well being, all that we have, even all is of
thee: thou give us our rest in the night, thou make us sleep in safety,
and renewest thy mercies to us in the morning: infinite is thy love,
innumerable are thy favors toward us: we beseech thee therefore, O Lord, give
us thankful hearts unto thy Majesty. Open thou our lips, that our mouths may
show forth thy praise: and grant us grace to dedicate our selves unto thee.
Bless (we pray thee) thy holy Church, and be good unto thy people. Give not
the soul of thy Turtle done unto the Beast. Be favorable unto Sion, and build
the walls of Jerusalem. Increase thy kingdom, and destroy thine enimes. Bless
thy servant James our noble king: find out his enemies, set thy self against
them, and make his crown to flourish on his head. Be merciful (we beseech
thee) to all other States amongst us: give ear to the cry of thy Saints, and
not to the cry of our sins. Grant, O Lord, that we may all of us serve thee in
the unity of faith with unanimity of spirit, that so glorifying thy name in
this world, we may be glorified of thee for ever in the world to come. Hear
us, O Lord, we beseech thee, and grant us these our requests for the merits of
Jesus Christ alone; unto whom with thee and the holy Ghost be rendered all
honor, praise, and power this day and for ever.

Evening prayer for the Family.
Gracious God and merciful Father in Jesus Christ, we do here bow down the
knees of our souls and bodies in thy presence, offering up this our Evening
sacrifice of praise and prayer unto thee, giving thee unfeigned thanks, for all
thy favors toward us, for electing us unto eternal life, for creating us
according to thine image, for redeeming us by the blood of thy Son, for
sanctifying us by thine holy Spirit, for our health, peace, and liberty, for
clothing and feeding us, for protecting and prospering of us this present day,
Nouem. 5 Anno. 1605.
and for that great and admirable deliverance vouchsafed to this whole State
and kingdom from that barbarous and bloody confusion, plotted and almost
performed by the wicked, the children of Babel: thy name (O Lord) be praised
for these and all other thy mercies. Forgive us, we beseech thee, our great
unthankfulness and all the rest of our sins, our ignorances, wilfulnesses,
negligences, presumptions, and all other our transgressions, and rebellions: O
Lord, forgive them all unto us for Jesus Christ his sake. Wash them al away in
his blood, nail them fast unto his cross, and bury the^ in his grave. Cloth
us (we pray thee) with his robes, and honor us with thy Spirit. Work in us
godly sorrow and remorsefull spirits. Mortify our sinful lusts, and adorn us
with all thy graces. Open our eyes, that we may see thy will, and incline our
hearts to follow it. Direct us in thy ways, and keep us from declining from
thee. Teach us so to frame our lives before thee in this word, that we may live
for ever with thee in the world to come. Be merciful (O Lord, we beseech thee)
to thy Church, and to all her faithful members: comfort them with thy
comforts, and enrich them with thy graces. Bless this kingdom, wherein we
live, pardon the sins of all estates amongst us, and continue thy Gospel to
us, and to our posterity, to the end of the world. Look upon thine anointed
James our sovereign Lord and king: adorn his heart with all regal and
Christian virtues, uphold his scepter, prolong his reign, and laugh his foes
to skorne. Bless our gracious queen Anne, Prince Henry, and the rest of their
princely progeny. Be merciful to all other orders amongst us, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil: and as thou aboundest in thy mercies toward us, so
grant that we may strive to abound in all thankfulness toward thee. Finally,
O Lord, for our selves; we beseech thee to take us to thy fatherly protection:
pardon the weakness of our prayers, watch thou over us to our good, and give
us such rest and sleep that we may be the fitter enabled to serve thee the next
day in our general and special callings. Hear (holy Father) from the heavens,
and grant us all these our requests for Jesus Christ his sake, thine only
Son, and our only Savior: to whom with thee and thine holy Spirit, one most
wise, glorious and eternal God, be rendered all power, praise, and glory this
night and for ever. Amen.

Trin-vni Deo gloria.
FINIS.

