THE BOOK OF FALCONRIE or HAVVKING; For the only delight and pleasure of all
Noblemen and Gentlemen: Collected out of the best Authors, as well Italians as
Frenchmen, and some English practices withal concerning Falconrie; Heretofore
published by George Turbervile Gentleman.

And now newly reviued, corrected, and augmented, with many new Additions
proper to these present times.

NOCET EMPTA DOLOR VOLVPTAS.



AT LONDON, Printed by Thomas Purfoot. An. Dom. 1611

The Contents of this Book.
A Description of all kinds of Hawks that are in use, and their properties.
The reclayming, jmping, mewing, and fleeyng, both the Field and River, of the
same Hawks. Their diseases and cures, and all such special points as in any
wise appertain to that most excellent and Gentleman-like quality. Also a
little Treatise translated out of the Italian tongue, touching the diseases
happening to Spanyels, with their cures.
The names of those Authors, from whom this collection of Falconrie is borrowed
and made, both Iatalians and French.
Italians.
M. Francesco Sforzinoda Carcano, Vicentino. M. Frederigo Giorgj.
French.
Tardiffe. Martin. Malopin. Mychelyn. Ame Cassyan. Artelowche.
Of Hawking by the Book.
If he that rydes, by Book,
Can make his Horse do well:
Then he, by Book, that makes his Hawke,
May make his Hawke excel.
The Hawke can flee as well by Art,
As Horse by rule can play his part.
In commendation of Hawking, George Turbervile.
I Deem that no man doubts, but games and all our* ^efe delights,
Were first deuisde to daunt the dumps of pensive pained sprights.
To clear the clouds of drowping cares, and mists of mournful mind,
And banish bale that heavy hearts in cheerelesse chains did bind.
And more than that, to further health, by moving too and fro,
That in our lumpish lustlesse limbs, no dire disease might grow:
Which otherwise (set sport aside, and sweet delightful glee)
In idle bodies breeds of force, as we by proof do see,
Not much unlike the standing lakes, in durtie dampish grounds,
Where water has no power to pass, most noisome filth abounds.
If games were thus found out at first, for mind and bodies ease,
As Well to quite that one of griefs, as the other of disease:
Why then? of force it follow must, that those delights are chief,
And most to be imbrast, that lend to either part relief,
Which if be so, I need not blush, or deem it my disgrace,
If Hawks and Spanels I prefer, and set in highest place.
For truly no devise delights, the mind of man so much,
No game so gladsome to the limbs, there is no pleasure such.
No Physic fitter to remove the dregs of direful pain,
And to restore to former life, the feeble force again.
Of Spanels first I mean to speak, for they begin the glee,
Who being once uncoupled, when they feel their collers free,
In roysting wise about they range, with cheerful chappes to ground,
To see where in the champion may some lurking foul be found.
A sport to view them stir their sternes, in hunting too and fro,
And to behold how nature does her power in Spanels show:
Who scour the fields with wondrous skill, and deal in cunning sort,
As though indeed they had conspirde, to make their master sport.
What merrier music can you crave? what note but half so good?
As when the Spaniels cross the run, of Peasants in the wood?
Or light upon the little Poutes, where they have lately been?
Assuredly no better glee, is either heard or seen.
So as by Hawks does pleasure grow, unto the gazing eye,
And dogs delight the listening ears, before the hawks do fly.
What dolt so dull but takes delight, when once the Spaniell springs
The fearful foul, and when the hawke lies long upon her wings?
What sense so sad, what mind so mazde, but sets his sorrows by,
What once the Falcon free begins, to send amid the sky?
To turn and wind a bird by sleight, and eke at last to slay
With strong encounter, doves, and duckes, and every other pray?
The pretty Partridge, Railes, and Quails, that haunt the open field?
And from her mountay to enforce the Hearon haught to yield?
By binding with her close in clouds, in manner out of sight?
For noble Peers and chiefest States, a passing pleasant flight?
So small a bird, so large a foul, at such a lofty gate,
To reach and rappe, and force to fall, it is a game of state.
No fellow to the flight at Brook, that game is full of glee,
It is a sport the stowping of aroysting Hawke to see.
And if she miss, to mark her how she then gets up amain,
For best advantage, to eneaw the springing foul again.
Who if be landed as it ought, then is it sure to die.
Or if she slip, a joy to see, the Hawke at randon fly,
And so for head to slay the foul, a noble sport to view,
In my conceit no pleasure like to Hawks, I tell you true.
It sets the senses all to work, there may none idle be,
The tongue it lures, the legs they leap, the eye beholds the glee:
The ears are busied eke to hear, the calling Spanels quest,
Do tell me then what sense it is, that respite has to rest?
And more than that the bart it leaps, and laughes for joy to think,
How such a slender hawke should cause, so huge a foul to shrink.
This kind of sport does banish vice, and vile devises quight,
When other games do foster faults, and breed but base delight.
No idle thought can harbor well within the Falconers brain,
For though his sports right pleasant be, yet are they mixed with pain.
The toil he takes to find the foul, his greedy lust to slay,
The foul once found cuts off co^ceits, and drives ill thoughts away.
He lures, he leapes, he calls, he cries, he joys, he waxes sad,
And frames his mood, according as his hawke does well or bad.
Dame Venus harbors not in holtes, no Cupid haunts the hills,
Diana dwelles in open place, with bow her game she kills.
In woods no wanton Goddess woones: in City soiournes sin,
There vice in vawts and dungeon dwells, the lecher lurks within.
Dianas train does love the launds, they long abroad to rome,
But bawdie Venus ympes embrace, the loitring life at home.
To dice, to dance, to coll, to kiss, to card the time away,
To prate, to prancke, to bowl, to bowse, and tipple out the day.
To check at Chesse, to heave at Maw, at Macke to pass the time,
At Coses, or at Saunt to sit, or set their rest at Prime.
Both Ticktacke and the Irish game, are sports but made to spend,
I wot not I, to what avail those trifling games do tend.
Unless to force a man to chafe, to chide, to sweat, to swear,
To brawle, to ban, to curse, and God in thousand parts to tear.
At cockepit some their pleasures place, to wager wealth away,
Where Falconers only force the fields, to hear their spanels bay.
What greater glee can man desire, than by his cunning skill,
So to reclaim a haggard Hawke, as she the foul shall kill.
To make and man her in such sort, as tossing out a train,
Or but the lewre, when she is at large, to whoup her in again?
Where birds, and beasts, and each thing else, their freedom so embrace,
As let them loose, they will be thralde no more in any case.
What finer feat than so to ympe a feather, as in view,
A man would swear it were the old, and not set on a new?
When hawks are hurt and broosde, by rash encounter in the skies,
What better skill, than for their harms a powder to devise,
To dry the blood within the bulcke, and make his Mummie so,
As no Physician greater Art, on pacients can bestow?
To cure the crampe, and eke the cray, the stone that lies within,
The Philanders, the Frounce, the Gout, the Panthas, and the pin.
The Rye, the Rhewne, the Canker, and both lice and mytes to mar,
And all such worms as with your hawks do wage continall war:
To make her mewe when time requires, to bowse and eke to bath,
By cunning skill to cause her cast, such glit as breeds her skath.
To cut her hoods, to shape her guess, her tyrets, and her line,
With Bells, and Berrets, Vernels eke, to make the Falcon fine:
Believe me is no common skill, no bate nor base devise,
But meet for civil courtly men, that are reputed wise.
Which if be so, then yield me thanks, that beat my busy brow,
And took this toil for thine avail, to teach thee when and how
To work this practice and devise. Accept the Printers pain,
Who shows thee sundry shapes of hawks, though little to his gain.
Both he and I can do no more, than offer our good will,
And all to further thy delight, and add unto thy skill.
Which if we do, we have the hire of both our meanings than,
You cannot do a better deed than thank the painful man.
George Turbervile.

The Induction or Proeme to this Discourse, and Treatise of Hawking.
WE find this a general rule and observation, and do hold it for good in all
Arts and Sciences, wherein men do travel and busy themselves, either to the
benefit of others, or to their own private pleasure, and humors, in the
beginning of their works to lay down ye subject of that whereof they mean to
treat, which in very deed is nothing else but the ground and matter which
does move them to write: which does not only fall out in all liberal
sciences, and studies greatly accounted and reverenced of the learned of al
ages, but also in the base and grosser trades of men, daily practiced with the
hand. As when the Goldsmith does determine with himself by curious and cunning
art, to fashion a Jewel of any price and value, he is driven to make choice of
his metal, either gold or silver, whereon to bestow the excellency of his
art, which cannot be named by a more fite or convenient term, then to be
called the Subject of his Science. Likewise here mine Author in this Treatise,
and Book of Falconrie, following the accoustomed order of the learned, and
common practice of such as do write, has laid down a Hawke, the Subject of
his devise, of which he is determined at large to speak, with full show and
declaration of the true nature and properties of all Hawks, as also such other
matter as is incident, and appertaining in any respect to that skill, of all
other gentlemanly sports and practices, the most pleasant and commendable. But
before he does aduentdure to deal, specially of any matter concerning
Falconrie, to give the Reader a perfect and absolute understanding, both of his
conceit, and of the knowledge of the thing, he thinks it not besides his
purpose, but a matter most necessary to the attainement of his devise, To
frame a general division of all Hawks and Birds of prey, racking (as it
were) and dividing that one entire and general name of a Hawke into many
members and parts, the better thereby to display the true nature, quality, and
condition of a Hawke, as also ye skill of Falconrie: for the whole being laid
out into his members and parts, it shall be the more easy to come to the
notice of that, whereof he is resolved to write, whose nature and substance is
included in his particular members. Wherefore mine Author following that order
and prescribed rule of knowledge, has used this method, setting down to the
view of the reader, in the very entry and proheme of his work, a manifest and
general division of Hawks, ye better to decipher the special nature of each
one Hawke in his own proper kind, which otherwise were very hard to do, by
means of confusion of sundry names and terms, as also, the number of birds of
prey.

A GENERAL DIVISION OF Hawks, and Birds of prey, after the opinion of one
Francesco Sforzino Vicentino, an Italian Gentleman Falconer.
FIrst (says he) you shall understand, that of Hawks that do live by prey,
and are in knowledge and use of men, there are nine kinds. 1 The Eagle. 2 The
Mylion. 3 The Gerfalcon, 4 The Falcon. 5 The Merlin. 6 The Hobbie. 7 The
Goshawke. 8 The Sparowhawke. 9 The Matagasse.
This Hawke whom I term a Matagasse, after the French, is in ye Italian
tongue called Regostola Falcone a, and among the Germains Thornkretzer, a Hawke
not in use with us, and in truth of slender regard and estimation in nature.
Yet nevertheless, both to follow mine Author, and to make my division perfect,
I hold it needful to reckon that kind of Hawke among the rest: and in the
latter end of the first part of this treatise, I will briefly describe you his
nature, which is no less base than strange. You must note, that all these kind
of hawks, Addition.
have their male birds and cocks of every sort and gender, [As ye Eagle his
Earne, the Mylion his Tercell. the Gerfalcon his Ierkin, the Falcon his Tiercel
gentle, the Merlin his Jack, the Hobby his Robin, the Goshawke his Tiercell,
and the Sparrowhawk his Musket.] And further, that ye female of al birds of
prey and rauine, is evermore huge than the male, more ventrous, hardy, and
watchful, but of such birds as do not live by rauine and prey, the male is
more large than the female.

A second or Subdiuision.
Moreover, you shall know, yt those nine sorts of hawks, may again be divided
into two kinds, and either differing from the other in condition.

For some of them do prey upon the foul, by stooping down from their wings,
and so seazing on the foul with their foot, do break in sunder with their
beakes the neck bone, being of more force and strength in that part, then in
the foot or tallons. And this sort of Hawks do never use to plume or the vypon
the foul whom they have seized, until such time as they perceive it to leave
busking and bating in the foot: of which kind and qualytie are, 1 The Eagle. 2
The Mylion. 3 The Gerfalcon. 4 The Falcon. 5 The Merlin. 6 The Hobbie. 7 The
Matagasse.


Now that other sort which I speak of, do slay their prey and game by maine
force of wing, at randon and before head, not stouping at all from their
wings, as the other Hawks do, whom I made mention of before. And thief
Hawks have their chief force and strength in the foot, and not in the ieake,
and therefore no sooner do seize upon the prey, but presently they give
themselves to plume and tire thereon Of this sort are, 1 The Goshawke. 2 The
Tiercel of the Goshawke. 3 The Sparowhawke.


Thus far have I made a general division of all kinds of Hawks that do
live by prey: and again (as you see) have divided those kinds into two parts.
Wherefore now do I purpose to deal more specially in the matter, and more
particularly to proceed to the natures of enerie of them, to yield you a more
perfect knowledge, and light therein.

Of the names of Hawks of prey.
AL Hawks and birds of prey, be comprised and included under these two names.

1 Aetos. or 2 Hierax
which is to say, 1 Ahnila or 2 Accipiter
which is the 1 Eagle. or 2 Falcon.


These two kinds do serve to fly the prey for man's pleasure and pastime: of
which only Hawks, my purpose is to treat and speak in this discourse here
following.

For all Hawks and birds of prey, do not serve the Falconers use, but only
such as are hardy, and free of mettle, able to fly the field and river. And
therefore those only kinds shall be the iniect of my book, and not those
base, basterdly refuse Hawks, which are somewhat in name, and nothing in deed.

As the Greeks would, that Hierax, and the Latins that Accipiter, which is a
special term to one hawke and bird of prey, should give the general name and
title to all Hawks, and birds of prey, because of his excellency: So in like
manner, the Frenchmen of our age, have ordained that the Falcon, which is a
term peculier and proper to one kind of bird of prey, shall give general
name and appellation to all Hawks, and birds of prey whatsoever they be,
because the Falcon does pass all other hawks in boldness and courtesy, and is
most familiar to man, of all other birds of prey. And thereof it proceeds
that we say, the Falcon Gentle, the Haggard Falcon, the Falcon Sacre, and so
likewise of the other Hawks, calling them all by the name of Falcon.

Moreover, as the Falcon, which is a special name of one kind of Hawks, has
given name to all other Hawks and birds of prey: So has it bestowed the name
and title of a Falconer, to every one of what state or calling soever he be,
that does deal with any kind of Hawks and the term of Falconrie, to the art,
profession, and knowledge of luring and manning those birds of prey, by which
singular skill, they are made to flee all other fowls, as well those fowls of
the air, as of the land and river. Which in my conceit, deserves no slender
commendation and praise, being a matter almost quite against the laws of
nature and kind, for one foul so artiffcially to undertake, and so cruelly to
murder another, and having achieved his enterprise, with greedy and willing
mind, to repair to man again, having the whole scope of the heavens, and the
circuit of the earth at their pleasure to range and peruse: and to yield
themselves in such frank manner to the prison, and custody of man, being by
kind set free, and at liberty to prey, and dispose themselves. Such and so
great is the singular skill of man, when by art he is resolved to alter the
prescribed order of nature, which by industry and pain we see is brought to
pass and effect.

Of the kinds of Eagles.
Having divided all those birds of prey and rauine, which serve to Falconrie
and Hawking, into Eagles and Falco^ns, I mean first of all to dicipher you the
Eagle and Vulture, whom some have thought to be comprised under the kind of an
Eagle. And so consequently after that, to speak of Falco^s, which are birds of
prey, serving to the use and mystery of Hawking, and taking their names of the
Falcon.

Aristotle was of opinion, that there was six kinds of Eagles, which are
named by him, according as it pleased the inhabitants of Greece to inform him.

Pliny in making the same division of Eagles, has varied in that point
altogether from Aristotle, as touching the names and terms of Eagles, for
that they were of diverse co^ntries, and did write in several languages. But
for that I mean in this Book only to speak of those kinds of Eagles, which
serve to Falconrie, I will deal but with two sorts of Eagles: for at these
days, we have the use and experience but of the brown Eagle, which is the
Eagle Royal, and the black Eagle, the other kinds being of a base and slender
courage, as no Falconer will pain himself to lure them, or manne them for use
or pleasure.

First of the brown or yellow Eagle.
depiction of hawk

THe brown or yeallow Eagle after Aristotle's opinion, is called in greek
Guyseon, which does signify in the French tongue (kindly and no bastard born)
because it is of al other kinds of eagles, the true and right eagle, and he does
call him by ye greek word Chrysaitos, by reason of his golden mayle, and in
latin he is termed Stellaris, and Herodus. This is that Eagle, whom we call
the Eagle royal, king of birds, and sometimes the bird of Jupiter, and that
Eagle which ought to be taken and accounted the principal best, being more
huge and large then the rest, and besides more rare and dainty to be seen. For
she does haunt most commonly the tops of high and craggie mountatnes, and
does there prey upon all sorts of fowls, as also Hares, kidds, Goats, and such
other like wild and savage beasts of the field.

This Eagle does live always solitary and alone, unless happily she has her
brood with her, whom she does conduct and guide from place to place, the
better to instruct them how to kill their prey, and feed themselves. But no
sooner has she made them perfect, and thoroughly scoled them therein, but
presently she chaseth them out of that coast, and does abandon them the place
where they were eyred, and will in no wise brook the^ to abide near her, to
the end, that the country where she discloseth and makes her eyrie, be not
unfurnished of convenient prey, which by the number and excessive store of
Eagles, might otherwise be spoiled and made bare. For it is very likely, that
if her brood and increace should there make stay, being so huge birds, and of
so great rauine, there would in short space lack prey for her self, and by
mean thereof breed her to a father evil and mischief: for the avoiding of
which, this provident and careful foul does presently force her brood to
depart into some other part and Region.

This Eagle may with ease be discerned from the Vulture, because this Eagle
Royal, being brown, or yellow maylde, has not her arms or feet in any
condition covered with plume, as the Vulture has.

True it is, that the arm of the Eagle is short, yellow mayld and all beset
with scales, ye pounces large, her beak black, long, and crooked at the top.
The train of the Eagle Royal, as also the train of the slender black Eagle
is short and stife at the point, even as the train of the Vulture is.

The Eagle is always of oneselfe hugeness, in respect of her nature, and it
cannot be said, in that she is an Eagle, that she is either larger or lesser,
at any one time or other, unless you give her the surname and addition of
black, yellow, or some other such proper name and tesme, which does alter her
according to her accidents, but nothing at all in regard of her substance and
nature. And were it not that she is so massy a fowl and not portable on the
fist, (as in troth she is exceeding huge) and besides, it is so hard and
difficult a matter to provide her prey and food, Princes and puissant States,
would more usually have her, and hawke with her for their solace and pleasure,
than they now do. But by reason she is so hugh and ventrous, she might happily
offer force and violence to the eyes and face of her keeper, if at any time she
should conceive displeasure against him. And for this cause cheiflie, the Eagle
is not in use, as other meaner howkes, and of less force be in these days.

He that will have the Eagle to be good and tractable, must devise to take her
an Eyesse in the Eirie, ma^ning and accustoming her among hounds and
greyhoundes, to the end that when he goes and addresseth him to the field,
the Eagle soaring aloft over the hounds starting the game, Fox, Hare, got or
such like beasts of the wood, she making her downe-come, and stooping from her
wings, may so stay, and seize vopn the game, until the dogs come in, and
procure the fall thereof. A man may feed her with any kind of flesh, and
chiefly of such game and prey, as she slays in the field by flight.

Tawnye or brown mayle in an Eagle, deep and hallow eyes, specially if she
be bread in the west parts of the whrld, is an assured sign of her goodness:
for the tawnie Eeale is ever found good in proof.

Also the whitenes on the head of an Eagle, or on her back, is a singular
token of an excellent Eagle.

That Eagle, that when she flees from the fist of her keeper, will either flee
upon the man, soaring round about him, or light on the ground, and take the
stand, is by all probability and coniectture, no inward Eagle, but a fugitive,
and a rangler.

At what time the Eagle displayes her train in her flight, and makes a turn
in her mounty, it is a very great sign that she determines to fly on head,
and gadde: the next remedy for which mischief, is to throw her out her meat,
and lure her with as loud a voice as you possible may. And if it be so, that
she then stoop not to that which is cast out unto her, then either has she
over gorged her self, or otherwise she is too hie, and too full of flesh. A
mean to avoid this inconvenience, is to sow the feathers of her train
together, to ye end she may not spread them abroad, nor use the benefit of her
train feathers in her flight. Or else another way is, to deplume and make bare
her tuell and fundament so as it may appear, and then certainly for fear of
the cold air she will not adventure to mount so hie: but feeling her train
feathers fast sowed together, she will stand in awe of other Eagles, whom by
the mean of that device and practice, she shall in no wise be able to avoid.

When the Eagle makes a short turn upon her keeper in her flight, and flies
not out aforehead, that is one principal good token that she will not away.

It has been said, that an Eagle is of force to arrest, and cause a Wolf to
stay, and will take him, with the aid and assistance of dogs, making in to her
rescue, and that it has been seen and experimented. But for my part I find
the odds of them so great, as I leave the belief of it to the Reader, not
reciting it as a troth, but a thing written to show the great hardiness and
undaunted nature of the Eagle.

It is reported that the men of the country where the Eagle eyreth, knowing
thereof, and intending to bereave her young brood, do arm and well furnish
their heads, for fear least ye Eagle do offer them force and violence. And if
so they show the old breeder one of her chickens, or tie it to the bough of a
tree near the place where she builds, she will call and cause the damme to
repair thither by continual cleping, who finds her, and pitying her cries,
will bring it so much provision and prey, as he that comes to take her from
the eyrie, shall there daily be sped of as much flesh and provision as will very
reasonably serve him and six others. For the old Eagle will convey thither
hares, Conies, fowls, and such other like vittel, and viands, for the supply
of her necessity.

The Eagle does not commonly use to prey nere unto her eyrie, but to kill her
provision abroad as far off as she may. And if so it happen, she leave any
flesh after she is full gorged, that does she reserve carefully for the next
day, to the end that if foul weather should happily grow to hinder her flight,
yet she might be stored of sufficient prey for the day following, without any
further travel.

An Eagle does not forsake or change her Eyrie all her life time, but of
custom does yearly return, and make repair to one self place, and there
builds most assuredly, by mean whereof it has been noted and observed in
times past, that an Eagle does live very many years. Before her old age, her
beak waxes so exceeding long and crooked at the topp, as she is much hindered
thereby of her feeding: in sort, as she dies not of disease, or by extremity
of age, but only by reason she cannot possibly use the benefit of her
beak, being accrewd and grown to such an exceeding length and disproportion.
Whereof comes the Proverb be as I take it, Aquila senectus, the age of an
Eagle, which is properly applied to men that do live only by drink, as old
men are wont to do.

The Eagle does ever wage war with the little Roytelet, whom the French men
do so term, for that this foul is thought to be a little king among birds,
as the Etimologie of the word does seem to import, the Latins likewise they
call him Regulus, and the Germans a Golden line. Alls^ occasion and chief
ground of this controversy betwixt the Eagle and the Goldhenline is (by the
report of Aristotle) only upon the name, for that she is called the king of
birds: of which title and pre-eminence the Eagle would willingly bereave her.

Again, there is one other kind of little foul, whom Aristotle calls a
Sitta, the Latins Reptitatrix or Scandulaca, and the Frenchmen Grimperean,
that does the Eagle very great outrage, and offense, For no sooner perceives
she the Eagle to be absent from the eyrie, but presently in great despite she
breaks all her eggs in pieces.

This little soul is called. In French, Roytelet. In Latin. Re^gulus. In the
German tongue. Goldhe^lyne.
These two being in a manner ye least birds of all other, are the greatest and
deadliest enemies to the Eagle,

That other, In Greek. Sitta. In Latin. Scandulaca In French. Grinpereau
and do contend with her upon points of principality and rule.

When I said before, that the Eagle royal was of a yellow mayle, I meant
nothing else by that speech, but that the Eagle was mayld, of the very color
of a Dears hair, which is in deed not yellow, but brown or tawny. And albeit
Aristotle for his pleasure, termed it by the Greek word, Chrisatos, which is as
much in effect as to say, ye Golden Eagle: yet must it not therefore be
concluded, that this Eagle is of a right Golden mayle, but of a more brown or
tawny mayle, then the other kind of Eagle is.

The Paynters and Statuaries of Rome have disguised this Eagle in their
portraytures, for every man knows that it is far otherwise, then they have
drawn it, As well the brown Eagles as the black, are skinned and uncased, as
the Vultures be, and their skins rent to the Furryers and pellitors of
France, with their wings, heads, and tallons, and even of the same very
color, as I have here set it down and declared it unto you.

Of the black Eagle.
depiction of hawk

I Have signified unto you, that there are only two sorts of Eagles which
serve for Falconrie, which are the yellow or tawnie Eagle, whom I have
hitherto treated of, and the black Eagle whom I must now decypher unto you.
Aristotle does term the black Eagle Melauratus, and Lagoph^^os, because she
takes the Hare: and this Eagle ye Latins call Pulla, Fuluia Leporaria and
Valeria, ye odds and difference betwixt these two Eagles is easy to be found,
for this black Eagle is less than the Eagle royal, which is ye yellow and
tawnie Eagle, and the black Eagle does as much differ from the yellow Eagle,
as ye black Milion does from the Milion Royal.

Pliny has placed this black Eagle in the first order and rank of Eagles,
as one that would willinly prefer her before oll other kinds of Eagles. And
here Aristotle has set her but in the third order and place.

The black Eagle (says he) being less huge and corpulent than the other, is
of far more force and excellency.

Moreover, he affirms that the Eagles do tower up and mount so hie, of
purpose for prospect, and to see from far. And by reason that their sight is
so clear and perfect, men have reported them of all others, to be ye only
birds that do participate with the divine nature.

Moreover, for the fear the Eagle has of her excellent eyes, she makes not
her stooping from her gate at once, and rashly, as other kind of long winged
hawks do, but by little and little.

The Hare is a prey in whom she takes great pleasure, yet when she finds
the Hare running, she offers not forthwith to seize upon him on the
Mountain, but can forbear and stai^ her time, until he be on the plain
champion, and the^ seazing on him, she presently carries him not away, but
does first make trial and experience of him, poysing and waying him in her
pounces, and after that lifting up ye silk beast, does bear him clean away,
and preyeth on him at her best will and pleasure

Now as touching the Vultures, and first of the large ash colored or black
Vulture.
depiction of hawk

THere are two sorts of Vultures, to wit, the ash maild, or black Vulture,
and the brown or whitish Vulture.

First will I speak of the black or ashemaild Vulture, who is in deed more
huge than the brown, for the ash colored Vulture is ye most larg bird of
prey that is to be found, and the female Vulture more large then the male, even
as it falls out by experience in all kinds of birds of prey and rauine.

The greeks, they call the Vulture Gips, and the Latins Vulture.

This Hawke is a passenger in Egypt, more known by her coat and case the^
otherwise, because the furriers do use their skins for stomachers, to guarde
and defend the breast against the force of fervent cold.

All other birds of prey do differ from the Vulture, in that they are
destitute and void of plumage under their wings, whereas the Vultures be there
vested and covered with an excellent fine down. Their skin is thick like a
Goats skin, and namely you shall find under their gorge, a certain patch of the
breadth of your hand, where the plume is somewhat inclining to a red, like the
hair of a Calfe, for ye kind of plume has not a web fashioned, as other
feathers are usually shapt and proportioned, but are like unto the down which
is to be found on either side the neck, and on the upper part of ye pinion and
bent of the wing, in which parts the down is so white that it glistereth, and
is as soft as silk.

The Vultures have this one point special, and peculiar to themselves, in that
they are rough legged, a thing that happens not to any other kind of Eagles or
birds of prey.

Of the less Vulture, which is the brown or whitish Vulture.
depiction of hawk

THe brown or whitish Vulture does differ from ye black maylde Vulture, in
that he is somewhat less then the black Vulture is, having the plumage of
her throat or gorge, of her back, the feathers under the belly near the
pannell, and of the whole body tawnie, or brown of color: but the brayle
feathers, and of the train, like to those of the black maylde Vulture, which
induces some to think that there is no difference at all betwixt those two
kinds, save that the one is male, and that other female, in the same gender and
kind. But this is most certain and assured, that with Noble personages you
shall see as well the one kind as the other. Either sort has a short train in
regard of the largnesse of their wings, which is not the nature and shape of
other birds of rauine and prey, save only that foul whom the French term
( Piscuerd,) the Italians, Pigozo, and in our mother speech, I may call the
Wodwall.

You shall ever find the Vultures rough, and hairie legged, which is an evident
sign that they fret and rub them against the rocks, where their chief
abode and stay is. And further you shall note that the brown or blancke
Vultures are more rare and dainty to be seen, then the black or ashemaylde
be.

Again this is peculyer to them in their kind, that the feathers on their
heads be short in respect of the Eagles feathers, which has been some cause
that they have been thought to be balde and without plume, though in very
deed it be nothing so.

The Vulture that is ash colored or black maylde, has short arms all beset
with plume, even to the very Talons, which is a specially note among all those
birds of rauine, only peculiar to them, and not to any other foul, having
crooked Talons, unless it be the Owl, who is rough legged even in sort as
these Vultures be.

To discern the brown from the ashemayled Vulture, you must note, that the
brown Vulture has her neck feathers very straight and long, much like to
those that ye Cock has or the Stare. In regard of those feathers on her
back, sides, and the corner of the plye of her wings, which are little and
slender, in manner of scales, but the breast feathers, as also those on the
back, and the covert feathers of the train are to the red Vulture red, and to
the black Vulture black, and to both kinds very large: by mean of their
hugenes they can not be upon their wings, nor rise from the stand without some
advantage.

A man shall seldom see them upon the plains, and champion of Italy,
Almanie, and France, unless happily sometime in the winter, for then they
raunge and wander into every part, for at that time in chief they abandon and
forsake the tops of the stately and high mountains, to avoid the extremity
of cold, and do take their passage into more hot regions and countries, where
the climate does better serve their purpose, and better agree with their nature.

The Vultures at the most, do not disclose above two or three Chickens or
young birds, and it is a very hard matter, and almost impossible for any man to
rob their Eyrie, for that most commonly they build in some hanging cliffe
whether there is very hard and dangerous access. They may be nourished and
fed with tripes, offall, and inwardes of beasts. And because they do
usually haunt the fields of purpose to devour the offall, and refuse parts of
such beasts as men have slaughtered and slain, and such like carrion, some
men are of opinion, that they do presage and betoken great murder and bloody
spoil of men that are in arms.

The opinion of William Tardiffe a Frenchman, concerning the division of birds
of prey, and other things worthy the observation.
BIrds of prey (says he) which we use in Falconrie, be of three kinds.

The Eagle. Falcon. Goshawke.


Of Eagles there are two kinds, the one is absolutely called the Eagle, the
other Zimiech.

Aquila, Zimiech,
A red mayle in an Eagle, and deep eyes, specially if she be bred in the west
mountains (as is before said) is one special sign of her goodness.

Whitenes upon the head or back of an Eagle, betokens the Excellency of the
Eagle, which in the Arabian tongue is termed, Zimiach, in the Sirian language.
Mearan, in the Greek. Philadelph, among the Latins. Mylyon.


The Eagle must ever be taken when she is in the eyrie, for her condition is
to wax afterward very bold and outrageous. It is said, that when the Eagle
begins to grow to liking, near cawking or calling time, she commonly
flies with other Eagles, bearing with them to their stand where they use to
prey, a piece of Arsenicke, otherwise called Orpiment, which does delay and
mortify their lust and desire.

The Eagle will seize upon the Goshawke, and any other foul of rauine, or prey
that does flee with Iesses, making sure account that it is a fit prey for her.
And for that only cause and none other, coueteth to apprehend and take them in
their flight, for when they are wild and ramage, using the deserts, she
offers them not any such violence.

A mean to avoid the Eagle, when a man is determined to flee with his Hawke,
is to pluck off the Hawks Iesses before she flee, for otherwise let her do
her best, she shall not escape the Eagle.

That Eagle, which is the kingly and right Eagle indeed, will slay the Hare,
the Fox, and such like beasts of the forest and field.

The Eagle called Zimiech, will kill the Crane, and other less fowls.

A Devise and Remedy for you, when the Eagle does molest and hinder your game
in Hawking.
Find the means to get an Eagle, and seele up her eyes, but yet in such
sort, as she may have a little sight to aspire and clime to her mountee, into
whose tuell and fundament, convey a little Assa fetida, and sow up the place.
Then tie to her legs, either a wing, a piece of flesh, or a red cloth,
which the other Eagles may conjecture to be flesh, and so let her slye. For
then will she in her flight, for her own safety and assurance, pull down all
the other Eagles from their stately gate and pitch, which otherwise she would
never do, were it not for the pain of that which is conueighed into her tuell.

Now will I lay you down the report of Francis Sforzino Vicentino, an Italian,
as touching the Division and Nature of Eagles, and so proceed to the Falcon.


THere are two sorts of Eagles, that is to say, the huge and royal Eagle,
which is the Haggart or passenger. And a less Eagle, which is a base and
bastard Eagle, in respect of the other.

The right Eagle is bredde in the highest clyues of the Leuant, and specially
in those of Ciprus. They are as large as a wild Goose, and more. Some of them
are of a brown mayle, and some other of a spotted mayle, their gorges and
breasts are full of straked lines, tending to read, they have long heads,
great beakes, and very much crookt, strong arms and rough large stretchers, in
a manner as great as the palm of a man's hand, boystrous talons, and a
reasonable long train.

These Eagles, in the main field will take the Hare, and by force hold him,
and carrye him in the air, as they flee, until they epsy some rock or other
fit stand, where they may prey upon him. In like sort they take other beasts,
and sundry times do roue and raunge abroad to beat and seize on Goats,
kiddes, and Fawnes. They are in use, and price with sundry noble men, as has
been reported unto me credibly.

The great Turk of all other Princes, does most use to flee with the Eagle,
and does give his Falconers in charge to man and lure them, as they do the
Goshawke: and being thoroughly manned, has a cast of Eagles at one time, upon
one perch: betwixt two of his people into the field, when they are there,
they flee both together, the one at the mowntee, a very stately pitch, and the
other more base and low, and that Eagle that does fly the base pitch, is
taught to make a great noise as she roueth too and fro over the Forest, not
much unlike the questing or calling of a dog, by mean of which sudden cry
and noise, diverse times there issue out of the covert, some wild and savage
Beasts, which are no sooner discried by that high fleeing Eagle, but suddenly
she bateth of her pitch, and stoopeth from her wings, and at the down-come
either seazeth or rifleth some one of them, slaying them by force, until the
dogs may make in to her reskew. And thus betwixt the Eagle and curres, the
prey is taken not without the great pleasure and liking of that mighty Prince
the Turk. You may guess of the excellency of this gallant Pastime, if it be
true, as it is vouched by report. Herein I can affirm nothing of my self, but
do follow mine Author, from whom I collected this kind of hawking, and am
bold to make recital of it in this place, both for the hugeness of the foul,
as also the strangeness of the practice.

All these kinds of Eagles, have their Tyercells or male birds, of whom some
huge, some of middle syse, and other some less, which are called Bastard
Eagles, not had in any account.

Thus (as you see) have I laid down to your view and judgments, the kinds and
sorts of Eagles, with their proper descriptions due to them, and other points
incident too their natures: and have stayed more about the matter, than needed,
in mine own opinion, being a foul so little in use with us, but I have done
it as well to make my division perfectly, as also to decypher that, which every
one perhaps has not read, as touching the natural inclynation of this royal
bird, who for that she is Queen and chief of all Hawks, deserves some
larger discourse than the rest, which are in nature more base, though in use
more familyar and ordynarie.

Of the Falcon, and how many sorts of Falcons there are.
depiction of hawk

THere are seven kinds of Falcons, and among them all for her nobleness and
hardy courage, and withal ye francknes of her mettell, I may, and do mean to
place the Falcon gentle in chief.

1 This Falcon is called the Falcon Gentle, for her gentle and courteous
condition and fashions. In heart and courage she is valiant, ventrous, strong,
and good to brook both heat and cold, as to whom there comes no weather
amiss at any time, whereas the most part of other Hawks, either are lightly
offended with the one or the other, and must have a hand kept upon them
accordingly, or otherwise there is no great pleasure to be taken in them.

The Haggart Falcon.
2 The second, is the Haggart Falcon, which is otherwise termed the Peregrine
Falcon. The Haggart is an excellent good bird, but (as my Author affirms)
very choice, and tender to endure hard wheather: but in mine own conceit she
is in nature far otherwise. And my reason is this, that she should be better
able to endure cold then the Falcon Gentle, because she does come from
foreign parts a stranger, and a passenger, and does win all her prey and
meat at the hardest by maine wing, and does arrive in those parts, where she
is taken when the fowls do come in great flocks, which is the very hardest
part of the year. Moreover being a hot Hawke by kind, she should the better
sustain the force of weather, and that she is a hot Hawke of nature, may be
gathered by her flying so high a pitch, which I take to be, for that in the
higher parts, she finds the colder air, for the middle region is more cold
then the rest, because thither comes no reflection. And again, she meweth
with more expedition (if she once begin to cast her feathers) then the other
Falcons do. But these points of controversy I leave to the learned, and such
as have the experience of the matter.

The Barbary, or Tartaret Falcon.
3 The third, is that Falcon which is called the Tartaret, or Barbary Falcon,
whom they do chiefly use in Barbary, and most account of.

The Gerfalcon.
4 The fourth, is the Gerfalcon, which is general, and common enough, as well
in France, as in other places.

The Sacre.
5 The fifth, is the Falcon Sacre.

The Laner.
6 The sixth, the Laner, common, as well in France, as in other Regions.

The Tunician.
7 The seventh, is ye Tunitian Falcon. These seven kinds of Falcons are all
hardy and good, according to the prey that belongs to their force and nature.
For they are diverse in nature, and of several plumes, and besides that,
disclosed and eyred in diverse countries. Wherefore I mean to touch every one
of their natures, and to declare you, whereunto each is inclined, according as
they are manned, and governed: and first of all I will treat of the Falcon
Gentle.

But before I speak of the Falcon Gentle, I will somewhat touch the Etimologie
of the name, and lay down the opinons of two learned men, and ancient writers,
as touching that matter.

First Suidas a Greek Author does affirm, that Falco which in our mother
speech does import a Falcon, is a general name to all Hawks of prey and
rauine, as Accipiter is in Latin, and Hierax in Greek.

Festus, he is of opinion, that the Falcon is so named, because of her pounces,
and crooked talons, which do bend like unto a since or sickle, which in Latin
is called Falx.

But wherehence soever the name is derived, this is most assured, that of all
other birds of prey, the Falcon is most excellent, and the very Prince of all
other Hawks, both for her goodness of wing, and great hardiness and courage.

Of the Falcon Gentle, and her property.
depiction of hawk

THe Falcon gentle, by nature does love to flee the Hearon every way, and is a
very good Hearoner, as well from her wings at the down-come, as from the fist,
and aforehead, and will flee all other kinds of greater fowls, as those which
are termed birds of Paradise, fowls more large then the Hearo^. Moreover she
is good to flee the shoueler, a foul like the Hearon, but somewhat less, the
wild Goose, and such otherlike fowls, and therefore is excellent at the river
or brook. If you take the Falcon Gentle an eyesse, you may boldly flee the
Crane with her, but if she be not an Eyesse, she will never be so hardy as to
venture on the Crane. And therefore being an Eyesse, and never seeing, nor
knowing any other less foul then the Crane, if you cast her off to the Crane,
she forthwith thinks it to be a foul fit for her, and by mean thereof
flees the Crane very well, and becomes a very good Crane fleer, for hawks
commonly prove either cowards, or hardy after they are first quarred.

An Observation.
IF a man do well, he should never take the Falcons out of the Eyrie, till
time they be fully summed and hard penned, or if he do happily commit that
error, he should not man her, but presently cause her to be conueighed and
placed in an Eyrie that most does resemble the Eyrie of a Hawke, if he may
conveniently come by any such, and there breed her, and feed her with good
flesh, such as the flesh of Pullets, Chickens, Pigeons, and such like, for
otherwise her wings will not grow to any perfection, and her legs and other
parts would quickly be broken and wax crooked, and her train feathers, and
for the most part, all her long feathers and flags be full of taints.

The good shape of a Falcon.
THat you may the better make choice of your Falcon, and know a good Falcon
from a refuse, I will discribe you the perfect shape of a right good Falcon,
such a one as is very like to be good, though many times we see, that in
proof, the most likely things to show, and to the eye, become in proof, the
worst and of least regard.

The shape of a good Falcon therefore is, first to have wide nares, high and
large eye-liddes, a great black eye, a round head, some what full on the
top, a short thick beak, blew as azure, a reasonable high neck, barbe
feathers under the clappe of the beak, a good large breast, round, fleshly,
strong, hard and stiff bonded And that is the true cause, why the Falcon does
greatly affie in her breast, and strikes with it, and gageth it most at her
encounter. And by mean she is very strong armed, she uses the more freely
also to strike a foul with her pounces and talons. Moreover she must be
broad shouldred, she must have slender sails, full sides, long and great
thighs, she must be strong and short armed, large footed, with the sear of
the foot soft, and all one for hew with the sear of the beak and nares,
black pownces, long wings and crossing the train, which train ought to be
short, and apt to bend and bow to every side. For in the train of a Hawke does
consist a great help, when she flies. And therefore (as well as for beauty)
if a train feather or covert feather be broken or bruised, we do covet to
ympe them again, or set them to right, because it may be the less hinderance
to the hawke in her flight.

You must note that those very Falcons, that are of one kind and sort, have
very great difference and odds betwixt them, and are called by diverse names,
according to the time that a man begins to deal with them, and does
undertake them, according to the places where they haunt, and according to the
Countries whence they come.

They are divided into mewed Hakes, Rammage hawks, Sore-hawkes, and Eyesses,
into large Hawks, mean hawks, and slender hawes, all which are of diverse and
several plumes and mayles, according to the diversity of the regions. Also
they are of diverse prices, according to the goodness and estimation of them.
Again, some are black Falcons, some russet Falcons, some other blanck
Falcons: some of which are river Hawks, to slay the foul at the brook, and
other some field hawks, to fly the land, and there to kill the Fesant,
Partridge, and such like fowls. Thus you see how diverse and many they be,
according to their outward accidents, and yet in nature, all Falcons.
Therefore because I am to treat of every kind several, I will not longer
hold you in this place, with description of the Falcon Gentle: but hereafter
when I write in another place of the diseases, cures and the manning of these
hawks, I will as near as I may, let pass nothing that shall belong in any
respect unto the Falcon, but that in one place or other you shall find it.

Of the names of a Falcon, according to her age and taking.
THe first name and term that they bestow on a Falcon, is an Eyesse, and this
name does last as long as she is in the Eyrie, and for that she is taken from
the Eyrie.

Those Falcons are tedious, and do use to cry very much, in their feeding
they are troublesone and painful to be entered: but being once well entered
and quarred, they leave a great part of that vice, and do prove very good to
the Hearon, and to the river: and all other kinds of foul they are hardy, and
naturally full of good mettle.

2 The second name is a ramage Falcon, and so she is called when she has
departed and left the Eyrie, that name does last, and she is called a ramage
Hawke, May, June, July, and August. These Falcons are hard to be manned by
reason of the heat, and for that they can ill brook hunger, or to stand empty
panneld: but who so can use them with patience and judgment, shall find them
passing good, for that they are without fault.

3 Thirdly they are called sore Hawks, from the end of August, to the last of
September, October, and November.

Those Hawks are of good disposition, they will do very well, and are in
their prime, and full pride for beauty and goodness. Nevertheless those
first plumes that they have, when they forsake the Eyrie, those do they keep
one whole year before they cast or mew them, and that kind of feather, is
called the Sore-feather. According to the diversity of these terms and
times, these Hawks do become better and better to be manned and kept.

4 The fourth speech and term that is bestowed on them, (as my Italian Author
does call them) is, that they are termed Marzaroly, and so are they called
from January, February, March, April, until the midst of May. I have no
proper English phrase for them, but they are very tedious and painful, and
the reason is, for that they must be kept on the fist all that space. Diverse
of them are great baters, and therefore not very greedy of meat or hungry,
they are but badde Hawks, much subject to Filanders and the worms, who looks
to win credit or good by keeping them, must be of good experience, and no
less patience.

5 Fifthly, they are called (Entermewers) or Hawks of the first coat, that is,
from the middle of May till June, July, August, September, October, November,
December.

Those Hawks are called Entermewers, for that they cast the old, and have new
feathers, and they prove very good, and hardy Hawks, but no great trust is to
be given the^, for that they are giddy headed and fickle: wherefore he that
looks to have good, or credit by keeping of them, must be very circumspect,
and regard their natures very well, and must keep a good hard hand on them,
and must make his fist their perch, and never in a manner let them be from the
fist. [And thus used, Addition.
they are in that year the highest flyers, and most apt for the river.]

Besides in those seven kinds of Falcons, which I spoke of in the first
division, there are included sundry sorts termed according to the Countries
and places where they are eyried, and whence they come: the special names and
properties of all which, I hold it not so needful to discourse upon, speaking
fully and sufficiently of those seven kinds of Falcons in their times and
places, as they shall offer themselves in order unto me to be decyphered unto
the Reader, to whose good judgment and industry. I mean to refer and leave
sundry things which I leave unspoken of, for that there is no man that is
desirous of skill, but may with ease and will with dilygence (I doubt not) flee
over to those very Authors in French and Italian, from whence I have made this
brief collection, where he shall be assured to find things more at large set
out: but the effect (unless I be deceived) comprised in these few pages of
paper as well concerning the kinds of Hawks, as also their manning, luring,
flights, mewing, diseases, and cures in every condition, as (I trust) to the
pleasure and profit of the gentle and willing reader. Wherefore I will now
proceed to the Haggart Falcon, a most excellent bird, if her nature and
property be observed in due manner.

Of the Haggart Falcon, and why she is called the Peregrine, or Haggart.
I Have many times studied with my self, for what cause the Haggart Falcons,
the most excellent birds of all other Falcons, have been termed Haggart or
Peregrine Hawks. And at first was of opinion, that men so called the^, for that
they are brought unto us from far and foreign Countries, and are in deed
mere strangers in Italy, (and as a man may call them) trauailers. And this I
know for truth, they are not disclosed or eyred in Italy, and besides that,
there are few in Italy that do take them at any time, but the greatest store
of them are brought and conveyed thither from forrane Regions, but if they
should be termed peregrine or Haggart Falco^s, for this only cause, and only
in respect hereof, and nothing else, then might we as well bestow that name
also upon all other Falcons, yt are not bred in Italy, as upon the Tunitian and
other Hawks that are passengers. Wherefore I am of opinion, that for three
causes principally, and in chief, they are called Haggart or peregrine Falcons.

1 First, because a man connot find, nor ever yet did any man Christian or
Heathen find their eyrie in any Region, so as it may well be thought, that for
that occasion they have atchiued and gotten that name and term of Peregrine or
Haggart falcons, as if a man would call them Pilgrims or Forrainers.

2 The second cause is, because these Falcons do rangle and wander more than
any other sort of Falcons are wont to do, seeking out more strange and uncouth
countries, which indeed may give them that title of Haggart and peregrine
hawks for their excellency, because they do seek somany strange and foreign
coasts, and do rangle so far abroad.

3 The Third and last cause, I do think, may be their beauty and excellency,
because this word ( Peregrino) or Peregrine, does many times import an
honorable and choice matter had in great regard: but it skilleth not much
which of these three alleged is the true cause, we will not stand upon that
nice point, for that a good Falconer ought much more to regard the scearching
out of the true nature and property of Hawks, then to have so great and
special respect unto their names, and terms.

Wherefore I conclude, that these Haggart Falcons are not of Italy, but
transported and brought thither from foreign places, as namely from
Alexandria, Ciprus, and Candy. And yet this is for certain, that in Italy
there are taken of these Haggart Falcons, as in the dominion of the renowned
Duke of Ferrara, and in the country near Rauenna, being brought thither by
force of weather and wind. And by that means there are none of those Haggarts
found Eyesses, but they are al either soar Hawks, or mewed Haggarts.

Of shape and proportion they are like the other Falcons, and are of three
sorts, as touching their making and mould, that is to say, large, little, or
Falcons of a middle size. Some of them are long shapt, some short trussed
Falcons, some larger, some less.

They are ordinarily of four mayles, either blancke, russet, brown, or turtle
mayld, and some pure white maylde, without any jot or sport of any other
color, but those a man shall very seldom see. And for that cause I mean not
to say much of that kind of mayled Falcons, but will deal with such as are
more ordinary in use.

Of the good shape of a Haggart Falcon.
depiction of hawk

A Good and right Haggart Falcon ought to have her head of dark or blanck
plume, flat on the top, with a white wreath or garland enuironing her head, a
large blew bending beak, widenares, a great, full, black eye, hie, stately
neck, large breast, broad shouldred, a great feather, in color like the
feather of a Turtle, long veins and sails, but slender shapte, long train,
high thighs, and white on the inside, I mean her pendant feathers, short and
great armed, large wide foot, with slender stretchers and falons, and the same
to be either pale white maylde, or pale bluish, tending somewhat to azure.
These are generally, the most assured tokens of an excellent Haggart Falcon.

How to know a Haggart by her fleeing.
A Good skillful Falconer, will quickly discern a good Haggart Falcon, from a
slight Falcon, though he be far off, by the stirring of her wings. For that a
Haggart Falcon uses not a thick stroke, but stirs her wing by leisure and
seldom, and gets up to her mountee, without any great making out. And
although perhaps she be not so large as the fleight or soar Falcon, yet to
seeming and show, she is more large, which happens by mean of her sails,
which in very deed are of greater scope and compass than the fleight Falcons
are. Contrariwise the fleight Falcon she uses a more short and quicker stroke
with her wing then the Haggart does, and does not deal so leasurely. There are
besides this one difference, sundry other betwixt these two kinds of Falcons,
which in this place I will deliver you, for that you shall the better judge the
ods betwixt them, being both very good Falcons, and the best of all other,
both for field, and river.

The difference and ods betwixt the Haggart, and the Falcon Gentle.
FOr that diverse have delight to know the difference betwixt the Falcon Gentle
and the Haggart, I will here show you certain special points concerning the
difference of them both. First the Haggart is a larger hawke then the Falcon
gentle, and a longer armed Hawke, with a reasonable large foot, and her talons
more long then the Falcon Gentles are, a hie neck and a long, a fair seasoned
head, and a more long beak then the other has.

1 The beam feathers of the Haggart, as she is in her slight, are longer then
the Falcon gentles, her train somewhat larger, the Haggart has a flat
thigh, but the Falcon gentle a round thigh.

2 The Haggart will lie longer on her wings the^ the Falcon Gentle, and has a
more deliberate and leasurely stroke then the other Falcon has, as I said
before.

3 From the fist, it is reported by some, that the Falcon Gentle does fly more
speedily then the Haggart, but at a long flight the Haggart is far the better
of both, and does exell all other kind of Hawks both for good wing, and
maintenance of her flight, which is a perfect proof of a very good back.

4 The Falcon Gentle is more hasty and hot in all her doings then the Haggart,
and is thought more rash and outrageous of nature then the Haggart is. And when
they flee together, the Falcon Gentle will make her stooping and downecome more
unadvisedly, and will use the greater haste to be at her pitch again then the
other, and missing the foul at the stooping, the Falcon gentle is in the
greater chafe, and will presently flee on head at the check, so as many times
she is hard to come by again. Whereas the Haggart is more deliberate and
better advised, which proceeds in my opinion, for that she better knows
the advantage of her slight, than the Falcon gentle, because she has been
forced often to prey for her self, and has not been subject to the order of
any keeper, neither has had any hand kept upon her, to make her eager and
greedy of the prey, more then naturally she is accustomed to flee at her
seasons to gorge her self, which she does both advisedly and to great
advantage.

5 The Haggart Falcon is taken in Candie, Rhodes, and many other places, of
that Sea which is called Archipelagus, or the Aegean Sea.

6 The best sort of those Haggart Falcons, have their beakes of the color of
azure.

7 Those of Ciprus which are small Hawks, and of a russet mayle, they are the
most hardy and ventrous Hawks of all others.

Much more might be said, as touching the Haggart, and Falcon Gentle: but for
that the Hawks are daily in hand and view, and because I have a larger field to
ear, which is to lay you down the manning of them, and such things as are
more necessary to a good Falconer, I leave it, and will proceed to the next
kind of Falcon, which is the Tartaret or Barbary Falcon. As touching whose
name and nature I mean to deliver you, what I have gathered as well out of the
French Copy, as also borrowed from the Italian, whom I do much reverence as
well for his language, as for his rare and deep devise in all things wherein he
hoth deal.

Of the Barbary Falcon.
depiction of hawk

THe Barbary or Tartaret Falcon, is a Hawke not very common in any Country,
and she is called a passenger or passeby, even as the Haggart Falcon is.

They are not full so large as the Tiercell Gentle, though some men do write
otherwise of them, they are red plumed under the wing, strong armed with long
talons and stretchers. They are very ventrous upon all kind of fowls, and will
fly at any game that the Haggart does. With this Tartarot, or Barbary Falcon,
and the Haggart also, you may flee all May and June, for they are Hawks that
are very slack in mewing at the first, but when they once begin, they mew
and shedd their feathers very fast.

For what cause this Falcon is called a Barbary, or Tartaret Falcon.
THese kind of Falcons are called Barbary Falcons, for that most commonly they
make their passage through Barbary and Tunyse, where they are taken more often
tha^ in any other place: As namely, in the Isles of Leuant, Candy, Cipres and
Rhodes, where these Hawks do more frequent and use, then in any other Region,
and the country men will sooner take them, by endeavor if they may, then any
Hawks that are eyreed in their Country. And truly I do not think, that in
any other place, there are so many good Crane-slayers, as there are to be had
in the Isle of Candy. The reason of it is, for that the Nobility and states of
the Country, are much more inclined to keep those kind of Hawks that will kill
the Crane, then any other people are elsewhere, and they do enure and make
their Falcons to that kind of game, more than to any other foul. And surely
you shall there have excellent good Hawks.

Thus much it has pleased mine Author to write of, and in commendation of the
Barbary Falcon: but here with us in England, I never saw or heard of the
proof of those hawks, to be so good or excellent, as by his report I find
them. Sundry other kind of Falcons prove better with us here, as namely, the
Falcon Gentle, the Haggart, and such like, which either are passengers, or
brought to us from other Countries. The Barbary Hawk is much less then either
the Falcon gentle, or the Haggart, and therefore I will only follow mine
Author as thuching her praise, and so proceed to the next kind of Falcons,
delivering you both the opinion of the Italian, and French Gentlemen therein.

Of the Gerfalcon.
depiction of hawk

THe Gerfalcon is a bird of great force, a very fair hawke, specially being
mewed, she is strong armed, she has large stretchers and singles, she is
fierce and hardy of nature, by mean whereof she is the more difficult and hard
to be reclaymed. A Gerfalcon will look to have a gentle hand kept on her, and
her keeper to be courteous and full of patience. The Gerfalcon is a gallant
Hawke to behold, more huge then any other kind of Falcon, her eyes and her head
are like the Haggart Falcon. She has a great bending beak, large nares, a
mayle like unto a Laner, very long sails, and sharp pointed, a train much
like the Laner, a large foot, marble seared, blanck, russet, and brown plumed
as other Falcons be, more beutifully to the eye than any other kind of Falcon.

These kind of Hawks are made to flee from the fist to the Heron, Crane,
Goose, Bustard, and such other like fowls. When they are mewed, they do very
much resemble the Laner, they do not change the marble sear of the foot.
Their Tiercels, (whom we call Ierkyns) are had in great prize, they are
brought from Leuant, Cipres, Candy, and Alexandria, by Merchants.

The Gerfalcons by report, do most commonly Eyree in the parts of Prussia, and
upon the borders of Russia, and some of them come from the confines and
mountains of Norway. But most commonly they are taken about Almayne Passebyes
(as we term them) or passengers.

With the Gerfalcon, you may naturally flee all kinds of fowls, as I have
already written of the Haggart, and the Barbary Falcon.

Let it not discourage or amaze you, that the Gerfalcon is so hard to be
reclaymed and manned, for the fircenesse and hardines of their nature, is the
only cause thereof, but in the end being once won, they prove excellent good
Hawks.

They will sit very upright and stately on the fist. Their beakes are blew, and
so are the seares of their legs and feet, their pounces and talons are very
long, and in troth they will lightly refuse to flee at nothing.

At my being in Muscouia, I saw sundry Gerfalcons very fair and huge Hawks,
and of all other kinds of Hawks, that only bird is there had in account and
regard, and is of greater price then any other. The reason whereof I learned of
certain English Merchants my country men, who told me, that the Emperors
Majesty Iuan Vazaluich, did use to flee the Raven with a cast of Gerfalcons
and took no slender pleasure and delight therein.

The Raven truly is a monstrous strong flight, by mean she is of so great
force and weight of wing, and withal does use to make so many turns in the
air, as you shall see no other foul do the like. Yet nevertheless as they
told me, they had seen a cast of Gerfalcons beat her in such wise, as she
has been forced to take the stand, and to perch in a Pins or Fir tree for
her succor and safety. But that shift little preuayles, for no sooner is she
pearched, but presently by commandment of the Emperor, each Muscouite drawing
his hatchet from his back, (without which tool they never travel in that
country) bestows his force to the felling of the tree, which is lightly done
by mean of many hands, and the tenderness of the timber, the hawks all that
while lying upon their wings, looking for their game: who finding the tree to
fail her, at the fall is driven to trust her wings again, and so by a fresh
flight and new encounter, does yield exceeding pleasure to his Majesty, and
such as are in the field, and in fine, is slain by her mighty adversaries the
Gerfalcons, who most greedily do seize upon her, as their kind has taught
them to do. I imagine the flight to be very strong, and truly the pastime and
pleasure cannot be small, but a game fit for such a mighty Prince as his
Majesty is. Thus much of the Gerfalcon.

Of the Sacre.
THere be 3. kinds of Sacres, the first is called Sephe after the Babylonians
and Assyrians, that kind of Sacre is found in Egypt, and in the west parts, and
in Babylon. She will stay the Hare, and such like.

The second kind is called Semy, she kills the Though, as her proper game,
wherein she takes the greatest pleasure.

The third is called Hyuair, or the Peleryn Sacre after the Egyptians and
Assirians.

She is called a Peleryn or Haggart, for that her eyree is not known, and
because yearly she makes her passage toward Judea, or Media, she is taken
in the Isles of Leuant, Cypres, Candy, and Rhodes. And therefore some think,
she conuneth out of Russia, and Tartaria, and also from the great Sea. That
Sacre that is taken an entermewer, is the best Hawke. The Sacre of all Hawks
the most laboursome, and best able to brook her fleight. She is also peaceable
and very tractable, and a Hawke that can best away with course and gross
diet. The prey of the Sacre are great fowls, the Heron, the Goose, the Crane,
Bytor, and withal the small beasts of the field and forest.

It is well to be seen, that the Sacre is a Hawk somewhat larger then the
Haggart Falcon, of a rusty and ragged plume like the kite, the sear of her
beak and foot like the Laner, her pounces but short, nevertheless, she is of
great force, and hardy to all kind of foul, as I have already reported of the
Haggart and Barbary Falcons, but not so ventrous and free to flee the Crane,
or such like game as the Haggart Falcon is.

This Sacre is a passenger, even as the Haggart Falcon is. No man is able truly
to say, when she eyreeth or discloseth, but at the Rhodes they say they come
from the parts of Russia, and Tartaria, and the Ocean sea. These Sacres are
take^in great number in the Isles of Leuant, Candy, Cipres, and Rhodes, and
sundry other Islands in the Ocean sea. But I must needs confess to you, that
the Sacre is more disposed to the field a great deal, then to the brook As to
flee the wild Goose, the Bittor, the Fesant, the Partridge, and all such like
fowls. And is nothing so dainty of her diet, or to be kept, as the long winged
hawks are.

The Sacre is much like the Falcon Gentle for largeness eand the Haggart for
hardines, and is a passenger as the Haggart is.

She is a Hawk chiefly to flee the kite, and yet may be made and manned to flee
the field, and stay other game of the field as the Falcon does.

The noble men that take pleasure in the Sacre, to make a flight with her at
the kite, do use this order and devise, to bring the kite down from her
mountee, for that in the heat of the day, she does use to soar and flee of
an exceeding height in the clouds, to take the comfort of the cold and fresh
air, that is in the middle region: They tie a fox tail to the leg of a
mallard or Ducke, whom they cause to be born on the fist of some one Falconer,
and do so, let the ducke flee in the midst of a plain, whom as soon as the
kite discries from her pitch, she presently bateth of her gate, and makes her
stooping to the ground, and there gazeth and woundreth at the strangeness, and
the shape of this foul: then do they cast off the Sacre to the kite, who
forthwith trusting to the goodness of her wing, gets up to her pitch, as hie
as possible she may, by making often turns and wrenches in the air, where it
is a very pleasant sport to behold the bickering that is betwixt them in the
air, specially if it be in a plain where no trees or groves are, to hinder
the sight of the matter, and the day fair, and not windy, for then will the
Kite and Sacre soar so high, as they will flee clean out of sight: But that
serves not the Kites purpose and turn, for the Sacre nevertheless does
conqure her in the encounter, beating her to the ground by mean of the sundry
stoopinges and downe-comes that she makes upon her.

They flee with the Sacre at two sorts of Kites, that is, to the Kite royal,
which is called by the Frenchman, the ( Milan Royal) and at one other kind of
Kite, called the black Kite, (the Milan Noyer) which is far the more nimble
bird of the two, and does more busily trouble the hawke in her flight then the
other does, by mean she is the less of the two, and uses her wings far
better. Of all hawks this kind of hawk has the longest train. We call the
Tyercell of the Sacre, the Sacret, which is the male bird, and the Sacre the
female, betwixt whom there is no odds more then in the quantity and
proportion: for commonly anong birds of prey, the male is less then the
female. The Sacre is called in Latin Bu^eo, and the Sacret Subuter.

Of the Laner.
depiction of hawk

THe Laner is a Hawke common in all Countries, specially in France, and other
places elsewhere, for voluntarylie she makes her Eyrie, and builds in high
trees and Forests and commonly in Crows nests or in the high rocks and
cliffes near the sea, according as the country is for the purpose.

The Haggart is somewhat less then the Falcon gentle, fair plummed when she
is an entermewer, but of shorter talons then any other kind of Falcon. And some
hold opinion, that those Laners that have the largest and best seasoned heads,
and the sear of the foot azure or bluish, be the Eyesses or soar Hawks,
they are the best and choyest Laners.

With this Hawke may you fly the rivers, a well with the Laner as the Laneret,
for they are both good, and likewise may you use them to other kinds of
flights, and specially to the field to kill the Partridge, the Fesant, the
Hare, the Choffe, ye Dawe, and all such sort of lesser foul.

The Laner is not over dainty of her feeding, but can better brook gross and
course victailes then any Falcon else can do.

Mewed Laners and Sacres, are hardly known from the soar Hawks, because they
do not change their plume. By these three signs you shall best know the Laner.

They are more blancke Hawks then any other, they have less beakes then the
rest, Addition.
and are less armed and pounced the^ other Falcons be. [The Laners of all
Hawks are the fittest for young Falconers, because they will hardly take
surfaits, and seldom be overflowed* or melt their grease.]

Of the Italian Author.
THe Laners do commonly Air in the Alps that divide Italy from Almaine: some
of them are reasonable hawks, some of a middle suit, and some less. Their
heads are white, and flat aloft, black and large eyed, slender nares*, short
beak and thick, and lesser then the Haggart Falcons, or the Falcon gentle*

They are marble or russet mailde, the breast feathers white, full of russet
spots, the points and extremities of their feathers full of round white
drops. Their sails and traynlong, they are short legged, with a foot
somewhat less then the Falcons, marble seered: but being mewed, they change
the seere of the foot to a yellow.

These Hawks will brook to ffee long on their wings after their manner, and
when they epsy one that goes abroad with a Sparowhawke to the field, they
presently follow and cover the spaniels, so as no sooner is the sparowhawk cast
off to the partridge, but if she miss or come short of her game, the Laner
stoopeth with great nimblenesse of wing, and either kills the foul, or
otherwise enforces it to stoop and fall amid the flight to the ground.

You shall never lightly see a Laner lie upon the wings, after she has flien
to mark, but after one stouping, she makes a point, and then does awaite for
the foul after the manner of a Goshawke: for if she miss at the first
downe-come, of kill not in the foot, she is by nature so slothful and dull,
as she will seek the advantage to her greatest ease: and therefore, does
commonly use upon the questing, and call of the Spaniels, to attend very
diligently, and so to prey at her pleasure.

They are highly esteemed in France, and (as they say) there made to the river,
and there do they use to flee with the a cast or leash of Laners to the
brook, and sometimes with the Laners and Lanerets together, and sometimes do
flee the field with the Laner: but in Italy they do not use this kind of
hawke at all. With us in England this kind of Hawke is in price, but accounted
very slothful and hard mettled, so as unless you keep a very hard hand upon
her, she will do little good, clean contrary to the nature of a Falcon
gentle, who for one good usage will show a treble courtesy, and the better she
is rewarded the better will she flee: but use the Laner well, and she makes
slender account thereof, but becomes slothful, and unapt to flee either
field, or river.

Of the Tunicion Falcon.
depiction of hawk

THe Tunicion is a Falcon even much of the nature of a laner, yet somewhat less
than the Laner, but very like her in plume and foot, always more sluggish and
heavy in her slight, and yet more creese then the Laner, and she has a large
round head.

The cause why she is called a Tunycian.
THis Falcon is termed a Tunician, for that ordinarily and most usually she
is found to air in Barbary, even as I have reported to you, that the Laner
does in France and otherwhere. And because Tunyce is the head and chief City
in all Barbary, and the Prince and state there commorant and most abiding,
holding the Court there, and do most chifely use to flee with these kind of
Falcons of all others, they are most chiefly termed Tunycians.

The Tunycian may also be called a Punycian Falcon, for that which we read of
the wars Punicke, against the Carthaginenses, being maintained against the
inhabitants of that pace, where now is situated Tunyce.

The Tunycian is large, approaching near the nature of a Laner, and very like
in plume and male, and not unlike for the sear of her foot, but somewhat
less, and of a longer slight: her head is large and round.

They are excellent good for the river, and will lie well upon their wings, and
fly the field well, as I have said before of the Laner. They do naturally
take pleasure to strike and seize upon the Hare, and all other kind of prey
whatsoever.

This kind of Falcons is not so ordinary or common in all parts and regions,
as other hawks are, save only in Barbary and Tunyce.

Of the Merlyn.
depiction of hawk

THere is a kind of Falcon that is called a Merlyn. These Merlyns are very much
like the haggart falcon in plume, in sear of the foot, in beak and tallons.
So as there sameth to be no ods or difference at all betwixt them, save only in
the bigness, for she has like demeanure, like plume, and very like conditions
to the Falcon, and in her kind is of like courage, and therefore must be kept
as choicely, and as daintily as the Falcon.

Assuredly diverse of these Merlyns, become passing good Hawks and very
skillful, their property by nature is to kill Thruthes, Larkes, and Partridges.
They flee with greater fircenes, and more hotely then any other hawke of prey.
They are of greater pleasure, and full of courage, but a man must make greater
care, and take good heed to them, for they are such busy and unruly things
with their beakes, as diverse times they eat off their own feet and talons very
unnaturally, so as they die of it. And this is the reason and true cause, that
seldom or never shall you see a mewed, or entermewed Merlin. For that in the
mew they do spoil themselves, as I have before declared.

My Italian Author has these words, both of the shape and in commendation of
the Merlin.

The Merline is (says he) of the shape of a Falcon, less than the
Sparowhawke, more nimble and wight of wing than any other Hawke, she does kill
all such game and prey as the Sparowhawk does use to slay, specially small
birds, namely Larks, Sparowes and such like, all which she does pursue with
exceeding cruelty and courage.

She is reported to be a Hawke of the fist, and not of the lure, albeit a man
may if he will, make her to the lure also. She is a very ventrous hawke and
hardy, by this we may coniectture it: For though she be little bigger then a
pigeon, yet notwithstanding, she will hazard her self to flee the Partridge,
the Quail, and such other like fowls, more large then her self, and will
pursue them in so cruel manner; as sundry times she follows them, even to
the villages and towns whether the silly birds do flee for aid and rescue,
from their natural foe the Hawke.

The Merlin is the only Hawke of all others, in whom as my author affirms,
there is no difference betwixt the male and female, but yet by experience we
find it otherwise, for the female is ye larger bird of the two, and more big
then the other in sight.

Some are of opinion, that Lidos, Hieraz in Greek and Levis Accipiter in
Latin, is our Merlin of whom we speak, and that those birds of prey whom
Aristotle terms ( Leves) to our judgment should be the Merlins, because they
are the less Hawks of all others that are to be found.

Of the Hobbie.
depiction of hawk

OF all birds of prey that belong to the Falconers use, I know none less then
the Hobbie, unless it be the Merlin. The Hobby is a Hawke of the lure, and not
of the fist: also she is of the number of those Hawks that are hie flying and
tower Hawks, as the Falcon, the Laner, and the Sacre be. If a man be disposed
to describe the Hobby, he cannot do better, nor deal more artificially, then
to match her for shape with the Sacre. For in good faith there is but small
difference or inequality betwixt them, save that the Sacre is far the huger
bird.

The property of the Hobbye in all countries and regions where they are eyred,
or otherwise brought, is to soar, and flee upon the Huntsmen and Falconers, and
so to follow them very watchfully, to the end that when they spring or put up
any small birds, she may stoop from her wings, and seize on them, as on her
prey. And this is so ordinary a Hawk, and the practice that I speak of so
general, as there is not the simplest bower or peasant but does know it. I can
make no fitter nor more apt comparison, then to resemble the frye and small
fish of the Sea, being had in chase by the huger sort of fish desirous to
devour them: to the small fowls and birds of the air, pursued by the Hobby.

For as soon as the silly fish that is chased by the Dolphin and such like, do
perceive their safety to be nothing in the Element of water, where, by God and
Nature they are allotted to live, eftsoon have they their recourse to the air
to save themselves, chosing rather to lie at the mercy of the ravening
sea-fowles, soaring upon the water, then to yield themselves in prey to their
natural adversaries the fish: Even so the Hobbies perceiving the Huntsmen or
Falconers in the field to hunt the poor Leueret, or flee the Partridge, do
forthwith accompany them, soaring upon them, in hope to encounter some one
small bird or other, whom the hounds or spaniels shall by fortune put up, and
spring by ranging the field. Then the Larks, and such like small fowls, whose
nature is not to branch or take the tree, but altogether to live upon the
ground, finding themselves pursued by the hounds and spaniels to beguile the^,
are enforst to trust to their wings, and to take the air, and being there,
finding the^selus molested by the Falconers and Hobbies, do make their choice
and election to become a prey rather to the dogs, or seek mercy among the
horse legs, and so to be surprised alive, then to affie in the courtesy of the
cruel Hobbies, and to be taken in their cruel tallons, where they are most
assured to die the death.

The Hobbie is so nimble and wight of wing, that she dares encounter the Crow,
and to give souse for souse, and blow for blow with him in the air.

This is a natural and special trick that she does use, espying the
Falconers in the field, she does follow them, and attend on them, but it is but
for a certain space as though in very deed she had her limits and bounds
precribed her, and appointed how far he should flee. For as soon as she
leaves them, she presently scoureth along the side of some grove or high
wood, where does ordinarily use to perch and take the stand.

The Hobby has a blew beak, but the sear of her beak and legs is yellow.
The crinet or little black feathers under her eyes be very black, so as most
commonly they continue and proceed from the beak to the temples or ear
burres, and in like manner is there an other black streak that descends to
either side of her gorge. As touching the top of the head it is betwixt
black and yellow, but has two white seames upon the neck. The plumes under
the gorge, and about the brows are reddish without spotte or drop. The
plumes under the belly (or as I may best term them) the breast feathers are
brown for the most part, and yet poudered with white spots as Ermines. All the
back, the train, and the wings are black aloft, she has no great scales
upon her legs, unless it be a few that begin behind the three stretchers and
pounchies, which are very large in respect of her short legs. Her brayle
feathers are engouted twixt read and black. The pendant feathers (which are
those behind the thigh) are of a rusty and smokie vernish complexion. When a
man sees her soar aloft in the air, he will judge her under the wings, that
her plumage and down, as well of her wings as betwixt her legs is russet and
reddish mayled.

There are two fowls, whereof the one is called, ( Ian le blancke) which I
take to be the Harrohen or capped Kite, and ye other ( blanch queue) the ring
tail, who do always flee with her for company, beating and sousing the Larks,
and if happily they spy the Hobby encountering the Lark, whom they put and
force to her wings, it is a pleasure to behold the game that is betwixt this
cast of bussards and the hawke. For their desire and intent is to bereave the
sillye hobby of her prey: but she being nimble and wight of wing, encountreth
with them, entercepting the Lark from them, mauger their might, and sundry
times they buckle so together, as you shall see them come tu^bling down both I
fear, one fast griping and seized on ye other.

Some would have that this Hobby of whom I write should be that bird whom
Aristotle calls Hipotriorchis, and the Latins Subuteo: but I am not of that
mind, but that it should rather be the Sacre, whom Aristotle does mean. But
let the learned reader Judge the controversy, I am to lay down their natures
and properties, and not to decide any matter of controversy, which indeed
does belong to the curious Falconer, and not to him that does embrace more the
sport, then the diversity and odds of speech, which in every Art a man shall be
assured to find. Let it suffice if I give the Reader to understand the nature
of every Hawke now a days in use, and withal (according to my promise and
meaning) do let him know the mean to fly with them both the field and
brook, as also to give him to wit, how to Mew, Ympe, and cure them being
diseased. These are the special points, and such as deserve thanks from me,
and commendation from him. I will proceed in the description of the nature of
this Hawke, according to the opinion of the Italian.

The Italians opinion of the Hobbie.
THe Hobbies are more large then the Merlyns, and for beak, eyes, plume and
foot, they very much resemble the Falcon. They will lie upon their wings
reasonably well, following me^ and Spaniels, fleeing upon them many times, to
the end that when any Partridge or Quail is sprung, they may the better stoop
from their wings, and so seize on the foul, which sundry times they do.

These kind of Hawks are used of such as go with nets, and spaniels: The order
of which game is this.

The dogs they range the field to spring the foul, and the Hobbies they
accustom to flee alost over them, soaring in the air, whom the silly birds
espying at that advantage, and fearing this conspiracy (as it were) betwixt the
dogs and hawks, for their undoing and confusion, dare in no wise commit
themselves to their wings, but do lie as close and flat on the ground as they
possible may do, and so are taken in the nets, Addition.
[which with us in England is called Daring, a sport of all other most proper
to the Hobbie.]

Some Gentlemen have made report and for truth assured me, that the Emperor
Ferdinando of famous memory, did give his Falconers in charge to keep and
reclaim sundry Hobbies. And his Majesty diverse times for recreation, would
take his Horse, and into the fields with a Hobbie on his fist, holding in his
right hand a long slender pole, or reed seven foot in length, on the top
whereof there was conueighed by sleight a strong line with a sliding knotte:
And when happily his Majesty had espied a lark on the ground, he would
forthwith hold up, and advance his Hobbie, to the view of the silly bird,
whom as soon as the Lark saw, he would in no wise dare to spring, but lie as
still as a stone flat upon the earth, so fearful they are of the Hobbie, in
chief of all other Hawks: then would the Emperor at his good leisure, and
great pleasure, with his long pole and the sliding line, take the sillye foul
and draw her up unto him, and truly took no small delight in this kind of
pastime, and would cause his Falconers to do likewise, who by this devise
took many birds, and in this sort would they Hawke from the beginning of
September to the end of October.

This practice did somewhat resemble, and draw to the nature of our devise, in
daring of larkes, which we use at these days, but (in my Judgment) nothing so
ready and fit as our pastime and ginne which we have, which is a very good
sport and full of delight, to see the fearful nature of the silly Lark,
with the great awe and subjection that the Hobbie has her in, by the law of
kind: for assuredly there is no other Hawke, no not the hugest, whom the Lark
does so much fear, as the Hobbie, which may manifestly appear by this that I
have written, as also by daily experience and practice in that behalf.

Of the Goshawke, after the opinion of William Tardiffe a Frenchman.
depiction of hawk

A General division of Goshawkes, whom the French men call Autour.

THere are (says he) five kinds of Authors or Goshawkes' speaking of the
Goshawke in the largest name and nature, comprised in that word Autour.

The first and most noble kind, is the female Goshawke, which is with us most
ordinarily in use.

The second is named a demi Author, or Goshawke, as it were a kind betwixt two
other sorts, and that is a spare slender hawke, and of little regarding respect
of any good she will do.

The third is the Tyercell which is the male, or cock to the Goshawke, who
does flay the Partridge, and is not of sufficient force to kill the Crane. He
is termed a Tyercelet, for that there are most commonly disclosed three birds
in one self eyree, two Hawks, and one Tiercell.

The fourth kind of Autour is the Sparrowhawke, whose nature is to kill all
kind of prey that the Goshawke does, save only the larger sort of fowls.

The fifth kind is called ( Sabech) whom the Egiptians term ( Baydach) which
does very much resemble the Sparrowhauk, but is less then the Sparowhawke, and
has a very blew eye.

There are sundry sorts of Goshawkes, and those brought and conveyed out of
sundry foreign parts and regions, but among them all, that Goshawke that is
bred and eyred in Armenia and Persia, is the principal best hawke, and then
next to her in goodness, the hawke of Greece, and lastly that of Affricke.

The Hawke of Armenia has her eyes green, but the best of ye kind is she that
has black eyes and black plumes on her back.

The hawke of Persia is large, well plumed, clear and deep eyed, with hanging
and pendand eyelids and brows.

The hawke of Greece has a great head, well seasoned, a strong neck, and is
reasonable well plumed.

The Goshawke of Affricke has black eyes in her soarage, but being a mewed
hawke, her eyes become reddish and fiery.

At what times Hawks begin to fall to liking, which is at Eawking time, all
birds of prey do assemble themselves with the Goshawke, and do flock together.
As namely the Falcon, the Sacre, and such other that live on prey, and rauine.

And hereof it proceeds that the Goshawkes become so diverse in goodness,
force, and hardiness, according to the diversity of their choice and cawking.

The best Goshawke ought to be weighty, and a heavy bird, as those of great
Armenia be.

In Syria they make choice of their hawks, by the Massines and poyse of them,
and do esteem the most weighty hawke for the best: as for the male and
conditions they do little regard or prize.

The blancke Goshawke is the largest, the fairest and most apt, and easy to
be reclaymed, and withal the strongest of all Hawks of that sort, for she
can kill the Crane. And by reason she is eyreed in a very hie and lofty place,
and can best endure the cold, which is most rife in the middle region of the
air, therefore is she good to flee all fowls of that sort and condition.

The Goshawke that does incline and tend to a black mayle, and that has
superfluous plumes on her head, reaching down her front or forehead, like a
peruque or borrowed hair, that is a very fair Hawke for beauty, but nothing
strong.

[But truly there is no Goshawke more excellent then that which is bread in
Ireland in the north parts, Addition.
as in Vlster, and in the Country of Tyrone.]

The good proportion and shape of a Goshawke.
She ought to have a small head, her face long and straight like the Vulture
or Eagle, a large wind pipe or throat, great eyes deep set, and the apple or
middle part of the eye black, nares, ears, back and feet, large and blancke,
a blancke long beak, long neck, big breast, hard flesh, long thighs,
fleshie, and distant one from the other, the bone of the leg and knee short,
long and large pounces, and talons.

The shape from the stern or train to the breast forward, ought to grow to a
roundnesse. The feathers of the thighs toward the train should be large, and
the train feathers short, soft and somewhat tending to an iron mayle.

The brayle feathers ought to be like the breast feathers, and the covert
feathers of the train should be spotted, and full off black rondels, but the
color of the very extremity and point of every train feather, ought to be
black streaked. Of mayle, and color, the best is the red, somewhat tending to
black or plain grieseld.

The signs of a good Goshawke, are hauty courage, desire and greedy lust to
feed, often tyring and plucking of her meat, sudden snatching of her food
upon the fist, good enduiug, and great force in assayling her game.

The sign of boldness in a Goshawke is this, tie her in an open light place,
and after a while darken and obscure it, by shutting some window, or such like
devise, then touch her upon the sudden at unawares, if she then iumpe, and
leap to the fist without fear or astonishment, that is an ass^red sign of
hardiness in a Goshawke.

The token of force in a Goshawke, is this, tie diverse Goshawkes in sundry
places of one self chamber or mew, and that Hawke that does flise and mewt
hiest and farthest of from her, undoubtedly is the strongest Hawke, for that
one point declares and argues a good strong back in the hawke.

A Token of goodness and excellency in those demie Goshawkes, whom my Author
does term ( Petite Autours) is to have large and clear eyes, a small head,
long neck, low, and close plume or down, hard flesh, a green seere of her
foot, large stretchers, and not goutie or fleshie, quick enduing, large
panell, and able to slise far from her when she mewteth. The point of the
beak to be black, is a very good sign.

The ill shape of Goshawkes.
ALbeit there be a general rule, that ( contraria contraries dinos^unter)
which is that one contrary is known sufficiently by the other, and therefore
having made you full show of the good shape of Goshawkes, the ill proportion
will easily thereby fall out, and be discerned of it self without any further
travel, yet nevertheless following mine Author, I think it not amiss to
dicypher you the ill form of a Goshawke: which is to have a great head, a
short neck, to be thick and gross plumed, soft fleshed, short thighed, long
armed, short tallons, tawnie hewed, tending to black, and hard and rough under
the foot.

A Goshawke that when she is loose in the house, flees as though she were at
large and liberty, breaking out of a mew, having great gross feathers, eyes as
red as blood, that is evermore baiting, and being set on the perch, offers
to flee at the face of a man, such a Hawke if she be kept low in flesh cannot
be borne on the fist; if she be hie and full of flesh, she will not then
abide with her keeper, but rangle and gad: wherefore of such Hawks, there is
no account to be made at all.

A fearful Goshawke is hardly to be reclaimed and manned, for the fear she
has, will always cause her to refuse the fist and lure, and make her check,
and not willingly repair to any devise wherewith she is called and rappeld,
after her flight, which is a very great inconvenience in a Goshawke, and no
small hinderance to the sport of him that shall happen to have such a fearful
Hawke: for commonly unless they be first fond of the keeper, and in love with
the call, they will not flee their game to the liking of their owner; and the
tediousnes in coming by them again after the flight, does breed
forgetfulness of the pastime, how good and delectable soever it were before.

That Goshawke that has pendant plumes over her eyes, and (as they say in the
Country) whose feathers hang in her light, the white of whose eye is very
watrish and blanck, that is red maild, or bright tawnie, has the most assured
token that may be of ill conditions, and is not like to be well coming. But
if happily such a Hawke fall once to be good, she will then prove a passing
Hawke.

Sometimes (though very seldom) do we see a Goshawke of bad shake, and in
condition clean contrary to those signs that ought to be looked for in a good
Goshawke, prove light, lusty, able to hold out and mainetaine her flight, and
such a one as will very well slay the greater sort of fowls.

The Goshawkes prey is the Fresant, the Mallard, the wild Goose, the Hare, and
Conie,: besides all which, she will strike ventrously, and seize on a Kidde or
Goat, and keep him play so long, as the dogs at length shall come in to assist
her and further the fall of it, which does manifestly decipher the great
inestimable courage and valor of the Hawke.

Out of the French I have collected this concerning the Goshawke.
Some men have thought, and been of this resolute mind, that the (Author) or
Goshawke has been of the kind of a Vulture, for the affinity and nearenesse
of their terms and names: for (Autour) in the French, is that Hawke whom we
call the Goshawke, and (Vautour) is the Vulture, which 2. terms as you see,
draw very near to one speech.

Some other have been of opinion, that betwixt the Goshawk and Sparowhawke, is
no ods or difference in nature, save only in respect of the hugeness of that
one, and the slenderness of the other: but my purpose is to treat of the
Goshawke severally from the Sparowhawke, and so to proceed to the
Sparrowhawke, of whom I will write according to the French and Italian
Authors, in a several Chapter by it self, to avoid the confusion, which
otherwise might happen in that behalf.

The Goshawke is ever more regarded than her Teircell, for the males or cocks
among Hawks and birds of prey, do make evident proof, and show to the eye,
of their difference from the females and Hawks.

Again we may with ease discern the Goshawke from her Tyercell, for that she
is far larger, then the Tyercell of her kind.

The Falconers and Ostregers, have to these two sorts, added a third kind (as I
said before) whom they teranie the Demygoshawke, as a bird indifferent,
betwixt the other two.

Both kinds of them are more hie, and longer armed, then either the Falcon, or
Gerfalcon: they are Hawks of the fist, and (as we call them) round winged
Hawks, quite contrary to those I wrote of before, all which are Hawks of the
lure, and long winged Hawks, otherwise called Tower hawks.

The Hawke (I mean the female) is very much like the Eagle in mayle, and if we
may make bold to compare ye less with the larger, she has a more stately high
neck then the Eagle, and of a more red or iron mayle, the ground of her plume
and down tending to a red color.

Those Goshawkes that are of Slauonia, are good at all manner of game, large,
hardy, and fair plumed, their tongs black, and their nares great and wide.

There are Goshawkes, whom the Italians call Alpisani, or hawks of the Alps,
which are much used in Lombardie, and Tuscane, they are more thick the^ they
are long, fierce, and hardy.

But those Goshawks that our Ostregers have now adays, are chiefly conveyed
out of Almaine, having their eyes and the sear of the beak, as also of their
feet and legs yellow, contrary to the Gerfalcon, whose sear is blew and azure.

Their trains are garnished with large drops or spots crossing the
feather, party black, and party gray, as also the plumes of the neck and head
are more toward a russet, and powdered with black, but those of the thigh, and
under the belly or pannell, are otherwise marked, for they are not full so
yellow, having round drops on them, not much unlike those that are on the
Peacockes train.

The Goshawkes of Almayne are not very fair, though they be large Hawks, red
mayled, and yet not hardy.

There are sundry of them good in their soarage, but being once mewed, prove
nothing worth: there be diverse of them taken in the forest of Arde, and in
sundry places of Almayne. The Greeks have called the Goshawke Hierax, the
Latins Accipiter stellaris, and the Italians Astuy.

Thus much have I collected out of another French author, as necessarily
belonging to the description of the nature of a Goshawk, because you shall see
the several opinions of sundry writers, and gather to your own use, what
shall occur and thwart best with your liking, for it is not the mayle and
plume of the Hawke that I so greatly regard, or do mean to stand upon, as the
making, reclaiming, diseases, and cures of the said Hawks, each one after
their proper nature and quality, if so my health will give me leave to runue
mine authors through advisedly, according to my meaning and resolution, at what
time I first undertook this collection.

Out of the Italian concerning the Goshawkes, and their kinds.
THere are sundry sorts of Goshawkes, according to the diversity of places and
regions. There be hawks of Armenia, Sclauonia, Sardinia, Calament, of the
Aples which they use in Lombardy, Tuscan, Marca and Puglia, some other of
Russia, Fr^uli, Almania, and othersome of Lombardie, all which I will briefly
touch unto you, and not long dwell in the matter, having out of my French
Authors already decyphered the natures of the most part of them.

First of all there are Goshawkes, calledt Armenia hawks, much differing from
the Goshawke, in sort as almost, they have no resemblance at all to the other
kinds of Goshawkes. They are very fair and huge, the mayle of them is blanke,
as sundry Haggart Falcons be, they flee with great courage and life, all
greater sort of fowls.

There are others eyried in Slavonia and Dalmacia, and thence are they termed
Slauon Goshawkes, which indeed are good for any thing a man will employ them
unto. Very fair and hardy hawks, large footed, very well penned, their down
and plumage excellent fine, their tongues black, and their nares large and wide

Those of Sardinia are nothing like the other hawks, they are brown and
russet plumed, small hawks, hard and not small footed, and nothing ventrous.

Those of Calament are short trussed hawks, and large, blanke seared on the
foot, those flee the greater fowls exceeding well.

The Goshawkes of the Alps, and of Calabria, are in a manner more large then
they are long, very proud, and hardy Hawks.

The Goshawkes of Lombardy are not very large, brown maylde, and cowardly
kytes to do any good.

The Goshawke of Russia and Sarmatia, is a large and huge Hawke, the most part
of them are blanke Hawks, and taken up of great Princes and Nobles states,
they are apt and able to do any thing that may be looked for from Hawks of
that kind. My self have seen great store of them in the City of Mosqua,
which is the chief Dukedom of all Russia. The Moscovites and Tartarians do
use to flee with those Goshawks at the brook, and there do beat up the foul
with the drum, without which you shall seldom see a Boyaron (as they term
them) which is a Gentleman, ride at any time. And one special thing which I
noted among them was, that as well Moscovites as Tartaros, do use to bear
their Hawks on the right fist, which is clean contrary to our manner and
guise here in England, or in any other Region that I have heard or seen, save
only in those North parts, no reason I can yield for it, but that each country
for the most part has his fashion.

Those of Friulie are good Hawks and large, but not so fair as the Slavon
Hawks.

Note this, that a good Goshawke ought to be little, and broad shouldred, large
breasted, very round and fleshly, having a long thigh, a short leg or arm,
and the same great, and a large foot, and not gowty, but slender.
Contrariwise, the Tiercell should be large, for it is a common saying,

A little Hawke, and a large Tiercell, is ever best.

All Goshawks are by nature greedy, and catching, of whom some do use to flee
the river, and fresh brooks, and some the Sea, and othersome again the field,
and never or very seldom the river or brook.

The first sort for the most part do prey upon Duckes, Geese, Hearons,
Shouelers, and such like foul as do usually haunt, and live in the Sea and
Rivers. And those diverse times do seize and take their prey upon the sudden
at unawares, by fleeing low near the ground, and stealing upon the foul.

The other, after a while that they have used to flee the field, do prey on
Pigeons, Pullets, Hens, and Partridges. And being once mewed Hawks, and past
their soarage, they will take the stand upon some tree, and finding either
Partridge, Fezant, Pullet, Hen, or such other like foul, they make their
stooping so fiercely, and in such great have, and do flee them so far before
head and at randon, mayntaining, and making good their flight, as in the end
they kill them, and do prey upon them.

Of the Goshawkes, those that be ventrous and hardy will kill the Hare, and
having kilde him, diverse times they swallow in for have great bones, and do
put them over very well, and endure them safely without any hurt of all.

Those that are the river Goshawkes, and do haunt the water, and brooks, are
commonly the most hardy and ventrous Hawks of all that kind, and do at the
River of their own inclination and nature, fall to kill the great Fowls of
the River, of which I have before made recital and mention.

Truly the Goshawke is very much to be regarded for her hardy mettle and
courage, for that therein she is not inferior to any kind of Hawke, but
rather more fierce and eager. And again to be kept with greater care, for
that she is more choice and daynty, and does look to have a more nice hand
kept on her, then any other kind of Falcon or Hawke, unless it be the
Sparrowhawke, which is all one in a manner in nature with the Goshawke, and of
whom I purpose now to write.

Of the Sparowhake, out of the French Authors.
depiction of hawk

I Will now write somewhat of the Sparowhawke, for that she is in her kind,
and for that game that her strength will give her leave to kill, a very good
hawke, and much used in France. And besides, he that knows well how to manne,
reclayme, and flee with the sparowhawke, may easily know how to keep, and
deal with all other Hawks. Moreover, it is a Hawke that serves both winter
and summer, with great pleasure, and the game that she flees is ordinary,
and common to be had, and she will generally flee at all kind of game more
then the Falcon, or then any other kind of hawke will. And the winter
Sparowhawke, if she prove good, will kill the Pie, the Iaw, the Chough, the
Woodcock, the Thrush, the black-birde, the Felfare, and sundry other sorts of
birds.

The Diversity of Sparowhawkes according to their times and age.
THe Eyasse Hawke, is she that is taken in the Eyrie.

2 The brancher, is she that follows the old Hawke from branch to branch,
and tree to tree, which is also termed a ramage Hawke,

3 The Soar Hawke, is she that has flyen, and preyed for her self, and is
taken before she mew.

4 The fourth kind, is that Hawke that is mewed, and has cast her soar
feathers.

The good shape and proportion of a Sparowhawke.
SParowhawkes are of diverse plumes, some are small plumed, and blanke hawks,
othersom of a larger feather, which are not so good in our opinion as for their
shape. The Hawke that is well shapt is large and short, with a slender head,
large, and broad shouldred, big armed, large and wide footed, and black
maylde, with a good great beak, her eyes somewhat hollow and deep set, blanke
eyelids, the sear of her beak twixt green and white, a high bigg neck,
long wings, reaching quite athwart the body of the Hawke, so as the point of
the wing meet with the top of the train very near, and that her train be
not over long, but of a reasonable broad feather, sharp pounces, small and
black, and evermore well disposed to feed hungerly, and with great appetite.

The Nyasse Hawke is good, and will come to the fiste very well, and not
lightly soar away, or be lost.

The Soar hawke is hard to be manned, but will prove good, if she will once
brook company: this Hawke, for that she has preyed for her self, is very
ventrous and hardy.

The best Sparowhawke, is that Hawke whom we call the brauncher.

What kinds of Sparowhawkes there are.
THere are Sparowhawkes, whom the Italians call ( divoutemiglia) which are
large and long Hawks, with a great beak, large foot, and with 13. feathers in
the train. Those Hawks are excellent to flee any kind of game.

There are other called Slauon Hawks, good for all purposes and full of
hardines, long and large Hawks, having a great long beak, and black breast
feathers

There are others of Calabria not very large, but of great courage plumed like
the Quail, that will do according as they are taught and manned.

There be Sparowhawkes eyreed in Corsica, and brought from Sardinea, small
Hawks, brown or canuas mayld, that will flee very well.

Those of Almanya are very slender, and nothing good.

The Hawks of Verona, and Vicentia, are of mean size, and many of them do
prove to be good Hawks.

There be Sparowhawkes called Alpisans, of the Alps, that are large, wight of
wing, and ventrous to flee any kind of foul.

There are others eyreed in the vale of Sabbia, of a reasonable size, russet
mayld, entermedled with golden spots, or drops, like the Turtle, those be
very good to flee great fowls.

There is one other kind of Sparowhawks, eyreed in Bergamasca, in a vallie
called the Black vale, near the confines of Voltolina, slender Hawks, brown
mayld, good to be manned and reclaymed, and those are the principallest of all
other Sparowhawkes.

I do not here in this place deal exactly of the mayles, and plumes of these
kinds of hawks, in part, for that the hawks are of sundry and several
plumes, according to the diversity of countries and regions where they are
eyreed: and part, for that the hawks themselves are so ordinarily in use, as it
were to be esteemed but a supersluous labor, to waste much time therein, in
penning of that, which is (in the opinion of men) of no great importance. My
chief care and industrye (if health allow me leave, and sickness too much
offend not my ease) shall consist in the reclaymed and manning of all these
kinds of Hawks, according to their natures and properties, and in displaying
the means to flee with them, and to keep them, both for the field and brook.
And after that, in declaration of their diseases, ordinarily incident unto
their kinds, and the best remedies for the same, which (I doubt not) are the
only and chiefest points that the discreet and learned reader will accept
from me, and such as will most stand him in stead that does mean to deal
with hawks. Wherefore I thus make ye Epilogue and conclusion of the first part
of my treatise and collection, wherein are contained all the kinds, names and
the causes of those names, of all such hawks and birds of prey as are most in
use, and regarded among noble men and gentlemen at these days, craving the
Reader to bestow no less good liking upon the translation and collection
hereof (if it in any part deserve it) then I have employed travel and pains
in the true search and examination of the same, both out of the French and
Italian Authors, where I must confess, I have not translated Verbatim, and by
word or line what I found, (for then had I not dealt so exactly as I now have
done, for that I found sundry things not so well agreeing to our humors and
use:) but have taken my pleasure of them, in making choice of the chiefest
matter, which did occur in them, hoping the more my pains have been, the
less shall be mine offense, and the greater the liking of the Reader, and the
better his acceptance: which if I find, both I for my travel, shall think my
self sufficyently guerdoned, and the careful Printer deem both his cost and
charge well employed, being meant, to the benefit and pleasure of his native
Countrymen, whose avail he chiefly respects herin, and not any great
advantage that shall privately fall out to him.

Of the Matagasse.
THough the Matagasse be a Hawke of no account, or price, neither with us in
any use, yet nevertheless, for that in my division I made recital of her
name, according to the French Author, from whence I collected sundry of those
points and documents, appertaining to Falconrie: I think it not beside my
purpose, briefly to describe here unto you, though I must needs confess,
that where ye Hawke is of so slender value, the definition, or rather
description of her nature and name, must be thought of no great regard.

The shape of her is this.

She is beaked and headed like the Falcon, her plume is of two colors, her
breast white, her eye, beak, and feet black, a long black train, her flags
and long feathers partly black, and white, and the color of those feathers
she changes not, though she mew never so often.

Her feeding is upon Rattes, Squirrells, and Lisardes, and sometime upon
certain birds she does use to prey, whom she does intrappe and deceive by
flight, for this is her devise:

She will stand at perch upon some tree or post, and there make an exceeding
lamentable cry, and exclamation, such as birds are wont to do, being
wronged, or in hazard of mischief, and all to make other fowls believe and
think that she is very much distressed, and stands needful of aid,
whereupon the credulous sellie birds do flock together presently at her call
and voice, at what time if any happen to approach near her, she out of hand
seazeth on them, and deuoureth them, (ungrateful subtle foul) in requital
of their simplicity and pains.

These hawks are in no account with us, but poor simple fellows and peasants
sometimes do make them to the fiste, and being reclaimed after their unskillful
manner, do bear them hooded, as Falconers do their other kinds of Hawks
whom they make to greater purposes.

Here I end of this hawke, because I neither account her worth the name of a
hawke, in whom there rests no valor or hardines, ne yet deserving to have
any more written of her property and nature, more than that she was in mine
Author specified, as a member of my division, and there reputed in the number
of long winged hawks. For truly it is not the property of any other Hawke, by
such devise and cowardly wile to come by her prey, but they love to win it be
main force of wings at random, as the round winged hawks do, or by free
stooping as the hawks of the Tower do most commonly use, as the Falcon,
Gerfalcon, Sacre, Merlin, and such like which do lie upon their wing, roding
in the air, and ruff the foul, or kill it at the encounter.

I cannot say, that at any time I have seen this kind of Hawke, neither in
any book read of her nature and dispositifn, as I have here made mention of
it, save only in my author, who writing of Falconrie, was so bold as to rank
her among other Hawks of greater account and value, and in Gesner, where he
treats of all kinds of birds and fowls, where I remember well I have read
of the name and nature of the Matagasse, and there have seen her proportion and
shape set down in colors, such as I have before declared you in this Chapter,
and in my Judgment, no odds or difference to be found betwixt Gesuerus,
description, and mine Authors, in that behalf.

The Second Part or Book of this Collection of Falconrie.
Certain special points necessary for a Falconer, or Ostreger, collected out
of the Italian Authors.
Having made you sufficient show in the former part of this book, and
collection, of all kinds of Hawks serving to Falco^rie, it shall not be
amiss to deliver you some special and necessary rules, due to a good Falconer.

First, it is behoouefull for a Falconer to be very diligent and inquisitiue
to learn and mark the quality and mettle of his hawks, and to know which
hawke he shall fly with all early, and with which late, because all Hawks
are not disposed or mettled alike. Wherefore the first and special observation
is, to note the natural inclination and disposition of his hawks in that
behalf.

Then next, it is necessary for him to be found over his hawk, patient, and
withal careful to keep her clean out of life, mytes, and all such other
diseases, as I shall hereafter treat of in the latter part of this collection,
with such remedies, as I shall lay down for every grief. And of the two, he
must rather keep his Hawke hie, and full of flesh, than poor and low. Besides
that, this is one general rule, which by experience you shall find to be most
true, that all kinds of hawks are more subject to infirmities, being poor
and low, then when they are lusty and full in flesh.

Every night, after he has flyen with his Hawke the day, either at the field
or brook, he must give his hawke casting, somewhiles plumage, some other while
pellets of Cotton, or such like, and again, sometimes some one medicine or
other, according as by her casting, or mewte, he shall perceive her to stand
needful thereof, which point I will more at large describe in another place,
proper and peculiar to that matter.

Every night he must not forget to make the place very clean under the
perch, so as he may both find the casting of his Hawke, and be certainly
assured whether she has already cast or not, whereby he may the better judge
and discern her state. For by the casting is found, whether the Hawke do need
either upward or downward scowrings, or stones, or any such like remedy.

He must remember every evening to tie out his hawke a weathering, save only
in such days, as she has bathed before, for because then the taking overmuch
moisture, will breed her a thousand evils, and inconveniences. For such
euenings as she has bathed the day, she ought of right to be placed in some
warm chamber on a perch, with a candle burning by her, where she must sit
vnhooded, if so she be gentle and not rammage, to the end she may trick her
self, and rejoice by enoyling her after the water, before she flee again.

Every morning early he must not forget to set her out to wether her, where if
she have not already cast, she may cast, and there keep her hooded, till
such time as she go to the field.

In feeding his hawke, he must beware of giving her two sorts of meat at one
time to gorge her withal, neither must he give her such flesh, as has any
evil savor, and is not sweet, but must respect to allow her wholesome meats
for breeding ill diseases. For hawks are dainty birds in their kind, and the
more to be considered of when they are in hand under a Falconers keeping and
usage, because they were wont to prey for themselves at liberty, and therein
follow such law and order, as nature had prescribed them, but being restrained,
the course of kind is quite altered in them, and therefore therefore the
greater art and regard to be usage for them. Art must supply the restraints of
kind by cunning.

He must beware, if happily he have occasion of necessary business, at his
departure from home, not to leave his hawke tied on a perch of any great
height from the ground, for fear of bating and hanging by the heels, for then
either will she cast her gorge, or otherwise spoil her self: but she must
be placed on a low block or stone, and if there be more hawks then one, they
must be sondred so far one from the other, as they may not approach or reach
one the other, neither with beak, talons, or otherwise, because their nature
is to bite, and buckle, together, if they come within reach.

When he addresseth him to make his flight with his Falcon, it is behouefull
for him to have all her follow Falconers, or such as have hawks in the field,
to set down their hawks on the ground, to be in the more readiness to assist
him in his purpose, and to tie them sure, for fear of ill accidents that may
be fall them.

And again, at the river, he must be skillful to land his foul so placing the
residue of his company, and their hawks, as they may flee eke without any
encounter, which is not only the loss of the foul, and hinderance to their
sport, but also the ruin and spoil of their hawks on both parts. He must be
careful that his hawke keep her gate, and flee it good, so as in no wise he
pluck her not down, nor make her bate of her pitch.

He must always be assured to have mummy in powder in his bag in a
readiness, whatsoever should happen, with such other medicines as I shall
hereafter treat of, for that it may so fall out, as his hawke may receive a
broose at the encounter of a foul. Moreover he must not be unfurnished of
Aloes washed, Cloves, Nutmegs, Saffron, casting, cryance, and such like
necessary implements. And he must remember that his Aloes be shining and
clear, for then is it of the best sort of Aloes.

Lastly, he must be able to make his lures, hoods, of all sorts, Iesses, Buets
and other needful furniture for his hawke, and must not be without store
thereof to allow his betters and states in the field, if happily they want any
such devises. He cannot well be without his coping Irons, to cope his hawks
beak if it be ouergrowne, which will be a hinderance to her feeding, and to
cope her pounces and talons, if need be. He must have his cauterizing buttons,
and other iron or silver tools, to cauterize or burn his hawks if cause
require such cure. For having all these necessaries, and doing as I have and
will tell you, all his game shall succeed and sort well, and he be assured
that for the most part of good pastime in the field, when other ignorant grooms
shall both lack sport, and lose their hawks, the greatest corsie that may
happen to a gentleman that loves the game. Let these few aduertisements and
instructions suffice in this place, if other points necessary not recited here,
be remembered at ye full in any other part of this book, I crave but thanks for
my pains, and courtesy at the Falconers hands, for whose learning and pleasure
I partly and chiefly wrote this collection.

The first instruction is, how to make a Falcon* and other Hawks fleeing,
after the opinion of Iean de Frauchiers.
FIrst let your hawks be taken on the fist and hooded, then let her be watched
three days and nights, before you vnhoode her, and feed her always hooded in
an easy rufter hood. At the end of three days you may vnhoode her, and feed
her vnhooded, and when she is fed, hood her again, so that she be not
vnhooded (but when you feed her) until she know her meat: then when she
begins to be acquainted with you, hood her and vnhoode her oftentimes, to
the end she may the better abide the hood. But use her gently, and be patient
with her at the first, and to the end your hawke may be the better manned and
the sooner reclaimed, you shall do well to bear her commonly in places where
most people do frequent, and where most exercises are used. And when she is
well manned, make her come a little to the fist for her meat. And when you have
showed her the perch or stock, and tied her upon it, put with her upon the
said perch or stock some Pullet, or other quick foul as often as you may,
and let her feed there upon at pleasure until she be reasonably gorged, and
do in like manner upon the lure until she know it perfectly. Afterward you
may give her more liberty, and lure her with a cryance, luring her twice a day
further and further off. And when she is thoroughly lured, you shall teach her
to flee upon you until she know both how to get to her gate, and to flee
round upon you. Then shall you cast her out some quick Foul, and when she
has stooped and seized upon it, you shall suffer her to plume it, and to
foot it at her pleasure, giving her a reasonable gorge thereon, as is before
said, and continuing always to reward her upon the said lure, in such sort
that she never find the lure without some reward tied upon it, and by that
means she will always love the lewer and her keeper well, and will not
lightly rangle or be lost. Thus you may continue her forty days or
thereabouts, and then you may flee with her safe enough. But before you so do,
let her be skowred and bathed, and fed with clean meat, and well washed,
giving her casting every night, even as men use to give fleeing Hawks.

The manner of fleeing with Hawks, as well to the field, as to the River, and
first to the river, according as Martine teaches.
YOu must understand that the river hawke ought to be let into the wind, and
above her prey to get the vantage of her gate, and to be at her pitch: then
shall you make in toward the prey. And when they are got up to their full
pride, run upon the foul, and land them, laying them out from of the water,
and if you fail in doing thereof, then you should take down your hawke with
some pullet, Pigeon, or other quick foul, to teach, and the better to win
such hawks as are but lately entered, until they know their prey, and their
fleeing perfectly.

To fly at the Hearon according to Martine.


THere is another manner of fleeing, which is called the flight at the Hearon,
this is the noblest slight of all others. For the Hawke ought to be well lured
and well trained to get up to an high gate, and therewithal she must well
know a quick foul, and such a Falcon as is apt to flee the Hearon, should not
be flowen with to any other kind of foul, but only to the Hearon most
commonly. For as much as amongst all other flights, there is no such mountey
made, nor such force used as in the flight at the Hearon, and therefore reason
would that such Falcons should not be flowen withal, or inured to any meaner
or less prey than the Hearon. For if a Hawke be a good Hearoner, it is
sufficient, and if after your Hawke have flowen the Hearon, you should let her
flee any other sleighter foul or prey, she will lightly (by your own
default) become a slugge and take disdain, in such sort; that (where before
she was a good Hearoner) she will be so no more, and will turn to her own
ease, so that she will never care to flee the Hearon. For as much as she will
give her self to prey upon foul, that is more easy to reach, and will
forget or foreslowe her valiant hardiness, the which is much to be lamented,
if a man have once a good Hearoner, and do so spill her. Nevertheless you may
flee with the Sacre all manner of foul more easily than with any other kind of
Hawke, because she is alike common to all soul, even so is she hard to be
made, and of a hard and dull capacity, but despair not therefore, for in the
end they prove good, if the Falconer take such pains with them as he ought to
do.

For the flight to the field as Master Ame Cassian reach^th.
SOme kind of Hawks there be which are made for the field. For as much as
there be some men which delight more to have Hawks for the field than for the
river, the Hawks which are good to flee the field, are first entered by the
Spaniels, and as well accustomed to know them by the hair and proportion, as
they know their prey by the feathers and flight: and secondarily, they are also
entered by customary knowledge of their prey, and therefore it is not lightly
possible that this kind of pastime should be perfectly handled, unless the
dogs and Hawks be so well acquainted and known one to the other, that each of
them do love others, for although naturally the Hawke be hardly entered to
become familiar with the dogs, and will not lightly, nor at the first love
them, yet marvel you not thereat, for in the end all field Hawks will love
them, and become familiar with them, but to bring that to pass, you must
continually bear your Hawke amongst Spaniels, and acquaint her with them, that
she may the better abide them, and that being done, the oftener that your
Hawke flee the field, the truer you shall find my opinion: and surely you may
easily have good hawks to the field, if you keep them in good order and diet
as reason requires, giving them upon their first, second, and third prey, a
reasonable good gorge, and afterward you may withdraw and abate your reward by
little and little, to make your hawke the easier forget it, for by that means
you shall make your hawke know her live foul the better, if you reward her
with the head and brains of the foul taken, and so of every one which she
shall slay, until you would give her a gorge, at time and hour convenient,
and by that means, you may have a good field Hawke unless the fault be your
own.

Other slights to the field called great flights.
THere is yet another kind of flight to the field which is called the great
slight, as to the Cranes, wild Geese, Bustard, Bird of Paradise, Bittors,
Shouelars, and Hearons, and many other such like, and these you may flee from
the fist, which is properly termed the Source. Nevertheless in this kind of
Hawking which is called the great flight, the Falcons or other Hawks cannot
well accomplish their flight at the Crane, Bustard, or such like, unless they
have the help of some Spaniell, or such dog, well inured and taught for that
purpose with your Hawke. For as much as great flights require pleasant aid and
assistance, yea and that with great diligence.

Advertisement given by Master Martine, to make a Hawke bold and hardy, and to
love her prey.
IF you would have your Hawke hardy, keep her oftentimes all day long upon
your fist, and feed her with Pullets flesh early in the morning, as much as
shall be sufficent for a beaching, that done, set her abroad in the Sun,
with water before her, to the end she may bath when she will, and bowze, as
naturally they are enclyned to do, and it does them singular great pleasure,
for bowzing may oftentimes preserve them from sickness, and yet sometimes a
Hawke bowzeth after some disease, whereof she has long languished, and dies,
or else she is thereby recured: for after such a disease, bowzing does either
cure her, or quite dispatch her. Now when you have done as is before said
(whether she bath or not) you shall take your Hawke upon your fist, and so
keep her on the fist until you go to bed, and when you go to bed set a
candle before her, which may last all the night, and in the morning (if she did
bath) you shall set her in the Sun for one hour until she be well
weathered, and then afterward (if she did not bath) take wine and water, and
therewith bespout her well with your mouth three hours after, setting her in
the Sun again, and (for lack of Sunshine) before the fire, until she
be very well dried, and if you be well assured that she is thoroughly
enseamed clean, and has been well manned by the space of thirty or fortye
days, then may you flee the field with her, and if you perceive that she
has good desire to flee, let her flee, and if she kill any thing give her a
good gorge thereupon, but if she kill nothing, then feed her with the leg
or the wing of an Hen or a Pullet washed in clean running water, keeping her
still upon the fiste as is before said: and the next day flee with her again,
and if she kill any thing, give her her reward, and keep her in this order
until she be perfectly entered and quarred: but then you must have discretion,
for sometimes by this order, you may bring her low, in such sort that she
should not easily be recovered to make her flight strongly. Yet Martine says
the contrary, but if an Hawke be very hard and stubborn to her Keeper in her
flight, then let her be well spowted again with lukewarm water, and so set
abroad all night in the open air. In the morning let her be set either in
the Sun or before the fire, where when she has well proyned her, you may
go flee with her, and if she kill and flee well, then keep her in this order
and tune, for else she may take sundry evil toys. And this precept serves as
well for them that desire to have good Hawks for the field, as otherwise: and
if you would have your Hawks love their prey, take Cynamon and Sugarcandye, of
each a like quantity, and make thereof a powder, and when your Hawke has
killed any thing, and that you come to reward her, sprinckle some of that
powder upon the part wherewith you reward her, and it shall make her love that
kind of prey the better ever afterward.

How a man should use an Eyasse Hawke.
IF you have Eyasse Hawks, you shall feed them most with Poultrie, Beef, or
Goats flesh: and this is done to keep them from ill toys: and when they be
well lured and trained, then bear them upon the fist hooded, and ordered in
all points according to the rule prescribed before in the first chapter, and
after thirty or forty days past, bring them to the flight, and the first,
second, and third flight, you may be fond over them, abating your favor,
afterward by little and little, until they be brought in perfect tune,
spowting them oftentimes with Wine and Water. For (as Martine says) some
Eyasse Hawks will not much bath them. Nevertheless you ought therein also to
use discretion, for by often bathing or spowting, you may bring your Hawke very
low, in such sort, that she should have more need of a good gorge, than of
bathing or spowting, and especially such Hawks as are fierce of Nature, and
will not often bathe of themselves.

A consideration of the Diversity of Hawks Natures, acccording to Martine.
THere are some sorts of Falcons which have this diversity of nature, that
some of them will fly well, being hie and full of flesh, and some other flee
best when they are kept low. Wherefore a Falconer should have especyall
consideration thereunto, for Falcons are fit for all flightes, as is before
said, but the blanke Falcons are of one nature, and the blew Falcons of
another, and the Falcon of the reddish plume has also her properties diverse
from the rest.

Nevertheless to speak as I have found, of all other Hawks, the blancke
Falcon is best. And both by reason and experience I find that she would be
kept higher, and in better plight then other Hawks, for you shall see the
blanke Falcon keeping a like hand upon her, and other Falcons prove higher and
in better plight when she is fleeing then any other Hawke. And the reason is,
because she is very gentle, and with more ease manned then any other kind of
Falcon, and loves her keeper better, so that thereby she keeps her self
higher, and in better plight then such Hawks as bate much, and are froward of
condition.

How to seele a Sparrowhawke, and to make her fleeing, according to Guillam
Tardiffe.
depiction of hawk

A Sparowhawke newly taken should be thus used, take a needle threeded with
untwisted thread, and (casting your Hawke) take her by the beak, and put the
needle through her eye lidde, not right against the sight of the eye, but
somewhat nearer to the beak because she may see backwards. And you must take
good heed that you hurt not the web, which is under the eye-lidde, or on the
inside thereof. Then put your needle also through that other eye-lidde, drawing
the ends of the thread together, tie them over the beak, not with a straight
knotte, but cut off the threedes ends near to the knotte, and twist them
together in such sort that the eye-liddes may be raised so upwards, that the
Hawke may not see at all, and when the threede shall wax loose or untied, then
the Hawke may see somewhat backewardes, which is the cause that the threede is
put nearer to the beak. For a Sparowhawke should see somewhat backewardes, and
a Falcon forwards. The reason is, that if the Sparowhawke should see forwards,
she would beat off her feathers, or break them when she bateth upon the
fist, and seeing the company of men, or such like, she would bate to much.

But to trim your Sparowhawke in her rights, she must have Iesses of
leather, the which must have knottes at the end and they should be half a
foot long, or thereabout, at the least a shaft-meete between the hoose of the
Iesse, and the knotte at the end, whereby you tie the hawke.

She should also have two good belles, whereby she may be the better heard.
For commonly when a Sparowhawke takes any prey, she will carry it into some
thick bush to feed thereon in such sort, that she cannot lightly be either
heard or seen, and whiles she plumeth it, the plumage does oftentimes cover
both her eyes, or one of them, then to take away the said plumage, she
straineth with one of her feet, and thereby her belles discover her. Therefore
if she had but one bell, she might happen to scratte with that foot which
lacks the bell, and so should not be heard. The Sparowhawks which are wonted
to be hooded, and which will gently brook it, are much better than they which
will not be hooded. For they bate less, and are with more ease borne in the
rain, or any evil weather. For being hooded, the Falconer may hide and couor
them with his cloak, which he cannot do to the other. Furthermore, they shall
be able to flee better and more strongly, that are good weather Hawks, for
they shall be less bruised than a Hawke which is not hooded, which will weary
her self with bating, and withal a man may the better flee with them at
advantage, because they bate not, but only when you would have them to flee,
whereby they have the greater courage, and also a man may bear them in all
places, without bating or beating themselves out of breath.

How a man should manne a Sparowhawke, and make her fleeing.
FOr as much as Sparowhawkes are of sundry sorts of plumes, and sundry shapes
and proportions, there are also sundry manners of manning them and making them,
and there is much less pains to be taken with some one, than with some
other. For the more eager and sharper set that a Sparowhawke is, the fooner
shall you win her, and man her.

First to win her to feed, rub her feet with warm flesh, chirping and
wistling to her, and sometimes present the flesh unto her beak, and if she
will not yet feed, rub her feet with a quick bird, and the bird will cry,
and if the Sparowhawke do seize it with her feet, it is a token that she will
feed. Then tear off the skin and feathers of the birds breast, and offer
it to the Hawks beak, and she will taste thereof. For a Sparowhawke which
feeds immediately after she be taken, does show that she is eager, and has
good appetite. And you may give her as much more at evening, yea and sometimes
in the day time, so that she be not gorged first, but that she have put over
her meat. When she is thus well entered, and will feed when you chirpe or
wistle to her, then may you hood her with an hood that is large and deep
enough, so that it neither hurt nor touch her eyes when she will endure to be
hooded and vnhooded, without bating, and that thee will feed hooded, then must
you abate her meals, giving her less meat, and feed her betimes in the
morning when she has endewed, (that is to say, when she shall have put over
her meat, so as there remains nothing in her gorge,) then may you give her a
beaching in the day time, taking off, and putting on again her hoode, to make
her the more eager. For it will not be amiss, to give her a bitte or two of
meat every time that you hood her. When it is evening then sup her up, giving
her the head or brains of a hen or pullet until the morning. And if you
perceive that she is become very eager, then loose the threade wherewith she
is seeled, but let it be night first, and that she have seen backwards as
before said.

If she may abide Company, yet watch her all that night that you vnseele her,
to the end she may also be accustomed to hear people speak, and be acquanted
with them, and when you hoode her again, give her two or three bittes of
meat. In the morning betimes, put a bird in her foot, whom if she seize
hardilye, and plume thereon eagerly, then may you boldly take off her hoode,
but if she bate them, hoode her again, and watch her until she be thoroughly
won and manned: but if she feed well before company, and become familiar
and quiet before them, watch her no longer, but keep her on the fist some part
of the night amongst company, making her to plume, giving her now and then a
bitte or two of flesh, and putting her hoode on and off therewithal.

When you go to bed, set your Hawke near to your beds head upon some
trestle or stool, that you may wake her often in the night. Then rise before
day, and take her upon your fist, and off with her hoode, that she may see the
people about her, and when she beholds them, put a quick bird in her foot,
as before said. When she feeds thereupon, hood her again, giving her the
rest of your bird hooded, and when it is further forth day, you may look
whether she have any thing in her gorge, or not. If she have nothing above,
give her some little beaching, and beach her oftentimes before company, hooding
and vnhooding her. But at night she should be always vnhooded, that she may
see people, and become acquainted with them, giving her to feed of a Hen or
Pullet. To heal the places where she was seeled, to the end thee may see the
better: when thou go to bed, hold her in a dark corner, and spirt a little
Water upon her head, that she may frote her eyes against the pinions of her
wings. Then in the morning when she perceyueth the day light, and has warm
meat ready upon your fiste, and is clean loosed that she may see both
before, and behind her, and seems to be familiar and bold amongst people,
then may you make her as before said. But remember that you give her no plumage
that day, in which you have given her washed meat, yea and allow her no plumage
until she be well manned. For until she be thoroughly manned, she will
not dare to cast. Then if you would thoroughly manne your Sparowhawke, and keep
her eager, take her early in the morning upon your fist, and go into some
place where no body shall interrupt you, where first cause her to plume with
her beak upon some quick bird, then vnseaze her, and set her upon some thing,
and reach her your hand, and show her your fiste, giving her a bitte or two
thereof. And if she come thereunto willingly, then call her again morning and
evening, further and further off, but ever before company, to acquaint her the
better with them, fastening a long line or cryance unto her limbs: if it be
fair weather, and that the Sun shine, you should then proffer her the water,
to the end she may bathe her. Provided always in so doing that she be
sound, well manned, and that she be not poor nor gorged. For bathing is a
thing which makes a Hawke familiar and lustye. But remember that always after
she has bathed, you give her some live bird to feed on, and always when
you call her or feed her, you must chirpe with your mouth, or whistle, to the
end she may become acquainted with your whistle, and come thereunto. You must
feed her amongst horses and dogs, to make her also the better acquainted with
them. If she have flowen, and you would set her in the Sun to weather, set
her upon the ground on some cudgel or truncheon, making her fast, and she
will always love the better to sit upon the ground. After she has bathed,
if you perceive your Sparrowhawke lusty, you may flee with her the next day
toward the evening, but first you must have reclaimed her to come out of a
tree, and called her to you sitting on horseback, being always provided of
some Pigeon, or other quick thing, to take her down the more easily. For
before a man flee with a Sparrowhawke, she would be thoroughly well reclaymed
by watching, carrying, feeding and plumming before people, that she love her
keepers fist, and his countenance, that she can abide both horses and dogs,
that she be clean within, as well skowred with washtmeate, as also with
plumage, and that she be sharp set, and well coming, as well from the
perch, as from off the ground, or out of a tree. ()

The mean to make a Sparrowhawke fleeing.
depiction of hawk

FIrst, he that would flee with a Sparrowhawke lately reclaimed, must flee in
an evening somewhat before Sunsette. For at that time she will be most eager
and sharpest set. Secondarily, the heat of the Sun, (if one should flee in
the morning) does much trouble the Hawke, and rayseth and stirs her
courage, making her proud and ramage. So that she leeseth the eagerness of
her appetite, and remembers it not, thinking on nothing else but to soar and
gadde abroad, whereby she may be easily lost. Furthermore, toward the
evening, she cannot soar so far away from you, (although thee should soar) as
she would do in the heat of the day, because the night will enforce her to go
to the perch and stand. Also to enter your Sparrowhawke, it shall be best to
seek out some Champion Country, far from the woods, and let her be
vnhooded when the Spaniels be uncoupled, then if the Partridge spring, and
she bate, cast her off, if they spring near you. And if she kill, reward her
upon the ground, of the head, brains, neck, and breast of the Partridge. When
she has fed, take it from her, and vnseaze her, and get upon your horse a
good way from her. Then whistle and call her, and if she come unto you, reward
her better. Above all things, you must take good heed that she fail not her
first flight at great birds, least she turn tail and accustom her self to
smaller game. But if she be once well entered at great game, you may quickly
make her flee Larkes and small birds. If you find that she have most mind to
flee Larkes, let her flee them, and reward her on them. For there is no flight
pleasanter than the flight of the Sparrowhawke at the Lark. And forasmuch as
the flesh and blood of Larkes is hot and burning, it shall be good when you
flee the Lark, to give your Hawke washed meat twice in a week, and plumage
very often. But give her no plumage that day that she has washed meat, nor
the day that she batheth. When there is a knotte of good company met
together, and every man has his Sparrowhawke, if one of the^ see his
Sparrowhawke flee when another is also from the fist, there begins the
pastime, and yet they may flee together. But it is a pleasure to take a Lark
towering or clyming. Or if a Sparowhawke have beaten down a Lark, or that ye
Lark be slipped from her, This flight is not used in England, neither did I ever
hear of it before.
and gotten up towering as high as a man may behold, and then an other
Sparrowhawke clyme after her, get so high that by often taynting her, so as the
Lark is constrained to stoop to the ground, and the hawke in the sail of
her. Then the Lark had rather flee for succor between the legs of the men
and the Horses, than to fall in the tallons of her natural enemy: yet commonly
she is there taken also. He that would learn to make a Falcon well, let him
begin with a Hobby, and he that would make the Gerfalcon fleeing, let him
acquaint himself with the Merlyn. But he that can keep and make a
Sparowhawke well, shall also be able to keep a Goshawke, for by the one that
other is learned.

To take Time from off a Hawks feathers.
TO remove the lyme from a hawke, take dry and fine sand and clean ashes
mingled together, put them upon the place which is lymed, and suffer it so one
night. Afterward you shall beat well together three yolks of eggs, and with a
feather you shall lay them upon the said places, and suffer them so two nights.
Then take as much larde as a plumme, and as much butter with it, melt them both
together, and annoint the said places, and suffer the hawke so one other night.
Then on the morrow wash her with warm water, and wipe her with a clean linen
cloth, until you have wiped off all the lime, which by this devise will
easily be removed. [Or if you beat Sallet oil, Addition.
and the yolks of eggs together, and so annoint the limed feathers, and then
within 12. hours after, wash them with hot water, and it will take away the
lime.]

How to right and make straight bruised feathers.
IF you would make sound a bruised feather, then temper the place which is
bruised, in warm water, and when the web thereof is well softened, and
become tender with the hot water, set it as even as you can out of the water.
Afterward take a great stalk of a Colwoort, and warm it well upon the
coals, or in the flame: then cleave it in sunder, and within the clift put the
bruised feather, strayning the two sides of the Colewoort stalk together,
until it have brought the bruised feather into his former estate. The stalk
of the herb called Br^onie, has the same virtue.

To right and mend a Feather broken on the one side, and to ympe a bruised
Feather.
TAke a slender long needle, lay it in Vinegar or salt water, that it may
ruste and so hold the better within the feather: Afterward thread it with
untwisted thread, and draw it through both ends of the bruised places, then
draw it back by the thread, until it may draw that one part to that other, so
as the web may be close joined together: and suffer not your Hawke to flee,
nor to use her wings, until it be closed and strong again. But if it were
broken on both sides, cut it off, and take a square ymping needle like unto a
Glouers needle, lay it in Vinegar and salt water, and thrust it into both the
ends of the web, until you have brought them together, then give your Hawke
rest until the needle be rusted in that web. For a feather that is broken or
bruised within the quill, take another quill that is lesser, that it may go
into the broken or bruised quill, then cut off the feather in that place, and
the stalk of the quill being put into the old quil, force the end of the
feather into the new quil that is cut: Afterward join together the two
pieces, with the quill that is so put in, covering the place where it is so
joined, with Cotto^ or small down feathers, with lew or Semond, or if you would
not ympe it, glue it in with Semond or Rosen, and Ware molten together. If the
feather be dropped away clean, then put in another of like syze and color For
to bind in a feather that were slipped out of the pynion, take flax small
chopped, and mingle with the yolke of an egg well beaten, put them together
upon a linen cloth which is very near worn, with the which you shall bind
on both sides the place where the feather slipped, or else annoint that place
with Myrche and Goats blood mingled together. To make a feather come again
which is cast and lost by bruise, or otherwise, and especially in the train of
an Hawke, take oil of Walnuttes and oil of Bays, as much of that one as that
other, mingle them together, and drop them into the place where the feather
grew, and it shall put out a new feather speedily.

How to bear and make a Falcon.
depiction of hawk

A Falcon lately taken, should be seeled in such sort, that when the seeling
begins to slacken, the Falcon may see forwards, to see the meat before her.
For she is better content when she sees the meat plainly before her, than if
she saw it sidewayes, or looking back. And she should not be seeled too
straight, neither yet ought the thread wherewith she is seeled, be
ouerstraight bound or knit about her head, but twisted and twyrled together.

A Hawke newly taken, should have new furniture, as new Iesses, Leasse, and
Bewets, all of good leather, and the Iesses, mayled, and the Lease mad with a
button at the end. Then must you have a little round stick hanging in a little
string, with the which you shall oftentimes stroke and handle your Falcon. For
the more she is handled, the better she will be manned, and become the
gentlier, and the more familiar: and also if you should stroke or handle her
with your hand, you might chance to catch a knappe of her beak now and then.
She must have two good belles, to the end she may the better be found and
heard when she stirs or scratteth. She must have a hoode of good leather,
well made and fashioned, well raised and bossed against her eyes, deep, and
yet straight enough beneath, that it may the better abide on her head, and yet
never hurt her. So must you also a little cope her beak and talons, but not so
much that you make them bleed.

How you shall manne a Falcon, and bring her out of her ramagenesse.
SOme say, that the soar Falcon which has been timely taken, and has
already passed the seas, is both the best Falcon, and also the hardest to be
wone and ma^ned. Wherefore observing the order which is before rehearsed, you
must feed such a falcon with good and warm meats (as pigeo^s) and such like
quick birds until she be full gorged twice a day for three days. For you must
not break her of her accustomed diet all at once, and being lately taken, she
will more willingly feed on warm meats, than any thing else. When you feed
her, you must whoope and lewre as you do when you call a hawke, that she may
know when you will give her meat. You must vnhoode her gently, giving her two
or three bittes, and putting on her hood again, you must give her as much
more. But take heed that she be well and close seeled: three days being
passed, if you perceive her to be eager and greedy of meat, and that she
feeds with good appetite, then begin to abate her her meat, that is to say,
give her but little at once, and often, so that she have not much above at one
time, until it be Evening, and bear her late upon your fist before you go
to bed, setting her upon a trestle or stool very near you, so that you may
wake her often in the night. Afterward you should take her on your fist again
before day, with some quick bird or such like meat: and when you have
observed this order with her two or three nights, and that you perceive she
begins to be much better fellow than she was wont, and that she seems
to begin to be reclaymed, and feeds eagerly upon good meat, then begin
to change her diet, giving her often, and little at once, the heart of an Hog
or a Sheep. In the Evening when it begins to be late, (without casting of
her) let her feeling thread a little loose, spowting water on her face, that
she may ieouke the less, and watching her all the night, hold her upon your
fiste vnhooded. But if she see any thing that mislikes her, and make semblance
to be afeard, then let her be carried into some dark place, where you have
no more but light to hoode her again. And afterward give her some beaching
of good meat, and let her be watched diverse nights together, until she be
reclaymed, and Ieouke upon the fiste by day time, although to let her Ieouke
also somesometimes in the night, is a thing makes her the sooner manned. In
the morning by break of the day, let her have some warm meat to begin with.

And because there be sundry Falcons of sundry sorts and conditions, as some
mewed at large in the Woods, some other taken at stand, where they have long
used, and some other taken soar Hawks (whereof we now treat) whether they be
Soare-hawkes, Mewed, or Nyasse, yet are they of sundry natures and properties,
and therefore they must be diversely governed and entered, which is the cause that
it is hard to give general Rules. For those which are Gentle, easy to be
reclaymed, and of a good kind and nature, ought also to be the more favored,
and the more gently handled. But when your Hawke is brought to the point before
rehearsed, as well for the hooding, as also for her eagerness to feed, if you
peceiue that she begin to be acquainted therewith, you may vnhoode her by
day time, far from company, first giving her a bitte or two of good meat.
Afterward hoode her again gently, giving her a little meat again hooded.

Above all things you must beware to hoode or vnhoode her in any place where
she may be frayed, for that were able to mar her at the first. When she
begins to be acquainted with Company, if you perceive that she be eager
or sharp set, vnhoode her, and give her a bitte or two of meat, holding her
right against your face and countenance. For that will cause her to dread no
company. And when it is night, cut the thread wherewith she is seeled, and you
shall not need to watch her, if you perceive her bold enough amongst company.
But yet let her be set upon a trestle by you, that you may awake her two or
three times in the night, and take her on your fist before day. For
ouerwatching of a Hawke is not good, as long as a man may reclayme her
otherwise.

And if by such good government, and by dealing courteously with her, and
keeping her from sudden fear, you perceive that she begin to be acquainted
with you, and to know you assuredly, and that she feeds eargerly, and
sucketh to her meat before company, then give her washed meat, and beach her
in the morning, so that she may always have somewhat in her gorge: which meat
you shall lay in clear water half a day, and you shall cause her to feed in
company, giving her in the morning about Sun rising the wing of a Hen or
Pullet, and at evening, hooding her again, take the foot of a Cony or an
Hare, which is cut off above the joint, and flay it, stripping away the Claws
also, and temper and steep the skin in fair Water, (pressing and wringing it
a little) the which you shall give her with the joint of the pynion of the
Hens wing.

You must take good heed how you give your Hawke any Feathers, until she be
thoroughly reclaymed. For until she be thoroughly won and reclaymed, she
dares not cast upon the fist. And on the fist you must bear her continually,
till she be thoroughly manned. But when she makes semblance to cast, vnhood her
gently by the tassell of the hoode.

You may give her two days washed meat, and the third day plumage, according as
she is clean or foul within. And when she has cast, then hoode her again,
giving her nothing to feed on, until she gleame after her casting. But when
she has cast and gleamed, then give her a beaching of hot meat, in company
giving her two or three bittes at once: and at evening make her plume a hens
wing in company also.

When you find her well reclaimed, and thoroughly manned, and eager, and sharp
set, then it is time to feed her upon the lure.

And you must mark whether the feathers of your Hawks casting be foul or
slimie, and whether the slime thereof be yellow or not. For if they be, you
must be very circumspect to make her clean with washed meat and casting, and
if she be clean within, then give her not so strong castings as Hares feet or
Conies feet: but give her the Pynions of an old Hens wing, or the plumage
that is to be taken thereupon, or the neck bone chopped four or five times
between the joints, washed and steeped in fair water. To make an end of this
Chapter, it is certain that it requires more time to win and to watch a
Falcon once mewed in the wood, then one which is taken sore at passage. And
likewise it is harder to win a Hawke taken at stand, when she has long time
been accustomed, then it is to make a Hawke which has been handled before.

How to lure a Falcon lately manned.
depiction of hawk

BEfore you show the lure to a Falcon newly reclaimed, you must consider three
things. First, that she be well assured, and boldned in Company, well
acquainted also with dogs, and with horses. Secondarily, that she be sharp
set, and eager, having regard to the hour of the morning or evening when you
will lure her. And the third consideration is, that she be clean within, the
lure must be well garnished with meat on both sides, and you must be a part in
some secret place when you would give her the length of the lease. You must
first vnhoode her, giving her a bitte or twain upon the lure as she sits on
your fist, afterward take the lure from her, and hyde it that she see it not,
and when she is vnseazed, cast the lure so near her that she may catch it
within the length of her lease, and if she do seize upon it, then shall you
use the voice and accustomed speech of a Falconer unto his Hawke, and feed her
upon the lure on the ground, giving her thereupon the warm thigh of a Hen or
Pullet, and the heart also.

When you have so lured her at Evening, give her but a little meat, and let her
be lured so timely, that when she is therewith accustomed, you may give her
plumage, and a iucke of a joint. Afterward, and in the morning betimes, take
her on your fist, and when she has cast and gleamed, give her a little
beaching of good warm meat. Afterward, when the day is further forwards, and
that it is time to feed her, take a Criance and tie it to her lease, and go
into some fair pleasant meadow, and give her a bitte or two upon the lure, as
before said, then vnseaze her, and if you peceiue that she be sharp set, and
have seized upon the lure eagerly, then give her to hold unto some man which
may let her off to the lure, then shall you unwind the Criance, and draw it
after you a good way, and he which holds the Hawke, must hold his right hand
on the Tassell of the Hawks hoode in a readiness, that he may vnhoode her as
soon as you begin to lure, and if she come well to the lure, and stoop
upon it roundly, and seize it eagerly, then let her feed two or three bittes
upon it, and then vnseaze her and take her from off the lure, and hoode her,
and then deliver her again to him which held her, and go further off and lure
her, feeding her always upon the lure on the ground, and using the familiar
voice of Falconers as they cry when they lure. And thus you shall lure her
every day further and further off, until she be well taught to come to the
lure, and to take it eagerly.

Afterward let her be lured in company, having regard that neither dogs nor
other thing come in suddenly to fray her, and when you take her up from the
ground, hoode her upon the lure, and when you have well and often lured her on
foot, then use to lure her on horseback: the which you shall the eassier
win her too, if when you lure her on foot, you cause some on horseback to
come near you, that she may see them, and cause them to come near her when
she feeds upon the lure, causing them also to turn and toss their horses
about her, but let their horses be ruly, least they should upon the sudden
affright her.

Furthermore the better to acquaint her with Horses, and that she may the
better know them, carry your Falcon (whiles she feeds) on high upon the
lure near unto some man on Horseback, or get your self up on horseback,
and reward her upon the lure amongst Horsemen, and when she is well
accustomed to them, and well acquainted with them, making no resemblance to
fear them, you may then lure her on horseback in this manner: He which
holds her to let her come to the Lure, must be on foot, and you where you
Lure shall be on Horseback, and when you call and cast the Lure about your
head, then he which holds her, shall take off her hood by the tassell, and
you the mean while shall call and lure in the cunningest wise you can, as
Falconers use to do: and if she sear eagerly upon the lure, and fear
neither people nor horses, then take off the luring line or Creance, and lure
her loose further and further off. And to make a Falcon come which is but newly
reclaymed, and to make her come in company of another Hawke, there must be two
to hold a cast of Falcons, and two which shall lure them, but he which holds
the Falcon that is but lately lured, shall not let her come so soon as the
other shall do: then shall the lure be thrown out unto the Falcon which is
but lately lured, and when she is fallen thereupon, her keeper shall carry her
upon the lure, to feed amongst the other make Hawks. This being done twice
or thrice, she will follow them and love them, and if you would have her love
dogs, which is most necessary, you must call dogs about you when you feed
her, or give her tyring or plumage.

How you shall bath your Hawke being but lately reclaimed, how you shall make
her fleeing, and to hate the check.
WHen your Falcon is well lured as well on horseback as on foot, and that she
is ready to be cast off, and has been well rewarded upon the lure, and is
now altogether reclaymed from her ramage toys, and when she is also somewhat
recovered of the pain and travel which you have put her unto in making and
reclayming her, and be yet in good plight, and have her thighs ploompe, and
well brawned, then offer her Water to bath her, spy out a fair day when the
Weather is clear and temperate, then take a Basin so deep that your Hawke may
stand therein up to the Thighs, and fill it with water, and set it in some
secret place: afterward your Hawke being lured and well rewarded in the
morning with warm meat, bear her up upon some high place or bank, and there
hold her in the sun until she have endued her gorge, taking off her hood, that
she may proyne and pick her self: that being done, hood her again, and set
her near to the basin, afterward taking off her hood again (if she will)
let her leap down into the Basin or upon the grass by it, and to make her
know the water, slappe therein with a little wand, and let her bath therein as
long as she lift: when she comes out of the Water, take some meat in thy
hand, and proffer it unto her, and be well ware that she come not out before
thou proffer her thy fiste to give her a bitte or twain, then take her up, and
hold her in the sun, and she will pick and proyne her on your sist, or upon
your knee; if she will not bath her in a basin, then proffer her to bath in
river water at some foorde. Bathing gives an Hawke great courage, much
boldness, and eager appetite: that day that she batheth, give her no washed
meat. To make a new lured Falcon, and to make her vpwardes, the morrow after
she has bathed, get on horseback in the morning or in the evening, when she
is sharp set, and choose out some field or pasture, where fewest doves or
choughes be, then take your lure well garnished on both sides, and having
vnhooded your Hawke, give her a bitte or twain upon the lure, then taking it
away for her, hoode her again, then going fair and softly against the wind,
vnhoode her: and before she bate or find any check in her eye, whistle her
from off your fist fair and gently, and when she flies about, (trotting
forwards with your horse) cast out your lure, and suffer her not long to flee
about you at the first. Continue this both morning and evening for a few days,
and if you perceive that your Hawke have no great list to flee about you, nor
to stoop to the lure, and that she makes no semblance to love other Hawks,
then must you make her flee with one which loves other Hawks, and which will
not gadde out to any change or check: and that must first be done at the
Partridge, for they flee not far before an Hawke: and if your Falcon have
slowen, and return to you twice or thrice, cast out the lure unto her, and
reward her upon your Horseback, and afterward feed her up on the lure
upon the ground with good hot meat, to make her resolute in her fleeing, and
that she may return to you with the better will, and if the foul which you
flew unto be killed by any other Hawke, let your Hawke feed with the other
Hawke, and when she is so rewarded a little, take her off, and feed her upon
the lure.

If you flee to the River with your Falcon, and that the flight be fair and
likely to be landed, stay and draw under the wind, and taking off your Hawks
hoode, cast her off with the rest. When you would have your Hawke prove upwards
and a high flying Hawke, you must let her flee with a very high fleeing Hawke,
but see that your Hawke be well taught to hold in the head, and that she love
well to flee with the other Hawks, and if the foul be in a poole, or on a
pit or plash, you must first cast off the high fleeing hawke, and he which
holds your new lured hawke, shall do well to get him under the wind, and
when he sees his vantage let him vnhoode her, and if she bate then, it is to
get up to the other Hawke. Then let him cast her off, and she will clime
against the wind right unto the high fleeing Hawke, and before she weary her
self too much with clyming to reach or cover that other Hawke, lay out the
foul, when the high fleeing hawke shall be at her pitch, and lay them out
behind her, if she kill the foul, then give your Hawke reward of the Heart and
the breast with the other Hawks. If your hawke go out to any check, and kill
a Dove or a Crow, or any other check and feed upon it, or have fed upon it
before you come at her, seem not roughly to rebuke her at first, but take her
down to the lure, giving her a bitte of meat, and hood her up, and flee not
with her in two or three days after, but when you do flee, flee as near as
you can where there be no check, but if by no means you can keep her from
checking and going out, then for your last remedy, do as follows. If your
Hawke have killed a check, and you come to her before she have fed thereon,
take the gall of a Hen, and annoint therewith the breast of the check which
she has killed, when she has plumed it, and is come to the blood, and let
her feed but little thereon least she make her sick, for she will surely cast
it again, yea though she should not cast it, yet would she have small lust to
flee at such a foul again, but will hate and loath the meat thereof, or put
any bitter meat therevppon, as powder of Mirre, or young small worms cut in
gobbets, but take heed that the bitterness be not over strong, and if that
the bitter taste have discouraged the Hawke, then wette her meat in sugared
water. Some put on two pair of belles upon their Hawks legs, or stitch
together the principal long feathers of their wings, and also it shall be good
when she goes from check, to cast her out the lure, or to lay out an hurt
foul before her which she may kill.

How to flee a Hearon.


TO make your Falcon a good Hearoner, you must set her very sharp, and have a
live Hearon, whereof you shall make your hawk a quarrey in this sort. In the
morning when it shall be time to feed your Hawke, if you perceive that she be
very sharp set, go to a meadow, and let the Hearon go after that you have
bruised both his feet and his hill, and hide your self behind some bush: and
then he which holds the Hawke shall vnhood her, the which shall be under the
wind. And if your Hawke will not flee at the Hearon, cast out your lure the
which you shall hold in a readiness therefore: but if she do seize on the
Hearon, make her a quarrey thereon, giving her first the heart, and when she
has eaten it, give the Hearon to him which held the Hawke before, who retyring
back a little shall lure, tossing the Hearon about his head, holding her by
one of the legs or wings: then do you vnhood your hawke again, and let her
fly to him which lureth so with the Hearon, and let him not cast it out unto
her, but stay until she take and seize it in his hand as he lureth with it:
then despoyle the breast of the Hearon, and let your Hawke feed upon it, and
take the marrow of the bone in the Hearons wing, and give it your Hawke: and in
this doing two or three days, you shall now sle your Hawke thereunto, and make
her love the Hearon, the which you shall also bring the sooner to pass, if at
the first you inure her with a make Hawk a good Hearoner. Then having found the
Hearon at siege, you must get you with your Falcon up into some high place,
into the wind, and let him which has the Hearoner (that is the make Hawk) put
up the Hearon, and when he has cast off his Hawke to her, let him mark
whether the Hearon do mount or not, for if she mount, then cast not off your
Hawke, nor vnhood her not, but if the Hearon seem to be discomfited, and that
she fall down into the water, and that the make Hawke do stoops her, then
vnhood your young Hawke, and advance her: if she bate to be gone, let her flee
to it.

How a man shall make his Hawke to love other Hawks, when she hates to flee
with them.
THere are some Falcons which will not flee with other Hawks, but draw
backward, and stir not: some other will crabbe with every Hawke, and flee of
purpose to crabbe with them: some Falcon hates to sit or to flee with
another Hawke, either for doubt and fear which she has of them, or else, for
because she loves them not. That hawk which hates other Hawks does crab with
them, and she which fears them, does flee from them. For remedy hereof you
must have a gentle Lanner, which may be set upon a perch with that Hawke which
hates others, but far enough off, and by day light, then give each of them a
bitte of meat, as you pass by them, and set them nearer and nearer, and when
they be near one to another, put meat between them, that both of them may
feed upon it. Then if the Falcon make no semblance to crabbe with the Laner,
you shall gorge her up at night with good meat, and set her abroad in the
frost or cold upon a perch, if she be high and in good plight, able to abide
it, and so shall you let her sit three or four hours.

In the mean time hold your Laner near to the fire, and afterward take her
upon your fist, then let another bring you your Faldon hooded, and hold her
close between your side and the Laner, and when she feels the warmth of the
Laner, she will draw to her, and hug to her for the heat, and let them stand
so together without ieouking (either the one or the other) until you see that
the Falcon does greatly desire to ieouke, then vnhood her fair and softly, and
let it be in such a place as she see not, but let her sit so all the night
upon your fist. And when day appears, you must set them on the perch, that
one near to the other, yet so as they cannot one reach to another: That being
don two or three nights together, let them both be set abroad the third night
in the cold, so near that they may sit close together on the perch, and when
you see them sit close that one to that other for warmth, then vnhoode them,
and afterward feed them, perch them, and lure them both together, and take
pain to find the advantage.

How you shall enseame a Hawke, or give her castings, and skourings, etc.
SOme Falcons be harder bo enseame, than some others are, or the longer that a
Falcon has been in the hand, the harder she is to be enseamed: and an old
mewed Falcon of the wood, which has mewed but one cote in the Falconers
hands, is much easier to be enseamed, than a younger Falcon which has been
longer in the Falconers hands: the reason is, because a Hawke which preyeth
for her self, does feed cleaner, and better, according to her nature, and
upon more wholesome meats, than she does when she is in man's hands, so that
it is no marvel though she be not so foul within when she is at her own
diet, as when another man feeds her. For a Hawke which is in our keeping does
feed greedily both on skin, feathers, and all that comes to hand. Neither is
she mewed with so clean and wholesome feeding, nor does endue her meat so
well, nor has such open air at times convenient as a Hawke which is at large
to prey for her self. When you draw your Hawke out of the mew, if she be
greasse (the which you shall know by her thighs if they be round and fat,
and also by her body if she be full in the hand, and that her flesh be round
as hie as her breast bone) and if she be well mewed, and have all her feathers
full sommed, then give her when she would feed in the Morning a bitte or two
of hot meat, and at night give her but a little, unless it be very cold,
and if she feed well without constraint or forcing thereunto, then give her
washed meat thus prepared: take the wings of a Hen or Pullet for her dinner,
and wash them in two waters, and if you give her Hares flesh or Beef, let it
be washed in three waters, on the morrow give her the leg of a Hen very
hot, and at noone meat temperately warm, a good gorge, then let her fast
until it be late in the evening, and if she have put over her meat and that
there be nothing left in her gorge, then give her a little warm meat, as you
did in the morning, and let her thus be dyetted until it be time to give her
plumage, the which you shall know by three tokens, the first is, that feeling
the end of the pinion of the Hawks wing, you shall feel the flesh as it were
tenderer, and softer than it was before she eat washed meat: the second, if
her mewets be clean and white, and that the black of the mewt be right
black, and not mingled with any other foul thing and color: the third token
is, if she be very sharp set and do plume eagerly, you may give her casting
either of a Hares foot or a Conies foot, or of the small feathers, which are
on the joint of the pinyon of an old Hens wing: take then the forefoote of
an Hare, and beat it with the back of a knife until the bones and claws do
fall out, because the small bones may mouldre and be all to frushed to pieces,
the which you shall afterward cut and lay it in fair fresh water, then wring
it and give her it at two morsells, and when you set her on the perch, sweep
clean underneath it that you may see whether the mewte be full of strakes or
skins, or not, and whether it be full of slime and ordure or not, and if it
be, then continue this kind of casting three or four nights together with
washed meat, as is before said, and if you perceive the feathers digested and
soft, and that her casting be great and full of ordure, then take the neck of
an old Hen, and cut it all along between the joints, and lay the joints
in clear cold water, and give it to your Falcon without any other thing: and
this is done because it bears down before it into the pannell, the meat
which is upon the joints, and there in the pannell the flesh consumes, and the
bones remain sharp and pricking, which break the kels and skins, and the
gross ordure, and bear them with them: and give her so three nights together,
giving her by day washed meat as is before rehearsed, and afterward give her
casting or plumage again, according as her state does require. And think it
not strange that a Falcon which is to be enseamed, is sometimes a fortnight or
more before she will take casting: neither yet that some Falcons will easlier
be enseamed in a month, than some other in five weeks, according as they be
stronger or weaker of nature, and fed with cleaner or fowler meats, or
according as they have been shorter or longer time in men's hands and keeping.
When you have drawn your Falcon out of the mew, and that her principal
feathers be full sommed, or that she have some yet in the quill, do not give
her washed meat, but quick birds, and good gorges thereof, and set her as much
as may be in open places, for otherwise her feathers may chance to shrink in
the quill, and come to nothing.

To enter or make a Hawke, after the fashion of Lombardy.
WHen a Sparowhawke is ma^ned and reclaymed, the^ give her nine or ten trains
at the least, and when she kills, feed her up always, and let the Quail
wherewithal you train her, have a feather pulled out of each wing, and cast
off the Sparowhawke to her a far off, so often that she will recover the Quail
far off, and then cast her out a Quail which has her full wings, afterward
you may flee the wild Quail with her: and evermore when she does kill, feed
her up with a full gorge: the Almaynes are of opinion, that the tercell of the
Goshawke is more weighty and more valiant than the Hawke, both to Partridge and
Fezant. If you would make a Sparowhawke to the Pie, then dismember the Pie, and
cast her on the ground to the Hawke, and feed her upon her with a hot meal,
as with a Finch or such like bird, and use that order with her twice or
thrice, and afterward you may cast up a Pie to your Hawke that is seeled,
being dismembered as before said, and let her kill her, and feed her upon her,
also you may take a feather or two out of the Pyes wing, and set her up in
some tree, and let your hawke kill her there, and make her as good reward as
you can thereof, and this being thus used, you may flee with your hawk to the
wild Pie, but ever remember that in making these trains your Pie be
dismembered, that is to say, her bill and her tallons cut off, or so tied and
abated, that she may not spoil or hurt your hawke. Goshawkes, and Tercels of
Goshawks are better when they are taken haggards of a Cote or two Cotes out of
the wood, than they are when they be Soarehawkes, but then they must be kept
with more delycate feed than the Soarehawkes, for they are made dangerous.
For as much as in the woods they did commonly prey upon warm meats, and
therewithal they are sooner lost then Soarehawks be, by reason they remember
their eyrie, but they should not be above one, or two Cotes at the most. ()

To enseame a Falcon and to make her.
depiction of hawk

TAke your Falcon, and use her as you use the Goshawke in manner before
declared, saving that when you feed her you shall call and lure, as if you
called her to the lure: and every day you shall proffer her water, and every
night give her casting accordingly as you shall see that she endeweth: and take
off her hoode oftentimes amongst company: and to the end she shall not bate,
hold always the hood by the tassell in your hand ready. And in the evening
when day light begins to fail, take off her hoode amongst company of
people by the candle light, until she rowze and mewte, and then set her on the
perch and not before, and set light before her, and when she is well won to
know the fist, then begin to make her know the lure, and so by little and
little reclayme her, until you may call her loose without Cryance. Every
Falcon has need of a make hawke to teach her to hold in the head, and
especially the Haggart Falcon, the which may be peradventure an Haggart of two
or three Cotes, and yet shall be the better Hearoner: but if a Haggart mewed
will not hold in the head, then cut off some part of her two princypalles in
each wing, the long feather, and that which is next to it, and that shall force
her to hold in. You must also feat her beak, and cope her reasonably. They
always give their Hawks tyring both morning and evening, but the Falconers of
the East parts are of a contrary opinion, and say that it weakeneth a Hawks
back. If you would make your hawke upwards, or high fleeing, then after she
is reclaymed and lured, and ready coming, when you lure her, and that she
comes toward you, stoop the lure upon her, and let her pass by you, and
when she retourneth toward you, throw her out the lure, and make much of her,
and do thus oftentimes until you may suffer her to flee longer about you, and
to get up higher, the which you must do in a plain field where no wood or
trees are: and if she get up to any pitch, then let her flee a turn or two of
iollity, and when she is at the highest, and right over you, throw her forth
the lure, or a Pigeon or Pullet, and give her a good gorge thereon, making the
most of her that you can devise, and take heed that you cast not your lure
into the water, least she should thereby be rebuked. And when she is at her
gate, if percase she gadde out after some check, and kill it, then take the
prey from her angarly, and beat her therewith about the head, and hoode her up
without any reward: and hereby she will the less delight to rake out after a
check. When your hawke has killed a foul, take it out of her foot, and cast
her up again, and when she is right over you, cast out the lure, and feed
her up upon it, to make her love the lure the better. But at the beginning
reward her and feed her well upon the quarry, and that shall encourage her and
keep her from going out to the check. When she is well in blood, and well
quarried, then let her flee with other hawks, until she be well acquainted
and invred.

If you would make your Hawk to the Crane, take an Nyasse Falcon gentle, and in
entering of her, let her kill the greatest foul that you can find. Her lure
should also be a counterfaite Crane. And when you would make her fleeing, let
her flee from the fiste, and succor her quickly. For you must have dogs made
for the purpose, which may help and succor her sooner then a man can do. And
let such dogs feed always with your hawke, to make them the better
acquainted. If you would make a Falcon to the hare, her lure should be then a
Hares skin stuffed with straw, and when she is well lured, and that you
would enter her, tie the said Hares skin to the end of a cryance, and fasten
it to your saddle pummell, and when you gallope it will be like unto a running
Hare. Then vnhoode your Hawke, and cry, Back with the Greyhounds, back with
the Greyhoundes. And when your Hawke comes to seize the said Hares skin,
let go hour cryance, and suffer her to take it, and reward her well upon it,
and make the most of her that you can devise. And when you go about to enter
her the second time, let not slip your cryance at the first, but rather pull
it from her by force, and afterward let her seize upon it, and so by little
and little you shall teach her to beat it and stoop at it. For so must she
do at a wild Hare. And you must feed her always amongst the dogs, and when
she is well nousled and entered in this manner, take a live Hare, and break one
of her hinder legs, and let her go in some fair place amongst your dogs, and
your Falcon will stoop her and ruff her, until the dogs may take her. Then
take her from the dogs, and cast her out unto the hawke, and cry back, back.

If you would make your Hawke fleeing to the Partridge, or Feasant, when she is
reclaymed and made, then every time that you lure her, cast your lure into some
low tree or bush, that she may learn to take the tree or the stand. And if
she take the stand before she epsy the lure, let her stand a while. And
after draw the lure out before her and cry, Lo bird, lo, Hey lo bird, hey lo,
and reward her well. For in this manner she will learn to take stand. But
feed her always on the ground, and in some thick place, for in such places
she must encounter with the Fesant at Perch. And at the first flee with her
at Feasant, or Partridge that be young, to give her the advantage, and
afterward at the old. If a Falcon will not take stand, but will keep her on
wing, then must you flee with her in plain places, where you may always see
her upon you. Sacres and Laners will commonly take stand both in a tree, and on
the ground, but the Falcon gentle takes stand more willingly upon the ground.
And when you draw a Hawke out of the mew, bear her not much in hot weather, for
fear least by much bating in heat, she may get the Pantise. But if there be
no remedy, then keep her always hooded, and take as good heed to her as you
can. If your Hawke be coy and dangerous, then give her salt with her meat, I
mean a dram of the salt called Sal Inde, or Sal geme, or Salis albi
pulverizati, and give her water, for she shall have need thereof. And make
her Ieouke all night in pain, and in a moist or cold place, and so shall she
watch most of the night, and thereby her grease and pride will be abated.
Sacres must be nousled and entered as soon as they be manned, for else they be
very hard to be entered. Draw your Hawke out of the mew twenty days before you
enseame her. If a Falcon trusse and carrye, to remedy the same, you must cope
her tallons, her powlse, and her petty singgle. Never reward your hawke upon
river foul, but reward her, and make much of her upon the lure, to the end
she may the better know it, and esteem it. The Souldan flees to the Crane,
wild Goose, and Bustard, with three or four Hawks at once, (or more) from
the fiste, yea and those of all kind of Hawks also, as Sacres, Gerfalcons,
peregrine Falcons, and Mylanes. And ofterwards a man may make them flee to the
mowntye. You should flee to the Crane before Sun rising, for she is sluggish
and slothful, and you may cast off to her a cast or a lease of Falcons, or
you may hawke to her with the Goshawke from the fist without dogs. Wild Geese
are flowen to in the same manner. And if you have dogs to help and succor
your hawks, see that they be stanch and gentle, and well made for the purpose,
and a Greyhound will be most readily made thereunto. You shall flee but once in
a day at the Crane, and thereupon reward her liberally, and make as much of her
as you can. The Millaine should be let flee down the wind. The Almaines do
flee at the Pie with a lease or two cast of Falcons at once, and they make them
to mount and to stoop, as they do at the River. But this must be in a plain,
where there be no trees nor wood, but little shrubbs and bushes. If you use to
give your hawke a breakefast or beaching very timely in the morning, it will
make her eager to flee at such time as will be convenient for her to flee. And
especially a Falcon which you would have high fleeing, and those should not be
highly kept, but should be fed nine days together before Sun rising, and at
night late in the fresh or cool of the Evening. So shall you make them high
fleeing, and by that means they will every day get gate higher and higher, so
that they be flowen with evermore in the plain champion. The Falcon gentle is
commonly better inward when she has mewed, than in her soarage. The Falcon
will kill the Hearon naturally, if she be a peregrine Falcon, and yet you
shall do well to give them trains. A Falcon may flee ten slights at river in
one day, if the season be not extreme, and that is the most that you shall
flee with her. The Falcons which are river Hawks, should always be borne upon
the fiste. A hawke shall have forty castings before she be perfectly made. For
a hawke which has not casting every night, will be surcharged with abundance
and superfluity of humors, the which do (from the stomach) so ouerflow their
brain, that they cannot flee so high as else they would do. And therefore all
hawks should have casting every night naturally, if you would have them sound
and clean: and it is good to give them tyring or plumage at night, especially
field hawks, but not river hawks, for weakening their backs. And every third
day you shall present them to the water at the longest. Touch your Hawks
feathers as little as you can, for much handling will make them out of order.
The Millaine and the Laneret may be set upon the stone incontiuently, as
soon as they be made. When your hawke has flowen or bated, feed her not as
long as she pants, or blows, nor until she be in breath again. For if
you should, it is perilous to bring her into the disease called Astum, and (in
a Hawke) the Pantise. If a hawke (either Falcon, or other) chance to be out of
heart, and discouraged, (which happens oftentimes) then take such pains with
her, that she may kill some prey, and feed her upon it with a full gorge even
as long as she will eat, and the same night set her abroad that she may
Ieouke in the open air at her own pleasure: and on the morrow take her and
feed her with small birds to enseame her, neither more nor less than you
would do with an Hawke that were new drawn out of the mew. If a Falcon or
other hawke will not seize or gorge, take the quill of a wild Gooses feather,
and tie it under her long single, and she will seize and gripe. And when she
begins to seize, take away the said quill, and she will seize long
afterward. If you cannot give covert to your Falcon, or your Goshawke, then
cast her off with the Sun in her back. All hawks may be made flee at the
sowrce or spring. But in what sort soever you flee with your Goshawke, let her
have the Sun in her back.

To flee all manner of Fowls.
ALl trains of Partridge, Rookes, Crows, and Choughs, should be seeled. Now
to enter your hawke at any of them, make a little pit or hole in the ground,
and put your train therein. Then cover the hole with a little board or sod of
earth, to the which you shall fasten to a small cryance or cord, and that you
shall hold in your hand to draw away when you list. Then you shall make as
though you uncoupled your spaniels to hunt and put up ye game, and you shall
carry your hawke vnhooded. And when you perceive that your hawke looks that
way where you have laid the train, then draw off the board, and cause the
train to spring as though the spanels had sprung it. And if your hawke do
take it, let her feed thereon her fill upon the ground. And thus must you do
sundry times. If you would have a good hawke, then nowsle her young, for so will
she increase her force by little and little, and in the end, she will
overcome both Feasant and Partridge, etc. And when she has killed, let her
gripe and seize the prey at her pleasure. And let her also plume thereupon so
long as she will, and evermore let her be rewarded upon the ground. And when
she is well nousled, then reward her never but upon the cocks of all preyes,
because that will make her love that prey the better. And when she kills a
hen of any kind, let her no more but plume upon it, and give her but the heart,
and the brain at the most, because she shall not love to flee the Hen so
well as the cock. It is much better to nousle hawks at young fowls, than at
the old. For most commonly if a young hawke be let flee at old game, she
will turn tail, end cowardly give it over, unless you do as before is
declared. If you would nouzle or enter a Haggart* then do not enter her, or
set her in blood upon a young prey, or inure her thereto. For then she would
not afterward pass much for old game. And likewise for the same
consideration you shall not nouzle nor enter a mewed Hawke at young game.

For the Goshawke, all fowls generally are good traynes, as Crane, Bustard,
Hearne, wild Goose, River foul, Cormorants, Choughes, Rookes, Kites, and all
other foul that haunt Rivers or Plashes.

How to make a train or flight for the Goshawke.
SEt one of the said fowls upon the water, and between you and the water let
there be some small shrubs or bushes, so as the Goshawke may have covert to
take the stand if need be, as also to keep her out of sight of the foul for
her advantage, then advance your fist, so as the Hawke may descrye the foul.
After which you may hold it lower again, and so cast off the Hawke. And if so
be that she seize the foul, let her feed thereon at her pleasure on the
ground. To make your Goshawke to the brook, let her flee those trains before
said, as I have told you. But when you see the Hawke approach the foul, and
to be within danger, then strike up your drum before such time as the foul do
epsy your Goshawke. For if she once see the Hawke before she spring, she
will by no means willingly forsake the brook, but fall to dyuing and ducking,
a defense which nature has provided and taught them.

Thus must you deal with the Goshawke to the brook, but if you will flee with
her to the Hare and Lyueret, (which is a game that the Goshawke does much
delight to kill, and prey on) then must you breech her, and at no time let her
flee without that devise, for fear least she spoil herself. For the Hare is
of some force, and in striving to escape from her, will force her to stretch
her arms, and open her self too wide, which is the utter undoing of your
hawke. The Sparrowhawkes do use to kill the foul at the Sowrce or Souse, as
the Goshawkes do, which nature has taught them (for that being round winged
Hawks,) if they dealt not upon the advantage, the foul might easily slip
from them, and escape their danger. But so great is the courtesy of kind, as
she ever seeks to recompense any defect of hers, with some other better
benefit, or at least, such as shall serve the turn. Thus have you the French
Falconers opinions laid down as touching the fleeing with each kind of hawk,
or at least the greatest part of them. For the knowledge to flee with the
Falcon, serves for all Tower Hawks, and the Goshawks for the round winged
Hawks. ()

To manne, hoode, and reclayme a Hawke, after the opinion of the Italian
Falconer.


HE that will furnish his hawke accordingly, must have esses and Bewets of good
leather, and shrill belles, according to the hugeness or condition of his
hawke. So must he also have a hoode for her: and therewithal he must
oftentimes hoode and vnhoode her, in such sort that she be not afraid thereof,
nor of her keeper when he handles her. In 9. nights he should not suffer her
to ieouke at all, nor to come on any perch, but should keep her continually
so long upon his fist. And when he will call her, let him observe this order:
Set the Falcon upon the perch and vnhoode her, then show her your fiste with
some meat in it, and call her so long till she come to it. And when she
comes feed her, and reward her as pleasantly as you can: But if she come
not, give her nothing at all until she be very sharp set. And this order must
you keep with your Hawke seven or eight days together.

When you would lure her, give her unto some other man to hold, and call her
with a lure well garnished with meat on both sides, as you called her to your
fist. After you have used that manner of calling 6 days or thereabouts, cause
her to be held further from you, and cast the lure about your head, and
throwing it out upon the ground a little from you; And if she come to it
roundly, then feed her and reward her bountifully. And whiles your Hawke is
upon the lure, go about her fair and softly, luring and crying, woe, ho, ho, as
Falconers use. And when you have thus done by the space of certain days, take
your lure garnished as before said, and every day call her to you as far as
she may well hear and perceive you: and let her be loose from all her
furniture, that is without either loins or cryance: and if she come so far
off to you, then feed and reward her well, and stop her in her feeding
oftentimes, for that will make her come the better: but take heed that you
hurt her not in so doing. You shall also sometimes call her on horseback. And
when you have used her thus a month, or until she come well and roundly, and
that she be familiar with the man without any strangeness or coyness, then
myy you stop the lure upon her, and make her flee upon you. But before you do
so, it shall be meet to bath her, least when she is at liberty she rangle to
seek water, and so you might leese your Hawke: and every seven or eight days,
your Hawke should be set to the water, for the nature of them so requires.
When you have thus manned, reclaimed and lured your Falcon, go out with her
into the fields, and wistle her off your fiste, standing still to see what she
will, do and whether she will rake out or not. But if she flee round upon you,
as a good Hawke should flee, then let her flee a turn or two: which done,
throw her out the lure and let her foot a hen or a pullet, and kill it and
feed her well thereupon. Vnhoode her often as you bear her, and cease so to
do until she have endewed and mewted sufficiently.

When your Falcon is thus made and manned, go abroad with her every morning
when the weather is fair and calm, and choose a place for her to flee in, where
there is some narrow brook or plash of water. And when you cast her off, go
into the wind so far that the foul may not discrie you. And when she is cast
off, and begins to recover her gate, make you then toward the brook where
the foul lie, always wysing and making your hawke to lean in upon you. And
when you perceive that she is at a reasonable pitch, then (her head being in)
lay out the foul and land it if you can, and if you cannot, take down your
hawke, and let her kill some train, as thus. Take with you a ducke, and slip
one of her wing feathers, and having thrust it through her nares, throw it out
unto your hawk, and cast it as hie as you can right underneath your hawke that
she may the better know your hand, and you. And remember that you never flee a
young hawke without some quick thing carried into the field with you, that if
she fail at first to kill the wild foul, you may yet make her kill that
train which you bring with you. And this you shall do for a certain time,
until your hawke be well entered and quarried, and that she know a quarrior
sufficiently. Some other Falcons there be of a contrary nature, which will
require great skill to find their properties. And the same being known, you
may keep them high or poor, according to their conditions. So shall you do
more good with them, than if you have no respect to the diversity of their
nature: for then you should commit great errors, and seldom make good hawks.
You may train hawks in this wise. First you shall feed your Hawke well upon a
foul of the same kind that you would train her withal, or have her flee to.
And you shall do so until you have acquainted your Hawke with that kind of
foul, the which you may do in this sort. Take that foul that you will make
the train of, and set it on foot with meat tied upon the back of it, and go
so near it, that the Hawke may see it: and when she sees it, let her seize
thereupon, and foot the foul, and kill it. Or you may thus do better: Take a
Cryance and tie the foul (which has the meat tied on her back) by the
beak, and cause one to stand close which may hold the same Cryance. Then
vnhood your Hawke, and stand a far off, and let him draw the foul and stir
it with his Cryance, until your Hawke may see it stir. And if she foot it,
then may you afterward make her this other kind of train. Take a quick foul
which can flee, and when you have half seeled it, and cast it out, let your
Hawke flee to it, and if she kill it, reward and feed her up well upon it. ()

To keep and make Sarowhawkes.
depiction of hawk

IF you would know how to feed and man Sparowhawkes that be taken tender
penned out of their eyrie, it is meet ye you keep them in a fresh and sweet
place, and give them as much as they will eat of small birds, as Sparrowes,
Martlets, and such like. And also you may give them other flesh, but see that
it be sweet, clean, and good, shred into small pellets upon a clean trencher.
When they begin to wax fullsomed, give them Sparowes, and other small birds
whole, that they may learn to plume, foot, and tire: and set them a basin of
clean water in a heap of sand, that they may bath therein, and proine and
pick their feathers. They that be thus dealt withal do not know how to prey,
and therefore you must enter the^ bytrains in this manner. Take a young chicken
which is of color and plume like a Feasant or Partrich, and cast it out before
your sparhawk. But if she flee not unto it, nor do foot it, then strip the skin
upon the head of the chicken until it bleed, and she will lightly seize it,
thinking that it is flesh to feed upon. The^ feed her upon it well, and thus
you shall use her until she will seize a chicken of her self. When she will
take a chicken of her self, go into some fair close or meadow, where nothing
may be to interrupt you, and take a young chicken, and throw it up unto your
hawke, until she flee to it and foot it: then feed her up therevppon, and coye
her as much as you can devise: For Nyasse Sparowhawkes are much more dangerous
and coy than others be. When your Sparowhawke will foot a chicken well as
before said, then you may train her thus. Cause some of your servants or
others to stand close in some ditch or other privy corner, with a live chicken
in his hand: and stand your self with your Sparowhawke upon your fist a little
distance from him: then cry and speak as you would speak, and cry to your
spaniels when they range the field. And when you think that your sparowhawk
looks that way as he yt has the train stands, let him cast up the chicken
as high as he can, and let your Sparhawke flee thereat and seize it. That done
reward her, and feed her thereupon, making much of her, and cheering her
evermore among. Thus shall you do twice a day. When you have thus trained her,
mount on your horseback, and give her like trains in the field as before said.
Then set her sharp against an evening, and go out to seek some game: and if
you find, seek to make her one flight at advantage, and let her flee but once,
and sup her up upon the prey. Thus in four or five days at ye beginning I
would have you let her flee but one flight in a day, rewarding her well always
when she kills any thing, to the end she may know her game the better, and
take the greater delight therein, until she be thoroughly nousled. To keep
your Sparrowhawke in good order, rise early in the morning, and taking her upon
your fist, tap her on the train with your two forefingers, and stroke on her
wings that she may mantle and warble, and advance her self bolt upright, and
delicately upon your fist. Sometimes also take off her hoode, and put it on
again fair and softly, for rebuking her. When you have kept her two hours
upon the fist, then set her in the Sun to weather her half an hour: that
being done, call her to your fist with meat, and whistle to heroften, and
chirpe with your lips, that she may learn to know that voice when you call
her, and when she comes reward her well. Thus you should use her daily,
until she come well to the fist: remembering always that you deal with her as
gently, and as amiably as you can devise. When she is well manned, and well
coming, try if she covet not the water to bath her. And if she do bath, the^
may you afterward flee with her: But first, get on horseback, and call her
from off the ground with a cryance, for fear least she should think strange
to come to you on horseback: and if she come well to you from the ground,
being on horseback, then may you boldly flee with her. But remember always to
epsy some flight with advantage at the first, for discouraging of your Hawke:
For if she be once well nousled and entered, you may afterward be the bolder
how and when to flee with her.

The manner to feed a Sparowhawke.
TO feed a Sparowhawke orderly, you should give her good meats, as thighs of
chickens and pullets, young Sparrowes, Martlets, and other small birds. Also
sheep hearts, or Lambs hearts: all these be excellent meat for a
Sparowhawke. And those you must give them clean and hot, if it be possible:
for with hot meats you shall keep her always in best plight, and least
danger to abate. And to prevent diseases, you shall give her every night
casting of Cotton or lynt, or such like. And yet some are of opinion, that it
is not best to give a Sparowhawke casting so often: But by their leave I think
it meet: and my reason is, that when you give her casting, you shall always
perceive the disposition of her gorge, and pannell from time to time, by the
signs which you shall see upon the casting, and in it: As sometimes it will be
white, sometimes black, sometimes yellow, sometimes green, and of other
colors: and by this means knowing the infirmity of your Hawke, you may the
better provide remedy for the same. Therefore I think it best to give a
Sparowhawke casting, and it shall not be amiss to put therein sometimes a
whole Cloue, in a pellet of Cotton, which is a tried medicine to draw evil
humors from a Hawks head: Or sometimes you may put a chiue of Saffron in her
casting. And above all things, give her water once in three or four days: For
Sparowhawkes do much covet the water, and it is the best thing (with other
good diet) that can be, to keep a Sparowhawke always sound and in good case.
Addition
[The hearts of Pigs are very good for a Sparowhawke, and ever after her
feeding, let her plumbe upon a handful of Parseley.]

Of feeding a Hawke.
TAke heed that you feed not your hawke with two sorts of meat at once, for
that is perilous. Forasmuch as the substances of them being diverse, they
strive in disgestion, or endewing, and breed evil humors and worms in a
hawke, and fill her with wind. And beware also that you feed not your Hawke
with flesh of beasts that be old, nor that be hurt or tainted: For such means
are hard to endew, and full of venom and corruption, breeding diseases. Beware
also that you give not your hawke the flesh of a brood hen. And it shall not
be amiss sometimes to change your hawks meat and feeding.

Gooose flesh (if you use it oftentimes) will breed many flegmatike humors in a
Hawke, and the cray in the pannell.

The flesh of a young calfe is good for a gorge or two: but if you give it
oftener, it it ingendereth fleame and cold humors in the head, These feedings
are for the most part contrary to our English order in Falconrie.
and breeds lice in her. The heart is much better for common feeding than the
rest.

The flesh of a Ram goat, a female goat, or a gelded goat, is good to set up
a hawke. But some are of opinion that it breeds the gowte, and moist watrie
humors, and opilations in the gorge.

Mutton is not good, for it breeds humors in the head, as the Rye and such
like: it dries up and enflames a hawke, and makes her hose sit close to her leg.

Lambs flesh, and the flesh of a Kidde, is good given with Goats milk,
especially when your hawke is poor, and has been hardly dealt withal.

Hares flesh, or Conies flesh, either cold or hot, is very good to endew, and
sound meat for a hawke: but take heed that you give her none of the brains,
nor any of the hairs or bones, for they are perilous, and breed worms in the
gorge, and in the guts.

Cats flesh is unwholesome, and hard to be endured, and breeds perilous
worms, and stops a hawke in the gorge, and marreth her wind.

Rattes flesh is good and wholesome: it consumes choler, helps to loose the
head, gives good appetite and digestion.

Dogs flesh is good and very sound, and very meet for those kind of Falcons
which are hot Hawks of Nature.

This feeding we use not.
Wolves flesh is naught, and contrary to a Hawks nature.

The flesh of a Fox (as mine Author affirms) is wholesome, and sets up a
Hawke.

If your Hawke happen to sit abroad in the cold air, and especially in the
night, give her small birds to feed upon because they are hot of nature and
comfort much: but beware that you use it not continually, for it will make her
too stately, and cause her forget you, in such sort that you shall hardly
reclaim her from her coyness.

To feed with river foul, and such like, there are some of them good, and
some bad, as I will briefly declare.

Some hold opinion, that the bones and blood of a Bargander, Moorehen, and such
like may be given to an hawke: but that the skin, flesh, or feathers of them
are not good, because they breed evil humors.

The flesh of a Ducke or of a Crane (as they report) is good and wholesome.

The flesh of a Partrich is most excellent when a hawke is sick and diseased.

The flesh of a wild Goose, or of a slecked Crow, is good: but you must give
your Hawke but litte thereof, and none at all of their blood, for it is salt,
brakish, and of an evil nourishment.

The flesh of these flesh Crows, and of the Wagtayles, (a Dishwasher as we
term them, in Latin called Motacilla) and the Cormorant, is of evil
nourishment and digestion.

The flesh of a white Storke, and also of the black Storke, called (
Saraciresia) is evil of nourishment, and hard to be endewed, and stinking.

The flesh of the Bitter, and Sea Coote, is good and sound, especially when the
Sea Coote does feed and scour her with sand, it is good to enseame and breath
a Hawke: although naturally all water fowls are cold of complexion, moist, and
hard of disgestion.

The flew of the white Heron, otherwise called the Shoueler, and of the blew
and ash colored Heron, is of good digestion, and nourishes well.

The flesh of Finches, hedge Sparowes, and such like, are in manner all one: and
you must beware that you give not your hawke too much of them at once.

The Cuckoes flesh is indifferent good for a hawke.

The flesh of a Hearon royal, that is to say, the gray Heron, is reasonable
good, according to the opinion of many ancient Falconers: but Ptholomeus King
of Egypt does allege the contrary, saying, that naturally all fowls which
live upon fish, frogs, or snakes, and such like venomous worms, are evil of
disgestion, and that their blood breeds opilations and evil humors, although
they seem to delight hawks to feed on them for their delicate sweetness and
taste.

The flesh of the red Hearon is good: but you must give but little of it.

The flesh of the Swan, and many other kinds of Water fowls, too long here to
be rehearsed, are to be used according to the time and circumstances of
occasion.

The flesh of Sea-crowes, and Ravens, Cormorants, and such like, are of a
brakish blood, and therefore you may now and then give your hawke a gorge
thereof: but you must not use it often.

The flesh of ravening birds, as Kites, Puttocks, Harpies, Eagles, Eyrons, and
such like, all these are very contrary to the nature of Falcons, and are
stinking, of evil disgestion, and chollericke. Their blood and brains are
worst of all, for they breed perilous worms.

The flesh of all birds which feed upon seeds, as Feasants, Partridge,
Quails, and such like, are the best that can be, especially when a Falcon or
any other hawke is sick.

Doves flesh is excellent, either when a Hawke is sick, or to mew withal: for
it makes a hawke to mew well and quickly.

Pullets flesh, and Chickens flesh, is good at all times, and always in
season, as the flesh of that fair foul Bella Dounais.

To manne and make a Hawke: and first of a Nyasse Falcon.
depiction of hawk

THere are three sorts of Falcons, viz. Nyasses, Soarhawkes and Hawks taking
preying for themselves at large, which our Falconers call ramage or slight
Falcons. And I am of opinion that they are all made after one sort, and are
manned much a like. But by mine advice no man shall much assure himself in a
Nyasse, because over and besides that (for the most part) they prove not well,
they do also require great pains and attendance with extreme patience, to
make them kill and stoop a foul well, or to flee a high pitch. Nevertheless
if a man will needs be doing with them, he should first make a Nyasse to the
Hearon from the fist, I mean both the blew and read Hearon, and to such other
great fowls. For as much as the Nyasse hawks are naturally good seazers, bold
and hardy birds, and after they be well in blood, and entered in fleeing to
those fowls from the fist, then may you make them to the River, going into
some fair large field, whereas there may be either some wild Peacocks, flesh
Crows, or some other great foul, bearing your Falcon on your fist: loose her
hoode in a readiness, drawing as near the foul as you can, and the first foul
or bird that springs, vnhoode her, and let her flee from the fist to the
same foul, because they may draw your Hawke upwards. And when she is at a
great gate, or at a reasonable pitch, then throw her out a Ducke or a Mallard
seeled with a feather through the nares. And if she kill it, then reward her
well, and feed her upon it with as much favor as you can devise, always
luring and crying to her to comfort and encourage her.

Of Ramage Falcons.
IF a Falconer chance to recover a ramage hawke which was never handled before,
let him immediately seele her, and therewithal let him eue^ then also put on
her Iesses, the which must be of Shameuse, leather, or soft calves leather, or
such other leather as may be gentle and pliable to her leg. At the end
thereof, it shall not be amiss to set two Veruelles of Silver, the one
thereof may have the Arms of the King, or Queen whom you serve, and the other
a Scutcheon of your own arms. For as much as when they flee out, if they
chance to be taken up, they may the sooner be returned again, and restored to
their owners, the which you must then remember to reward the taker up of his
hawke liberally. You shall also put her on a pair of good belles, with two
proper Bewets: Being thus furnished, you shall go about to man her, handling
her often gently, and both to avoid the sharpenes of her beak, as also the
better to rebuke her from biting and nipping: you shall have a straight smooth
stick, as big as your finger, and half a foot long or more, with the which
you shall gently stroke your hawk about the pinions of her wings,and so
downwards thwart all her train. And if she chance to knap or bite at the
stick, let her bite hardly, for that will rebuke her thereof, whereas your
hand being twitched away fearfully, would make her proceed the more eagerly. To
man her well, you must watch all the night and keep her on your fist: and you
must teach her to feed seeled: and having a great and easy rufterhood, you
must hood and vnhoode her oftentimes seeled as she is, handling her gently
about the head, and coying her always when you vnhoode her, to the end the
take no disdain or displeasure against her Keeper. And also make her to plume
and tire sometimes upon a wing, and keep her so on the fist day and night
without perching of her, until she be weary, and suffer you to hoode her
gently and stir not: and correct her of her ramage toys, especially of
snapping and biting, stroking her evermore as before said with your stick. But
if if it happen (as it does sometimes) that your chance be to have a Falcon so
ramage and shrewde mettled, that she will not leave her snapping and biting,
then take a cloue of Garlic clean pilled, or a little Aloes Cycatrina, and
when she byteth or snappeth at your hand or stick, offer her the Garlic or
Aloes, and let her bite bite it: For either the strong sent of the Garlic, or
the bitter taste of the Aloes, will quickly make her leave her biting and
snapping.

To use a Hawke to the hoode
IT happens oftentimes that Falconers have hawks which come from Ciprus,
Candya, Alexandria, and other far countries, the which having been in the
hands of such as could not well skill of them, become coy and very untoward to
be hooded, and will hardly be won to abide the Hoode by any means. In this
case you must first seele your Hawke, and being seeled, you must fit her
with a large easy hoode: and hoode and vnhoode her often therewith, watching
her a night or two, and handling her oftentimes about the head as before said,
until she have forgotten that fault. And when she once does leave it, you
may unseal her in an evening by candle light, handling her still softly with
your hand about the head, hooding and vnhooding her oftentimes, until she
will well abide the Hoode, and brook to be handled. And here I think good to
express mine opynion, that he which takes in hand to be a Falconer, ought
first to be very patient, and therwithall to take singular delight in a Hawke,
so that he may seem to be in love (as it were naturally) with his Hawke, even
that a man would say, it were a thing bread so in the bone as it could never
be rooted out of the flesh. For such a man with never so little pain and
industrye, will become an excellent Falconer: but he which takes not that
delight in his Hawke, but does rather exercise it for a pomp and boast, than
upon a natural instinct: or being a poor man, does use it to get his living,
such a man in mine opinion shall seldom prove a perfect Falconer, but a
mar-hawke, and shall bear the bag after a right Falconer.

To turn to my purpose, when your hawke being so seeled, does feed well, and
will abide the Hoode: and to be handled, without striking or biting at your
hand: then in an Evening by Candlelight you shall vnseele her, and with your
finger and a little spittle, annoint the place where the seeling thread was
drawn through. And when you have hooded her, take her on your fist, and hold
her so all night until day appear again, doing off her Hoode oftentimes, and
handling her gently with your hand, stroking hersoftly about the wings and the
body, hooding and vnhooding of her, and giving her sometimes to feed, a
morsel or twain, or sometimes tyring or plumage. But above all things you
must watch her on the fist so many nights together, without setting her down
on any perch, that she may be weary, and suffer you to hoode and handle her
gently without any manner of resistance, and until she have altogether left
and forgotten her striking and biting at your hand: but some hawks will belong
before they leave that fault, as the more coy or ramage that they be, the
longer they will retain those ill tatches, and will not peradventure be won
from them in three, four, or five days. When she is well reclaymed from it,
then may you let her sit upon a perch to rest her. But every night you shall
do well to keep her on the fist three or four hours, handling her and
stroking her gently, and causing her to tire or to plume, always making of
her, and hooding and vnhooding her oftentimes, as before said. And the like may
you do also by day light, but in a Chamber apart, where she may see no great
light until she feed surely and eagerly without dread.

To make your Hawke know your voice,
IF your hawke be thus in four or five days manned, so that she begin to
feed eagerly and boldly, then you shall first begin to make her know your
whistle, or the chirping of your mouth: and afterward your voice in this manner
Take a quick Pullette, and going into some secret place, where your Hawke may
well perceive the foul, and yet see no great open light, let her plume and
feed upon it, as she sits upon your fist: then chyrke with your voice, and
use those other sounds which Falconers do to their Hawks: and feed her so,
hooding her gently: then afterward you may let her plume a little upon some
wing, being still hooded, as well to loose her in the head, and to make her
cast wat^r, as also to teach her the better how to fit on the fiste. The
feeding for a Falcon shall be Pullets not very old, and Calves hearts,
weathers hearts, and hogs hearts, and to give her a convenient gorge, to the end
the may the better digest both the gross substance, and the slimie matter.
But if your Falcon be not eager or sharp set, then shall you do well to wash
her meat sometimes in fair water, and some other whiles in urine, wringing it
a little, and then feeding her therewith for one, two, or three gorges, and
that not continually: but respecting a day or two between, and that is
referred to the discretion of the good Falconer. For this done somewhat to a
bate a Hawke, and to enseame her. It shall not be amiss also in the morning
when she is empty both in the gorge and pannell, to convey into her a little
Sugar candy, to the quantity of a small nut, for that dissoluing in her, will
make her the better to endure, and will both break the gross substance, and
digest the glit in her, and also will make her eager as shall be further said
hereafter.

How to make a Hawke know her feeding.
WHen your Hawk feeds eagerly, and knows your wistle and your voice, then
may you teach her to know know her feeding, and to bate at it in this wise. You
should with your right hand show her meat, crying and luring to her aloud and
if bate or strike at it, then must you quickly and handsomely let her foot it,
and feed on it for three or four bits: and do thus oftentimes, to the end
she may the better know her feeding. And afterward feed her, and give her
every night (without intermission) some casting either of feathers, or of
cotton with two cloves sometimes cut in four pieces, and put into the casting,
or a little Aloes, wrapped up in the Cotton, according as the Falconer shall
see that it is requisite. For such castings make a Hawke clean and eager. ()

To make a Falcon bold and ventrous.
depiction of hawk

WHen a Falcon has learned to feed, and to know the call of her Keeper: then
to make her hardy, you shall suffer her to plume a pullet or good great
chicken. And you shall go into some close place, where she may not see
overmuch light, as before said, where loosing her hood, in a readiness you
must have a live pullet in your hand, and kneeling on the ground, luring and
crying aloud unto her, make her plume and pull the pullet a little. Then with
your teeth drawing the strings, vnhoode her softly, suffering her to plume and
pluck it with her beak twice or thrice more, cast out the pullet upon the
ground before her. Then must you with raising or holding down your fist,
encourage her until she leap down upon the Pullet, and seize it. Then when
she begins to break it, and to take blood, you shall lure and cry aloud
unto her, and encourage her by all the means that you can, feeding her upon the
ground. And therewithal you shall take her up gently and nimbly with the pullet
in her foot, whereon let her plume, and feed now and then a little. Then hoode
her gently, and at last give her tyring of a wing, or a foot of the said pullet.

To make a Falcon know the Lure.
AFter that your Falcon has twice or thrice thus killed a pullet in some secret
place, then must you make her know the lure in this wise, Fasten a pullet unto
your lure, and go a part. Then give your Falcon to hold unto some other man,
who may draw loose the strings of her hoode in a readiness. And when you are
gone a little back from him, take your lure at half the length of the string,
and cast it about your head once or twice luring with your voice also. Then let
that other vnhood your hawke, whiles you throw out the lure not far from your
hawke, luring and crying stll unto her. And if your hawk do stoop to the
lure, and seize the pullet, suffer her to plume her, coying her, and luring
still with your voice. Then let her feed on the pullet upon the lure, and
afterward take her upon your fiste together with her meat, and hoode her
suffering her to plume and tire, as is before said.

How to call your Falcon loose and at large.
WHen your Falcon has come well three or four times unto the lure in some
secret place, as well to a live pullet as to a dead, then shall you go abroad
into some fair meadow, where are no trees, and fastening a quick pullet unto
the lure, give your Hawke to hold unto another man. Then tying also a cryance
unto your hawks lease, cause that other which holds your hawke to make ready
her hoode, and give her a little bit of meat on his fist, chirping and chearing
her with his voice: Even therewithal do you go back four or five paces or
more, luring twice or thrice, let him which holdeih the hawke, do off her
hood, then do you take the lure at length of the string, and cast it about your
head, crying and luring alowde, throwing it upon the ground: and if your hawke
stoop at the pullet, suffer her to break it, and feed her upon the lure,
casting her to eat the brains and the heart of the pullet with the lure also,
always crying and luring. And this order, shall you observe daily further and
further off, until she be well lured, entered, and manned.

How to call a Falcon that will come loose.
WHen your Falcon will come a far off unto the lure, and stoop to it being
thrown out, without any coins or ramagenes, then setting her sharp, you shall
get on horsbacke in a morning, and go into some fair plain field, and as
near as you can, where there is no wood nor trees, there giving your hawke
unto some other man to hold (which must also be on horseback.) Put your
cryance to your hawke in such wise, that she may not tangle her self therewith
in coming to the lure. Then drawing back a little as much as you think meet,
give a sign to him that holds the hawk, to make ready her hood, and let him
hold up his fist on high. Then lure you three or four times, as loud as you
can, always casting ye lure abour your head, whereunto for ye first time I
would have Pullet fastened still. And while you so do, let him which holds
your hawke, pluck off her hoode, and if she come straight to the lure,
forbear until she come within eight or ten paces of you, then cast it unto
her. And if she take the lure, let her plume thereupon, and lure you still
with your voice, lighting off your horse, and draw near to your hawk fair and
softly, luring and crying unto her, and so feed her as before said. But after
that she be called two or three days to the lure on horseback with a criance,
or more or less, according to the towardness or untowardness of the Hawke,
if she come roundly a bow shot from you, you may then go out in a morning,
having set her reasonably sharp for the purpose, and call her loose on
horseback, that is without either lease or criance, but loose, and in company.
And ifshee come to you, feed her upon the lure, as before said, luring still
unto her, to make her acquainted with your voice. And the next day you may call
her to the dry lure without a Pullette, or any thing upon it. And when she is
come to the lure, cast her out a quick Pullette, breaking first the feet and
legs thereof, and let her kill it upon the lure, and feed her up.

To make a Falcon fleeing.
WHen your Hawke will come, and stoop to the lure roundly, and without any
ramagenes, then if she be a Haggart, you must put her on a pair of great
luring belles, and the like shall you do also to a Soarehawke. And so much the
greater ought your bells to be, by how much more you see your Hawk giddy-headed,
or like to rake out at check. For it can be no hurt to clog her with great bells
at the first, until her conditions be known and well perceived. That being
done, and having also set her sharp, go one morning on horseback into some
fair large field, without wood or trees, if it be possible, and having your
hawk upon your fist, consider of ye wind, and ride you up into the wind, or
toward that way as the wind blows, half a bow shot. And having loosened
your Hawks hoode, whistle softly, as it were to provoke your hawke to flee.
Whereupon she will begin to bate, or at least to slap with her flagges and
sails, and to advance her self upon your fiste. Then suffer her until she
rowse or mewt, and when she has done either of them, vnhoode her, and let her
flee with her head into the wind. For thereby she shall be the better able to
get up on wing, and to get into the wind. Then will your Falcon naturally clime
upwards, rouing and fleeing round. Therefore when you see that she has flowen
two or three turns, you shall cry and lure with your voice, and cast the lure
about your head, whereunto first tie a Pullet, as before said, and if your
Falcon come in, when she approaches near you, then cast out the lure into the
wind, and if she stoop to it, reward her as before.

To make a Falcon leave the stand on the ground.
IF your Falcon at first when she fleeeth from the fist, will not get up, but
take stand on the ground, as the most part of soar Falcons do commonly, you
shall not yet therefore be discouraged, nor out of hope, but rather making
toward her with your horse, and threatening of her, seem to fear with your
wand, and drive her from the stand, until she flee a turn or two. Then take
her down to the lure, and feed her. But if so chance that your Hawke will not
leave that fault of taking the stand, then must you seek to find out some
Chough, Starling, or some such birds, making ready your Hawks hood, draw as
near them as you may until they rise. Then vnhoode your Hawke, and no doubt
if she will flee them, they will train her well upwards. Then must you have
in a readiness a Ducke seeled, as before said, and so as she may not see but
backewards, because she may thereby mownt the higher. And holding her fast by
one of the wings, near unto the body, in your right hand, and luring with your
voice to make your Falcon turn the head, forbear till she be at a
reasonable pitch, then running under her, cast up your Duck toward her that
she may perceive it, and that the Ducke may be to her in stead of a train.
And if she strike her, or stoop her, or trusse her, then suffer her to kill
it, and reward her upon it, taking out one of her legs, or both, if need
require, feed her with a reasonable gorge. This being done once or twice, or
oftener, according to the occasion, your hawke will leave the stand, and delight
to keep her on wing, and become also the more obedient and loving.

To make the Falcon to the River.
WHen your Falcon is accustomed to flee for it, and will lie upon you at a
great gate, or at a reasonable pitch and will come and hold in the head at
your voice and luring, then may you go to the River where you shall find any
foul, and there shall it behoue you to use such policy, that you may cover
the foul, and get your hawke to a good gate above the foul. And when her head
is in, then lay out the foul, and cry, Hey gar, gar, gar. And if your Falcon
do stoop them, and enew them once or twice, then quickly thrust your hand in
your hawking bag, and make her a train with a Ducke seeled. And if your
Hawke do either trusse or stoop it, succor your hawke immediately, crossing
the Ducks wings, and let your hawk plume, etc. I am of opinion, that for the
first or second time that you show your hawke a foul, it shall not be best to
show her great foul, but rather small foul, as the Dapchicke, or such like.
For if you show them the greatest fowls at the first, it often happens that
they slip from the Hawke up the wind, and the hawke cannot recover them (but
raketh out after) whereby the Falconer is feign to trotte farther than he
would, yea and sometimes also he loses his Hawke. Wherefore in my judgment
it were better at the first to be merry and wise.

To make a Hawke inward at the River, when she raketh out.
IF it chance that your Hawke rake out with a foul, and cannot recover it, and
in the end gives it over, and comes in again directly upon the man, then shall
you do well to cast her out a seeled Ducke. And if she stoop it, or trusse
it, cross the wings, and suffer her to take her pleasure, rewarding her, and
giving her the heart, brains, tongue, and liver, with a leg or two,
according as you see occasion. And for default of a quick Ducke, take her
down to the dry lure, and let her plume a pullet, and feed her upon it. Thus
doing, your hawke will learn to give over a foul that rakes out, and hearing
the Keeper lure, she will learn the better to hold in the head, and to make
back again to the river.

To make a flight for a Haggart.
HE that would make a flight for a Haggart, he shall do well in my conceit,
to flee where there be no Crows, Choughs, or such like for the first two or
three flights, because she shall take none occasion to rake out after such
check. And it shall be good also, that you let her not flee out on head too
far at the first, but run after, and cry to her ( Why lo, why lo) to make
her turn head. And when she is come in, take her down with the lure, unto the
which I would have a quick Pullet fastened, as before said. And you shall
suffer her to tire, plume, and feed as before, etc. It happens oftentimes that
a Haggart through her gadding mood and gallantnesse of mind, does rangle out
from her keeper, more tha^ upon any other cause. Then shall you clogge her with
greater luring bells, and make her a train or two with a ducke seeled, to teach
her hold in, and know the man. You shall not need to train a Haggard so often
as a Soarehawke, because they have been accustomed to prey for themselves, and
do by experience know one foul from another. But they do much better
remember either the rebukes, or cherishings which are made to them, than
Soarehawkes do: and therefore it behooves to use more care and heed about a
Haggart, than a Soar Falcon, and above all things to take her often down with
the dry lure, and to let her take her pleasure of her reward. And (as
Falconers term it) to be ever well in blood. For otherwise she will not
long be at your commandment, but make you follow her. ()

How to make your Falcon kill her foul at the first.
depiction of hawk

WHen a Soar Falcon or a Haggard is well lured, and flies a good gate, or a
reasonable pitch, and stoopeth well, then shall you first cast off a well
quarried, or make Hawke, and let her stoop a foul upon a brook or a plashe,
and watch her until she put it to the plunge: then take down your make Hawke,
and reward her and hoode her up, setting her a little way off by the flight,
that you may use her help afterward if need be. This being done, take your
young hawke which is not yet entered, and going up the wind half a bowshotte or
thereabouts loose her hoode, and softly whistle her off the fist, until she
have rowsed or mewted, then let her flee with her head into the wind, having
first given show to your company that they be in a readiness against the
Hawke be at a good gate, and to show water, and lay out the foul. This order
being observed, and running and crying as Falconers use to do, hawke on your
Falcon, and give her leave to get up, and when she is at a reasonable pitch,
and covering the foul, give a sign to your companions that they draw neat
to the water, and all at once make in upon the foul on all sides the brook
(as Falconers term it) to land her: the^ if your Falcon stoop, and strike or
trusse it, run in a pace to help her, and crossing the fowls wings, let
your hawke take her pleasure on it, feeding her as custom is: but if so chance
that she cannot stay it at the first stooping, then you must give your Hawke
respite and time to recover her gate: And when she is at her gate again, and
her head in, then lay out the foul again as before said, until you may land
it at the last, always remembering that as soon as she seize it, you succor
her quickly, and reward her according to order. True it is, that to be assured,
you shall do well always to have a quick Mallard or Ducke in the hawking
bag, whenever you would make a slight: and if your hawke kill not the foul
which is stooped (as often happens by many overthwart chances) then may you
quickly have recourse to the hawking bag, and feeling your live Ducke (your
hawke being at her pitch, and her head in) you may throw her up to your Hawke,
and reward her, etc. For this order shall always maintain your Hawke to be
inwards, and in good life and blood.

How to do when your river hawke will take stand in a tree.
IF you have a Falcon which (as soon as she has once or twice stooped and
endewed a foul) will take stand on a tree, you must as much as may be, eschew
to flee in places where trees be, and you must have two or three live trains,
and give them to sundry Falconers, placing them all of purpose, some here, some
there: and when your Hawke has stooped, and would go to stand, then let him
unto whom the hawke does most bend, cast out his train ducke seeled, and if
the Falcon stay her, then reward her, etc. And by this means she will leave
that fault, but if in this doing twice or thrice, she will not leave that
trick, then the best counsel I can give you, is to rid your hands of such
a kite.

To make a hawke fond of the Lure.
WHen your Hawke is well quarrieed, and flees well to the river, and flees a
great gate, or a reasonable pitch, then shall you do well also to make her
fond of the lure: for when a Hawke has stooped once, twice, or thrice, you
shall do well to take her down with the lure, and to let her kill a Pullet,
and feed her upon it: yea the higher fleeing that a Hawke is, the more need
to take her down the oftener with the lure, and to regard that you ouerflee her
not: For if it happen that a foul being often stooped, will not spring again,
but will rather fall to diuing (which Falconers call the ploonge) then must you
take her with dogs, or kill her with Hawking poles, or use some such other
devise, and be feign to take down your Falcon with the lure, and give her the
foul upon the lure, feeding and rewarding her with as much delight as you can,
to make her fond of the lure. It happens oftentimes that many Falcons will
hardly become fond of the lure, through the great desire they have to kill
their foul. To help that, I think it not sufficient only to keep her from
often killing, but sometimes you must also take the quarrey out of her foot as
soon as she has fed upon a little of the brains, and hood her up, then
giving her unto another to hold: go from her a bow-shot, and call her to the
lure, and so feed and reward her well upon the lure with the foul that she
killed, and this order will make her fond of the lure.

How to help a Hawke when she is froward and coy through the pride of grease.
SOmetimes a Falcon will become very proud and disdainefull by being over high
kept, in sort that she shall not need to be fed nor rewarded according as
they feed when they prey of themselves at large: and although she flee and
kill, yet as soon as she has plumed a little, let her keeper take a sheep
heart cold, or the leg of a pullet, and whiles the Hawke is busy in pluming,
let the Falconer convey the heart of the sheep, or the pullets leg into some
part of the body of the foul, that it may take some taste of it: and when the
Hawke has eaten the brains, heart, and tongue of the foul then let him take
that forth, and call his Hawke with it unto the fist, let him feed her
therewith, and give her a little of the feathers in the neck of the said
foul, to scowre her and make her cast.

When a Falcon will not hold in the head.
IF a Falcon use to rake out after check or otherwise, and lean out so far,
as neither for whooping, luring, or for casting the Hawks glove about your
head, she will come in again to the flight, but rather still more and more
gad out, and so flee away: in this case you must follow after her, luring and
whooping a good, proffering her to the lure, to make her put in her head
again: and if she do turn and come to the lure, then feed and reward her.
etc. And do not fail in any wise to be fond of her when she comes to the
lure, because she may thereby the better learn to know your voice, and to come
to the lure another time. Holding this order, (especially with Seare-hawkes, or
hawks of the first Cote) they will learn to hold in at the voice or sight of
the lure, yea, and that with such readiness as it will breed admiration in all
them that behold it, to see the excellency of art, what it is able by cunning
to atchieue, which truly does appear in nothing more than in Hawking.

How to keep a Hawke high fleeing.
WHen a Hawke is well made to the river, you should not flee with her above two
flights in a morning, but feed her up although she kill not: but if she be a
stately high fleeing Hawke, you should not in any wise flee her above one
flight in a forenoone, for it will bring her down, and make her fall off her
stately pitch by often fleeing, and becoming greedy and hot of the quarrey.
When a good high fleeing Hawke being whistled, or cast off the fiste, does
gather upwards to a great gate, you must have regard to continue her therein,
fleeing with her upon broad waters and open Rivers, eschewing little brooks,
and gullets, and such places as lie near under covert, where there be trees,
shrubs, and bushes in such sort that it will be very hard to land a foul
handsomely from them, at least not without help of dogs, and great clapping
and a do. Yea sometimes eke you must of force alight from off your Horse, all
which things are able to mar a high fleeing hawke. Forasmuch as crying,
clapping of hands, noise, bawling of dogs, and alighting on foot, and
furthermore when a Hawke cannot see the water under her, al these things do
teach her to forget her kindly fleeing, and to play the Kite, houering and
winding as the Kite does in the air without any show of state: and in twice or
thrice doing so, she abateth her gate, and marreth her sleeping. Therefore let
the Falconer take good heed to that consideration, and keep his hawke always
as high fleeing as he can, suffering her but seldom to kill, and not to
stoop, beyond twice or thrice at the most, and even when she is at the
highest, let him take her down with the lure: where when she has plumed and
broken the foul a little, let him feed her up, and by that means he shall
maintain his Falcon high fleeing, and inward, and very fond of the lure. Here
I will not deny but that if she kill every day, although she stoop from a
very high gate, yet if she be not rebuked or hurt therewith, she will
doubtless become every day higher fleeing than other, mary therewithal she
will so much forget the lure, as the more you show it her, the more she will
bend from it, and flee out on head from her Keeper: and oftentimes will teach
you hot poasting iourneys. Wherefore above all things, the high fleeing hawke
should be made inwards, and (as we term it) fond of the lure, because it is
no less praise worthy in a high fleeing Falcon to make in, and turn head at
the second, or third toss of the lure, and when she powers down like a
stone upon it, than if she had killed: nay rather such are more esteemed than
the other. And so is the Falconer more praise worthy which does win his Hawke
thereunto. For to come unto the lure is a thing taught by art and industry, but
to kill a foul is the natural property of a Hawke.

To make a high fleeing hawke upwards.
IT happens oftentimes that a Hawke (although she be naturally high fleeing)
will yet belong before she be made upwards, but will fish and play the slugge:
for when she should get up to cover the foul, she will stoop before the
foul be put out, the which may proceed through two causes. First, it may be
that she is too sharp set, and the second cause may be that she is flowen
withal out of time, either too soon or too late. So that when you see a
Falcon use those evil tatches without apparent cause, you shall do well to
cast her out a dead fowl or a dead pullet for a dead quarrey (as Falconers
term it,) and to hoode her up without any reward, to the end she may take no
encouragement to use those vile tricks: for there is no greater spoil to an
high fleeing Hawke, than when she kills a foul from a base and low pitch,
and so much the greater is the loss of her, by how much the more she does use
those vile buzardly parts. Therefore by my best experience I praise that order,
to throw her out a dead quarrey and hood her up: then afterward within half
an hour, call her to the lure and feed her, and do this as often as she
uses to fish or to play the base flugge on that fashion, and to find whether
it proceed of being too sharp set, or of fleeing out of time, the Falconer
shall do well with all diligence to note the natural disposition of his
Hawks: as which will flee being hie and in good plight, and which best, when
she is kept low, which will flee best when she is set most sharp and eager,
and which contrary, and which in a mean between both, which early at Sun
rising, and which when the Sun is two hours high or more, which sooner, and
which later in an evening. For the natures of Falcons are very diverse and
sondrie, in such sort as to flee with a hawke at her best hour and time, and
to flee with her out of that time, is a thing which will show as great
difference, as between an excellent good Hawke, and a Kite. Therefore let the
Falconer have especial regard thereunto, setting his Hawks to flee according
to their natures and dispositions, and keeping them always in good order. And
here it is to be noted, that al hawks, as well soarhawks, as mewed hawks and
haggartes, should be fet out in the evening two or three hours, some more and
some less, having convenient regard to their nature, as it is stronger or
weaker: and in the morning also, accordingly as they cast, hooding them first,
and then setting them abroad a weathering, until you get up on Horseback to
go to field, and so your hawks will always be well weathered and in good
order. These be the best means and observations which I can set down for
River Hawks, which if it succeed well to you, then shall you stand assured of
your sport, and I of my desire.

To make a Falcon to the Hearon.
NOw to teach you to make a flight at the hearon: although it be the most
noblest and stately flight that is, and pleasant to behold, yet there is no
such art or industry therein as in the other flights. For the Hawke flees the
Hearon: moved by nature, as against her proper foe: but to the river she
flees as taught by the industry and diligence of the Falconer. Then must it
needs follow, that (such Falconers as have flowen at the river, when the end
of the month of February, or the beginning of March is come, a time when
Hearons begin to make their passage) if you will make those Falcons to that
flight, you must cease fleeing at the river with them any longer: but you must
pull them down and make them light, the which you shall do by feeding them
with no wild meats, but the hearts and flesh of Lambs, Calves, and chickens,
and calling of them to the lure with other make Falcons, that is to say a cast
at once, to the end they may accustom and acquaint themselves one with
another, and so may the better flee the Hearon by helping one another, and by
succouring each other. Herein you must take good heed so to acquaint them that
they crabbe not together, for so would they do when they come to the flight,
whereby they might be in peril to be spoiled or killed. When your Falcons be
skowred and clean, so as being sharp set, they may be called hungry hawks,
or (as Falconers term them) eager hawks, you must get a live Hearon, upon the
upper part of whose bill or truncke you must convey the joint of a reed or
Cane, so as she may not hurt the hawke therewith: that being done, tie the
Hearon in a Criance, then setting her upon the ground, vnhood your hawke, to
the end that when she espieth the Hearon, she may flee her: and if she do so,
make in apace to succor her, and let her plume, and take blood of it, allowing
her the brains, the marrow of the bones, with the heart all together: (the
Italians call it Soppa.) Having thus laid it upon your Hawking glove, give it
your Hawke: and afterward rippe the breast of the Hearne, and let your Hawke
feed thereon until she be well gorged. This being done, hoode her up upon
the Hearon, suffering her plume thereon with all the favor that may be: then
take her upon your fist, and let her tire a little upon the foot or pynion of
the wing. But if a Falconer have not store of Hearons to train withal (as
often it happens, by mean the foul is rare and dainty,) then may he do thus:
When he has armed or cased the Hearons tronke with a Cane or reed, as before
said, he may take a piece of a Calves skin, or such other like, as long as
the neck of a Hearon, and beginning at the head, continuing to the shoulders
and body of the Hearon, let him sew it in proportion and shape of a sheath,
that it may arm the hearons neck and head: and afterward with a pensill,
pen, and incke, or such other device, let him paint it as like as he can to the
neck and head of an hearon, with feathers and every thing to the purpose. Then
let him set the counterfeit Hearon upon the ground, as before said: and when
the Hawke does flee it and foot it, he must have a quick young Pigeon, the
which he must hansomly convey under the Hearons wing, and let the Hawke plume
and feed thereon, reserving the hearon safe for an other time, and to make
train again with it the next day. Then having thereupon rewarded your Hawke,
and coyed her sufficiently, you may go the next day into a meadow, or other
convenient place with your Falcon on your fist: and giving the Hearon armed as
before said, to some other which may hold it under his arm a good way off
from the Hawke, as half an Arrowe shoot or more: Then your Hawke being
vnhooded, give sign unto him to throw up the hearon on hie, and if your hawke
seize it, reward and feed her with a pigeon as before said, dealing
familiarly with her, and the third day you may do again in like manner,
causing him that holds the train to hide himself as close as he can, and to
cast out the Hearon as far from him as he may. All these being done, and the
Hawke having thus often taken her train to your liking, you may the fourth day
in a fair field, put out the Hearon without cryance, or arming her at all: and
when she is up of a reasonable height, you may cast off your Hawke, who if she
bind with the Hearon and bring it down, then make in apace to rescue her,
thrusting the Hearons bill into the ground, break his wings and legs that
the hawk may the more easily foot and plume it. Then reward her as bountifully
as you can with the brains, the marrow of the bones and the heart as is before
declared (making her the Italian Soppa) many use to make a train another way,
which does not mislike me, and that is this: they cause one to clime a tree
with the Hearon, from thence he casts her out to the Hawke, and then they let
their hawks flee as before said. But as touching these trains, it behooves
that the Falconer be of good judgment, as also in diverse other things. For
even as the Hawke does flee them with better or worse list and life, so
behooves if that the trains provided be stronger or weaker accordingly. ()

To make your Hawke flee the wild Hearon.
depiction of hawk

WHen your Hawke will kill a train lustily, and boldly, then may you go into
the field to find a wild Hearon at siege, and when you have found her, win in
as nie to her as you can, and go with your Hawke under the wind, where having
first loosed her hoode in a readiness, as soon as the Hearon leaves the
siege, off with her hoode, and let her flee: and if she clime to the Hearon,
and beat her so that she bring her down, run in apace to rescue her,
thrusting the Hearons bill into the ground, and breaking her wings and legs
(as is aforesaid) feed her and reward her upon your hawking glove, in manner
before declared. But if your hawk should fail to beat down the hearon, or
do give him over, then shall you flee the Hearon no more with her, unless it
be with some other make hawke, which is well entered, and in good fleeing. And
thereby the unskillful hawke seeing that other Hawke flee at the Hearon, and
bind with her, will take courage and flee eake with that other make-Hawke,
either little or much, and if they kill the Hearon, then should they be fed
and rewarded together while the quarrey is hot, making them an Italian Soppa as
before said. And by this means the coward hawke may be made bold and perfect:
But if it chance that any lusty roysting hawke will flee the Hearon of herself
without trayn, or the Shoueler, the Falconer should let her foot it, plume and
break it until she find blood, and should give her the Soppa, as Falconers
do term it, for so they will become much bolder, and the better Hearoners
also. But he that will work surely to enter his Hawke at the Hearon, let him
help her by any practice or means that he can devise: and these be the means
and precepts to make a Falcon a good Hearoner.

Of such Hawks as flee from the fist, and first of the Sacre.
depiction of hawk

YOu must understand that all sorts of Falcons are made to the lure, after one
self manner, but they are not hawked withal alike: for the Sacres, Lanners,
Gerfalcons, Millions, and Merlins, do not flee the river, unless happily the
Laners do, which as I understand do flee the river in France: but they flee
not single, but sundry Laners at one time, more than a cast or a leasse of them
at once, and so peradventure do the Gerfalcon and the Million. Whereof
although there be few in this country which are made or flowen withal, yet will
I not spare to write what I have learned of them by heresay, beginning with the
Sacre. I say that they are flowen withal from the fist, in a plain field
where there are fewest blocks, or stubs, or such other impediments, but that a
man may gallop freely: men hawke with them to the Hearon, the Kite, and such
like, as also at Feazant, Partridge, Quail, and sometimes at the Hare, but
with more than one single Hawke at once as I said before. And in Cyprus they
hawke with them to the Crane with the help of the peregrine Falcon in this
order: When they have found the Crane, the Falconer does loose his Hawks hoode
in a readiness, (I mean the peregrine Falcon) and drawing as near to the
Crane as he can under the wind, when she rises, he quickly vnhoodeth his
hawke, and lets her flee, and after her they cast off a cast or a lease of
Sacres, which follow the peregrin Falcon, that leads them as the more weighty
and valiant Hawke: and because the Crane strives not at the encounter in
defense as the Hearon does, but always flees right forwards, therefore the
peregrine Falcon does seize upon the Crane, and buckling with her two or three
bounds, the Sacres make in and beat her down to the ground until the
Falconers come in to rescue their hawks, who speedily thrusting the Cranes
bill into the ground, do eftsoone break her wings and legs (as they do the
Hearons,) because they do Hawks most wrong with their legs and feet: which
being done, they reward and feed all their Hawks upon the Crane, making them
an Italian Soppa upon their hawking glove, of the brains, marrow, and the
heart, but giving the peregrine a greater reward than the Sacres, (yet with
discretion) they reward them altogether. Those peregrine Falcons which are good
for the Crane, are much esteemed in Cyprus of great states, and so much the
more, by how much they are more rare and passing in perfection. But here
amongst us this slight is not used, as well for that we have no such ordinary
store of Cranes, as also because our fields are not so plain, and free without
fuel, as theirs are in Cyprus.

This is the order in Cyprus, but in France, the chief use of the Sacre, is to
kill the Kite as I have touched, and partly made you show in the description of
the Sacre, in the former part of this Collection. But by this ye see, Every
country has his custom. ()

How to flee with the Lanner from the fish.
depiction of hawk

LAnners are much esteemed in France, for they flee with them (a cast or more
at once) to the River also. And because they are hawks (which maintain long
slightes,) they tire a foul in such sort, that with dogs and hawking poles
they kill many, and by that means they spoil more with a Laner, than with a
better hawke. Thus much I have heard by credible reports. These Laners are
flowen withal at Partridge also and Feazant, and some say that many of them
prove very good therefore. But in Italy they use no such fleeing, pereduenture
because there is no great skill in it. If you would flee with a Laner, you must
keep her maruailous short and sharp set. For they are of the same nature that
a Sacre, and that one (in manner) is made even as that other is: and because
they keep their castings long, by reason they are hard metteld hawks, you
shall not give them casting of cotton, but of towe, or knottes of Hemp, or the
shauing of a Hasell wand. And if you give them any cotton casting, yet put the
towe or knottes of Hemp on the outside of it, and so because they take small
pleasure therein, they will cast the sooner. Let this suffice to be said of
these kinds of hawks, because they are ordinary, and their natures too well
known of all men.

To hawke with the Gerfalcon and the Mylion.
I Will speak some few words of the Gerfalcon and the Milion, which are all
(in manner) of one nature, as the hawks last rehearsed, and are made to the
lure in the self same manner. These hawks (as far as I have understood) do
not flee the River, but always from the fist they flee the Hearons, Shouelers,
and the Kite with the forked tail, and at such other flights. In going up to
their gate, they hold not that course or way which other Falcons do. For they
clime up upon the train when they find any foul, and as soon as they have
reached her, they pluck her down, if not at the first yet at the second or
third encounter. They are fedee and rewarded as other Falcons are: they are
very crafty of nature, and covet to keep their castings long through sloth.
Therefore you shall not give them casting of Cotton, hut of Tow, Hasell, or
hard things, as you shall do the Sacre and Laner. And you must keep them
likewise very eager and sharp set. It is a Hawke that is flowen withal by
great states and Princes most commonly. And therefore I will write no more of
it, as one that have no great practice thereof.

To flee with the Merlyne at the. Partridge.
IF you will flee with the Merlyne at Partridge, choose the formal, which is
the larger, for they only will prove good thereunto. And in trayning or making
the Jack, you should but loose your time. When you have made the formal
Merline to the lure, in manner before described, and that she will likewise
abide the hoode, you must make her a train with a Partridge, if you can get
any, if not, then with some other live bird, in such order as has been set
down to train other hawks. And if she foot and kill it, then reward her,
suffering her to take her pleasure on it, etc. This being done, you may
straightwayes flee with her the wild Partridge: and if she take it at the
first flight (which seldom happens,) or if she flee it, to mark and take it
at the second flight, being retryued by the Spaniels, feed her upon it with a
reasonable gorge, cheering her with your voice in such sort, that she may know
the same. But if she prove not hardy at the first train, then you shall do
well to prove her with another train, before you flee with her at the wild
game. But if at the second train she prove not hardy, it is a token that she
is cowardly, and nothing worth. ()

To flee with the Merlyne at the Lark and Lenet.
depiction of hawk

I Like it well that men flee with a cast of Merlines at once at the Lark or
the Lenet. For over and besides that they of themselves love company and to
flee together, they do also give greater pleasure or delight to the lookers
on. For now that one (at the stooping) strikes the bird, and then that other
at her down come: and when that one climeth to the mowntie above the Lark,
then that other lies low for her best advantage, which is most delectable to
behold. Yea and sometimes the poor birds become so fearful, that they
shrowde themselves in the houses and chambers of such as dwell near the
fields. So that both the bird and the Hawke are oftentimes taken both
together by the countryman. And therefore it shall not be amiss to tie unto
their Iesses or Bewets some veruile bearing the arms of their owner and
master, (as if they were falcons) to the end they may be restored unto them.
But to return to my purpose, I say that when the Merlynes are thoroughly
manned, and made gentle, you may carry them into the field, where having found
a Lark or a Lenet, (making loose her hoode) you must go as near as you can
into the wind to the bird. And as soon as the bird rises from the ground,
vnhoode your cast of Merlyns, and cast them to flee until they have beaten
down the Lark or Lenet, and let them feed on her for their labor
indifferently. But herewithall note that there is a kind of Larks, (called
cut Larkes) which do not mount as the long spurd field Lark does, but flee
foreheade before the Merlyn. In any case let them not flee such Larkes, for
neither will they make you like pastime, nor yet can you flee them without
danger of leesing your Merlynes.

Of the time to mewe a Falcon.
Let us now speak of the order how to mewe hawks, and of the Mewes. First,
to speak of Falcons, they may be flowen withal until Saint Georges day,
that is about the midst of April. Then set them down. And you must
diligently mark, whether they have any lyse or not. And if they have, pepper
them to kill the said lyse, and skowre them before you cast them into the
mewe. That being done, you may put them into the mewe. There are two sundry
sorts of mewing, that is to say, mewing loose at large, or at the Stock: and I
will first speak of this last kind of mewing.

Of mewing at the Stock or the Stone.
THe place wherein you should mew a hawke at the stock, should be a low parler
or chamber upon the ground, far from any noise or concourse of people, and
situate toward the North or Northeast. Place therein a table of a convenient
length, for the number of your Falcons, and let it be five or six foot broad
at the least, with little thin boardes or planckes all along the sides and
ends, nailed on four fingers high. And let this Table be set on trestles of
two foot high, or three foot high from the ground, and fill these Tables with
great sand, which has pretty little round peeble and gravel stones in it: in
the midst whereof you may place some great free stones a Cubite high, made like
unto a pillar, flat in the bottom, and plain and smooth above, growing by
peecemeale less and less unto the top of them, Whereunto let your hawks be
tied, either Falcon, Gerfalcon, Myllion, or Merlyne. Then take a small cord of
the bigness of a bowstring or little more, put it through a ring, and bind it
about the stone in such sort that the ring or swyvle may go round about the
stone without any stop or let: And thereunto tie the lease of a Falcon, which
may so stand upon the said stone being set in the sand. But you must have
regard, that (if you mew more Falcons than one at once in one room) you set
your stones one so far from another, that when your hawks bate, they may not
reach one another for crabbing. The great stones are set, for that a Falcon
feeling the freshnes and coolenes of the stone, will delight to sit still
upon it, and the little grauel stones are, because a hawke will oftentimes
swallow them to cool her within, and will keep them sometimes two or three
hours, or more within her. The sand also is necessary, because when they bate,
they shall not mar their feathers, and also because thereby their mewts are
the easlier cleansed, and to be removed from them. The little cord or bend with
the ring on it, are tied about the stone, because the Falcon bating this way
and that way, she shall never twind nor tangle, because the ring follows her
still. All day your Falcons should be hooded upon the stone, unless it be
when they would feed, for then only you must take them on the fist until they
have sed. At night off with their hoodes, and because sometimes inconveniences
do happen by night, the Falconer may do well to have his bed in the mew, that
he may the sooner, and in time help or redress any thing that shall happen
amiss amongst his hawks.

Of mewing at large.
IF you mould mew your Falcon at liberty, and at large, then must you mew but
one at once in one room, and yet if the circuit of your mew be great and
capable enough, there may two, three, or four Falcons be mewed therein well
enough (with divisions.) The scope for one Falcon must be 12. foot square,
and as much in height, or therabout, with two windows a foot and a half broad,
or two foot broad at the most. Whereof the one should open toward the North,
whereby the mewe may always receive fresh cold air, and the other toward
the East, for the heat and comfort of the Sun. And each of these windows
should have his close casementes on the outside, to shut when you list, either
one or both of them, according as occasion serves. If your hawke be a
madbraine Kite, and a great bater, then should it be best that this mew or
chamber were on the ground, which if it be so, you must cover the ground with
gross sand four fingers thick, and thereupon set a stone in such sort as
before said, because Falcons do covet to stand upon a stone. And therwithal you
must make her two handsome perches, near to each window one, that sitting on
the one, she may have the comfort of the Sun, and on the other, the fresh of
the cool air, and every week, or at least every fortnight, you must set her
a latten basin, or a vessel of stone or earth, and at evening fill it with
water, that your hawke may to the water, if she desire it. And if she do has
therein, then take it away the night following, and have regard that your
basin, pan, or such other vessel be of such bigness and depth, that a Hawke
may therein commodiouslie has at ease. Your mew must also have a Portall,
wherein there may be a little hole below to convey in the devise whereon their
meat is served, called amongst the Falconers, the Hacke. And that must be made
on this fashion. Take a piece of thick board, a foot and half long, and a
foot broad, or therabouts, under the which fasten two little trestles, three or
four fingers hie. Let them be fast pinned or nailed to. Then with an awger or
a pearcer, boar two holes on each side thereof, and through each of these put
a short cord of the bigness of a bow-string, with the ends downward, through
the holes, and knots fast knit on them under the button of the board, so
straight knit, that you cannot raise the cord above the boorde more than a
fingers breadth, or there abouts. And when you would give your Hawks meat,
take a little stick somewhat longer than the Hacke, and as big as your
finger, but let it be of strong wood, as Crabtree, Holly, or such like. And
upon that stick bind your hawks meat, and put the ends of the stick under
the cords, upon the Hacke, and so convey it into the mew to your hawks,
because the hawke shall not trusse or dragge her meat away into the mew, but
may feed there. And as soon as she has gorged her and fed, take it away
again. And it is be understood, that if you mew more tha^ one hawke single,
then you must have for every hawke her several Hacke. And it shall be good to
keep one set hour in feeding your hawke, for so shall they mew sooner and
better: and thus may you mew hawks (loose and at large.) But unless it be a
Falcon which is so hot and madbrayned, that you are forced to mew her so at
large.

In mine opinion it shall be better to mew at the Stock or Stone, as before
said, or else to mew them at the grate, (as we call it.) For in that kind of
mewing we take our hawks on the fiste every day, and so may see in what
plight and state they be. And if they be sick, or fallen into any infirmity,
then may you give them such medicines as shall be declared in the next
division, the which cannot be done when you mew at large. And therefore I
commend the mewing at the Grate, because many times our hap is to have
Haggarts, or Passengers, or Lentiners, the which have flowen either to the
river, or preyed for themselves. So that it shall be needful to bear them
often and every morning in the cool air, until midde July, or more, or
less, according as you shall see them ramage and coy, yea and to call them to
the lure, and to ride abroad with them also sometimes an hour or two, in the
fresh air. And it shall be a thing most necessary for a haggart or a hawke
that has preyed for her self, either more or less. This I have observed in
mine own experience, and me thinks it an advertisement worthy the noting unto
all Falconers. Sundry Gentlemen do use to mew their hawks on the perch,
which truly I can most commend, as well for that they are then assured to be
clean fed, as also to be daily perused for life, worms, and other diseases,
whereto they are by nature subject. ()

How to mew Marlins.
depiction of hawk

MArlins are also worth the mewing, if they be hardy, and have flowen well in
their soarage. For although some men be of opinion, that a mewed Marlin is
seldom good and that they are not possible to be mewed: yet have I had Marlins
that (being good in their soarage) have proved much better when they were
mewed. So that I would wish him that has a good Merlyn to mew her: for surely,
if you can mew them, they will prove better and better. Some men in the mew do
use to cast meal about their Merlyns, because they should not eat their feet:
but as well because they may eat their feet howsoever they were mewed, if that
were their property: as also because in those that I have mewed, I have found
no such cruelty used toward themselves: therefore I count it but a fable, nor
will give any other rules in the matter, than such as I have prescribed already
for the mewing of Falcons, and such like long winged hawks. Addition.
[Onely this if you shall line her perch or stock with a black Cony skin,
and keep her mew close, she will do much better.]

Of Goshawkes.
YOu shall not need to show any other game to a Goshawke for her first entering,
than a Partridge, because in learning to flee the Partridge they prove most
excellent. And the first year you shall do best to flee them to the field,
and not to the covert, for so will they learn to hold out, (and not to turn
tail) in the midst of their flight. And when they be mewed hawks, you may
make them do what you will: and understand you, that you shall not need to
take such pain, nor to use such art in making of a Goshawke which is taken a
brancher, as with a Nyasse, for she will always know of her self what to do.
Yea and it shall be rather better to let her be a little ramage still, than to
man her over much. Her feeding would be good and hot meats. And if you would
instruct her to kill great fowls, make hor trains thereof, as I have showed in
the treaty of Falcons. And if you would have her continue at those flights,
then you must not let her flee any lesser fowls, for that would quickly mar
her. If you would make her to flee with a Spaniell or dog to help and assist
her, then feed your Goshawke with great fowls, as Cranes, Wildegeese and such
like, and give your dog flesh tied under the wings of such fowls when you
train your hawke with them, and let your dog be rewarded with the said flesh,
when you reward yeur Hawke upon the train: and always acquaint the dog and
the hawke well together. And this order you shall observe for a month, or
until your dog will thoroughly know his duty. And evermore keep your dog
tied up: for if you let him go loose, it will mar him if he were the best
that ever was. And never give him reward of flesh, but when he makes in at
such fowls to rescue the Hawke. Call your Goshawke to none other thing than to
your fist. Yet sometimes you may take her down with a dead Pullet or such
like. And oftentimes spowte good wine upon your Hawks Sear, observing the
order to set her to the water, as is before rehearsed in the Treatise of
Falcons. Evermore note that a Goshawke (for that she is dainty) would be cured
with sweet things ministered in all such receites as you shall give her.

To make fleeing the Goshawke, either Nyasse or Ramage.
depiction of hawk

YOu shall first observe many things already written of other kinds of Hawks:
as to seele and watch your hawk, win her to feed, to the hoode, and to the
fist, and diverse other such points which should be but tedious to rehearse.
Therefore let me write of the order how to make a flight with a Goshawk, either
Niasse or Ramage, the which is very hard to do well. And for my part I would
not counsel any man to trouble himself much with them. But if any man have a
Nyasse, or Ramage Goshawke, whereof he would see the proof, let him man her,
and make her to the fist: then let him enter her first to young Partridges,
until it be November. In which time the fields are rid clean, and become
empty, and the trees bare of leaves: then may you enter her to the old Rewen,
setting her short and eager. And if she kill at first, or second flight, feed
her up for three or four times with the Partridge which she has killed: by
that means I have seen some of them come to good perfection.

To make the Soar Goshawke or the Haggart Goshawke.
YOur Soar Goshawkes, or your Haggarts, shall be trimmed with Iesses, Bewets
and Bells, as soon as they come to your hands: and you shall by all means make
them abide the hoode well, the which will be best brought to pass, keeping
them seeled, and hooding and vnhooding them oftentimes, and teaching them to
feed on the fist three or four days, more or less until they leave their
ramagenesse and coyness, and become gentle: that being done, vnseele them at
night by candlelight, causing them to plume or tire vyon a wing or leg of a
Pullet, and use your hawks gently, and deal the best with them that you can
devise, until you have thoroughly manned and won them, and that in secret
places where they may not see much light, setting them upon a perch, and using
all diligence to make them impe to the fist by little and little, until at last
they will come three or four yardes from you, and feeding them most with the
legs of Pullets or Calves hearts: then you may go into a garden, or into a
close abroad, and causing them to feed first a bit or two upon your fist, with
their hoods on, and afterward as much with their hoods off, cast the^ down
fair and softly to some perch, and make them come from it to your fist,
either much or little, with calling and chirping to them, saying: Towe, Towe,
or Stowe, Stowe, as Falconers use, and when they come feed them, crying and
calling still to make them acquainted with your voice, The next day you may call
them with a Criance, setting them upon a perch until they come unto you
further off, feeding and rewarding them liberally to make them love you. And
when they come to the fist readily, and without checking or ramagenesse, then
lay a little from you a dead pullet upon the ground, the hawk sitting upon the
perch and calling and chirping to her, if she come and seize the pullet let
her plume her, and feed a pit or two thereon, walking about her until you may
without danger or moving of her, come near and take her upon your fist, and so
feed her: That being done, let her tire and plume. Here I must advertise you
that the wing of a pullet cold, is not good feeding for a Hawke: for it will
make a Hawke sick: But the legs either hot or cold may be given. And likewise
you shall mark that I would have you cast out a Pullet to a Goshawke dead, and
not alive: for these kind of hawks are much inclined of nature to play the
Poulters. So that if you should use to throw them out live poultry, it might
make the^ sometimes when they flee, turn tail to the Partridge, and seize the
pullets or chickens which they shall see in husbandmens yards and backsides
when they flee. Or in like manner when they are set to bath at length of their
loins, the which would not only mar them, and make them full of ill
properties, but also might cause the ignorant people, (as women and boys) to
kill them in stead of a Puttocke. When you have thus called your Goshawke
abroad two or three days, until she be well cunning, you shall take her on
your fist, and get up on horseback with her, and so riding with her the space of
an hour or thereabouts, vnhood and hoode her sometimes, and give her a bitte
or two of me at in the presence and sight of your Spaniels, because she shall
not be afearde of them. That being done, set her on a tree with a little short
Cryance tied to her loins, and going seven or eight yardes from her on
horseback, call her to your fist with such voice and words as Falconers use:
and if she come, give her two or three bits for reward, and cast her up again
to the tree, then throw out the dead pullet eight or ten yards from her. If
she flee to it, and seize it, let her feed three or four bits upon it, riding
the mean while about her on horseback, and rating back your Spaniels,
because they shall not rebuke her at first, and so make her ever after
fearful of dogs. Then alight off your horse, gently take her upon your
fist, feed her, and when you have so done, hoode her, and let her plume or
tire. Here I will say for mine own opinion, that a dead Partridge, or a
counterfeit Partridge, made with the very plumage, wings and tail of a
Partridge, were much better to throw out unto your Gosshawke, because it would
make her both know Partridge the better, and Poultrie the less.

To make a Goshawke flee to the Partridge.
depiction of hawk

WHen your Go shawk is thus manned and cunning, then may you go into the field
with her, carrying with you a train Partridge if need be: and vnhooding your
Hawk, bear her as quietly as you can: you may let her plume or tire a little to
make her eager. And if the Partridge spring, let her flee: if she mark one, or
two, or more on the ground, then go to her fair and softly, and manacing her
with your hand, or with a wand, cause her to take Perch on some tree thereby.
Then if you can retriue the Partridge with your spaniels, as soon as it
springs, you must cry Howit, Howit: and if she flee it to the mark again,
you must put her to a tree, and retriue it the second time, crying when it
springs as before said. And if she kill it, feed her up with it: but if so
chance that the Spaniels should take it, as oftentimes hot Spaniels light upon
the Partridge, being either flown out of breath, or otherwise surcharged with
fear: then alight from your horse quickly, and taking it from the Spaniel,
cast it out to your hawk crying, ( ware hawke ware) and let her feed her fill on
it. The next day you shall not flee with her, because having fed and rewarded
her with bloody meat, she will not so soon be in good case to flee again. For
such meat is not so easily endewed by a hawke, as the leg of a chicken or such
like. Using her thus three or four times, she will be well in blood, and become
well fleeing at this pleasant field-flight.

How to help a Hawke that turns tail to tail, and gives over her game.
IT happens oftentimes, that when you have let your Goshawk flee at a
Partridge, she will neither kill it, nor flee it to mark, but turns tail to
tail, as Falconers term it: that is when she has flown it a bowshot or more,
she gives it over and takes a tree. Then shall you call in your Spaniels to
the retryfe, that way that your hawke flew the Partridge. And the Falconer
drawing himself that way, may cast her out a quick Partridge which he shall
carry for such purposes in his Hawking bag, in such sort as the Hawke may see
it, and think that it is the same which she flew. And so crying when you cast
it out, ware Hawke ware, make her seize it, and feed her upon it, that she may
be encouraged thereby to flee out with a Partridge. The day following you shall
not flee with her, as is before said, but prepare her against the third day,
and set her sharp: and if then also your Goshawke giu^^^er, serve her with a
quick Partridge again. But if she (...) it the third time, I would not wish
you to trouble your self any longer with such a vile Buzard, but rid your
hands of her, for sure it is great odds that she will never prove good. And
yet if any man will try his Hawke to the uttermost, than let him make her flee
a Partridge which is flowne to the mark with some other well entered Hawke, at
the first or second flight. And if she kill that, let him feed and reward her
well, using her to such flights three or fouretimes, and so peradventure she
may learn to hold out, and maintain her flight the better.

When a Goshawke will not flee at all.
FOrasmuch as the Goshawks which are taken in September or October, do not
know their prey so well as they which are taken later, since they have not
preyed so long as those old, it happens many times that when they are made to
the fist, and brought even to the point to flee, if you let them flee at a
Partridge, they take a tree and will not flee at all. To redress that, you
shall go into a plain field where are no trees, with a quick Partridge, the
which you shall give to some of your company, your self shall ride up and down
half an hour with your Hawke upon your fist vnhooded: and then drawing near to
your companion which has the Partridge, when you come within ten or twelve
paces of him, let him privily cast out the Partridge, and let your Hawke flee
at it: which done, reward and feed her well thereupon. If peradventure your
Goshawke have need of more such trains, then you may continue it three or four
times, until she be well in blood with such flights: But surely such Hawks
are not greatly to be regarded. The same that is said of Goshawkes, is to be
understood also of Tercels. And always remember, that the dext day after you
have rewarded and fed your Hawke upon the foul or bird that she kills, feed
her the next day with a sheeps heart, or hens legs betimes in the morning, to
bring her in order again to flee.

To make a Goshawke flee quickly.
Soar Goshawkes (especially Niasses) are commonly very fond of the man, and
therefore should be flowne with a little more ramage, and before they be
thoroughly reclaymed, for else oftentimes within two or three strokes with their
wings, they will give over the foul that they flee, and return straight again
to their Keeper. Therefore remember to flee with them as soon as you can, and
that until they be perfectly nousled and in blood. They must also be set in
places where they see not many folk, for fear they become very fond of the
man: But when they have flowne, and have killed twice or thrice, then set them
where people and dogs frequent, the which shall be necessary to prevent the
inconveniences which might happen, when they are at mark near to a house, or
upon a high way, if then they should be discouraged with sudden sight of any
person that went by. And yet by this advertisement of fleeing quickly with a
Soar Goshawke or a Nyasse, I might make some Falconer learn a worse
mischief, if by fleeing ouer-soone with his Hawke, he should pull her down,
or make her poor, the which would cause her to become fearful and cowardly,
and to give over a Partridge, as I have seen diverse, that although they were
at the first very toward Hawks, yet after they have been once pulled down,
they have lost their courage and goodness. And therefore by what means soever
a Goshawke or Tercell, shall become poor, it shall be the Falconers part
first to set her up again, before he flee with her, unless it be some
Goshawke (whereof there are but few) which will not flee when she is hie, and
in good plight. Then the Falconer may somewhat bate her flesh and pinch her
with scouring, washed meat, and such like devises: But let him always rather
keep his Hawke in such wise that she may flee when she is lusty: and
therewithal let him set her abroad (when it is not over cold) betimes in the
morning for one hour or twain. For being so weathered, when she has flowne a
Partridge to the mark, she will not away, until it be retriued by the
Spaniels.

That a Goshawke being a good Partridger, be not flowne with to the Feasant.
IF your Goshawke be once a good Partridger, beware that you let her not flee
the Pout, or the Feasant, for the feasant flees not so long a flight as the
Partridge does. And therefore the Goshawke being naturally more ravenous and
desirous of prey than any other Hawke, would more delight to flee a short
flight to the Feazant, and will care less to hold out at a Partridge True it
is that some are good for both, but those are very rare: And therefore you must
have consideration thereof, as also to keep them in good order with fleeing,
bathing, weathering, tyring, pluming, and diverse other points of Falconrie,
the which do serve also for tercels as well as for goshawks.

How to use a Haggart Goshawke.
THe traynes which you use to give soar Goshawkes and Nyasses, are not so
requisite for a haggart. For the Soarehawkes and Nyasses when they are made to
the fist, and to seize a pullet upon the ground, will then abide and never soar
away, and may immediately be flown withal at a Partridge, so that you bear a
live train Partridge with you to serve her if need be, as has been heretofore
declared in entering of other hawks. And the principal point of consideration
is, that you encourage any hawke well at the first. In fleeing with a Goshawke,
it happens oftentimes that fleeing in the snow, and killing their prey upon the
ground, they fill their belles with snow, so that the Falconer cannot tell where
to find them. At such times then, fasten a bell upon the two covert feathers
of your Hawks Stearne or Train, and that aloft near to her rumpe. For so do
the Falconers of Dalmatia use at all times of the year to flee with their
Hawks. And it is a good mean to know at all times where, and what is become
of your Hawke.

To flee with a Goshawke to the River.
depiction of hawk

NOw I have (in mine own judgment) set down as much as is necessary, to
make a Goshawke perfect in killing of a Partridge or any other field flight: I
will also declare how you may flee to the River with a Goshawke, and how you
may kill great Fowls with her. A Goshawke (but no Tercell) may flee to the
river at Mallarde, Ducke, Goose, Hearon, and such like, whether it be because
the proves not to the field, or for any other delight that she or her keeper
has to the River. And you shall hold this order in making her, the which
doubtless shall bring her to perfection: for Goshawkes do more willingly flee
such flights than at any other. And yet is there great difference seen in the
proof of them: for some of them prove much hardier and better than some other
do. Well, the Falconer shall first make his Goshawke to the fist, in such sort
as I have prescribed, when I taught to flee them unto the field. Then must he
carry her into the field without bells, with a live Ducke given unto one of his
companions. And the Falconer must have with him a little drum or taberd fastened
to the pommel of his saddle, together with the sinew of an ox leg dried, which
shall serve him to strike upon his drumslet or taberd: and causing his companion
to hide himself in a ditch or pit, with the Ducke tied to a Cryance, his
Hawke being vnhooded upon his fist, he shall draw toward his companion which
stands so hid in covert. There has been used a kind of flight with a
Goshawk called the flight made to the beck, and it is like to this, but it is
much surer and better.
And when he is near him within two or three paces, or little more, he shall
strike upon his Tabarde twice or thrice: and his Companion hearing him, shall
throw out the Ducke aloft. And let the Falconer cast off his Goshawke to it,
and if she take it at the Sowrce, let him reward her and feed her with a
reasonable gorge, making her all the cheer that may be: then let him take her
upon his fist and hoode her, suffering her to plume or to tire upon a wing or a
leg of the Ducke. The next day he shall not flee with her, as before I have
admonished. But the third day he may go again in like manner with his companion,
or else may seek some water plash or pit where Wildefowle lie, as Teales, or
such like. Provided always that he seek the advantage of his flight, where
the Banckes be high: for the higher that the banks be, the better he may come
to make his flight: and in such a place, he and his companion, one on the one
side, that other on the other, may ride fair and softly until they find
foul, and yet put them not up. When they have found them, both of them shall
draw back along by the bank, and the Hawke being vnhooded, they shall trotte
both of them right upon the foul with their horses. When they be near them,
he which has the Tabarde shall beat it, so that the Foul may rise, and then
he may let flee his Hawke: and if she take any of them at Sowrce, let him make
in to her apace, and cross the Fowls wings, so that she may foot it, and
plume it at her pleasure, rewarding her as before, etc. And the better to
encourage her, when he has hooded her, let him set her upon the Foul, and let
her plume it her fill, and after let him take her on his fist, and give her a
wing or a leg of the foul to tire on: And the next day let him not flee, etc.
And when his Hawke is thoroughly nouzled and in blood, then he may flee twice
in a day or oftener with her, rewarding her as before is expressed. Using his
Hawke thus, he shall so well encourage her, that he may flee the oftener with
her at his pleasure.

Of fiecing the Wilde-goose and Crane with a Goshawke.
SOme delight to flee Wildgeese and Cranes with a Goshawke, and such other
great flights. And the train must be made in this wise: When the Hawke is made
to the fist as before said, let him go on foot abroad into the field with his
Goshawke on his fist, carrying with him a wildgoose or a tame Goose of the
color of a wilde-goose, tied by the tail with a Cryance. And having set her
on the ground eight or ten Paces from him, let him vnhoode the Hawke, and
twitch the Goose with the Cryance until he make it stir and flicker with
the wings. Then if his Goshawke bate at it, cast her off, and run in to
succor her, so that the Goose beat her not with her wings, for discouraging
her. And if he have store of trains, then he shall reward and feed her on the
brains, heart, and thigh of that which he trained withal. But if he have no
store, then it shall be needful to save that for another train. This done,
let him closely convey a pigeon under the wing of the train, and reward his
hawke therewith, as has been heretofore declared in the trains to the
Hearon. And the next day let her not flee, but set her down, etc. The third day
he may give her another train somewhat further off. And the third train he
shall give it her on horseback, fifty or threescore paces off at the least, or
so far off as he may come in to succor his hawke in time. His hawke being
thus trained and entered he may ride out with his hawke (without belles,
because the Geese shall not rise before the Falconer have brought his Hawke to
the vantage) then with his Tabard to beat it up, and so forth, whereof I have
told before. And having found any wild geese, he shall show them to his hawke,
who being naturally moved, will make from the fist to them, and will flee low
by the ground, until she come near them. Then the Falconer shall ride after
apace, and strike upon his Tabarde, until he raise the wildgeese. And if his
Hawke seize any of them at Source, he shall quickly succor her, and reward
her, etc. But forasmuch as wild Geese will rise as soon as they see any body.
Therefore the Falconer must teach his Hawke to take the advantage, which is
thus done: As soon as he has found them a far off, let him alight from
his horse, and carry his Hawke vnhooded behind his horse, stawking toward
them, until he have gotten reasonably near them, holding down his hawke
couerte under the horse neck or body, in such sort that she may find the
Geese. Then the Falconer shall run in apace, and strike upon his Tabarde, to
raise the Geese. And if she kill any of them, reward her, etc. Using his hawke
in this order, she may be made to kill two or three, or more, in a day. And in
like manner may she be made to the Crane: And in like sort may he creep to
flee at foul which lie upon pits or pondes. First showing them to his Hawk,
and letting her draw to them, and then running in to put them up with his
Tabarde. But the Falconer must take heed, that as long as he may find great
flights, he flee not at smaller foul, to the end his Hawke way continue the
more boldly to flee great flights. For a man may soon make a Hawke a cowarde,
and a slugge. Yet some there be (but those are very rare) which fleeing at all
kinds of Fowls, become still hardier and hardier, and better and better. Now
having written sufficiently of such flights, I will pass over to teach the
means to mewe a Goshawke.

To mew a Goshawke.
WHen you have flowen either with Goshawke or Tercel, Soar, or Haggart, until
March, give her some good quarrey in her foot, and foreseeing that she be
clean from lyse, cut off the buttons of her Iesses, and throw her into the
mew, the which may be a room either below, or on the ground, set toward the
North if it be possible. And as for the bigness, so that it be not too
little, let it be as large as you will, and let the pearches therein be lyned
with Cannas or cotton, so that the hawke hurt not her feet there upon: for
thereby she might catch either the gowte; or the pynne. Let the mewe also have
a window toward the East, and another toward the North, to take fresh air, and
the comfort of the Sun. You shall also provide in the same mewe, a Basin or
other vessel for water, and every three days at the most, change and shift
the water. And feed your hawke either with Pygeons, or with Quails, or else
with hot flesh of a Weather or gelded Goat, for that will make her mew well
and quickly.

To draw the Goshawke out of the Mewe.
ABout the beginning of October, if you perceive your Goshawke fair mewed, and
hard penned, then give her either chickens, or Lambs hearts, and Calves
hearts, by the space of 20. days together, to skowre her, and to make her
slise out the slimy substance, and glytte out of her pannell, and to enseame
her (as Falconers term it.) That being done, one evening you may draw her out
of the mew, and new furnish her with Iesses, belles, and Bewets, and of all
other things that shall be needful. And when you have feeled her, keep her
so seeled two or three days, until she will be gently hooded. And thereof a
Falconer ought to have a special regard. For commonly all mewed hawks are as
coy to be hooded, as when they were first taken. But when you have won her to
abide the hoode gently, then in an evening by candle light you may vnseele her,
and the next day you may go about to show her the fist and the glove. And as I
have before advised you to deal with Haggarts, or hawks new taken from the
Cage, you shall not forget to let her tire and plume morning and evening,
giving her sometimes in the morning, when her gorge is empty, a little Sugar Candy, for that will help her maruailously to endew. Sometimes also when she
is empty in gorge and panell, you shall give her skowrings of Aloes Cicatryne,
Cloves and Stauesaker, wrapped in a little piece of cotton, or in towe, or
linen cloth. But hereof shall he written more plainly in the treatise of
medicines.

To make a mewed Goshawke fleeing.
WHen the Falconer shall perceive his Goshawke to feed eagerly, and perceives
by his judgment that she is enseamed, and that he may boldly flee with her:
then let him go with her into the field, and finding Partridge, if the hawke
bate at them of her own accord, it is a token, that she is empty, and ready
to flee: but if she bate not, then does it betoken the contrary. Therefore in
such case feed her still with washed meats, and things convenient, as long as
you shall think requisite. For doubtless if she be once thoroughly enseamed and
ready, she will flee of her own accord. And then if she kill, feed and
reward her, as has been before declared. But if she flee to the mark with a
Partridge, then you must retriue it and serve her as is also before expressed.

How to keep Nyasse Sparowhawkes.
depiction of hawk

SParowhawkes are to be considered as all other kinds of hawks are,
according to their age and disposition. Some of them are named Nyasses, some
Braunchers, some Soarehawkes, and some mewed hawks: Some also Haggarts, being
mewed in the wood, they are called Nyasses, which are taken in the eyree.
Branchers are those, that having forsaken the eyree, are fodde by the old hawke
upon the boughs and branches near about the eyree, and thereupon they are
called Branchers: afterward they are called Soarehawks. They are called
Soarehawkes, because when they have forsaken the wood, and begin to prey for
themselves, they flee up aloft upon pleasure, which with us Falconers is called
soaring. Mewed hawks are all hawks that have once or more shifted their
feather: and Haggarts are they which prey for themselves, and do also mew
themselves either in the wood, or otherwise at large. To begin with the
Nyasse which is of greatest difficulty to bring unto any perfection, you must
first feed her in some fresh cool Chamber or parler upon the ground. And the
same chamber should have two windows not very large, whereof that one should
open toward the North, and that other toward the East, to take the fresh
cool air, or the comfort of the Sun at her pleasure. These windows must be
open, barred overthwart with lathes, or thin bordes, so thick that neither
your hawks may get out, nor your Catte may come in. And in this Chamber
cast and strew Vine leaves, and other fresh leaves. For it refesheth a hawke
maruailously to rest upon them. And for the same consideration it shall not be
amiss to set two or three great free stones in the chamber, whereupon the
Hawks may sit cool and fresh. You must also have two or three pearches
lined or covered, one a little higher than another, so that the hawke as she
grows huger and huger, may flee from one perch to another, and never hurt
her feet. And when she is full sommed, so as she can flee, then will it be
meet and most necessary to set some large basin, or other vessel full of
Water, that she may bath her at pleasure therein. For that is not only very
wholesome for her body, but also will make her put out her feathers the
better, and the faster. And you shall do well to shift her water every three
days. You shall feed her with young Sparrowes, Martelettes, and young Pigeons,
and sometimes with sheep hearts: and whiles she is very young and little,
you should cut her meat, and shredde it in small pellets upon a trencher,
or a clean boorde for the purpose, setting it so near her that she may reach
it with her beak, and feed. Thus you shall fade her twice, or more every day,
even as you shall see her endew it, or (as Falconers say) put it over. Beware
that you give her not gorge upon gorge, for that will make her cast her gorge.
But when she is full sommed, and flees about, then you shall do better to
give her whole birds, and sometimes to feed her upon your fist, suffering her
to kill and strain the live birds in your hand: Yea and sometimes to put
quick birds into the chamber to her, that she may learn to know them, to
foot them, and to kill them, and let her feed upon them her self in your
presence. For that shall be very good as well to noule her, as also to make
her leave that vile condition which commonly all Nyasses have, which is, to
carry and hide their prey in some hedge or ditch, or secret place: and therein
they will sit very close for being heard, when they hear or perceive their
Keeper to seek them. Whereupon their Keepers are oftentimes evil troubled and
displeased. And also it shall not be amiss, every morning to go into the
said Chamber, and to call them to the fist, whistling and chirping with your
mouth, for by that means you shall both man them thoroughly, and also you shall
gain the time which you should else spend afterward, in making them when
they were ready to be drawn out of the faid chamber.

To reclayme and make the Nyasse Sparowhawke.
WHen your Nyasse Sparowhawke has put forth all her feathers, and is full
sommed, then shall you take her out of the chamber and furnish her with belles,
bewets, Iesses, and lines. And by my counsel you shall also seele her at the
first, to make her gentle to abide the hoode, which is contrary to her nature,
and to make her tractable to be handled, using her favorably and lovingly
always: and at the first with a hood, which is too great and large to hoode
and vnhoode her oftentimes, stroking her head softly with your hand, until
she will stand still, and abide the hoode gently. Then in an evening by light
of a candle you shall vnseele her, giving her somewhat to tire upon, handling
her, and stroking her feathers gently, sometimes hooding and vnhooding her. And
because Nyasse Sparowhawkes are seldom made perfect and good without great
pains and diligence, therefore observe these things and use them accordingly,
if you will have a good Nyasse Hawke.

To train a Nyasse Sparowhawke.
WHen your Nyasse is well won to the hood, and to the fist, let her kill
small birds upon your fiste, then call her two or three days together, until
she will come far off. Then you must take a quick Pigeon tied by one foot
with a Cryance, and stir it until your Hawke will bate at it, and seize it,
though not far off, yet as you may, and help her at the first, least the
Pigeon struggling with her, be too strong, and discourage her. Then let her
plume her, and foot her, and feed her thereupon with as much favor as you may,
and whistle to her, to make her know your whistle, until she have taken a
reasonable gorge. Then hood her up, and let her plume or tire a little
afterward. The day following you shall call her to the fist, and show her a
live Pigeon, so near that she may reach at her with her beak. Then cast it
out before her, until she flee it, and take it.

That done, reward her, etc. Again, you shall another time throw out a chicken
before her, and if she take and foot it, reward her, etc. Afterward you
shall cause one to hide himself close in a ditch or pit, and throw her out a
pigeon or pullet, if she take it, reward her and feed her up with the brains,
heart, and a leg or a wing, whistling, chirping, and speaking to her, to
encourage her: and this order you shall observe a while, still serving her with
greater and greater trains: for by that means you shall give her courage to
flee, yea if it were at a Feasant, for that chickens are some of them not much
unlike a Feasant poult. As also using her to great chickins, she will never
covet to carry as she would do, if you trained her with smaller birds, which
is a thing worthy the observation, as you shall find by experience.

And when you have given her sufficient trains of chicken and such like, you
shall one day set her sharp, then take a Quail tied in a Criance, and in a
plain meadow: First, show her unto your Sparowhawke, then throw it up aloft,
and cast your hawk off handsomely after her, and if she take it, reward her with
the brains, to nousle and encourage her, but feed her with the leg of a chicken
or pullet, and deal daintely with her.

The next time you may train her with a Quail without a criance, the which
having a leg broken, and two feathers plucked out of each wing, give it to
another which may closely throw it out to her, and feed her up thereupon
with a good gorge. Being thus oftentimes trained, you may ride out into the
fields about nine of the clock, where calling your Sparowhawke to your fist,
and giving her a bitte or two of meat, go with your Spaniels to seek some
Beauie of young quails, advancing your fist aloft, that your Hawk may see them
when they spring, and let her flee with advantage at the first. If she kill,
reward and feed her, etc. but if she miss, or that you find no young
Quails, then serve her with a train of a Quail, as is often before said.

How to Hawke with a Sparowhawke being mad^.
WHen your Sparowhawke is once made, you may go freely into the field: and if
you find any young Quail let her flee thereat with as much advantage as you
can: and if she take it, reward and feed her, etc. Remember that at first
entering of your Hawke you hold your fist aloft always, as well because your
Hawke may see the game spring, as also that she may learn to have an eye to
the Dogs, the which you shall always cause to hunt on your right hand, when
they raunge, but especially when they quest and call, to the end you may the
better, and at more advantage cast off your hawk when you let her flee. And
when your Sparowhawke does know her game and how to flee, then may you flee
more than one flight in a forenoone or an afternoon, so that always you give
her some small reward at every flight that she kills. And because it behooves
much always to encourage your Hawke, and to keep her well nouzled, you shall
do well ever to carry a live Quail with you, that if you find none, or flee
and miss, you may therewith train or serve your hawke accordingly: and you
may cause it so to be cast out unto her, that she will think it is sprung
with the Spaniels. As also I would wish you evermore to keep alive the second
Quail that you shall take, and keep it in your hawking bag, so as if need
be, it may serve you at night, or at any time to reward your Hawke with: for
keeping your hawke in this order, she can never lightly be discouraged. And
when your Hawke is thoroughly entered, and perfectly well in fleeing, and well
nouzled, then you shall hold your hand low, whereas before you held it aloft.
For your Hawk being much quicker sighted than you are, she will sooner see the
game spring also, and bate at the whurre, as we term it: then before the
Hawke can recover your fiste, the game is flowen far off to her great
disadvantage: yea, although you should let her go when she bateth, yet shall
she not flee with such advantage as you might let her flee when she and you
both spied the game spring at once, He therefore that will be a perfect keeper
of a Sparowhawke or such like, must have a quick eye, and a good consideration
and regard to the Spaniels, keeping them still as near as he can upon his
right hand, and hold his hand low, because his Hawke shall not bate at the
game before he see it. And also it shall not be good to be over near the
Dogs, but rather a little above them, that you may let your Hawke flee,
coasting at the vantage when the Game springs, and always to be quick of
eye, and nimble of hand, for he that is not so, nor regards the advantages of
a flight, shall hinder his Hawke, whereas he might further and help her.

How to make a Sparowhawke, being either Soarehawke Ramage or Mewed Hawke.
NOw I have spoken at large of Nyasse Sparowhawkes, it were meet that I should
set down some instructions also concerning Ramage Hawks, and such as are
taken when they have preyed for themselves. And yet in effect the same precepts
that serve for a Nyasse, will serve also for ramage Hawks and mewed Hawks.
But yet they, (I mean ramage and mewed Hawks) require not so much pain to
make them know their game, nor to enter them, because they have been practiced
in preying for themselves, and the Nyasses are altogether ignorant and simple:
so that the Nyasses must be taught to know their game, in a manner, even as
they are taught by the breeder in the wood, the which (as I have heard old
Falconers tell) when her young Hawks go out of the nest, and can hoppe or
flecke from one bough to another, comes in with some prey unto them, and
calling them altogether, she flees aloft, and lets the bird fall amongst them,
so that which soever of them catches it with her tallents, feeds upon it for
that meal, and then returns the old Hawke for some prey, until she have
fed them all and taught them to foot their prey. And therefore when a man
has them, Nyasse which never were taught so by the breeder, he must practice
as near as he can like the old hawke, to teach them to foot, and to kill their
prey, and to know it, the which you shall not be troubled with in a Soar,
ramage, or mewed Hawke. For they which bear those names, have learnt to prey
for themselves: and most of all the mewed haggart Hawks, for they are
thoroughly nousled and trained therein, yea and most commonly they have learnt
such conditions, that with all the pains we can take, few of them can be
brought to any good perfection. But he which has a Haggart Sparowhawk, must
above all things take pains in weyning her from that vile fault of carrying,
and that shall he do by serving her often with great pullets, and other great
trains, the which she cannot carry, and thereby she will learn to abide upon
the quarrey. Also they which delight in Haggarts, must take great heed that
they offend them not, but rather coy them as much as they can with all devises
of favor and cherishing, for they will remember favor or injury much better
than any other kind of hawk. And of the same condition are Lentiners for the
most part, the which are called with us March Hawks or Lentiners, because they
are taken in Lent with lime or such like means. And the Italians call them
Marzarolli, because they are taken in March or thereabouts: so that the
Etymology of the name proceeds all upon one cause, and they are called so
whether they be Soar-hawkes or mewed hawks. Neither is there any great
difference between them and Haggarts for evil conditions, but the Lentiners
are more subject to moist humors, and especially in the head, and therefore you
must plie them with casting and scowring, as shall be more at large declared in
the Treatise of medicines.

Certain observations for an Ostreger in keeping of a Goshawke.


MAny times it happens that a Goshawke or a Tercell which was good in her
Soarage, does become nothing so toward or good when she is mewed: and that
proceeds because in her soarage she was not cherished to make her take
delight in her flight: for in a manner all the skill of a Falconer or Ostreger
consists in coying and delicate usage of his hawke and so cherishing her,
that she may take pride and pleasure in her flight. Therefore I would not
think it amiss if he had always at the first entering of his Goshawke or
Tercell, a train Partridge in his bag, to serve her with, when need does
require, and so he shall win her love. And therewithal let him mark these
observations, to keep his hawke in good tune always. First, let him consider
that naturally all Goshawkes are full of moist humors, and especially in the
head: and therefore let him plie them with tiring and plumage, both morning and
evening, for that will open them in the head, and make them cast water
thereat. Let the Goshawks tyring be the rump of a beef, or the uppermost joint
of a wing which we call the Pynion, or a chickens leg, given by the fire, or in
the warm Sun. This will not only keep your hawke open in the head, but
also keeps her in exercise, and use, and from slothfulnes, which might mar
her, and utterly spoil her.

It is good also to give her every night casting either of feathers or of
cotton, and then in the morning to mark whether it be wrought round or not,
whether it be sweet or not, whether it be moist or dry, and of what color
the water is that drops out of the casting, for thereby he shall judge in
what case his Hawke is. He should also have regard to her mewtes, to see
whether they be clean or not, and thereupon he may give medicines accordingly,
as shall be hereafter declared. For the infirmity of a Hawke being once known,
it is the more easily cured. He has also to consider the season: for in the
winter and cold weather, he must set his hawk or Tercell warm in some place
where fire is made: he must roll the perch with cotton, or some such like
thing, and the perch must be set far from the wall that his hawk hurt not
her feathers when she bateth: but if it be not cold, he may set her every
morning in some place where the Sun has power, for an hour or two.

Remember that no hens or pultrie come near the place where your Hawke shall
perch, and especially in Lent when Hens have young chickens commonly following
them.

Remember also in the spring to offer your hawk to the water every week, for
else she will soar away when she flees, and make you seek her.

If your Hawke bath her at any time of her own accord after her flight, go
presently to the next house with her, (if it be in winter or cold weather) and
weather her by a fire with her back to the fire, and not her gorge, for that
would make her sick. And likewise dry your Hawke if you have carried her in
the rain. Let a good Falconer or Ostreger always keep his hawke lusty and
hie, and yet keep her in such tune, that she may flee best when she is high:
for doubtless the plucking down of a Hawk does mar her and make her cowardly.
Above all things an Ostreger must be patient and never chollericke.

A good Ostreger must also keep his hawke clean, and her feathers whole, and
if a feather be broken or bruised, he must ympe it presently, as shall be
taught hereafter also in this book, and therefore he must have his ymping
needles, his Semond, and such other things about him evermore in a readiness.
()

Certain observations concerning Sparowhawkes.
depiction of hawk

SEt your Sparrowhawke every morning abroad in the Sun two hours, or near
thereabouts, and set her to the water twice in a week at the least, and
especially Nyasses, for they covet the water more than the rest.
Soar-sparowhawkes would not be flowen withal too soon in a morning, for they
soar willigly Take your Sparowhawke from the perch always with somewhat in
your hand, to make her love you, and be fond of you, for that is a thing of no
small importance and consideration. As also to make your Sparowhawke foot great
fowls, to the end she may not learn nor be accustomed to carrion. And as
touching mewing of a Sparowhawke, some use to put their Sparrowhawke in the mew
as soon as they leave fleeing with her, cutting off both her bewets, lines,
and the knots of her Iesses, and leave herin the mew until she be clean
mewed. But if you will have her to flee at Partridge, Quayle, or Feazent poult,
then you must draw her in the beginning of April, and bear her on the fiste
till she be clean and thoroughly enseamed. Some other keep their Sparowhawkes
on the perch until March, and then throw her into the mewe being peppered for
life if she have any. Her mew should be a chamber aloft from the ground eight
or nine foot long, and five or six foot broad, with two windows, to the East
and the North, as is before declared in the description of the mew for a
Goshawke: and set her pearches and all other things even as for a Goshawke,
saving that the mewe must have one little window to convey in her meat at. And
your Sparowhawke being thus provided of her mew, go in to her in May in an
evening by candlelight, and taking her softly, give her to thy companion to
hold, until thou have pulled out all her train feathers, one after another,
holding the princiyall feather with thy one hand (which Falconers do call the
covert feather) and plucking out the other feathers with that other hand, for
so shall thou do her least hurt: and this shall make her mew the faster, if
thou feed her with hot meat and birds, and always keep an hour certain to
give her her meat. Some will set water in the mewe by their Sparrowhawke
continually, shifting and renewing the water every second or third day. Some set
water before a Sparowhawke in the mew but once in a fortnight, and then take it
away again within 24. hours after they have set it there. Some will never set
water before their Sparowhawks at all when they mewe them, saying that
Sparewhawks are very hot, and pluck out their own feathers for extreme heat,
and that therefore water is not to be given or allowed them, because it
kills and delayeth the heat in them, which should further their mewing. I
like that opinion: but for mine own part and experience I would leave the
extremities and take the mean. And I would think it best to set water before
a Sparowhawke in the mew, once in 14. days at the least, or oftener, if the
hawke seem to have need, the which you shall easily perceive, if she have any
feathers or down that stand staring up on her back, and when she sits
always as though she would rowze, or is twitching at her feathers with her
beak, then set her water: but to set it by her continually, does forslow her
mewing: and to keep it always from her, does make her that she meweth not her
feathers so clean or so gallantly, as when she may have water once in a
fortnight. As touching remedies for Hawks that be slow of mewing, it shall be
set down in the Treatise of medicines in this book also. ()

The Third Part, or Book, of this collection of Falconrie.


BEfore I deal with diseases of Hawks, and cures due to the same, (which is
the subject of this third and later part of my collection of Falconrie) I hold
it very necessary, and of importance, as well to the attainment of the cause of
each particular disease, as also the devise of remedy for each kind of
mischief, to speak somewhat of the complexions of Falcons, under whose name
and nature (you know) in the beginning of this Book of Falconrie, I have
comprised all other hawks, in regard that the Falcon is chief, and the Queen
of all other hawks: nothing doubting at all, but that diverse will muse at the
name and term of the complexion of a hawke, as though indeed there were no
such matter, led thereunto by their gross conceit and blinded imagination, for
that they cannot in their opinions judge so easily of the natures of Hawks, as
they can of the complexions of men, whose clearnes and thinnes of skin bewrayes
their inclination and complexion, whereas hawks are not in any condition so to
be deemed and judged, by mean of their plumes: which indeed is far
otherwise, for, as in man the natural complexion is truly discerned by the
skin, so is the natural disposition and constitution of a hawke by her cote
and plume: which I adventure not to report of my self, for that it strives
too much with common sense and ordinary capacity, but do follow my Author, and
thereupon am emboldened to auow it, not blushing to lay you down his speechches
as touching this matter, though not in the French Phrase, wherein he wrote it,
but in the English ydiome, into which I have translated it.

Artelowch mine Author, writing of the complexions of Falcons, in his treatise
of Falconrie, medicines and cures, and such like matter, reports, and eke
advises:

That the black Falcons are melancholicke, and therefore should of right be
phisicked with hot and moist medicines, by mean of their complexion, which is
cold and dry, as with Aloes, pepper, Cocks flesh, Pigeons, Sparowes, Gotes
flesh, and such like.

That the blancke Falcons are flegmaticke, and to be phisicked with hot and
dry medicines, because of their phlegm, which is cold and moist, as with
Cynamon, Cloves, Silermont, and Cardamomum, Gotes flesh, Choghs, and such like.

The russet Falcons be of sanguine and chollerike complexion, mixed
indifferently, and therefore to be physicked with cold medicines, moderatly
moist, and dry.

As with Myrtels, Cassia, Fistula, Tamarinds, Vinegar, Pullets, Lambs flesh,
and such like.

Having spoken thus much of the complexions of hawks, a matter not long to be
stood upon, I will refer you over to the Italian Authors, as touching the
diseases and cures, whose judgments I do very well allow, and in many points
prefer beyond the French Falconers, for that they seem to be the more
reasonable men, and less given to frivolous inventions. Yet nevertheless in
the last part hereof, you shall at your pleasure, peruse the French Falconers
also, for that I would have you to want nothing that may be to your better
knowledge and furtherance in Falconrie.

Of the diseases and cures of Hawks. The opinion of M. Francesco Sforzino
Vicentino, an Italian Gentleman Falconer.
IT does belong to a good and skillful Falconer, not alone to know all kinds
of hawks, and to have the cunning how to reclaim, keep, fleepe, ympe, and
mewe the said hawks, with sundry other like matters incident and appertayning
to Falconrie: but it is very necessary and behoueful for him to have knowledge
and good experience in their diseases and cures: for that they are birds
subject to sundry maladies and accidents, the cure of all which does rest in
the careful keeper. Wherefore having (unless I flatter my self) in the
former parts of this collection, performed my promise, made in the very entry
and beginning of this book, as touching Hawks, and other matters belonging to
the mystery and skill of Falconrie: it is only left now, and I rest charged
with their diseases and cures, to dicipher unto you the mean to know the
maladies, as also a method to recover them: wherein if happily any man desire
a more ample discourse of the natures, and original causes of those diseases,
tha^ herein I shall bewray, let him know and bethink himself, that I am neither
profound Philosopher, nor learned Physician by profession, but that in these I
deal as a Falconer, manifesting and making show of cures proper and peculiar
to every disease, wherwt I could ever yet find a hawk charged, and such as may
light upon any kind of hawke, by misfortune and casualty. And as touching
remedies for their mischiefs, I mean to speak of very few which I have not
sundry times approved with very good success, wherefore I say, that hawks may be
diseased and imperfect, either in body or feathers, which I intend and mean,
when they are unable by any evil accident to perform their parts and duties in
any condition, as not to be able to flee, or strain the prey with their pounces,
or any such like action, which by nature they ought to perform.

In body they are diseased, either by some outward cause, as by a stripe or
bruise: or else by some hidden and inward evil, as by corrupt and contagious
humors, proceeding either of too great heat and moisture of the head, or
otherwise overmuch drought and siccity of the liver and inward parts, from
which proceeds many times the pantas and shortness of breath, and other
perilous evils, whereof I mean to write in their peculiar places hereafter.

Again, hawks are accustomed to be ill affected and diseased (as I may term
it) in their feathers, for that diverse times being found of body, and in
perfect state of health, yet they cannot flee or stir their wings, by mean of
some broken or sliued feathers, and especially the flags, long feathers, or
sacels, which sundry times are broken either in the quil, being bloody
feathers, or near the top or point of the feather: the remedy for which
mischief and evil accident, I will reserve to the last part of this treatise,
as a matter meetest for that place. But because ye mischiefs and diseases that
grow within the bodies of the hawks may be best discerned and known by their
excrement, and by that which comes from them, as namely, by the casting and
mu^t of a hawke. Therefore I account it most expedient, to have good judgment
to distinguish and know the diversity and difference thereof, the better to
come by the true knowledge of the diseases, whereby there may in good time be
had a convenient remedy for the evil Wherefore let us first speak of their
castings.

How to know the health and disease of a Hawke by her casting.
FAlconers do use to give 2. sorts of casting to their hawks, either plumage,
or cotton: and because most commonly they give the Falcon pellets of cotton for
her casting, I will first speak thereof. You must make choice of fine, soft,
whit cotton, and thereof fashion and frame your casting as big a great nut, and
at evening convey it into her gorge, after you have supt her: and in the
morning betimes make diligent search to find it, to peruse it in what manner
the hawk has rolled, and cast it, because thereby you shall perceive her good
or evil state: for if she cast it, round, whit not loathsome in smell, and not
very moist or waterish, it is a manifest token that she is sound. But
otherwise, if she roll not her casting well, but cast it long, not white,
stinking, very moist, and slimy, it does argue, that she is full of diseases, as
I shall more specially declare unto you eftsoon. You must observe this, that
these castings do import and betoken the greater evil, by how much more they
do resemble the muet of a hawk in color and smell. For by that they do make
show that your hawk does abound with too much evil humor. Wherefore you must the
more diligently mark it, and wring it betwixt your fingers, to see how much,
and what kind of moisture does drop from the casting, and wtal note the smell
and color thereof. But now it is hie time to proceed to a more special
declaration of those castings, that you may be perfect in each condition.

Of naughty castings.
IF your hawks casting be long, not wrought round, Black casting.
and be full of water, how much more long and moist it is, so much more it
betokens the hawke to be diseased. And again, if so it be black, and
stinking, so much the more the hawke is in evil case and state. All and every
of these signs do yield a show and proof, that the hawk has been foul fod,
and with corrupt flesh. Wherefore to remedy this mischief, you must feed her
with hot Birds, as Swallows, Sparrowes, young Doves and such like, giving
them alive, or as soon as they are killed.

But if it so happen, for all this care and good intendaunce, that the casting
continue at one self stay, and be like evil in show, then must you needs
give your Hawke askowring, according to art, such as I will teach you to make
hereafter.

If your Hawks casting be green, it is a sign that she is ill affected and
diseased in the Liver, Green casting.
the cure whereof I will refer to a peculiar chapter for the same evil. But
know nevertheless, that hawks when they are ramage, diverse times do cast
such like green castinges as I speak of, and make such muets, by reason of
some wild foul, that they have killed and preyed upon at their own pleasure,
or otherwise have had the same given them by Falconers. And a man need not
greatly force thereof, for that with good feeding, they will lightly be
recovered, and rid of this disease.

Yellowish black casting.
When the casting happens to be yellowish black, and very moist and slimy, it
argues your Hawke to be stuffed with evil humors, proceeding of too great
heat, or of immoderate and over great flights, or too much bating. For recovery
of which evil, you must as speedily as you may, bestow good feeding upon your
hawke, and cool her, by washing her meat in good fresh water, as endive water,
or such like, as shall best please the fancy of the Falconer, allowing her
besides one or two, or more castings of cotton: into which you must convey very
excellent good mummy beaten into powder, and otherwise among incense, used in
like manner. But if it so fall out that your hawke continue her ill casting,
for all this remedy it shall not be amiss, fortwice or thrice to give her this
kind of casting, or upward scowring every other day.

Take Aloes washed and beaten to powder, one scruple, powder of Cloue four
grains, of Cubebes beaten to powder three grains: all which being well
confected, and made in mixture, enwrappe in a piece of cotton and give your
hawke being empty, and having no meat above, or in her pannell. And I nothing
doubt, but using this order which I prescribe you, your hawke shall recover in
short space. In any case you must be circumspect and heedefuil, having a hawke
thus diseased, to mark diligently whether the do mend or pair, whether she
wax high, or abate her flesh. For that according as she shall do any of
these, it shall be necessary for you either to augment or decrease your
scowring, and her feeding. And believe me, I know this by experience, that
sundry hawks do perish more by being over poor and low brought, through
negligence of ill keepers that make slender regard of them, tha^ by the
extremity of the disease. This shall be sufficient as touching castings of
cotton, which (as I said before) were peculiar to Falcons.

Falconers are accustomed to give their hawks casting of plumage, sometimes
being empty above, Casting of plumage.
and eake in feeding to suffer the^ to take feathers, but specially to
Sparowhawks. They give them ioukes of wings of small birds, and Quails, when
they have fed them, tearing them out with their teeth, and plucking away the
longest feathers, and so give it.

These castings ln the morning being wrought round, and cast without any ill
savor or stink, do make evident show that the hawke is sound: and how much
more round and sweet they are, the better token of the hawks geed state. But
contrariwise, if the casting be long, slimy, and rammish in smell, with some
small parts of the flesh vndisgested, cleaning to the same, and withal
frothie, having a kind of foame sticking on it, all these things together, and
every one special by it self, do import the disease of the hawke, and make
full show of her ill state. And therefore that she stands needful of a good
scowring, and good intendance, as I said before.

The way to know in what tune hawks are by their mewting.
WIth that help and light that I have already given you by the hawks casting,
if you diligently observe the mewte, The good mewt.
you shall easily prognosticate and so; esee her evil, and any such disease as
your Hawke is infected with. For if the mewte be white, and not over thick,
nor ouercleare, and besides not having any black spotte in it, or at the least
but little, it is an evident proof that the hawke is excellently in tune, and
not diseased. But if it be white, and very thick in the midst, well it may
importhealth, but it argues the hawke to be over gross, and too full of
grease. And therefore it shall be needful to cure that mischief, by giving
her liquide and moist meat, as the heart of a Calfe, Lamb, or such like. And
for one or two mornings, to allow her (being empty and having nothing above to
put over) a quantity of Sugar Candy which will scowre her, and make her slise,
or else a gut of a chicken well washed, of a convenient length and size, full of
good oil olive, well clarified in water, in such sort as hereafter I shall
instruct you.

It is easily sound, when a hawke is ever greasy, and not enseamed, by her
mewte, when it is white with some black in it, which evil is easily removed by
giving her hot Sparows, and young Pygeons.

The evil mewte.
But if her mewte be white, entermedled with red, yellow, gray, or such like
color, it is a sign that the hawke is very ill and diseased, and moreover
that she stands needful of a scowring, as of mummy purified and beaten to
powder, wrapping it in cotton, or some such like matter, to set the gorge and
stomach of your hawke in tune again, and other inward parts, as hereafter I
shall make further show of in a place meet for that speech and discourse.
Assuredly, when you see your hawks mewte so full of diverse colors, it is
very necessary for you to respect her cure, and to endeavor your self to
remedy that mischief, or otherwise she must needs perish under your hand, for
that those are very deadly signs, and proofs of the ill state of your Hawke.
The white and yellow mewte.


The white mewt, having a greater part of yellow in it, tha^ of any other
color, does evidently make show, that the hawke is surcharged with chollericke
humors, caused and engendered by ouer-great flightes, when you flee with your
hawke in the heat of the day, as also of overmuch bating. Which evil you may
provide for and eschew, by giving your hawkesmeat washed in cold waters, as
Buglosse, Endive, Borrage, and such like wholesome cold waters, very medicinable
for that mischief, always remembering to strain the hawks meat, and wring it in
a linen cloth, after you have washed it in the waters aforesaid.

And if this fall not out in proof to your contentment, then if you can give
your hawke a quantity of Agaricke in a scowring, for the space of one morning
or two, not suffering her to flee, or do any thing, but do set her down.
There is no question, but by the care and diligence of such a keeper, your hawk
shall quickly recover.

The mewt of a hawke which is very black, declares her liver to be infected,
and is the most deadly sign of all others. The black mewte.
For if it continue three or four days, most assuredly the hawke will pecke
over the perch and die. But if it be so but once, and no more, it greatly
skils not. For then may it proceed of one of these two causes: either for that
the hawke in pluming and tyring on the foul, has taken of the blood or guts
of the prey, which is a matter of nothing: or else because she has been gored
with filthy meat. In this case it behooues you to respect her, and to allow
her good warm flesh, and a cotton casting, with Mummey or the powder of Cloves
and Nutmegs, with a small quantity of Ginger, to set her stomach in tune again.

A green meewt is also a sign of an infected and corrupt Liver, and happily
of some Apostume, The green mewte.
unless she make that kind of mewte upon this occasion, that she has been
gorged with some wild and rammage meat, or her self be a rammage hawke: for
then this rule does not hold. You must look to this evil as soon and with
as great speed as you possible may, feeding her with meat all powdered with
Mummy prepared, if she will take it with her flesh, as diverse hawks will do
of themselves: but if not, then must it be given her in a casting, or some
frowring, continuing it in this manner, sometimes after one fashion, sometimes
after another, until you find the mewte to be changed from the badde color
to the better. But when this mischief does proceed, and continue long space,
then shall you be fame to bestow on her a scowring of Agaricke, to rid those
evil and noisome humors which do offend your hawke, and after that another
scowring of Incense beaten into powder, to recomfort her.

The mewte that is vndisgested, and tending to read.
The mewte that is not perfectly digested, tending to read, and that is full of
small worms, like unto flesh, not perfectly digested and endewed, gives
manifest proof, either that the hawke is not well in her gorge, or else that
she has been fed with ill and corrupt meats, cold and stinking, and
unwholesome for a hawke.

This evil may be cured and helped with good warm meats, and besides that,
with scowrings of wormeseede, enwrapped and conveyed into Cotton, or Lynte And
it shall not be amiss to give her a scowring of powder of Cloves, Nutmegs, and
Ginger, which does maruailously strengthen, and set the gorge in tune.

Of the dark sanguine mewte.
The dark sanguine mewte, with a black in it, is the most deadly sign of all
other, and I do not remember that ever I saw hawke make that kind of mewt, but
she died. Yet nevertheless a man ought not therefore in that case to give
over his hawk and to despair of her, but rather to allow her of that receite
and medicine, which erst Iherom Cornerus, that noble man, and cunning Falconer
made, or else that which was devised by Signior Manolus the Greek, which I
have many times experimented in Falcons, not without good success, and great
commendation. And therefore hereafter I will lay it down for your better
knowledge and practice, as the excellent devises of most skillful men in
Falconrie.

And yet for all this, it may be, that a hawke does make the like mewte that I
wrote of, by mean of tyring on a foul, and taking the blood of it, and of the
rayns and guts, which if it do happen, it is a matter not to be regarded.

I have sundry times seen the mewte of a Hawke gray, like milk, when it is
turned and waxen sour, The gray mewte.
which truly is a deadly token, and sign of great danger. Yet it shall not
be amiss, to use the receite which I lately spoke of, devised by those
Gentlemen Falconers aforesaid.

By this which I have spoken, as touching the mewtes of Hawks, it may be
gathered how greatly it does import, and how behoouefull it is for a Falconer,
or Ostreger, for the better cure of his hawks, to peruse every morning with
great care the mewte of his hawks. For that it does greatly concern the good
health and state of them, to find out at the first their indisposition and
diseases, before they be too deeply rooted and confirmed in them, when truly
it will prove a very hard and difficult matter to remove the evil,

But now I count it high time to proceed, and descend to the knowledge and
particular cure of the ordinary evils, and diseases, which do plague and
pester hawks. In which discourse, to observe some method and order, I will
speak generally of all infirmities and ill accidents happening to the bodies of
Hawks, as namely of the fever, and so consequently of every special disease
that belongs to each particular member of a Hawke, as well those that are
within the body as with out: And besides all these, of the gorge, guts, and
liver, of the stripes and bruses that happen to hawks: and lastly of their
feathers, and other evils. Laying down to your view in the latter part
hereof, such instruments and tools as Falconers do use to cauterize their
Hawks withal, with such other ordinary remedies, as they do commonly bestow
upon their diseased and sick Hawks.

Or the Fever or Ague wherewith Hawks are wont to be molested and troubled.
I Have noted and observed, that the Fever happens unto Hawks, by reason of
some small cold, and heat ensuing the same. And verily in mine opinion, it
does much resemble the Tertian, wherewith we our selves are daily vexed. You
may easily guess this grief, when you see your hawke shake and tremble, and
presently after hold her wings close under her train, stouping down with her
head to the ground-warde. And besides all these tokens, you have one more,
which is, yt your hawke will have her barbe feathers under her beak staring,
and out of order, and sometimes eake she will refuse her meat. And if happily
you touch her with your hand, you shall feel sensible the extremytie of
heat that does surcharge her. All, or the most part of these signs, do
evidently argue your hawke to be troubled with a Fever, a very dangerous
grief, but not altogether deadly, for that I have seen many hawks recured of
this disease. Wherefore all your care must be, to cool and refreshe her,
because in deed the Fever is nothing else but aninordinate heat. In this
case, her feeding must be either the leg of a chicken or a young pigeon, or
some other small foul, but Sparowes last of all, for they are not to be
allowed in the beginning of the disease, for their great heat. And you must
remember to wash her me^^ in the water of Buglosse, or Endive, or in a
mucillage of Psillium, in the juice of Cowcombers or Mellons, and afterward
dry it in a cloth, and so give it her to feedeon. Moreover you must (if you do
well) bath the perch, and also her legs in the Summer with Plantaine water (or
for want of the water, with the very juice of it) with Lettice water, or Nightshade
water, and sometimes among with the juice of Henbane, Lettice water, Nenuphar,
Howsleeke, and such other cooling devises, to delay her inordinate heat and
inflammation, setting her in some out place where the air is fresh, but not
where she may take the air too much, for that may breed a further
inconvenience. If your sick hawk be very low brought in state, you must allow
her a gorge twice a day, but with discretion and judgment, not giving her
overmuch at one time. And if so the Fever cease not by these practices
aforesaid, it shall be well done to give your Falcon of excellent good Rubarbe,
finely beaten to powder, two scrouples, in a Cotton casting, to purge and
scower her choler, which is the very original ground of her Fever. There are
some that do will and prescribe, that you must let your Falcon blood in the
thigh, which albert I have not experimented, yet does it stand with reason,
that it may do good, if you can finely do it: but it were much better in mine
opinion, to open the vain under her right wing, because that would chiefly
refrigerate, and cool the liver out of hand, and so by a consequent, ye whole
body throughout. This order aforesaid is to be used, if the fever be a hoate
fever wherewith your hawke is molested. But if it happen to be a cold fever
which you shall perceive, by that your hawk will be extreme cold, if you touch
her. Her eyes look not of their wonted hew, and besides all this, she seldom
mewteth and that with great pain.

Then you must set her in some warm place, and after her fit of cold is
past, she must be gently borne on the fist. Besides when the fever has left
her, for that time you should let her flee a little, it will do her great
good. Look that her meat wherewith you fee^er, be hot flesh, as Sparrowes,
(which in this cold fever are very well to be allowed, though in the hot ague
I told you they were hurtful) pullets, pigeons, and such like hot fowls, the
flesh of whom you must wash in wine wherein have been boiled these hot things
following, as Sage, Mints, Pelamountaine, Cloves, Cynamon, and such other sweet
comfortable devises. Besides, you may give your hawke the foresaid flesh if it
please you, with honey, and a little powder of Oil, Fenell, and Commin meddled
together. But spetially you must observe this rule, and remember it well, not to
give your hawk gorge upon gorge: and again, if your hawke be high in flesh
when this disease takes her, she must be fed with little and seldom,
although in deed it be very good at all times, howsoever she be affected, to
keep a reasonable hand upon her, as touching her diet, whether thee be
diseased or in perfect state. For of over great gorges, and too full and
liberal a hand, do proceed a thousand mischiefs and diseases to a Hawke, as
experience does daily instruct us, both to the great pains of those silly
birds, and the great grief and cost of the unskillful Keeper, whose purpose
and meaning perhaps, is by giving his hawke liberally, to have her flee
lustily, and to continue in perfect health and state, whereas in troth nothing
does so much offend a hawke, as too great a gorge. As in all other things, so
in this likewise, The mean is best.

Some Falconers do prescribe this method for cure of the feuerin a hawke,
which I do not greatly commend or allow. They will you to take Reubarbe,
Musk, Sugar Candy, and the juice of Motherwoort, and making a pill of those
things aforesaid, to give it your Hawke, feeding her afterward with
Sparrowes, or young Rattes, which are very hot meat.

Othersome appoint a paste or mixture to be made, as big as a nut, of these
things following, which being steeped a space in Vinegar, must be given her,
not dealing with her in six hours after, at the least. They take to the
composition of this paste, Aloes, Musk, and the sat of a hen, equal portions,
giving it the hawke in manner aforesaid.

The Signs that they give to know the fever, are the wrything of the hawks
train, the coldness of her foot, and oftentimes the casting of her gorge. But
the first rules and remedies do satisfy me sufficiently, without these,
because I find in them some more reason: yet do not think it amiss, to set
down diverse men's opinions, because every man may make his choice: for what
likethone, perhaps contents not another.

Of diseases of the head, and first of the Apoplexy or falling evil.
Having in purpose to treat of the diseases wherewith hawks those silly
birds are vexed in their heads, I must do you to know, that under the name
and term of the head, I do not only comprise that part that contains the
brain, but also the ears, eyes, beak, or chap, nares, and mouth of the
hawke: al which parts are subject to sundry diseases and evils. But first of
all, I mean to speak of the chiefest, and most principal part of all the
rest, and of such maladies as light upon the brain, and after that, of such as
happen to the external and outward parts of the hawks head. Among all which
infirmities and griefs, I account the Apoplexy (whom the Italians call Gozza)
the greatest and most perilous, as the which does ordinarily cause and bring
sudden death.

This mischief does commonly befall hawks, by mean of too much grease, and
store of blood, for that at that time there does happily break some one vain
or other in the brain, which does fill some concauity or hollow cell of the
brain with blood, in which Cells, (as the learned do imagine and affirm) the
animal spirits are engendered, and have their beginning. Without which animal
spirits, no living creature can either have sense or moving. Whereupon it does
follow of very necessity, and by a mere consequent, that the passage of those
spirits being shut up, and intercluded, the creature whatsoever it be, must
die.

Again, it may happen, for that the Hawke has been set too long in the
heat of the Sun, for by that occasion there may be so much humidity and
moist humor drawn up into the brain, as may engender this evil, and procure
this mischief in the hawke.

Moreover it may chance by making a long flight at a Feasant or Partridge, in
the heat of the day, by mean of which the hawke has surcharged her self with
overmuch travail. Wherefore it shall be behouefull and necessary so to use
the matter with care and diligence, as it may be foreseen, that hawks incur
not this adventure and evil. Whereupon for that hawks in the mew, are
accustomed to gather much grease, it shall be good for the space of fifteen
or twenty days before the drawing of them out of the mew, to feed them with
lyquide and slipper flesh, such as may lightly be put over, and pass through
them. As namely, with the hearts of Calves, Lambs, or Goats, washed in luke
warm water, and afterward dried in a linen cloth, before you give it your
Hawke.

Likewise may you boldly feed your hawks before they are drawn out of the
mewe with small Pullets, and young Sparowes. When you have thus done, and
observed this order of feeding them, when the time is come to draw them out of
the mewe, you must remember to draw them very orderly, and after that, to
continue the same kind of feeding, and to keep the same hand upon them for
other twenty days space at the least, to scowre and disburden your Hawks of
that slime and glitte, which does surcharge them, having them always for the
most part on the fist, and especially at night. Neither shall it be evil to
scowre them, (or as our Ostregers and Falconers do term it) to enseame them,
by giving them a quantity of washed Aloes, allowing a Falcon as much as the
biggenesse of a Bean beaten in the powder, wrapped in Cotton, and so to make
her a scowring thereof, and besides to give her Sugar Candy two or three
mornings. But in any condition you must beware not to use Aloes unwashed,
because thereof are bred sundry ill accidents in hawks. And for that occasion
is it prescribed you to use Aloes washed, to avoid that undoubted evil which
would otherwise happen.

Moreover, I have happily, and with good success approved this remedy. I have
given so much larde, or butter, as I could well convey into my hawks throat,
when she has been empty above, having first prepared the lard, or butter,
by washing it seven, eight, or more times in clear water, and afterward
letting it soake in Rose Water a space, and lastly, by putting unto it of the
best Sugar that I could get, or Sugar Candy beaten to powder. And my order
was, ever to give this scowring every seventh or eight day. And this is not
alone to be used to hawks in the mew, but also to such as are kept on the
perch and stock. But if it so fall out, that by these devises and scowrings
you cannot make your Hawke have a stomach, and greedy appetite to feed, it
shall not be evil to piss upon her meat, and having dried it in part again,
to give her a gorge sufficient, so much as may serve her, and as she will
take. For the more liquide and slipper flesh you give her, the sooner will she
be enseamed. And by this means do Falconers preserve their hawks from the
falling evil, and sudden mischief, Adition.
and besides that from sundry other perilous accidents, that do follow those
silly birds. [But if you take fine larde and beat it with Rue and Hysope till
it be all one body, and then make a round pyll and give it to the Hawke, it
will help all diseases of the head.]

Of the Apostumes of the head.
FAlcons, Goshawkes, and other birds of prey, are wont to be much cumbred and
molested with the swelling of the head, and the Apostume thereof, a very
grievous evil, occasioned by abundance of evil humors, and the heat of the
head. It is discerned by the swelling of the hawks eyes, by the moistur which
sundry times issues and distilleth from the ears, and often eake by evil
Savor, and smell of the Apostume. Also it may be perceived by the small desire
the hawke has to move or advance her self by the wresting of her head, and
the little regard she has to tire and pull the flesh that she feeds on,
as though indeed tyring were very painful to her, and by that she is
scarce able to open her clappe, and beak, after her accustomed manner.

Against this most perilous evil, it shall be very necessary first of all to
skowre your Hawke thoroughly, and after that the head in chief.

As touching the general skowring. I can commend and allow you to give her
three or four morninges, when she has no meat to put over, a pyll as bygge
as a nutte of butter washed seven or eight times in fresh water, and steeped
well in Rose water, mingling it afterward with Honey of Roses, and very good
sugar, holding your Hawke on the fist, till she make one or two mewtes. Which
being done, to disburde^ and skowre the head, it shall be excellent well done
to take of Rewe seed four drammes, Aloes Epatick two drammes, Saffron one
scruple, reducing and forcing all these to fine powder, and with a quantity
convenient of honey of Roses to make a pyll of that bigness and syze, as may
well be conveyed into the hawks beak, by which her brain may be purged and
skowred, thrusting the pyll so deep into her throat, as you may well see,
holding her a space after it upon the fist. And that done, setting her down
on the perch, in a convenient place, fit for the time, and two hours after, to
feed her at her accustomed time with good hot meat.

But if happily there be any of the corruption and filth in the Hawks ear,
it shall be very necessary, carefully with an instrument of silver, or other
good metal for the nones, that the one end be sharp poynted and edged, of
purpose to apply lynt, and on the other end hollow, and fashioned like unto
the ear of a Hawke, to cleanse and remove the filth that furreth the hawks
ear. And with that end, whereon the lynte or bumbast is, to skowre it very
daintily, and presently upon the same, to infuse and drop in a quantity of
Oil of sweet Almondes, fresh and luke warm, and after the same to convey
into the ear a little lynt or bombast, to keep in the Oil, till such time
she be dressed again, to the end the Oil, may supply and mollify the
filth, so as it may easily be removed and cleansed. And this order must you
observe and continue, until the Apostume be resolved and thoroughly ripe. But
if it so fall out, that the Aposthume will not come to maturation, or ripe, in
sort as it may grow to suppuration, and be mundified in manner aforesaid, but
will rest at one stay in the head of the hawke: then must you be feign to come
to cauterize the head aloft, and bestow a button there, to cause the humor to
breath, and to bring the corrupt matter thither, remembering after this fire and
cauterie to remove the escarre, by bestowing on it for the space of eight or
nine days, butter, by which you shall easily remove the crust or escarre,
which is made by the fire.

You must not forget, if it be so, as your hawke be so weak as she is
unable, or so froward as she will not feed and tire upon her meat which you
give her, then to cut it in small pellets, and so give it her, either by fair
means or foul, not leaving to use it so, if it be possible, as she may
receive it willingly, and feed her self, because it may the better nourish
her. For this is one undoubted rule, that when a Hawke does refuse to feed and
tire, she is very unlusty, and diseased, and not one among a hundredth of them,
that does recover. And for mine own part, in all my time, I have recovered but
one Falcon being so diseased, and that by the mean and cure aforesaid, and by
using this cauterie.

Let this suffice, as touching this monstrous accident, for I mean to refer
you to another place for the cauterie and fire, which you shall use to hawks
where I will speak specially thereof. Only giving you this caveat before you
go, that this evil of the head, is infectious, and will pass from one hawke
to another, as the maungie does among Spaniels, or any such contagious disease.
Wherefore it shall be very good to sequester and sunder the hawke that is thus
affected, from your other hawks, for avoiding of the same evil.

Of the distillation and swelling of a Hawks head, and also of her eyes and
na^es.
Hawks are accustomed to have a certain distillation or Catarre in their
heads, because when they ard hard sleen withal, and set in great heates, by
long and painful flights, they easily take cold upon the same, either through
some unhappy storms of weather, or great winds, or by reason of the extreme
cold of winter, and chiefly when they are full of gross and naughty humors.

Of this Catarre or distillation, sundry times there grow a thousand mischiefs
to those poor birds, and specially the swelling of the head, with a kind of
dropping humor, which is the cause many times, that the hawks eyes become
less, and are contracted in a manner together. Beside which inconvenience, the
nares also become to be stuffed and stopped with excessive excrement that
descends from the brain. All which evil accidents do require, and stand
needful of several cures before they can be removed, and the hawks enjoy
their accustomed health.

Wherefore first of all, it shall be necessary to scowre your Hawke being thus
affected and diseased, with Butter prepaed in manner aforesaid, or with Oil
Olive prepared after that fashion, as I shall instruct yon in the Chapter of
the Pantas.

I have in the Catarre of Falcons, (as also of other hawks) diverse times used
with great good fortune and success, to give them of Agaricke two scruples, of
Cynamon finely beaten, of the juice of Liquorish, of either one scruple, being
make also into powder, and with a quantity of honey of Roses, to make all those
things aforesaid into a pyll, as big as a Bean, for the largest sort of
hawks, and for other less hawks, half as big. And this was I accustomed to
give my Falcon, and other Hawks in the morning, having nothing above in their
gorges, holding my hawkeon the fist, until such time the medicine began to
work, because she should not cast the scowring, (which then would do her no
pleasure at all,) and after three hours then to feed her with some meat. You
must remember, and note this very well, that if your Hawke to whom you give
this scowring be greasy, and full of flesh, you may boldly give it her two or
three mornings. But if she be poor, and low, then once or twice to allow
this scowring, will very well suffice her. For there is ever respect to be had
of the state of a hawke, when any upward or downward scowring is given them,
for otherwise it will do them greater mischief than pleasure.

But when you perceive your hawks head to swell, and her eyes to be full of
dropping humors, and to wax less than naturally they were accustomed to be,
by mean of the swelling of her head: It shall be good, having given her this
general scowring, that I have spoken of, to scowre the head alone, and purge it
with some devise, to force her snite and snifle, as men do accustom to sneze:
and to force her thereunto, you may take Pepper, Cloves, and mustard seed, of
each one a like quantity, making them all into very fine powder, as is
possible, and then with a whistle of silver, or other like mettell, (yea though
it be but a quill, it will serve the turn) being applied upon hernares, to
blow it into hernares as strongly as you may, to make it pierce the furtherin.
And besides that, you may rub and frot the palate of your Hawke with the said
powder, and not feed her after it, until such time she has left sniting, and
snifling. If you continue this practice three or four days, your hawke shall
recover assuredly.

To discharge the head of a Hawke, that is stuffed with ill humor, Stauesaker
which the Apothecaries do sell in the winter, I have found a very excellent
thing, and of great force, giving of it the biggenesse of a Bean unto my
Hawke, being empty, and having nothing above. And withal I was accustomed to
rub the palate of her mouth, forcing also some part of the powder to ascend
up into the head, by the hole that goes to the brain: and after I had so
done, would cast my hawke to the perch, vnhooding her. Which was no sooner
done, but you should see her cast a world of slimy filth and moist humor, and
snyse at her nares as fast.

But if it be so, that the abundance of humors in the head, by none of these
aforesaid remedies will be removed, applying them never so often, nor the
mischief cease to vex your hawk which you shall easily discern by her slimy
castings, and the abundance of filth that will issue at her nares: then must
you of force be driven ventrously to flee to the actual cauterie, and with an
iron button heat in the fire, to cauterize her upon the head, using no less
judgment and discretion therein, than the daintiness of the place requires,
regarding the bone of the Hawks head, which is not very strong, or hard. And
before you do use the cauterie, it is necessary to cut away those feathers,
that are growing about the place where you mean to bestow your fire.

If with this monstrous moystnesse of your hawks head, there be joined a
swelling, or the dropping of her eyes: in that case I do think it best to
bestow your button upon her head, just betwixt her eyes, observing the same
order that I have already prescribed you.

When the nares of your hawke are stuffed with filth, and surcharged with such
distillation from the head, as I have spoken of: after a convenient scowring,
then shall it be good to take Pepper and Mustard seed beaten into fine powder,
and putting it into a clean linen cloth, to stype it a space in the strongest
vinegar you can get: and that done, to bestow some few drops thereof upon
her nares, so as they may enter and pierce her nares. For truly this devise
will so scowre and dry up the humor, as it will do great pleasure. But if so
with these remedies and means you cannot resolve it, then must you be feign to
use the cauterie, not aloft upon the head, but round about the nares, giving
her a little touch with the fire, somewhat below the nares, to make them more
large, always using the matter so carefully as you touch not the root or (or
poret) of her nares. When you have in this manner bestowed your fire, and
actual cauterie, until such time the pain do cease, and the escarre fall
away, (which is nothing else but the crust that is grown there, by mean of
the fire,) you must anoint the place with fresh butter, and after that you
have so done, then proceed to the cure of it with the powder of Masticke, or
Olibanum.

This is a very good remedy for the swelling in the head of a Hawke. Take
Stauesacre, a quantity of Pepper, and a little Aloes Epaticke, beat these said
things into fine powder, and put them into the water of rue, where when it has
been steeped a space in the said liquor, with a little bombast or lint, bath
your Hawks nares twice a day, and you shall find it ease your hawke greatly,
and rid a great part of the filthy matter that breeds the stoppage in her
head. If all these remedies which I have alleged generally, nor any one
special medicine will prevail, as I said before: then must you repose your
chiefest trust in the cauterie, which must be done either on the head with a
cauterizing button, or about the nares with a needle, or sharp iron, fire hot,
or some golden or silver Instrument, of purpose made; applying after the fire,
for the removing of the Escarre, and the cure of the same, the remedies
aforesaid.

Of the giddiness and shaking of a Hawks head.
THere does diverse times happen unto Falcons, and other Hawks a mischief,
whose nature is, to cause the hawke to shake her head continually, so as at no
time she can hold it still or steady, but is ever moving it to one side or
other, holding her eyes close shut withal. This disease is called Soda, which
in english we may term the Megrim, or a kind of palsy, by mean the head is in
continual moving.

The Cure.
This evil may proceed, either by the fowlenesse of the panell, or of a corrupt
and naughty liver. The remedy for it is this, which I have found very good,
and wherewith I have cured my hawke in times past. You must giu and your sick
hawk a casting of cotton, in which you shall enwrappe of Aloes Epaticke one
scruple, of Cloves two grains, making these into powder before you give it:
then two hours after the taking of this scowring, feed your hawke with a young
Pygeon, or a hot Pullets leg, using this self same order three or four
mornings one after another.

One other remedy for it is this. Take as much unwashed Larde as the top of
your little finger, with a quantity of Pepper, and a little Aloes Epaticke,
beat these two last into powder, and convey them into the Larde, which done,
thrust them into your hawks throat, holding her on your fist a space after it:
then tie her on the perch in the Sun, and there let her stay till she cast
both the scowring, and the slimy matter which is in her gorge. And this
medicine you may use every rhird day once, feeding your hawke with hot meats,
as Pigeons, and young Sparowes, and euerytime you give her this scowring, convey
into her a little Aloes, which is an excellent thing to scowre her, and quit
her of of this disease.

If these receipts and scowrings yield no remedy, then must you to the actual
cauterie, shearing away the plumes about that part of the head where you will
apply your fire, ever respecting the bone, and burning nothing but the very
skin, to let the mischief breath, removing the escarre, and doing the cure
after the escarre removed, as is before said. Let this suffice for this
monstrous mischief which kills many hawks: yet have I cured my hawks twice by
these remedies in my time.

Of the Cataract in the eyes of a Hawke.
BEsides those other evils, there is a Cataract which does light upon the eyes
of a Hawke, whom we may term a suffusion, a mischief not easily removed, and
diverse times impossible to be recured, as namely, when it is grown too thick
and ouerlong, has been suffered in the eye, without seeking remedy for it: but
if it be not confirmed, then may it well be remedied, and I my self have
cured sundry hawks affected with this evil.

This evil accident does happen, by mean of gross humors in the head, which
are wont to dim and darken the sight, and sometimes clean to put out the
hawks eye without redemption.

It may be, that the hoode is the cause and ground of this disease, for I
never in my life remember that I saw any other bird or foul troubled with it
but only the Falcon: and perhaps it lights on her in chief, for that of all
other, she is most used to the hoode, and to be almost at no time vnhooded.

You must therefore have an eye, The Cure.
and especial regard to this inconvenience at the first, by giving one or two
morninges a scowring of Aloes, or of Agaricke, to scowre your Hawke withal,
because if you should adventure upon any sharp or hard painful medicine,
applying it to the eye of your hawke, it would perhaps cause a great repair of
evil humors, and accidents to the place diseasaid.

When you have given this scowring of Aloes, or Agaricke, to remove the matter
from the eye, you must use a powder made of washed Aloes, finely beaten, one
scruple, and of Sugar Candy two scruples, blowing out this powder into your
Hawks eyes three or four times in a day, with the Pipe or quill aforesaid.
This is the gentlest, and most Sovereign medicine that you can apply to the eye
in this case, and whilst you do minister this receipt, it shall be good
sometimes to bath the eye with the urine of a little boy.

If by these medicines aforesaid, the web of the eye will not be removed, we
must be driven to use a stronger receipt, which is this:

Another remedy.
Take a new said egg, and roast it so long until the white of it become like
milk. When you have so done, put it into a fine white linen cloth, and
strain it so much, and so long, until you see issue through your strainer a
clear green water, whereof you shall now and then infuse a drop or two into
the hurt eye, using it so three or four times in the day at the least, vntll
you see your Hawke amend of her mischief, and wax sound.

Last of all, if these things avail not to the cure, I do commend and allow
above all the rest, that you take the juice of Celendine roots, making them
clean from the earth that does use to hang to the moors: then scrape away the
outmost rynde and pill of the root, and use the juice to your Hawke. Truly I
have found this to be of singular force and virtue in the like accident.

It shall not be amiss, in this and such like affections and ill passions of
the eye of a Hawke, to bath her eyes often with rose water, wherein have been
boiled the seeds of Fenygreke. But you must remember, that this water or
coli^ie, be somewhat warm when you use it, because the eye is so noble, and so
sensible a member, as it can ill brook things either ouerhote, or over cold,
but must have them moderately hot or cold. This devise may you use to bath your
Hawks eye withal, until such time she be recovered, feeding her mean while
with good meats, and such as are light of disgestion.

Hawks are of so noble and excellent a nature, as the most part of medicines
that you do apply to the hurtes and cures of men, you may boldly bestow on
hawks, as things very wholesome for them, as by their working will be most
evidently seen and perceived: yet must there be a discretion used, in the
administration of these said receites, having always a regard unto the weak
and delicate nature of Hawks, in respect of men: and therefore the quantities
of every thing must be allowed and given accordingly. [For when all the
medicines recited shall fail to work, Adition.
if then you take but a leaf of ground Iuie, and champing it in your mouth,
spit the juice thereof into the hawks eye, it will not only take away this
evil, but any other grief in the eye whatsoever.]

It happens diverse times, that through the catarre, and pain of the head and
eyes, there lights upon the ears of a Hawke so mortal and deadly an apostume,
as seldom when, though there be great care used about the cure, she may be
brought to perfect state or recovered. And this proceeds, because the
mischief lies so near a neighbor to the brain, as before it can break or
be cleansed outwardly, it causes the Hawke to perish, Besides that, it is very
hard to apply medicines in that place: but if the hawke be of so strong a
nature, that she brook the breathing and rupture of this disease, which you
shall perceive by the quitture and filth that does issue from her ears, give
her this remedy, which is a very noble receipt, and approved of me oftentimes,
as well in men, as in Hawks, to my great commendation and glory.

Take honey of Roses, and oil of eggs, The Cure.
incorporate them together, and power twice or thrice a day into the ears of
your Hawke, some few drops of it hot: and if you find by the abundance of
filth, that there needs great abstersion, you may add thereunto a quantity
of Sarcacoll beaten into powder.

The Wine of Pomegranats is a most excellent remedy in this mischief,
confected with those things aforesaid.

Butter well coyled and beaten in a mortar of lead, one hour at the least, and
afterward powered into the hawks ears reasonable hot, twice or thrice a day,
is a very good remedy.

Of such evils as happen to Hawks in their chaps and mouths.
THe chaps and mouth of a hawke is subject to sundry diseases, and in the
hawks mouth there are wont to grow certain white pieces of flesh, and
sometimes tending somewhat to black, which do hinder the hawke from her
feeding, by mean whereof without any other evident cause, she becomes lean
and low. Wherefore it shall be very necessary to look into her mouth
sometimes, both in the palate, and under the tongue, beeause that many times,
there especially, do grow up certain pieces of flesh like in shape to a grain
of pepper, sometimes less, sometimes bigger than a pepper grain, which it
shall be necessary to cut away, either with a pair of cysers, if you may
commodiously doeit, or with Roch allome burnt, or with a drop of oil of
brimstone, applied upon a little cotton, with an iron unto the place, taking away
the corrupt flesh. You must mundisie the place with honey of Roses, and bumbast,
or lynt, until you see the quick flesh underneath it, then afterward unto
the honey of roses, you may apply and add a little powder of masticke, or
incense, to consolidate the wound, washing it sometimes among with white wine.

Moreover and besides this, there is wont to happen unto hawks in the mouth, a
certain frownce or impediment, which does hinder their feeding, as the other
pieces of flesh do, of which I have spoken before. This frownce may be very
well perceived and discerned with the eye, and will appear also by the feeding
of the hawke.

Diverse times this kind of evil is cured with honey of Roses, and with the
powder of nut-shels bound in a piece of linen cloth, well bathed and stiped
together, and thrust under the hot ymbers until it may be brought unto fine
powder: this may you continue twice a day, as long as shall be needful.

But if this will not serve the turn, it shall be very necessary to mortify,
and kill the frownce with Aqua fortis, such as Goldsmithes do use to part
their metals withal, having respect not to touch it any where, saving only
upon the frownce, and part diseased, for that it will fret the good and sound
flesh.

After you have mortified the frownce or canker with Aqua fortis, as I have
told you, then must you mundifie and consolidate it with honey of roses, which
will cure it out of hand.

Also it is very good to apply this receipt following in the cure of the
Frownce, whom the Italians call Zarvol.

Take a clean Skellet, whereunto put good White Wine, a quantity of Verdigrece
well beaten to powder, of Roche Allom like quantity, one ounce of honey, and a
few dry Rose Leaves, boil all these things together to the consumption of
half the Wine: then strain it, and with the straining hereof twice or thrice
a day, bathe the frownce with a little lint or bumbast tied on the top of an
Instrument for the purpose. But you must well regard whether the Flesh be
good or no, and with a tool fit for it to search and cut away the dead
flesh, for otherwise it will do little pleasure, and the Hawke should be
assured to suffer great pains, and yet to die at last. Having mundified the
wound with the receipt aforesaid, bath it only with honey of Roses, and it will
dispatch the Cure.

Take Verdigrece a quantity, bind it in a linen cloth, stype it one day and
one night in Rose Water, or Plantine Water, or common water, not having the
rest, The Cure.
and afterward wash the frownce therewith, until they be mortified, which
you shall well perceive by the quick flesh that will grow under: then apply
Honey of Roses in the end of the Cure, and it shall do your hawke great good.

Egiptiacum is an excellent thing to cure and kill the frownce in a Hawke,
Another
which is none other thing but a very Canker such as men are plagued withal.
Wherefore take Verdigrece, Roch Alome, of either two ounces, Honey of Roses one
ounce, water of Plantaine, wine of Pemegranats, of either two ounces and a
half, set them on a soft burning fire, always stirring them with a stick, or
wodden splatter, until, it turn to the thickness of honey: then take a little
of it, and mingle with a quantity of Plantaine water, and you shall find this
the most excellent remedy, as well for the frownce in a Hawke, as also for the
canker in the mouth of a man Thus much is necessary to be used, when the
frownce does happen unto a Hawke by some postume of the head, engendered by a
corrupt liver, or some other inward part. But many times it so falls out,
that the beak of a hawke is hindered and offended with this kind of evil, and
not the mouth so much, in such sort as the Hawke cannot well feed, by mean
this mischief does so fret and eat the horn of her chappe and beak. For
remedy of that, you must take a sharp knife, and pare away as much of the
beak as is corrupted: but if the malady or frownce have eaten very far under
the horn of the beak, it is not sufficient to cut it away with a sharp
knife, as far as the canker has eaten, but you must afterward anoint the
place with honey of Roses twice or thrice: and in so doing the Hawke shall
recover and do well, for the honey of Roses will both mundifie and incarne.

Sometimes a hawks beak or chappe does ouergrow so much, as it is very
necessary to cope it with an iron, and afterward to sharpen the beak with a
knife, taking away so much as is needful for the better feeding of your
Hawke, but in any wise you must not meddle with the nether chappe, because that
does not commonly grow so fast, nor so far as to hinder your hawks feeding.
Wherefore that part is to be favored. Let this suffice as touching the
diseases of the hawks mouth, and the frownce, because there is no canker or
frownce so ill, but being taken in time, with these receipts, it will be cured
assuredly.

Of the Pantas.
ONe special disease among others that be lurking and secret within the
breast and covert parts of a Hawke, is the Pantas, a very dangerous evil, and
familiar to hawks: for lightly few escape that are once encombred with this
infirmity.

This mischief proceeds when the lungs and those breathing members by
excessive heat are ouerdried, and baked in such sort, as they cannot by any
means freely draw the air to them, nor yet utter it well being once received,
for the better cooling of the heart, whose bellows the lungs are, by nature
ordained for that special purpose and office, whereby the heart waxes inflamed,
and by a necessary consequent, the hawke of force must perish.

Beside that, the humidity and moisture of the head distilling from above upon
those breathing parts, and there encrassed and waxen thick, is wont also to
be a great furtherance to this mischief, and breed difficulty of breathing.
Wherefore it shall be very necessary to regard it at the first, before the
disease have taken too deep root: for that then, (for any thing I know) there
is no remedy in the world to be had for the Pantas, which is commonly termed
Asma.

You may judge of the beginning of this grief, and know it by this. Your Hawke
labors much in the panell, moving her train often up and down, at each
motion of her panell, and cannot many times mewte or slise: and when she does
slise, she drops fast by her, and makes a small round burnt mewt: these are
apparent proofs that she has the pantas growing on her.

Again, you may perceive it by the more violent motion of her gorge then
custom was, but the other are the most assured signs that you can desire, and
infallible. Moreover, when your hawke does oftentimes open and close her
clappes and beak, then is the disease very near confirmed. And look how much
the more she does it, ye more is the Pantas roots on her, and then is the
cure desperate, and not to be hoped for.

The best remedy that ever I could find for the Pantas, was to scowre the
Hawke with good oil olive, The cure of the Pantas.
well washed in sundry waters, so long, until it became clear and white.

The way to wash oil.
My accustomed manner of washing it was, to put it in an earthen pot, that had
a little hole in the very bottom of it, of purpose made round, whereby it might
the better be stopte with the top of my finger: then do I convey into this
pot that quantity of Oil, which I mean to wash in it, and with clear
water do there coile it together with a wooden platter, or a spoone, that the
water waxes somewhat dark with it: after which removing my finger, the water
passes away by the hole, the Oil remaining behind, and swimming aloft, as it
is the nature of it to do. And thus do I fix, seven or eight times: so long
until I perceive the Oil to have no filth left in it at all. Then of this
Oil thus prepared, I bestow upon my Hawke that has the Pantas, filling
therewith a chickens gutte washed very clean, of an inch long and somewhat more,
for a Falcon and Goshawke: but for other less Hawks of a less length, fast
knit at both ends with a thread, to the end the Oil may not issue out, which
gutte I convey into the Hawks throat, after she has cast: and is empty above
and in the pannell both, holding her on the fiste till she make a mewte: and
one hour after she has left mewting, then I feed her with some slipper
flesh, as the heart of a Calfe, or a Pullets leg, refusing to use old
Pigeons and Sparowes, because they are over hot meat, unless happily the
Hawke were very low and poor, but being hie and full of flesh, those other
meats aforesaid, are not alone wholesome, and sufficient for her, but they will
be much better, being washed in water of Buglosse, and wroong dry in a linen
cloth, and then minged with the powder of Sugar Candy, using this order six
or eight days, or more, every other day till my Hawke recover: giving her
every third or fourth day a cotton casting with Cubebes, and cloves, to scowre
and discharge her of such moist humors as distilleth from her head, which
sometimes (as I have said before) is the chief and original ground of this
disease.

Besides this remedy, there is one other very good, and that is butter, and
Larde well slised, and washed in sundry Waters, till they become very clean,
and White, which you may keep in Rose Water, until you have occasion to use
it.

Of these being thus prepared and conserved, you may take as you have need, for
every scowring such a quantity, as will serve to make a pyll or pellet, so
great as you may well convey into your Hawks throat, using it in manner and
time aforesaid: giving her now and then among that scowring of Cubebs and
Cloves, as well for the reason already alleged, as also because of her liquid
meat and slipper feeding upon those hearts, so bathed and steeped in water. For
Cubebs and Cloves will greatly comfort the stomach and gorge of your Hawke.

I have found by experience that oil of sweet Almonds is of wondrous efficacy
in the cure of this disease, giving it in a chickens gut as aforesaid.

If these remedies which I have showed do not prevail, nor perform the
perfect cure of your diseased hawke, ne yet do make her mewte, which happened at
no time to me in all my experience and practice. But when there is no remedy
to be had at all, I can well allow the use of Agaricke with a cotton casting,
because Agaricke is of great force to cause a Hawke to slise. But if for all
this, the grief do daily proceed and increase, then do I think good that
you bestow a Cantery upon your Hawks head, betwixt her eyes, and eake at her
nares, specialy if there be any imperfection in them. Some men are of opinion,
yt for the cure of ye Pantas you should give your hawk two inches of a Lucerts
tail, newly cut off, conueying it into your hawks gorge, and afterward
setting her in some dark place, till she have cast, and then to give her goats
milk with the blood of a Dove. Othersome Writers do will and advise to let
the hawke blood in the neck.

But I for my part have neither tried the one nor the other, if I shall tell
you the truth of the matter, because I do not at all like of these devises:
but do assure you, that with those other remedies and receipts, which I have
taught you in this Chapter of the Pantas (I mean the scowrings, and the
cauterie) I have done very much good, and recovered my hawks of this disease,
and therefore do recommend you to them, as undoubted experiments.

Betony reduced into the form of an Electuarie with honey is a very good
remedy for this grief, as well in men, as in Hawks.

One other remedy which I find in an Italian Author, is this. Take Mummy,
Rheubarbe, Saffron, and Sugar Candy, make all these into powder, giving it to
your Hawke, for the space of eight days at least in a chickens skin, if she
will take it, if not, force it into her. And while you minister this medicine
unto her, all that time let her not be borne on the fist: and withal among
sometimes, give washed fresh butter with sugar candy, and sometimes a cotton
casting with incense within it. But I do more commend to give her Bole
Armoniacke in a Pill with honey.

These remedies no doubt are very good and sovereign against the Pantas of a
Hawke. Make you choice of them, but let the cautery be the last refuge, for
that is an extremity. Remember this rule of Physic, that ever it is best to
begin with the weakest: for if they will profit and do sufficient good, in
vain it were to charge nature with the strongest receites, which are rough and
churlish in working.

Of the infirmity and disease in the gorge of a Hawke. when she does cast her
gorge.
Sundry are the diseases that Hawks are pestred withal, by mean of the
indisposition of the gorge, when the part is out of tune: among which, the
most ordinary and perilous is the casting of the gorge, when a Hawke does cast
her meat vndisgested, in the self same form she received it: or else
corrupted, and of a loathsome savor, both which they do many times.

If she cast it clean, and not stinking, but of good smell, there is no great
fear of the matter, nor any great danger: because it may proceed by mean some
small bone is crossed and turned in the gorge of the Hawke, which does cause
her to cast it again for her more ease and quiet: Wherefore in this case it
shall be good for the more surety, and to know the worst of the accident that
may happen thereby, to bear your hawke to the water, or to offer her abaso^ of
water, to try whether she will bowze or no. For by bowzing, besides the good
that she shall receive by it, you shall have evident proof and undoubted show
of her disease, and that indeed she is sick, and does stand in need of
Physic: but if she bowze not at all, it argues her to be in good tune.

Those accidents are wont to happen by mean of over much moisture and
humidity, and through excessive rotten humors engendered in the gorge.

Wherefore if the Hawke cast her meat well sauouring, and of good color,
neither stinking to smell, nor loathsome to view, and do bowze after it, it
shall be good to heat and comfort the gorge with the powder of Nutmegges and
Cloves, with a quantity of Musk, all enwrapped in a piece of fine cotton or
bombast, giving it to the hawke when she is empty pancid, as custom is to
do, holding her on the fist, until she put over her said casting into her
gorge. Then two hours after she has cast it again, it shall be very
necessary to feed her with young Doves, giving but half a gorge, or somewhat
less at a time: and at night when he sups her, to let her plume a little, and
if the Hawke will bowze, to give her leave to do it, for truly it will be
very wholesome for her. By this means I promise you, I have recovered sundry
sick hawks, and chiefly Sparrowhawkes.

I have over and besides this, used with great good success good Rose water
altered with a quantity of powder of cloves, and musk, preparing it after this
manner.

I have taken Rose water two ounces, powder of Cloves two scruples, of fine
musk five grains: and of this have I given my hawke five ounces, or
thereabout, after that as my hawke has been either poor or hie in state,
holding her on the fist, until she has made a mewte.

This medicine will bring her to a good appetite, a sweet breath, and will
besides all these scowre very well.

But if that which she does cast, be corrupted and stinking: over and besides
the foresaid remedies, which indeed are excellent good, I can allow well that
you take the root of Celidonie, or Celondine, removing away the upper rynde,
and pill off the root until it look read, and drop again, then to infuse
it in a quantity of luke warm water, stirring the root up and down in the
water, to cause it to receive the effect and quality of the Celydonie the more.
Of which root you must (after you have so done) convey a pellet as big as a
bean for the huger sort of hawks, into the beak of your Hawke, thrusting it
down with your forefinger into the very gorge of her, to the end it may the
better descend into your Hawke. Besides this, it is very good to open her
beak, and convey into her one spoonefull of the water aforesaid, not all at
once, but at twice or thrice, closing fast her clappes again, because she may
the better keep it, and not cast it up presently.

This being done, keep her a space upon the fiste, until the root and
licout be well settled in her gorge. After which, cast her on the perch in
such a place where is no resort, either of people, Dogs, Chickens, Cattes, or
other such like things, to the end you may the better discern her scowring:
and besides, that she may have the less cause to bate. There let her stand
until she has cast all the root which she received, and that the water has
made her mewt, and s^se sufficiently, which will do her very great good. Then
after two hours it shall be well to give her a young Rat or Mouse, newly
stripped out of the skin hot, and for lack thereof, a young Pigeon, whom
you shall kill, by throwing her forcibly against the ground, with the raines
downward, because the blood may gather together and stand: whereof feed your
Hawke giving her the heart also, and the raines thereof, without any more
allowance of any of the Pigeons flesh. When she has dispatched and rid this
beaching of the Pigeons heart and blood, or of the young Rat, then give her in
like manner the like quantity, only of the dead Dove: only twice a day to a
Sparowhawk, but to a Falcon or Goshawk, four or five beachings in one day,
ever observing the self same order that I have prescribed you.

The next morning you may, if need be, in a little lint, or flax, or such
devise, give a scowring of Incense or Olibanum, I mean the leaves of it bruised
in your hand, as small as is possible, giving her but a small gorge, to the end
that toward the Evening, you may allow her a reasonable Supper.

By this usage and order have I cured sundry Hawes of mine own, and other men's.

You must note yt when these remedies aforesaid do not profit nor do the
feate, and that the Hawke does cast her more than twice, then is it a desperate
case, and so much the worse, if the Hawke be low and poor, for then in that
case have I seen very few or none recured.

Nevertheless I have sometimes seen a marvel wrought in this case, by making
the greater kind of hawks, as Falcons, Gerfalcons, and such like, drunk with a
spoonful or two of strong Malmesey, conveyed by force into her gorge: but to
the lesser hawks you must not give so much of the malmesie, but in less
quantity. Which done, they have been placed upon a bed or a cushion, for on the
perch they cannot stand, being drowsy, but will lie as things in a trance
for the space of a quarter of an hour, and many never recover themselves
again, but if happily any do after they are thus dealt withal recover and
slise, and scowre away their medicine, no question that hawke shall thoroughly
recover: then is it good to give her of the bloody parts of a Pigeon used in
that manner as I foreshewed you, but this dangerous medicine is not to be
given, but in desperate cases.

Of diverse Accidents that happen to Hawks, by means of fowlenesse of the
gorge, and indisposition thereof.
IT happens sometimes that a Hawke can hardly put over her meat, which may be
discerned by this, when in the morning she has of her supper above. This
misfortune chances partly by reason her meat was ouerdrie, and (as we may
say) so hard baked in the gorge, as she could not put it over, and partly
again, for that the Hawke cannot endue sufficiently, neither yet does fill in
the Pannell as she ought to do.

In the first case, I have helped diverse with giving the Hawke water at will,
to bowze her pleasure, bathing besides her feet and perch with fresh cold
water: which not serving the turn, I have thrust my forefinger into her gorge,
and so helped it along, and sometimes my little finger, or a wax candle: and by
that means have caused her to fill in the ventricle sooner than otherwise she
would have done. The weakness of which part diverse times is a cause that the
Hawke does not well endue, nor fill in the Panel.

Somewhiles again I have used, and chiefly to Falcons to give a scowring in
Cotton of powder of Mummye, prepared of Cloves and Nutmegs, rolling aloft upon
the cotton a little lynt of Flax, because they should the sooner cast it. And
by this means have recovered them presently.

When a hawke does endew but slowly, and has by that means small lust to her
meat, you must thus do, to make her more eager, and sharp, wrap her meat in the
seed of Nasturcium, or water crassies, and so cause her to take it. But this
must he used only in winter, by reason that kind of seed is very hot.

The meat being thus used, will bring her to be very sharp set, and cause
her to be well breathed, and besides make her lusty, for indeed it is a
medicine very excellent, and of infinite virtue.

Besides, sometimes the gorge is so out of tune, as it is the cause that the
hawke at her accustomed hours does not cast, but retayneth her casting within
her. Whereupon it behoues some art to be used to make her cast. The next remedy
for that (as I have said already) is to give the root of Celendine, prepared
in form aforesaid.

Moreover mustard seed, otherwise called Senuy seed, is an excellent and a
present remedy for that mischief, being conveyed into the Hawks throat of the
bigness of a bean, to the huger sort of hawks: but to the lesser hawks a
less quantity ought to be given: and besides that, one grain of Cloves, with
a little pure Aloes well washed, albeit that will somewhat vex and wrong the
hawke in this care.

But above all other, do I hommend and prefer a scowring conveyed into a
little cotton casting, that is made of the powder of Aloes Epaticke washed, of
Cloves, Nutmegs and Ginger, of each of these equal portions, roling the Cotton
in a little Tow or Flax, making it as hard with your hand as you may, and then
rolling it in the powder of cloves, and forcing it down the Hawks throat: and
presently you shall see your hawke cast it up with the old casting which she
had before. This, besides the benefit of that, will comfort greatly, and
strengthen the gorge, and scowre the head of all such evil humors as are
there, surcharging the same. The use of this devise now and then will be very
necessary and beneficial to your Hawks without doubt.

If your Hawke will not cast, take Aloes, Pepper, powder of Cloves, and honey of
Roses, making of all these a long pyll, and as big as a casting, give it your
hawke, and she shall presently cast upon the taking of it.

Of worms that molest and trouble hawks out of measure.
NOw do I hold it high time, and the place very convenient to write of such
kinds of worms, as do trouble and vex the poor hawke as her mortal enemies,
which after a sort do depend of the gorge, through whose weakness there are
engendered gross and viscuous humors in the bowels of a hawke, where being
weakly wrought by default of natural heat, the humor conuerts into small
worms a quarter of an ynch long and more.

You may perceive these worms to plague and trouble your hawke, when you see
her cast her gorge, when her breath stinkes, when she trembles and writheth
her train, when she croakes in the night, offers with her beak to her
panel, when her mewt is not clean, white, nor in such abundance as it ought
to be. And besides all this, when your Hawke keeps at one stay, and is low of
flesh continually.

In this case it behooues you to destroy these worms either with a scowring of
washed Aloes Epaticke, Mustard seed, and Agarick, of each one equal portions,
using to give it as I have taught you before. Or else by ministering the powder
of the Gal of a Bore pig dried in the smoke: or if these fail, to give the
powder of Hearts horn being dried.

White Dittander, Hiera pigra minore, (for there are sundry kinds of it) of
each two drams, Aloes Epaticke well washte three drams, Agaricke, Saffron, of
each one dram, being al incorporate with honey of Roses, is an excellent remedy
against the worms. You must keep it well, and give Falcons, Goshawkes and
such like, the bigness of a bean, but to Sparowhawkes, and the lesser sort of
Hawks, as much as a pease, in form of a pyll, thrusting it down your Hawks
throat, keeping her after it a space on the fist, till she have slised and
mewted her medicine, feeding her afterward with good meat after your wonted
manner. And this shall recover her, and kill the worms.

For the same disease it is very good to give a scowring of white Dittander,
Aloes Epaticke well washed, Cubebes four or five, a few flakes of saffron,
enwrapped in a morsel of flesh, to cause the hawke the better to take it.

This receipt no doubt will both make the hawke to slyse and mewt, and withal
recover her. For it is an approved remedy against the worms, and specially when
the hawke does writh and wrest her train.

Again, take Rheuponticum, Sugar Candy, filings of iron, of each like
quantity, of these, with juice of Wormwood, frame pyls, and conueying them
into the skin of a chicken, give your hawke one pyll at a time, and it shall
do her pleasure.

Of the Flanders.
NOw I am entered in speech of worms, I think it good to write somewhat of ye
Filanders, to give both knowledge and cure of them. Albeit these worms do not
al depend of the gorge, for their natural place, and being is near the the
rains of a hawk, where they be enwrapped in a certain thin net or skin,
several by themselves, apart from either gut or gorge.

These Filanders (as the very name does import,) are small as threeds, and one
quarter of an inch long, and more proper and peculiar to Falcons, than to any
other hawke or foul. And this makes me to think that they are naturally
allowed the Falcon, because indeed they do not at all times vex and trouble
the hawks, but now and then, and especially when the hawk is poor and low of
flesh. But if she be hie and lusty, then by reason of the abundance of
nourishment and food that they receive from the hawke, they molest her not at
all, but rather do her good: and my reason is this. I cannot be induced to
think that nature (who does use to make nothing but to some end and purpose)
has produced and placed those Filanders in that part of the falcon for naught,
or to hurt the hawke. But how and in what sort they pleasure or profit the
hawke, I could never yet reach by conjecture.

When they are troubled and grieved with the Filanders, you shall first
discern it by the poverty of the hawks, by ruffling their trains, and by
certain twitches and starts that they will make, strayning the fist or perch
with their pownce, and lastly by their crooking in the night time, which kind
of noise they utter, when the Filanders prick and gripe them within. For when
they want their sustenance, which they can by no means have when the hawks are
low and poor, then do they endeavor to rend and break that slender net
wherein they are naturally enclosed, to issue out to seek their victuals some
other where. And many times it happens, that, not seeing to it in time, and at
the first, they pass through their web, and crall up as hie as the very heart,
and other principal parts of the Hawke, whoreof it must needs consequently
follow, that she perishes without redemption.

I have sometimes seen this pestilent worm by piercing and breaking the bed
wherein nature has laid them, ascend up so hie as they came forth, and
appeared at the Hawks beak and mouth.

Wherefore it shall be necessary to respect the cure of these Fylanders, not by
killing them as you would do other worms, (for then happily being dead, and
rotting in that pleece, from whence they cannot pass away with the hawks
mewte, they would there corrupt and breed a filthy impostume in her) but the
way that you must take, is, by making them drunk with some medicine to
entertain them in such forte, as they may not offend or gripe the hawke.

The best remedy that can be devised for it, is to take a Garlic head,
pilling from the cloves thereof the utmost rind: which done, you shall wc some
small iron tool or bodkin heat in the fire, pierce the Cloves, and make
certain holes in the^. And afterward steeping them in oil at least three
days, give your Falcon one of them down her throat: for the Cloue of Garlic
used in this manner as I tell you, will so enrage and astone the Filanders,
that for thirty or forty days after they will not at all molest your Hawke
Whereupon some Falconers when their Falcons be low and poor, once in a month
do of ordinary give them a cloue of Garlic for fear of the Filanders, to
prevent the worst, and truly to good effect. And for that very purpose and
cause, are seldom or never without Garlic steeped in Oil, where the longer
they lie, the better, and more medicinable they are.

Thus must you deal with those Filanders that lie in the raynes. But there is
one other kind of Filanders lying in the guts or panel of a hawke, which are
long, small and white worms, as though they had dropped out of the raines of ye
hawk. If you will destroy those Filanders, you must take Aloes Epaticke,
fylings of iron, Nutmegs, and so much honey as will serve to frame a pyll, which
pyll you shall give your hawke in yt morning, as soon as she has cast,
holding her on the fist for the space of an hour after. The^ cast her on the
perch, and when you guess her to have slised her fill, and mewted it clean,
then feed her with good hot meat.

There are besides these, yet one other sort of Filanders in the guts of a
hawke also, which cause a hawk to cast her gorge as soon as she has fed, and
do make her strong breathed: for them provide this remedy.

Take Aloes Epaticke, and wormwood made into very small powder, temper the
powder with oil of bitter Almonds: and that done, anoint therewith the
flanks and sides of your hawke. And if you like not the oil, for gresing your
Falcons feathers and plumes, compound those foresaid powders with Vinegar at
the fire: but it is certain that the Oil is the better far of both, and more
proper to this disease,

If you can, give your hawke oil of bitter Almonds, and not disquiet her
gorge, and after it bestow the other cure upon her, with the anointing her as
I have taught you, you shall find it the most perfect remedy that may be
against those Filanders that lodge in the guts and bowels of your hawke.

Of the disease of the Liver.
THe liver of a hawk is oftentimes enflamed by overmuch bating and travel, as
it happens not seldom to Falcons brought from far and foreign countries by
ship, and again, when they be impatient and bedlam in the mew, or when they
flee surcharged wc over great bells. For the ouerbelling of a Falcon puts her to
a greater pain and trouble than needs. By these, and such like occasions,
hawks become hot liuered. Again sometimes it happens by mean of an Apostume,
which is engendered either by some prick of a thorn, or the stripe of an other
hawks pownce, by crabbing wc her. For when they have such a stripe or prick,
the skin is broken outwardly, but the blood remaining corrupt within,
engenders the apostume. Many times this disease of the liver proceeds of some
bruise against the ground, or in a tree or the encounter with another foul.

You shall perceive this disease of the inflammation of ye liver when your hawke
stands melancholy, casts not at her accustomed and wonted hours, by her
foul castings, by her stinking and ill colored mewts (whereof I spoke before)
by her laboring thick in the panell, and by feeling of her: For her pulse
does beat as the pulse of a man that has a Fever. Moreover, her mewt is as
black as any incke. The disease is the most pestilent and dangerous of all
others.

If the heat of her liver proceed of too much bating, or broiling with her
self, you may easily cure her with four or five good liquid and cooling
gorges, as to feed her with the leg of a Pullet, or the heart of a Veale,
bathed in Water of Buglosse, Bowrage, Hearts tongue, and such like waters.

Moreover, it is very Sovereign to wash her meat in the juice of Henbane, or
else (that which does much more refresh the Hawke) to take a little larde or
bacon without the rind, and well washed and conserved in good Rose water, and
last of all rolled in powder of Sugar Candy. With this receyte more than with
any other, am I accustomed to recomfort and refresh my hawke when she is sick
of her liver. Notwithstanding the other medicines are very wholesome and good.
And specially good fresh butter, or Oil washte and prepared, as I taught you
in the former chapter.

But when the mischief of the liver is engendered by some prick of a thorn,
or the crabbing with some other hawks or foul, as diverse times it happens
to the Falcon, by encounter with a Hearon, when they bind together in the
air. In this extremity, mummy purified made to powder, is very good. You must
roll your hawks meat in this mummy prepared three or four times, and so give
it to your hawke: and if she refuse to take it of her self then convey it
into her by force, with a cotton casting, four or five days one after an
other.

If she be ill affected in her liver by a bruise against ye ground or against
a tree, or by encounter with some other foul, then take Rewbarbe of the best
one scruple, dry it upon a hot iron pan, until it may be made into fine
powder, of that give in a canuas casting, the weight of two grains of wheat
to your larger sort of hawks, but for the less hawke, the one half will
suffice. After she has taken this casting, i^ she be hie in flesh then two
hours after feed her with a pullets leg washed in one of those cooling
waters, but if she be low and poor, with good hot meat. Thus must you
continue four or five days, giving one day the casting with Rewbarbe, and
another day with the mummy aforesaid. Truly without doubt your hawk shall
recover if you follow this method, unless the liver be removed out of his
place, which sometimes does happen by some great bruise or strain. And you
shall know it by a continual hardness which you shall feel in the hawks
pannell, and by her yellow mewts.

For this inconvenience there is no remedy in the world to be had, although
you would try all the medicines that are to be used to hawks, you shall
profit nothing. It must needs follow that within five days your hawk peke off
the perch. It is not curable.

Gioroa us an excellent Falconer, for the indisposition and heat of the liver,
wills you to take half an ounce of Soldanel, and one ounce of I^eos, which
is flower de Luce. You must beat these into fine powder, and convey it into
your casting, and so give it your hawk. Withal at night he wills you, when your
hawke has put over, and well scowred her filth, feed her with good meat washed
in these cooling waters following.

Take water of Endive, Maydenheare, Cycorie, and Buglosse: in these waters may
you wash your hawks meat, as also her casting, if it please you, wrapping in
the casting the powder aforesaid. For what with the help of the one and the
there, no doubt you shall see a very good effect.

Moreover the said Giordanus says, that the Gerfalcons are of all other the
hotest hawks, and therefore to maintain and keep them sound, he does advise
to wash their castings in this water following.

Take Endive water, Maydenheare, otherwise called Capillus Veneris, the water
of Scabios^ of either two ounces, one dram of choice Rewbarbe, of the best
Agaricke one scruple, put those in infusion, where after they have been infused
seven hours wash your Hawks casting in it. This order use ever when your
Gerfalcon is out of tune, and it shall greatly pleasure her.

Of diseases that happen to Hawks feet, and first as touching the swelling of
a Hawks foot.
SOmetimes the arm and foot of a Hawke does swell, by means of ill humors that
descend and drop down through weakness of the foot or arm, through over great
travel and toil, through age, by reason of some blow or bruise received long
before. This mischief may easily be discerned as well by view of eye, as touch
of hand: for besides that you shall plainly perceive it in sight, you may feel
a very great heat in the member, so as sometimes the Hawke is unable to stand
on her legs for pain and auguish thereof. Wherefore it is necessary to look
to it with all care that may be, and to use the matter, as the humor breed not
the goote, or the pin, which oftentimes happens to those poor birds to
their great and continual plague.

The way to cure it, is to give the humor a vent by launsing it, and after that
to recomfort the member, by often anointing it with the white of an egg,
vinegar, and rosewater, well beaten and coyled together, or else with very good
old oil of olives, such as you can come by out of a bottle wherein oil has
been long time kept: for those drops that hardly come out of the bottle, are
far better than any new fresh oil, and are more medicinable in this case.

Moreover, besides the ceasing of the pain, to delay the swelling, you shall
find it very excellent good, to take the powder of Acacia, and terra Sigillata,
of either four drams, incorporating them with vinegar, the white of an egg,
Rose Water, and the juice of Nightshade, as much as will suffice to make this
unguent soft and delicate, and with this receite to anoint the hawks foot or
arm oftentimes for a space: for this unguent no question, will both take away
the immoderate ach and pain, as also mollify and delay the swelling, and so
restore your hawke to her former plight again. [But above all there is none
more certain then to take oil of bay, and beating it well with aqua v tae,
Addition.
anoint the hawks feet or legs therewith.]

An other approved medicine is, to anoint the swelling of your hawks foot
with Oleum Petraelium (which is the oil of a Rock) and with oil of white
Lillies, taking of each of these like quantity, the blood of a pigeon, and the
talow of a candle, heating all these together a little at the fire. This
unguent will thoroughly resolve the mischief, or at the least, by resolving the
thinnest humors, bring it to that pass, as you shall see the grossest parts
well digested which you shall perceive by the whitenes and hardness thereof. Then
must you make an issue by la^cing finely with a knife the skinof the hurt
place, and afterward anoint it for certain days with the unguent aforesaid,
and it shall recover.

Besides this, a very good remedy for the swelling in a hawks foot after a
rupture made, is to use this cerot that follows. Take Gum Arabicke,
Armoniack, Sagapeum a gum so called, of either two drams, Greek Pitch, and
ship pitch, of each a reasonable quantity, powder of Masticke three ounces, of
oil of Juniper, or of the Firtree, new wax as much as will suffice to make a
Cerot according to art: dissolve your gums in vinegar, which done, spread of
this upon a plegga^t of linne^ cloth, applying it hansomly both within the foot
and without, making certain holes where through to convey the hawks stretchers
or talons: Always remembering if the swollen part be broken before the
application of your Cerot, to mundifie and cleanse the water and slime that is
in the wound, and so every two or three days to change and renew your Cerot.

The virtue of it, is to deficcat, comfort, and mundifie the filth and quitture
that is in the hurt member, whereby the hurt must of force be recovered.

Of the Gout in a Hawke.
MAny times for all the care and remedies aforesaid, the gowt does befall a
hawk, which is none other thing tha^ a hard tumor and swelling, full of
corruption about the joints of a Hawks foot and stretchers, which disease is
very paineful and offensive, by mean whereof the hawke cannot prey. Truly the
gowt is an incurable evil, and may be termed a (nurquam sanus.) Let Falconers
and writers say what they list, I for my part can thus much assure you, that in
all my life, I was never able by any devise to cure the gowte confirmed,
whether it were for want of cunning in me, or by reason of the malignity of the
disease, which does rebel and scorn any remedy that shall be applied unto it.
Yet notwithstanding because it shall not seem that I do it upon sloth, and for
desire to be silent, I will lay down some one remedy or two used by diverse
Falconers, though often times to small purpose or success.

Some for the Gowt do use to take the pyls of wild Apples or Crabs, wild and
sour sloes, the rind of an Ash, or the keys that grow upon the ash beaten
into small powder, mingling it with half a pound of old Oil Olive, all which
they put into a Glass bottle or other vessel of glass close stopped with
Paste, or such like devise, so as no breath may issue forth of the Vessel,
which done, they cover it in sand in the sun, or in horse dung for the space of
forty days, and after that they strain it altogether, so as the virtue of the
ingredience may be incorporated with the oil. With this forsooth they annoint
the place, hoping to resolve and cure the Gowt, which I could never do upon
any hawke of mine.

Othersome do accustom to anoint the Gowt in a hawk, with the milk or juice
of Selandine, and the marrow of a Bacon hog, and taking a piece of linen
cloth, do bath the member every third day with the strongest Vinegar they can
get, and do cause their hawke to stand upon all this for the remedy of the
Gowte.

Again, there are, that with the juice of Selandine, Vinegar, and Honey, do
vaunt they have made an Unguent wherewith they hand done great wonders. But
because by experience I could never find these to prevail in the cure of the
gowte, I leave to speak or write in commendation of the same, putting you out
of all hope for recovery of the same.

Of the Pin in the Hawks foot, a disease much like the corn in the foot of
a man. The Italians term them Chiodetti.
THere is yet one other evil which happens in the foot of a hawke, by mean
of matter that powers down in a manner as hard to be cured as the Gowte, and
as cumbersome to the silly hawke as the Gout, for by reason of the pin she
is neither well able to foot her prey, to feed her self, nor yet to stand sure
upon her perch.

The Pin is a swelling disease that does resemble sharp nails, rising up in
the bottom or palm of the hawks foot: and by reason it does so much in
shape resemble a nail, by mean of the sharpness thereof, those swellings
are called by the Falconers of Italy Chiodetti, as a man would term them in
English small nails, of which, very few hawks can be recured.

Yet for remedy of this disease, some do advise to open the vain of the leg, a
thing not only frivolous to talk of, and a very old woman's fable, or
Canterbury tail, but also very perilous to be put in practice. For truly
neither will I my self at any time practice it, ne yet advise others to do
it. I can more commend that you mollify and make soft the said pin with strong
Vinegar the best that may be gotten, which done, pare it til the blood follow
after: then to bring it to maturation, and to ripen it, apply handsomely upon
it in a linen plegget, a quantity of unguent made of juice of Lemmons, one
ounce and a half of hens grese, three drams powder of Masticke, leaves of
Bittony and Frankensence, or Olibanum a reasonable portion, and so much new wax
as will serve the purpose.

Besides this, I do use to boil it in good white wine, all these things
together, Wax, Oil of bitter Almonds, of each like quantity, a little Sage,
Frankincense, Rewe, Rosemary, to the consumption of three parts, then pounding
well all these with Turpentine and yellow Wax, I make an unguent of excellent
virtue and operation. And if by these remedies aforesaid, the Pin become to
be soft, and forgo his hardness, then does it behoue you to cut it out from
the root, as low as is possible, and to dry it up with Agrippa, an unguent so
called, and with Gratia Dei, mingling these two together by equal portions, as
much of the one as of the other.

Over and besides all these, the plaster that is called Emplastrum Sacrum and
Isis, whom the Apothecaries do so term are of singular virtue, because they
do mollify and desiccate the wound or disease. I cannot remember, that above
twice, I could ever do any good upon my Hawks herewith (nor with any other
remedy) and therefore I will leave to make any further recital hereof.

There be some ventrous Falconers, that will with a cauterizing iron go about
to root and burn out the Pin, which I will at no time endeavor to do,
doubting least thereby I shall shrink my Hawks sinews, and spoil my Hawke,
by means they are so near neighbors to the heart.

Of the breaking of a Pounce, or Cley of your Hawke.
Seeing that I have begun to write and decipher you the mischiefs that do
happen to hawks feet, it shall not be beside my purpose, nor amiss to say
somewhat of the cure of their Pounces and Talons, when either by striking the
foul, or by any other accident they break clean off, or riue in sunder.

Wherefore when your hawk happens to have this mischief the part of the pounce,
or the whole pounce being broken away, you must apply unto it the bladder of
the gall of a Hen, using the matter so as it may get into the broken Talon,
binding it so handsomely and artificially to the hawks foot, as the gall may
not issue out, nor fall away from the place. This devise will stop the blood,
cease the pain, and within four or five days fasten and harden the horn of
the Pounce, so as the hawke shall be able to flee: and if she be a Falcon
she shall strike or ruff a Ducke as before her hurt.

And to the end your hawk tear it not away with her beak, it shall be
necessary either to clap her on a hoode with a false beak made unto it, or to
fasten to her hood a piece of leather artificially, so long and large as may
serve the turn, to arm her beak, so as in time her pounce, if it be but
broken, may wax whole again: or if it be clean riued away, a new may grow in
the place again. [But if it be not clean riuen away, then with a little new
red sealing wax fixed about it, Addition.
let her rest, and it will soon conglutinate together again.]

Let this suffice as touching the breaking or riuing of the Pounce of a Hawke.

When the thigh or leg of a hawke is out of joint.
BY some outward accident many times the thigh or leg of a Hawke is become
out of joint: wherefore it shall be very necessary in this case, as soon as is
possible, to set it in his right and natural place again, to the end that no
matter nor flux of humor descend or distill to hinder the setting of it in
joint again, which must needs ensue if it be not regarded in time. Which done,
set the hawke in some such place where she shall have no occasion to bate or
broile with her self, but be at the greatest quiet and rest she may,
applying medicines that have virtue to desiccate and strengthen the hurt member
which you shall do by bathing a linen plegget, or a plegget of flax in the
white of an Egg, Oil of Roses, and Turpentine, with two drams of Sanguis
Draconis, and of Aloes incorporated together, and binding it about the thigh or
leg which is out of joint, and fastening over and above the said plegget a
slender roller of linen cloth, to conserve and keep if the more firmly and
stayedly in the place where you would have it to remain. Using the matter thus
ten days together shifting and renewing the medicine every two days once, to
the end the plegget wax not over dry and stiff to the hurt member.

I can like very well withal, if before you apply this said medicine, you bath
well the thigh or leg of the hawk with a reasonable warm lotion or bath made
of Wine, roses dried, Myrthe, Sage, Comfrey, Camemill, and Rosemary: for these
will warm and comfort the nerves and sinews, and withal dry up such flux
of humor as shall power down upon the lame and broosed member. [But above all,
Addition.
if you bath if with the oil of Swallows and the oil of Mandrag mixed together,
it will take away all pain and tumor.]

When a hawke has broken a thigh or a leg.
IF by any mishap your hawke have broken an arm or a leg, as sundry times
Falcons that are foul slayers do use to do by some stripe or encounter at
the brook with a strong foul, you must with all care and speed set right the
broken bones in their natural place again: which done, deplume and pluck
away the feathers from the member that is hurt round about the wound.

Then take Bole Armoniacke, Aloes Epatick of the best, Sanguis Draconis,
Of each a reasonable quantity made into fine powder.

After that take of Bean flower, Barley flower, Linseed flower,
Of each one dram.

Then take of Oil of Dill, Oil of Roses,
Of each two drams.

Then take The white of an egg, The mucillage of fenegreke, The mucillage of
linseede, The mucillage of hollihock,
So much of these as will serve to make a plaster according to art.

When you have made this plaster, spread a portion of it thin upon Flax or
Lynte well towsed, applying it upon the rupture and broken place with as great
cunning and care as you can: you cannot use it too daintily when you apply it,
because of the tenderness of the hurt. This done, bind it with a fine linen
collar to stay the plaster. Then make fine splets of Timber all of one length,
thin as may be, and in fashion like the scales of a Sword scabbard, whom you
must enwrappe in Lynt for brusing the member. These splets bestow orderly about
your Hawks leg or thigh on every side, binding them with the linen rollers
or fillets artificially, but neither so loosely as the bones may slip out of
their place, ne yet so straightly, but that the hurt member may receive his
natural nourishment and comfort. For otherwise it would be mortified, and the
use of it lost.

This ligature and rolling of the member must be continued at the least 30.
days, for that the bone cannot close again firmly under one months space.
Yet can I wish that you unbind your rollers, and change your medicine twice at
the least in the first fifteen days, dealing so daintily as the boues may not
sunder thereby. And by mean thereof will your medicine, and the ligature work
the better effect.

Lastly, it shall not be amiss after you have thus done, to use for three or
four days this lotion or water, to bath your hawks leg, to strengthen and
comfort the place.

Take Roch Allom one dram, Roses dried, the Pill or rind of Pomegranets, and
Frankensence, of each a small quantity, white Wine as much as will suffice:
wherein you must boil these things aforesaid to the consumption of half the
wine with this lotion, bath your hawks thigh and leg plucking away the
feathers as aforesaid. And this shall comfort the member so as no flux of
humors shall repair to the place. Besides all this you must not forget during
the time of this cure to keep your diseased hawke removed from all noise and
access of people: and if this misfortune befall her in the Winter time, you
must set her warm.

Moreover it shall be good and necessary in the beginning of your cure to give
your hawke, 1 Aloes washed, or 2 Agaricke in Trocyscks,
to scowre her, to the end there grow no inflammations. And withal to feed
her with good meat, the better to maintain her in state during the cure.

It will be good for you to use the help of some Apothecary for the
confection of the plaster, as also for your lotion or bath: for the more
artificially it is made, the better effect it will take. Truly it does stand
with good reason that it will recure your Hawke, the receipt is so good. All the
care must be in the dainty handling of the broken member, and in rolling and
spletting it orderly.

Of the stripes and bruises in a Hawke.
HAwks are wont diverse times to receive stripes and blows by other fowls, as
the Falcon by encounter with a heron, and sometimes by some other accident, as by
carrying her in a hawks bag upon occasion, or by rashing into bushes and
thorns or such like hurtful places.

These stripes and hurts either are simple hurts (as they are termed) that is
to say, in the skin and flesh of a hawke only, or else compounds, as when a
nerve and sinow is pricked, or cut in sunder.

The simple wounds and hurts are of slender or no danger at all, and will be
cecured lightly again, either with the juice of Orgium, or a bath and lotion
made of Masticke, Aloes and Myrrh two drammes, Pympernell, Comfrey and Sage,
of either a handful and a half, of Agresta clear and good, six pounds,
putting all these things aforesaid into a stone vessel made very clean, or
else into an earthen pot, there suffering it to boil so long with a close
cover upon it, until two third parts of the Agresta be wasted and consumed.
Then strayning it very well, adding unto it one Ounce of powder of Myrtils.
This may you reserve to use as a blessed and sovereign medicine.

There is yet one other notable medicine devised by Master Frederick Zorz, and
oftentimes approved by me with very good success.

Take good Aloes, Myrrh, Olibanum, and Sarguis Draconis, of either one dram,
of fine Grains one scruple: beat al these into powder, and infuse them in two
ounces of Aqua vitae, for the space of twelve hours: then after strain it
very well, and of this use to the hurts of your hawks head, and also to her
shoulders, if they receive any bruise or stripe.

But in any condition I cannot allow the use of Oil of Roses in hurts of the
head, as it sames that the said Author would have it.

If your hawks skin of her thigh or hinder parts be broken, fretted away, or
hurt by bearing her in a close Canuas bag, or such like, you may easily
recover her with this devise. The leaves of dried Sage beaten to powder, or the
powder of Olibanum, or Masticke, bathing the hurt with white wine, when you
mean to apply the powder, and in two or three days you shall see it recovered.

But if the stripe be joined and matched with the offense of any nerve or
sinew, then will it be a harder matter to cure, for that the hurt is of greater
importance and danger, for then is it wont to be full of pain, and to cause
inflammation. Wherefore in this case, the best remedy that can be devised, is
excelcellent good oil powered reasonable hot into the hurt, taking away the
feathers first that are about the wound, and using this bath about the member
where the hurt is.

Take Roch Alome one dram, dried Roses, rinds of Pomegranates and Myrrh, of
each a quantity, boiling all these in good odoriferous White Wine to the
consumption of half.

No question this will greatly comfort the wound, and hinder the flux of
humors that otherwise would flow down to the place, and breed an Apostume.

Much more might be said of stripes and bruises of hawks, but I do leave you
over to the learned Physicians and skillful Surgeons, because I will not
ouerweary you with tedious circumstances: accounting it sufficient for me to
have laid down the cures for most ordinary hurts, which do rifest happen to
hawks, and of such as have times past by fortune come to my hands. If you
covet to have greater store of Medicines for the cure of any member or hurt
part of your hawke, I advise you that have skill in the Italian tongue to slay
ouerto Mess er Frederigo Giorgi his practice, plainly and excellently set
down in his Book of Falconrie, from whence I have collected sundry things.
But as touching these hurtes and stripes of hawks, I have not borrowed much of
him, but have in this part of my collection more used the brief cure of
Francesco Sforzino Vicentine, that excellent Italian Gentleman Falconer.

Of Hawks Lyse.
Having hitherto spoken of such diseases and greefes, as for the most part
hawks are troubled withal within their bodies: now remains that in few
speeches I show you a remedy for vermin and Lise, a particular passion and
affection that lights on the skin of a hawke, and specially about her head,
the plye of her wings, and her train: for indeed these lise and mytes do
chiefly reign and lodge in those three parts of the hawks, more than in any
other.

Falconers do use to rid these vile worms and lise in the winter time by
takfng of pepper beaten to powder two drams, of warm water one pound, or as
much as will suffice, mingling the pepper and water well together, and the^ to
pepper (as we term it) or wash all her feathers with the said lotion or bath,
and specially those parts of the hawke whereof I spoke before, where the mites
and lise do most haunt: which done, they set the hawke on a perch with her
train and back to the Sunneward, holding in their hands a small stick, one
handful long, on the top whereof they fasten a piece of wax, either red, or
green, and with that (while the Hawk does weather her) they take away the lise
and mytes crawling upon the feathers, so as before the hawk be thoroughly dried
and weathered, what with the wax and their own dropping away, there will not be
a vermin leff about the hawke. For the pepper and water does so much disease
them, as they are enforced to leave their accustomed lodgings: then the heat of
the Sun or fire, helps to make them show themselves: and the wax by cleaving
to the^, utterly and clearly rids the hawke of them.

I have seen some Falconers add unto the pepper and water, a quantity of
Stauesager, as an enemy to the lise and mites, by mean of strength and force
that is in it: and I take it to be very necessary to be added in this medicine
to the Pepper for the better dispatch of those vile vermines which do so much
vex and annoy the hawke, as she can by no means keep her self in good state
whilst she is encumbered with them.

You must remember to pepper you hawke in this manner as I have showed you in a
very warm sunny day, when there is no wind at all blowing in the sky. But if
by fortune you be enforced to do it in another time when the weather is cold
and the Sun not shining, then must you set your hawke by the fire to weather
her, and dry her feathers: but neither must the fire be over hot, nor the
gorge of your hawk toward the fire, whereof I have given you advertisement
before, in those precepts which are to be observed of a good Falconer. For if
you set her with the gorge to the fire, no doubt she will receive no small
harm and inconvenience thereby, and for the most part death ensues of it.

In the Summer time you may dispatch your hawke of the lise and mites with
Auripigmentum beaten into very fine powder, bestowing and sifting it betwixt
the hawks feathers with your fingers, and specially in those places where they do
most usually haunt, always having regard that none of the powder come into
your hawks eyes for offending her. And after the bestowing of this powder, you
must in no wise bespowt her with water (as some use to do) to the great hurt and
mischief of those poor birds. For the bathing or spowting her with water, is
a mean to make the powder to frette away, and consume the Hawks feathers.

Some other affirm that Mint leaves boiled in water, to the consumption of a
third part, bathing the Hawke therewith somewhat warm, will dispatch the Lyse and
Mites, but for my part I never approved this medicine, and therefore can say
little of it.

Let these suffice as touching the peppering of lousy hawks, for of all other
plagues that be fall the Hawke, I account this the least, because they may most
easily be destroyed, as daily experience does teach us: and yet the remedies
for them good to be known, because you shall seldom or never buy a Hawk from
the Cage that is not lousy, or set your hawke on a perch where a lousy hawke
has stood, and she shall be assured to be never a lowse the worse for it.

Of misfortunes that happen to Hawks in the mew. And first of all, of their
laying eggs in the mew.
IN the mew hawks are subject to sundry accidents. Among all which (to pass
over the greasines and excessive glit that they are surcharged withal, having
some what touch^ that matter in the Chapter of the Gowt) the greatest mishap
that may be, is when hawks fall to laying eggs, and to be with egg in the
mew. For in very deed this is a great mischief, and diverse times does kill the
Hawke,

You shall first perceive it by the creaking and crying that they use in the
mew sometimes, and other whiles on the perth, albeit now and then they dee it
for eagerness and appetite, when they are sharp set: which as it is easily
found, so is it as quickly remedied.

A man shall know when they fall to liking and laying, by this, from the neck
of the hawke down to the very middle of her train, there is upon the feather a
certain thing like the flower of branne of a pale and ashie color.

And because this accident happens by mean of too much daintiness and
lustful pride of the Hawke, it shall be good to keep her low, and to hold a
hard hand over her, pinching her of her feeding, giving her liquid and moist
flesh from the middle of April to the end of May, which is the only tune to be
feared of all the year for this matter. When the hawk does leave her croaking
and crying in the mew, it is a manifest proof that she is with Egg, which
you shall know both by her grosenes and silling in the panell, as also by her
idle standing without list to feed. And it hahpily the eggs be grown any
thing great within her, you shall hardly hinder her but that she will lay them.
Therefore (as I tell yon) it shall be good in time to look unto it, keeping
her low in April and May. And in those months to minister unto her Aloes
Epatick washed, a quantity of Saffron lapped in bumbast or cotton, whereupon
convey a little Flax or Towe, and make a casting or scowring of it, thrusting
it down her throat into her gorge, the hawke being both empty paneld, and
having no meat above to put over kooping her on the fist after it, till such
time the scowring be in her gorge. Of this and such like scowrings may you give
your hawke every third or fourth day for four or five times, feeding her with
liquid meats, such as will lightly be endewed. And using this order, no doubt
your hawke shall do well.

Again, it is very good against the same mischief, to cause your Hawke in
four or five bits of meat, to take a quantity of Saffron in Chiues, using her
after the manner and form aforesaid.

Moreover, it is a very good way to delay and kill the list and liking of a
sparowhawke to feed her for three, four, or more days if you think good
with liquid meats washed in water, wherein the great pylles of Ornus have been
infused for the space of eight or ten days being finely cut to pieces. But it
should be far better if you cause those rinds and pills to be boiled in water,
so long until they become soft and tender, and then to wash your hawks meat
therein.

If your Hawke be with Egg (as they term it) so as you may perceive and
feel the eggs within her, besides those foresaid remedies, it shall be good to
anoint her tuell with oil olive: which being done, convey in thy forefinger
at her tuell, as finely as thou can, to feel the eggs, which if thou once
feel gripe thy hawks panel softly for hurting her, forcing downwards the eg
toward thy finger in her tuell, and if it be possible so bring it away clean,
and rid thy hawke of it: but if thou can not do it, break it even there
right, and afterward bestow a glister upon thy hawke of things lenitiue, to
make her mewt and slise well: for by this mean (as my Italian Author does
inform me) thou shall discharge thy hawke of this mischief, and bring her to
be in perfect state again.

To cause a Hawke to mewe fast and well.
SOmetimes it so falls out, that hawks do not mewe in time, so as they may
be flown with in the pleasant time of the year, nor be drawn when other
Falconers do accustom to draw their hawks, but they come so late as the year
is far spent, and small pleasure to be taken in keeping or fleeing with them,
for which a man is sometimes driven of force to use devise to further the
matter, and to practice to make her mew sooner than her accustomed manner is to
mew of her self. Wherefore to make a hawke mewe timely, thesmost and best way
is to cast her off into a good mewe for the purpose, (made in manner as I have
taught you before) and there to allow her of the best hot meats that may be
had, as Quails, Pigeons, and Sparowes, and now and then among to set her in
the mewe some vessel, large and deep, conveniently filled with water, wherein
your hawke may bouze and bath at her pleasure.

But if this ordinary kind of good and kindly mewing will not serve the turn
(which seldom or never almost happens to Goshawks, for that by this former
fashion and usage they does use to mew very well and orderly (then as I said)
it behooves to assist and further nature by art and physic, to cause a Hawke
to mew timely.

To help in this case those kirnels or small nuttes, which are growing under
the throat of a weather, are very good (as mine author affirms) using them
every third day for thrice, or thereabouts, allowing a Sparowhawke three or
four of them at once, being both empty gorged and panneld. But you may give a
Falcon six or more at one time, holding the hawk on the fist, till she
begin to slise and mewte, and after that a space feed her with good hot
meat, always remembering that if the hawke do loath the taking of them, (as
happily she will) or do not very well brook them after thee has taken them,
then that you give her respite betwixt times for three or four days together,
to the end she may not find her self cloyed with them.

If at the end of eight days she begin to cast any feather, then may you
into the mew with her without more a do: but if not, then must you fall to
giving her of those glandulous kirnels of the weather again, once or twice
more: for using it in this order the second time without question, within six
or seven days, she will cast the back feathers, or her sarcels or flags:
the^ must you throw her into the mew, giving her water to bath for she will
very much covet the water, and you shall see her within two oor three days so
bare, and in a manner clean without feathers, as she will not be able for
lack of them to flee to her ordinary stand or perch. Wherefore I can commend
and advise you to have some low perch and stand for her in the mew, whereunto
she may iumpe when she has cast her feathers, so as she is unable to flee.
Especially remembering to seed her all that while she is so without feathers,
twice in a day, allowing her such and so much meat as she can endew, and make
away with. For all that time will she covet great gorges, and rid great
store of meat until she have recovered her cote again. And to restrain her,
or keep a hard hand upon her, having mewed her feathers, and being now at
point to put forth new in their places, will breed her feathers to be full of
taints and ill favored, and besides that her Sarcelles and principals will not
be so long and large as they ought to be, by means whereof she will not be
able to slay so well as she was accustomed.

Some others, to cause a hawke to mew speedily, do will you to enwrappe her
meat in the powder of a Frogge dried in an oven or furnace.

Other some, in the powder of a Cuttell bone, taking off the powder of this
fish bone, to the weight of a penny. But these practices and devises I did
never approve, and therefore do commit them to the discretion of the Reader.

Of Accidents that happen and light upon a hawks feathers, and first how to
use the matter when a feather cannot be ymped.
Diverse and sundry times it so falls out that a Hawks feather being drawn out
of the wing or train by violence and force, the hole closes up, and shuts
after it presently, in such sort as a new feather can by no means grow and
spring up in the place to serve the hawks turn and use again.

For remedy hereof, some do will a man to make the hole again where it was
before, and to open it a fresh with a barley grain, dried so as it be not
burnt. Then after that, to keep it open that it run not together again, you
must frame a small Pellette of Larde, or boiled Honey, which being conveyed
into the hole, will there abide, until such time as the shooting out of the
new feather do remove it and displace it.

Some other time it happens a feather to be broken in the quill so near the
wing, as it is not possible to ympe it again: then do they use, (to make the
quill to fall and drop away without pain to the hawke) this devise. They
annoint the place with the blood of a young Rat, which will cause the broken
quill to come away. After which, to keep the hole open they use the help
aforesaid with the barley corn.

These two cures I never tried, because it was never my hap (I thank
fortune) to stand needful of the practice. But truly I like neither of them
so well, as I can greatly commend them.

Otherwise it chances through the hurt of a Hawks wing, that one or two of
her Flagges, long feathers, or Sarcelles are bruised, and thereby both put her
to great pains, and eake hinder her fleeing. Wherefore it shall be in this
case very necessary, as soon as it happens to look and view the wing well,
whether there be any blood much or little in the quill that is bruised in
manner aforesaid: which if it be so, it shall be needful to pierce it with a
sharp needle, or such like instrument to give the blood issue before such time
as it be congealed and waxen hard. And after that to anoint the bruise, (and
especially where the black blood is) witholde larde and resty Bacon.

Moreover, it shall be very good to cease the pain, to pour upon the hurt
place three or four drops of good Oil of roses somewhat hot, which having
used for the space of three or four days, it shall not be amiss to bath it
with Aqua vita to dry and resolve it. If you use this mean in the beginning
when the hurt is first taken, no doubt it will breed resolution.

But if by negligence or otherwise it be foreslacked at first, so as the
bruised Sarcell or other feather grow out of order, and cross the next feather
to it in fleeing, and by that mean be a hinderance to the Hawke, and a pain,
it shall be good to cut it off in the quill. And to the end there may grow an
other second feather in the place of that which is so spoiled and cut off, it
shall be well done to make the quill to drop away. To bring that to pass,
first of all wipe well the blood congcaled and corrupted within the place, and
after that, fill it with Aqua vita, of the best that may be gotten, and deal
so artificially as the Aqua vita may stay, and not droppeout of the place.
Which must be done by stopping the hole with wax, or such like devise. This
Aqua vita by mean of the heat of it, will cause the quill to fall away within
eight days or little more, by mean whereof there may shoot out a new feather.

The way and manner how to ympe a Hawks feather, howsoever it be broken or
bruised.
Sometimes it so falls out that ye feathers of a hawks wing, or train may be
broken, whereupon it is both necessary and needful, to set other like in
their steades. Which feat we term the ymping of a hawks feather.

This may be done in four several manners and fashions after that the feather
is broken.

For first, in the greater and huger sort of Hawks, The first way to ympe a
hanke.
if a feather be broken one fingers breadth or thereabouts mithin the quill,
then your next remedy is, to sheare it off with a pair of Syssers or sheares,
to the end it may not clean or riue any further. Then having prepared a like
feather to the same of some other Hawke or Foul, resembling the broken
Feather: you must cut the quill off it, and so force it together, as it may
enter the broken quill of the Hawks feather, anointing it before you thrust
it in, or seem to place it for good and all, in the Gummie fat of a Fig,
the Yolke of an Egg, or some kind of Semonde made of purpose, thrusting it
very directly into the truncke and quill of the broken feather, and as we may
term it, graffing the one in the other. And to the end it may have the
better hold, and the faster stay, it shall not be amiss to clynte or nail
them fast together with the point of a Partridge feather, taking the very top
of it, and stripping away the Feathers on either side the web: and after
that, making a small hole with a slender Needle, so as it pass through both
the quilles, as well that which sticks fast in the Hawks wing, as the other
borrowed and adopted Feather, drawing through the hole made with the Needle,
the point of the Partridges feather to fill up the hole again. Which done, cut
it off close by the Webbefinely on either side, and so will it stand very
handsomely fast, and almost not to be discerned, but to be the hawks natural
Feather.

The second manner of ymping.
But if a Sarcell, a Flagge, or a Train feather be broken or sliued amid the
Quill, so as another Feather ymped in him after the manner aforesaid, can well
take no hold, or stand sure: Then shall it be necessary to take a Iunyper
stick, or such like dry timber, and thereof to make a small sharp Pegge so
as it may enter the Quill, which done, dippe the one end of it in Glue, Semond,
or the slime of the fish, whom my Author terms a Colpisce, the Germans a
Leymefische, (a fish as Gesnerus reports so soft and tender, as being sodde
or fried, he falls all to a gellie, or glue, for which cause he is detested
greatly, and banished al men's tables.) He is headed like an Ape, and for that
occasion (called of diverse Marmotum, as we may interpret it, a marmoset, or an
Ape.) In the slime (I say) of this Fish, dip your Juniper stick, thrusting
it into the broken quil, remembering to place it so aptly as it may be without
the quill, of just size to answer the length of the feather when it was found,
and vnbroke^. Then do put the other end likewise in the glue or semond,
conueying it by force into ye quil of the fether which you have gotten, so
close as the one quill touch the other directly. After all this, fasten and
clynt both the quils to ye juniper peg, with a Partridge his feather as before.
And if it were so, as the quill were sliued or rent, pierce it through with a
needle and thread, and with the thread bind it hard to the stick on both sides
the quill, and it will hold very fast, and serve the hawks turn in her flight
in stead of a natural feather.

If a sarcell or other feathers be broken above the quill, The third manner of
ymping.
toward the point of the feathers two or three fingers breadth, you must cut
it off with a sharp penknife a slope, (and as they say) a swash, and then take
another like feather to the same, cutting it in like manner as you did the
other, so as it may fit with the same feather both for length and cut. Which
done, with an ymping needle laid in vinegar and salt, so close them together
as they may be thought to be one feather.

The last manner of ymping is, when a feather is not quite broken off, but
bruised, and (as it were) but marked, so as it cannot be helped and righted
again with warm water. The fourth and last manner of ymping.
In this case it shall be bether rather to cut away the feathers, only to cut
away the nether part of the web, just over against yt bruised place, leaving
the upper part whole and untouched: then to take a long slender needle like a
Glouers needle, and to thread it, and bauing so done, to thrust the eye of the
needle being threeded into the greater part of the feather toward the quill,
forcing the point of it so hard with a thimble, as it may be clean hid in the
feather, and no part of it to be seen. After that, joining both sides of the
bruised feather together, where you cut the web, draw the thread as hard and as
straight as you can possible, so as the point of the needle, by pulling off the
thread that hangs out, may so far enter the upper part of the feather, as
it may be half on the quill side, and the other half on the point of the
bruised feather, which will strengthen the feathers maruailously. This done,
cut off the threede which was for none other purpose put there, but to draw the
point of the needle back into the upper part of the feather. ()

How to ympe the train of a Hawke being all broken, and never a feather whole
or sound.
MAny times it so fortunes, as the train of a hawke is quite spoiled, and no
one feather left to serve the turn. Wherefore it shall be necessary in this
case, to set your hawk a new train which is done after this manner.

You must take a pee of paper as big as your hand, in the middle whereof you
must slit a hole, through which convey the hawks train being broken, up to
the very rumpe of her, drawing back through the said slit of the paper, all
the brailes and small feathers of the train that grow about the hawks tewell,
both above and beneath, so as there appear none at all but the long feathers,
upon which you mean to work your feat. Then cut off those long train feathers
with a fine penknife, beginning from the first, second, third, fourth, fifth,
and so on the other side of the train in like manner, and you must cut them
off a slope, sidewayes toward the top of the trunk or quil, until you come to
the two covert feathers, which two you must cut directly and not sloping, as
you did the rest. So as when you have done, the train of the hawke may be in
shape like the pypes of a pair of Organs. Then take the train of a mewed Iay
(if it be possible, because they are the fairest frathers being mewed) setting
in every quill of the hawks train, one feather of the Iay orderly, the first
feather of the Iay, in the first quill of the Sparowhawke, and so consequently.
And if the Iayes feather will not enter the hawks quill, then must you cut it a
little, and brusing it with your finger, force it into the cut quill,
anointing the end of the borrowed feather in the fat of a fig, the yolke of
an egg, or such like stuff, and so placing it right and directly with the
hawks feather. Having set one feather in this order aforesaid, on the one side
of the hawks train, pass over to the other first feather of the other side,
and do in like manner, always placing and ymping them so, as in length, and
each condition else, they may agree fully with the natural feather of the
hawke: and so from one to the other, until you come to the two covert
feathers, which you must set last of all the rest, and those in so good order,
as your eye may judge them to be excellently ymped by the just length and size
of them. After all this, take away your paper, and with a knife wette in a
little spittle, go over all the ymped feathers, putting the knife betwixt
every quill, close by the rumpe of your hawke, and so go along the feather to
cut away all such small feathers, as shall be out of order, by mean of the
ymping and cutting off the feather in the train of your hawke. Which done
feather by feather, set your hawke first on your fist, and so after a space on
the perch, that she may trick her self, and right and enoyle her feathers
with her beak.

Here will I not omit to remember every good Falconer, that he have in his
house, and in a readiness about him at al times, his ymping needles, and such
like necessary implements, to serve the turn withal, and to lend his
companions if they need. For it shall redound to his credit greatly, and by
means thereof he shall be accounted a gallant Gentleman, and a good fellow.

Now in mine own opinion, I have discoursed sufficiently of all diseases, and
made you privy to the Italians order of physicking his hawke, which I can very
well commend, as greatly agreeable to reason. Yet nevertheless in this last
part, you shall for your greater store of remedies, and better knowledge have
the french falconers manner of dealing with their hawks have set down. But
before I do that, I will write somewhat to instruct you how to prepare your
Mummie, a very necessary thing to be learned, and without the which you ought
to be at no time, if you mean to keep hawks, and to have them in good order
and tune.

The way and mean to prepare Mummy for Falcons, and other birds of prey, and
when and how it ought to be given.
Sythens that in these receipts for hawks diseased and sick, I have diverse
times made mention of Mummey, and of other medicines appropriate and peculiar to
sundry griefs, here I think it not amiss to lay down the mean how to
prepare it for the use and benefit of all Falconers that shall have occasion
to employ it to any sick hawke: For that in cure of a bruise, I take it to be
the most ready and exquisite way to recover the hurt hawke again.

Mummie is prepared in this manner.
First, you must take Nutmegs, in number four, Cloves, Ginger, and Cynamon, of
either half an ounce, Saffron one dram, reducing all these to fine powder.
Boil them in an earthen pot well glazed, and covered close with a reasonable
quantity of good Malmesie, to the consumption of a third part: then take Mummy
three ounces or four, or so much as shall content you, beating it to powder,
and putting it into a linen cloth, so bound, as it may by no means issue out
of the same. Hang it so by a string fastened to a stick, as it may not reach
the bottom of the pot, but as it may be infused in the very middle of the
Malmesie, which you must cause to boil again at a soft fire, so long until
there be a consumption of another third part. Which done, take it frour the
fire, and let the mummy being so bound in yt linen cloth, rest for ye space of
four or five hours, to the end the virtue of those powders may pierce and enter
the mummie, which by this mean will become very perfect. And having done all
this, keep the mummie out of the sun and wind in the shade, in the self
same cloth wherein it was infused, until it be perfectly dry again, and then
use it in powder at your need, either strewing it upon your hawks meat, or
giving it in a casting of Cotton as I have taught you before.

There is a kind of pyll or past devised by that noble Gentleman Hierom
Cornarus of famous memory for sick Falcons, which have lost their appetite,
and day by day become megre and low, making a black mewte, or full of flesh
undigested, which is prepared in this manner following.

Take Saffron, Agaricke, Cubebes, Frankincense, Rewe, Cloves; Cinnamon, fine
Aloes, of either two scruples, two Nutmegs, choice Mummy, Rewbarbe of the best,
of either one dram, and the fifth part of the marrow of a Beef, or Veale, as
much as will suffice to make a mixture of these powders aforesaid: of all which
you must make a pyll or past, giving thereof to the huger sort of hawks as
much as a bean in a pyll in manner aforesaid,

This is a very good receipt, but not so good as this underwritten which is
devised by ( Messer Manoli) the Falconer to the renowned Signior Bartelmew
Alviano, and practiced upon his Falcons being sick and ill affected in their
gorges. He was wont to take Triacle, Hiera Pigra, Cassea Lignea, Cloves,
Cinnamon, Aloes, Galenga, Agaricke of the best, Sirupe of Roses, confection of
Hamech, Diacatholicon, Benedicta, of either one scruple, choice Rewbarbe, Mummy
washed and purified, of each two scruples, of Nutmegge three drams beaten to
powder, those things that are to be beaten in powder, and incorporating all
with honey of roses, making thereof a pyll or past, which he would keep to
serve his turn at need, whereof he would give his huger hawks the quantity
of half a bean, and to lesser hawks a lesser quantity inform of a pyll,
being empty both in gorge and pannell. And truly this would work a maruailous
effect upon his sick Hawks: and if you use the same, no doubt you shall find
great pleasure in it.

Of the cauterising instruments and tools, wherewith Falconers do sear their
Hawks in desperate cures, when nothing else will serve the turn but fire, the
last refuge of all others.
depiction of cauterising instruments

Having sundry times in my collection of Falconrie spoken of cawterie, to be
bestowed upon Hawks, according to tho diversity of their diseases and hurts,
it shall be very needful for me here in the latter end of my third book, to
set down the proportion and shape of the yrons which are proper to the matter
and manner of cure, being a very necessary thing for every good Falconer to have
those yrons about him continually to serve his turn.

Wherefore I say that the cauterising yrons are made in four manners, and bear
four several kinds of shapes, as by their peculiar pictures and portraitures
may be seen.

Whereof the first assigned to this charact (A) does serve to cauterize the head
of a hawke, because it is round, A
and somewhat plain on the top.

The second, B
signed with the letter (B) shall serve to cawterise the nares without danger
or hurt to the little stert that grows up in the middle of the nares, for
that it is round and hollow at the top.

The third, which is (C) is a cawterising button to burn or sear the head of
a Hawke, C
and with that other devise on the back side, to cut the skin under the nares
if need be.

The last, signed with the character (D) is oftentimes used to cawterise and
enlarge the nares of a Hawke, D
and therefore is made so small and sharp at the point, ye better to enter the
nares.

Of these tools and instruments, it behoues you to have larger and lesser,
according to the variety and proportion of your Hawks, for that the Falcon and
Goshawkes head being more huge than the Sparowhawkes, it shall not be good nor
convenient to cawterise the all with one self iron of one bigness, but to shift
your tool, according to the quality of the hawke.

Over and beside all these tools aforesaid, a Falconer must have his pair of
knives, one straight pointed, the other bending at the top, a splatter, his
coping yrons, a pair of Sisers and a Surgeons instrument to serve his use in
all diseases of a hawke about her beak and pounces.

Thus much I accept sufficient as touching Hawks and birds of prey, so as now
there remains nothing more, but the French Falconers opinion of diseases and
cures, and lastly, one small treatise and very necessary discourse, as touching
the diseases that happen to Spaniels with the cure of the said mischiefs,
which shall be the very last part of af all this collection of Falconrie.

Though I like the Italian Gentleman very well for his singular skill and
judgment in Falconrie, yet nevertheless, because I find sundry things very
good and necessary in the French practicioners which may stand you in stead,
(as well for manning and luring, as also curing your diseased hawks) for whose
only benefit I undertook the collection of this my book. And partly, for
that the French Gentleman shall not grow iealoous of me that I scorn his
skill in regard of the learned and delicate Italian, waying them both
indifferently, if I find them both to deserve like due commendation and praise:
I have here offered to your view and judgments sundry French men's opinions
and inventions as touching this art of Falconrie, craving you to judge the best
both of the^ and me: of them your neighbors for their first inventions: and of
me your Countryman for my late collection: whose pains bestowed herein, shall
be nothing but a pleasure, if I may find my self guerdoned with good liking,
and deserved thanks from you. And so I commit you over to the discourse it
self without any farther circumstance or protestation.

How to keep and maintain all manner of Hawks in health, good plight, and
liking.
TO keep Falcons and all manner of birds of prey in health, the chief Falconers
say yt they must never have a great gorge given the^ specially of gross meats,
as Beef, Porke, and such other that are hard to be put over and endewed.
Moreover you must beware in any wise that ye feed them not with the flesh of
any beast that has lately gone to rutte, for yt will kill them, and ye shall
not perceive how. I find by experience, that the giving of great gorges, and
the feeding of them with such sorts of flesh, (specially cold) does destroy
and surfeite more hawks than all other mischances that can happen to them. And
therefore I warn all Falconers to beware how they ouergorge their hawks: and
if they be driven to feed them with gross flesh for want of better, let it
be well soaked in clean water, and afterward sufficiently well wroong. It
must be done in Summer with cold water, and in Winter with luke warm water,
and it must not be wroong too much with the hand: for the massinesse of the
flesh, and the looseness of the water will cause them to put over, and to
indew the sooner and more speedily. And it will cause them to have the larger
panels, whereby they shall the better scowre themselves downward of the glit
and gross humors. And this is to be understood of all gross flesh wherewith
ye shall be feign sometimes to feed your hawks: but not of any other
feeding that is light and of good digestion. For ye must have discretion to
reward your hawke now and then with some good line and warm meat, or else she
may be brought too low. Nevertheless the serving of your hawks with washed
meat (as is said before) is the way to keep them in health.

Of Aloes Cicotrina, wherewith you must make scowrings for your Hawks.
I Tell you further that to maintain your Hawks in good plight, and to keep
them from all diseases, you must every 15 days, give them the mountenance of a
bean of Aloes Cicotrine which must be put into them, wrapped up in a little
of the flesh, or of the skin of a Hen, to the intent that the taste of the
Aloes which is very bitter, be not felt of them. And when your hawke has
swallowed it down, bear her upon your fiste, the better to cause her to keep
that which is given her, which done, let her afterward cast up the water and
slime which she has in her body: and take up the rest of the Aloes again
which she has cast, and let it not be lost, for it is good and will serve for
another time. Then set your hawke in the Sun or against the fire hooded, and
feed her not till two hours after, at which time you shall give her a
reasonable gorge of some live bird or foul. And the said medicine must be
given in the morning after that the hawke has cast.

Of common pylles that are given to Hawks for laxatiue medicines or downward
scowrings.
Nevertheless in stead of the said Aloes, ye may at your discretion use
common pylles, such as Apotecaries give men to make them loose bodied. And many
are of opinion that they be much better than that other of Aloes: for the pills
drive downward, and scowre more strongly and with greater Effect. Yet
notwithstanding ye may use either of those two, making the^ at your pleasure.
Of the said pills you shall give your Hawke one or two after as the quantity
of them is, and when she has taken them, set her by a fire, or in the Sun,
and feed her not for the space of two hours after, at which time ye shall give
her some quick and live thing to feed upon: For the taking of the pylles,
will set all her body out of temper and tune. And so ye shall keep your
Hawks in good plight, state and health.

Another way to scowre by medicine.
Stancsaker is called Filander, because it loves a man, and will cleave to him
like the burre.
TAke Aloes Cicotrine, and grains of Filander, otherwise called Stauesaker and
Cassia Fistula, as much of the one as of the other to the mountain of a bean
together, and when ye have beaten it into powder, put it into a Hens gut of
an inth long, tied fast at both ends: then convey it into her in the morning,
so as she may put it over, and that must be after she has cast, if she had
any casting at all. Then set your hawk by the fire or in the Sun, and feed
her with a quick chicken, or some other live warm meat two hours after, as
is said before: and so your hawks shall be kept in good plight and state. And
it is to be noted that you must not give so much to a Goshawke, for they be
not of so strong and churlish nature and mettell as other hawks are: and much
less to a Sparowhawk, because she is not able to brook so strong a medicine
as the Goshawke is. And therefore you must bear in mind that your giving of
the said things to your hawks must be according to their natures and
strengthes, by the good discretion of such as through their noble disposition
do place their care, pleasure and minds upon such things.

To make a Hawke cast when she keeps it too long.
FOrasmuch as Hawks do sometimes keep their casting too long, and cannot put
it up: or else it may now and then fall out that a man knows not whether they
have any casting or no: in such cases you must give your hawke a little Aloes,
and then she will cast it together with the slime, and filth that hindered the
casting of it. And for want of Aloes, give her the mountenance of a bean of
the root of Celendine, in two or three pellets, and it will ease her out of
hand. And to further the matter, it shall not be amiss to give her one
spoonefull of water wherein the Celendine roots have been steeped some space:
for the bitterness thereof will force her to cast.

Of the bathing of Hawks.
IF you mind to keep your hawks in time and state to flee well, you must make
them bath oftentimes, and you must set water by them, though they list not to
bath. For sometimes a Hawke is desirous to howze, and take of the water by
reason of some chance, or for some heat of her body, or of her Liver: and then
is water good and available to set her again in good plight and health: which
thing you shall lightly perceive by that that the Hawke will make countenance of
more cheer and rejoice more. When your hawke is bathed (whether it be
Goshawke or Falcon) let her be thoroughly well weathered at the six, or in
the Sun. And if she happen to be washed or sowst with rain, or otherwise,
let her be thoroughly weathered as is said before, lest she surfeit by cold,
specially when she comes from the field, and from her fleeing. For then is she
commonly mard for lack of good order and looking too, insomuch that thereupon
ensue the Pantas, and other diseases. And therefore when the Falconer
perceives the time to be dangerous for his hawke to take such manner of cold,
as in winter time after her flight, or by taking wet in flying: he must first
weather her well at the sire, or in the Sun, and then give her five Cloves of
Maces in her casting, and that will heat her again.

To keep Hawks from inconveniences which they take of themselves, or which
happen to them unawares.
FVrthermore, to preserve Hawks from mischiefs which they take lightly by
cold or otherwise: when ye have bathed and weathered them, beware of setting
them in cold and moist places, but choose some warm and dry place, and with
some cloth roll the perch or billet that they stand on. For diverse times when
hawks have beaten and bruised themselves at the encounter, with great toil in
the field or at the river, they be so tired, and take cold so lightly, and do
so chafe their feet, that if ye should set them down in that plight upon a
stand of stone or wood, their legs and feet would swell by reason of the
humors that would fall down and distill from the higher parts, and by that
mean breed gowtes, as happens in men by like disorder. For such diseases light
not to men, nor yet to Hawks, but for want of good heed and looking to when
they have distempered themselves by any immoderate exercise. When such diseases
light upon poor birds, they be hard to be cured, unless a man have very
good skill to order them, and to provide remedy for them.

How men should make their Hawks to tire every day.
I Say further, that the good Falconers and such as have a care to use their
Hawks well, and to keep them in health, must make them to tire toward the
euenings before they let them iouke. When your hawke has put over and endued,
afterward in giving her casting, you may well at your discretion give her (if
you list) a little Aloes Cicotrine in her casting, or else some common pyll,
and that does greatly scowre the head, and do her much good. And that must be
done either once a week, or twice in three weeks: and the said medicine is
given diverse times by such as like not to give their Hawks tiring.
Nevertheless I say that tyring in the morning after the Hawke has cast, is
very good: And if the tyring be of plumage, keep her from eating of feathers
(as well as you may) for fear least she take casting before the evening: for
toward night it is no danger, for then of common course she is to have
casting. Let her tire against the Sun, snyting and sewing her beak a little
at your discretion, after as you find your Hawke low and poor, until you
intend to go to your pastime. I have known many Falconers that never make
their hawks to tire, saying, that it is but a custom, and needless: but I say
the contrary. For inasmuch as the Hawke is exercised by reasonable tyring, she
becomes the healthier and the lighter both of body and of head, by all
moderate exercises, yea, and she is the better in state also as you may
perceive. And I believe that the opinion of such as say so, proceeds of
nothing but of sloth and of small love which they have to their hawks.
Therefore forget not to make your Hawke to tire against the Sun in the
morning: for it riddeth them the better of the watery humors that descend out of
their heads, if either before the doing of it, or after, you set the^ upon a
perch against the Sun, that they may trick and enoyle themselves at their
pleasure. This done, ye may set them in their accustomed places. And because
some Falconers are so slothful (as is said before) that they will not make
their Hawks to tire, and othersom have not leisure always to do it: in stead
of tyring, I will give them a remedy that follows to ease them of their watery
humors which they have in their heads for want of tyring. Take Agarike beaten
into powder, and Ierapigra with a little saffron, and make a pyll of it as
big as a bean, and put a third part less of Ierapigra than of Agaricke to
bind your powder together. Let that pyll so made be put into her wrapped in
Cotton, toward Evening when she has endued her gorge and is empty, making
her so receive it three or four days together. And you may use this medicine
from month to month at your discretion: And by the opinion of all Falconers
ye may give this pyll for all unknown and hidden diseases for which you know
none other remedy.

Another receipt to keep and maintain your Hawks in good health.
IF you entend to keep and maintain your Falcons and al other Hawks in
health: take Germander, Pelamountaine, Basil, Grimel seed, and Broom
flowers, of each of them half an ounce: of Isope, of Saxifrage of Polipodie,
and of Horsemints, of each of them a quarter of an ounce: of Nutmegges, a
quarter of an ounce: of Cubebs, Borage, Mu^my, Mogewort, Sage of the four
kinds of Mirabolans, Indorum, Kebulorum, Beliricorum, and Embelicorum, of each
of them half an ounce: of Saffron an ounce, and of Aloes Cicotrine the fifth
part of an ounce. All these things confect to a powder, and at every eight day
or at every twelfth day give your Hawks the quantity of a bean of it with
their meat. And if they will not take it so, put it in a Hens gutte tied at
both ends, or else after some other means, so as ye cause them to receive it
down. And if they cast up the flesh again by force of the powder, let it no
more be given them with flesh, but in the foresaid manner of the gutte, and let
them stand empty one hour after. And according as you see your hawke
disposed, make her to use this medicine, to scowre her of the evil humors that
are in her body, bred of feeding upon naughty flesh, which engenders such
humors, and causes many diseases in hawks.

That the diseases which Hawks have in their heads, do commonly come of
giving them too great gorges, and of foul feeding: the mean to know it.
THe chief Falconers say and agree, that the diseases in hawks heads do most
commonly breed of giving them too great gorges, especially of gross and ill
flesh. For when a Hawke has too full a gorge, she cannot well put it over and
indue it, whereupon it falls to corrupting and stinking in her gorge by
lying too long there, and specially, more in a Hawke that is low and poor,
than in one that is high and full of flesh: insomuch that she is forced to
cast it all stinking. And if she happen to put it over so stinking, it
attainteth and rotteth her panel, by means whereof the fume and stinch ascend
up to her head, and there close and stuff up her ears, and the passages of
her pipes and head, so as the humors which were wont, cannot pass away as they
were accustomed, by reason whereof the head swells inordinately. For the
humor seeks issue, and vent either at the ears, or at the nares, or at the
throat: for want whereof the Hawke falls in danger of death if she have not
speedy remedy. And to discern the disease of the head, the Hawke will sniffe
often, and shut her eyes toward night, and sometimes shut eft the one, and eft
the other eye, and make as though she iouked with worse cheer than she was
wont to do: and then must you beware that she swell not between the eye and
the beak. And if she do, then cauterize her in that manner that is set down
hereafter. Whenever the humor makes a show to sew out at the Hawks ears, at
her nares, or at her throat, then is she in peril of death, if she be not
helped presently.

The remedy of the said disease.
YOu must take the larde of bacon that is not restie, nor over old, and of the
fattest of it make slices, as it were to larde Partridges, and such small
birds, and let them steep in fresh cold water a whole night, changing the
Water three or four times. Then take the marrow of beef well picked, and
sugar once boiled and clarified, and of those three things being each of like
quantity, with the quantity of a little Bean of Saffron in powder well mingled
together, make pylls of the bigness of a bean, and give them to your hawke,
causing some body to cast her, and opening her beak by force, if she will not
take them otherwise. This done, set her by the fire, or in the Sun, and anon
ye shall see how she will scowre and slise by casting upward and downward
the gross humors wherewith her body is ouercharged. And when she has muted
well three or four times, let her be taken from the fire or out of the Sun,
and set upon her perch in her accustomed place, and let her not be fed till
two hours after, and then allow her of a chicken or mutton but half a gorge.
Let her be thus dealt withal three days together, making her to tire every
day against the sun both morning and evening. And four, five or six days
after, give her eueryday a cloue of Mace in her casting, and she shall recover.

When the three days are past wherein you have so scowred her, take a little
pepper beaten into very fine powder and mingling it with Vinegar in a Sawcer,
open her beak, and rub the roof of her chap therewith, and likewise put a
drop or twain of it into her nares, and set her by the fire or in the Sun,
and you shall see how mightily it will open her head. Howbeit you must not give
this medicine to a Hawke that is very poor, for she will not be able to
brook it. And within an hour or two after feed her with a chickens leg:
and after let her have twice a day at her hours a reasonable gorge, and let
the said powder be given her no more but once.

In stead of this powder some give this medicine following which you may give
also if you think good: that is to wit, a little Stauesacre, howbeit that is
very strong, if there he not skill used to delay the strength of it. Wherefore
if you mind to give your hawke of it, give her not past three or four grains
of it wrapped in a cloth or in linte, which you must break afterward, and beat
into powder. Then take a little clean water in a dish, and put your powder in
it, and mingling it together in manner of a Sirop, put three or four drops of
it into your hawks nares, and set her in the Sun or by the fire as is said
before, if it be cold.

That done, then by Martines advise, take pitch if you will to the mountenance
of a bean which you must warm betwixt your hands, and afterward cleave it to
the roof of her Beak, rubbing it over with a little of the powder of
Stauesacre and Pepper till she feel the pitch well upon her Palate: and by
and by in laboring to shake off the said pitch and water from her Palate, she
will cast: and let her cast her fill till she be thoroughly scowred. And when
ye think she is scowred sufficiently, take away the said pitch if it it be
not fallen off already, and set your hawke to the fire, or in the Sun, as is
said in the medicine of the pepper, and feed her with some good meat one
hour after.

And to recomfort your hawke after all these Medicines, ye may give her four
or five Cloves of Mace as is said before, after as the bigness of them is,
which you must first brooze a little, and put into her casting. For the Cloves
so given, are singularly good for hawks against all Rhewmes and humors of the
head, so that it makes them to have a good breath and keeps it from
stinking, by setting their whole bodies in a temperate heat. And the Cloves
being so given every eight day, is enough to keep a Hawke from all
rhewmatike diseases of the head, and from all other diseases that come of cold.

Of a confirmed Rhewme that comes of cold.
NOw that I have spoken of the disease of the head which comes oftentimes of
giving too great a gorge, or of foul feeding, I will speak of the Rhewme or
pose which breeds of the coldness of the brain and upper part of the head.
The hawks that have this disease, endure such pain as they cannot hold open
their eyes. And of this disease spring many other griefs, as the pin and the
web in the eye, whereby they loose their sight: and sometimes they loose
their sight without having the pin and the web in their eyes. Besides that,
there follows the Hawe in their eyes as in the eyes of a horse, and sometimes
also the pyp in their tongs, and another disease which is called the
Eff^^^^yllous in the French tongue, (I know not what english term to bestow upon
it.) And moreover the swelling of the roof of their palate which is called
the Vvul^, an ill disease, whereof breeds the Canker. All these diseases are
very dangerous, and put hawks in great hazard, if there be not skill to
remedy them betimes. And Master Ame Cassian says, that such diseases breed of
phlegm which is in the bodies of Hawks, as I said before of the other Rhewm:
and that phlegm comes of setting them in moist and cold places. Also
sometimes it comes of bringing them home cold and wet out of the fields, and
of setting them down upon their pearches without drying or warming them at the
fire or in the Sun.

The remedy of those diseases is first and foremost to cauterize them in manner
following. Fashion a little iron with a round head like a peaze (which is
called a button) and make it in manner read hot in the fire, but yet not
ouerhote (for iron is very violent if it be too much heat.) Cauterize her
therewith on the top of her head, because the grief and disease is there
grounded. Cause your hawke to be well cast that you may cauterize her at your
ease and pleasure, for you must beware of burning her too deep, and therefore
that ye may be sure to do it well, mayle your hawk fast, and pull off a few of
her feathers. As soon as you have done so, take another iron with a point as
sharp as the tooth of a comb, and put it in the fire as before said, and
therewith pierce her nares in the mids. The^ two or three days after take
another flat iron of a finger broad, heat likewise red hot, and cauterize your
hawke again therewith handsomely as it were between the eye-lidde and the
horn of the beak, and do it with the sharper side of the iron: not that the
iron ought indeed to have any edge, but rather by all reason to be blunt. And
take good heed that the fire touch neither the ball of her eye nor her nares,
and therefore see that ye guard her eye with a wet clout to keep it from the
smoke. All such manner of fires must be given toward the evening before hawks
are supped, when they are empty, for otherwise the handling of them would make
them cast their gorges. When all is done as it should be, half gorge your
Hawke, or somewhat less with warm meat. And the same day make provision of
such Snayles as are among vines, or among Fenell, and such as have gray
shelles, they are the best, for men are wont to eat of them. Steep five or
six of them in the milk of an Ass, or of a Gate or else (for want of that)
in woman's milk, and let it be done in a good large glass well covered, that
they creep not out.

The next morning break the shelles, and wash them in new milk as it comes
from the Cow, then give four or five of those Snailes to your hawke, after
that they be of bigness. And as soon as that is done, set her against a fire
or the Sun, and remove her not away til she have muted four or five times.
And if she can abide the heat well, let her alone still for it does her much
good. After noone feed her with a hens leg or with some small birds, or with
a Ratte or a Mouse, which are best of all, and then set her in a warm placa,
and give her not too great a gorge. When evening comes that she has endued
and put over her meat, take five or six Cloves of Mace, broken a sunder, and
wrapped in a piece of flesh, or a pellet of Cotton, and make her to receive it
by fair means or foul by opening her beak, and conueying it into her.
Continue this medicine four or five days, and your hawk shall recover.
Afterward make her to tire evening and morning and let her feeding be steeped
in milk as is said before of the Snayles, for the milk scowreth her body
within, as is very nutritive, and will quickle bring her to be hie, and in
flesh again.

Another medicine that Mallop in gives in stead of the other aforesaid.
TAke the powder of Saffron and Camomill, of each the mountenance of a little
pease, and when ye have mingled the^ together, put thereto larde that is
neither restie, nor over salted, and steep them a night and a day in three of
four changes of water, and then wash the Larde thoroughly in fair licour. That
done, take Sugar clarified and the marow of a Beef. Of the things aforesaid,
take as much of the one, as of the other, so as you may make five or six balls
of the bigness of a bean. Then mingle the said mixtures, and the powders
together, and every morning give your hawke one of the balls till all be
spent: and as is said before, set your hawke by the fire, or in the Sun, and
feed her not by the space of an hour or twain after: at which time you shall
give her either a Hens leg or some small birds, or a Rat, or some Mice. And
in the morning when she has well indewed, give her four or five cloves of
Maces lapped in a little flesh, or in the skin of a hen, or in pullets of
Cotton. And so may you cauterize her before the said medicine after the manner
that I have showed before in the former receipt of the Snayles, so you draw her
meat in milk or in fresh butter.

For the disease of the ears which comes of the Rhewme, and cold.
SOmetimes there happens another disease to hawks, by reason of moisture of
the head which is called the disease the ears, because there issue out
certain humors by them. And ye shall know the disease by this, that the hawke
will often times wryth her head back, and makes not so good cheer as she should
do, and is more unlusty. Wherefore search and peruse hereares, and you shall
find the disease there. The remedy whereof, by Master Ame Cassians devise, is
this.

Take a little long iron round at the end as a pease, and Oil of sweet
Almonds, or for lack of that, Oil of Roses, which is much better, if you can
come by it. Then heat your iron in the fire, neither glowing red, nor very
hot, and put it into the oil, and of that oil so heat with the iron, drop
a little into your hawks ears, putting the iron a little into them that they
be not stopped. For then of such inconvenience happens oftentimes the Canker to
the brain which is incurable and kills the hawke. And beware of thrusting
the iron too far in, or of being too hot, for else you may kill her. You
must continue the ministering of this oil four or five days, always wiping
away the humors gently that issue out of her ears, and always respecting her
casting whether, it be clean or no. And if you list to scowre her with a
common pyll or twain, they will ^ase her head maruailously well, and do her
exceeding much good: or if you do it with the said balls of Larde, Sugar, and
marrow of beef, it is good likewise, for you may use either the one or the
other at your pleasure.

Of the disease of the eyelids which comes of the Rhewme and cold.
ANother disease happens to Hawks in the eye-liddes which causes aswelling
under the eye-lidde, between the eye and the fear of the beak (we have no
proper speech for it) if ye remedy it not betimes it will swell round about:
and thereof comes the hawe in the eye which will ouergrow the eye and stop
it. And assure your self it is a sign of death if it grow too long. For I
have seen many die of it in my time for lack of remedy. Now by Master Ame
Cossians opinion, the remedy is this. Heat the little round iron that I spoke
of before, and cauterize her with it softly upon her head as is said for the
Rhewm. Likewise with the other cutting iron, fear her between the eye and the
beak. Also pierce her nares with the little iron, and afterward give her the
Medicine of the Snayles after the manner aforesaid, four or five days
together. And for want of that medicine, you may use the other of Larde, Sugar,
and the Marow of Beef mingled with the powder of Saffron and Camomill. [But if
they fail, then take the juice of Housleeke, Rose water, Addition.
and the oil of the white of an egg, and mix them together, and therewith
amount the hawks eye, and it will cure it without cauterizing.]

Of the Hawe in the eye which comes of moisture and cold, and how it happens.
Moreover sometimes there grows a great disease in their eyes which is named the
Hawe and comes after the same manner that it comes in horses: namely,
sometime by a blow or a stripe, sometime by a disease in the head, and most
commonly by hurting of the eye with the straightness of the hoode, or by some
other misfortune which cannot sometimes be eschewed. And you shall discern
the coming of this disease, by seeing a little filme growing up from the
bending of her beak, and covering her eye by little and little. And this filme
is somewhat black before, and is called the hawe, which puts out the eye if
it once ouergrow the ball of it. To remedy the same, take a little needle that
is very sharp pointed, and fine threeded with a silk thread, and therewith
take up the hawe handsomely, and cut it with a little slicer, as horseleaches
do to horses, but beware that you cut it not too much for hurting of the eye,
which you must wash with Rose water three days together. In these cures of
diseases that grow in the eyes, there must be great ear used for fear of a
greater mischief, because of the daintiness of the place.

Of a blow given to the eye, or of some other mischance.
SOmetimes the eyes of hawks are hurt by some mishappe, ome stripe or otherwise
as I said before. Against such unlooked for mischances, Master Ame C^ssi^r
gives clear Fenell water, and Rose water, as much of the one as of the other,
and therewith washes ye eye twice or thrice a day. Master Malopin in his book
of the Prince, wills to take the juice of Celondine otherwise called Herb
Arondell, Arondell in French, is Hirundo, a Swalow, otherwise called Chelidon.
or Swallows herb, and to convey it into the eye. And if it be not to be
had green, to take it dry, and to beat it into powder, and to blow it into
her eye with a quill, and this shall recure the hawke.

Of the Filme in the eye, which some call the Veroll, or the Pin and Web.
THere is another disease in the eye called a Filme, which comes sometimes of
disease in the head, and of Rhewms that distill into the eyes, and sometimes of
standing too long, or too close hooded, which happens through the fault and
negligence of such as have the bearing and oversight of them. For the remedy
hereof, Master Martine says, that ye must tak Celondine and bray it, putting
thereto honey and fresh butter, and of each of those three give your hawke a
like portion with a hot gorge, and moreover, put the Powder of Pepper and
Aloes in her eye Or else (as says Master Ame Cassian) you must give her the
foresaid medicine of Larde, Sugar and Marow of Beef three or four days
together, to scowre her, setting her by a fire, or in the Sun, and feeding
her after it with some live Foul, and keeping her out of the wind, and from
standing cold or moist. After she is so scowred, if ye that the web show
it self much, cauterize her upon the upper part of her head, and likewise a
little between the eye and the beak after the manner aforesaid. When all this
is done, squirt a little Rose Water into her eye, and if need be, minister
thereto the powder or the juice of Celondine otherwise called Herb Arondell, as
is said before. This disease of the Pin and Web, is of some men called the
Verol, for the remedying whereof, they burn the shell of a Tortoise in a new
pot, and beat it into fine powder, which they serce through a fine cloth.
Then take they a cockle of the sea which is fashioned like a Heart, and burning
it thoroughly in the fire, make it into fine powder, and serce it likewise. And
finally they take Sugar Candy in powder. These three powders mixed together in
equal portions, they use to put into their hawks eyes till they be whole.

Master Michelin tells of one other receipt for the said disease, which is
this. Make a little hose in the top of an egg and power out the white of it:
then coil clear Rose water, and Sanguis draconis well together, and fill up
your egg with them, and stir them thoroughly with a small stick. Afterward
wrap up your egg in paste, and stop up the hole of it, that nothing get out:
which done, set it so closed in the fire till the past become black and red at
the taking it from the fire. Then take out that which is within it, and beat it
into powder, and serce it through a fine cloth: and of that powder you may use
to put in your hawks eye till it be cured, washing her eye now and then with
water of Fenell, and of Roses.

Master Mallopin makes another medicine for the same disease which is this.
Take the dung of a Lyzart, (which is called a Provincial) and beat it into
powder with Sugar Candy, somewhat more in quantity than the other, mingling
the^ both together. He says, that this powder is much better than all the
others, whereof you may use as is said before, conueying into your hawks eye
water of roses, and of Fenell. Addition.
[But the best medicine is to put every day into the Hawks eye a little of the
powder of Tutia, or wash it with Tutia, and Rose Water mixed together.]

For the disease that breeds in Hawks beakes, commonly called Formicas.
Diverse times there grows a disease upon the horn of hawks beakes, which
eats and fretteth the beak from the head. Master Ame says, it is a worm
that eats the horn of the beak within, by reason whereof the hawke is in
great danger if she be not helped in time. Ye shall perceive it by this,
that the horn of the beak waxes rugged, and the beak begins to riue and
cliue from her head. Master Ame Cassian gives this answer and remedy
thereunto. Take the gall of an Ox (or of a bull, which is better than of an
ox) and all to beat it, and break it in a dish, and put thereto the powder
of Aloes Cicotrine, and mingle them well together. Then noynt the horn of your
Hawks clap or beak therewith, and the very place where the Formica grows,
twice a day. But beware that you touch neither her eyes nor her nares. And
continue your so doing till she be thoroughly cured, and let her be bathed
with Orpiment and Pepper, to keep her from vermin and Mites.

For the disease that breeds in the Nares of Hawks.
ANother disease bredeth in Hawks nares, so as they swel exceedingly: and
sometime upon the horn of the beak there ryseth a crust, at the removing
whereof the flesh is found to be raw underneath the clappe, insomuch that
diverse times they loose the one half of their beak. Master Ame Cassian says,
that the hawke has small Mites in her head, which creep down along her
beak, and entering in at her nares, do breed the said disease: and that the
hawke feeling them, and being molested therewith, thrusts her talents into her
nares. Or else it happens sometimes that a cast of Hawks do burcle and crab
together, and thereof breeds the said disease. M. Ame Cassian provides for
it this remedy following. Make little matches of paper, Here is left out the
manner of cauterizing a hawks nares because the Italian has set it down.
of ye bigness of the tag of a point, and let your hawke be cast handsomely, and
set your matches on fire wc a candle, and sear your hawke upon the place
swollen, taking good heed yt you do it not too roughly. Which being done,
anoint it the next morning with a little Hens grease, and so will it heal
well, and her beak and nares will not be stuffed but remain open. Nevertheless
ye must be feign sometimes to touch her with an iron, which is more dangerous
than the other.

The disease called the Frownce, which breeds within hawks beakes, and in
their tongues.
THe Frownce proceeds of moist and cold humors, which descend from the
hawks head to their palate, and the root of the tongue. And of that cold, is
engendered in the tongue, the Frownce, otherwise called (of the French men the
Barbillons, or Sourchelons.) by means of which they loose their appetite, and
cannot close their clap, whereof they oftentimes die, and that disease is named
the Eagles bane. For as I reported to you in the first part of this collection,
the Eagle seldom when dies of age, but only by mean her beak does
ouergrow, so as she cannot feed and gorge her self. Ye may perceive this
disease by loss of her appetite to feed And to know it the better, open your
hawks beak, and look on her tongue whether it be swollen or no: And if there
appear not that disease, open her beak again within a while after, and see
if there be any likelyhoode of it, and so may ye easily discrie the mischief.
For remedy whereof the said Master Mallopin says, that you must take oil of
sweet Almonds, or oil olive washed in four or five waters, and with that oil
annoint her throat and her tongue three or four times a day with a feather for
five or six days together. And if your hawke cannot feed, let her meat be
cut and shredde into very small pellets. This done, open her beak gently, and
make her to receive it down, by conueying a small stick into her throat,
giving her not paste half a gorge at a time, and that must be either of
Mutton, or of some live foul, Hen, Chicken, or such like: five or six days
after, open her beak handsomely again, and with a pair of sharp Sissers, cut
off the typpes of the Barbyllons, till the blood follow, but yet beware of
cutting away too much. After this, anoint and moysten well her throat with
sirope of Mulberies, called of the Apothecaries Diamor^n, and then anoint her
with oil of sweet Almonds, or with oil Olive, Addition.
till she be recured. [Nothing cures the Frownce so soon as the powder of
allom brought to a salve with strong wine Vinegar, and anoint or wash the
hawks mouth therewith.]

Of the disease called by the French men Escorchillons, a kind of Frownce or
Canker.
Escorcer in French, is to rippe off the rind or skin of any thing of which
word this disease seems to be derived.
SOmetimes there happens a disease to hawks which is called the Escorchillons a
hard disease to be discerned. It breeds commonly of a Rhewme confirmed in
the head, from whence spring many other diseases, (whereof I have made mention
in the Chapter of Rhewmes in the head, and of the disease called (the
Barbillons) which breeds in Hawks tongues,) as the Pyppe does, the disease of
the Palate, and the Canker, which are very dangerous diseases and deadly. If
ye will know the Escorchillons, let your hawke be cast handsomely, and open
her beak, and force down her tongue with yout fingers end, so as you may see
her winde-pipe, and a little beneath her windpipe ye shall find the
Escorchillons like three or four sharp priekes growing one against another,
that sometimes the Hawke cannot cast by mean thereof. And that is a perfect
way to know this evil. Furthermore, in the same place, and on either side of
the windpipe, ye shall find two small sterts of flesh, which are natural to
all Hawks. But at the lower end of them do grow up many little pricks which
are the cause that a Hawke cannot well cast in the morning, insomuch that
sometimes she is feign to cast her casting by peecemele, and not whole. And
that is another assurance of the said disease, which may be well cured and
remedied both together.

The remedy which Ame Cassian gives for this disease, is set forth in the
former Chapter by Master Mallopin, where he wills you to take oil of sweet
Almonds, or Oil Olive, etc.

The disease of the Canker which breeds in the throats and tongs of hawks.
YE must understand that the canker breeds of foul feeding your Hawks, not
washing of their meat in cold water in Summer, and in warm in Winter, which
engenders in their guts gross slimie matter. And when those humors come to
be moved, they sum up into the head, and (so distilling again) engender heat
of the liver which breaks out in the throat and the tongue, and there engender
the canker. You shall discern this disease by the feeding of your hawke, for
in taking her meat she lets it fall, and afterward has much ado to swallow
it. Therefore let her beak be anointed, and you shall find the disease of
the Canker. Master Ame Cassian gives this medicine for it. Take Oil of
Almonds, or oil Olive washed as is said before, and anoint well her throat with
it twice or thrice a day. That done, give her the said medicine of sugar, lard,
and marrow of beef three days together, and feed her with mutton or with
pullets, or hens flesh dipped in the foresaid oil, but ye must not wash
your oil of Almonds. After this, you must behold and regard the canker, and if
you find it white, take a small iron made at the one end like a Rasor, and at
the other end edged and sharp. And if her tongue be very much ouergrowne with
the canker, slit and open it ha^dsomely along the side of her tongue, and with
your rasor scrape away the whitenes softly which you see there. Then take a
little cotton or lint to dry and drink up the blood of her tongue, and see that
none be left. And if the other side of her tongue happen to be so too, slit it
likewise: which done, take the juice of Maydenhaire and lay upon it. And for
want of that hea^^be take a little vinegar, or rather the juice of a lymond
which is much better, and wash her meat in oil till she be thoroughly
recured. Master Michelin gives another remedy which is this. Anoint well her
throat and tongue with sirupe of mulberies (otherwise called Diamoron) two or
three days together, after which, take of the foresaid good oil: Then take
the powder of brimstone, and of sugar candy, or of other white sugar mingled
well together of each a like, and put a little thereof upon the canker: for if
you should lay much, it would fret the tongue too sore. And this manner of dealing
is better for a confirmed canker than any other. Therefore wash her meat with
the oil aforesaid, and feed her with mutton, or the flesh of hens or pullets.

Of a kind of Pippe that is in a Hawke.
THe Pip comes chiefly of cold and moistnes of the head: and sometimes of
feeding your hawke with evil and rotten flesh without washing it, and making it
clean in warm water in the winter, and in cold water in the Summer. Whereof
ingendereth slimy and gross humors in the body, which asce^d up to the head,
and engender the pip on the top of the tongue as ye see commonly fall out in
chickens. And ye may perceive this disease by your hawks often sniting, and
by making a noise twice or thrice in her sniting. Master Ame Cassian says,
that to remedy this disease, you must cast your hawke gently, and look upon
the tip of her tongue: and if you find her to have the pip, ye must scowre her
with a pyll made of Agarik and Ierapigra, given two or three days together
with her casting toward night, and that will rid her of the Rhewm in her head,
the rather if she be made to tire against the sun in the mornings as is
said before. M. Malopin in his book of the Prince, says, that to cure the pip,
ye must bind a little cotton upon a sticks end, and dipping it in sweet
rosewater, wash her tongue well with it: and afterward anoint it three or four
days with oil of Almonds, and oil olive, well washed as is before said: and
when ye have done so, ye shall find the pip all white and soft. Then take an
awle, and with the point of it lift up the pip softly, removing it as women do
pip their chickens. Howbeit ye must not remove it till it be full ripe: for
if ye take it too green, you shall hurt your hawke. And look that ye wet
her tongue and palate twice or thrice a day with the foresaid oil, till she be
thoroughly cured.

Of the disease of their palate which falls to swelling by reason of moisture
of the head.
SOmetimes it happens that the palates or roofes of hawks mouths are swollen,
and look whitish: which comes of moisture and cold wherewith their heads are
surcharged. And ye may perceive this disease by that they cannot close their
beakes, and by that they look not so chearly as they were wo^t to do, ne can
put over, or endew their meat but with great pain. To cure your hawke of this
disease, you must open her beak, where you shall find the roof of her mouth
whitish and swollen. And if you find it not so, you must search her beak to
discern if she have any other disease there that lets her to shut it: for
sometimes their beakes grow more on the one side of the clap than on the other,
so as they cannot close them. The remedy that M. Ame Cassian gives for this
evil, is this: The hawks that are so diseased must have the said pills of
Larde, sugar, and marow of beef, given them every morning one or two for four
or five days space together, and about an hour or two after, feed them with
some poultrie or mutton drawn through the foresaid oil. And after those days
open her beak again, and softly scrape of the whiteness: and if ye find the
swelling abated, then do none other thing to her but only continue your
anointing of her with the said oil. But if ye perceive the swelling to rise
too hie, ye may lance or prick it, but ye must beware that ye strike not
too deep, for ye may soon kill your hawke. Afterward lay the juice of
mayden-haire to it, and continue it till it be thoroughly cured, and always
draw her meat in the said oil, or else in milk or butter.

For the disease of the jaws
THe disease of the iaws comes either of drawing ye hood too streit, or for
yt it is too close and streit of it self. And yt causes the Rhewme to drop
down out of the hawks head upon her gums and jaws (if we may so term them.)
You shall know it by this, that she can neither open nor shut her beak.

M. Michelins medicine forths same.
Anoint well the gorge, jaws, and nares of your hawke with oil of sweet
Almonds three or four days together and for want of that, take oil Olive
washed in two or three waters, and draw her meat through it as is said before,
and give her pyls of lard, sugar and marow of a beef, or else common pylles to
scowre her both upward and downward.

Of the Hawke that has broken her clappe by some mischance.
ANother inconvenience befalls hawks by the negligence of such as keep them:
for in their feeding there cleaves or remains some piece of flesh in their
jaws, or in the roof of their mouth, or on some place or other of their beak
which marreth their beaks, so as it is enforced to fall away in sliuers and
pieces. This happens for want of wiping their beaks as they ought to be after
their feeding, by mean whereof both her claps grow so much, as at length it
falls to breaking and riuing if it be not remedied in time. And thereof
breeds this disease which we call ( Formica Corrosiva) whereby the beak
becomes brittle, and is utterly marred. Master Ame Cassian appoints this
remedy following. Look into your Hawks beak, coping it and keeping it very
clean, and if you find any Formica corrosiva there, remove it. That done,
anoint ye horn of her beak with the blood of a snake or an adder, and the
blood of a hen mingled together, to make it to grow the more speedily. Also
let the meat which she eats be cut in small pellets, for otherwise she
cannot feed. And yet for all that, cease not to flee with her. Within 15.
days or three weeks after, when ye see her beak begin to grow again, cast
your hawke handsomely, and cope her nether clap that the upper clap may ioyn
orderly unto it, as it should do of his own nature.

Of the falling sickness which happens to hawks as well as to men, and
other living things.
THe chief Falconers say, that the falling sickness happens to hawks through a
fuming heat that ascends up frour the liver to their heads, and makes them
to fall down upon ye sudden. M. Mallopin says, that to remedy this disease,
the hinder part of their head must be perused and sought, where a man shall
find two little pits which must be cauterized with a wire of brass. And if that
help not, then must you cauterize her daintily upon the head with the foresaid
round iron, or else you may hap to kill her. This done, dry red Lentils in an
oue^, and make them into fine powder: then take the filing of iron the finest
of it, as much of the one as of the other, and mingle the^ both together with
honey, and make it in little bals of the bigness of a pease. Then give your
hawk two or three of them, putting them as far into her gorge as you can, and
hold her upon your fist at the fire, or in the sun till she have made a mute or
twain, and let her have no meat till noone, and then serve her of a Pigeons
wing, dealing so with her seven or eight days together: In the night let her
be kept always abroad, and in the day times in the dark with water
continually before her.

M. Ame Cassian teaches another medicin: that is to wit, that the skin of
their heads must be launced right over against the foresaid pits, where there
are little veins which must be taken up with a silk thread, and anointed
over with the blood of a chicken. Which being done, ye must give her the
foresaid pills seven or eight days together, taking good heed that ye set her
not near any other hawks, and that your hawking glove be very clean. For
that kind of disease is co^tagious, and will soon pass from one hawke to
another by feeding on the glove whereon another has been fed before. And by
night let her stand in the wind and open air, and by day in dark places, with
water always before her, as is already taught you.

Of another falling evil, which first breeds in the neck and in the gorge
of a Hawke.
IF you perceive your hawk to have a swollen neck and gorge, and that she
pants more strongly in ye mornings at one time than at another: assure your
self that she has the falling evil. Martin says, that you must take
Sanguis Draconis, nutmegges, that kind of Mirabolans which are called Kebulme,
Cloves, Cinnamon, and Ginger, of each two penny weight, and making it all into
fine powder, strew a quantity of it every morning upon her meat, supping her
every night with a ratte or a mouse three or four days together, and that
will make her whole and sound.

Of the Fistula, a grief that proceeds through pain of the head.
YE shall perceive when your hawke has the Fistula by the running of her
nares, and by the streaming down of the humors from her head. For the which
disease Martine allows this remedy. Ye must cast your hawke handsomely, and
deplume her head behind in the backer part, and anoint it with butter and swines
blood together. And you shall find a vain that comes down to her eyes which
you must cut, and knit it again with a red silk thread, anointing it well
and thoroughly with butter and swines blood for nine days together, and then it
will recover her.

For the swimming in the head of a hawke.
IF your hawke gape much and beat her wings, then be ye sure that she has
the swimming in the head. The remedy whereof is this. Take a fine needle that
is sharp pointed, and when ye have well heat it in the fire, pearce her nares
with it through on both sides, and beware that ye go not awrie, for so ye
may do her great harm. Then anoint it with oil and butter together, and it
will recover her by mean of the vente that you shall give the humor by the
nares.

For all manner of diseases in the head, and specially for the ach that is in a
Hawks head.
Whenever your hawk has any great disease, or pain in her head, take six
grains of pepper, four of Stauesaker, and five cloves, and beat them together
into fine powder, and feed her but three days together with warm meat
mingled with it, and she shall recover. And for want of that ye may use the
fine powder that is mentioned heretofore. And if your hawke will not be fed
with it, let be conueighed into cotton or into a hens skin to take away the
sent of it, and feed her with none other than warm meat, and such as is light
of disgestio^. For the diseases of the head do so weaken her appetite and
stomach that she cannot put over, nor endew her meat. And to the end she may
the better indew it, give her but small meals till she be thoroughly
recovered. And if she will eat the yolke of an egg, drop upon it some of the
said powder, and give it her with hot meat, and so ye shall reccouer her.
Here are sundry receipts and medicines which I never have proved, and therefore
I can warrant little of them: but nevertheless I find them in my French Authors,
and therefore am so ventrous to place them here in this collection of remedies
for hawks: leaving the^ over to the desirous Falconer that has a will to
practice upon his hawk. For store (they say) is no sore, and among many there
must needs fall out some good and wholesome receipts. Wherefore judge discreetly
of all: and make proof of such as you like: Experience is the mother of skill.

Of the stone, and how, and whereof it comes.
YOu must understand yt there are 3. sorts of diseases in hawks called by the
name of the stone, and scarsly does the one come without the other. The one
keeps beneath in their tuels, and the other in their bowels and panels: and
they may be cured both together. Some call this disease ye Cray. And M. Ame
Cassian says that the stone or Cray comes by the eating of filthy flesh and
by mean of soul feeding. For it burns and dries in their bowels (as I said
heretofore in the diseases of the head) because ye filth which they have
gathered in their panels inflameth their liver, which does so dry up the
substance of the guts, that they cannot mute, but must needs die of it if they
be not cured. Some say that this disease comes of giving the^ washed meat hot
before it be thoroughly cold, and that is like enough, for a hawk likes not of
water and blood both together at once. The stone in the fundament comes of
the filth which the hawke should mute, which thickneth and lies bakte at the
tuel: by means whereof she becomes so poor that she cannot mute or stise from
her, and so must needs die. Yet notwithstanding I have often seen that when a
Falcon is hie and lusty, she wilstise it out well enough by mean of her
strength. And ye may perceive when she has the stone by that she muteth with
pain and by drops, which is a sign yt she needs to scowre that matter
whereof the stone does grow. And when she muteth at twice, and a third time
after that, it is a token that the stone is thoroughly confirmed in her guts and
panel. Moreover, when ye see that her tuel is chafed, and but little drops from
her, and that the feathers of her train are much filed with her muting, and
that she is evermore picking with her beak about her tuel, be ye sure she has
ye stone in her tuel, which we call ye stone Cray. Again, when she muteth and
makes as though she would iouke upon your fist, and in her cies is more
troubled tha^ of ordinary: doubt not but that she has the stone cray. And
because she cannot rid it, she is in danger, if she be not looked too in time.
The remedy thereof by the judgment of M. Ame Cassian is this: take a slice of
lard (or a pellet of soap, wet in salet oil) of the bigness of a goose quill,
and an ynch long, and put thereon the powder of Aloes Cicotrine: which done,
cast your hawk hansomly, and convey it into her tuell as ye would give a man a
suppository, and if the lard be too tender and soft to handle, stick it upon a
hens feather, so as the feather appear not through the Lard, (for so may ye do
her great harm with the feather,) and so convey it up into her tuell drawing
away the feather gently, and leaving the Larde behind, and have snayles in a
readiness to give her immediately after ye have applied the said devise. And
for lack of snayles, give her the forementioned pyll of lard, mingled with
marow and sugar, and set her in the Sun, or by a fire, without feeding of her
til one hour after noone. And if thee endure well to be by the fire, or in the
Sun, let her alone, for the heat is very good for her. After this, give her
somewhat more than half a gorge of a young pullet, or if ye can come by any myce
or rats, nothing is better. But let her not stand in the air or in the wind
except the weather be fair and warm. At night when she has indewed well, give
her four or five cloves of mace broken, and lapped up in a little cotton, or
in the skin of a hen: and do so three or four days, saving the suppository
or pellet aforesaid, for it will serve twice well enough. And thus shall you
skoure your hawk thoroughly. Look well to it that she cast not up ye cloves of
mace, for they be singular good for hawks in all respects, specially for all
humors that surcharge their heads and generally for all Filanders and worms.
And if you mind to rid a falcon clean out of the cray, and of the said disease:
give her meat steeped in Goats milk, or in other milk, and do so four or
five days together: for the said milk is very good against the cray. In the
book of the Prince, there is another receipt for this disease of the cray or
stone. That is to wit: Take the gall of a pigge of three weeks old, and convey
it into your hawks beak, so as she may take it and swallow it down whole
without breaking, and take heed that she cast up none of it again.
Afterward, give her a little piece of the Pigges flesh, of the bigness of a
Bean, and let her stand empty panneld upon the same until night, setting her
in the Sun, or by the fire. This medicine is very good for all birds of prey
that are encombred with the Cray or Stone. Nevertheless, if a Goshawke or a
Sparowhawke have that disease (so it be not too sore) give it her no more but
once. But as for other hawks that are of stronger metal, ye may give it
them thrice. And when evening is come, feed your hawke with a pullet or with
mutton, or with small birds, and the next morning steep her meat in Goats
milk, or woman's milk, feeding her so three days together with small gorges,
and she shall be sound. And if you will not or cannot use the said receipt, ye
may take a little oil Olive, and somewhat less honey, and wette your hawks
meat therewith, for it is good to help that disease. Some put the said things
into a Hens gut lied fast at both ends, because a hawke will take it the
better: and naturally she likes not oil with her meat.

Master Michelin sets down another medicin which is this. Take Lard, marow of
beef, Sugar clarified, and once boiled and Saffron in powder, of each a like
quantity, provided that the larde be first steeped in vinegar four and twenty
hours, and the water shifted three or four times, and set abroad in the open
air. Of the which things confected together, ye must make pyls of the
bigness of a bean, whereof you shall give your hawke one or two, setting her
in the sun, or by the fire, and feeding her with poultry or with muton,
allowing her but reasonable gorges four or five days together, and giving her
maces as before: for they cannot but do the hawke great pleasure in every
condition and part. Master Michelin teaches another receipt for this disease,
specially for Goshawkes, and Sparowhawkes which I have tried often.

Cut a sheep heart in small pieces, and when ye have let it lie steeping all
night in asses milk, goats milk, or woman's milk, put a little boyld Sugar
into the milk, and gorge your hawke reasonably therewith three days together.
And assure your self that this medicise is very excellent for the Cray, and
without danger for all manner of hawks. M. Martin says in auouchment of this
matter, that when a hawke cannot well mute with her ease, it betokens and
plainly shows yt she has the stone Cray. For remedy whereof, take the heart
of a hog, and a quantity of his sewet minced very small, and make them into
powder together, and give it the hawke in her meat three days successively.
Again, I have seen some take the whit of an egg, or the whole egg, with a
little saffron in powder well coyled and beaten together, which being bestowed
upon the hawks meat, has cured her.

Mallopin sets down yet one other receipt more. Put the juice of (water
Cressyes) in a Hens gut of one inch long, tied at both ends, and force your
hawke to receive it. Which done, set her in the sun, or by the fire, and feed
her not till noone, at which time give her but half a gorge of hot meat,
because of the medicine which has set all her body out of temper. Let this be
done two or three days, and if you find the medicine to have scowred and taken
much at the first of your hawke, give her less and less, and so shall she
recover. The book of Princes sets down yet one other remedy for the same
disease, that ye might put it in ure which soever liked you best. Take a penny
weight of Persly seed, as much of Smallage seed, a dram of boyld sugar, a
penny weight of Stauesaker, of wheaten bran one dram, and half the shell of an
egg. Put them altogether into a good large posnet full of water, and sees it
till it be consumed to the one half, and then strain it through a cloth. Then
take of Cassia Fistula one dram and of Turbith one penny weight, of
Hermodactils two penny weight, and of Aloes Cicotrine three penny weight. Beat
all these into fine powder, and put them into the water wherein the other
mixture was boiled, and make thereof a Clister in the bladder of a Pigge.

Then take a great quill of a goose, or of some other bird, and thereof make
the neck of your Clysterbagge fast tied to the bag that nothing may issue
out of it, and so give your hawk the Clyster as you have seen it given to men
at their need. This done set your hawke in the Sun, or by the fire, and keep
her empty till noone, at which time give her a pullets leg, and so she shall
recover no doubt.

For the disease called the Filanders which happen in the bodies of Hawks: and
first of such as are in their gorge.
THe chief Falconers say that al hawks have the Fila^ders at all times, and
are never without the^, like as it is said that no horse is without the Bottes.
There are four kinds of Filanders, and one other kind of Filanders, of which I
will speak hereafter in their due places. And with all these sorts of
Filanders, some hawks are more pestered than other some. The cause of the^ is
either their feeding on gross and foul meats, which engender and increase
those filanders in the^, or else for that in flying either ye field or the
river, they break some small veins within their bodies, at the encounter, by
seazing too violently upon their prey. By reason whereof the blood bursteth out
into their bowels, and there dries and clottereth, whereof breed the said
Filanders in great abundance. Afterward by reason of ye stinch of the said
blood so clottered and bakte, being corrupted and putrified in the bulk,
because it is out of the proper vessels and vains where it ought to be, the
Filanders run about seeking the cleanest places of the body to shun the said
noisome stinch, and creep up either into the hawks heart, or into her gorge,
so as she dies of it. Again, some men say, that their hawks die of the
diseases of the head, or of the Cray, when in deed they die of the Filanders,
or (which is worse) of the ( Aignilles) a kind of Filanders, for which we want
an English term. I will speak first of those Filanders that craule up to ye
hawks gorges, and from thence to the holes in their palates, whereat the
hawks do breath, and by them into their brains whereby they be in danger of
death. Ye may perceive this inconvenience in the gorge by this, that when you
have fed your hawke, the Filanders feeling the sweetness and taste of the
flesh, do stir and craule about in such wise, as you shall see your hawk
oftentimes gape. By reason whereof it comes to pass that now and then she
casts her gorge. Again, ye may know by this, that your hawke will be
strayning at them with her talons. Therefore cast her gently, and look into her
throat, and you shall see them crawling there. To kill the said Filanders, M.
Ame Cassian says thus: take a great Radish root, and make a hole in it, and
fill it with water, and set it in embers very hot, putting fresh embers to it
continually by the space of half an hour or more, til it be thoroughly well
boiled, and as your water diminishes, fill it always up again, howbeit that
the raddish yields water enough of his own nature. Than put the raddish into
a dish, stamp it and press out all the juice quite and clean. This done, put
the quantity of a Pease of saffron made into powder into the said water, and
wash your hawks meat therewith when ye feed her, and give her but half a
gorge. And if she will not feed on it, let her be kept empty till she be
very greedy and eager: do thus to her three or four days together, and you
shall kill the Filanders and make your hawk sound. [If you wash your hawks
meat in the distilled water of Sauin, Additio
it will kill the Filanders in any part whatsoever, or any other worms.]

Of the Filanders that are in hawks bowels, and in their Raines.
YE shall discern that the Filanders are in her bowels, and guts, by her
heavy cheer and playnt in the night, for she will cry, and make a mournful
noise. Also ye may perceive it by this, that when ye take her on your fist in
the morning, she will stretch herself more strongly than she is wont to do of
ordinary, and sometimes she will make as though she would iouke upon your
fiste, and she will be busy with her beak about her back right over against
her raines. When ye see these signs, assure your self that either the
Filanders or the ( Aignilles) do trouble her: and if she have not help of
them betimes, they will kill her, for I have seen many die of that disease:
Master Ame Cassian gives this remedy for that mischief.

Take Lentilles of the reddest that you can find, and parch them at the fire,
and make fine powder of them, with the powder of worm seed, less by one
half then of the powder of Lentils, and mingle and temper them well tothether,
and make thereof a plaster, driven (upon cloth or leather.) Then deplume your
hawke in the place where her grief is, and lay the plaster to her panel,
changing it every day for four or five days space together, and she shall be
cured.

If ye like not that receipt, Master Michelin gives you another which is this.
Take the leaves of a Peach tree, of Rue, and of wormeseed, and of those three
being brayed together, streine out the juice, and afterward take the powder of
Wormewoode, and put it into the juice, and lay it upon your hawks reins
playsterwise twice a day evening and morning for four or five days together,
and it will kill the Filanders, and save your hawk.

Master Ame C^ssian tells yet one remedy more. Take (says he) a cloue of
Garlic pilled, and give it your hawke in a hens skin, and it will heal her.

Of the Filanders or worms that are in hawks legs and thighs, which the
Frenchmen call Verse.
THere is another manner of Filander called the ( Verse,) which comes sometimes
upon hawks that are lately taken, by setting them upon a perch vnhooded or
vnseeled, for they fall to beating of themselves with so great force that they
break the veins of their legs. And this happens specially rather to haggard
hawks than to soar hawks. By means whereof the blood of those veins so
broken, pours and distilleth along their legs and panels between the skin
and the flesh, and there lying in lumps does convert to worms, whereof the
hawke dies. This disease may come also by her bating overmuch upon the fist,
where through she bruseth her self violently: and sometimes he that bears
her furthereth it by his rashness and impatience. And ye may perceive that the
filanders and worms are in your hawks legs or bowels by this: They plume
themselves oftentimes, yea, and the pendant feathers of their thighs and of
their panels fall off voluntarily M. Mallopin says that ye remedy for this
disease, is to wash your hawks thighs and belly twice a day for four or five
days together, with the foresaid medicin of the leaus of the peach tree, of
rue, and of wormseede, and with the wormeseede it self.

For the diease called in French the (Aiguils) an evil worse than the
Filanders, for which I know no apt English term, and therefore must borrow the
French term of mine Author.
THere are found a kind of Filanders which are called ( Aiguilles) because they
be sharp like a needle, shorter and more perilous tha^ are the great
Filandes, for as much as in seeking the cleanest parts of the body to shun the
stinch and filth, they pearce the bowels and creep up to the heart, so that
your hawke perishes of them if she be not regarded in time. Ye shall perceive
this disease by her shrinking and snyting upon ye lure, as also by her grasping
with her foot more strongly in the morning, than she was wont to do, and again by
the often picking, and beaking in her braile feathers, and near her tuel. M.
Mallopin gives this remedy following. Take stauesacre beaten into powder, the
herb of Barbary, otherwise called in Greek Pestora and Aloes Cicotrine, of
each a like quantity, coyled altogether into powder, and give your hawk the
quantity of a bean thereof, lapped up in some part of a hens skin, or in cotton.
Which done, set her in the sun or by the fire, and at noon allow her but half
a gorge. You may give her of this powder three or four days, so she be not
too low already: for if she be not somewhat hie in flesh and in life, she will
not be able to bear and brook it. And if this medicine cure her not, take this
that follows, which is of M. Malopins devise also. Burn Hearts horn well raked
in the embers, and when it is waxen cold, bent it into powder. The^ take yt
like quantity of Lupins made into powder, as ye had of the hearts horn, and
as much again of the powder of wormseed, as of both the other, and half as much
Aloes Cicotrine, as of the Hearts horn, and half as much Tryacle as of Aloes.
Mingle all these together with honey by little and little, and force it to that
thicknes, yt ye may make bals of it to the bigness of a nut, whereof ye shall
give your hawk every day one by the space of five or six days allowing her
but half a gorge after it. And if your hawk cast it again, let it be lapped
in a little cotton, or in a hens skin ye she feel not the bitter taste of it. M.
Amo Cassian gives yet another remedy which is the medicin made heretofore for
the filanders, yt is to wit, rue and wormwood, of each alike, and as much of the
peachtree leaves as of the^ both, with a little powder of wormseed infused in
the juice of the said herbs. The^ fill a hens gut of an inch long therewith tied
fast at both ends, and give it to our hawke.

You may use any of all these at your own discretion and pleasure.

When a Hawke gapeth inordinately up on the fist of her keeper.
A Hawke will now and then fall to gaping, either upon her keepers fist, or upon
the perch, and specially when she is set in the Sun being somewhat hot. And
this gaping may be understood and construed two ways. The one is when she
does it of her own nature, but that is not so often as the other which comes
by mischance, and that either of cold that she has taken, or of some moist
humor that distilleth down into her gorge. Some are of opinion that the hawke
which uses it often is diseased with the Filanders which creep up and down
in her gorge before she be fed, or after she has indewed, as I have declared
in the chapter of Filanders of the gorge.

The remedy by Master Ame Cassians advise, is to take the powder of wormeseede
and of wormwood, of each alike, and one quarter less of Aloes Cicotrine, and
of these three powders mingled together, to give your hawke the mountenance of
a Bean in her casting, lapped up in a Hens skin, or in any such like
devise.

Of Apostumes that breed in Hawks.
WHen a Hawke has any Apostume in her body, ye shall know it by the stuffing
of her nares, and by her inordinate panting, which accident comes sometimes
by rushing rashly into bushes, or by bating too much upon the perch, and
moreover, by over free encounter with her prey. Now when she is so bruised and
chafed, and takes cold upon it, Apostums breed thereby, because the mischief
is not known and looked unto aforehand. Mallopin in his book of the Prince,
gives this remedy.

Take the white of an egg well beaten, and the juice of Coleworts well
bruised, as much of the one as of the other, and give it your hawke in the
morning in the small gut of a hen, and set her by a fire, or in the Sun, and at
noon feed her with mutton, or with a pullet. The next day take Rosemary dried,
and beaten into fine powder, and bestow it upon her meat reasonably. For other
three days give her sugar, and three days next after that plie her again with
her said powder, letting her stand warm day and night, and feeding her with
good meat: and the likelihood is great she shall be recovered.

Of a Hawke that has her Liver inflamed.
THe inflammation of the Liver happens sometimes through the negligence of such
as have the keeping of hawks. For they feed them with gross and naughty
flesh, such as is state and stinking, without making of it clean, by means
whereof proceeds the said inflammation of the Liver. Also it happens for want
of bathing when need is, and for lack of water, which they ought to have, or
with ouerfleeing of them, when they be empty paneld. Ye shall perceive this
disease by their feet: for they will be chased, and the color of their chaps
will be changed, and look whitish through the heat of their Liver. And if
ye find her tongue scorched and scalded black, it is a sign of death. To
remedy this mischief, make the medicin of snailes steeped in Asses milk, or
Goats milk, mentioned in the chapters of the diseases of the head, and of the
stone: and give your hawks of it three or four days in the mornings. And if
ye cannot get that medicin, ye may use the other that is made oflard, marow of
beef, and of boiled Sugar, with a little Saffron, four or five days together
every morning, as is said before. For the scowring of her will rid and abate
her heat. And all that while for seven or eight days feed her with poultrie,
or with mutton steeped in milk: for milk is very good for the heat of the
Liver. And you must beware you feed her not with Pigeon, nor with other gross
flesh for breeding her to inordinate heat. M. Ame Cassian says yet further,
that to allay the said heat in hawks, it is very good to steep or wet their
meat in Endive or Nightshade water: and likewise in white whey newly and lately
made. And that this manner of feeding must be continued four or five days till
the Hawke be well scoured. And that if the hawke have a desire to bouze the
said whey, ye must let her take her fill. Master Ame Cassian says moreover,
that when your medicine has scowred your hawk after that manner, and her tongue
is not aught in the better tune, ye must take oil olive washed in two or three
waters, and bath her tongue and throat therewith with a feather three or four
times in the day, for four or five days together, and gently scrape her tongue
and throat with a devise of silver or of other mettell for ye purpose. And
although she nether ca^ feed nor will, yet she must not be given over, but have
meat gently conveyed into her gorge by small morsels and thrust down low
enough with a fine stick that she may take it: for she cannot swallow her meat
by reason of the swelling of her tongue, and therefore she must be assisted in
manner aforesaid. M. Michelin says furthermore that to comfort and strengthen
the liver withal, ye must steep Rubarb in a dishfull of cold water all night,
and the next morning wash her meat therewith, continuing so by the space of
four or five days together.

Martin gives yet one other medicine which is this: Take a Pullets gut thrice
the length of your little finger, and cutting it in three pieces (which you
must tie fast at either end) fill them with Oil of Almonds or oil olive, and
thrust them into her throat, so as she swallow them one after another: and
within an hour after gorge her reasonably with a young pullet. And the next
morning take the seeds of rushes and the scrapinges of Iuorie, and the dung of
Sparows, of each two penny weight and make thereof a powder, and season your
hawks meat therewith, and it will pleasure her. And these two medicines are
to be used when a hawke is not very foul within, for if she be, then are the
other former medicines better.

Of the Canker which breeds of overgreat heat in the Liver.
IF a Canker happen in the throat or tongue of a hawke, by means of the heat
of the Liver: Make her the foresaid medicine of Snayles, or that of Larde, as
it is devised before, giving her her meat sowst in Milk, or oil of sweet
Almonds or oil Olive: and let the Canker be washed twice or thrice a day, till
it wax white and ripe, Then with your Instrument scrape it clean away that
nothing of it rewayne. And if there happen to be any dead flesh in it, put
powder of Alom, or the juice of Lymons in it, and plye it still with the said
Milk or Oils, till she be thoroughly recured. And to make new flesh grow up
again, put to it a little honey of Roses.

Of the Pantas of the gorge.
BEcause many men speak of the disease of the Pantas diversely, and yet know
not what it is: I will show three manner of Pantases wherewith hawks are
diseased. The first in the gorge, the second comes of cold, and the third is
in ye reins and kidneys. The first kind of Pantas comes of bating upon the
perch, or upon the fist of him that bears them, by means whereof some little
veins of the liver break, and the blood powers out upon the Liver, which
dries and cloddeth into small flakes, and those rising up afterward when the
hawke bateth again, do stop the passages and windepipe, and thereof comes
the Pantas. And sometime when the Hawke bateth, those flakes do so ascend into
her throat, and he overthwart it that she presently falls down dead:
insomuch that some hold opinion, it is the Pantas that makes Hawks to die
suddenly. For proof whereof, open your hawke when she is dead, and ye shall
find this malady in her throat. Master Ame Cassian gives no Medicine to this
Pantas in the gorge, because it cannot be ministered to her, neither by her
throat nor otherwise. For the disease holds her in the very windpipe, whereby
the breath passes in and out. Nevertheless his counsel is to close up the
hawke in some convenient chamber with lattis windows, so as ye may not get
out, and to set her two or three perches, that she may flee from one to
another, and have the Sun shine in upon her if it be possible, and she must
have always water by her. And when ye feed her, her meat must be cut in small
pellets, and have neither feather nor bone in it, least she strain her self in
tyring, and she must have but half a gorge at once, and but once in a day.
This is his counsel and advise for this mischief.

Of another Pantas that comes of cold.
ANother Pantas comes of cold when hawks take wet in fleeing the field, or
the ciuer, and are not weathered afterward, nor set in a place where they may
stand warm. Again, this disease comes by standing where smoke or dust may
annoy them. And ye shall know the Pantas by your Hawks panting, for that she
cannot draw her breath as she should do. Malopin says, that to remedy this
disease, ye must take the filings of iron, and meal of Lentils, of each like
quantity, which you must temper together with honey till it be like past, that
ye may make it in little bals as big as a Peaze. Whereof you shall give your
Hawk two or three every morning, and after noo^e feed her with good meat, but
not with beef: which diet you shall allow her three or four days. And if she
amend not, season her meat with powder of Orpiment two or three days.

M. Michelm gives this medicine following: Take Mayden-haire which grows
lightly at the heads of ponds and pits, and therewithal the roots of Persley,
the roots of Smallage. Of all these take like portions, and boil them in a
good big pot that is new. Then strain the water through a Colander, and put
thereto a quantity of clarified sugar with a little marrow of beef, and stir
them altogether, and thereof give your hawke a portion in the morning, and as
much at Evening with a small tunnel, or otherwise with a spoon or other fit
device four or five days together, and let her not feed till noon be past,
then give her of pullets flesh without blood, dipped in Oil of sweet Almonds,
or Oil olive washed in two or three waters: and when ye have so sowst her
meat, let it also be seasoned with a little Saffron and Sugar. And four or
five days after, if need be, give her on her meat the powder of Orpiment
without oil, other three or four days. And afterward ye may return again to
your oil of Almonds, or oil Olive, till your hawke be thoroughly recured.

Of the Pantas that is in the reins and Kidneys.
IT happens sometimes that when a hawke has been recovered of some great
grief by good keeping and intendance, afterward she waxes evil again, and
falls to panting, whereof breeds this disease of the reins and kidneis, in
manner of a canker, as big as a bean, which swells bigger and bigger, in such
wise that she falls to casting some part of her meat. This Pantas differs
much from both the other: for it will leave her seven or eight days, and then
vex her again more strongly. And sometimes it will take her but from Month to
Month, so as she shall bear it out a whole year. It is discerned by this,
that when she pants, she stirs her reins more tha^ her pineons, whereas in
the other she stirs more her pinions than her reins. Again, to know it
truly when it comes and goes every seven or eight days, if your Hawke
chance to die, rippe her and you shall find a knubbe of the bigness of a small
bean full upon the reins and the small of her back whereof that disease
proceeds.

Master Cassian gives this remedy for it. Ye must take the roots of Capers,
of Fenel, of Smallage, and of Parsley and boil them together in a new pot,
to the consumprion of a third part. Then take an old Tyle, the older the
better, and make powder thereof. When you serve your hawke, feed her with
flesh steeped in the water of the said roots, a quarter of an hour, or
therabouts before hand. In the morning when ye give her of that washed meat,
give her none of ye powder, and at night wash not her meat with the said
Water, but besprinckle it with the powder, so competently as she may receive
it, and give her not at any time above half a gorge: let this be done nine or
ten days or more. If ye see that your Hawke amend not, continue it still: for
then was the disease very much confirmed, and the hawke had borne it out long,
and it is hard to be cured. But if ye take the disease when it is new and
green, plie her diligently with this Medicine, and it will help her.

Of the Hawke that is morfounded by some mischance.
Morfound is the French word which does signify in English the taking of cold.
SOmetimes it falls out that hawks are morfounded by some mischance, and
sometimes also by giving them too great a gorge, specially when they be wet.
For then they cannot indew, nor put over their gorges, and so they surfeit,
because their meat conuerteth into slime, and gross humors which overthrow
their appetite, by means whereof they come oftentimes to their bane. Ye shall
know the disease by this, that if ye give your hawke a great gorge, specially
over night, the next morning she will have no list to her breakfast, but
becomes cold, and so falls into great disease. Mallopin in his book of the
Prince, gives this medicine for it. When ye perceive her to be so morfounded,
and to have lost her appetite, give her no meat that day, but set water before
her, and let her bowze or bath at her pleasure. When she has bathed and is
weathered again, throw her a live Pigeon, and let her kill it, and take as
much of the blood of it as she lifts, but let her not eat past one of the
legs at that time. Afterward set her down on some hie thing with water by her,
and beware of giving her any great gorge. Then for four or five days together
give her five or six cloves of maces lapped up in a hens skin, and that will
recover her.

Of the disease that is called the privy and hidden evil in a Hawke, for
which we have no special term.
SOmetimes hawks perish for want of knowledge of some secret disease that
happens to them, and therefore I will tell you how you shall know it. The hawk
that has that disease is always greedy to feed, insomuch that when ye have
given her a great gorge in the morning, she will have indewed it out of hand,
and if ye give her another at noone, she will put it over by and by, and if ye
give her the third at night, she will dispatch that quickly also, and the more
she feeds, the more greedy and nippie she is. This disease comes of this,
that when your Hawke is very poor and low in state, and you desirous to set
her up quickly, thinking to bring her in good plight with great gorges, you
feed her with Pigeons and other flesh which she cannot indew by reason of her
poverty and weakness, for want of heat in the liver: the heat whereof is the
cause of all kindly digestion and indewing. Also you may know this disease by
her often muting which is watrish and thin, and besides she does slise further
tha^ she is wont to do by reason of speedy induing her meat. M. Mallopin in
his book of the Prince says, that for remedy of this disease ye must steep a
sheep heart cut in small pieces all one night in Asses milk, or Goats
milk, and the next day give your hawk a quarter of it in ye morning for her
beaching, as much at noon, and the rest at night, forcing her to receive as
much of the milk as ye can, and continue it five or six days together til ye
see her mute kindly. Then feed her reasonably with good meat, steeped in oil
of sweet Almonds, continuing it for three or four days space twice a day. And
as ye find your hawke to mend, so increase her meals by little and little, till
she be in as good plight as she was before, always continuing the said Milk:
for some are of opinion that milk is good for all diseases of a Hawke. Master
Ame Cassian says, that to remedy this disease, ye must take a tortois of the
land and not a water Tortois, and steep the flesh of it in woman's milk, Asses
milk, or Goats milk, and give your Hawke a quantity of it for a beaching
three or four times, and a little more at her feeding times six or seven
days together. Afterward feed her with sheep hearts steeped in woman's
milk, by little and little at once till she be recovered: and let her not
stand in a dampish or moist place, but in warm places in the winter, and in
cool places in Summer, and always hooded.

Of the disease and weakness in there ynes.
WHen your Hawk cannot iump the length of her lines and cryance to your fist,
or from your fist up to the perch, nor bate with her wings: Ye may well think
that she has the disease of the reins. Therefore M. Cassian wills you to
chop a hares skin hair and all in very small and fine pieces and to mingle it
with cats flesh, and to feed your hawke with it seven or eight days together:
and if she indew it, she shall recover of her disease.

Of Hawks that have the ague or Fever.
TO know whether your hawke have the Ague: Mark whether her feet be more
swollen than they were wont to be or no: if they be, then has she the ague.
To remedy this mischief, Michelin says, you must mingle Arsenicke and Capons
grease together well sprinkled with Vinegar, whereof you must make a little
ball, which you must cause your Hawke to take by casting her, and use it in
such wise as she may keep it, and it will rid the Ague.

Of the Hawke that voydeth worms.
IF a Hawke void worms, by master Martins advise ye must make this medicine
following. Take of the fine fylings of iron and strew it upon your hawks meat,
which (if you do well) must be Porke: and feed her so three or four days
with that kind of flesh so seasoned, and it will cure her.

Of the Teynt in a hawks feather, and how many kinds of it there be.
HItherto ye have read of the inward diseases of hawks: Now I will tell you of
the outward accidents: and first will speak of the Teynt which the French
Falconers call Taigne, the Italians Zignuole and Tarmae, whereof there are
three sorts. The first is when their principals or long. Feathers begin to
drop off, by means whereof many hawks are marred and cast away without
knowledge how to help it. Master Ame Cassian says, that this comes
sometimes of the Liver, and of the excessive heat of the body, by means
whereof small pimples rise upon their wings, or on their trains, which
afterward cause their Feathers to droppe-off, and when they are gone, the holes
where they stood do close again, where through the hawke does perish, if she
be not remedied. This disease is contagious, and one of them will take it of
another, and therefore ye must not let the Hawke that is affected with it
stand near a Hawke that is sound, neither must you touch or feed a sound Hawke
on the Glove whereon a sick Hawke has been fed. And ye shall know that
she has that disease, by her often picking with her beak upon her principal
feathers of her wings and train and by their dropping away. Therefore cast
your Hawke, and let her be well perused, and ye shall find the said disease.
For remedy whereof, Master Martin, and M. Cassian say, you must cast your Hawke,
and when you have found the small pimple whence the feather dropped first, you
must get a little stick of Fur, which is by nature gummy and fat, make a
little pegge of it, not sharp at the forend, nor thrust it in with violence,
but softly as you may. And if ye can get none of that wood, then take a grain
of Barley and cut off the forepoint of it, and anoint it with a little
Triacle, or Oil olive, and convey it into the hole, so as it may stick a
little out, and the hole not close together, and stop again. Then with a
small Lance or Penknife, you must slitte the pimple, and let out the red
water, which you shall find there. After this, take Aloes Cicotrine in powder,
and put it into the gall of an ox, coyled in a dish, and with those two
mingled together, anoint the slit round about: and beware that there come
nothing in the hole where the feather grew, for it might do the hawke great
harm. This done, take of the reddest Lentiles that you can come by, and less
than half so much of the filings of iron, and mingle them together with honey,
and thereof make Pills as big as a Pease, and then give your Hawke two or
three of them every morning. Then set her by a fire, or in the Sun and after
noone give her a reasonable good gorge of a Pullet, or of mutton, and if ye
list ye may give her of those Pills toward the Evening also. Let her meat be
steeped in milk as is said heretofore five or six days together, and look
always to the incisions that ye made, and she shall be recovered.

An other remedy Martin gives for the same disease. Annoint the place with
some good Balm where the feathers fell away, and the Teint will die out of
hand, and fresh feathers supply the place again. And he says moreover, that
you must take the powder of Petre of Alexandria, which is sold at the
Potecaries, and mingle it with Vinegar, and anoint the diseased place with it
three or four times, and it will be whole.

The second kind of Teynt which fretteth the principalles of a Hawke to the
very Quill, comes (as the chief Falconers affirm) of ill keeping, when they
have not their due intenda^ce, being neither bathed nor scowred, nor kept in
whole some places And therefore we are forbid to keep a Hawk in a sluttish
corner. Again, sometimes both in the mew and out of the mew it happens that by
feeding them with filthy and loathsome flesh, they become full of filth both
within and without, whereof breeds such a sort of worms, as do utterly
fret asunder and mar their feathers. The three chief Falconers say, that for
this second teynt which fretteth the feathers of a hawke in sort that they
become like sticks, ye must take vine shreds, and make thereof as strong Lie as
ye can, and wash your hawke once a day with it thoroughly: and when she is
weathered again, anoint all her feathers with honey out of the comb. Then make
powder of Sanguis Draconis, and roch alom very small, and powder the foresaid
Quils therewith, and your hawk shall be recured. Or else take a Mole of that
sort which breeds in medows, and put her in a new earthen pot well covered,
and stopped, and set it on the fire one whole day: which done, take her out
again as she is, and make her into powder very small. And when ye have bathed
your hawks feathers thoroughly with the said lee, by and by bestrew her
feathers with the powder of the Mole a certain time together, and it will
pleasure her.

The third kind of Teynt is known in hawks by the riuing of their principal
feathers throughout along the upper side of the web of them. And that happens
commonly for want of clean feeding and due attendance. To remedy this, Mallopin
says, that ye must take a green reed, and clean it all along, and scrape
out the pith of it, and wring out of it as much juice as ye can, wherewith you
must moysten the said riuen feathers all along the riftes of them, and they
will close and shut again as before. And if any feather happen to be dropped
away, let a tente made of Fur or of a grain of Barley as is said heretofore
be put into the hole of it, and use it after the foresaid manner, and a new
feather will grow again out of hand. It this devise, to cause a feather to
grow again be not to your liking, you shall in this collection find such as
may content you.

Martin gives another medicine and advice for the same, which is this: Take
two penny weight of Orpiment, and nine grains of pepper, and make it into
powder, and cast it upon her meat which must be reasonable warm. Again, take
three slices of bacon of that which is nearest the skin, and let them be so
small as your hawk may swallow them with ease: sauce them with a little honey,
and strew of the powder of the filings of iron upon the honey, and give your
hawk thereof three days together. After which time take a young chicken, and
before ye boil it in wine, bruise the breast of it, and open it with a sharp
knife or other instrument that the blood may follow. The^ feed her with the
said pullets flesh warm, steeped in Goats milk, or other milk. Practice this
two or three days, and afterward thereupon give her good warm meat, and she
shall recover.

Of the Hawke that indeweth not, ne puts over as she should do.
IT falls out sometimes that a Hawke cannot well indew, nor put over her meat
as she should do, and that is only because she is foul within, or has
taken some surfeit, or else that when she was low and poor, her keeper being
desirous to set her up again too hastily, gave her too great gorges which she
by reason of her weakness was not able to put over, and indew, where through
she surfetted and forwent her appetite of feeding altogether. For remedy
hereof, Maliopin says, ye must feed her with light meats, and little at once,
as with young rattes and mise, or with great rattes, for there is more
substance in them than in the other, whereof ye must give her but half
gorges, that she may the sooner indew them, and put them over. Or else feed
her with Chicken, or mutton dipped in Goats milk, or otherwise. And for want
of those, take the yolke of an egg, and give her a quarter of a gorge thereof,
and when ye feed her with the flesh of any live bird or foul, steep it well
in the blood of the same foul, and it will do her much good. So shall your
hawke mount of her flesh apace: if besides that, you do also scour her with
pills made of Larde, marow of beef, sugar and saffron three mornings together,
and two hours after give her a reasonable gorge.

Another receipt which M. Michelin gives, saying. When a Hawk indews not her
meat, ne puts it over as she ought to do, but has surfeited and wants
natural heat: Take very pure white wine, and steep her meat in it luke warm,
giving it her by little and little often times in the day, always changing her
meat, and see that it be light of digestion. Do thus to her till she be in
better tune again, giving her five or six cloves of maces in the evening
wrapped in a little cotton, or in some other such like devise: for that will
warm her head, and all her other parts very well, and let the cotton be
dipped in odoriferous old wine.

Of the hawke that can neither cast up her meat nor endew it as she ought.
ANother mischief is wont sometimes to light upon hawks namely, that by taking
ouer-great gorges, they can neither indew nor cast it again, and also that
many times a hawke soareth away with her prey, and feeds so greedily upon it
by reason she was kept over eager and sharp, that she can neither get it up
nor down, and thereupon falls in danger of death. Wherefore all men ought to
use discretion in feeding their hawks, that they ouer-gorge them not.

M. Cassian says, that for remedy thereof, ye must set clean water in a
vessel before your hawke, and let her houze thereof at her plasure. And if she
list not: then take the quantity of a bean of Porke, of the fattest of it, and
two parts less of powder of Pepper, with a little salt brayed very small, and
when ye have mingled them altogether, make a little bal of it as big as a
bean, and put it in your Hawks beak, so as she may receive it. Then set her
by the fire, or in the Sun, and you shall see her cast her gorge. But let not
the hawke be too poor to whom you intend to allow this pill, for if she be
too low, she will hardly bear it.

Another medicine to make her cast her gorge.
RUb the roof of her mouth with a little Vinegar and Pepper, and she will cast
by and by, And if ye list, ye may also convey two or three drops of the same
into her nares, and it will make her cast her gorge out of hand. And if ye see
that the Vinegar and Pepper do vex and distemper her too much after the
casting of her gorge, spirt a little fresh water with your mouth into her palate
and nares.

Of the Hawke that casts her gorge over much, and cannot indew as she should
do
MAny times it comes to pass that when a hawk has fed, she cannot keep
her meat but falls to casting, as soon as she has received it. This
comes of feeding her with gross foul, and unwholesome meat not washed: or
else for that she is foul in the panel, and so cannot indew by reason of the
great store of filth that is within her. Therefore ye must beware that ye cut
not her meat with a foul knife, or with a knif that has cut onions, leekes,
chibbols, or such other like things. To remedy this inconvenience, give not
your hawke great gorges. And to bring her well in tune again, scour her with
the forementioned pills of larde, marow, sugar, and saffron by the space of
three days. And above all things, let not the hawke that has cast her gorge
be fed a good space after it, but let her stand empty in the Sun with water
before her to bowse at her pleasure, for that will do her much good. And when
ye feed her, give her at the first time but a quarter of a gorge, and at the
second somewhat more, if she keep the first: and her meat must be some live
foul, and good of digestion, till she be brought again to her natural
plight. But if she keep not all her meat, give her young rats or live mice: and
for want of those, give her small birds til she be recovered. If these
foresaid things boot not, then by Mallopins advise, take Coriander seed beaten
in powder, and temper it with warm water, straining it through a cloth, wash
your Hawks meat therewith four or five days together, and if ye have no
Coriander seed, take the juice of Coriander. And if your hawke mend not yet for
all this: Follow the counsel of Master Michelins here ensuing. Boil Bay
leaves in white wine till half the lyquor be wasted, and then let it cool
with the leaves still in it. Which done, force a Pigeon by devise to bowse so
much of the wine that she may die of it. Then immediately feed your hawke with
the same Pigeon, and let her not eat more than a leg of it.

Of the Hawke that has lost her appetite and will not feed to make her eager
without bringing her low.
A Hawk does sometime loose her appetite of feeding by some misfortune, as by
taking too great gorges toward evening, which she cannot well endew, because
the nights are colder than the days. Also she may loose her appetite by being
foul in the panel, and diverse times by coldness, or by some other disease
which cannot be perceived out of hand. For remedy whereof, Master Mallopin
says, ye must take Aloes Cicotrine, boylde Sugar, and marrow of beef, of
each a like, saving that there must be least of the Aloes, and when ye have
mingled them together, and made them in little Balls or Pills as big as
beans, give of them to your hawke, and hold her in the Sun till she have
cast up the slime and filth that is within her. And if it happen to scowre
downward, let it not trouble you, for it will do her much good: and feed
her not till noone, at which time give her good meat, and serve her so three
days together.

For the same disease Michelus says, you must take common pills that are given
to purge men withal, and give one or two of them to your hawk in the morning,
keeping her hooded by the fire, or in the Sun, looking to her that she cast
them not, (if it may be) to the intent they may cause her to scowre downward.
And the book of the Prince says, that it is good giving of those pills to
hawks in the beginning of September. For if they have the Filanders, or any
other inward disease, it scowreth them, and riddeth them of all mischiefs that
may ensew. Three or four days after you have given your hawke these Pills, if
she have yet no lust to feed, cast the filing of iron upon her meat three or
four days together.

M. Ame Cassian says, that for the same disease, when yon perceive it you must
give your hawke a live stockedoue, allowing her leave to seize and tire upon
it, and to take the blood of it at her pleasure. And for want of a stockdoue,
small birds are good, and so be rattes and mise, so she have them alive. And
if you will have her to endew them quickly, give her but half gorges.

When Hawks are low brought, a remedy.
IT happens sometimes that Hawks are brought so low, that a man shall have
much a do to set them up again. And that comes through the fault of
unskillful keepers, rather than any other thing. For some give them ill meat,
cold, and unwashed. Also Hawks do happen to grow poor by some disease that
their keepers are not ware of. Again, sometimes it happens that a Hawke soars
away, and is lost four or five days, and so becommes poor for want of prey.
M. Cassian says, that if ye will set her up again, ye must feed her a little
at once and with good meat, such as rattes and mice are, for they they be light
of digestion, or else with small birds which are good likewise, and of great
nourishment. Poultrie also is good but it nourishes not so much of his own
nature as Mutton does.

Again, ye may set her up (when she is low) in this manner following. Take a
spoonefull or twain of honey, three or four of fresh butter, boil them
together in a new pot of water, the^ take Porke well washed, and steep it in
that water, giving your hawke a good reasonable gorge of it twice a day,
warming your said water when you intend to feed your Hawke. And if ye can
find any Snailes that breed in running waters, give her of them in the morning,
and they will both scowre away the gross slimie humors that are in her panell,
and also be a great help to set her up again, (for they nourish very well.)
And if ye mind to make your hawke eager, and sharp set, without bating her
self, take the heart and liver of a Pie, and when ye have made it into powder,
make your hawke to eat it, and it will set her sharp and eager. These are the
opinions of the French Falconers. You are to consider of them all, and to use
the most probable at your election and pleasure.

Of a Hawke that has no list to flee, and is become unlusty, or slothful.
NOw and then it happens, that a Hawke has no list to flee, either because she
is in evil keeping, that is to wit, of such as know not how to give her her
rightes: as bowzing, bathing, and such other things, whereof sometime she has
great need: or because the hawk is too hie, and full of grease, where through
she becomes coy: or contrariwise, because she is too low and poor: or else
by reason of some mishap or disease which she has that is unknown. Therefore
M. Cassian says, if a hawke be unlusty to flee, she must be viewed and perused
by some one of good skill, and have such remedies ministered to her, as she has
need of, as well for bathing as for bowzing: For in any wise water must be set
before her. And if she be high and not well enseamed, her meat must be
thoroughly washed, that it may scowre her the better. Or else if ye list, ye
may give her the foresaid medicine of Larde, Marrow, and saffron. And if ye
perceive your hawke to be sick or diseased, ye may use the remedies set down
heretofore, according to the several natures of the diseases, till your hawke
bae in good plight again as she was before. [But truly there is nothing
better for this evil then to give herin a morning three or four handsome pyls
of Seladine well washed. Addition.
]

Of the Hawke that has broken her wing by some mischance.
IT happens somewhile that a Hawke breaks her wing by mischance, as by bating
against the ground, or otherwise. Master Mallopin says, that when a hawke has
her Wing broken after that manner, ye must take Sanguis Draconis, Bole
Armoniacke, Gum arabicke, white Frankensence which is called Olibanum,
Masticke, Aloes Cicotrine, of each of them a like quantity, and a reasonable
quantity of fine meal flower. Make a powder of all the said things, tempering
it with the white of an egg, and make thereof a plaster, and lay it to the
hurt when ye have first set it right again. Then cross her wings one over
another, as though they were not broken, and mayle her well and fast, so as she
may not stir them, and let the meat that you give her be cut in small
Pellettes. Remove not the plaster for seven or eight days, and when ye lay
on another, in any wise beware that that wing be not removed: For if it be
never so little removed or displaced, your labor is lost, and your Hawke
marred for ever.

Therefore keep her in that order by the space of 14. or 15. days, setting
her upon a very soft cushion, and let her meat be good and new killed, and
give her meetely good gorges of it, for she needs not to be kept low to
recover her health the better.

Of a Hawke that has had some blow or stripe upon her wing.
SOmetimes a hawke has a stripe on her wing by some mishappe, so as she
cannot afterward hold it right, but it hangs always down, and lolleth.
Master Cassian says, that ye must take Sage, Mintes, and Pelamountaine, and
boil them altogether in a new earthen pot full of good wine, and when they be
well sodden, take the pot and set it upon hot Imbers as close stopped as may
be. Then make a round hole of the bigness of an Apple, in the cloth that
your pot is stopped withal, for the steame to issue out at. Which done, take
your Hawke upon your fist, and hold out her hurt wing handsomely a great while
over the hole, that it may take the fume which seameth up out of the pot.
Afterward let her be well dried by keeping her warm by the fire, for if she
should catch sudden cold upon it, it would become worse than it was before.
Use her thus twice a day, for three or four days together, and she shall be
recovered.

Of the Hawke that has her wing out of joint.
WHen a hawks wing is out of joint, ye must take her handsomely, and put it
up, so as ye may set it in his right place again. Which done, lay a Plaster
to it, made of Sanguis draconis, Boli Armoni, Masticke, and flower tempered
together with the white of an egg, and maile her up letting it lie by the
space of five or six days, and it will be whole.

Of a Hawke that has her pinion broken.
IF a hawke chance to have her pynion broken by treading upon her, or by
striking against some thing, M. Mallopia says, that there is no better
remedy, than the foresaid Receipt made for her wing broken: and that if need
be, she must be mayled, that it may the better join together again, and the
plaster renewed every five days. Or else let the hurt be splented by and by,
and bound up with convenient devises for the purpose, giving her her meat cut
in small pellets, and let her continue mailed, that she trouble not her seife
with tyring.

Of the Hawke that has her leg or thigh broken.
TAke Fur or Frankinsense, pill off the bark of it, and beat it into powder,
and mingle it with the white of an egg: and if ye can, put in also a little
Sanguis Draconis, and make a plaster of it. Then deplume your hawks thigh, and
lay the plaster to the broken place, taking good heed that ye bind it not too
straight for fear of flux and repair of accidents to the place, for so ye
may do her great harm. And for want of Fur, or Frankincense, take the bark
of an Oak: for Fur is not to be had in many places. Afterward renew your
plaster every five or six days, till your Hawke be thoroughly whole, always
cutting her meat to her as aforesaid, and keeping her hooded. And if it be
broked beneath the thigh, lay the same plaster to it, taking good heed that
ye bind it not too hard: for in so doing ye may make her foot to wither
away, and mortify the member, which is a very great negligence. For Hawks are
dainty birds, and daintily to be dealt withal.

Of the Hawke that is wounded with a stripe, or some other misfortune.
IF a Hawke hap to be wounded by an Eagle, or any other bird of prey, by
crabbing together, or by encounter in fleeing: or by a iobbe with the truncke
of a Crane, Hearon, or other water foul: or by taking some great blow against
a tree or ^ocke, whereby she is greatly pained, and in danger to be marred, if
there be not skill to help her with speed. By M. Ame Cassian advise, take the
juice of the herb called Culuerfoote, otherwise named Herb Rebert: and if
ye find your Hawks stripe to be great and black, and yet that it has no
great gash, you must make incision, and slitte the skin a little more by your
discretion, that ye may the more easily convey in the said juice. That done,
lay a leaf of the same herb upon the wound to cover it, spreading the
feathers handsomely again over it, and let it not be removed 24. hours after.
And know ye, that the said herb has such virtue, that what wound soever
you lay it on, it shall never swell nor rancle. For want of the herb it
self, take of the Powder of it, and put it into the wound, keeping it always
clean by washing it with a little white Wine, as is aforesaid. And if ye see
that the juice or powder of that herb do no good, take the medicine that
Mallopin speaks of. Take Oil of Roses, and Capons grease, of each alike
quantity, with a little less Oil of Violetes, and less of Turpentine by the
one half, and confect them altogether. Then take Masticke and Frankinsense in
powder, of each alike: and if ye can find the said herb called Culuerfoote,
dry it, and beat it into powder also: and when ye have serced your powders,
put them into the said Capons grease, and stir them together with a stick,
till they be thoroughly incorporated, and so shall your unguent be perfect. And
the chief Falconers say, you must make handsome tents of Cotton, bebestowing
on them this unguent, and so apply them to the wounded places of your hawke
from time to time till they be recured. And if the Hawks skin be much broken
or torn, ye must sow it up handsomely, leaving a little hole in one side for
an issue, which you must keep open with a tent noynted with the foresaid
unguent till it be thoroughly whole.

Master Michelin sets down another medicine, saying, that if a Hawke happen
to have a stripe or a wound, you must pluck away the feathers round about the
hurt place, and that if the wound be so deep, as it can by no means be
stitched up: ye must put of the powder hereafter following into it. Take
Sanguis draconis, white Frankincense, Aloes Cicotrine, and Masticke, and of
those four being all in like quantity, make a fine powder, and lay it upon the
wound, and afterward anoint it round about with oil of Roses, or Oil Olive
warm to comfort it. And if the wound be not so large but that it may well be
stitched: sow it together again leaving a little hole for an issue. Then make a
plaster with the white of an egg, and having first anointed it with the said
Oil, lay of the powder upon the sore, and put a tent in it dipped in the said
unguent to keep the issue, and lay your plaster upon it, dressing it after
that manner still, till your Hawke be sound.

There is yet another medicine very good and available, which is this. Take
the powder of fine Canell which is nothing else but Cinnamon, and put it in the
wound, supplying it afterward with good oil of Roses, or oil Olive.

Another medicine of Master Cassians making.
TAke half an ounce of Masticke, a quarter of an ounce of Bolo Armoniacke,
half an ounce of Roses, an ounce of Capons grease, an ounce of Oil of Roses,
an ownce of Oil of Violets, and a quarter of an ounce of virgin wax. Of all
these, let the things that may be molten, be molten together: and let those
things that are to be beaten into powder, be beaten to fine powder. And when
ye have streyned al your liquors into a new pot, put your powders into them,
stirring them about with a stick till they be well incorporated together, taking
good heed that ye put not too much fire under your pot, and so shall your
unguent be perfect. Which you may use in handsome pleggets for your hawke,
tenting her with small tents dipped in the same unguent, after the manner
mentioned in the former receipt, till she he thoroughly recured.

And if your hawke be hurt or bruised without any skin broken, take the
powder of Mummy mingled with the blood of a wood Culuer, or of a Pullet, and
convey it into her throat so as she may receive it down, and two or three
hours after give her a reasonable gorge of good meat. If the broose be
apparent, annoint it with good oil of Roses, and if need require, for the
largeness or soreness of her wounds, let her be mailed, as is before said,
for her more quiet, and more speedy recovery.

Of the Hawke that has swollen feet.
IT happens diverse times that hawks have a swelling in their feet, and that
comes by chasing of their feet in fleeing their prey, and in striking it, and
by taking cold upon it, for want of rolling the perch with some warm cloth:
or else because they be full of gross humors, and foul within, which humors
being removed by their labor and travel in fleeing, drop down upon their
feet, and there swell, specially in Sacres more than in any others. For they
be of their own nature very heavy hawks and have gross feet. Again, it
happens sometimes that a Hawke pricketh her self upon a thorn by rushing into
hedges and bushes over ventrously, whereupon follow such swellings as are
dangerous, and hard to be cured. Therefore Master Cassian says, that when a
Hawke is in that taking, she must be scowred three mornings together with the
Pyls of Lard, Marow, Sugar, and Saffron, and set in the Sun, and fed two
days after with some good meat. Then must ye take Bole Armoniacke, and
Sanguis Draconis, less by one half, and make it in powder, and temper them
well together with the white of an egg and Rose Water, and anoint her feet
with it three or four days twice a day, setting her upon some cloth to keep
her feet warm. And if this medicine do her no good, take this that follows.

Mallopin says, that if a Hawks feet be but swollen, and have not any knubs
in the ball of the foot, take a pair of sizzers or coping yrons, and cope the
talons of her swollen foot, till the blood follow: which done, take Capons
grease, oil of Roses, and oil of Violets, of each alike, and twice as much of
Bele Armoniacke. When ye have mingled the^ all well together, make thereof an
unguent, and anoint your hawks feet therewith twice a day til they be thoroughly
whole, always setting some soft and warm thing under her feet. And if this do
her no good, then try the receipts above mentioned till your hawke be thoroughly
recured.

Of the swelling in the legs or thighs.
SOmetime a hawke has her legs swellen, and sometime her thighs and not her
legs: and that comes either by ouer-laboring her self in fleeing, How to
make oil of agges.
or by overmuch seazing her prey, and by taking cold upon it. Also by like
labor and bating, the humors being stirred within her, drop down to her
thighs and legs, and thereof comes this swelling.

Wherefore first let your hawke be scowred with the pylles made of Lard, Marow,
Sugar and Saffron, then roste nine or ten eggs hard in their shells, and when
they be cold again, take the yolks of them, and break them with your hand in
an iron possenet over the fire. The^ take an iron Laddle, and stir them
handsomely without ceasing, and when ye see them become black that ye would
think they were mard and burnt, boil them still: which done, gather them
together and press out the oil of them, then heat them again as before to
press out as much oil of them as is possible, and put it up in a glass. And
when ye mind to use it for the said disease, ye must take ten drops thereof,
put thereto three drops of vinegar, and three of Rose Water, and mingle them
well together. This medicine is singular good against all swellings of their
thighs, legs and feet, and moreover it supplyeth and mollifieth their sinews.
But first ye must anoint the swellings with a little Adiantum, and afterward
with your oil prepared as aforesaid till your hawke be cured.

Of the swelling in a hawks foot which we term the pin, or pin Gout.
Diverse times there rise up knubs upon the feet of hawks as upon the feet of
Capons which some call Galls, and some Gouts. They come sometimes of the
swelling of the legs and thighs, which I have spoken of before, or of other
diseases that breed of the abundance of humors within the Hawke, which must
first be scowred with the last mentioned pills three or four days together
And Master Ame Cassian says, that when a hawke has the said pinnes and
gowtines in her feet, ye must make round matches of paper as big as the
agglet of a point, and fear or cauterise the pin round about. And if the
knub stick far out, ye may slit it mannerly with a hot sharp knife, and
put a little slice of fat Lard into the slit to keep it open, and set your
Hawke upon a little heap of very fine salt. And if there grow any dead flesh
it in, lay the powder of glass, and two parts of Hermodactels upon it, and
when the Sore is scowred, anoint it with Swines grease and honey together,
always laying salt under her feet to the end of your cure. And to remedy the
same, Mallopin in his Book of the Prince says, that when a Hawke is gowty or
has the pin on her feet, ye must take of Rue three ownces, of Barberies three
ownces, of Colewort leaves three ownces, of Oil of Violets a reasonable
quantity, of Turpentine two ounces, of Sheep sewet as much shall serve, of
the fat of a young Pullet one ownce and a half, of Vergin wax one ownce, of
masticke one ownce, of white Frankincence one ownce, of Opopaner one ownce, and
of Allom two ownces. First strain out the juice of the said Herbs brayed
together, then put thereto all your other mixtures made into powder. Which
done, melt all your sewets together in a new earthen pot, and put your iuyces
and powders thereunto, stiring them continually with a stick over a soft fire,
and so cooling them by little and little, whereby your unguent will become
perfect, and you may keep it two years good. And when ye occupy it, spread
it playsterwise upon leather, or linen cloth, laying it upon the pin gowt,
removing it each other day till it be whole, for 15. days together. And if the
pin open not of it self, slit it and open it with a little sharp lance of
steel made hot, then cleanse the filthy matter and quitture, and so shall
your Hawke recover assuredly.

Master Cassian sets down another good and well tried receipt for the same
which is this: Take a quantity of Turpentine, half as much white Soap, making
the Soap into powder. That done, make ashes of vineshreds, and take thereof
somewhat less tha^ of the powder of the soap. Set these three mixtures
together upon the coals in a new pot, and stir them softly with a stick till
they be incorporate together. The^ make plasters thereof, and bestow them on
the pume-gowte so as they may not fall off, nor be removed by the hawke,
shifting them every two days till fifteen days be past, and that the disease
grow to maturation. Alterward you may slitte the pin, drawing out all the
matter and quitture clean, but let your lance be somewhat hot wherewith you
slit it, and if the pin open of it self, it is better. After this you must
apply another plaster of Draculum magnum, which you shall find at the
Apotecaries: or it is a great drawer, and if it have any dead flesh in it, lay
a little Verdegreece to it, for that is a corosiue and a fretter.

Martine says, that to soften the pin on the hawks foot and to make it grow
to a head, ye must take the roots of Flower deluce which bears the blew
leaf, dry it and beat it into powder, and make thereof a salve with honey of
Roses, and lay it to the pin till it be thoroughly whole.

Master Cassian says further, that if your hawks feet be chafed, and fall
to swelling, take the fyling of iron beaten into powder to the mountenance of a
bean or twain, and the quantity of a bean of a gad of steel fyled into
powder, and twice as much of the bark of an oak, as of the fyling of iron, of
which bark of the Oak, you must take away the uttermost part, and of the rest
make fine powder, feered through a cloth. When ye have mingled all these
powders together, boil them in a new pot with a potsle of good vinegar, to the
consumption of a third part. Then let it settle, and put the cleerest of it
alone by it self, and the grounds of it also by it self in a long narrow
bag that the hawke may rest both her feet upon it. And with the water ye may
use to bath, her feet every day three or four times a day. Likewise ye must
wet and refresh the bag with the same water, that the grounds may lie the
closer under the feet of the hawke, which must stand upon it night and day
till she be recured. And truly this is good for all manner of griefs and
swellings of the feet.

Martin is of opinion that ye must take half an ounce of Aloes and the white
of an egg, with half an ounce and two penny weighte of Glue, mingle them all
together, and put them in press, so as all may be residence, and make thereof
a plaster, and lay it to your Hawks feet till there be some issue and vent,
then anoint them with soft soap. And when there happens any rupture, take
Saltepeeter and Allom, of each two penny weight, making it into powder, bestow
it upon the broken place to fret the dead flesh away, for this is a good
corosiue for that purpose.

Of the Hawke that cares away her own feet
THis inconvenience happens to Merlions in chief, above all other hawks, and
to few or none else that I can read of. Master Cassian says, it is a kind of
Formica which makes them to eat their feet in that order. For remedy hereof,
make your hawke a collet of Paper to convey about her neck, so as she may not
touch her feet. Afterward, take an Ox gal, mingle it with a reasonable good
quantity of Aloes, and anoint your hawks feet therewith twice or thrice a
day, four or five days, and it shall do her pleasure, and preserve her from
this evil. If that do her not good, then by Master Cassians advice, take
Swines dung, and putting it on a Tyle, set it to the fire or in an oven, bake
it till ye may force it into powder. Which done, wash your Hawks feet with the
purest and strongest vinegar that ye can find, afterward bestow her feet in the
same powder, doing so twice or thrice a day for 14. or 15. days till she be
thoroughly recured.

The manner of the taking up of Hawks veins when an humor droppeth down too
fast on their feet.
WHen ye intend to stop the veins that feed ill humors in your hawks feet,
let her be handsomely cast then away with her pendant feathers. After that,
force her leg a little with your finger, and you shall see a good pretty big
vein under the knee. Having found the vein, take a needle and raise up the
skin a little, and make an issue at your discretion: but take good heed that ye
touch not the vein. That done, take the Clee of a Bittor, or of some other
bird whatsoever, wherewith do lift up the vein, and draw your silk thread
under the vein upon the Clee, and knit it on the side toward the leg to the
kneeward for if ye cut it toward the thigh above the knot, ye spoil your
hawke. Do no more to her but let it bleed as much as it will, remembering the
next morning to anoint it with oil or Capons grease. And be ye sure that the
taking up of veins is good and needful. For afterward the humors power not
down upon their legs and feet. I thought good to set ye down this manner of
taking up of veins, because I have used it my self, and recoue^ed many hawks
thereby. For when a Hawke has the veins of either thigh once taken up, the
disease can no more return for want of the wonted supply of moist humors, and
crude matter that flowed unto the place.

The manner of scowring and using your Hawks when they are to be cast into the
mew.
WHen the time is come to cast Hawes in the mew, it is requisite and needful
to scowre them, and to make them clean. For diverse times we see, that foul
feeding of Hawks in luring and fleeing time, engenders the Filanders and
other diseases in them, whereof they perish for want of care and cure in due
time. Wherefore Master Michelin says, that when ye entend to cast your Hawk
unto the mew, ye must make three pittes of the bigness of a bean, of the
foresaid mixture of Lard, Marow, Sugar, and Saffron, which you may giur her
three mornings together, not feeding her in two hours after, but suffering her
to gleame. Then give her some good flesh and reasonable gorge, setting her all
the while at the fire, or in the sun. And for other three mornings, after
that, you must give her the mountenance of a bean of Aloes C^ostrine when she
has cast, keeping her likewise by the fire, or in the Sun, and she will cast
the Aloes with gross slime and filthy stuff. Likewise Aloes being given
toward night enwrapped in her casting, is very good against the Fila^ders.
This done and performed, as I have told you, ye may cast her into the mew.

M. Ame Cassian says, that for the same purpose ye must convey the quantity of
half a hazell nut of Ierapigra into a hens gut, knit feit at both ends, and
force it into your Falcons throat, holding her on the fist by the fire or in
the Sun, till she have scowred, and so keep her empty and void till noone,
at what time she must be allowed of some good hot meat a reasonable gorge:
the next morrow feed her well, and after those two days cast her into the mew
without any more ceremonies or circumstance.

Artelowch advises you, that the mewing of a Hawke naturally with young
Rattes, Mice, Dogs flesh, Pigeons, Rabbets, and other wholesome fowls, is
far better than to use any art in the matter, or such superstitious
practices, as you may perhaps read some, and hear of many. Truly I am of his
opinion, and so do persuade you, that will mewe your hawks in good order: for
have in that case makes wast, as in all other things.

The best thing that you may do, when you mean to cast her into the mew, is
first to scowre her well after that manner that I have showed you in this book,
to cope her well and to set her up in flesh before you cast her into the mew to
discharge her of all disease as near as yon can, to rid her of mites and life
being once in the mew, to set her water sometimes, to feed her with liquid and
laxatiue meats now and than, and to omit none of those instructions which I
have collected for you out of the Italian Falconers: for they are very good
observations, specially for soar Hawks and Niasses.

But in the French man Artelo^ch, I find one necessary note for a Haggart,
which is this.

The Haggart (says he) is not to be cast loose into the mew, but to be mewed
on the fist, for otherwise she would become too coy and strange, and if she
fall to bating and beating her self for heat, then must you hoode her up, or
bespowt her with cold water, the next way to make her leave bating. Thus must
you continue her on the fist till she begin to shed her feathers, then shall
it be good to set her down, and tie her to a stone or perch as you do the
rest. And after she has mewed, and comes to flee, then if you let her stand on
a block or billet cased and rolled with cloth, you shall do very well.

Goshawkes, Tiercels and Sparowhawks must be mewed as Falcons, save that they
will not be borne on the fist, but be at liberty in the mew, and very cleanely
served.

Before you draw your hawke out of the mew fifteen or twenty days, you must
begin to bate her of her diet, the sooner and better to enseam her, by
restraint of her full feeding, which she had before, for otherwise there would
follow surfeit and repleation, than which there is no more dangerous evil.

It is no slender part of skill so to use a Hawke in the mew as she may be
quit of all mishaps that befall her in the mewe, if she be not well attended
and regarded, during the time she is in the mew.

The manner how to deal so with a Hawke in the mew, as she may avoid the
mischances of the mew which sundry times do happen, as well diseases as other
harms.
IT happens diverse times that when Hawks are in the mew, some do mew well
and some ill, so as some of their own nature, and some by mishap do fail to
be diseased, or otherwise break their feathers, and cast them not all the
year long. As touching this matter, Master Mallopin in his book of the Prince
says, that when your Hawke meweth not well and kindly, go in May to a
slaughter house where Sheep are killed, and take the kernels that are under
their ears right against the end of the iaw-bone, of the bigness of an
Almond. Chop ten or twelve of those kernels very small and give them to your
hawke with her meat, finding the means by some way or other that she may
receive them and put them over. And when she once begins to cast her feathers
give her no more of them.

Another way.
WHen ye mean to further the mewing of your Hawk, take of the Snailes that have
shells, stamp them shells and all, straining them through a cloth, and with the
oil that comes thereof wash her meat two or three times. Also take of the
snayles that lie in running streams, give your hawke of them in the morning:
for that will both scowre her and nourish her greatly, and sets her up, and
makes her to mew apace. Master Michelin in his book of the King of Cipres,
says thus: Cut an Adder in two parts and sees him in water, and with that
water and wheat together feed your Pullets, Pigeons, Turtles, and other birds
which you intend to allow your hawks that are slack to mew, and soon after
they shall mew their feathers apace.

M. Cassian says, that when a Falcon will not mew, ye must take of Backs,
otherwise called Reremice, and dry them so at the fire or in an Oven, as ye
may make them into powder which you must bestow upon your Hawks meat. Also
take little sucking whelps, and feed your hawke with the flesh of them
steeped in the milk or renet which you shall find in the mawes of them:
afterward shred the maw it self in small pieces, and force her to take it, and
she shall mew very well and timely. Likewise all manner of live birds make a
Hawke to mew well, for it is their natural feeding, and therefore best for them.

Martin says, that to mew your Hawke well, ye must set water by her once or
twice a week, and also roast Frogs in the fire, making them into powder, and
bestowing it upon her meat. Likewise small fishes chopped, and given with her
meat, do further a Hawks mewing very much. Thus do the French Authors write,
I leave them to your experience that list to follow the French fashion.

The manner of dyetting and keeping Hawks in the mewe.
WHen ye intend to cast your Hawke into the mew, ye must see the mew very
clean, then furnish your hawk with all her implements, setting her two or three
times in the Sun, taking good heed that her furniture of her legs be not so
straight and uneasy, as she be driven to be ever tearing at it. Also you must
cast her into the mew high, lusty, and in good plight, well scowred, and fed
with good hot flesh. Again, ye must now and then give her small fishes,
specially to Goshawkes, Sparowhawkes, and all other round winged hawks, because
those fishes be (as my Author terms them) laxatiue, and good to scowre,
setting them water twice or thrice a week. For now and then they will bowze, by
means whereof they discharge their bodies of humors, and also their bathing in
it, makes them the better penned and the firmer. Young Rattes, Mice, and
Swallows are very good feeding for a Hawke, for they ^ee nourishing meats,
and will keep the Hawke in good plight. Therefore let your Hawke be mewed in a
place that is clean, handsome, and well kept, for she will rejoice and delight
greatly in it. Thus have ye the manner of mewing your hawke after the opinion
of the French.

The manner of drawing Hawks out of the Mew.
WHen ye draw your hawks out of the mew, ye had need to take heed that they
be not too greasy: for sometimes when they be so, and set upon the fist
vnhooded, they so take on and heat themselves with bating, that they break
their grease within them, putting themselves in great danger of death. Wherefore
my counsel is, that all mewed hawks should be well attended and fed with washed
meat, fourteen or fifteen days before they be drawn out of the mew to
breed resolution of glitte and gross matter which is in their panels, whereof
they shall scowre the most part by doing as is aforesaid, and so shall ye quit
them of all danger.

Mallopin speaking hereof in his book of the Prince, says, that if a hawke
be huge and greasy, when she is new drawn, a man must not bear her vnhooded.
For ye may well understand, that if she feel the sun, the air, or the
wind; she lightly falls to bating and stirring, by means whereof she
heateth her self inordinately, and so runs in danger of death, and spoil by
taking cold upon it. Whereupon the Petty falconers and Nouices which know not
what it means, say that the hawke perishes by mean of her me wing and
thorough default. And therefore when a Hawke is to be drawn out of the mew,
she must be well attended and looked to, that hernie at be washed, and regard
had that she be not ouergorged. And if happily she loose her appetite, and
list to feed, take Aloes Cicotrine, and the juice of Barberies, and fores her
to receive it in the gut of a hen. Which done, hold her upon your fist until
she have scowred, keeping her empty till noone: At which time give her some
hot meat or bird, and the next day give her of a hen, setting her water to
has: and assure your self that this medicine is good against all worms and
Filanders that may breed in the body of a Hawke.

Mallopin says, that when ye draw a hawke out of the mew, ye must wash her
meat, feeding her therewith by little and little, and allow her such flesh as
is laxatiue, that she may have the less joy to keep it long or stand upon it,
and to the end she be not proud or ouerhaught of her drawing out of the mew.
And there withal she must be daily plied and borne on the fist. Within few
days after she is thus drawn, ye must scowre her and enseame her with the
foresaid medicine of Lard, Sugar, Mace and Saffron with a very little Aloes,
for if ye confect it with too much Aloes, ye shall bring her ^ouer low.
Therefore give her of it every day a pyll for three days together: and
thereupon set her in the sun or by the fire, keeping her empty two or three
hours after, then give her a reasonable gorge of a pullet, or of mutton.

M. Cassian says, that some Falconers after they have enseamed their hawks in
manner aforesaid three or four days before they intend to flee, do give them a
pyll of the bigness of a bean made in manner following. They use to take a
little Larde with the powder of pepper and ashes sisted and serced, of each a
like much, and a little fine salt, and a quantity of Aloes Cicotrine in powder.
They mingle them all well and thoroughly together, and make thereof a bal, and
convey it into the hawks beak, so as they enforce her to take it down, if she
will not otherwise. Which done, they hold her hooded by ye fire or in ye sun,
making her to keep the pill as long as they can, and afterward do let her cast
it at her pleasure. By this mean ye shall see yt she will g^^^ and
slegmatick humors whereby her panell and vowells will be discharged of much
glit, and she become sound and cheerful, and ready to flee her prey. And an
hour or twain after this, they feed her with a live thicke^: for ye must
(...) the pyll which she has received has distempered h^^ very much.
Nevertheless I must give you warning that you must (...) so deal with a poor
and low Hawke, as ye would wish a hawke that is high and in pride. In doing
after this manner your Hawke shall be lusty, and enjoy her all the year after.
For hardly shall that hawk do her part in fleeing that year which is not well
scowred, and carfully enseamed.

When Aloes is to be given to Hawks that are fleeing.
MAny are of opinion that when Hawks are fleeing, they must have Aloes
Cicotrine given them from month to month, conueying the quantity of a bean
thereof into their meat, or into a Hens skin, to take away the bitterness
thereof, that they may keep it as long as may be before they cast it, then
setting them all the while by a fire, or in the Sun, till they have cast the
slimy and gross humors with the Aloes. And if ye mind to keep your Hawke
from the worms and the Filanders, give her the mountenance of a peaze of Aloes
every eight days in her casting. Again, ye must remember that whenever you
perceive your hawke wax any thing cold, to give her five or six cloves of
maces, and they will scowre her head of all watery humors: moreover, being given
at evening in a little cotton as ye give the Aloes, they be very good and
available against all manner of Filanders.

Of the Hawke that has her talons broken.
A Hawke does sometimes break a talon by some mischa^ce and often by the
rudeness and churlishnes of the Falconer in vnseazing her roughly from her
prey, insomuch that her talon tarrieth behind in the thing that she seized on,
and sometimes is quite broken or sliued from the flesh, by reason whereof she is
in danger of spoil, or at least wise of lozing her talon. When a Hawks talon
is so sliued off, as there remains nothing but the tender part that was
within it: make a little pretty lether glove of the bigness of her stretcher or
clea, and fill it with Capons grease and dr^w it on, tying it handsomely to her
leg with two pretty strings, renewing it every other day till the point of her
stretcher be well hardened again.

And if a Hawke happen to have but a piece of her talon broken off, so as some
part of it remains still behind, let it be anointed with the fat of a
snake, and it will grow again as the others. And if the Hawke be hurt by
violence, so as the talon is become loose from the flesh, and falls to bleeding:
then first of all cast the powder of Sanguis Draconis upon it, and it will
stanch the blood out of hand: and if it swell or rancle after it, then dress
it and anoint it with Capons grease or honey of Roses till it be thoroughly
recured.

In these hurts of hawks talons, Martine gives this counsel following. Make
little matches of paper, and sere therewith the stretcher that has lost his
talon, and bind the cindre of the same paper with a little honey to it, and let
it so rest nine days together. And if the talon be quite bereft, put on the
foresaid glove with Capons grease, till the pownce be grown again, and let the
Hawke rest till she be thoroughly sound. And if the Hawks foot or leg chance
to ranckle and grow to further inconvenience, confect the unguent of Capons
grease, Oil of Roses, Oil of Violets. Turpentine, powder of Frankincense, and
Mastick, and anoint the swelling therewith, and let her rest till she be
thoroughly recured.

Of the Hawke that lays an Egg in the mew, or out of the Mew.
SOmetimes Hawks are with egg in the mew, and efte withour the mew, whereby
they fall sick, and are in great danger if there be not remedy had for it:
which thing you shall easily perceive by them in May and April, at which times
they are wont to be with egg. To remedy this inconuenie^ce, let the Hawks
meat be washed in the urine of a man-child of six or seven years old, eight
or nine days together, and that will keep her from laying. But if the eggs
be already full fashioned within her, then to break and dispatch them, ye
must (as Master Martin says) give her the yolks of a couple of eggs reere
roasted with butter, twice or thrice a week: and that must be done during the
months of May and April. For besides that, it will break and wast away the
eggs within a hawke, it is good also to set them up when they be low in state,
howbeit you must remember that whenever ye minister this medicine, ye must
give them flesh withal, for it is of great nourishment.

Again, Mallopin says, that to break eggs in a Hawke, ye must take of the
liquor that bleedeth or oozeth out of vynes in March when they be cut, and with
that liquor wash your Hawks meat nine or ten days, and the eggs will consume
and waste away by that means, how great soever they be.

The manner of taking Hawks in the Eyree.
FIrst you must beware that you take them not before they are somewhat waxen:
for if ye do so, and bring them into a cold and moist place, they will have a
disease in the back, so as they shall not be able to stand on their feet, and
moreover they shall be in danger of utter spoil. Therefore they must not be
taken till they be somewhat strong, and can stand well on their feet. And you
must set them upon some perch or bail of wood, that they may by that means
the better keep their feathers unbroken, and eschew the dragging of their
trains upon the ground, for so shall they be the better sunned. Michelin
says further, that to keep Eyesse hawks from that inconvenience, specially
when they be taken over little, they must be kept in a dry and clean place,
and ye must strew every where under them the herb that in (French is called
Yeble) which has a seed like Elder. This herb is of nature hot, and good
against the gowte, and the disease of the reins which might befall them:
Wherefore if ye will keep hawks well that are new taken from out of the nest,
if ye take them in the morning, ye must let them stand empty till noon: and
if ye take them in the evening, ye must not feed them till the next morrow.
And when ye feed them, give them tender flesh, and after that, let them not
stand empty any more too long for hindering their feathers, and tainting them.

Of Hawks that have lice, mites or other vermin.
IF ye will know whether your hawks have lice or mites set her in the warm
Sun out of the wind, and by and by ye shall easily perceive it: for they
will crall out upon her feathers and swarm there. For remedy hereof, take a
quantity of Orpiment beaten into very fine powder, and having mingled it with
half as much powder of Pepper, let your Hawke be cast handsomely that she
break not her feathers then powder first the one wing, and so the other
gently, and finally, all the whole carcass of her: after which, set her upon
your fiste again, bespowt her, and squirt a little Water on her with your
mouth, and set her by a fire, or in the Sun til she be thoroughly wethered.
Afterward when ye intend to feed her, wash her beak to take away the savor of
the Orpiment, and beware that your Hawke be not poor, when you intend to use
Orpiment. Having thus done, you shall see that all the mites and lice will
discover themselves upon ker feathers and die, either the Orpiment alone, or
the Pepper alone are as good as both of them together, to spoil the mites. But
here is the odds, the Pepper makes the mites to show themselves, and then the
Orpiment murdreth them. When ye use the Pepper alone, put thereto a third part
less of Ashes, to abate the force of the Pepper, and so shall your Hawke be
rid of those vermin. And assure your self that no hawke which has the mites
(be she never so good) is able to do her duty and play her part by reason of
the annoyance which she feels in her feathers by them. And if ye would
rid her of the mites without washing her, then my Author bids you take a
very old Mauis or black bird, and having taken out all the grease that ye
can find in her, anoint your Hawks feet, and the perch whereon ye set her
therewith, for all the vermin will repair down to it: and therefore shift her
out of her place twice or thrice in the night, that she may be no more
troubled therewith.

Addition.
[But your best medicine of al, is to wash her in a warm bath made with water,
black Soap, Stauesacre, pepper and Orpiment, having care to keep it out of
her mouth, eyes and nares.

Of the Hawke that holds not her wings up so well as she should do, but
lolleth them.
IF a Hawke that is newly taken be set straightwayes upon a perch or upon the
fist of one that has no skill to use her, she ouerheates herself with
bating, and afterward catches such cold upon it, as she cannot recover or
trusse her wings close to her again, nor be able to flee well. Mallopin
says, that to remedy this mischief, you must take of the best vinegar yt is
to be gotten, and with your mouth spirt it upon, and betwixt her feathe as
till she be thoroughly wet, taking good heed that none of it come in her nares,
and afterward set her by the fire or in the Sun, serving her so two or three
days together. And if she recover do nothing else to her, but if she recover
not, let her bath, either of pleasure or of force, and she will trusse up her
wings to her by mean of striving with herself. Then let her be set very warm
by a fire or in the Sun: for if she should chill upon it, she woulb become
worse than before.

Of the Crampgout.
MArtin says ye shall discern the Crampgowt by your Hawks holding of her
one foot upon the other, and by her often knibbing and iobbing of her foot with
her beak. For remedy whereof ye must east her handsomely and let her blood
on the vein that is between the foot and the leg, and afterward anoint the
vein with Capons grease, or with oil of Roses.

To keep a Hawke from all manner of Gowtes, the French man's opinion is this.
BY Martins advise, if ye doubt that your hawke shall have the Gowt, you must
fear her and cauterize her, as hereafter follows. Take a small iron with a
round button at the end as big as a peaze, heat it red hot, and fear her
therewith, first above the eyes, then upon the top of her head, and thirdly
upon the bals of her feet. And this violent kind of dealing with her, is the
next and assuredst way to do good in such desperate diseases, if any help be
to be had. But my Italian Author Sforzine gives over a Hawke that is troubled
with the Gowt, and thinks there is small credit to be gotten by the cure,
because of the impossibility.

For the biting of a venomous beast or worm.
IF your hawke be bitten or stung of a venomous beast, or worm, make her to
receive a little Triacle, and powder of Pepper, and afterward feed her with
hot meat two days: and beware that she touch no water for twenty days
after. Or else burn a Frogge and beat her into powder, and put thereof upon
Cats flesh, and yiue it your Hawke.

These are strange remedies and rare, and of the French devise. Give your
judgment of them, and by trial you shall know what they will do. I find them
in my Author, and therefore do set them down, and not for any experience I
have had of them.

For the wound or biting of any beast.
IF your hawke be hurt by any mischance, and the mouth of the wound very small,
rippe it larger, and scowre it with white wine, laying thereon a plaster of
white Frankincense and Masticke, and annoini it round about with butter, oil
of Roses, or oil Olive.

A Treatise and brief discourse of the cure of Spaniels when they be any way
ouer-heat: devised and written by M. Francesco Sforzino Vicentino the Italian
Gentleman Falconer.


HOw necessary a thing a Spaniell is to Falconrie, and for those that use that
pastime, keeping hawks for their pleasure and recreation, I deem no man
doubts as well to spring and retriue a foul being flowen to the mark, as
also diverse other ways to assist and aid Falcons and Goshawkes. Wherefore,
seeing that hitherto in my collection I have spoken altogether of Hawks both
for the river and field, and in my conceit have left few neeefull points for a
good Falconer untouched or treated of: now I shall not do amiss, nor wander
over wide from my purpose, if I say somewhat of Spaniels, without the which a
Falconer, (specially using to flee the field) cannot be without mayme of his
pastime, and impair of his gallant glee. And again, for that they are subject
to many diseases and plagues, (as we commonly term them) for dogs, and
longer than they are without infection we may expect from them no pleasure,
assistance or recreation: I will only in this treatise describe you their
harms with cures due to the same. Among all which I place the Mangie first, as
the capital enemy to the quiet and beauty of a brave Spaniell, wherewith they
poor dogs are oftentimes greatly plagued, both to the infection of their
fellows, and the no slender grief of their masters.

The way to cure and discharge a Spaniell of the mangie, is to anoint him
either at the fire, or in the Sun, The cure for the Mangie.
thrice every other day with an unguent made of Barrow, flicke one pound,
common oil three ounces, Brimstone well brayed four ounces, salt well beaten
and broosed, ashes well sifted and fierced, of either two ounces, boiling al
these in a Kettle or Pot of Earth, mingling them well together till the
barrow flicke be incorporate and well compounded with the rest. With this
Unguent thus made and confected, anoint and besmeare all the body of your
Spaniell, and every other part of him, shifting his litter and kennell often,
the oftener the better. And lastly, having thus done, wash him over and over
with good strong lie, and it will mortify and kill the Mangie.

But if perhaps (as commonly it falls out) the Spaniel loose her hear,
though it proceeds not of the force of this unguent and strong medicine, yet
it shall be very good to bathe your Spanell, shredding his hair in this order,
with the water of Lupines, or Hoppes, and to annoint him with stale Barrowes
flicke.

This medicine, over and besides that, it cures and quitteth the Mangie it
also makes the Spanells skin beautiful and fair to look to, and killes the
flies, the dogs disquieters and enemies, to his ease.

But when this foresaid remedy is not of force sufficient to rydde the Mangie,
but that it spreddes and gets greater power and dominion over your Spanell:
then does it behooue you to douise a far stronger medicine, which is, to take
of strong Vinegar two quarters, or as much as will suffice, common Oil six
ounces, Another remedy more strong.
Brimstone three ounces, sut of a chimny or pot, a quantity of six ounces,
brayed salt and serced, two handfulls: boil all these aforesaid in the
Vinegar, using the former order of anointing your Spanell in the Sommertime.

If neither of these remedies aforesaid will serve the turn, then for a last
refuge, you must be driven to practice with a far stronger, than either of
both. But in any wise, this medicine must not be ministered in the cold of
winter, for it will then put the Spanell in great hazard of death.

A very strong medicine for the mangie.
Take quick Silver, as great a quantity as shall suffice, and mortify it with
stale Barrowes flicke, or Larde, as if I should set you down this proportion:
Of Quick Silver two ounces, Barrowes grease ten ounces, mingle them well
together, until they be incorporated: with this unguent annoint your Spanell
in the sun, tying him afterward for the space of an hour in the Sun, to the
end the unguent may sincke in, and pierce the deeper. Then wash him twice with
black Soap, and observing this order of annoynting him every other day twice
or thrice, assuredly you shall ryd him of all Manginesse, whatsoever it be.

But I must tell you this by the way, that this unguent of Quick Silver will
cause her hair to fall away. Wherefore it shall be requisite every third or
fourth day to annoint him with stale Bacon grease, for that will presently make
his hair to grow and come again.

If a Spaniell be not very much infected with the mangy' then is it an easy
matter to cure it in this sort. A way to cure the mangie without any unguent.


To make a kind of bread with wheaten branne, and the roots, leaves and fruit,
or flowers of the herb which we call Agrimonie, beating it well in a mortar,
and making it into a past or dow baking it in an oven, and so made to give your
Spaniels of the said bread as much as they list to eat, and none other bread
at all for a time. With four or five of these loaves of bread, made in manner
as I tell you, have I cured my Spaniels of the mangie, and some other of my
friends.

Though every body for the most part do know these common herbs, yet
nevertheless I will follow mine Author, and set it down with the same
description as he does.

Agrimonie is an herb that grows in meadows and fields, near unto some
root of a tree, and upon the mouth of saw pittes, and other old unclean and
unoccupied places. The leaves of it do spread upon the ground, they are a
shaftment in length, iagged on each side, like unto the leaf of Hemp, divided
into five or more parts and branches, indented round about. It brings forth one
or two blackish stalks, upon which there are certain boughs standing one
distant from another, on which there are yellow flowers, and those flowers
being through ripe, do yield certain round berries, as big as a Peaze or
Fetch which will cleave and hang to a man's garments if he once touch them. This
description does my Italian Author make of the herb Agrimonie, whereof he
would have this bread made to cure the mangie Spaniel. I leave it over to thy
use and discretion till thou need it. [But when all these medicines shall
fail, or to be sure not to fail in your cure, take only a pint of strong
wine Vinegar, Addition.
and mix therewith a good quantity of gunpowder well bruised, and therewith
anoint the dog al over, and you shall spare all other experiments.]

Of diverse accidents that happen to dogs, and first of that ill which is
called For^ica.
EVery man does know that there is a kind of vile disease that lights upon
Spaniels ears, which does greatly vex them in the Summer time especially
with the flies, and the scratting and tearing themselves with their own feet.
We term it in English, a kind of Mangie, but but both the Latimst and the
Italian term it Formica. The French man he calls it Fourmye^, which in
troth is in English nothing else but an Ante or Pismire, applied here in this
place to a dogs disease for some likelihood and property betwixt the Pismire
and the mischief, which is accustomed to exeepe and go further and further
with his infection, to the great annoyance of the poor Spaniell, even as the
Pismire is ever busy trauayling to and fro, and never unoccupied.

The Cure.
The way to rid this vile disease and mischief, is to bestow upon the
infected place a medicine made of Gum Drag aganthe four ounces infused in
the strongest Vinegar that may be gotten by the space of eight days: and
afterward bruised on a Marble stone, as Painters do their colors, adding
unto it Roch Allom and Galls beaten to powder, of either two ounces. Using
these things as I have showed you, you may make a powder of maruaylous force:
for this purpose, laying it upon the Member where the Mangie lies. This no
question will kill the Formica.

Of the swelling in the Spaniels throat.
Sometimes there befalls this mischief upon poor Spaniels. There droppeth down
an humor from their brains, by mean of which their throats and necks do
swell unreasonably. For remedy of this, I will advise you to take nothing more
than to anoint all the place without with Oil of Camomill, then washing and
embroching the Dogs throat round about the grief with vinegar not
ouerstrong, and with Salt. If you do this you shall recover your Spaniell,
and drive away this distillation of ill humors, that fall out of the Spaniels
head, causing the great swelling in the throat.

Of a kind of worms breeding in the hurts and mangie parts of a Spaniell.
SOmetimes when a Spaniel has taken a hurt or wound, there do engender in the
wound certain worms that do hinder the cure of the hurt, causing it to
continue at one stay, or to grdw worse and worse. Wherefore it shall be very
necessary to endeavor to kill them which you shall do assuredly if you convey
into the wound nothing but the gum of Iuie called in Latin ( Gumma Hederae)
keeping it there for the space of one day or two, washing the woond with Wine,
The cure.
and after that anointing it with Bacon grease, Oil of earthworms, and Rue.

Moreover, a juice made of the green pylles, and rinds of Walnuts, or the
powder of dried Lupynes is very good. Likewise powder of wild Cucumbers is
excellent to kill those worms: and not that alone, but it will play the part
of a Corrosiue fretting away the dead flesh, and increasing the good.

But when the worms grow within the body of a Spaniel, Of worms within the
body. The Cure.
they must be killed in this manner with an inward receipt.

Cause your Spaniell either by love or force to eat when he is fasting, the
yolke of an Egg with two scruples of good Saffron beaten into powder and
confected with the said Egg, When a spaniel is bitten by a Fox or mad dog.
keeping him after it from meat till night.

When a Spaniel is hurt as long as he can come to lick the wound with his
tongue he needs no other remedy. His tongue is his surgeon. But when he
cannot possibly lick it, then such wounds as be not venomous, you may
resolve with the powder of Matresilua dried in an oven, or in the Sun. And if
it be the bite of a Fox, it shall suffice to annoint it with oil, wherein
earth worms and Rue have been boiled together.

But if it were bitten by a mad dog, it shall be best presently to thrust
through the skin of his head, and pol with a hot iron just betwixt the ears,
so as the fire may touch both sides of the hole made: And after that with your
hand to placke up the skin of the dogs shoulders and flanks backwards,
thrusting it through with the hot iron in like manner.

The giving of this vent to the wound will greatly pleasure the Spaniel, and is
a ready way to cure him.

Besides the application of this cauterie and fire, there is one other approved
remedy, and that is, to cause your Spaniel to lap twice or thrice of the
broth of Germander, and eat the Germander it self boiled. I need not to
describe the herb it is so well known: but my Author sets down his
proportion and flower. It bears a iagged leaf, and has a purple or blew
flower, and in shape it is like a little oak.

This herb Germander sodden and confected with salt and oil, To help a
Spaniel that has lost his sense of smelling.
either simply bruised together, or made into a paste, and given unto a
Spaniell, will do him very much good in the cure of the bite of a mad dog.

Now and then Spaniels by mean of too much rest and grease, and some other
accident besides, do loose their sense of smelling, so as they cannot spring
or retriue a foul after their accustomed manner. In this case it shall be very
good to scowre a Spaniel in this manner. The Cure.


Take Agaricke two drammes, Sal gemma one scruple, beat these into powder and
incorporate them with Oximel, making a pill as big as a nut, convey the pill
into butter, and so give it the Spaniell either by love or force, as he may
swallowe it. This will bring him to a quick sent and sense again, as I have
oftentimes approved.

To cut off the tip of a Spanels tail or stern.
IT is very necessary to cut off a little of the Spanels tail, when it is a
whelpe for sundry occasions: for in so doing, you shall deliver him, and be a
mean that no kind of worm or other mischief shall greatly offend that part
of your Spanell: Which, if it be not cut a little at the very point and top,
is subject to many evils and inconveniences, and will be a cause that the dog
will not dare to press ouerhastily into the covert after his game. Besides the
benefit of it, the Dog becomes more beautiful by cutting the top of his
stern: for then will it bush out very gallantly, as experience will teach you.

It shall be good when Spanell whelps are one month old or somewhat more, to
worm them under the tongue: To worm a Spanell.
for there have they a string very like to a worm, which must be plucked away
by some devise or other. This is the order of it: If it be a whelpe of a month
old, they take him and open his flew and tawes with a man's hand: but if it be a
bigger Spanell, then do they convey a round stick into his mouth, to keep it
wide open: which done, they pluck out the Dogs tongue, and with a sharp knife
of purpose for it, they slyt the tongue all along where the worm lies, on both
sides, and so very artificially with the point of the knife, they raise up the
worm the better to pull it away. But in this case there must be care used,
that the worm be not cut asunder, but had clean away, without leaving any
part of it behind.

Some men do use (in the taking away of this worm in a Spanels tongue) a needle
or such like instrument with a double twisted thread hanging to it, two
shaftments in length, thrusting the needle quite underneath ye worm just in ye
middle of it, drawing the needle so far until the double twisted thread be
level with the middle of the worm, then drawing it hard with the hand, they
pull it out (but by drawing the thread artificially, many times the worm
breaks in two pieces, and then it is a very hard matter to come by that
part that is slipped and left behind. Wherefore in mine opinion, the first is
the better way to dispatche him clean. For when this worm is once quite
drawn out, the Spanell will become far the fairer, and wax the fatter. Many
times the want of worming does keep a Spanell poor, and out of flesh, so as
he can not prove. And (as ancient writers affirm) the worming does discharge
the Spanell of madness and frenzy (which I can hardly credit or believe: the
infection and biting of an other mad Dog being so venomous, as it is able
to work great effect in the Dog that is bitten.)

Thus much I thought good to write of Spanels, and their diseases and cures,
for that they are superintendants, and necessary servants, both for the Hawke
and the Falconer, without whom, the sport would be but cold, and the toil
far more than it is to the man. Wherefore it shall not be amiss for a good
Falconer, always to breed and keep of the best kind of Spanels that he may
come by, and so to respect them, as they heat not at any time: Or if they do
by misfortune or negligence of your lackey boy; then to regard their cure,
which may be done in manner as I have here set down: And withal to use due
correction to the boy. For a good Spanell is a great jewel: and a good Spanell
makes a good Hawke, and a cursed master, a careful footeman. Farewell. ()

FINIS.
The Epilogue unto the Reader.
LO Reader here, the end of this my book,
Though not the end of my good will and love,
Bestow thy pains hereon a while to look,
As I employed my head for thy behooue:
It shall suffice if thou do not reprove
This slender work, compilde for thy delight,
Whose friendly look my labor shall requite.
I count my toil and travail but a game,
I deem the days not long or spent amiss,
If so I may unto thy fancy frame
This book of mine which all of Hawking is,
Than which there can be found no better bliss
In my conceit to such as love the glee,
And force the fields where brauest pleasures be.
I must confess, my Hammers have but hewde
That royal Rock, which others found of yore,
I do but tread the path which others shewde
Unto their friends, to make their skill the more:
I but translate a garment made before:
Which if I do with gallant shape to view,
I deem as much as if I made a new.
For hard it is to stalk in others steps.
He thinks himself a thrall that marches so:
He iumpes in joy that at his pleasure leapes,
And is not forced in others feet to go:
Nothing more leefe than liberty you know,
Which no Translatour has I undertake,
Unless that he his Authors sense forsake.
Which vaunt I dare, I seldom here have done,
Zforcino knows, and can control me then,
Italian borne, whose book I over-runne,
And Giorgies eke compilde with learned pen,
Assuredly these two were skillful men,
And wistfull well what Hawks and hawking meant,
And all things else that further this intent.
To Tardiffe eke the Frenchman I appeal,
To Malopyn, and Mychelyn, cunning wightes,
Let Artelow^he be witness how I deal,
In field affairs, or else in river flights,
And Cassyan eke who well of hawking wrytes:
All these I wish as Judges in the case
Where I corrupt or alter any place.
Some men perhaps will wonder that I wrote
Of slately hawks, and birds of rare delight,
And blazed it out but in so base a note,
As scarce will please the gallant Courtiers sight,
Who weyes no gold that is not burnisht bright:
His curious ear but hardly will digest,
Sweet Musickes sound, that is not of the best.
For mine excuse and for my simple pen,
To answer thus, I fear I shall be feign,
Since charge of Hawks committed is to men,
That Nobles serve for yearly hyre, and gain,
(Who are not fine but homely mates and plain)
My purpose was, to set them down the trade,
To man their Hawks, and how they might be made.
For Peers (I know, and you must needs agree)
Regard no more but only to behold
The fleeing Hawks, their joy is but to see
The haughty Haggard worth her weight in gold,
To slay the foul at brook with courage bold,
With Hawks they never deal in other sort,
Their servants feed, and they enjoy the sport.
Which if be so, the low and playnest style
Does best agree the Falconers mind to fit,
To carpe it fine with those that have no guile,
A jest it were and sign of slender wit,
The writers ought the readers vain to hitte.
This was the cause I wrote my book so plain,
I told it erst, I tell it now again.
The modest mind I know, will rest content,
With this excuse, and brook mine answer well,
Of other some perhaps I shall be shent.
Whose sullen breasts with secret envy swell,
Who pleases all, deserves to bear the bell.
But if the Courtier fancy this my book,
I scorn the proud disdainful Momus look.
Falconers farewell, at pleasure do pervse
These leaves and lines, each picture and each page.
Readers adue, I have no farther news,
I can but wish you ancient Nestors age,
Unto whose doomes my writings here I gage:
To cure your Hawks or make your cunning more,
If ought be here, I clappe my hands therefore.
My Muse, and I, have done the best we can,
To learn you how your Hawks to lewre and man.
George Turbervile.

Liuor, edax rerum, tuque in vidiosa vetustas,
Omnia destruitis.
FINIS.

