THE JUST AND NECESSARY APOLOGY of HENRY AIRAY the late reverend Provost of
Queens College in Oxford, Touching his suite in Law for the Rectorie of
Charleton.

LONDON, Printed MDC XXI.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
ALthough the rule be true, Convicia spreta exolescunt, si irascare adgnita
videntur, Injurious accusations are best answered by silence and neglect; yet
then to be silent when the imputation is very grievous and most unjust, were
both to wrong the truth, and wilfully to betray a good name. Besides, not to be
sensible of deep wounds inflicted upon our reputation, is not patience, but
dull stupiditie. How much the licentious tongues of some, and uncharitable
conceits of others have wronged this reverend and worthy man (now with the
Lord) will appear by this his own Treatise; which contains a plain and
naked declaration of that intricate controversy, and acquaints the ignorant or
scrupulous in this case upon what grounds of Law, but especially of conscience,
be first undertook the suite: quitting every objection with such a sufficient
answer, as, I doubt not, will give good satisfaction to the indifferent and
impartial. His maine purpose in composing this Treatise, was to clear his
own innocence (without any offense, I hope, to others,) and to avoid the
rash constructions of some, who are wont first to censure, and then to enquire.
Hitherto I have suppressed it, hoping that his eminent credit in the Church of
God, would quickly (of it self) consume the envy and vanity of this weak
exception, and so with honor outliue it. But seeing (as by many his religious
friends I understand) he cannot yet rest quietly in his grave, this cavil
being often (upon occasion) and odiously renewed, cast in like a dead fly to
corrupt the sweet ointment of his blessed memory, and raised as a thick
vapor to obscure the luster of his good name: I cannot (without palpable and
irreparable injury) any longer forbear to put forth his own shield for
protection of his guiltless fame, which lies bleeding under the merciless
strokes of intemperate tongues, whereof some (I fear) through his sides aim
at the disgrace of religion. His worthy favorers every where see it with
commiseration, but know not how to remedy it: it is high time therefore to let
him speak for himself. For where calumnious accusations are so loud and
vocal, it were more then pity that just Apologies should be dumb and
smothered. I have therefore published it in his own words, without the least
alteration, and do commend it to Gods blessing and thy loving acceptance.
Peruse it without passion, and then (I doubt not) thou will in judgment acquit
the Author, who for his integrity was generally and justly reverenced.

C. P.

THE JUST AND NECESSARY APOLOGY of Henry Airay the late reverend Provost of
Queens College in Oxford, touching his suite in Law for the Rectorie of
Charleton.
THe rule of the holy Apostle is: Against 1. Tim. 5. 19.
an Elder receive none accusation, but under two or three witnesses. Which
rule, if it were as well observed, as it may be easily known, calumnies
against an Elders innocence would not so hastily be believed, as many times
they are; nor should I now need to trouble my self with a task of this kind.
But having learned out of Solomon, that a good name is better then Eccl. 7. 3.
a good ointment, and to be chosen above Prou. 22. 1
great riches; and out of the heathen Orator, that Dissoluti hominis est
negligere quid quisque de (...) sentiat, None but a dissolute person will
neglect what men think or speak of him: and having heard by sundry my good
friends, that unto much vexation and distraction, unto great trouble and
charges by occasion of a tedious suite in Law, this also is added, that many
aspersions are cast, and many speeches pass upon me, which some believe, and
touching which others desire to be satisfied: it is my desire, in regard of my
ministry, of my degree, of my service, and of my place of government, and out
of that care to provide things honest, 2 Cor. 8. 21.
not only before the Lord, but also before men, which the Apostle requires,
to satisfy others with those things, wherewith, I thank God, I satisfy my
self in this case. And to that purpose I have plainly and nakedly set down a
simple and true narration of passages in that business, and of the case in
that suite, and of the grounds whereon I leaned both for law and conscience,
together with the exceptions which are taken against me, and the answers
thereunto; that when men are truly informed in that matter, and see what is
answered unto all objections, they may either clear me in their judgments, or
censure me at their pleasures.

A suite between M. John Alcock and me, about a Lease of the Rectorie of
Charleton upon Otmoore in Oxford shire, long depended in sundry Courts at
Westminster Hall, which he began in the Chancerie, and wherein afterward
sometimes he, and sometimes I were Plaintiffes. Wherein the case will the
better appear, if first the state of that Rectorie be opened; which is as
follows.

The Advowson of that Rectorie being in the King, M. Dennys who was Provost of
this College, and Incu^bent in that Rectory, affected the purchase of it for
the College. For the effecting whereof, because the Benefice was held in
Capite, and the College then through want of Mort-maine was incapable of it,
he put into that business one Andrews and one Temple: who, according to M.
Dennys his desire, purchased the Rectorie from the King, Ann. 35. Henr. 8. and
in the same year made it over unto M. Dennys then Provost, and unto M. Shaw
then Fellow of this College, as in trust for the College. Which Rectorie
being so purchased and passed over, M. Dennys died in the last year of Queen
Mary's reign.

M. Dennys being dead, and M. Hodgeson succeeding in the Headship of the
College, M. Alan Scot then Fellow of the College, was presented unto the
Rectorie of Charleton, 1. Elizab. not by M. Shaw the suruiuer feoffee, but by
Hugh Hodgeson Provost, and the Fellows of the College, etc. when there was no
right of patronage at all by law in the College, and was thereupon admitted.
Which M. Scot coming to be Provost, 5. Elizab. made, as Incumbent, a Lease of
the Rectory of Charleton unto one William Izod, alias Shillingford, 10.
Elizab. for the term of 81. years, reserving only to the Incumbent during
that term 20. lib. per annum, or 30. lib. per annum if he should serve the
Cure, together with a chamber in the Parsonage; and laying all other burdens
upon the Leasee, procured the Lease to be confirmed, as it is said, by the
Ordinary, and by the College as Patron. Which Lease so made by M. Scot, as
Incumbent, and confirmed by him as Provost, was enjoyed by M. Izod, alias
Shillingford till 20. Elizabethae.

In the mean time M. Scot died, viz. about 17. Elizab. and M. Shepherd then
Fellow of the College was presented unto the Rectorie of Charleton by M.
Bowsfield then Provost, and the Fellows of the College, having as yet no
right of patronage in law, unless it were by usurpation, and was thereunto
admitted. Which M. Shepherd seeing the Glebe-land of the Rectorie to be
exchanged and alienated by M. Izod, and perceiving the Lease made by M. Scot to
M. Izod to be naught in Law, and as bad in conscience, accordingly spoke of the
Lease, and of his purpose to question it. Whereupon M. Izod taking advice, and
finding great cause to fear the inualiditie of his Lease, tendered the sale of
it to M. William Alcock, who then kept his Courts, and who being a Counselor
at Law, was better able to maintain it, if it should be questioned, then he
was. Howbeit M. William Alcock refused to meddle with it, unless M. Izod
would secure his peaceable possession for the space of ten years, hoping in
that time, as it may seem, to save by his bargain.

After sundry passages between them, M. Izod assigned over the Lease to M.
William Alcock, 20. Elizab. with a clause of warrantize for peaceable
possession for the space of ten years, as appears by the Assignement. Which
Lease so assigned, M. William Alcock enjoyed, and died seized of it, having
before his death much molested M. Shepherd for speeches against his Lease, and
at length released him of all personal actions betwixt them, with a prouiso,
that that release should not extend to prejudice any right, estate, or term of
years which he had in the Rectorie of Charleton upon Otmoore.

After M. William Alcocks death, such right and estate as he had in the Lease
came unto his widow, and unto M. John Alcock his Executor. Upon whose coming
unto it, the Lease was questioned by M. Shepherd, and for a while trauersed;
but the suite not continued unto trial, for that M. Shepherd was so poor
that he was not able to prosecute the law, and besides had prejudiced himself
by the acceptance of that which was reserved upon the Lease unto the Incumbent.

Upon M. Shepherds death, M. Harper then Fellow of the College, was presented
by the College to that Rectorie: who resigning after one half year and
somewhat more, for that he could not through the weakness of his body endure
such travel and toil for the overthrowing of the Lease by due course of Law,
as the whole company desired he should do; I was by the College presented
unto it; and, both out of the same considerations which moved M. Shepherd, and
out of commiseration of the state of that people where the Benefice is, and out
of my due regard of my own duty unto this College, and of my Companies
earnest desire, and after much deliberation for matter, both of Law, with many
very skillful in the Law, and of conscience, with sundry reverend and
judicious Divines, I endeavored to do the best service I could to this College
and that Church, for the overthrowing of that unreasonable and unconscionable
Lease.

This being the state of that Rectorie hitherto, the question is, whether that
Lease so dimised by M. Scot, so confirmed by M. Scot and his company, when the
College was not Patron in law, and by a wrong name of the College, so doubted
of both by M. Izod, and by M. William Alcock before the Assignement, and so
questioned since M. Scots death by M. Shepherd, be a good Lease, or no?

M. John Alcock, though at the first he seemed by suing me in the Chancerie, to
flic the Law, and to lean only unto conscience, yet afterward pretended the
Lease to be good both in Law and in conscience, which I ever thought (under
reformation) to be naught in Law and in conscience.

And first, in Law I held the Lease to be naught upon two grounds: first,
because it was never confirmed by the true Patron, no Lease being good in Law,
10. Elizab. which was not confirmed by the Ordinary, Patron, and Incumbent. And
that the Lease was never confirmed by the true Patron, it appears, because it
was never confirmed by M. Shaw, in whom alone as suruiuer feoffee, the
patronage truly rested till 24. Elizab. when upon the procuring of a Mort-mane
for the College by my Lord Bishop of Carlisle, then Provost of the College, M.
Shaw made it over to the College, as appears by his instrument under his
hand and seal. Which being so clear that it cannot be denied, M. Alcocks
only evasion is, that the College had gained the patronage by usurpation,
because their Clerk, M. Scot, presented by the College, was admitted, and not
disturbed. In which case, though I know not what the Law is, whether upon our
presentation a right of patronage will be gained by usurpation, or whether
usurpation will enable the usurper, not only to present to the Church, but
also to confirm a Lease against the good of the Church; or whether a Lease
leaning on usurpation upon one presentation in the beginning, be strengthened
by the access of mo presentations afterward; or whether the College can
gain or hold a right indirecte, whereof it is not capable direct, that is,
whether usurpation can gain a right unto a College, whereof it is not capable
in it self, yet in reason, which Lawyers say is the ground of the Law, the
plea of usurpation seems to be very harsh in this case. For if an usurper be
an intruder and wrongful possessor, then what is usurpation, but intrusion and
wrongful possession? And then what is the plea of right gained by usurpation,
but a plea of right wrongfully gained? And then what is M. Alcocks plea for the
goodness of his Lease in Law, but that his Lease is good out of a right which
the College gained wrongfully? Which plea seems yet the less reasonable,
because it may seem, that the gaining of right by usurpation was provided for
the good, and not for the hurt of the Church; which in this case falls out
quite otherwise. For albeit by the presentation from the College the Church
was filled, which may seem to have been for the good of the Church; yet the
stablishing of the Lease by the right so gained, is in perniciem Ecclesiae,
because so, during the term of years in the Lease, the Church, through the
smalnesse of maintenance reserved upon the Lease for the Incumbent, cannot be
provided of a Pastor sufficient to feed and instruct that people.

A second ground whereupon I held the Lease to be naught in Law, is, because of
the error in the true name of the College, both in the Lease and in the
Confirmation: the true name of the College being, Aula scholarium Reginae de
Oxon. as appears by the license of Edward the third unto our Founder, wherein
he licenseth him to found and build Aulam quandam Collegialem de scholaribus,
capellanis, and alijs, perpetuis temporibus duraturam, sub nomine Aulae
scholarium Reginae de Oxon. and the Lease being dimised and confirmed by the
name of, the Queens Hall or College in the University of Oxford. Which
shows, that what difference there is between Aula scholarium Reginae de
Oxon. and Aula Reginae de Oxon. the like difference there is between the name
of the College and the name in the Lease and confirmation, that is, a
substantial difference.

Again, in conscience I hold the Lease to be naught for these causes: first,
it is a Lease of a Benefice presentatiue, and with the cure of fowls, where
are three villages, and much people: which kind of Leases was by a whole
Parliament thought unconscionable and unreasonable, and a law made against all
such Leases in future times, about three years after the dimising of this
Lease, viz. Ann. 13. Elizabethae.

Secondly, it is a Lease whereupon so small allowance is reserved unto the
Incumbent, as that the maintenance is not sufficient to maintain any fit
Minister for the instruction of that great people; whereof what conscience
ought to be made, every man knows.

Thirdly, the term of years in the Lease is so long, that the Benefice being
presentatiue for 81. years, that great people is in great hazard to be too
much neglected, if the Lease shall continue so long, without euiction at Law,
or relief in Chancerie against it.

Fourthly, the Lease is so prejudicial unto the Glebe land of that Benefice,
as that thereby much of it is alienated and exchanged with other men upon
enclosures, and already grown almost out of knowledge.

Fifthly, the Lease has been noted from chief seats of Judgment to be so
unreasonable and unconscionable, as that it was pity the Leasour had not been
hanged before the dimise; to be such as I was bound in conscience to overthrow
if by the Law I could; and to be no whit, or very little better then
sacrilege, depriving them which wait at the altar, of the things due to them
which there wait.

Sixthly, whence was it that when the matter was referred upon the motion of the
Barons of the Exchequer, unto Sir Julius Caesar, Sir Thomas Parrie the then
Lord chief Justice, and Justice VValmesley, M. Alcock refused to be bound to
stand to their order; that when upon request from the Lord Chancellor unto
those great persons of their pains again for an order in the matter, an order
was set down by them, and the same made an order in the Chancerie, M. Alcock
would not obey the order, but stood out in contempt thereof unto a writ of
rebellion, and the sending of a Serieant at Arms for him; and that always he
refused to submit unto a final end by the Lord Chancellor, or the Master of
the Rowles, without further suite, but that his own conscience told him that
his Lease was naught in conscience?

But a valuable consideration was given for the Lease.

It is said that M. Izod paid for it 280. pounds, whereof 80. pounds came to
the College, and that M. W. Alcock paid for the Assignement 400. pounds. But
it does not appear upon the accounts of the College; where if any such thing
were, it should appear, that any penie came to it, either by the Lease, or by
the Assignement. Howbeit if it were so, that M. Izod paid for the Lease 280.
pounds, he may seem to be well satisfied by the commodity of the Rectory for
ten years before, and by 400 pounds paid to him for the Assignement. And if
it were so, that M. William Alcock paid for the Assignement 400. pounds, he
and his heir may seem to be well satisfied by the commodity of the Rectorie
for thirty years and upwards, and by 500. pounds which M. John Alcock is said
to have had of M. White upon the morgage of the Lease.

But an hundred Marks were paid to my Lord of Carlisle then Provost, to the
use of the College, for the securing of the Lease, as his note (...)

Whatsouer color there be of such a note, yet by two Letters written from his
Lordship upon my desire to be satisfied in that point, and still to be showed,
it may appear that the College being in much debt at his coming to this
Headship, that sum of 100 Marks was borrowed of M. Izod upon five several
bonds for the repaying thereof in five several years, and was accordingly
repayed in the five years next following, and the several bonds upon the
several paiments redeliuered, and was not otherwise for any use of the
College. Which being the tenor of two Letters under his Lordships hand and
seal, is in reason more to be esteemed then an odd piece of paper of an hand
breadth.

But M. William Alcock purchased the Lease from M. Izod as good.

He knew the Lease to be disabled in M. Izods time so well, that he would not
meddle with it, till M. Izod yielded to secure the peaceable possession for ten
years, though M. Izod had moved him often through fear of trouble, by
occasion of it, to buy it. And how can they deny the Lease to have been
doubted of by M. William Alcock, who say that 100. marks were given for the
securing of it, to my Lord of Carlisle, who was not Provost for some years
after the Assignement?

But it is hard for a College to seek the auoidance of its own act.

It is an act of M. Scot, as Incumbent of the Rectory of Charleton, and
whereinto being Provost he drew by means so many of the College as served his
turn, to have a hand in the confirmation thereof, (as also the same year he
did to the leasing of an Impropriation for 500. years, and had done the year
before to the making away of some Land belonging to the College in Dorcetshire
for ever,) which I labored to overthrow by legal courses, and not any Lease
either dimised by the College, or duly confirmed by the College.

But it is hard to disturb possession after thirty or forty years.

It is harder to be wrongfully kept out of possession so long. And that
possession was in that time disturbed, appears, inasmuch as upon speeches
against the Lease, it was made over to M. William Alcock; and after the
Assignement, suite was commenced by M. Shepherd for the euicting of it,
howsoever he was not able to prosecute the suite unto a trial, through want of
means necessary in such case.

But it is hard to take advantage upon a misnomer.

Is it not harder to avoid a clear case in Law, which requires confirmation
by the Patron, by a refuge of usurpation? Or is it hard in my case, which is
usual in many cases of Colleges and Cathedral Churches, as is well known by
Merton College, which avoided a Lease upon the very like misnomer as in my
case, there the name of the College being, Custos and scholares Collegij
scholarium de Merton. and in the Lease being, Custos and scholares Collegij de
Merton; as in my case the name of the College is, Praepositus and scholares
Aulae scholarium Reginae de Oxon. and in the Lease the name is, Praepositus and
scholares Aulae Reginae de Oxon. and many other like cases? Or rather is not an
advantage of misnomer in this case well taken, where a right is only claimed
by title of usurpation against the good of the Church?

But to avoid the Lease, is to overthrow the state of a poor Gentleman and
his family, which is hard.

How much his estate is decayed through his continual wranglings, I know not:
but how much the state of souls is more to be commiserated then the state of
bodies, and the states of many more then of few, so much more is the state of
that people, which feeding with their corporal things cannot be fed with
spiritual things while that Lease lasts, to be commiserated, then the state
of M. Alcock and his family. And if further it shall be considered, that before
any suite, I made this offer to M. Alcock, in the presence of some witnesses,
that if upon sight of his Lease, and due consideration of the validity thereof
by four Judges, or other, indifferently chosen between us, and informed by
our learned Counsel, his Lease should be deemed good in Law, I would never
further molest him; and if it should be deemed naught in Law, yet whatsoever
they thought meet for me to do out of any conscionable respect toward him and
his, I would very willingly do it; and withal, that the beginning of the suite
was from him, I hope I shall not be censured to have been uncharitable, but he
rather to have been wilful.

But this suite was much against the liking of many of the Fellows of the
College.

Upon this false report and suggestion they all testified under their hands
(which is yet to be seen) that out of an advised consideration of the
inconsionableness that Lease, dimised to the great prejudice of that Church
and of our College, and out of a long settled purpose to put that Lease in
suite when they should have opportunity, the suite was at the first commenced,
and still continued, not only with their liking, but with their great desire
that the Lease might be avoided; and that they were so far from auouching any
thing to the contrary, as that they professed it was always their purpose
upon the first auoidance of the Benefice, to confer it upon such a one as
would try the Lease with M. Alcock.

But some of my own degree have said, that for many Benefices they would not
have entered into such a business.

Nor would I, if regard of my oath, and duty to this College and that Church
had not pressed me thereunto. Which men of my own degree might rather deem
and conceive of me, then seem to censure my courses, the grounds whereof they
either know not, or consider not.

But why then did not my Lord of Carlisle question the Lease?

M. Shepherd was presented unto the Benefice long before my Lord of Carlisle
was Provost, and continued in it all his time, and long after my coming to be
Provost; and durig his incumbencie, none but he could question the Lease, to
bring it to a trial in Law.

But in the Exchequer, Judgment passed long since for M. Alcock.

No Judgment passed there at all in the cause, but after some arguing of the
case by Baron Hearn, and somewhat by Baron Altham; upon some fault in the
special verdict, a new Uenire facias was willed to be sued out, or else an
arbitrable course to be agreed upon for the ending of the matter. Which was
done, but without effect, because M. Alcock would not be bound to abide the
order of such honorable Arbitrators, as after much ado we had agreed upon.

But now Judgment is passed for him, and against me in the Kings Bench.

It appears by the order of the Arbitrators, which was made an order in the
Chancerie, that the Lord chief Justice Flemming, and Justice Walmesley were of
opinion that the Lease was naught in law. And M. Justice Dodderidge, who had
been always of counsel against me, and professed from the Bench, that he had
very seriously studied the case for his own full satisfaction therein,
clearly delivered his opinion to be, that the Lease was naught in Law. But it
is true, that the swaying sentence was for the Lease, upon two points: first,
because Nihil facit error nominis quando constat de corpore; secondly, because
there is no substantial difference between the name of the College and the
name in the Lease, but only a transpositio^ of words, which makes no material
error. Touching the first of which points, I desire to know, whether it be a
received rule in the Common Law, that nihil facit error nominis quando constat
de corpore; and if it be, how then so many Leases have been avoided, so many
Graunts have been frustrated, so many Writs have been miscarried, upon
misnomers? For although many instances may be given wherein men have not
prevailed in suites upon misnomer, when the error was not material; yet
certain it is also by many instances, that men have often prevailed in suites
upon misnomer, when the error has been material. Touching the latter point
also I desire to know, whether the difference between, Aula scholarium Reginae
de Oxon. the name by which the College was licensed to be founded, and Aula
Reginae de Oxon. which our Founder used, and by which the Lease was dimised, be
not a substantial difference. I see the license of Edw. 3. to be this:

De gratia nostra speciali concessimus, and licentiam dedimus pro nobis, and
haeredibus nostris quantum in nobis est etdem Roberto de Eglesfield, quod ips
in quodam Messuagio suo cum pertinentijs in Oxon. in parochiae S. Petri in
Orient situato, quandam Aulam Collegialem de scholaribus, capellanis, and
alijs, perpetuis temporibus duraturam, sub nomine Aulae scholarium Reginae de
Oxon. quae per vnum Praeprositu^ de dictis scholaribus iuxta ordinationem
praefati Roberti inde faciendum gubernabitur, construere, and de nouo fundare;
ac Messuagium illud cum pertinentijs praefat. Praeposito and scholaribus dare
possit, and assignare. And I see the words of our Founder to be these: Eandem
Aulam, Aulam Reginae in Oxon. aeternaliter institui nominandam. Wherein whether
our worthy Founder has not unawares used a name substantially differing from
the name whereby he was licensed to found the College, I desire to know: as
also, whether a Founder may swerue at all from the name whereby he is licensed
to found; and whether whatsouer is put (sub nomine) be not to be counted
sacrum, and nulla ex part mutandum. And further, for the name attended with
the persons, I desire to know, what is the name of the College licensed by the
former words to be founded, whether this, Praepositus and scholares Aulae
scholarium Reginae de Oxon. or this, Praepositus and scholares Aulae Reginae de
Oxon. and whether out of the name, Aula scholarium Reginae de Oxon. the word
Scholares, can be transferred unto the persons, Praepositus et scholares, and
so the name to remain as in the foundation, Aula Reginae de Oxon. Upon better
knowledge of which points, another point will be cleared, viz. whether there be
an error in the judgment passed against me.

But the cause found no relief in Chancerie.

I hoped for relief there, whatsoever the event should be at Common Law,
against a Lease of this nature, either by reasonable increase of allowance for
the Incumbent, or by abridgement of the term of years in the Lease, or by
provision for the Glebe land, that the Church should not therein be prejudiced;
or by all of these, or some other means, but am yet without relief, and so am
like to be, unless after eight years toil and charges there as Defendant
against a Lease, only good upon title of usurpation, and otherwise
unconscionable and unreasonable, I will renew the suite, and henceforth become
Plaintisse there.

But the suite has been easy for me, and has undone him.

In distraction and vexation, in toil and travel, it has been very grievous
unto me, and in charges it has been so costly and heavy unto me, that if I
had so many hundredth pounds in my purse as I have spent in the suite, I might
therewith be a very good Benefactor unto our College. As for my Adversary,
the suite has been very aduantageous unto him; first because he during the
whole suite paid nothing out, either to me, or to the Curat, or to the King
for tenths or Subsidies, or to the Archbishop, Bishop, Archdeacon, or others,
for Visitations, Procurations, Synodals, and the like, which amounting to 40.
pounds a year, or thereabouts, he was by his Lease to have paid, and yet,
until order for sequestration, received, by the space of six years, all the
fruits and profits of the Rectorie, save some fruits which in two years I
received by composition with some of the Parish, for which I have bin
accountant. Secondly, because the Lease, which before our suite would not yield
1200. pounds to him, will now, as it is said, yield unto him 1800. pounds and
upwards. Thirdly, because the yearly rent of the Rectorie is now improued unto
200 lib. per annum, which before the suite was not above 150. lib. or 160. lib.
per annum.

Let it then be considered, that the Lease was ab initio naught in Law, for
want of Legal confirmation by the true Patron, that upon fear of the
inualiditie of the Lease and trouble by it, M. Izod assigned it unto M. William
Alcock, that M. William Alcock would not meddle with it without warrant from M.
Izod for peaceable possession for ten years; that M. William Alcock much
molested M. Shepherd with suites for disabling the Lease; that the Lease was
questioned by M. Shepherd, and only not prosecuted unto trial because of his
poverty; that the beginning of the suite between him and me was from him;
that the only strength whereon the Lease stands against the maine point in
Law which quelleth it, is the right of patronage pretended to be gained to the
College by usurpation; that the error in the name is, as I conceive it with
submission, a material error, and that many Leases have been avoided, and
Graunts and Writs frustrated upon such error; and again, that the Lease is of
a Benefice presentatiue, and for an unreasonable term of years, and with
reservation of an unfit allowance for a fit Minister, and whereby the Glebe of
the Benefice is exchanged and alienated, and that M. Alcock by his own courses
bewrayed the testimony of his own conscience against himself for matter of
conscience; and that there is not any exception against my suite for the
overthrowing of the Lease, but has that due answer which may clear it from
aspersions cast upon me and it, and then let judicious and indifferent men, not
interessed in this business, or in the like case, censure me at their
pleasures, so as it becomes men that love the Gospel, and the Ministers and
professors thereof, and with respect unto the cause, not unto my person.

I am not, nor have been in this case, I praise God, willing to give offense,
but rather much desire to clear my self from any offense which has been
taken any way. And if I be not partial in my own cause, that (I hope) may
satisfy others, which I thank God does satisfy my self in this case. Howbeit
I willingly submit all, only wishing that men may not with Joseph's master be
too credulous, especially against an Elder, as I said in the beginning, but
rather may beware how they condemn where God condemns not. If I had not out
of many reasons bin thoroughly well persuaded of the goodness of my cause, I
would not for the world have dealt in it; and if any man think otherwise of me,
God forgive him.

FINIS.
FOR THE FARTHER CLEAring and enlarging of some passages in the preceding
APOLOGETIQVE, a worthy and judicious friend (for testimony to the truth, and
of his love to the memory of the deceased,) has been pleased to annex AN
ATTESTATION.
I being from the beginning of Do. Airy his intermedling in this suit, and
before, acquainted with and of Council in this cause, and question, could not
but afford to this narration apologetical, the affixing of these points, partly
of attestation, and partly of addition, viz: That before that reverend man was
either Provost of Queens College, or Parson of that Church: Mr Shepherd then
Incumbent and immediate successor (as I take it) of Scot the unhappy and
ungracious Lessor, made Entry into and claim of the Gleebe-land to the said
Church pertaining or some part thereof. Hereupon a Bill was exhibited against
him in the Chauncery by Izod alias Shillingford (if I mistake not his name)
being the first Lessee or his Executor. Shepherd hereupon came to me
requesting me to be of Council with him and to draw his Answer, which I did:
But so poor he was that after the taking out the Copy of the Bill and paying
his Atturneyes fee, his purse was empty and therefore I was of Council with
him in Franckalmoigne. After this he came to me in the Country requesting me
to move the said College being then Patrons to assist him with their purse to
bring the said Lease to trial, telling me that he had Mr Plowd^ns opinion for
the avoiding thereof: I did accordingly move Mr Doctor Robinson then Provost,
to that purpose: but the Answer that I received was, that if he would resign
or when the Church should become void, the College (presenting an able
Preacher) would be at Cost in the suite: but not for him, who was either
Potentia or actu no preacher, or to this effect in substance: it being hard to
relate phrases and syllables twenty years after, for so long I take it to be.
Thus Mr Shepherd having but 30 pounds per annu^ bare rent for him his wife
and Children was glad to sit Down and let the Title of the Lease rest for want
of ability to proceed in suit. After this the said Lease (in part at least
(viz: for one or two Morecor and Fencot to my remembrance.
villages within the parish) was offered to be sold to Mr Temple then of Water
Eaton, now Sr Thomas Temple, who wanting provision of Come to his house as it
seemed was willing to have bought it, lying not far from him. But upon inquiry
finding the validity of it to be under question refused to deal therewith. Mr
Alcocke finding it not current in the Country, after gat money upon it in
London viz: of one Mr White the sum of 500 pounds vt dicitur, and this was as
I take it immediately upon Shepherd his Death or in his last sickness. After the
Death of Shepherd Mr Doctor Airay being instituted and inducted into the said
Church, before any suite by him co^menced for avoiding the said Lease, The said
Alcocke exhibited his Bill against Doct. Airay as knowing the time was come for
bringing the validity of the said lease into question according to the
intention and purpose of the said College long before published and
discovered. Therefore he now sought relief in equity as doubting himself his
strength in law. Doctor Airay on the other side advised in my presence both
touching the point in law, and touching equity with two ordinarily coming
that Circuit and others, men of as great note for learning and Judgment in the
law, as any of their time. Their Judgment was* both that (the Lease was void
in law, and that it being of a Benefice* with Cure of souls, Chauncery nor
equity would never uphold it. Suite was therefore hereupon commenced at the
common law, and upon reference before it came into the King^ Bench, Sr Thomas
Flemming (either when he was Lo. chief Baron or chief Justice of the Kings
Bench) and Mr Justice Wal^iester* certified under their hands the same opinion
in Law touching the invalidity of the Lease. In the Kings Bench, Mr Justice
Dotheridge, who had bin of* Alcocks Council in the Exchequer, and there argued
for him, yet as a Judge in the Kings Bench, gave his opinion against the lease
(viz: that it was of no validity:) Adding, that it was* as like to Merton
College case, (wherein the Lease though not as this of a Benefice was adjudged
void) as one egg to another. These things thus being, can any blame Do: Airay
for thinking the Lease not good in law? How and where should he attain to
greater knowledge of the law then these Counselors of great reputation, nay
then these three Judges? but it will be said, (and indeed must be, by those
that will censure him as faulty here. about) that although the lease were, or
at least were justly to be thought, void in law yet it was against conscience
to seek toavoyd or overthrow it. Upon this I must demur, For this then will be
the Case: A leaf is at this day made by a Parson, and confirmed by Patron and
ordinary, which yet by the law is not of force nor validity: But whether the
Successor of this Parson be not tied by Conscience to admit this to hold as a
good lease, By the statutes 13. Eliz.
though in law not good, must be the Question. A strange question, such as
would make paper blush to bear as a question, were it capable of blushing. For
since the voice of Conscience is loud and plain against the making of such
leases, is it possible she should dissemble and whisper in corners for the
upholding and supporting of them? Certainly, this voice if any such be is but
of fals^ nominata Conscientia, as St Paul speaks of Scientia. And to find out
whether it so be or not let us consider of the institution of Benefices, and
the end of the endowment of Churches with Livings, and this is declared by the
statute. 3. R. 2. Cap. 3. to be; That the Benefices thus endowed, should be
given to honest and convenient persons, for the serving and honoring of God
diligently, the keeping of hospitality, the informing and teaching of the
people and the doing of other noble things pertaining to the care of souls.
This is the Judgment of the wisdom of the Land viz: of the King, the Lords
spiritual and temporal, and the Commons. And can then Conscience speak
beyond law for the Diuersion and alienation of these livings from those
public and pious uses yea from their original Institution to supply a
private Kitchen? Let us in this also heat the voice and Judgment of the whole
Realm (and turpis est pars quae cum suo toto non conuenit.) In the reign of
K. H. the 8. Ao 32. Cap* 28. A law was made to make good and firm all Leases
for reasonable Term viz: not above xxj years or three lives of lands usually
letten made by any, seized in their own rights (though in Tail) or in the
right of their wives or of their Churches so as the old and accustomed rent
were reserved. And what then for Leases by Parsons and Vicars who are seized in
right of there Churches? The whole Realm thought fit these should be excepted
and not be made good, though thus for a reasonable term as by the Statute
appears. But it may be said that yet a Parson with Assent or Confirmation of
Patron and Ordinary might make a lease for any long term. True, by the
permission of the Common law, the whole trust being reposed in these three to
preserve the Churches rights and possessions, and so also might the whole
inheritance be aliened if they three all concurred. But this was never approved
by Parliament: but contrariwise as knowledge and piety more increased, so was
it more restrained and suppressed. Therefore Ao 13 Elizab. which was shortly
after the Date of Scots lease, were two Acts made, the one against long Leases
by Colleges and all having spiritual livings branding them with this note,
first that they were unreasonable. 2. that they were the Cause of
Dilapidations. 3. That they were the Decay of spiritual livings and Hospitals.
4. That they were the utter impouerishing of all Successors Incumbents of the
same. And therefore it was enacted Cap. 10. That no lease of such or like
livings other then for xxj years or three lives howsoever or by how many
soever confirmed should be good or of force. And least yet Parsons and Vicars
might with Confirmation of Patrons and Ordinaries prejudice the Church so long
as. (...) xxj years, It was enacted Cap. (...) Lease by such should be good or
of force longer then the Lessor should continue resident, without absence,
above 80 days. So as by Death of Lessor (if not sooner) it must fall to
ground, (no hurt being that each, for his own time of life and residence,
might by lease, for the better applying of his study, free himself from
husbandring his Gleeb, or collecting his Tithes.) And this Law in the preface
expresses this Cause of that Provision (viz:) that the Livings appointed for
ecclesiastical Ministers, may not by corrupt and indirect dealings be
transferred to other uses. So that this making of Leases is termed and judged a
Transferring from the original Institution, and that Transferring is by the
Judgment of the Realm a corrupt and indirect dealing. And in truth this
Leasing is as much in effect or has as much evil in it as an Impropriation
for the time, and the time in our case being above 80 years, is of no small
length. What then if in some Cases, art and ingeni^, as one Statute speaks, a
practice have been to do this eiull either by long lease or Impropriation;
but Digitus Dei being in it has made this wicked act to have a gappe or flaw
left, and to fail in some circumstance material to give it force in. Law.
Must the Conscience of the succeeding Incumbent help to make up this gappe by
confirming or affirming it to be of force and strength and so admitting it when
law has given it no such strength? What is this but vltimam manum apponere to
approve and partake in the wicked act of the Predecessor: to see a
sacrilegious person, and as the Psalm speaks of a thief to run with him to
help to perfect his theft, and lock up the door of Restitution, which the
Law had set or left open? Nay, what is it but to make Conscience opposite to,
and to give aid and assistance against the end and Institution of Benefices,
viz: the diligent serving and honoring of God, keeping of Hospitality, the
reaching of the people, and doing other noble things appertayning to Cure of
Souls as that Statute. 3. R. 2. speaks: nay, to be helpful to that which is
unreasonable, a cause of dilapidations, and decay of spiritual livings, yea a
corrupt and indirect transferring of them to foreign uses, as we heard the
Statute. 13. Eliz* speak; yea an exposing of the people to the seducement of
Jesuits and priests, and to their reco^ciling of the^ to the Sea of Ro^e
absoluing and dischardging of them from all obedience duty and Allegiance
toward their Sovereign, and so preparing them for unnatural and dangerous
rebellion, which the same Statute cap. 2. declares to be the effect and
Consequence of the want of good Instruction occasioned by the diversion of the
pastoral maintenance. Now if any will make conscience so unconscionable as to
play this part he deserves, mo^strari et dicier his est, eue^ to be poiuted and
wondered at. Yet let none wilfully mistake or pervert my words: I say not that
Conscience should go so far as to pull Down and overthrow such leases if
they have their full strength force and perfection by law: Factum valet quod
fieri non debuit. In such case only perhaps an act of Parliament may justly
demolish this lewd edifice and building. But I say where the Law vpholds it
not, suppose only a Deed written signed and sealed but wanting Delivery, or
confirmed by Ordinary and not by Patron, or by Patron and he within age, or the
Patronage entayled, or be it otherwise Defective, Conscience I say rightly
guided must rejoice that the Law has not given it full strength, and not
either belie the Law that it does make it good where it does not, or supply
that strength to it which it wants in law. Herein therefore no blame can be
fastened upon that worthy man viz: that he brought this evil contriuance of a
Diuersion from good and holy Institution, to the Balance or Standerd for
trial. And Mr Justice Crook Delivering his opinion in law for the Lease so
expressed his conscience, that it was pity if it could not be avoided by the
Rules of law, being so ill and so ungodly an act. If any shall say that it
being assigned over to a Purchaser must turn the wind and make conscience go
on the Leases side, he is much deceived; For then every such unconscionable
lease whereby as in our Case even house as well as Living shall be alienate
from the Parson, and he be turned to an Alehouse for his food and lodging, made
one Day to A and the next Day assigned to B (nay perhaps made to A for that
purpose to be assigned to B) should make Conscience turn as easily as the
wind. It is a rule of law in such Cases caveat Emptor, nam nouisse debuit se
imemere alienum, and again, Quod in initio non valuit, tractu temporis non
valebit. Nay it is a rule both of Reason and Religion, Melius vt pereat vnus
quam vnitas. The bodily Death or Destruction is not to be valued with that of
the Soul, as was taught by the best Master that ever was, much less must the
corporal Provision of or for one person or family ouerweigh and supervalue the
spiritual provision for many persons, many Familyes diverse Towns and
Villages, nay the Kingdoms safety. If any object the validity in Law of this
Lease, they return to the first point and blame him for not foreknowing what
Judges would resolve better then his Council, which to do is (absit
indignatio verbo) very absurd. For suppose the University, by their Councels
advice, try in law a Contriuance of a Recusant, to defeat them of an Advowson,
or Presentation to the Church, and that the Judges should not in some Case
conceive the Statute. 3. Iacobi, to reach so far, or be taken so liberally as
their Council (being of great ability) thought: it rending to so good a
purpose for the Churches good: shall the University be blamed for bringing the
Case to trial in Law? Absit. Besides that as many Judges have (as appears by
the premises) been in law against the Lease made by Scot, as for it. It would
take up a great deal of labor and paper to set down the many Leases and
Conueyances which by several Judgments have been avoided upon Mishaming; yet
in this Case that was not properly the point, but the College only confirmed
as Patron, where the Patronage was in others. To help this, it was alleged,
that by a wrongful presentation the College had gained the Inheritance of the
Patronage as by usurpation. And to avoid that, this misnaming was stood upon
chiefly in this wrongful presentatio^. Nay a case is in one of our late Books
printed, of a lease made 2. Ed. 6. of a Parsonage Cook lib. 1. fol. 153 the
Rector of Chedingtons Case Mich. 40 and 41 Eliz.
Com: Buck. confirmed by Patron and Ordinary, and yet (after it had been
enjoyed above 50 years,) avoided by Judgment and euicted from the sixth or
more remote purchasers (without any relief in equity,) I will not say upon a
nicer point then was this in our Case, but surely to mine eye and apprehension
less discernable. Thus it is evident that justly no scandal nor Imputatio^ can
for this matter be cast on this reverend man. And otherwise he was doubtless
one of those, of whom: St Paul says, Tales in pretio habete, a true Labourer
in Gods harvest, one that sought not himself, nor great things for himself.
Let us therefore honor the memory of such, and fear that woe denounced against
them that call evil good, and good evil.

T. W.

FINIS.

