NOSCE TE, (HVMORS.)BY RICHARD TVRNER.

Disce dediscere. printer's device formerly of John Wolf; framed device of a
fleur-de-lis with two cherubs and I. W. (McKerrow 294)

LONDON Printed by I. W. for Iefferey Chorlton, and are to be sold at his shop,
at the great North door of Paul's. 1607.

TO THE READER.
DIgnare indignis (Reader) soft, I might as well have called you gentle, per
Antiphrasin, you will say but you were not best be prating, lest I make Cato claw
you by the Coxecombe, with ne ad concilium, etc. But Apology, define plura, do
you hear (predicte) heeres asixepenie purchase for you; I think you may call
it Epigrames, or a book of this thing and that thing, and just nothing, if you
have better skill, you may scoff at it, or you may look and laugh at it, you
may buy it and bear it, and then you may either read it, or hear it, or else
take it and tear it, or if you can do nothing else, clip your tail twixt
your legs, like a weary sheep, and cry mew but may be, your stomach has
pressed your belly to the three penny Ordinary, take this word in your pocket, for
it is not there I assure you. Farewell.

Richard Turner.

TO THE CARPING Misinterpretor.
CEase gualde-backt-guilt, my inscious lines to mince,
The world will know you are rubbed if once you wince,
They hemme within their seeming critic wall,
Particularly none, generally all;
Among which if you have chancht to catch a prick
Cry Wee-hie if you will, but do not kick.
NOSCE TE, (Humors.)
NOsce te, (Humors) fantastic, know thy self,
The ape of fashions, Natures very Elfe,
Here learn, abhor, reform thy infamous rumors,
Platter faced Proteus (Nosce te, Humors.)
Meet swearing Samme; and say you are glad he is well,
Even so is he by you; he is by hell:
Ask him if he a pint of wine will take,
He Will give it you; aye by the Stygian lake:
Tell him it is spoke his dealings are but evil,
His humor scorneth rumor, aye by the devil.
This his detested swearing, each man loathes,
His oaths are his, God grant, he not his oaths.
SEarch from the orient to the occident
To find some vnknowne-land by accedent:
Wring Prester John by the beard, draw Cham by the heels,
Tie such as Hector to our chariot wheels,
Pish, what were this? now none are famde but drinkers;
Lets to a tavern, be as drunk as Tinkers,
Drag up some whores into the room by'th'haire,
Swingde up the Vintner, throw the Drawer down stairs,
Rouse out with such a horrid thunder, score.
Make Errabus amasde, the Welkin rore,
Fall out, scolde, fight, and after all these quarrels,
Suck out the very entrals of the barrels:
O had we never ended Spanish iarres,
Then these had never been our English wars.
OTher men's joys chifefly from those Ioise descend,
Yet (cruel Ioise) my joys in Ioise have end,
My only joys, by only Ioise are crossed,
Ioise is my love, in whom my joys are lost.
Hark how he blows, puff, he will cassear you all
Gallants, alane, give Gurmandise the ^all:
O Buttockes! bigger then a pair of butt's,
The very paragon of grease and guts,
Attorney, I cry you mercy, now I Will swear
It Is he has made tuftaffatie so dear,
A sixeyearde iacket's nothing, for i will tell ye
Th'ers a huge circuit bout his boundles belly;
Ale by whole runs, the vastiles conceales,
It Is strange, no tripe-wife for his garbage deals,
Yet all is not lost by feeding Gurmandise,
Then weep not (Besse) for when thy husband dies,
Do thou but sees the entrals of the chuffe,
Thou art worth at least five mark in kitching stuff;
Yet soft, i will make a Proclamation,
That cloth and stuff, may join in supplication;
And pray (O mutton pasties) goose and pigge,
That bellies may break before they grow so big.
BLessed Creator) turn thy cursed creature,
The best by name's become the badst by nature
Grace, now give ore that name, be Grace no more
O Grace is graceles, for Grace is a whore.
SHine hollow Caves, and thou celestial round,
Drop down harmonious accents from thy spears,
Let heaven and earth with merry noise resound,
The Flagge hanges out to day thei'l bait the bears,
For how to spend my time I could not tell,
Cause all the whores of Lambeth, be in Bridewel.
Thus idle Libertines consume their lives,
In some detested sin, some horrid vice,
Rauishing maids, dishonesting men's wives.
At tauernes, bawdy houses, plays, whores, dice,
They that have liberty, do thus abuse it,
Cursed, nay all most dambd, are they that use it.
MVmme chancing Tom to his eternal grace,
The dicing-heraldes did create sise ace,
This Tom in gamling was (forsooth) so nice
No trick escapte his knowledge on the dice:
Barde cater trayes, fullomes, high cuts, low cuts
Nay Tom did know the dices very guts,
But what avails skill, if luck be bad,
Ingratum fatum, Tom lost all he had.
When lo to dire revenge Thomas is drawn,
And put his cloak (despite the dice) to pawn,
But valiant dice better at blows then brawle
Conquerde at arms, cloak, doublet, hose and all,
Quoth furious Tom, is this my merit's meede?
A plague upon it, here is bare -- luck indeed
Then calls all villanes, rogues, panders and whores,
And in his summer's suit, swinges out of doors,
Catch-poles, and bruers horses, give the wall,
Or breechles Thomas swears he will bang you all.
MEndoso's turned, what? swaggerer, by this light,
I am sure he is not, beleaue't he is, he will fight,
He Is rich and valiant, as a man may be,
London affordes none properer then he,
See how he laughes, nay, prithee do not score it,
I am sure it is true, I heard him when he swore it,
Trust me you wrong the Gentleman, nay fie,
It Is a lest indeed, Mendoso swear and lie.
A Gentleman, why? he has been once or twice
Why, I hope to God a Serving man may rise,
Why name you Ambodexter among the rest,
Did he follow him? it is true, he did in jest,
The other morning to digest his can,
To cut Tobacco, he swore he mist his man,
Disgraced to fil't himself, in a great rage
Can curse the Earl, that needs would have his Page,
He had a Page, he lies that dare say nay,
Three days he served him, ere he run away:
He Is turned I assure you, lies as well as many,
Bids God renounce his soul better than any:
Cries (villains) I have learnd a new Carouse,
No man comes near me in a Bawdie house:
When others pawnd their land, he spent no ground,
Because he had none: but almost three hundred pound.
He spent indeed a little which he got,
Question not how, perchance it was his lot.
AS my young Mistress walked by her gate,
A Beggar asked her worship for a penny,
She prizing worship at the lowest rate,
Bade him be packing for he got not any:
Another kneeling, came with (good your honor)
And it was no marvel, for she wore a Hood:
She hearing such a title put upon her,
I warrant (quoth she) his breeding has bin good:
Out came her purse, and money, read how much,
A penny faith, her honors bounty was such.
TOuch not my Rapier, for by my rapiers hilt,
If thou defile my rapier with thy sight,
Then by the radiance of my rapiers gilt,
My rapier sends you to eternal night:
But see it quoth a? know slave, my rapier scorns
The vile beholding of so base a groom.
What will you faith? come, come, I Will cut your corns:
Die (villain) die, or quickly leave the room,
Cham not so simple, quoth the country clown,
To run away for every Mouse that cries.
Chau been the lustiest man in all our town:
Quoth Hot-spurre (O my spleen) by Jove he dies.
Plain-dealing Tom, esteeming that course best,
Drew a hudge Alehouse dagger from his back:
Put up, quoth Hot-spurre, can abide no jest,
In conscience I should beat thee like a sack:
Rusticke was ready, Hot-spurre began to fawn,
Faith he would have beat him, if he had not drawn.
Obtain of me my living, lands and life,
Obtain the nightly lodging with my wife:
Command me hang my self, nay fight for thee,
Nay (sweet friend) my rapier must be free
What else I have, by your name is known,
What Is mine is my friende's, save only that is mine own:
Of mettels strange, of composition rare,
Like Mars his sword, my rapier scorns compare,
Is not possession to thefts fire fuel?
Whoe'd trust security such a jewel?
Who has your rapier that you do not fear it?
Nay, where is your rapier that you do not wear it?
O sir, so many cans of expense,
Why do you laugh? faith it is not pawnd for sixpence.
Splendour of nature, luster of a nose,
Whose color far exceeds the reddest rose,
A radiant nose, for brightness glorious,
A nose whose greatness is notorious,
All modern noses this nose far out goes,
A handful broad, why it is monstrous for a nose.
Mirosos coming to a tavern near,
In gallant terms began to curse and swear,
This roguish house, what the pox brought me hither,
What are these rogues and whores gone altogether:
It Is a maingie house, here gentlemen may starve,
Whilst knaves and drabs are playing that should serve:
Anon says one, may it please your worship dine,
My leisure is (you slave) to drink some wine.
What smell is this? faugh, here is a filthy fogge,
A shaking room, able to choke a dog:
Such durty towels, rude cushions, rotten stools,
Plague on such Beggar-masters, and men fools.
A quart of Ipocras fresh, neat, and pure,
Now by my bl^de, I shall be angry sure:
The boy with humble flexure does decline,
And ^^dging to the Celler down for wine,
Mean while Miroso's gone, and wot you why?
^oxe take the Beaker, must he stand so nie.
I Have a love by whom the morning rise
Looks still to have her blushing glory tainted,
Were they not bleard, O she had excellent eyes*
The world affoards a face no better painted:
A lip like to Diana, her fountains brincke,
Heavens for a breath, O that it did not stincke.
Did thou but see with what facility
She winnes a lover with an amorous look,
Thou Would consecrate to all eternity
Her famous name, within some brazen book.
Lightning of Nature, beauties amazing thunder,
The rogue does smile, it would make your worship wonder.
Compared to her priceles-valued mind,
Perfections richest jewel is but poor,
One cannot wish a wench to be more kind,
Mistake me not for a Pandor, her a whore:
For if you do, you wrong us not a little,
You may know we are honest, cause we live at Spittle.
MY Lady's sick, no earthly thing can cure her,
She looks so grimme, no creature can endure her,
O fetch no Doctors, it were but idle cost,
Her box, pomatum, life, and all, are lost.
Seek not to comfort me, my wife is dead,
Gush forth salt tears, drown every sense with weeping,
Last night I was so troubled in my bed,
That for my life, I could not wake for sleeping:
Nor can I stand for leaping, weep for wincking,
Nor hardly eat a bit of bread for drinking.
Thus in most pittious manner have I lived,
This too too tedious time, two days with my maid,
Never like me was any creature grieved,
Ere since her death, for very woe I have played:
No marvel, for I could not work for sweating,
Nor could the eggs be butterd ere I was eating.
Yet now at last, it is time, it is time, adue,
Live (loved soul) for ever in sweet bliss:
When the old is gone, it is time to seek a new,
I love thee dearly (Besse) aye by this kiss;
The match is made, and here is an end of sorrow,
We Will lie together to night, marry to morrow.
HEr niceness pleasure is to walk,
Room there for Madam Minx,
O fie upon this bawdie talk,
Now faugh, by gisse it stinkes.
Why will you not give place (sir knave)
He Will not attend your fables,
She loves not to hear of, nor to have
Such foul evil favored bables.
O touch her not, for Dian's sake,
She Is Venus chiefest scorner,
The place you greatly do mistake,
I hope this is no corner.
One snatched her keys that sat her near,
Because the chain was gawdie,
And put them I Will not tell you where,
Because t is somewhat bawdie.
Polluted things, touch not her rings,
Your stinking heat she will cool:
For fingers twain, scarce touched the chain,
And carried them to a poole,
Where till she had bestowed great store
Of washing the defiled,
She to her keys a crown before,
Could not have reconciled:
But happiest men crosses endure,
When Fate her might aduances,
Nor puritanisme is secure.
From greatest of mischances.
For within a month, and twenty days,
This Minx surnamed the Mild,
Did make the fowler of her keys,
The father of a child.
SCud coward valor, fly my tempestuous ire
And the turbouse tumbling of my whirlewinde fury,
So raging spleen, belke out thy sparkling fire,
My hands are judges, and my sword's the Jury:
None scapes with less, that dares approach my sight,
Than condemnation to eternal night.
The extreme torture of his fatal hour,
Attends the villain that is next obuious,
Stretch out my legs, I Will walk five mile an hour,
Soft, now I know, what makes me so outrageous:
Knew I who would trust me, I Would go ease my mind,
I am hudge and hungry cause I have not dined.
Among liquids, R. and L. surpass the rest,
Of consonants, S. X. were, and are best.
O Hark my Mistress comes, where shall I hide me
Her rattling silks prognosticate she will chide me.
This peevish dreaming whore, where is she mising?
That does so well attend me whilst I am rising,
No cussion for my feet, no chair to sit in,
Nor any basin set (forsooth) to spit in,
A hair lay on my stockinges, do you ginne to cry?
Nay more (you queen) my buske-points stood awry,
My shoes an inch asunder, with no sockes in,
My kirtle wrinckled big as any pin,
Pox on your fingers, are they grown so nise,
My girdle trust me, was as cold as ise,
Whether run you (sirrogue) what are you blind?
I hold my life, my munkey has not dinde:
Come, dood a, dood a, this villain must be beaten,
This silly worm no bit to day has eaten,
O God is this a life? judge (Gentlemen)
A Gentleumans Monkey fast till ten,
With that unto the trembling boy she skips,
And set's her signet seals upon his lips,
And also with the maid she kindly dealde,
Who could not pass in law till she was sealde,
Admire the rising of this curious charmer,
Her father is so poor a country farmer,
That in my conscience it would content his mind,
To eat the scrappes her munkey leaves behind,
Farmer? (poor man) ay, and with care observes
To farm the stable as occasion serves
GEorge has a wife which for his dagger cares not,
Cause she dares fight when Georges dagger dares not:
For when he fell at strawes, and leapt ore stocks,
Coursing the can until he had caught a fox;
She with her nails examinde so the matter,
That he was feign to draw his dagger at her,
But yet poor Nouerint conquerde by the cup,
Being soundly bangde he sheathde his dagger up.
MIssa will needsly marry with a fool.
her reason;
O sir, because he has an exlent --
peace, treason:
And reasons more, the maid does show,
of perfect approbation,
Witness my ear that heard her swear,
it was the Ladies fashion.
An other reason that does move her take him,
I will unfold,
Because (forsooth) she does intend to make him
a --
Your nicest dames, that dwell by Thames,
of fools are nothing scorning:
For the veriest clown in all the town,
will best endure the horning.
TOm had a penny but he had no purse,
Tom then a purse esteemb'd, a penny worse,
Tom grew in choler, and began swear and curse,
Tom sold his penny and did buy a purse,
Tom was a fool, because in sums disburse,
Toms penny is more current then his purse.
TOm waxed thirsty, and went to his brother
His purse and belly empty each as other:
His brother kept an honest alehouse near,
Sold exlent bottle ale and double bear,
When Tom came there he merrily began fawn,
And for a pot would put his purse to pawn,
To sell for purses his brother had not any,
Tom might have had a pot now for his penny.
O Tom was wise, pence have too speedy vent,
Tom has his purse, his penny had been spent,
And now if any penny Tom can win,
Tom has a purse to put his penny in,
But now let Tom his purse and penny rest,
Tom's good, his purse is better, his peny's best.
COme (gossippe) sit and talk, look there is a stool
I Will tell you a wonder, Prudence is a fool,
Will wooes, nay wood her, did, nay would (to be short)
For he asked, she answearde no, and lost the sport,
He asked again (O willing wretch) she would not
But strait she wild, he nilde, she would, he could not.
Look (Ladies) here is a face, for Gods sake turn you,
Pack hence (^hacht houses) or good faith it will burn you
So set with carbuncle, ruby and pearl,
T'might well beseem the wearing of an earl,
A nose touching his mouth (which ever gapes)
Which crushed yeeldes liquor like a bunch of grapes,
A chinne as free from beard as any dog,
Save stubbes more hard then brisles of a hog:
And yet thereof the owner is so nise,
No week escapes it without shauing twice,
O cry you mercy, now the cause I have learnde
He fears lest by his nose, it should be burnde,
Why say it should, the course were not so dear,
It Would save him forty shillinges every year,
Ay, but therein another danger lies,
His burning beard might burn out both his eyes.
And that is the cause his shauing course is such,
Such scuruy faces must they cost so much.
A Monied fool, is like a woman witty,
Neither of either knowing the right use
Should no dies rise, wantons grow wise? it were pity,
If one, of one, if both t'weare both's abuse,
He would be miserable of his money,
She prodigal of wit, if she had any,
He like a sw^et perfume in stinking shrowde,
She like one Sunshine added to another,
He Would be too slavish base, she too too proud,
The flame would burn here is out, the smoke his smother
But this conversion seems to me the boniest.
Let him be wise and rich, she only honest.
FLaminio's chinne scorns every cut but bare,
And yet his head scorns naught, save only hair.
It Is merry when gossips sit upon a bench,
To talk of risting Robbin and his wench,
Of fair Philip and of Besse the brown,
And every Ducke and Broodgoose in the town,
My hen, says one, each week seven eggs does lay,
What Is that? quoth another, mine lays two every day,
The third complains, she broke her hatchil handels,
The fourth hatt the Oven, the fifth made candels,
The sixth began to sneuill, snore and sneese,
The seventh on friday made a morninges cheese,
By this; confused babbling all does smother,
The lies are lost, one cannot hear another,
Strait all fall out, bout fathering of a fart,
They rise, and scold, and scrach, and so depart.
A Country fellow courser clothed then witted,
A foolish Lawyer wisely thus he fitted;
Good sir (quoth he) are you necessity,
The Lawyer was amasde exceedingly,
And askte him why necessity? (sir Daw)
Forsooth (quoth he) because you have no law.
SVsinne's all mettle, only air and fire,
A wench as merry as one would desire.
She Will look, she will laugh, she will dance, she will play, she will sing,
She Will clippe, she will kiss, nay she will do any thing,
With any one at cards she will have a say,
And laugh and lie down, is her common play
She plays at tables well, and true as any,
Only sometimes she will bear a man too many:
At bowls she beats your cheifest alley-lubbers,
Always provided that they hold out rubbers;
Nay, if you will nocke the shafte, she will shoot at pricks,
She Is nothing else but mirth and meretrix.
RObbin does rise, and forth must needesly go,
Only to speak but with a friend, or so,
But Robbin's wit in wetting's ever shrunk,
For Robbin near comes home, but Robbin's drunk.
WIll you not pledge me sir? now by this light,
I care not of a bull rush if I fight:
Nay now my resolution naught withstands,
Horror and blood attend my murdrous hands:
Entreats are vain, for when I once am willing,
The world cannot dissuade my blade from killing.
He draw'd, and winckt, and thrust and shook, and swore,
And kept him off his rapiers length and more;
Well played in faith, mass that had spoild your sport,
Had it not been at least a yard too short.
Bullie, put up, I see thou art a man,
Come Tom, by Christ, I Will give thee half a Can.
O Face, no face, has our Theophiles,
But the right form of Mephostophiles:
I know it would serve, and yet I am no wizard,
To play the Devil in'th Vault without a vizard;
(Nature) be it spoke to thy eternal grace,
That a man has mettle even in's very face.
NIcke wears three noses in an union,
Each richly died with skarlet of the best:
Nichol^s refused the Communion,
Because the parson prayed not for his smel-feast:
He only prayed for triple-nosed Nicke,
Now Nicke was well, but's nose was hugely sick.
Nicke plays at tables well; but O his noses!
For with his eyes, the worme-eate slaves play booty:
His luck in casting's good; yet still he loses:
How can he choose, when is things are so vnsutie?
For his fellow gamster makes his sincke a sice,
Whilst he remooues his nose to see the dice.
THe great dispencer of small conscience,
Has made his niggard-name most richly known,
His money-thirsting soul, that conscious ens
Is sure the devils, though his coyne's his own:
How does that chuile abuse his pyles of pelf,
That worse then any devil damnes himself.
Reply not (Chance) though I call thee incestuous whore,
Bringing forth golden bastards to thy son,
To him that has too much, still giving more,
And yet his avarice has never done.
You must be pleased with what I said before,
For our sir John can prove you are a whore.
Do you see yon Munkie in the silken hat,
His cloak of velvet, and his Ierkin leather,
May't please your worship hear the coxcombe chat,
And see him draw his mouth and eyes together:
So impudently bold, that none can fear him,
And swears and lies, it would do you good to hear him.
He has left his reformation now of locks,
How think you then his living does come in?
Why he mends the burning fever, cures the pox,
And gets his living by the peoples sin:
Good his head has, and Rich his heel does crave,
Rich if you will, but good? in troth he is a knave.
IF he is no slave, that to all vice is thrall,
Begges ierkins, hats, hose, dublets, the devil and all:
And of no man of Note, but still does crave;
Why then praedictus Mounsieur is no slave.
Forbear (impure) stain not her thought clear name,
The saint's devoted to the Queen of shame:
Most beastly-wicked, man pack speedy hence,
O God, come hither with unchaste pretense,
Wrinckle (alluring face) eyes, wanton, nise,
Come, come, i will scrach you out, must you entise?
Strait to her maid the gallant does deliver
A satin gown, which he had bought to give her,
Which she espying, thus ends her churlish frown;
Busse me (Ducke) sweet, who'd have thought, thou had had a gown?
CRambde be the guts of beggar slaves with mutton,
And greasy licking of the dripping pan:
I care not for such gross meats of a button,
Give me a Capon. Zoundes a man's a man:
Must Gallants stand like pusse-cats crying mew?
Drink (villains) why ground, I hope you will look blue
Attend us (rogues) Vintner, bring here your wife
And shift her, (sir) in her satin gown,
What is thy Ordinary? now by Pharoes life,
I Will leave it, if it be under half a crown.
It Is but two shillinges: O extreme disgrace,
He scorns to suppe, when suppers grow so base.
What ailes (my Fisco), prithee (chucke) be merry,
Thy sadness makes my sorrow pass all bounds:
Come Busse thy Mistress, is my puppy weary?
Some Aquavitae quickly Fisco soundes,
I faint with grief, O bear me to my bed,
The paragon of fisting dogs is dead.
Then to an Epitaph my self i will task,
And thus in brazen letters be it written,
Fisco loud butter, and did die of'th laske,
For such a pretty dog, O death too shitten,
Now all you mourning curres in grief persevere,
That Fiscoes fifting may be famous ever.
BIfronted Peter's head, grown big with wife,
Yet a loves her whoreshippe as he loves his life,
Ay, (Peter) wink at small faults for thy wench
Has a pocky sort of crowns, all only French.
What give ten pound for counsel? give a straw,
Do you think there is any so basely-low prisd law?
Well, yet i will take it, and somewhat I will do,
But it will not be above a word or two,
So foul a case as this has never past,
Nay, I am as sure as can be, you will be cast:
With that the discontented Client frowns,
And makes a rusling consort among his crowns,
The which no sooner (laugh not) Conscience hears,
But presently the case is changde, he swears,
Pardon me (sir) I did mistake the course,
Assure your self, the land is firmly yours.
I Know Ann Hill, and yet it is not mons,
Both springde, and bridgde, with neither sons nor pons:
This Hill has a will, O strange, a Hill a will!
Nor fons, pons, mons, yet spring, bridge, yea Ann Hill,
Ay, (Hill) leave thy will, or else (will) leave thy Hill,
For Will with Hill, or Hill with Will, does ill.
RIchard and Robert with intent to gull them,
Borrowed of Will and Wat a hundred pound,
But mark how finely Will and Wat did pull them:
For Wat was wit, and Will was wily found:
They said themselves had not to ease their sorrow,
but if they would bring a pawn, they would it borrow.
They pawnde a lease of threescore pounds a year,
Thinking to get it back again by craft,
For not long after, both come back and swear,
They are in suit of law, and needs must haue't.
For if it be not shown within three hours,
It Is lost (quoth they) and then nor yours nor ours.
Wat laughed at this, and Will or rather wile,
With doubled Negatiues their cunning crossed,
They walked away in choler, and mean while
The time of pay was past, the lease was lost.
Thus were these crows guld by the other dawes,
But fallere fallentes non est fraus.
Observe the ponderous sense of every word:
And look you here is a face for any Lord:
Do see this beard? I tell thee (groom) each hair,
Then Prester John his crown, I prize more dear,
Note but my carriage, thou see I am most valiant,
Then judge if I am not a perfect gallant:
He learnde conjunction when he went to school,
For words, face, beard, behavior, all is but fool.
MAt grew of late most miserable poor,
But of his uncle he was sure of help,
And coming to his house, knocked at the door,
But mark the currish nature of this whelpe:
He knew him not, nor bade him once come in,
Knowing torn breeches could not be his kin.
But neuer-alwaies-bad-imperious fortune
Raised his deserts soon from thridbare to brave,
When lo, this worme-eate Churl, seems to importune
The loved acquaintance of his Cuzze to have:
What incantation this proud world bewitches,
When men are less esteemb'd, then velvet breeches.
MIca is turned religious: why? he fasteth
Long as his pennilesse religion lasts.
A pox take Pierce, for since his Supplication,
Poor Mica's purse was nere in reparation:
Go fagget, how sir? a seminary Priest,
Why I have not any cross about me, see?
Which croslesse cross, made Mica's case so clear,
And therefore fair fall nothing once a year.
What Is he that walks with such a stately grace,
And puts down any Coach-horse for a pace:
With a hat as long, and sharp, as the Dutch steeple,
Able to fear ten groates worth of poor people:
Who his mustachoes so ascendent wears,
They seem to whisper rebellion in his ears:
With a nose, in circuit like a new changed moon,
And for a face, puts down your best Baboone.
With rapier by his side, half a yard more
Than would measure Prick-markes off at half a score?
Why do you ask? cause I may say to you,
I heard one swear, that fellow was never true:
He Will make a match to day, and firmly speak it,
Nay swear, to morrow, forswear, the third day break it.
Nay more; he said he was tyranys chief jewel,
No Turk, no Pagan, no wild Boar so cruel:
He was naught, nay worse, he never means to mend;
He Would gull, deceive, nay more, he would rob his friend:
To say what country man he is, it is hard,
It is indeed: for I think he is no --
WHo'd think yon gallant by the boy attended
Did lie a bed, mean while his hose were mended?
Or that they lived hid in a hiue like Bees,
Only with barley bread, and Bridgenorth cheese?
Yet shall you hear him, and his boy protest,
That Beef and Mutton's but a skuruie feast:
He skornes to feed at night, on goose, or ducke,
Yet (Fortune) I perceive that you have stuck
Upon his witty nap, your wealthy burre,
For in wit, he is far; and yet in wealth, he is fur.
MY mistress loftines, who in the light does mark,
Thinks not she would be so lowly in the dark,
There (prostrate wretch) doue-like, deuoid of gaull,
How long so ere the wrong, she puts up all.
Yet (Wat) your jealousy with you plays booty,
When you come home, I hope she does her duty.
To clip, and coll, and kiss, she never misses,
What? cannot husbands be content with kisses?
Fasingo has a back, is it possible?
Aye, and a belly, but as unsociable
As any back, and belly you shall find,
For's back goes brave, marry his bellie's pined:
His back wears silk,
His belly scorns milk,
Because he cannot get it:
But if he can rob
A Herring of a cobbe,
You Would bless you to see him eat it.
Fasingo has another trick well noted,
No Pilchers head escapes him, though vnbloted:
But he cares not much for marmelet or gelly,
But if a cheese will find parings, he will find belly.
When any he sees,
He Will pick his teeth,
As he sits at his door:
When he has not eat,
One bit of meat,
In three days space before.
MY Mistress goes each day in her Scotch hat,
Yet sets me down to supper with a sprat,
And walks her self mean while about the hall,
To see I eat both head, and tail and all,
My swaggering stomach brooks head, tail, skin and bone
Whip says my mouth, and then the sprat is gone,
Then learnedly my Mistress gins to chat,
The wondrous virtues of a bloted sprat,
First how it fills, next how it does restore
One from a hundred sicknesses and more,
But in my throat I scorn this physic diet,
Nor can my belly keep my guts in quiet,
Which she perceiving gins to scold outright,
Bids give me the other sprat, and choke me quite,
When lo, my teeth as quick as any cats,
Soon make two simple fellows of the sprats,
I think you will near have supt (quoth she) sir gull,
I rise, she says, I hope you are farting full,
It Is true, with air, therein we both accord,
But to preserve, I do beseech the Lord,
Tom Weningtons blue breeches from the rats,
And me, and all good men, from supping with sprats.
AN honest Vicker, a wisard or a witch
A Chimney-sweeper, Tom Tinker and his bitch.
Met altogether at a tippling house,
To try each other's valor at carouse,
Sir John did reason, the witch did also well,
Chimny-sweepe better, the Tincker did excel,
And surely Tom had quickly got the best,
But that his bitch past him, and all the rest,
They wondered much at Tom, but at Tib more,
Faith (quoth the Vicker) it is an exlent whore,
Chimny-sweepe and the Tincker fell to fighting,
Kicking grew in use, with pinching, scratching and biting,
The witch and the bitch fell out, and began to brawle:
Sir John spoke latin enough to choke them all,
And near leaves off until the fray he ends,
Calls for the other pot, then all are friends;
And then a fresh they fall again to swill:
But the Chimny-sweeper takes Tobacco still,
Do you ask why? O his Commission's large,
For he may sweep his nose himself, and save that charge
And presently the Tincker gins to suck it,
Till he makes his chappes as black as any bucket,
O then let Gentlemen leave off to think on it:
When Tinkers and such rascal slaves do drink on it.
ZAy (Zisse) can fancy? then prithee constant prove,
For in conscience I am beastly deep in love:
I be sworn those frowns will make me to abhor thee,
Come, if thou't have me, here is a pinne-purse for thee,
Ah Rostemeat (Sisse), I am sure to me thy marriage,
Would be as good or better then plumme-porrage,
Sure thou't be plag'y sweet to him shall try thee,
I know no butfer-milke will ere come nie thee,
And furthermore Sisse comes so near to souse,
That I could almost eat my blacke-bricht mouse,
And I among youths have ever bore the bell,
Thou see my heels be whole, and all things well,
My head and beard (as rusty bacon) yellow,
Nay I am sure an extreme admirable fellow,
Sisse laughed and let a fart, there love was shown:
And run away, judge, is not she his own.
TIm speaks common, what is proper to a king,
Calling for's doublet, he bids our doublet bring,
Why ours you will ask? O (sir) he has good reason,
That our's as clear (as he of shift) from treason:
For he and's brother, freti simplicibus,
Wear'th suit, and'th shirt, alternis vicibus.
WHy (Will) art thou my brother? then give me a thu^p
Come bezle to me, let us be drunk in pomp:
Let the Iackes groan, the Iugges be all confounded,
The Cruzes crushed, Cans cracked, Pitchers expounded:
The black pots pincht, bowls banged, cups canonized,
The fawsets fired, the spiggots anatomized:
Now noses twang, guts groan, (Will) throw thy cloak off
Who'd die infamous, never to be spoke of?
Shal's hawle the house by the heels out at the doors,
You, hostess, bawd, come; where be all your whores?
O rise not spleen, by the Lord I am offended,
What cannot dubbed drunkards be attended?
That Is skuruie ale, this sweet, the other sower,
I have drunk a barrel better within this hour.
Rouse off thy tipple (Will) be not afraid,
They drink, they stincke, hose, room, and all is beraid.
Thus Peter Potus every morning prays,
Devilish, pray God not damned are his days.
US, ours, all, the world, the flesh, the devil,
With wealth, lust, craft, allures, deceiues, orecomes,
Fathers, sons, both, none can escape that evil,
Which by transgression from old Adam comes:
Yet grace, adoption, faith, pure, holy, civil,
VVithstands, deludes, orecomes, world, flesh, and devil.
YOu horrid sins, that heaven has named deadly,
Cease to suggest the wretched souls of men:
You that of all the world have made a medly,
Yet now at last sleep in your hellish den:
If not, yet be united; be seven no more,
For seven are one, one worse than seven; a whore.
Epillogus.
HEre have you read, if harsh, not triuiall sport,
It Was brief, if bad, the time you lost was short:
And yet because it was the Authors first,
Say it is but naught, although it be the worst.
Reader, some faults (by reason of my absence) escaped by the Printer: I
entreat you, if you will, to excuse; if not, correct: the first, if kind; you
may: the second, if curious; you must: and easily. If it be in the end of the
verse, by comparing the meeter: if else where, the sense.

FINIS.

