The order of the great Turckes court, of his men of war, and of all his
conquestes, with the sum of Mahumetes doctrine.

Translated out of French.

1524.

Ricardus Grafton excudebat.

Gum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.



To the reader.
IF that good prophet Ieremye so bewailed ye beatyng down of the walls of
Jerusalem and woofull captiuitee of the people thereof, yt he was co^streigned
to confess that he wanted water to power out of his yies for the just
lamentacion of that woofull case, what streams of tears may seem sufficient
unto us, to testify the inward grief that we ought to have, when we
consider how far and how wide Antichrist has dilated his kingdom by other
his instruments, and namelye by Mahumet that pestiferous false prophet? For
not only castelles, tounes and citees have been blasted with the deadly breath
of this poisoned serpente, but also whole and soundrye provinces, realms and
nations, have so dronken in his ca^kerde venom, that it has been hard for
the very chosen to escape his terrible stynges. And where as other adders do
only corrupt the bodies, this hell viper with his forked fierye tongue has
perced even the very souls of men.

Read Mahumettes acts who so lust, and he shall find such pride and
arroga^cie such ambicion, such bloudynesse and cruelty, such hypocrisye and
supersticion, briefly such a mind to deface, abholyshe and destroy the
kingdom of the son of the living God (I mean Jesus our sauyoure) as in the
chiefest membre of Antichrist, he calls him self the most excellent
Prophet and counceler of God: he denies that Christ dyed (in whose only
death stands our whole hope of remission of sins) he taught his disciples
to fast all day, and at night to give theimselues tooe immoderate eating and
drynckynge: he was not ashamed to say, that God spoke to him from heaven and
gave him license to abuse as many wemenne as could fantasy him: he counted
his wicked laws so good that no Christian manne might open his mouth against
them without shedynge of blood: he was a treytoure and made insurreccion
against his prince. There are many other false, deuelishe and abhomynable
doctrynes which this monster taught and meynteyned: but it is more necessary
for us to lamente the miserable case of Christ's people and to fly to gods
mercy for aid then to reherce his deceytes, gyles, delusions treasons and
conspiracies against the true and everlasting Messiah and his chosen beleuers.
For we ought to know that for our sinful living and open contempt of Gods
holy word, this cruel woolfe has been suffered so piteouslye to have
stained his mouth with Christian blood. Nevertheless, if we which profess
the name of Christ (the promised seed of David) earnestly considering these
myseryes, would return to our merciful father with unfeigned purpose to
change our lives and to embrace with all reverence his blissed word, he
would shake of from our brethrens necks these intolerable yokes. Let us
remember that he has not only promised delyueraunce to them that cast away
their unfaithfulness and earnestlye cry upon him for help, but also has
performed it in deed heretofore that we should in no wise doubt of his prompt
and ready goodness.

When the Israelites were cruellye and miserably oppressed of the Egyptians,
and cried faithfully to God for succoure, he stirred up Moses and Aaron to be
their captains, and to lead them out of that fyrye furnace. Likewise, when
the Emperor Iuliane tormented the good Christians, at the contynual prayer of
his repentaunt servants: God without any delay plucked from them that
terrible tormentoure: For at what time Iuliane took his iorneye into Persia
threatenynge the Christians, that at his return he would sacryfice their
blood to his false gods: by the prouisyon of the true God, he was led
aside by a man of Persia, into a wilderness where he received his deaths
wound, and was constreigned to confess with his blasphemous mouth, that it
was the manyfeste plage of God. For he took clottes of blood and threw them
up to the skyewarde, saiynge: thou have ouercommed O Galilean, thou haste
ouercommed, calling Christ a Galilean, because he was brought up in Galile.

There is also another later example, which seems more notable than that I can
ouerpasse it. When the Saracens with their captain zulimus, greuouslye
assaulted Constantinople in the time of the Emperor Leo, a great pestilence
also piteouslye waistynge the town in extreme desperacion of man's help,
they wholye fled to the merciful goodness of God, leaving their
supersticious religions, and buyrying all their abused images of the town, and
apointyng all the rest in their kingdom to the fire. Then our merciful God
seeing their repentaunt hearts, deferred no longer from them his present
help. For all these things foorthwyth came together upon the Saracenes,
cold, hunger, pestilence, sedicions among theimselues, the death of their
captain, their ships partelye burnt up with fire from heaven, partly
bonged and drouned with an horrible tempest.

These examples ought to move us, both to abhor and deteste our
wickedness and supersticion, and also to conceive a sure trust, that God will
shine upon us with his favorable countenance and deliver us from our most
cruel enemies, if we begin a new life and turn vnfeynedlye unto him. And
if there be any manne that earnestlye doothe not consider the miseryes and
calamiteis of Christian people, let them read this little treatise, wherein
they shall perceive, how mighty Mahumettes supersticious impietee has
preueyled: how ample regions the Cristians have lost, in what bondage they
live, and whereunto that base and vile nacyon the Turckes have increased,
through our sins. Upon the consyderacion whereof they and all other may be
sturred to call upon our heavenly father, that he will send his living
spirit among us, to work true faith and repentance in all men's hearts
to raise up true preachers of ye kingdom of Christ, to confound Antichrist
with all his heretiquall and damnable sects, and to deliver his people from
miserable bondage.

Amen.
The estate of the court of ye great Turcke. The order of his army, and of
his yearly revenues.

Item a breife rehearsal of al conquestes and vyctories that the Turckes have
had, from the first of that stock, to this Solomon ye great Turcke that now
reigns.

Translated out of French into English.

1542.

Ricardus Grafton excudebat.

Cum priuiilegio, ad imprimendum solum.



The estate of the court
YOu have often requysred, and yet require that I would write to you ye estate
of the court of the great Turk, which thing you know as well or better than
I: For I am certain, that you have seen and red all that both the ancient
authors and also men of our time have written thereof, which have so largely
entreated of this matter, that it may seem arrogauncie and presumpcion for me,
once to open my mouth after them. Nevertheless, the frendshyp which has been
What thing moves the authoure hereof to write this treatise.
between us from our chyldhode well deserves, that I should accomplish your
pleasure, and satysfye your request, not only in this thing, but also i^ al
other, which shall lie in my power to do.

Wherefore, ye shall first understand, Where the Turkekepeth his resydence
that the great Turcke keeps his ordynarie resydence in Constantynople,
which the Turks call Stamboll. And he has his house called Saray, sytuated
upon the Sea coast of Asya, over a The name and sytuacyon of ye Turks palayce.
gaynste the castelles called Scutary Where in times paste stood the city of
Calcedo^. And there is but a little passage by the sea, from the one to the
other, which strayghte of auncyente time was called Bosphorus Bosphorus, a
streyghte of Thrace.
of Thrace, now named the strayghte of Constantynople.

In the foresaid Saray, (which The descripcy on of Saraye ye palayce royal.
is the palayce royal, of great cyrcuite and compass) there are many chambers
rychely appareled, and pryncypally that which is appointed By whom the Turk is
served in his chamber.
for the great Turckes own perso^ne. In which he is served with vi. young
spryngaldes. Of which two of them keep the watch all How.ii. yo^ge me^ watch
the Turk night lie.
the night, one at the beds head another at the feet, each of them
holding.ii. torches burning in their hands.

These spri^galdes every morning make hi^ ready, and put in the pockets The
monye yt is put daily in the Turks pockettes.
of his roobe, called Castan, in ye one.xx. ducates of gold, in yt other a M.
aspres, which be little poynted peaces of silver moore square Fyfty Aspres make
a ducate And a ducate is worth.v. s. sterlynge so yt every. x Aspres
makes.xii. d. sterlynge.
than round: of which.l. make a ducate. And they have nothing graven in
them but only letters neither yet their ducates which they call Altum and
Altumler. For they use no arms nor crounes, though our peynters attrybute to
them tharmes of Co^sta^tinople. Which are a cross of gold in a red field of
gueulles, with.iiii. yrons such as we stryke fire wythall out of a tinder box,
but they are not yrones, but four greek, B. that sygnyfye Basileus Basileon,
Basileuon Basileeis, that The sygnyfycacyon of the superserypeyon of the Turks
coin.
is to say: king of kings, raygnynge over kings. The foresaid monye is to be
employed on small tryfelynge pleasures of the said great Turcke. And if it
chance How every day ye Turk has so much monye newly put into his pocket
or pursse, and to who^ the monye remains if he spend it not.
that he spe^deth them not that day they remain to them, which did put them
in ye pockettes. For they that aparrel him, put in other the next day.
These.vi. spryngaldes wait upon him, whether soever he goes, but he changes
them as often as him lysteth: and going forth with him, every one has his
office. One is Odabassi, that is The office of yt.vi. spryngaldes.
chief master of the chamber. The second Cheocadar, bearer of the robe.
The.iii. Silichter, bearer of his bow and arowes. The.iiii. Sarapter, bearer
of the pot or vessel to drink water in, for ye said great Turcke drinks
no wine. The. v Chinctar, which caryeth his shoes because the custom of ye
Turckes The Turcke always drincketh water
is to put of their shoes when they go into their houses. Which houses for the
same purpose have the The custom of the Turks is to put of their shoes
when they go into their houses.
flowerths covered with thro^med carpettes, as it were matted: and some bemade
with payinted rysshes or bentes, according to the haby lytye of every
householder. The office of the.vi. called Chemligi, and The trimmi^g of their
flourthes.
he bears stoles or chayers for ye said great Turk to sytte in.

In the said Saray, ye Turk holds his court, which they call Capy yt is to
say: ye port or gate in which be the officers herafter folowinge

And for the better understanding how they be entretained, and paid The
Tureke uses two manner of payme^tes.
you shall know, yt in the state of ye great Turk there ar.ii. manners of
payme^ts or wages. One is called Olopha which are sure and ready paime^tes,
after our manner of paiyng by ye hands of treasurers The other is The first
payment.
called Timar which is as it were an The second payment.
assignacio^ of lands, heritages, and possessions or revenues, dismes, and pro
fettes in form of pe^sio^. And they which enjoy these kind of pe^sions are
called Timariotes ye other Olophagi And there are many officers which have both
paime^tes, as I will show herafter by name, and I will begin at Three captains of
the porters that has each of them x. s. sterlynge a day.
the entrance of the court

First in ye gate of ye said Saray, there are.iii. Capigibassi, yt is to say
captains of ye porters. Of which one has an. C. aspres, a day. And there are
under the^.ii. C and.l. Capigis Two hundred and fyftye vnderporters yt have
every one of them viii. pe^ce or.ix. pence a day. st
or porters, which have vii. or.viii. aspres a day. Of the captains, one is
always at the gate, with lx. porters, and they change from day to day

Moreover, there is a captain of the gate called Capagas, which An other
captain of the gate yt has. vi s. sterlynge a day.
is a geided man, and he has every day three score aspres.

One called Saraydarbassi a gelded man also, which is the captain of the
Palayce in the absence of the great Turcke, has.l. aspres a day The captain
of the palayce has.v. s. the day sterlyng.
These.ii. have.xii. gelded men under them. Of whom, ye one part has ten,
and the other fyftene aspres a day.

In this place of Saray, there are brought up about.v. hundred young
spryngaldes, from.viii. years of age to twentye, which the How the Turcke in
his palayce brings up. five, L* young me^ne in learning
great Turcke causes to be enstructed as well in learning as in feats of
arms. Chiefly, he procures them to be taught to write and read, and to
know their law, to ride, to shoot, and to learn other exercyses of war,
and of scyencis, The teachers of yt young me^
according as they ben found apt and mete. They which are apoi^ted The
teachers of the young men.
to teach them, ben old doctors in their law called Talismans. And the
foresaid springaldes ben new apparelled twyse a year, at their two solemn
feasts or Easters, How these young men have.ii. lyuereys a year.
which they call Bayram, half of sylke, and half of woollen cloth. And they go
not out of the Saray, until the great Turk sees that What time ye young men
go forth of the Saray.
they be in age to do service, and to have offices. Then he makes the^ his
Spagoglans or Selichtars, or sets them in some other state or degree,
according as he fyndeth the^ suffycie^t, or as he favors them. They are
divided in the said Saray by ten and ten, and over every The division and
captayns of the young men.
ten a gelded man is captain.

They lie all in one hall separated one from an other, and be wrapped The
lodgyng of the young men.
every one in a Sclauine, which is a thro^med carpet, and dare not come one to
a another. In the mids The lodgyng of the gelded men.
of the said halle lie the gelded men, in which halle there are great lamps
burning all ye night

In the said Saray is a fair and large garden, kept and trymmed The garden
perteyning to Saray.
by.xl. or.l. gardeners called Bastangis, and they have a captain
Bostangibasi, which has.l. Aspres a day. The captain of the gardeners.


The Bostangiz or gardeners have some.iii. some four or five Aspres according
to their qualityes. And they have a lyuerey ones a year of The gardyners
lyucrey.
blewe clothe or watchettes. They are Iannisserotz which is a diminutife of
Iannissaire: For when they go out of the garden, they are made Iannissairers
ben such pages as appeteth hereafter in this book.
Iannissaires. In ye said garden they ben divided by ten and ten, and over
every ten there is an hedde called The deuisyo^ of the gardyners and their
capteynes.
Adabassi. Moreover, there is a lyeuetenaunt of Bostangibassi, that they call
Protogero, which is a greek name, and in their language Checa^a, The
Liuetenaunt has.ii. s. sterlynge a day.
and he has.xx. aspres a day.

Nere to the said garden upon the sea, are two foystes or barges, in which
the gardeners carye the The barges that attend upon ye great Turk.
great Turcke for his pastyme at his pleasure into Asia, unto the castelles,
Scutari, or whether it shall please him.

Further, there are in the said Saray an. C. Iannisserotes, appointed There is
an hundred Iannisserotes appointed to catye wood.
to bear fire wode, which they carye in charettes, and their wages is.iii.
or.iiii. aspres a day.

There are also.x. Iannisserotes or There are ten Iannisserotes that carry water.
base Iannissaires called Sacca, which bring water upon horses in goats
skins, like as they carry wine in the mountains of Auuergne or Limo sin, or
as ye bouge men do in London, The manner of their caryeng of water.
and they have semblable wages.

In the kytchyn of ye Saray, there is one called asbassi head of the coo^es,
which has.xl. aspres a day, The Master cook.
and under him there are.l. cooks which have every one.vi. or.viii. ^spres a
day.

There is also a clercke of ye ke ^hyne The Clerk of ye kytchyn.
named Mutpachemin, which has.xl. aspres a day, and under him a clercke,
that has.xx. aspres a day. The under clerk.


The Sewer called Casnegir^assi, which has the charge of the The Sewer.
meats, and serves dyshes before the great Turk has.lxxx. aspres a The
office of the Sewar.
day, and under him are an. C. called Casneger, which serve in semblable
office, and have some fortye, and The Sewer has under him an hundred.
some.lx. aspres a day.

Moreover, there belongs to the said Saray a stable with.ii. hundred The
stable with the number of horse men.
horses, and an hundredth men to keep them, which have some six some.vii.
aspres a day.

There are other small officers Note that every officer is not recyted nor yet
all the chyefe and princyyall that is in ye Turcke his court.
perteining to the Turckes court but it shall be suffycient to have named part
of the princypall. And now I will speak of them which be without the said
house, and first of his guard.

In the guard of the great Turcke there are.xii. M, Ianissaires, which The
Turckes guard.
they call Iannissarlar (and Iannissar one Iannissayre) all slaves of the
great Turcke, and christen men's children These Iannissaerlars are christen
men's chyldrenne.
as I will show hereafter. I have learned of some of them yt we and they write
this word Iamogla false, and yt it comes of Cham, which they pronounce Tcham,
and signifies a lord or The interpretacyon of Cham and yeser.
Prince, and yester signifies a slave, not such slaves as they bye and sell
for they are called Coul, and Coullar but such as are appointed to wait upon ye
king. The said Iannissaire gooe a foot, under a captain called Iannissaraga
or simply aga, which The Iannissaires wait upon the Turcke a foot. The captei
ne of these men.
signifies a staff, Which captain has a. M. aspres a day. and.vi. M ducates
yearly of Timar yt is of pensio^ by revenues. And he is of so great autorite,
yt often he marieth ye daughters or sisters of the great Turk. The autoryte of
this capteyne. The great capteyne has under him an other. The clerk of the
Iannissaries. Wages of ye Iannissaries.
Under him there is a Checaya or Protogero, which has.ii. C. aspres a day and
a clerk called Ia^nissariazigi ye is to say clerk of the Iannissayres.

The said Iannissaires have some eyghte Aspres a day more or less, and they
been divided by ten and ten. Over every ten there is an head called Odabassi,
that is to say chamberlayne, or head of the lodginges. The division and
capteines of the Iannissaries.


And over every. C. a Centeiner or captain of an hundred, which they call
Boluchassi that sygnifyeth head of a band of men. The captain The captain
over ten.
over ten has.xl. aspres, and the captain over an. C. has.lx. a day. These
captains do always ride. And the said Iannissaires are The liveries of the
Iannissaryes.
apparelled twyse a year with a lyuerye of course blewe cloth. They which be
married, continue with their wives: they are lodged in Note yt these men are
not always resydent in the Turcke his court.
certain houses appointed unto them, in the countrees and quarters of
Constantynople, and live viii.x. xii. or more of them together They which are
of lower estate and The living of ye Iannyssayres.
have less wages, serve the other yt have larger stypendes for the reco^pense
of that, that they be not abl^ to bear the expenses and charges by equal
porcyons with ye other.

When the said Iannissaires ar^ become old, and be no longer fy^ to serve in
ye guard of the Turcke How the Ian nissarys are used when they be aged.
they are sent as men nigh deaths door, in to certain places and castles:
and they ben called assarer.

And the capitaines over tens and over hundredes being aged: are How the
capteynes are used.
made kepars and capitaines of ye said places, having of the pensyon Timar, as
much as their wages came to, that they had before.

Among ye said Iannissaires a. C. and How an hundred.l. of the said
Iannissaryes gooe a foot about ye person of ye said Turk
l. ben chose^ named Solachlar, which the Greeks call Solachi, and they likewise
gooe a foot about ye person of the great Turcke, and some of the^ have.xv.
some.xx. aspres a day. The Solachtars.
And their.ii. captains named Solachbassi have each.xxx. aspres a day and
they obey to the Aga captain The. ii captains of the Solachtars.
of the Iannissaires. Solach sygnifyeth lyftehanded, and it is said yt they
bear their weapons in their lyfthandes.

In the guard of the said great Turcke are three, M. men called The
signifycacyon of Solache.
Spachoglan which have a captain called Aga of great estimacyo^ and
autorytie, and under him a lieuetenau^t called Checaia with a clerk. In the
Turckes guard is iii. M. Spachogla^s, over whom is a great capiteine called
Aga, that ride on the right hand of the great Turcke
The captain has five hundred aspres, the lieuetenauntan hundred the clerk.
xxx, and the said Spachoglans thyrtye or fortye a day, and they serve with
four or five horses, ridinge on the right hand of the great Turcke.

Other three thousand Selichtars with their captain Aga lieue tenaunte, and
clerk, have as many horses, and as much wages as A another compaignie which
ride on yt left hand of the Turcke.
the Solaches, and they ride on the lift hand of the Turcke.

All the which Spachoglans, and Selichtars, had their finding and brynging up
in the palayce of the Great Turcke, as I have said before.

Furthermore, there are.lxxx. Mutaseracha, which bear spears before the
great Turcke. Among whom: he that has most wages has fourscore aspres a
day, The spear men that wait on the Turcke.
the other less, and they also were brought up in the Saraye, as is above
said.

This is the most certain and The no^bre of the Turcke his guard is.xxxviii.
M. footmen and horsemen.
surest strength that the Turcke has, which are twelve thousand footmen,
and about five and twentye thousand horsemenne.

There is also a captain of hunters, and fauconers, named Sechmenbassi, which
is as it were the The captain of hunters and fauconers.
chyefe hunter, and he has an hundred aspres a day, and under him there is a
great number of Iannissaires.

There is further a Sagarzibassi, The Master* of the hounds.
that is a master of the hounds, which has fyftye aspres a day, and under
him there been many Iannissaires.

Also.ii. chief faulconers called zaniligibassi, which have each an. C. Two
hedde faulkeners.
aspres a day. And they have.xxv. lieuetenauntes with two hundred faulconers
called zaniligilars, of the which a hundred have ten aspres a day, the other
have pensyon of Timar, and they ben exempted from subsydyes.

Further, ye Turcke has about The Turcke has forty lackeys.
xl. lacqueyes, and runners a foot, called Peyche, and they ben ever about him
to do his messages: both in peace and war, beside the posts, which they
have appointed in certain places as we have whom they call Vlach.

He has also an interpreter called Dragoman, to speak to strangers, The
Turks interpreter.
which has so much autorytie and credyte, as he has wit, and knows how
to behave him self best for his own advantage. And he has.v. hundred
ducates a year, and as much more of The exspences of the interpreter.
the pensio^ Timar besides his auayles, and gifts of embassadoures and
strangers.

The aforenamed officers are all of his court, but in war he has other,
which in like manner are ordinarye, (as the chyefe christen princes have).
Namely Asapagar capitaynes of Asapis, which are The officers of the Turcke that
are extraordynarie.
extraordynarie fotemen.

Two capytaynes of Caripoglan which are extraordinaire horsemen and the said
Capitaynes have.lxxx. aspres a day, their lyeuetenauntes thyrty, their
clerks twe^tye, The officers ordinary and extraordinarye.
and the said Caripoglans have some twelve, some syxtene aspres a day.

One called Olophagabassi, capytayne of the Olophages has.ii. hundred and
twentye aspres a day, his tenauntes, clerk, and Olaphages, like estate as the
before said, and they ben ordynarie horsemen.

He has a captain of artillary The interpretacyo^ of Topgibassi.
called Topgibassi. For Top signifies in their language a go^ne, and Tophec an
hachushe. And the said Topgibassi has three score Aspres a day, with the
lieuetenaunte, and clerk which have each five and twenty aspres a day, and
there ben two thousand Gonners called Toagilars, The Turcke has ii. M. gonners.
which have some seven, some eight aspres a day, and gooe a foot.

The Arabagibassi, that is a captain of the charettes (for Araba The captain
of the charettes.
sygnifyeth a charette,) has fortye Aspres a day. The Checaia, or
lieuetenaunt, and the clerk have twentye Aspres a day, and the three thousand
charrette men have every one, four or six Aspres a day.

There are two masters of the horse called Bracarbassi, a great and Two masters
of the horse.
a less, the great has five hundred aspres a day, and ye less has two
hundred: with lieutenauntes and clerks.

And these have rule over the horse kepers, mule kepers, sadellers, spurryars,
and over them which conducte the camelles, and horses, and they have under
their charge four thousand chosen horses that always are in readiness.

There is a Chambassi (captain of Chiaus,) which are as it were hui shers)
and the said Chambassi, is as it were master of ye household. Which The
authoryte of the master of the Turckes household.
has so great autorite, yt if he goo to any of ye great Turckes subjects, of
what estate, qualytie, or condicyon so ever he be (high or low, great or
small) and whersoeuer he be, though it were to one Bacha, or to one Beglerbey,
and he say that he is sent to have his head to carye it to the great Turcke,
he is obeyed though it were in ye plain field without showing any further
commissyon or commandment.

There is a Mechterbassi, which has charge of tents, pauylyons, hangynges,
and of the great Turckes The keeper of the Turks palayce and the officers to
him belonging.
lodging. Which he sets up, trymmeth, and prepares when he is abroad.
And he has.xl. aspres a day, and his lieuetenaunt five and twenty. And.lx.
Mechters, which ben under him, have every one five aspres a day.

There is an other Mechterbassi, captain of the trompettes, cornettes The
captain of the trompettes.
and waytes, tabrettes, and other instruments of war, which has.xxx. aspres
a day.

And his leuetenaunte and clarke have.xii. a day. And under him be about.xii.
hundred Meghters, partly on horse, and partly a foot, which have like wages as
the aforsayd

There is an Imralem Aga, which bears the great Turckes banner, where there
hangs an horse The bearer of the Turckes baner.
tail, for the remembrance af Alexander ye great, as I have hard of them,
which did bear it upon his helmet, and in his cresset. And so have also the
ancient captains done as Vergile says of Geneas Christaque insignis equina,
that is to say: notable with a creste of horse hear. And the said Imralem,
The stypende of the sta^dard bearer
has.ii. hundred aspres a day, and is captain of all the Mechters.

There is an Arpaemyn, which has charge of hay, chafe, barley, otes, poulse
and other prouysions The forenger
for horses, both in peace and war And he has.lx. aspres a day, his
lyuetenaunte.xxx. and his clarke xx. under the same there be^.xx. me^ which
have.viii. or.x. aspres a day One called Saremyn deputed to prepare and make
clean the ways both A skauenger, with his company under hi^
in peace and in war, has.l. Aspres a day. And under hi^ there are.iiii. C
men which have.iiii. or.v. Aspres a day.

The tresurers and their offycyes.
Now it shall be conuenyent to speak of the Treasurers and their offices. And
after yt we will speak of his counselors, and of the governance and
conueyghaunce of his affairs.

First you must understand, that the Turcke calls his treasure The names of
the Turckes treasure
Casnas, and his imposytions, subsydies, toulles, tributes, and other revenues
Caraz.

The first offycer of his court over the said treasures is Casnadarbassi The
treasoret of the palayce of Saray.
treasurer of the money lying in the palayce of Sarai, being as treasurer
ordained of the spare money. And he is a gelded man, and here mayneth in the
said Saray having for his wages.lx. aspres by day.

There are.ii. Defierder, that is ge The treasoret of yt profytes of the
cou^trye a longeste the river.
general receauers. One of them having the charge of the monye that comes
of the countries about the river Dunce, or Danube, as Seruie, Bulgarie, Bosne,
VValachie, and other, with the countries of Asya, Syria, and Aegypte. And he
has of the pe^syon Tymar, x. M. ducates a year, besides his aduauntages and
profytes which are very great

The second receaueth the treasures The treasorer of Greece
of all Greece, which wha^ the Turk goes to war, abides in Constantinople
as his leuetenau^ This manne has.v. thousand ducates of the pensyon Tymar,
and other great profits. The authoryte of the treasorers and stypende of
their clerks,


Their offycees are of great authoryte. And they have under them.l. clerks
to write, and to keep acompte of the said treasures, which have each of them.
xxx or.xl. Aspres a day. Two over seers of the clerks.


Two Rosumanegis, that is chief heads ofye said clerks have.xl. Aspres a
day. And there are many other receauers and collectors for the receyte of the
said treasures.

There are.ii. Vesnadars which be Two wayers of money.
appointed to way ducattes and Aspres, and have each.xx. Aspres a day.

Six Serassiers as it were ba^quyers are ordained to judge and deserne Six
tryers of money
gold, silver, and other money, which have semblable wages and state, as the
aforesaid.

Two foreign Casnadarbassi where of one is of Grecia, another of Asia, which
are the bryngers in of the money, and each of them has.l. Aspres, The colecters
and bryngers in of ye money.
a day. And under every of them there are.x. Casnadars, that have each of
them.x. Aspres a day.

Two Desteremyn, one of Grekeland, another of Asya: have the office Collecters
of the pencyon
of gatherynge the pensyon Timar, and give account of the Tymariotes, each
has.l. Aspres a day, and.x. clerks have.xv. a day

They have showed unto me that the ordynarye revenues of the Turcke does amount
to the some of.xv. Millions of ducates, which The yearly revenues of the Turcke
does a mount to xxxvii. C. thousand, and.l. M pound ster.
makes.xxxvii. hnndred.l. thousand pound, sterlynge.

Now herafter, we will speak of his counsel and governance of the
countries, which are subject unto him, and of the order that he keeps.

The great Turcke has none other counsaylers but ye.iiii. Bacha which they
call Visirbacha, that is to say: a counsayloure Bacha, and Bach in their
language, sygnyfyeth captain or head, by the which they may be interpreted
captains or rulers. Many times there are of them but three, as it chanced
latelye. That was Aias Bacha, borne in Cimera, about the ysle of Corphou, in
the old time called Corcyra, Cassin, Bacha* of Croace: and Ibraim The chief
rulers under the Turcke
Bacha, of Parga Albanois, which the Turcke put to death, all these.iii.
beeinge the sons of Chrystyen men.

And this aforesaid Ibraym, because he was brought up in ye Saray with the
great Turcke, came to sooe great creadence and authoryte, that he commanded
and ordered al things absolutely, the great Turcke medlynge nothing therewyth.
And his father was a christian in Constantinople, an vnprofytabe fellow, a
tavern haunter, a druncarde, and one that would lie by the streates like a
best. From which naughtye life Ibraim could never revoke him: nyether cause
him to put on any honest apparel notwythstandynge that he labored therein
dylygently.

Of late the great Turcke has made another Bacha, which is called Ayredenbey
whom we call Barbarousse And I have heard but a little while se^ce, yt the Turk
has made him another counselor named Mehemeth Bacha, of these.iii. or.iiii.
Baches The pencyon of the rulers
some have.xxiiii. thousand ducates a year out of ye pension Timar (as Ibraim
Bacha had) and other xvi. or xviii. M, besyd other daily profytes and
aduauntages which amou^t to twyse as much as their former pensio^, and there
are of the^ that has vi. thousand ordinary men found of their wages. And all
they keep housholdes with their wives and servants like as ye great Turcke
does.

Wherefore in time paste there Other counceloures yt has been in Turckye
were other counselors, as Perybacha, which governed the great Turcke in his
youth, Farethbacha, which was the lyuetenaunte of The gouernoure of the
Turcke in his youth.
Surye or Syrie: and Achimath Bacha, gouernoure of Cayre and of Aegypte, which
wyllyng to make himself a souldayne was slain by the Turckes that were with
him.

These Bachaz go into the chamber of the said great Turcke, and The chief
counselers of ye great Turcke
consulte and dyspose all things concerning the estate and governance of his
affairs

Next unto these is the Mosey which is as it were their bishop, declarer and
expouner of their law and medleth with none other thing

Two Cadiz Leskier Talisma^s are two doctors in their law, to se justice
executed, and they are as it were presydentes, one of Greece, and the other of
Asya. These men ordynarelye follow the Turckes court: and for honor go
before the Viserbaches, though they have not so great authorytye.

They both institute and put down (if it seem good,) and if Two presyde^tes.
the case so require the Cadiz, which are the judges of the prouynces. And each
of the said Cadiz leskier, has.vii. thousand ducates a year of the pensyon
Timar, and ii. or.iii. hundred servants, and.x. clerks paid by the said
Turcke.

Moreover, there is a Massangibassi as it were chau^celoure, which sygnyfyeth
the letters with the The chaunceloure.
great Turks seal, whose office also, is of great authoryte and
rereputacyon, his place is next the Beglerbey, and he has.viii. thousand
ducates of the pensyon Tymar a year, and more other proffettes, and he is
accompanied with a great number of horses and servants.

The Baretemyn, which destrybuteh letters and commandments The clarke of the
hamper
has.xl. Aspres a day, and he has under him.x. clerks, and two Protogeros.

But for as much, as I have spoken before of the Iannissaires affyrmyng them to
be the chief strength of the Turcke, ere I go any further I will show you
what people they be, and from whence they come.

In Constantynople there is a captain of Ianoglans or Azamoglans in which are
the children of trybute. And somesaye that Iamoglans sygnyfye innocente,
simple, and ignoraunte folks or learners. But other say that it should be
pronounced Chamoglan that is the kings pages. And they may be in number.v.
or.vi. thousand. Their captain has. lx Aspres, a day.

And it is to be noted, that every fourth year the great Turcke sends into
the countries of Greece, and of Anatolie: (that is the East Asya the less)
tooe take up Chrystyanne men's male children, which are subject to this
kind of debte and danger, how be it, all are notte in such bondage.

But often times, yt he may receive of the^ more largely, he charge the said
Chrystyans with such great and importable subsydyes that they which be not
subject to this trybute of children, because The Turcke has sometime.x.
thousand chrystyan me^nes children.
they be not able to pay the said subsydyes: are co^streyned to give their
children. Sooe that some time he has.x. thousand children and more.

Of which he choseth the good lie to be in his Saray, The rem naunte he
causes to be dystrybuted to laborers and shepherdes about Burcia and
Taramania, where The Turcke puts christen men's children to plough
they are taught to till the ground and to keep cattle, or to do some other
husbandry or service to accustom and harden them to pains, and to learn the
Turckyshe language.

And after four year, when he has sent to take up other, these are
commanded to come to Constantynople, and to be delivered to the captain of
the Chamoglan, where they are brought up and have two lyueryes a year, and
been enstructed in sondrye occupacions.

So afterward they are divided to the Iannissayres to serve them and in
process of time they become Iannissayres them selves, and from Iannissaires
to Salachlars, Silechters, and other offycyes.

And as long as they abide in the said countries of Bursia and Carmania, they
spend nothing of the great Turckes, because they to whom they do service
does find them meat, drink and raymente.

I said before, that in the Saraye, or where the Turcke keeps his resydence,
there be a boute.v. The wives of the great Turcke.
hundred young spryngaldes.

But there is also another Saray where his wives and his children be.

His wives are called Sultanes that is queens. And they are The wives children
of ye great Turk
divided one from another with their children. In their guard and service
there are a great meanye of gelded men, and about threhundred young
maidens, governed by the elders, which teach them too esowe, and work with
the nedle.

The said maidens have some twelve, some fyftene Aspres a day. And they are
apparelled twyse ayeare, at their two solemn feasts all with sylcke.

And if it chance that any of them please the great Turcke, he uses that
woman as his wife and gives her at every time.x. thousand Aspres: and
seperateth her from the other, augmentyng her wages and estate.

When the maids be come to the age of five and twentye, and that it please not
the great Turto retain them any longer for his service, he maryeth them to
the Spachoglans, and other of his servants and pages of honor according to
their qualytyes and condycyons.

And in their places new are sent into the Saray, In which there are
captains, Capygiz, and all other officers like as is in the place where he
keeps his resydence

About the town of Pera, which is by Constantynople, having only an haven
between them. For Pera is as much to say, as beyond. There is another Saray,
where there are four hundred Another place where are found.iiii. C. children.
young children with all officers as the aforsayde have.

At Andrinopoli, or Adrinopoli there are two places, the old and the new.

In the old, there are brought up three hundred young children. In the new
which is upon the Another place where the children are brought up.
river Marissa called some time He brus, are three hundred Iannisserotz, and all
officers like as in the other.

Out of these two Sarayes, and out of that which is at Pera some are ever
chosen to be put into the great Saray, as they lack, or se^d away the elder.

On the coaste of the said Pera The place where the Turk has his ships
made.
upon the sea bancke, there is aplace called Tersenal, where they make galeys,
and ships.

In which ordynarelye two hundred Masters work and Shypwryghtes
have every one.x. Aspres a day.

And there been fyftye overseers, which have when they work xii. aspres a
day, and when they soiorne, they have but six. Also the chyefe clerk, which
has ten other clerks under him, has.xxv. aspres a day, and the other ten.

And to the service of the said Tersenal, there belongs a great nombre of
handye worckemen, which have.iiii. aspres a day.

They have as much wood to make ships as they desire, and The Turckes have
no cunning in making ships.
that very good, but they have not the connyng to make them to the purpose,
specially gallyes. For they make them nothing so good nor so light, as the
christen men do, but boisterouse, heavy and evil The christian men help the
Turckes to make their shpppes.
to govern. Notwithstanding that they have some christian masters, and give
them as much wages, as they will require.

Over the said Tersenal, and all the offices thereof, there is a general
capiteyne called the Beglerbey The admyral
of the sea. which has also charge of the army on the sea at their going
forth. And the custom was, that ever ye capiteyne of Callipole what so ever he
were, should be the general captain or admiral.

But a little time sythens the Turcke commits the charge there of to
Barbarouse. Which has The Barbarouse is the Turckes admyrall.
for this office, out of the pensyon Timar. xiiii. M. ducates a year, assygned
out of the Isles of Mechelni Rhodes, and Nigrepont, whereoute he gayneth and
exacteth three times as much.

Before that the Barbarouse took upon him this charge, the Turckes knew little
or nothing touching the science and knowledge of the sea, except a few out
runners. And yet to this day, when they will address an army of the sea,
they goo into the mountains of Crece, and Natolie, to take up herdmen which
they put in galleys to row or to serve in other vessels, to which purpose
they ben so unapt, that they can scarcely stand on their fete, so far of it
is yt they can row or do service. Which causes that the Turckes never did
enie notable act upon the sea Nevertheless, the said Barbarousse has
somewhat amended them.

I have spoken sufficyently of Constantinople, and of the court of the great
Turcke, and if I have not showed every thing accordingly, it is no marvel.
For it requires a better wit then mine is, to search out so great a matter.

Hereafter I will declare how ye great Turcke does govern his and the order
appointed unto his souldyars, as much as I my self could inquire, and know.

In every province, there is a gouerner yt they call Beglerbey, that is
Beglerbey what it is.
to say a lord of lords.

The first is, the Beglerbey of Greece, under whom ben all the countrees,
which ye great Turcke has in Europa. And he is above all other, and has.xvi.
thousand ducates a year of the pensyon Timar, but he exacteth thryse as much.

Under him there is a Defterderler, that is to say, a treasurer. Which
has.iii. thousand ducates for his yerlye wages, to whom there ben subject an
hundred clerks which The stipende or pencyon of the Beglerbey of Greece.
keep the comptes and registers of the pensyon Tymar, and of the Tymariotes.
Under the charge of the said Beglerbey, there are.xxx. Sangia clars,
capitaynes of the souldyars, which are divided by bannyers, called in their
tongue Sangiac.

Which Sangiacs have.viii. ten, and some.xii. thousand ducates of the The
pensyon of the Sangyacs.
pensyon Timar a year, and they are lodged in the princypal towns of the
province, to keep the^ in peace, and obedyence.

Under them are.iiii. hundred Sobassis or more, which are as it were
lyeuetenauntes, abidyng in Sobassis, what they are.
small towns for the same purpose and they have every one a thousand ducates
a year, with many Flambolers, which also sygnifye heads and capitaynes,
of.ii. iii.iiii. or five hundred horses, which are sent by the Beglerbeys or
Sangiacs, in to sundry places as the case requires, to make spedy expedicyon
of their affairs.

Under the said Sangiacs, there are.xxx. thousand Spachis, which serve
with.iii. or.iiii. horses a piece and they have.ii. hundred ducates a year, and
they ben all Azamoglan, that is to say, the pages of ye great Turcke.

Moreover, in the said country of Greece, there ben.xx. thousand Tymariots or
horsemen, which have but.xl. ducates a year, and ben subject to the said
Sangiacz.

Besides these, there are.lx. thousand Akengis, as it were adventurers, which
are horsemen without enye wages or payment, but therefore they only be free and
exempted from all subsidies. And yt towns ben bound to sustain their charges,
upon their way, when they goo in the service of their prince.

In the countrees of Asia, there ben.vi. Bsglerbeyes. The first is ye
Beglerbey of Natolie, which has The first.
charge of the countrees of Pontus, Bithynia, Lidia, Phragia, Mernia, Caria,
being all comprehended under this name of Natolie. And he has xiiii.
thousand ducates a year out of the pensyon Timar. Under him ben.xii. Sa^giacz,
of which some have iiii. some.vi. thousand ducates a year with Sobassis, and
Flambolers, and xii. thousand Spachis.

The second is the Beglerbey of The second.
Caramanie, which comprehe^deth Cilicia, Licia, Lycaonia, and Pamphilia. Which
capiteyne has.vi. thousand ducates out of the pensyon Tymar. And under him
ben seven Sangiacz, and seven thousand Spachis, having such wages as the
former.

The third is the Beglerbey of Amasia, and Toccat, which comprehends The
third.
Cappadocia, Galatia, Paphlagonia, He has eyghte thousand ducates a year, of
the pensyon Tymar. iiii.c. Sangiacs, and.iiii. M. Spachis, with the wages
aforesaid And the City Trebisonde is under him.

The.iiii. is the Beglerbey of Ana^dule or Aladule, which are mountains
The.iiii.
of Armenie, called in old time mount Taurus, and now Cocas, on the side of
the mountains called Caucassus. The Beglerbey has of the pension Tymar, x.
thousand ducates a year, and under him seven Sangiacs, and.vii. M. Spachis,
having wages like ye aforenamed.

Further, there are ordained in the said countrees.xxx. thousand horsemen
serving without wages, free from subsydyes, as are ye Akangis of Greece.

The.v. Beglerbey, is of Mesopotamia, whereof the pryncypall city is The. fyfte.
Edissa, called in the holy scripture: Rages, and of the frenchmen Rohaiz.

Under this governance part of the great Armenye is comprehended. For the
rest is possessed of the Sophie, and by ye Cordins and Beduins, which are
warrelyke people, dwelling in mountains called Tarquinians, and in old time
Medes, ioyninge upon Bandras, a town of Assiria, which some suppose to be
Babylon, and other Niniue, the head city of Assiria.

This Beglerbey has (as the fame is).xxx. thousand ducates of the pensyon
Timar, twelve Sangiacs, and.xxv. thousand Spachis, which have more wages and
prouisyon then the other, because they lie upon the costs and borders of the
said Sophie.

The.vi. is the Beglerbey of Damasco, Syria, and Iurye, which The syxte.
has.xxiiii. thousand ducates a year out of the pensyon Timar. xii.
Sangiacs, and twentye thousand Spachis, paid as the forenamed.

The Beglerbey of Carry, or of Aegypte: The captain of Carry.
has thyrtye thousand ducates of the pensyon Tymar, syxetene The wages of
the Sangiacz.
Sangiacz, and twenty thousand Spachis, the said Sangiacz have every one
eyghte thousand ducates The wages of the Spachis.
a year, and the Spachis two hundred.

This governance extends unto the red sea, and unto Mecha, where
Mahumettes body lies. The place where Mahumet his body lies.
It conteyneth part of Arabie the deserte, and part of Arabye the rich.
Howebeit, they are not holy subjected to the Turcke. Arabie is not wholye
subject to the Turcke.


For there are many lords, of which: some take part with the Sophy, and
some with ye Turcke, and there are some again, which acknowledge neither of
them both.

The other side joining to the country of Assiria, called now Azemye is under
the Sophy, and is extended a long by Mesopotamia unto Liuerous, The second
strength of ye Turcke stands in Spachys.
some time called Hileri. The second strength of the great Turcke is founded
in these Spachis, which force should be great, if ye said Spachis were all
good. And as touching footmen beside the Iannissaires, the Turcke has none,
any thing worth. For they know not how to keep any order and it is
against their nature to learn.

Now, there rests to speak of the nature of the Turckes in general, of
their manners and condicyone, of their belief, and living. Which thing I
will do as Whereof the Autour will entreat.
briefly as I can, and after I will speak some what of the compleccyon of
their King, which now reygneth.
THe Turckes worship one only god, which made heaven and earth, The belefe or
faith of the Turckes.
and sent them their law by the Prophet Mahumet written in a book, called
Alcoram, that is to say, the true law. The said Mahumet was in the year of
our lord six hundred and. xx, in the time of Heraclius the The time yt
Mahumet was in.
Emperor, which succeeded Phocas Daugobert reygninge in France, and the
Lomberdes in Italye. And as we are called Christyanes, so they ben called
Musulmans, that is to say saved. And they call us in their langage Caours,
specially ye Grecians which they regard not: because they were so easily
subdued, fayntly defending them selves by reason of their secret hatreddes,
diuisyons, and discordes. But they have the Italyans in good estimacyon, and
count them valiant men of war, calling them french men The Turckes have the
Italyans in good estimacyon.
For a great time they knew no dyfference of those nacyons and tongues.

The foundacyon of their law stands upon these words Lahila ha, Hilaalla,
Mahumet, Resulalla, Tangri, Bir, Beremberac, that is to say, God The
foundacyon of the Turckes law.
is God, was, and shall be God, and Mahumet is ye messenger or counselor of God,
there is one God only and one true prophet. Which words if a christyane
pronounce unawares, or otherwise in their country, if it be heard, he shall
be constrained to receive their law or to die without fail. In yt stead How
by speaking of certain words a christen man sha^be compelled to receive
their faith or else to dye. How the Turckes are circumcized.
of Baptism they ben circumcised as the Jews are, howebeit, they pass not
greatly of it.

For their children are often six or seven years of age or more, before they
been circumcysed, and many dye without circumcisyon, at the which they make a
great feast and an assemble. Their prestes ben called Mesen, and their
churches The cause of their going to church and what they do there.
Meschet, in to the which they never enter, onles it be to pray unto God, and
to make their inclinacyons or bouinges, which thing they do five times a day.

The first in the morning, ye se The times of their goinge to church.
conde at none, the third about three of the clock, the fourth about six,
the fyfte, when they gooe to bed. And they are not bound to gooe to church
to make their inclinacyons, but if them list. Only they spread upon ye ground
where they are, an ha^dkercher or a white lynen cloth, and bow them selves
five times, their faces upward, having their hands upon their breasts. The
said hours ben showed to the^ by their Talismans, which gooe up upon the
toures of their How they are called to church.
churches, and cry out a loud the words before written, stoppynge their
ears with their fyngers.

The women gooe not in to the churches with the men, because The women gooe
not to church with the men.
they ben not circumcised. Wherefore they ben counted unclean. For which cause
they say also, that they shall not enter into Paradyse, The foolyshe opinyon
of ye Turckes.
but shall tarry at the gate with the Christyanes, which have well kept their
law.

It is a great despyte among them when they call one Sunet* that is
uncircumcised. They have our lord Jesus christ in great reverence, The
opinion and reverence that the Turckes have Jesus christ in.
and they hold that he was borne of the virgyn Mary, whom they call Murgen
Ana, Mary the mother, and Jesus christ yesse Berember, that is Jesus the
prophet conceived How they name Christ and our lady.
by the spirit, and breathing of God. If any man has blasphemed Christ, be he
Turcke, Jew or Christyane, he shall be punished in like manner as if he had
blasphemed The Turks will not suffer Christ to be blasphemed.
Mahumat. The punyshement is fortye strypes with a staff, and a mercement of
money.

They believe not that he dyed The punishment due for blasphemye.
thorough the hands of ye Jews, but yt it was another which they took in
his stead. For they say yt he was to good a man, and to great The Turks
believe, yt christ was not crucified of the Jews.
a prophet, to suffer such outrage of the myscheueous Jews, which they count
to be ye vylest nation of the world. They so despise them, and hate them yt in
no case they will not How ye Turckes abhor ye nacyon of the Jews
eat in their company, nether mary a Iewesse: howbeit, they mary often times
chrystien women, which they suffer to live according to their own law, and
they have pleasure to eat with the chrystyans. And moreover, if a Jew will
deny his law, and become a Turcke, he shall never be received, oneles that he
were first baptized, and made a chrystya^. Among their scryptures they have
our Gospelles which they call Ingel: but they take away the passion, saying:
that the Jews How ye Turks have yt books of the Euangelystes. The Turckes
have noone images.
added it to mock the chrystyans. They have neither pyctures images nor any
carved or graven thing, which they defend out of the law of Moses.

And they say the Pater noster as we, translated into the Arabique tongue
almoost word for word. They call the deuell Seythan, and The Turckes say the
Pater noster as we do.
dread and abhor him as we do. Before their prayers, and inclinacyons, they
wash their fete, hands, The Turckes abhor the deuell.
and faces and all their body when they be in secret places, as often as they
may. Also they wash The ceremonial or superstycyous custom of the Turckes
them selves after every purgacy on of nature, in which point both the men
and the women keep so great honestye, yt they have great shame to be seen or
found in that act. And they reprove the christyans The clenlines of ye Turckes
for their negligence therein calling them Chunup Caour, that is filthy
chrystyans.

They have two lentes every year The Turckes has two lentes. The manner of
their fasting
and they fast every time a month All the day, they eat nothing, all the
night they make good cheer At their Easters they send salutacyo^s one to
another, and give gifts wyshynge one another a good The Turckes give gifts at
their Easters as we do at New-yers time.
year, as we do the day of the cyrcumcysyo^ of Christ, or neweyeres day as we
call it. And the said easter feast is not ever at one time, but once in the
somer, and another time in winter, or in the spring time and in harvest, which
thing chau^seth because they count not the year after The Ester of the Turckes
has no time.
the course of ye son, but after ye moan, which they call Hay, and have her in
great reverence. They salute and great her as soon as they se her The Turcke a
worshype the moon.
first, specially in war with great cries and gonne shottes and sound of
trompettes. And the weme^, and children bear the figure of the moon hangyng
about their necks, calling Women carry about their necks the figure of the
moon.
it Nalcha, because it rese^bleth an horshooe. Besides their prestes Mesen and
Calismans they have Deruiz Sophiz, De^cher Serifz, and other manners of What
sects are among ye Turckes
religion, differinge in appparel and ceremonies, as our Monks and Freers did

And ye Turckes are naturally superstycyous beleuers of dremes, The Turckes are
superstycyous.
prophecyes, and Diuinacio^s, which I have seen them use with wax meltted, and
cast into water, and beans with marckes upon, and they have many other
superstycyous manners

And they hold predestynacio^ for a sure thing, and that the hour The
Turckes opynyo^ in predestynacyon,
of their deaths is written in their foreheades, which they reckon to be
impossyble to avoid. Wherefore they enter beastlye into perelles, at the least
the baser people, for ye great men have not that opinyon And they have Saints,
which The Turckes call upon sayintes.
they call upon partyculerly in certain necessaries, and syckenesses

Of our saynctes they acknowledge none but Sayncte George which they call
Dereletz Bozatle, that The Turckes knowledge noone of cure saints but ^s
George.
is a knight upon a white or gray horse.

And I think they esteem him for none other cause, but that he is painted as a
man of war, whom they have in great honor and reverence. If there be any
goodness among them, it is in this point only, that they are pytye The
Turckes are pytyful to the poor
full to the poor, and great founders of hospytalles.

The manner of feadyng and living of the Turckes.
AS touching their living, The gross ^ rudenes of the Turks
and eating they are rude and vncleanlye. They sytte on the ground, their
legs The syttinge of the Turckes.
laid a cross above a little round table very low, covered with le therlyke
spanysh skynnes.

In rich men's houses, they are gylted wroughte and with little The manner of
their tables.
flowers, as we trim our books in the out side. And i other menes houses
they are all plain, which table has hangyng about it, a linen cloth long and
narrow which serves in the stead of napkyns to wype their hands. Their
deynty meats are pasties and hacked flesh with many onyons and spyces, and
every day they eat ryce and honey for potage. They are forbydde^ by their law
to drink wine, but The potage of ye Turckes
they make their drikee of prunes honey and raysons, which they use The Turckes
may drink no wine by their law, but yet often times they do and are
drunken
that are of riches and substance ye, and they drike wine tooe, wha^ they may
get it, and become very droncke^ namely the souldyers, nether count they it
any reproach to the^, but rather do it of set purpose Against the Turckes shall
fight, they drink dru^cken
chiefelye when they shall fight, or make an assaute: than if they fid no wine
they eat an herb called Of an herb that the Turckes eat.
Afyon, of the apothecaries Opiu^ which makes the^ lose al thought
remembrance and fear. They have one custom or use with them, yt they will never
put any paper (if it have any thing wryte^ therein) to any The Turckes will put
wrytynges to no fylthy use.
filthye use or purpose no not sooe much as to wrappe gold in it, fore fear,
least ye name of God be written therein wherefore: also they fear to tread upon
written paper. The Turckes sunday is our friday.


Our friday is their sunday, which they call Iumar howebeit, they cease The
Turckes work on theie Sabbath day
not to work, at yt lest, in ye after none. And ourso^day is their market day.
As pertayni^g to their houses The Turckes may keep as many weme^ as they will,
but they may have but one wife.
and families, it is permited unto the^ to have as many weme^ as they are able
to keep, nevertheless they have but one whom they take for their wife, which
bryngethe her husband no doury, but contrary wise ye husband gives money to
the father, and the mother to apparel their daughter, and they make a great
feast and assemble at their maryages. Howebeit they have lybertye afterward to
be deuorsed The Turckes may be deuorsed from their wives if they cannot agree
with them.
the man to leave the woman, and the woman to forsake the man if they cannot
agree together, and to mary other.

The women never gooe abrod The women when they go abroad have their faces
covered,
their faces uncovered. And after that they be married, they keep no more
company with their fathers brethren, or kynnesmen, but they may vyset their
mothers, systers and kynswomen. They dye or stayne The women dye their hears,
hands and feet.
their hear and ye outsyde of their hands and feet with an herb called Cna,
resemblyng the leaves of a Myrre tree, and they temper it with the juice of
orenges, or Limmons, How the women dye themselves.
where of their hear, hands and feet become very read, chiefly their
nails, which thing I have seen them do often times. How the women dye
themselfes
And that color dureth but.xv. days, or.iii. weeks, but yt it must be
renewed again, and they count this a great bewty. Their roobes and all their
garments are open before unto the foot, except their smockes: which may be
seen wha^ they gooe, and are commenlye of The apareyl of the women
some colored Taffeta, and welted about with parsemente, and wroughte with
golden thredes about the coler. The poor women do were them of checkerd or
plain lynnen cloth, having a border about the neck of some rybban. And they
are gyrded about with a broad gyrdle, as it were an horse gyrth, which goes
twyse about their bodies. Their said roobes dyffer nothing from the men's
garments, saving that they be a little more pynched, and have as The aparel of
yt men.
it were little playtes upon the breast and they have likewise long sleues,
strayte and hanging.

The men count nothing so strange in our garments as ye codpeces of hosen
which seems The Turckes abhor the fasyon of our codpeeces.
to them very dishonest. Likewise ye Grecians were them not. And if they find
any chrystian man in any place where they may overcome him, they cut of his
codpece, specyallye the men of war.

Furthermor, they are very gelousperso^s, presumptuous, and great bosters and
generally al so proud The pride of the Turckes.
that they thyncke no nation in the world to be like them: ye, that they are
able to subdue the whole world to them selves.

They love men of war chieflye nobylyte. For if a chrystyan receive their
law and make them believe ye he came of a noble stock they do him honor,
and call him Cheliby, that is a gentle man. They have pleasure to be well and
rytchelye apparelyd, and among other things to have their sweordes Wherein the
Turckes delight.
and weapons garnished with gold and silver. They are of nature heavy, gross,
slouggish, recheles, and vile people, and commenly glottons. For they will sit
three days and more at the table without The nature of the Turckes.
rysynge except it be to make water. And if sleep come upon the^ they couch
the^ selves in yt same places. Howebeit, they make no very good chere, except
they have wine though it be forbydde^ the^, whereof they have enough.

For the Jews and the chrystyans sell it the^. As much as I have seen and
known they be like the Almaynes in bewty of personage The Turckes resemble the
Almaynes in some things
pronouncynge of their language and for ye pride that they have in their
wars, sauinge yt they have no learning, ne books, but only of their law.
Nevertheless, the great Turcke has some books of Arystotles phylosophye
translated into the Aribique tongue which he redeth some times, and so did The
Turckes for the most part are unlearned.
his predecessors. They bear in war great roules of paper written, and in
the writing there are figuers of sweordes, holbards, bows, arrows, daggers,
and they have a phansye that those things The superstycyous mind of the
Turckes.
shall keep them from being wounded.

All manner of ryotte is permytted unto them, where unto they are greatelye
inclyned. And they goo not to war but by force, and beatynges, chyeflye if
they perceive danger to be in it. And they are the most coueteouse men of all
The false hearts and cowardnes of the Turckes
other nacyons. Their houses are small and low, well tri^med with household
stuff, having the floreths covered with carpettes as I have said before.
Wherefore, they go not in with their shoes, but leave The descrypcyon of
their houses.
them at the doors, for they are easy to put of and on, like as our slippers
are, and they call the^ Pasmach but those shoes yt they go in when they iourneye
are like unto ours, and them they call Papouch.

They lie upon great quyltes The manner of the Turckes lodging.
made of fine woll, covered with velvet, and other cloth of sylke according to
their habilite, for they use The Turckes use not to lie on feathers
no feathers. Their sheets are of course lynnen clothe, wroughte over with
sylcke of nedle work, so yt ye cannot se the lynnen. Which The shetes of the
Turckes, whereof they are made
is a goodly thing to look upon for they are all of crymosyne color, at the
least, I have seen none other. And there were many found in the city Modon,
when our gallyes took it. They eat in vessels of tinned copper large and deep

They have no great regard of building or purchasing lands, specially they
that are in service with the great Turcke, because wha^ they dye, the said
great Turcke takes the third part of all their goods, and often times
altogether, as when they are made great officers, namelye Baches, or
Beglerbees, and to their children he gives wages of the pencyon Tymar.

The Turckes have other customs, and manners of living, which now shall not
be needful to rehearse, for as much as daily ye shall here more, wherefore,
after that I have spoken a few words of the said great Turcke I will make an
end of my lettre.

THE great Turcke The name of ye great Turcke.
which now raygneth is called Sultam Soleyman, that is tooe say: king
Soleiman. For Sultam or Sultan in Moresque sygnyfyethe a King or Prince. So
the Turks call him when they speak of him famyly How ye Turk is called of
his subjects
arly, but when they speak of him reuerentlye, they call him Vnghyar, which is
to say, the kings majesty.

Some time they call him Sultam Soleyman Cham, which they pronounce Tchaam
which sygnyfyeth Lord.

But it is the Tartarysche language and not the Turckysche. I have heard him
named among the Turckes Badicaa. The said king The age of ye Turcke.
Soliman at this present is about the age of.l. years, and he has along
body, little bones, he is lean, and euel proporcioned, his vysage is brown and
wrythen, his head is shaven, saving a tufte in the top, as all the Turckes
have, yt their Tolopa^ may sit the better, that The descrypcyo^ of ye great
Turk.
is an ornament of lynnen which they were on their heads, he has an high
forhed and a large, great yies and black, he is hawk nosed he has a long
neck, small and stoopynge, his bearde is clypped and not shaven, he is dumpyshe,
and speakethe and laugheth seldom but he is very cholerycke and is an euel
favored man and euel proporcyoned, and takes no pleasure in any exercise.
Further he is reputed among them verteous, and a good keeper of his law,
moderate, louinge peace and rest, more then any of his predecessoures have
done, which the Turckes impute to him for cowardnesse, and fault of courage.

He is esteemed of them gentle and courteouse, nevertheless he pardons not
offenders lightely. His pastime is to read books of philosophye, and of his
own law In which he is so instructed that his Moftie or bishop can teach
him nothing at all. He is not counted very lyberal, but rather more sparynge
then his predecessors.

He suffers him self to be ruled of them whom he loves, and in whom he
trusts, though he be somtymes obstinate, and opinatyue: thryse a weke he
has read before him the historyes of his predecessors. In which he suffers
no lie to be written, nor flateries, but only the bare acts. And he is
satisfied with no treatyses or enterpryses, but with those which were done
among their neighbors and other nations about them, faithfully and truly
declared, concerning the conduycte of their affairs, he has a son called
The great Turcke has a son of the age of.xxviii. years.
Mustapha, about.xxviii. or.xxx. years old, and he is gouerner of Iconie, and
of all the sea costs of Magnesia, over against yt Isles of Chio and Methelin,
toward the Rhodes, where he keeps his contynuall resydence.

To conclude, because many have marvel that the great Turcke wynneth daily,
and leseth nothing I will show you what order he sets in the countrees
which he conquerethe, and in what state he leaves them.

The order of the countries.
WHen ye great Turcke has won a country, first he beats down all ye
fortresses, which seem not unto him of importance and profit, and the walls
of all the towns there about.

And if there ben any rich or strong houses in the said countrees, the
inhabytauntes whereof have allyaunce with some great lords being
straungiers, he takes those men away, and sends them to dwell in some other
place of his other countrees, being already stablished in obedience. But he
suffers every man to live according to his own law and belefe constrayning
no man to deny his faith, which thing he does, because he will not
destroy them, nether bring them to desperacyon, besides yt, by their law
such constrayntes ben defended. After this he sends his Sangiacs and
Spachis, How the Turcke ladeth his people with taxes and imposityons.
and charge the people with so great taxes and imposycions, that it is
impossyble for them at any time to rebel.

Also he leaves them no harness nor weapons of war, nor suffers them to
gooe out of the country, nether to serve any but him self, ye he
constreineth them to abide in their houses, that they may be ever found
redye, when he has need of them. And he uses them in his armies for
dychers, handecraftesmen, fyndinge them only meat and drink.

Justice is there rigorously administered as in his other countries by ye Cadiz
and Sobassiz. But weigh The ministr^cyon of Iuslyce.
tie and great matters are handeled by him self and the Baches, for the great
Turcke speaks seldom to his other subjects.

He hears gladly messengers and embassadoures strangers, chyefely if they
bring him presents. But he practyseth nothing with them, but only hears
them declare the cause of their coming. To which he answers nothing or if
he answer, he says only, I have heard the, resort to the Baches, and they
shall despatche the, after this they se him no more.

His custom is not to send embassadoures first. But if any has begone to
send unto him he is content to entreteyne them, and to send his own again.

By these things before rehearsed, you may perceive that the Turcke has no
good footmen.

That in his camp there are a A sum or brief rehearsal of that which is
before spoken.
great nombre of Christyanes. That his armies on the sea been evil furnysshed
both of men and good ships, that he is not accompanied but with pages and
slaves, that his princypall countries are inhabyted of Christyanes, of whom
he makes his warryers, and yt in the countrees there are no fortressed places.

Wherefore, it is to be thought that his strength is permytted of God, which
for our sins sufferethe this estate so far swaruynge from all good
pollycie: so to prevail and not that it is maynteyned by their wisdom,
strength, or virtue.

The co^questes or victories of ye Turckes.
I Thought verily yt I had The preface of the writer into the conquestes.
ben dyscharged, and that I had satisfied you, at yt least so far as my
knowledge and power would stretch, concerning the matters of ye great Turcke.
Nevertheless, now you demand of me their petigrees particulerly, how I say
they have proceeded to ye conqueste of so many countrees, which they now
possess. But you consider not the affairs, yt I have in this palace, which
as you know ben of such qualite and importance that it is right hard for me
to emploie my short memory to any other thing then my present busynes does
require. Wherefore, if I shall not say so much as you desire hold me excused,
for there is no remedy but I must acco^plysh your will, be it never so rudely
done.

IN the year of our lord The year of our Lord. M iii. C.
a thousand and three hundred, when ye emperor Henry the seventh purposed to
sow in Italye parcialytyes and dyuisyons between the Guelfes, and the
Gibelins, and Phylippe the fair reigned in France, there were found in
Natolie or Asia the less certain capitaynes of the turckyshe nacyon. For
there they dwelte after the journey of Godfrede of Bologne Duke of Boullen, and
were there The first gatherynge of ye Turckes against the christyanes.
before, but then they came forth, and gathered them selves against the
Chrystyan armies before the town of Nice, called in old time Antigonia, under
a Capytayne named Soliman.

After this, there passed an hundred years and more, and no mencyon was made of
them, unto the time aforesaid, when there were sondrie captains in Natolie,
and a monge other Othman, Caraman, and Assan, surnamed Begy, or Bey, which
signifies lord or master. Howebeit, they take away the letter. y. and say
Othmanbeg. etc.

Othmanheg which was a great Othmanbeg entered allyaunce with. ii Grecyans and
a Turcke.
aduenturer, entered alliance with two Grecians, that had denied their
faith, and with a natural Turcke. Of the said Grecians, the one was named
Michali, the other The names of the Grecyans.
Marcke. And of the said Michali came the Michalogliz, of which stock: there
remain some unto this present day, and likewise of Marcke came the
Marcozogliz. The name of the Turcke.


The Turcke was called Auramy, of which lynage none remains that any man
can tell of. Their successors are counted of the blood royal, and the empire
of the Turckes pertayneth unto them, if the said lynage should fail. By the
aid of these.iii. the The first victoryyes of Othmanbeg.
said Othmanbeg came in credit and puissance, and conquered certain towns
bordering upon the great sea costs called Pontus Euxinus, and among other the
town Siuas, called Sebaste, and Augusta. Caraman went toward Cilice, to
which country he gave his name. And Assam went into Persia and Assiria.
These.ii. and their successors have ever ben pursued by ye said Othman, and
his successors, Of this Othman descends all the great Turckes.
so that they have disco^fited Caraman, and taken his country. But Assambeg
which is the Sophi holds his own yet, and lives in perpetual war and
hatred with the Othmans. The The Sophi keeps his kingdom to him self, and is
not subject to ye Turcke.
said Othman reigned.xxviii. years, until ye reign of Philip of Valoies and
he was so surnamed of a town or castle called Othmenach, which is between
Sinope and Trebisond, he left a son called Orcan: which succeeded him.

Orcan ye son of Othman married Orcan the son of Othman.
ye daughter of Carama^beg. But afterward, he made war with him and put
Caramanbeges eldest son to death, his wives brother, whom he took in bataile.
He conquered ye city Bursia, or Prusias. In which time it chau^sed yt
Andronicke Paleologo, emperor of Constantinople at ye hour of his death made
tutour of his children Caloianne, and Andronique, one of his familiar
servants named Johan Cantacusane, which man though he behaved him self well
and wisely in ye said tuitio^, nevertheless he was put out of his office
thorough ye envy of ye patriarch of Constantinople and an other personage of
base co^dicio^, but of great credit about ye young emperor Caloianne.

Howebeit, he found the means afterward to return, and to beco^me the
myghtyest in Constantinople. And for the assurance of his estate, he procured
that his daughter should be married to the said Emperor Caloianne.

Notwithstanding, they could not live in peace, and therefore the Emperor
wythdrewe him self secretly into ye ysle of Tenedo. Whether the army of ye
Geneuoyes came to seek him with.iii. score galleys, and brought him again to
Constantinople, and chased away Cantacusane, which ran for succor to the
venetians, with whose aid he came to assaute ye Geneuoyes, being in the Canal
of Constantinople, called sometime Propontis.

Nevertheless, ye Geneuoyes had the victory, and the town remained to
Caloianne, which gave to the captain of the Geneuoyes, Frauncies Cataluz, the
Isle of Methelni, or Lesbos Which they did hold to ye reign of Mahumet, the
second, which took it from Nicholas Cataluz ye last duke thereof. This little
diuisyon caused The cause of the war between the Geneuoyes and the Venetia^s
great wars between ye Geneuoyes and the Venetians. Which brought the
Veuetians to an extremyte, in somuche that they would have yielded them selves
to the Geneuoyes.

But afterward, the Geneuoyes contrariwyse, were brought to utter distruccyon
and bondage, wherein they continue unto this day.

For they were co^streigned to give them selves to the archebyshop of Millean,
then gouerner of the said town. And after yt to sell their lands and
lordshyppes to the comunaltie of S. George, which is in their town. And then
they ran for succor to ye king of France, which gave to them duke Johan of
Calabrie, son of king Rene.

Again, they returned to Philyppe duke of Millan, and afterward left him,
so yt they knew not, to what saint they should vow them selves. But the most
mischyefe was, that the said wars were an occasyon of the loss of Sirya,
and of the realm of Jerusalem, and that they opened a gate unto the Turckes in
to Grecelande, and Europe, as I will declare hereafter. And it was about that
time, when Loys of Rauiere, and Federike of Austrige were at varyance for the
empire of Almanie.

The said Orcan reigned.xxii. The reygne of Orcan.
years, to the beginning of king John of France, which was the year of our
lord a. M.iii. hundred and fyftye. And he left his son Amurath to be his
successoure.

AMurath, which ye Hungariens call Ammerat, and the Turckes Moratheg or
Morathey, and Norathegby, which signifies Morath, ye lord, he succeeded Orcan,
when Cantacusan pursued the Emperor Caloianne his son in law, with the aid
of Marcke Carlouich, lord of Bulgarie.

He was favored also of certain Barons and lords of Greece enemies of the
emperor Caloianne Which forbecause he perceived him self to weak, he was
constreygned to ask help of ye said Amurath, and he did send to him.xii. M.
horsemen, with ye which he pacified all his matters, and afterward gave them
license to depart. But they having seen and tasted of the goodness and
pleasauntnes of ye country Amurath his journey into Greece.
of Greece (persuaded as it was easy to do) ye said Amurath to gooe into Greece,
like as he did in deed, accompaigned with.lx. thousand men, with whom, by the
aid and means of two merchants ships of the Geneuoyes, which had of him
lx. thousand ducates, he passed over the strayct, in old time called
Hellespontus, and now called Callipolly or the castle, by reason of two
castelles being there at this hour where sometime were wont to be.ii. towns
Sestus and Abidus. And they The two castelles Sestus and Abidus.
took the town of Calipoli, being nere to ye said straight. And afterward
Adrianopoli now callled Andrinopoli, and Philippoli, sometime called Olimpias.
They also ouerran all ye country of Thrace, called of some How Amurath ouerran
all Thrace.
Romanie, even to ye mounteyn of Rhodope, called by ye Greeks Basilissa, ytis
the queen of mounteynes. Othersome does call it yt mounteyn of silver, by reason
of diverse mines of silver yt there are. They disco^fyted in bataile ye said
Marcke Carlouich, and took The dysco^fyture of Mark Corlouich.
prisoner the Earl Lazare of Seruir, which is Misia the less (called of
Frossarde the erledome of Lazaran) and caused him to be behedded, in the mean
time ye Emperor Charlys the fourth being greatly hindered and damaged with
the resystaunce of the children of Loys of Bauiar, some time Emperor, and in
defending him self from Ferray or Federic Marquis of Mysue, and from the Earl
of VVirtenberge his pursuers, he was constrained to leave the Empire after him
to his son Lancelot, and to sell the towns and lordeshyppes of Italye as
Myllan to vicountes and diverse other.

Finally, the said Amurath was slain by a servant of the said The death of
Amurath.
Earl of Lazare in reuengyng of his masters death. In the year of our Lord
athousande, three hundred three score and thyrtene, after that he had reigned
three and twentye years, even nere tooe the beginning of the reygne of Charlis
the fyfte king of France, leuynge two sons behind him, the one named
Pazait and the other Seleyman

PAzait, or Bazait, after ye Turks which never pronounce the letter. P was
called of Froyssart king Basant ye son of Lamorabaquin and some time
Amorabaquin after his fathers name Engner: and master Nycole Gilles, which
gathered and compyled the Chronicles of France, does call him king Basaac.

This manne was hardye, The hardines of Bazait.
dylygente and a great enterpryser he slew in one battle Marcke Carlouich,
in the which also were slain all the nobles of Seruie and Bulgarie, and
thereafter over ran all the country of Thessalie, and Macedonie, now called
Thumenesie, and Albainie

He destroyed all Greece, even tooe Athenes called of some Cuthine he spoiled
Bosue which is ye upper Misia, Croace, and Sclauonie, which are Dalmacia and
Liburnia. The Emperor The deposing of ye Emperor Lancelot.
Lancelot, son of Charlys the fourth, then living, was sooe peasyable and
quiet, that often times he was imprisoned by his own subjects, and was
deposed of his Empire, by the Almaynes How the Almaynes chose ii. Emperoures.
which did elect two others, that is to wit Ioce, his neueiue, and Roberte
of Bauyere called Rueprech which sygnyfyeth in their language Trouble peace.

For tooe return again tooe Bazait, he entered into Hungary and dyscomfyted
king Sigismound which afterward was made Emperor called by Engnarran,
Sagemont in the famous battle of Nicopoli The battle of Nycopoly.
which was lost, because the French men would not believe the said Sigismonde
nor tarry upon the approchinge of his battayles nor of the Almaynes, which was
rekened to their great pride and arogancye as says Frossarde.

In the which battle were taken the Earl of Neuers, Ihon afterward duke of
Burgoynie the son The noble me^ taken by Bazait, in ye king dome of Hungarye.
Philippe the first duke. Philippe of Arthois Earl Deu, constable of France.
Ihon the Maingre called Boucincalte, and diverse others, to the number of.vii.
or.viii. which were sent to Bursir, all the rest were slain to the number of a
thousand speres. The which battle was on the vygyll of Saint Myghell in ye
The time of the battle
year of our Lord.xiii. C. lxxxxvi

The said prisoners were after ward redeemed (not without great raunsons) by the
dylygence of one called James of Hely gentelman The raunsomynge of the
prisoners.
of Pycardie, which was taken with them, and who also before, was well
beknowen and trusted in the court of the said Amorabaquin.

After this battle Bazait assyeged Bazait beseeged Constantynople.
the town of Constantinople, and had taken the same, had not been, that a
great prince of Tartarye did enter in the Lanatolie, which was called Tamerla^
or Tamburlam, by the Turckes called Demirlenge, and by some hystoryans of
France named Tacon of Tartarie, but he was called of his own Temircuthlu,
that is to say: fortunate or happy swearde, or happy iron. And was the son
of Cham of Tartarie called zaym Cham of the Horde, or multitude of zanoltha,
and Czahaday, being be twene ye rivers of Rha and Volha, which enter in the sea of Abacuth, which ye Latinistes call Mare Caspiu^ or Hircanu^.

And this zaym, was the very same, whom they of Pole called in their
hystories Bathy the first Mahumetyst, Bathy ye first Mahumetiste of Tartary
of all the Tartaryans. Tamerlan soon after, was lord of al Tartarie Precopie
called by them Prezelzoth, which signifies diches or tre^ches lyinge betwixt
the ryuers of Tana, called Tanais, and called of the Bory sehenes Nepar, and by
the Turckes Decoz, the which country in old time was Scithia ye less,
beingnowe in the possessyon of the Turcke.

And the said Tamerla^ held his seege in the great town of Samarcande upon
the said see of Abacuth and The surname of Tamerlan
made him self to be surnamed the ire or wrath of God, but his title and style
was Vlucha^, yt is to say, ye great lord. To Bazait now, was convenient to
leave ye seeging of Constantinople, for to come unto ye said innumerable army.
So yt both the armies did mete toward the town of Angory, in old time called
Ancira, nere to the mountain called Stella, and by Enguarran of Mo^strelet
called Appady, where some time Po^pee ye great, disco^fited king Mithridates.
And the said Bazait, was vainquished, and taken in battayl by the said
Tamerlan, which The taking of Bazait.
made him to be bound and fettred with cheynes of gold, and kept him in a caige,
like as he were a Lion, and so caused hi^to be carried about with How Bazait
was bound with fetters of gold and kept in a cage
him, throughout all the cou^trye of Asia, so long as he lived, which was.ii.
years or therabout, so yt he died in ye year of our lord. M. iiii C after yt he
had reigned.xxvii. years The death of Bazait.
unto the.xxvii. year of ye reygne of ki^ge Charles ye.vi. This very same
Tamerla^ made him to be called Yldre^ The surname of Tamerlam
that is to say: thonder out of this battle and prease. Certain sons of
the said Bazait did escape, who thynkinge to pass into Europe How the sons
of Bazait fled.
fell into the hands of the Emperor of Constantinople, which made the
passage of the sea to be straytly kept. By chance, one of the said brethren
called Cyris, whom some did call Calepin or Calapin, passed through and came
to Andrinopoli. And as I do judge, the error of The error of his surname.
that surname is come of this that some called him Cyris Chelebi, which is a
title of honor and nobylyte given and attributed to the children and sons
of ye great Turckes, as Achmat Chelebi, that is to say gentylman, like as the
Spaignardes says Don Alonso or Don Rodrigo, and as the Frenchmenne says
Charles Mounsire that is is my lord Charlys, or Loys my Lord, which be tytles
of ye blood royal. This Cyris did reign.vi. years, or therabout, and left a
soonne called Orcan, and three of his brethren, the cyldren of Pazait Moyse,
whom they called Musach Mehemet, and Muscapha, which went forth of
Constantinople while the Emperor came to seek aid and help of the said king
Charles the.vi. against the said Cyris. Musach killed Orcan his nephue, and in
recompense One murtherar destroieth another.
thereof, he himself was sleyne by Mehemet his brother. Then began a custom
and use among them one to sleye another, which sens that time they have metly
well observed.

MEhemet the first of his name having slain Mehemet ye first of that name.
Musach his brother possessed the empire and recovered all the country of
Natolie, which Tamerlan had taken with Bazait, and removed his see from Bursye
transportyng the same to Andrinopoli. He warred upon the country of Valachie,
called by some French historians Valaigne, and of others Blaquie, which in
the old time were called Busse and Triballi. He vainquisshed the Emperor
Sigismonde How Mehemet vaynquisshed Sigismunde.
in the plain feldes of Silinubes, and was the first of his nation, yt ever
did pass over the great river of Danowe who also took Bosue and made Mehemet
was the first of the Turckes that came over Danow
war against Caraman, and dyed in the year of God. M.cccc. xviij. and in
the.xxxviij. of the said king Charles the.vj. after that he had The death of
Mehemet.
reigned.xviij. years, comprehendyng therewith ye time of Cyris, which some
others do not reckon. And he left a soonne called Amurath.

AMurath the second of Amurath the son of Mehemet.
that name, called also Moratbeg, was i Natolie when his father deceased: who
as soon as he was advertised thereof, went into Europe, notwithstanding that the
Emperor of Constantinople did that was in him to stop him of the same,
sending against him Muscapha his uncle, ye son of Bazait whom as yet he did
reteyne with him after the taking of his father (as I have declared before.)
But the said Muscapha not being strong to resyste his power was disconfited
and slain in battle by the said Amurath, who ardently intendyng to revenge
him The purpose of Amurath.
of the^ Emperor of Constantinople spoiled, and brent all the country of
Thrace, and of Greece called Romanie and took from the Venitians the good town
of Tessalonyc called Salomachi which Andronye Paleologo sold un to them for
very spyte of the Emperor Constantyne his brother. After the said Amurath
entreed into Serine, or Rascie where he co^streined George Vucouich deputy or
lord of ye said country, to give him in marriage his daughter called Iriny,
yt is to say, Peace, surnamed Cathacusine. And yet nevertheless after that he
came against him, so yt he fled into Hungary toward yt Emperor Albert the
son in law of the last Emperor Sigismond, leuyng his soonne George to keep
his country which afterward was taken by yt said Amurath, whose yies he
caused The cruelnes of Amurath against his brother inlawe.
to be thruste out, notwithstanding, that he was his brother in law. After
the death of the said Albert, Lancelote brother to the king of Pole was chosen
by the Hungaria^s to be their king. Howbeit the said Albert left Elizabeth
his wife great with child which after his disceasse was delivered of a soonne
called Lancelot being brought up and nouryshed in the custody of ye Emperor
Frederic the third, which was the occasion and cause why yt the said
Lancelot of Pole durst not take in hand to meddle with the Turckes, ner ones
to assaille the^ fearyng that if ye said Emperor perceiuyng him any other
where troubled or occupied should in the mean time restore the said Lancelote
the just and righteous king of Hungary to his own realm. In this mean
while Amurath which could not abide at the siege of Belgrado which they call
Mandoralba, and Alba Greca, called by the Hungariens Chrieschisch, in old time
called Taurunum, liynge betwixt the two ryuers of Danowe and Saua toward yt
part, whereas both the said ryuers do mete together. The which town the
said George Vucouich had changed for other, with the said emperor
Sigismonde, because it is ye keye and chief entrey of Hungary. A little after,
at yt request of the said deputy George Vucouich the forsaied How Lancelot
prepared an host and prevailed.
Lancelot prepared a great army, by the which he recovered the country of
Seruie and Rascie, and restored them again to ye said George Vucouich. By
reason of the which Amurath sent against him Carabey, (that is to say, ye
black lord) with a great army and power, so that both the armies did mete
nere unto the mountain of Costegnaz, in old time called Hemus where the said
Carabey was discoumfited and taken prisoner, the which two victories The
taking of Carabey.
with many other, both before and after did come to pass through the
vailliantenes and noble feactes of John of Huniad called by Enguerran of
Monstrelut and Philip of Comynes ye white knight of Valaigne, and by ye
Hungariens Lanco Ban, or Vaiuod, that is to say, governor of Tra^ssiluana now
called Moldauia, and by yt Hungariens Sibenburge, that is to say Septem Castra,
or the seven Castelles, called in old time Dacia. The which John Huniad was
father of Mathias king of Hungarye that did reign in our time.

After this battle was a truce A truce concluded between the Turckes and the
Hungaryens.
taken for.x. years between the Turckes and the Hungaryans, by reason whereof
Carabey was delivered, paiynge for his rau^sone fyftye thousand Ducates. The
The breaking of the truce.
which truce was sone after broken, by the said king Lancelot, (at the
instaunce and persuasion of ye Bishop of Rome, Eugene ye fourth) which chaunsed
to his great mischief, for he was slain in battle nere to the town of
Verne, which is The death of La^celot king of Hungarye
called Dionysiopolis, on saint Martyns day the.xi. day of November in the
year of our Lord. M.cccc. and.xliiij. Out of which battayl Ihon Huniad did
escape. Of this victory Amurath did nothing rejoice, for as much as he bought
the same very dear, he took also the Sophie capitalle of Bulgarie, Scopie, and
Nouomont. He ran through the country of Acarmania now called Ducat or
Duche, and the country of ye Cymera or Eperotee called Epirus Epirus.
from ye river of Achelons, called at this day Pachicolam, nere unto the
mountains, now called the mountains of the Demble, in old time called
Acrocerannii which are a part of the mountain called Pindus, he took the
port of the Velon, sometime called Aulon, and passed over the goulfe of Larta,
called the Ambracius Beye and went to the town of Oricus, now called Rigo and
from thence toward Cataro called Risonicus Beye or goulfe, which is about xxv.
miles of length from Ragusa, which was called Epidaurus. He co^streined John
Castrioch deputee and governor of Cymeria to re^dre to him the strong town of
Croya, and to give his three soonnes in pleage whom he made to be come
Turckes, the youngest of them named George, was but.ix. years old or there
about, and was surnamed Schanderbegge, yt is to say the Lord Alexander,
which did beecome a right valiant capitain and worthy to be compared unto
Pyrrhus and to others his predecessors: for under Amurath he conquered Saruie,
and took a great part of ye country of Caramanie, retournyng afterward to
the Christen faith, he caused to be taken from the said Bazait, first ye
country of Seruie then Croya. And all the countrees, tounes and castelles,
which apperteined to ye late Ihon Castrioth his father, besides twenty or
thyrty battailles which he had against the Turcke, in the which he at all
times had the victory, in so much that Amurath the great Turcke could never
lay any thing to his reproach, save only the good chere, yt he made to him
the time he was under his power, calling him his unthankful son and child,
by diverse his writings sent to him, full of many amyable and favorable good
words. The said Schanderbeg feared him so little, that he left his own
countreye, to gooe and help Ferdinand king of Naples, against How
Scha^derbeg left his own country to gooe and healpe Ferdinand king of Naples.
John duke of Calabre. The which Ferdinand he did set into his realm and
thrust out thesayde duke who^ he conquered. For thewhiche pleasure thesaide
Ferdinand called his sons being spoiled of their goods by Mehemet the
second, after the death of their father, and gave unto them great substance
and riches, somuche yt they were made Marquesses of saint Ange. Of this stock
was Ferdinand Castrioth Marquis of saint Ange, which dyed in the battle of
Pauye. Amurath afterward occupied ye countreye of the Moree, thewhyche in the
old time was called Peloponesus, by the varyau^ce and discord of two brethren
Thomas and Dimitre or Demetrius deputyes of thesayde countreye and brethren of
Constantyne Peleologo the last Emperor of Constantinople, for because that the
Albanoys made war upon them, and therefore they ran for succoure to
thesaide Amurath, and he made them his trybutoryes. And forasmuch afterward
as they rerefused to pay that which they had proinysed him, he chased them.
Dimitre he returned again toward him, and Thomas went to Rome to the bishop
thereof, where he dyed and left behind him two sons and two daughters.
Amurath being come to extreme age, How Amurath would have been areligeous
man and geue^ouer his rule and dominion.
weary of the world and of his victoryes, wythdrewe himself with certain
heremytes and religious persons of their law, to thentent to live from that
time forth in solytarynes and rest. Having set in his place his son Mehemet
which was verey young, and therefore he committed the rule and governance of
him to Haly Bacha, which sometime is called Caly Bacha. But when afreshe, Ihon
of Huniad and the Hungarians had sent a great army to assail them, he was
constreygned at the desire of his said son and of thesayde Haly Bacha to
take again his admynistracion (because they could not be obeyed) and to set
an order in these affairs* going against the How Amurath took upon him
again, the rule and dominion of Turckey:
Hungarians, whom he vaynquyshed and drove back. And afterward he went and
asseged Croye against Schanderheg, but he could not get it. And then in his
retournyng by the mounteignes, he was robbed and spoiled of the Paysans, which
How Amurath was robbed and spoiled.
slew many of his people. So that what with the great grefe and dyspleasure
that he then took, and also for age, he dyed the. M.cccc. and The death of
Amurath.
li. year of our Lord, being of the age of.lxxv. years, and the.xxxii.
year of his reign, and the.xxvi. of the reign of Gharles the.vij. king of
France. And he was the first that ordained the Iannyssaryes.

MEhemet the second of Mehemet the second of that name.
that name (called by Enguerrand and other historigraphiers) Frau^ces Morbesan,
and I am in doubt whether they would say Morbesalem, which is as much to say
in the Syryan and Moresque speech as these words of the Gospel (Vade in
pace) in english, goo in peace: ye son of Amurath and of Iriny Vucouich the
daughter of George deputye of Seruie, began to reygne the.xxi. year of his
age, and with in two years after, he wanne the The wynning of Constantinople.
siege of the town of Constantinople which was in the. M.cccc. and.liij. year
of our Lord, where was slain the Emperor Constantyne. And it The first and
last Emperors of Constantynople was named Constantyne
came so to pass, that like as one Constantyne the son of Helene was the
first Emperor of Constantinople so another Constantyne being the son of
another Helene was ye last Emperor thereof. This Mehemet was nether Christian,
nor Musulma^ or Mahometist, for in his youth he was instructed in the
Christyan faith by his mother, and after he learned this doctrine of Mahomet:
so that when he came to age and dyscrecion, he nether kept the one nor the
other. In the beginning Turckyshe tyranny.
of his reign, he caused to be slain two young brethren that he had, the one
of ye age of.xviij. months and the other of.vi. Notwithstanding some say,
that in the place of the elder was put another child, and he that was his
brother was sent to Constantinople, and from thence to Venyce and so to Rome to
Calyxte then bishop of yt see, which caused him to be baptized and named How
ye brother of Mehemet was Christened.
Calixte Othman, to whom the Emperor Frederick ye third gave great gifts
and substance in Austria. Mehemet having taken Constantinople, as I have
said, he turned him to the realm of Hungarye and besieged Belgrado, from
whence he was driven by Ihon Huniad, which was within the same with the
Cardinal of saint Ange called Ihon, and a graye freer named also John, and
surnamed Capistram.

From this siege, Mehemet fled shamfully, for he was hurt, and lost his
artillarye and other bagages without hope of the recouerye of Hungarye. So that
he was co^streined to pass unto Moree which the Venecyans had taken from him
and newlye repeyred the Examilo, which is a wall conteignynge vi. miles, or
two legues long, from the goulfe of Patras, called ye baye of Corinthiacus,
unto that of Legine, which was called the baye of Megaricus, where sometime
was the town of Corinthe, which now is brought unto a little village called
Corintho, the which Examilo, Amurath his father had beaten down that he might
enter the easelyer into the Moree. Mehemet coming the Venecyens thought to
wythstande Mehemet discomfyted the Venecyans.
him, but they were vaynquyshed, and lost that battayll, in the which was
slain a great nombre of good capteynes of the Italyans, after whose taking
and the veraye same time, was taken also the Isle of Negrepont called Eubeia,
ioynyng to the said land, enclosed with a bridge. And afterward the ysles of
Stalimene or Stalmini, in the old time called Lennos, and Methelim, called
Lesboos, the which perteigned to Nycholas Cataluz geneuoye: afterward also
saint Maurye, called Nerytus, and by some Leucas and Leucadia, Imate in the
old time name zacynthus and Cephalenie called Chifalonye. And recovered again
Croya, after the death of Schanderbeg, he took the town of Scutari or Scodra
from the lord Arinth Comino or Connenus, surnamed Gollent, that is to say
Cheuelu, father of the lord Constantyne, that governed the Marquis of
Mountfarrat after the death of the Duchess his nyece, the same time that king
Charles the eight came from Naples. Afterward he entered into Bosue and took
the lord or deputye named Stephyn Hierchec (and of some historiphiers the duke
of Latic) whose head he commanded to be stryken of, and caused his son to
deny his faith and to be circumcized and surnamed Achinath. He took from
the Geneuoys the town of Capha, which is called Theodosia, set in Precopie,
which is Taurica Chersonessus, which in manner is as long as the Moree, and
on the one side thereof is the goulfe of Nigropila called the baye of
Carcinites, and on the other side the black seea called Bicis Palus, and nere
unto it, is Meotides Paludes which at this day is called the goulfe of
Tanais. Being thus combred and troubled with all these cares and prouyuysyons
of war, and trauaylynge and labourynge in all these countries lyeng so far
one from another, he was assailed in Natolie by Piramet Caraman, which
constreigned him to leave his entreprises, How Mehemet was assailed by Piramet
Caraman.
and yet notwithstanding before that he parted, he took the strong castle of
Mancup, situate upon the straight, which by land encloseth Precopie, that in
the old time was called Taphie. This thing done he passed into Natolia
dryuynge back Caraman, and entered into his countreye, a great part whereof he
wanne and brought under his subieccion. In his coming back, he took Sinope ye
head of Paphlago sytuate upon the great sea, and Trapezus called Trebisonde
which is an Empire: and he caused to be slain the Emperor David Conyno or
Commenus which was a Christian, of the lynage of the valiant Isaac Conyno,
the which from a capteyne, became Emperor of Constantinople, next after the
Emperor Mychael. And all these things aforesaid came to pass Note, that ye
dyscorde between Christian princes provoke ye Turcke to war.
in the time that the Hungaryans and them of Austriche made war against the
Emperor Frederycke, because they would have had Lancelot the soonne of Albert
their lord and king which was in the keeping of the Emperor, and he would
not deliver him to them, because he was not of leful age. And streyte upon
these victoryes aroase a new enemy of thesayde Mehemet, which was the How ye
king of Persye assailed Mehemet.
king of Persie, called Vsuncassan or Assembeg, which was accompaigned with a
great army of the Persians (whom the Turckes call Keselbach, that is to say
read heddes, because they use to were read cappes or hattes) he entered into
Capadoce and Trebisonde, and in the first battle Mehemet was dyscomfyted, in
the second Assamheg had the woorsse and lost a great part of his countreye.
The which Assembeg was of the lignage of David Conyno the Emperor of
Trebisonde, like as before I have made mencyon, and he reigned in the year of
our Lord. M.cccc. and.lxxii. Mehemet being delivered of this trouble,
returned into Caramanie, after the death of Piramet Caraman, and constreigned
Abraham his son to seek aid and succor of the Christians and of Pius the
second bishop of Rome which bishop myndyng to go in his own person against
him caused himself to be carried to Ancone, where he prepared a great army by
the seea, and there dyed, while he tarried the coming of the Venecyans which
should have accompaignyed him in this voyage. The^ it came to pass he be ynge
dead, that the army skattered and so departed without taking any effect, the
Almeignes being then in war with the Hungaryans, they found Caraman alone
without help or aid, who^ the said Mehemet caused to be slain. And by this
mean, the stock of Caraman was destroyed The dyscomfyture and death of
Caraman.
and their contreye remeyned to Othmans. Mehemet being sure of this quarter he
sent to Marbeye, Samgiac of Bosue, which was the soonne of a Geneuoye, to
spoil the countreye of Istrie, called Liburnie, of Craine or Carnie, called
Corinthe, and of Stirie, which they call Steirmarck, and in yt old time called
Valeria, which all are comprysed within Illirium, and so passed forth to
Friol, which was called the merket of Iulii, and trauersynge betwixt The great
ryuers Gue and Nou.
Gue and Nou the great ryuers, dysco^fyted the Venecyans which he found before
him, where were slain and taken prisoners, all the rest of the good capteynes of
Italye. On the other side, Mehemet sent Achmath Bacha surnamed Ghendich, (that
is to say: to the great toothe, the son of Stephyn late deputee of Bosne of
whom I have spoken before) with a great army by seea into Italye, and he took
the town of Otranto called Hydruntus, and in old time Iapiginum, in the
country of Pouille or Apulia. Before this also Mesithba Paleologue (which was
of the lignage of the Emperoures of Constantynople) had assieged the town of
ye Rhodes, and could not get it. And not content with these three armies,
Mehemet went himself against ye Soudiane of Egypt, but being arrived very nigh
to Nicomedie, (which some at this day call Comedy,) he dyed in the year of our
lord. M.cccc. lxxxii, being about thage of The death of Mehemet.
liiii. years and the.xxxi. year of his reign. He was called by the Turks
Mehemet Boiuc, that is, the great. And he left behind him.ij. soonnes named,
Pazait and zizimi, which does signify love, for Muscapha Laisne governor of
Icony, called Iconium dyed sone after ye second battle of Ambassag, in the
which he bare himself well and valyau^tly.

PAzait, or Bazait, the second Pazait or Bazait the second of that name.
of that name, and the youngest of yt three brethren, (by the aid and help of
the Iannissaryes, specially of Laga, that is to say a captain, which was
nigh kynne to him) he ceased or possessed the Empire. And zizimi his brother
had possessed himself of a Pazait the turckysh tyranne assaileth his brother.
town called Bursye, wherewith he was well satisfied and contented, yet
notwithstanding Pazait with the army that his father had prepared to have
gone against the Souldyan, he assauted his brother. To the which Souldya^ the
forsaied zizimi fled, and was by him aided both of money and men: but he
lost two battayles and was dyscomfyted by Achmath Ghe^dich Bacha. Wherefore,
not thinking enye more to recover, he withdrewe How zizimi the son of
mehemet fled to ye Rhodes for succoure.
himself to the Rhodes for to have succoure of the Christians, and zizimi was
of the age of.xxviij. years Pazait being aduertized hereof sent great
presents unto the chief master and counceler of the Rhodes desyryng him to
keep and cherysh well his brother, for the expenses and good entreaty of whom
he would pay unto him yearly forty thousand ducates, that so long as he was
gentely enterteyned of them, he woolde make none enter prise or war with the
christians. The which things he kept and observed with them. And ye said z
zimi for the more surety, and for that he was always kept in fear and
subieccyo^ of the said Pazait he was sent into France, where he lived a
great while in one of yt houses perteining to ye Rhodians called
Bourga^ne^sis: afterward he was given to Innocent bishop of Rome ye.viij. of yt
name and sent to How zizimi was under the keeping of the B. Rome.
Rome where he was yt time yt king Charlies ye.viij. went to Naples, which
desired to have him, hoping by his How the emperor desired to have zizimi.
aid to have recovered the Empire of Costantinople, but Alexander the. vi,
bishop of Rome, delivered him to ye Emperor empoysened, (as some say) in
such sort that he lived not past. iii, days after, and How the bishop of
Rome poisoned zizimi.
dyed at Tarracina. Pazait dyspatched of his brother, went about to conquiere
yt Transiluana, afterward, he took Moncastro, and Lithostomo the one upon the
river of Neper or Boristhenes, How pazait being despatched of his brother,
begins a new to war upon christendom.
that is to say Moncastro, and Lithostomo upon the mouth of the Danowe.
Afterward, he caused to be put to death his good captain Achmath Ghendich
Bacha, which he might have said had been equal with enie excellent manne of
war, and he was the soonne of his nere kinnesman Stephin depute of Bosne as I
have said before,

This being done, Pazait to go forward with the enterprise of his father, and
to avenge himself of the Soudian which had favored and meynteyned zizimi his
brother against him, he sent a great army How Pazait prepares again the
Soudian.
into Surie, of the which the Mameluchs being advertised, did assemble
theimselfes at Antioche and came toward the Turckes to the mount Amanus,
called at this present mount Negro, or the black mountain, where they
encou^tred and defied the said Turckes, between ye said mou^te and yt goulfe
Laiaffe, which was called the baye of Issicus, where sometime Alexander the
great disconfited king Darius and there was taken Chirseogli being ye soonne
in law of Pazait, and was brought before yt Soudian in ye town of Kair, which
the Turckes call Misir. But forasmuch as I am fallen from my matter by the
reason the Ma^maluchs, it shall not be far out of the way to tell you what
is meant by a Ma^meluch. Mammeluch in the Sirians tongue, which also is
Affricane, by us called Moresque: but for the better understanding, it
signifies in our vulgar tongue, a servant or souldyour. And ye must
understand that the Souldyan and the Mammeluchs are one manner of relygyon, and
they profess chastity. Upon their other apparel they were a roobe of white
Ma^meluchs are much like the knights of ye Rhodes.
Buckeram bright and shynynge. And likewise as ye great Turcke has weytynge
upon him four Visir Baga, so the Souldya^ has four Emyr Quiber, that is to
say chief or head admyralles. Beside this, he has a great or chief
Conestable, which they they call Derdart Quiber. The said Souldyan is made
and chosen by the forsayde How ye souldian is elected and chosen.
Mammeluchs among theimselfes as the knights of the Rhodes those among them
selfs their great master and most commonly is one of the Emyrs or head
admiralles and he that is chosen, does give unto every of the said Mammeluchs
for his welcome an hundred ducates for a present. The which Ma^meluchs were
all Christen men or The Mammeluchs were christen me^ne
Christen men's children, that de nyed their faith and professyon, like as
are the Iannyssaries, for by no means they will receive into their compaignye,
either Turcke More or Jew. The which Ma^meluchs the Tartres took and sold
them by heaps to the fore said Emyrs, which when they had bought them
brought them up and made them Mammeluchs and they were made the most vyllaynes
and slaves of all other men, and greatly given to ye feactes of arms,
specially on horseback, keeping the law of Mehemet. This religion began in
the time When the ma^meluchs began.
that king Lewis was taken at Damiate, which some call Heliopolis, and the
first Soudian was named Melech The first Soudan.
Sala, whom the Mammeluchs slew, which caused that the said Lewis was ye
sooner and easelyer delivered.

But for to come again to Pazait, this dyscomfyture that the Turckes had at
Laiasse by ye Mammeluchs, was the greatest that ever he had. And therefore the
said Pazait seeing How Pazait returned into Sclauony
that his busynes framed not in yt quartre, returned into Sclauonie, and took
the town of Duraz, of old time called Dyrrachium and Epidamnus, which was ye
Carleuichs, whom they say came out of the house of France, and of Charles of
Duraz surnamed of the peace, the soonne of Peter duke of Grauine, the soonne of
Charles the second king of Naples, brother to the forsaied Lewis.

In the year of our Lord a thousand four hundred.xciii. Pazait sent eight
thousand horssemenne, conducted by Cadum Bacha to run between Hungarye and
Sclauonye: against whom came certain lords of ye said country of Hungarye,
of Croace, and of Sclauonye, and they met together upon the river The
discomfyture of the Christians.
of Moraua, of old time called Moschus, where the Christians were scatered and
dyscomfyted. Five years after, Haly Bacha Albanoys Monouc sent a great army
by seea unto Iara or Iadera, being upon the goulfe of Venyce, called Mare
Adriaticum, on the coaste of Sclauonye. And then for as much as the army of
the Venecyans, which was veraye great followed them, they durst not assail
it, wherefore Haly Bacha then knowing that the Venecyans were afraid, took,
spyght of their beardes the town of Lepantho, called in old time Naupactum.

In the.xv. C. year, Pazait came him self to Modon, which was called Methone,
being in the Morce, and took it. After that, king Lewys the twelfth, and
the Venecyans were of allyaunce, against Ludouic Sforce, surnamed the Mor^^,
calling himself the duke of Millan, Pazait at the request and desire of the
said Ludouic cast of.x. M. horssemen of the Turckes within Fryol, thewhyche
came unto Triuiz and within the sight of Venyce, wherefore the Venecyans
prepared and set forth by seea a great and mighty army. With whom the
gallyes of France did mete, being under the charge and governance of the
Lord of Rauestaing and Gonsalo Fernando, surnamed the great capteyne, with
the gallyes of king Ferdinand Daragon, called of the Frenchemenne John Gippon.
The which army took again the ysles of Chifalonie and of saint Maure,
which afterward was given again to the Turcke by the said Venecyans upon
the conclusyon of peace made between them, by the intreatye of Maistre Androwe
Gritti afterward duke of Venyce. The gallyes of France went forth to the
ysle of Methelin, where they could do no good. About this time began the
renounie and fame of Siach Ismail king of Persye named Sophi, as was his
father, and he was the son of one of the daughters of Vsuncassan, and of one
named Seichayder, that is to say: the good Seich. For he was counted for an
holy manne, and as a prophet. And he was called Sophi of that sect, or as I
The Sophi.
should say, that religion, which they call Sophi or Sophilar, of ye which I
have spoken before, but some say that it is because the countreye which they
possess is so called, but neither the Turckes ner yet the Persyans know what
Sophene is.

The forsayde Seich after the death of thesayde Vsuncassan was sleyne by
Iacobbeg his brother in law, for envy of this, that the people of Persie were
more enclyned and affeccionate to him, fearyng least they would have made him
king.

Siach Ismael being then of ye age of eight years, fled and remained a long
time in the town of Leziam, upon the seea of Dabbaccuth until he came to
man's state. Afterward he returned into Persie, and found the means to get
unto him thrye hundred men, with whom he took the town of Sumach, being
then the chief or hedde town of Mesopotamie: afterward, the nombre of his
people encreasynge, he took Taurus, and and then Syras, the chief city of
Armenie: he vaynquesshed and caused to be put to death Aluant which was
made king of Persie, and he slew Iacobegge the son of Vsuncassan and uncle
of the foresaid Siach, which made allyaunce with Aladule or Alnaudule and the
Soudian of Egypt, by whom he was sturred and persuaded to make war upon
Pazait, against whom also he had many times prevailed. And about this time
Selym the youngest child of the said Pazait departed from Trebisonde, of the
which he was gouernoure, and without the knowledge of his father, he married the
daughter of Chan of Tartaire Precopie, with the favor of whom, and with the
healpe of a great nombre of horses which his brother in law (whom the
Turckes call Chamogli or Canogli) had sent to accompaignye him, and having
also on his side the Iannyssaryes: he compelled his father to give over his
realm unto him, the which while they carried him The death of Pazait which
was poisoned by his son Selym who also destroyed his own brethren ^ is ye
father of Solyma^ ye great Turcke that now raygneth.
back over the great sea to have lived there the rest of his days, he dyed
by the way, poisoned by his said son Selym, as some judge because they
drank together at their departing. Pazait reigned xxx. years, and he
lived.lx. years and he dyed the. M. D. and.xij. year, and the.xiiij. from ye
reign of Lois the twelfth. And he left behind him.iij. sons, Selym, Achmat
and Corcuth.

SElym being come to Selym the son of Pazait.
the realm by ye means aforesaid ente^ded before all other things to
dyspatch his brethren, and first of all he caused How Selym sought ye
destruccio^ of his brethren.
to be sleyne Corcuth, which was fled alonge the seea coaste, nere to the
Rhodes, where he hyd himself, waytyng for a ship, to have gone to the great
master of the Rhodes, but he was betreyed by one of his The death of Corruth
brother of Selym.
own folks and was taken and strangeled with a bow strenge. Achmet dyed the
like death, but he was taken in battle (acco^paignyed with a great army,
which he had made out, by the aid of Siach, Ismail, Sophie and of Campson
Ciauri Soudan) forasmuch as he was so fat and gross, that he neither The
death of Achmath the other brother of Selym.
could save himself by flyenge, ner endure to ride.

Selym being thus delivered and dispatched of his father and brethren,
purposed to make war against the Sophie, as well for ye old enemyte which
was beetwene them, as also for the dyspleasoure that he did in aydyng his
brother to make war against him. And the more easily to bring to pass this
his purpose and entencyon, he found the mean to have peace with Lancelot king
of Hungary and to refreshe and renew again (for The coming of the Sophy
against Selym.
his more surety) ye allyau^ce which he had with ye Venecyans: and then he
took the way of Perse. And as ye forsaid Sophy was come unto him with a great
nou^bre of horses armed and barbed even unto Assyrie, he was scatered and
dyscomfyted with the artillary of the Turks, with which the horses of yt
Persians had not been accustomed. And the battle was made in the plain of
Calderam between Tauris and Coye, where, as I have said is the town called
Artaxata, and this battle is peynted or portured in the hall of the council
of Venice, where I have seen it, and some say that the said Selym sent it to
them. After this battle the said town of Tauris came into the hands of ye
Turckes with a great part of the realm of Persye: but it remained not long,
for Siach sone after recovered it again and it is kept at this day by Taanas
his soonne. Selym going back again from Persye, did wyntre in Trebisonde,
and the somer next following, he assailed the lord Amandule, which bordreth
upon yt Soudan toward the town of Aleph called of the Fre^chmenne Halappe, of
the Turckes Aldephe, Aleph is the first lettre in the Hebrew alphabete, and
thereof was ye town named the first in Surye.
and in the old time Epiphania. And it is called Aleph, forasmuch as it is
the first town of Sury. On the other side toward Amasie is joined to ye
Turcke Cony otherwise called Icony, and to the Persians by the little Armenie.
All the country of the said Amandule was taken, and he himself also, whose
hedde Selim caused to be smytte^ of Then remained there none, but the Souldan,
which came with a great strength against Caythbey Emyr of Alep, that did rebelle
and disobey him, being accompaignied with xxviij. thousand horsemen which were
for the most part Mammeluchs that nothing regarded nor feared ye Turckes
because they had many times before beaten and vaynquisshed them, as is
aforsaied. Selym feyned him to goo against the Sophy making the bruyte to goo
so a broad. And as he did come unto ye town of Aman in old time called
Apamea, being sumwhat betwexte Ale and Damas, he was prayed and desired by ye
said Caythbey of aid and succor against the Soudan, where unto most wyllyngly
he did agree seeing it was the thing yt he most earnestly desired, and the
mean and occasion also that he greatly looked for, howbeit, he durst not open,
nor declare his mind thereupon, seeing these two armies in the feldes, for fear
least they should have agreed to have fallen upon him, watching and sekyng a
mean how he himself might bring them both to destruccyon, wherefore he did
inco^tinently join and associat himself with the said Emyr Caythbey, and they
defied the Soudan Campson Ciaury, which died in the battle like as did
Cathbey, then Selim remained lord of Surie, of Damas of Jerusalem and of
Iudee. The Mammeluchs which could escape and return into Egipte, with them
also that remained at home chase another Soudan, named Tomombey Emir of
Alexandrie. Selim followyng hotely this fortune and victory, entreed into
Egipte, and vaynquished Tomombey in another battle, and took the town of
Caire, which of some is called the wrong full Carra, and by some others by more
apparau^t reasons Me^phis. And as ye said Tomombey saved himself by passing
over the river of Nyle, he was pursued by Canogle, who following him, passed
over the said river to Nou with.x. thousand horses of Tartarie, because he
found the bridge yt was made of botes broken and destroyed by the Iannissares:
so that the said Tomombey was taken and brought back again to Selim which
caused him to be hanged, whereby the said Selim did remain king of Egipte which
was in ye year of our lord a. M. D. and eyghtene.

Selim being returned again to Constantinople and wyllyng to go to Andripoli,
died, by the way at ye village of Ciorlich, where as I have said he had
assailled his father with ye Tartarians. And he dyed in the year of our Lord a
thousand five hundredth and twenty, being forty and six year of age, and
the eight year of the reygne of Francoyes the French king that now presently
does reygne, after that he had put to death these three Baccha Chenden Baccha,
because that he would have made busynes with the Iannissaries mouyng them to
riot at his entryng in Perse. Boscangi, or Constantin Baccha his son inlawe,
for dyuer^ robberyes and enormitees, which he had committed, and Ianus Baccha
none can tell why or wherefore, save only but that he thought him to proud or
arrogante. This Selym left one son only called Soliman and by ye Turckes
Seleyman, leuing him in the custody of Peribaccha which did govern him in his
young age.

THe tyrant Seleiman the which now has the dominion and rule of the Turckes
at this present time lord and governor over the Turckes began his reygne the
xxviij. year of his age who in the year next following by counsel of
Peribaccha beseiged Belgrado and wa^ne and took the same from Lois king of
Hungary, the soonne of Lancelot of Hu^garie, which the^ was very you^ge the
princes and lords of the hole country being at great debate and varyaunce
for the gouernemente both of the king and his realm, whereby it so chaunsed
that they took no heed to provide for any aid or succor of the said place.
And the next year after he went against the Rhodes, lystenyng and watchyng
at all times according to ye custom of his predicessours where he might hear
or perceive any division or dissencion yt should chaunse to be among the
christian princes, the which enterprise he did take on hand without ye
counsel and advise of the said Peri Baccha, which did reckon the same to be
very doubtesome and to great an adventure. Nevertheless it came to pass
according to his own desire and that in yt year of our lord a. M D.xxvij.
when Italy was in wars and troubles Seleiman entered into Hungary with
favor as he says of John of ziphs Vaiuod of Sibens This child is it (the
son of Ihon) who has now occasyoned the war in Hu^garye, and by whom the
Turcke makes claim thereunto.
borge, which pretended the said royalme to apperteyne unto him. So that it
came to pass that the young king Lois was slain as he came to the battle,
and thereafter deceased the said John, leuyng a very young child behind him
which not long ago together with his mother were taken by ye said Seleiman and
sent unto Costantinople as it is reported. As concerning such things as are
chaunsed of these last years, it is not necessary to write to you of ye same,
seeing that the same is manifestely known how he has recovered Coron, Patras,
Castelno and other places, which the Emperors army and navy by the sea had
taken from him. The great enterprise of the Barberousse, which by great
craft and subtlety took the town of Tunys in Affrique, that we call Barbary
the which is eue^ at our doors, or nere unto us, and there is not (if a man
may say it) but one river to pass, between us and the realm of Tunys. The
which realm of Tunys at this present time is in hold of ye Emperors
majesty, who did most victoriously conquest ye same in the year of God. M. D.
xxvi, chacynge Barbarousse from the said realm, ye which he did before most
wrongfullie hold, possess and occupy, to the great hurt and damage of all
Christians.

How ye great Turcke not long ago has disco^fited in battle the army of
Ferdinand king of hungary, not by no valiau^t feact, but through chau^se of
variaunce and debate betwixt the almaignes and hu^garians who^ he found
fightyng the one against the other in their own camps. Like as the veniciens
were constraigned to render to him, the strenght and fortress of Naples, of
Romanie, yt was called Nauplias. And it is to be thought that he shall not
keep them, forasmuch as he believes them and lets them do what they
will.

Ye have caused me to enter in this matter which requires to be set forth
more largely, and by one of a greater wit and knowelege then I am of. And
also I have lightly and briefly over passed the same. And it shall be expedient
too know, that not only a king, as is this king of hungarye, but a small
lord, and in manner asimple gentleman, had had strength and power enough not
only to resist and withstand the assautes and entreprises of this nation,
but to have driven them away, in destroyenge and taking them, and that in
ye chefest of all their strength and courage. Wherefore it is not impossible but
that we may even now in this time do as much and more, when it shall
please God to encourage us thereunto

THe laws of Mahumet co^teine some things very madd and disagreyng from all
reason and some worthy to be abhorred and detested of all men, some
folishe and like old wifes tales etc. Some have such color of honest and
wisdom that a man would think them right holily made. Some be so like
Moses law and the evangelical doctrine, yt you would judge them to have been
derived out of the spryng of ye heavenly oracles. For Mahumet cries out
against the unfaithfulness of the Jews, he affirms constantly that Christ
was conceived of the holy ghost and borne of a pure virgin, he calls Christa
great prophet of God, the word, ye soul and the spirit of God which shall
judge all the world Nether would Mahumet seem to be yt enemy of Christ, or
to abholishe his doctrine, but only to correct those things which were
corrupted, and privily put in by other men. Mahumet also fights strongly
against certain doctrines damned by God his word, as of the Anthiopomorphites,
which fasion the God head with a manes body and form.

Item, he abrasethe the supersticion of the heathen and deniethe ye pluralite
of Gods, and says that images be not to be worshipped. Briefly this is
the su^me, and chief head of Mahumettes religion yt there is one God, which
made, preserves and governs all things, and that Mahumet was his principal
ambassador, and one of his privy counsel, and that he brought forth nothing
to be observed and believed, which he drew not out of the mouth and heart of
ye true God. So that to believe the master of truth is to believe God, which
used Mahumet familiarlye, and to despise him, is to despise God which sent so
heavenly a doctor. And that the folowers of Mahumetes learning, be the lawful
sons of faithful Ahraham, heirs of gods promyses. And that in the earth
they shall have the fruicion of all good things and in ye world to come they
shall be the indwellers of Paradise, and that their they shall have sweet waters,
pleasant fruits and fair womenne. And whosoever despyseth the laws publyshed
in the Alcora^, as ungodly persons, shall not only be punished here
temporallye, but also in the world to comme euerlastyngly, when in the
resurreccion the souls shall be called again to their bodies, he denies that
Christ was put to death of ye Jews, and farther he says plainly that Christ
dyed not. Mahumetes do ctryne has no hold of the head Christ, it is a
plantacion which ye heavenly father has not planted and therefore shall Christ
pull it up by the roots. The foundation of everlasting truth is builded upon
Jesus of Nazareth, which was crucified, and dyed under Ponce Pilate, the
saueour of the world, chiefly of the faithful.

Now seeing yt the Turkyshe profession denies this thing, and fights
against it. The everlasting truth constraigneth us to grant yt this
infinite multitude, (which is an horrible thing to thyncke) of Mahumetanes,
Turks, Saracenes and other, stands in danger of most grievous da^nacio^. To
which sect they that cleave freely and vnconstr eynedly, they enter not in to
the way of true salvation, but throw theimselfes headlynge in to extreme
darkness, in to the compaignie of the devil, in to eternal death, in to ye
helpitte of horrible calamite, here thou have what to be thought and judged of
the Mahumetanes.


