THE POLICY OF The Turkish Empire. The first Book. LONDON Printed by John
Windet for W.S. and are to be soulde at Powles Wharfe at the sign of the
Cross Keys. 1597





To the thrice Honorable, and most worthy Lord, George Baron of Hunsdon, Lord
Chamberlain of the Queens house: Captain of her Majesty's Gentlemen
Pensioners, governor of the I Will of Wight, Knight of the Honorable order of the
Garter, and of her Highness nost honorable privy Counsel.
RIght Honorable: The remembrance of your forepassed favors, And a desire to
make known my honest thankefulnes: has encouraged me to present you Lordeship
with a collection of Turkish Histories: Discovering the policy of the Ottoman
Empire both in the state of their Religion, and in the manner of their civil
Government, and marshall Discipline. The which my labor, though it may seem
an Idle work, and far unworthy of so Honorable a Patron: Yet as the pure
and fine Gold being artificially laid upon Copper or some such base metal,
does make it seem rich and glorious, gracing the baseness of the stuff,
with the excellency and ritchnesse of her color: So the least aspect of
favor and good countenance from your Lordship toward the gracing of this
work, may make others to have it in some regard and estimate, though of it
self it be reputed worthless and of no account. Howsoever it be, my hope is
that your Lordship will accept of it, as a sign of my good affection: And in
that respect vouchsafe it your good liking. For as a certain cunning
Geometrician in the games of Olimpus, by the view of the proportion and
bigness of Hercules foot, did give a conjecture of the quantity and stature
of his whole body: So, by the consideration of my well willing mind in so
mean a matter, your Lordship may measure the readiness of my heart and most
inward affections. Which (being wholly devoted to do you service) do tie me
to be ever both an assured follower of your Lordship, and a vowed Orator for
the continuance and increase of your most happy fortunes: under the which I
rest ever to be commanded.

To the Reader.
Many men do wonder at the great power and puissaunce of the Turks: And they
think it strange, how this nation (being a people most rude and barbarous, and
their beginning most base, vile, and ignominious) could attain within the
compass of so few years, to the excessive height of their present greatness.
Which their admiration (as it seems) proceedeeh only of ignorance: Because
they know not the manner nor the means, by which they have so suddenly
prevailed in their Conquests. For such as are acquainted with the Histories of
the Turkish affairs, and do advisedly look into the order and course of
their proceedinges: do well perceive, that the chiefest cause of their sudden
and fearful puissaunce, has been the excellency of their Martial
discipline joined with a singular desire and resolution to advance and enlarge
both the bounds of their Empire and the profession of their Religion. The which
was always accompanied with such notable Policy and prudence, that the
singularity of their virtue and good government, has made their Arms always
fearful and fortunate, and consequently, has caused the greatness of their
estate. And yet, as their virtue has made them way to their excessive fortune:
so is this one thing worthily to be wondered at: How so rare virtue could be
found in so brutish and barbarous a nation, rather then how they could attain
to so great conquests and dominions. Considering therefore both the wonderful
puissance of their Empire: And Conferring it with the baseness and obscurity
of their beginning, as also with the barbarousnesse of their disposition: To
the intent this strange union and conjunction of so rare virtues with so
notable Barbarism might be the better discovered: I supposed it would be a
matter neither unpleasing nor unprofitable in some sort to make known that
order of Policy Discipline, and government, by which the Turks have purchased
so goodly and glorious an Empire: making themselves Lords and masters of a
great part of the world: In so much as the fury of their Arms has not only
by this means swallowed up infinite, and those most mighty nations in the
East* But the terror of their name does even now make the kings and Princes of
the West, with the weak and dismembered relics of their kingdoms and
estates, to tremble and quake through the fear of their victorious forces.
This was hit that first drew me to Collect into English the sum of the Turks
Religion: The manners, life, and customs of that people in general: The
order, fashions, and Majesty of their Emperors Court, and person: And the
manner of their Civil policy and Martial discipline. For by discovering the
nature and state of their religion, and their immoderate zeal in affecting it,
by showing their inueterate hatred against Christians and christianity, by
making known their Barbarous customs and most cruel disposition, by
observing their politic and advised course of proceedings, in all their
affairs both Civil and Military: we shall easily discern: That the whole
Policy of the Turkish estate both for their religion, life, and customs, as
also for their civil government and Martial discipline: And that all their
actions Counsels, studies, labors and endeavors have been ever framed and
directed, and wholly bent and intended to the enlarging and amplifying of their
Empire and Religion, with the daily access of new and continual conquests by
the ruin and subversion of all such kingdoms, provinces, estates and
professions, as are any way estraunged from them either in name, nation, or
religion.

Seeing then the discovery of these things does represent unto you matter of
so good consequence both for pleasure to delight, and of knowledge for your
profit: Let not my honest endeavors (subjected to the diversity and
vncertantie of your judgments) be recompensed with unfriendly acceptaunce. It
may be, exception will be taken both against the form of this work for the
rudeness of the style, and against the matter for the imperfection of it:
because the one is homlie and nothing curious, and the other does seem to
promise more in show and apparaunce, then it does yield in proof and
performaunce. But how so ever it be faulty in the penning, yet for the
imperfection thereof, it is not without excuse. For though I do now present you
only with one part of that Policy, which the title of this Book does promise
to impart unto you: Yet seeing the other part is but delayed for a season (some
needful respects causing it for a while to be concealed) My hope is that in the
mean time, neither the imperfection of the matter shall draw it into reproof,
nor the baseness of the phrase shall turn it to disgrace. Wherein if the
success be answerable to my hope, and if I find this my first attempt to be
fortunate, by the friendly acceptance of this discovery of the Turks
religion: You shall shortly see it seconded with the other part of these
discourses: Relating unto you their manners, life, customs, government, and
Discipline, with some other matters of good and necessary observation. All
which being joined in one, will represent unto you at full the whole Policy of
the Ottoman Empire, and so shall you have the Title of this Book made perfect,
which till then may seem to remain imperfect.

THE POLICY OF THE Turkish Empire.
The first Book. Containing the State and sum of the Turks Religion.
Of the first beginning of the Turkish Religion, and of the establishment
thereof amongst the Sarracens by their Prophet Mahomet. Cap. 1.
THat the Religion of the Turks was first forged and invented by their false
Prophet MAHOMET: And that the Sarracens and Arabians his own people and
countrymen, were the first to whom he published it: and that they (being
seduced by his devilish doctrine and illusions) did first entertain the same,
and make profession of it: There is no man either of learning or judgment in
matters of history, that will in any sort make any question of it.
Notwithstanding touching the manner and time, how and when it began: and upon
what occasion, and how, the Turks (being a distinct nation from the Sarracens)
came to embrace and profess it: is not perhaps a thing so commonly known unto
the world, but that the discovery thereof may of some be accepted: And
therefore it shall not be amiss briefly to lay it open.

In the year of our redemption 591. (MAVRITIVS then Emperor of the Romans
reigning in Constantinople) was MAHOMET borne in Arabia in a village called
Itrarip: Mahomet his birth and parentage.
His parents were of diverse nations and different in religion: His father AB
DALLAS was an Arabian: his mother CADIGE a Jew both by birth and profession.
His parentage (according to most histories) was so mean and base, that both
his birth and infancy remained obscure, and of no reckoning; Till that his
riper years (bewraying in him a most subtle and crafty nature and
disposition) did argue some likelihood, that the sharpenes and dexterity of his
wit, would in time abolish the obscurity and baseness of his birth. And soon
did he make show and proof thereof: for being trained up of a ladd in the
service of a most rich and wealthy merchant, by his great industry and
diligence he so insinuated and wrought himself into the good favor and
liking both of his master and mistres: that when his master dyed, and had left
all his wealth and riches unto his wife, she made choice of her servant
MAHOMET for her husband: making him Lord and master both of her person and of
her substance. The man being thus raised from base and low degree to great
wealth and possessions, and having a working and aspiring head; did from
thenceforth plot and imagine, how he might raise himself in honor and
reputation: presuming that the greatness of his wealth would be a fit mean to
work his higher fortunes. Sergius a Monk and Arrian co^federat with Mahomet
in the invention of his Religion.
Neither was he deceived in the expectation of his hope. For consorting
himself with one SERGIVS a fugitive Monk, a notable Heretic of the Arrian
sect (whom he had made bounden unto him by his great liberality) there grew
so strict a league of amity and secreat familiarity between them, that they
had many times private conference how and by what means MAHOMET might make
himself way to rise in honor and estimation. After much consulting and
debating of the matter; the best course which they conceived to effect their
purpose, was to coin a new kind of doctrine and religion: under color
whereof (the times being then troublesome, the people full of simplicity and
ignorance, religion also waxing cold and neglected) they thought it an easy
matter to draw many followers unto them, and by that means to grow great in
the eye and opinion of the world. Hereupon these two helhounds (one of them
being an arch enemy to Christ and the truth of his religion, and the other
seeming a mere Atheist or profane person, Mahomet his doctrine derived out of
sundry sects and Religion.
neither perfect Jew nor perfect Christian) patched up a particular doctrine
unto themselves out of the old and new Testament: deprauing the sense of
either of them: and framing their opinions according to their own corrupt and
wicked affections: They brought forth a monstrous and most devilish religion
sauouring partly of Iudaisme, partly of Christianity, and partly of Arrianisme.

This new doctrine (after they had digested and put it down into some rude and
confused form) MAHOMET began privately and in secret to set it abroch: making
it known first unto his wife, and some others that were his followers, and
made them believe that the same was commanded and delivered unto him by divine
revelation; and that many times he had secret conference with the Angel
GABRIEL purposely sent unto him as he pretended from God himself out of
heaven. With these and many other cunning sleights and illusions he abused the
simplicity of diverse, and drew men to have him in great admiration: Mahomet
sets abroch and publishes his religion.
Insomuch that albeit he durst not at the first openly publish his new devised
religion, for fear of the magistrate: Yet within a while his followers having
caused the same underhand to be spread abroad more and more, and the common
rumors which they gave out of many miraculous acts done by him, brought the
barbarous Arabians (deuoid of true knowledge and religion) into such a blind
conceit of his holiness and worthiness, that multitudes began to adheare unto
his new religion: And the common people seduced by his impostures and iugling
devises did not only repute and esteem him for a Prophet, but they attributed
unto him reverence more then humane, with divine honors. The magistrates of
Mecha (a chief City in Arabia) having intelligence of these practices of
MAHOMET, and perceiving that the contagion of this wicked doctrine did so
mightily increase, that it was like to endanger both the publikc safety of
their estate, and the purity of the Christian religion: they thought to have
surprised the ringleader, and to have executed him according to his demerites.
But he having some aduertisements of their intent and purpose, did not only
very cunningly avoid their trains laid to entrap him, but gathering together
a great number of his followers and disciples, he armed them against the power
of the magistrate: And after some bickeringes past between them, he withdrew
his company for a time into the deserts and by-places of Arabia where he
stood upon his guarde, still enlarging his forces by the continual preaching
and publishing of his new found doctrine. By means whereof in process of time
the most part of the Arabians seemed to cleave unto him and to embrace the
profession of his damnable religion. And they were the rather induced so to do
for that the time it self seemed to favor him in his proceedinges, by reason
of the sundry troubles and tumultes wherewith the Roman empire was as then
pitifully distracted and sore distressed. The which having at the first
animated and encouraged him to proceed in his seditious practices, did also
minister unto him fit opportunity and occasion afterward both to make himself
great in credit and reputation, and to lay a most sure foundation for the
establishment of his new doctrine, as shall appear by the discourse following.

Not long before that MAHOMET did enter into his detestable and pernicious
practices in setting abroche his superstitious and devilish traditions: It
happened that the Empire of Rome was usurped by one PHOCAS, who being a chief
favorite, and in principal authority under the Emperor MAVRITIVS: Phocas
murdereth Mauritius the Emperor and usurps the Empire.
yet aspiring to the imperial crown and scepter: most traitorously murdered
his Lord and master together with his children, and so took upon him the name
and title of Emperor. Now (as it is commonly seen) that one mischief draws
another, and that mischaunces do seldom come unaccompanied; So the hateful
and odious act of this usurper, was the occasion of many commotions and
tumultes, and of many chaunges and alterations in diverse parts of the Empire.
For the head and chief commander having encroched upon the estate, by so
notorious an example of disloyalty treason and murder: It seemed a small
matter unto the members to participate in the like vices. For thereupon began
all care of Religion quite and clean to be abandoned, and ambition and
avarice in all estates and persons so abounded: that the Prelates of the Church
contemning Christian humility aspired to temporal government, and challenging
the double sword thirsted after regal authority: In so much that the desire
of superiority swallowed up all regard of piety, and the covetousness of the
Clergy made them neglect their particular duty. Then grew the usurpation of
supremacy in the Church of Rome: after which ignorance and superstition
increased in the West, no less then Mahometisme prevailed in the East. In like
manner the Laytie, forgetting their allegeaunce and following particular
profit, enclyned to mutinies, sedition, and rebellion in so much that sundry
nations both in Europe and Asia began to decline and revolt from the imperial
government. By means whereof the Roman Empire was mightily encombred with
many great and grievous wars, and sore pressed on all sides with the armies
both of rebels and foreign enemies. Thus that Empire which PHOCAS had
purchased with blood and treason, he held all his life time with continual
trouble and vexation: Wars between Heraclius the Emperor and the Persians.
and at his death he left the same to his successors full of tumult and
confusion. HERACLIVS the Emperor (who succeeded after him) being driven to
great extreamities by the multitude of his enemies: found himself most
encombred by the armies of the Persians: who (having before revolted from the
Roman obeisaunce) had raised a strong and mighty kingdom in Persia. Against
the fury and violence of this so puissant an enemy, The original of the
Sarracens.
he determined to serve himself with the forces and succors of the
Sarracens; who inhabiting in Arabia Petrea, had their name of a town in the
same Country called Sarraca, seated not far from Petra: which (being the
chief and Metropolitan City of that part of Arabia) gave the whole province
the name of Petrea. These Sarracens being grown famous partly by reason of
their great and populous numbers, and partly by the course and manner of their
life, for that they were accustomed to live by robbery, spoil, and pillage,
(a usage familiar to most of the Arabians) they had the name in that age to be
a most stout and warlike kind of people. In regard whereof HERACLIVS resolved
to use their aid against the Persians: And the rather for that their nation
having been lately seduced and perverted by the damnable doctrine of MAHOMET
(whose power and authority was then grown great amongst them) they seemed at
that time to be seditiously addicted, and were suspected to be inclining to a
rebellion. To the intent therefore he might avoid the danger threatened to the
Empire on the one side by the wars and fury of the Persians, and on the other
side by the seditious disposition of these misbeleeuing Sarracens, the Emperor
thought it good policy to serve his turn of the one against the other and so
to make each of them the mean of the others ruin and destruction. Heraeclius
hireth the Sarracens to serve him against the Persians
According to this determination he hired diverse great and huge numbers of them
to serve him in these wars, supposing that the country being thus purged
from so pernicious and pestilent a people, and they exposed to the sword and
fury of a stout and warlike enemy, the imminent dangers would soon cease
and be avoided. But that counsel which seemed to the Emperor to be most
sagely and politikely devised, turned afterward by the covetousness and folly
of his officers, to be the utter ruin and confusion both of the Empire and of
Christian Religion. For after that the Sarracens had for certain years served
very valiantly against the Persians, and had so harryed and spoiled that
kingdom, that it was reduced under the subjection of the Roman Empire: they
coming to demand their pay of the Emperor his Treasurer; answer was made
them, that the Emperor had scarce money sufficient to pay the Greeks and
Romans, and the Christians his other soldiers, much less had he any for
such a company of dogs as they were. The indignity of this injury and
disgrace was taken so haynously of the Sarracens, and did so exasperate their
courages (who of themselves were always prone and ready enough to rebellion)
that presently they revolted from the Emperor: The cause of the Sarracens
revolt from the obeisance of the Romans.
and shaking off the yoke and obeisance of the Roman Empire, in their return
homeward they spoiled and harried all the country, towns, and villages about
Damascus in Siria. Which done and knowing that MAHOMET was then grown to be of
great power and estimation by reason of his wealth and the opinion of his
Religion (which made him highly adored, both of the Arabians and the
Egyptians.) They were easily drawn to elect and choose him for their head and
governor: And being thereunto solicited, both by secret persuasions and by
large and bountiful rewards (whereby he had wrought and won them) they both
gave unto him the name and honor of a Prophet, Mahomet proclaimed Prophet and
Prince of the Sarracens.
and proclaimed him for their Duke and Prince: not only the Sarracens, but the
rest also of the Arabians and a great part of the Egyptians acknowledging him
for their Lord and governor.

In this manner did MAHOMET erect a new Religion and kingdom amongst the
Sarracens in the year of grace 623. And making Siria the seat of his new
Empire, Mahomet writes the Alcoran.
he lived the rest of his days in the confines of Damascus. During which time,
it is said that he made the Alcoran: A book, wherein are written all the laws
ceremonies and traditions of his Religion, with an infinite multitude of
fantastical tales and feigned miracles. Howbeit sundry times before his death
he altered and changed, added and detracted many of his precepts and
institutions: according as the variety and vanity of his passions and lewd
conceits did induce and lead him. Notwithstanding it is thought, that that
form of Religion which is at this day prescribed and observed out of their
Alcoran, was for the most part reformed and perfected by his next successors,
at what time they had made themselves Lords of the most part of Asia. Howsoever
it was: after MAHOMET had Reigned about nine or (as some say) ten years, he
departed this life being forty years of age, and (as is reported) dyed of
poison. For having oftentimes boasted before his end, that the third day after
his death he would rise again: and having therefore given straight
commandment that his body should not be buried nor enterred in the earth:
Mahomet dies poisoned by one of his Disciples named Albunor.
One of his Disciples called ALBVNOR, (being desirous to prove and make trial
of the truth of his doctrine and prophecies) did secretly cause poison to be
conveyed into his drink: The which MAHOMET having taken, his body presently in
all parts began to swell extremely: and so he gave up the ghost most
miserably. For twelve days did his body lie unburied: during all which time
their appeared no likely-hoode of any resurrection; but his Carcass yielded an
intolerable and most filthy stench. Mahomet his body torn in pieces by
Dogs, after his death
In the end ALBVNOR coming to see him, found his body torn in pieces and
devoured by Dogs: whereupon, gathering together the bones that remained, and
putting them into a coffin, he caused him to be buried. This was the end of
this monster of mankind: who having filled the world with Idolatry and
infidelity by his blasphemous traditions and damnable forgeries, seemed to
have been borne for the utter overthrow and desolation of many kingdoms,
estates and provinces, and for the ruin and confusion of many millions of
souls.

Of the original of the Turks: and how they came both to embrace the Religion
and to encroch upon the Empire of the Sarracens. Cap. 2.
AFter the death of MAHOMET, Ebubezer second king of the Sarracens.
EBVBEZER otherwise, EBENBEHOR, or (as some call him) ABVBACHER: his son in
law, succeeded him in his kingdom: And was the first whom the Sarracens called
AMIRAS: which in their language signifies Prince or successor. Damascus Gaza,
and Jerusalem won by the Sarracens.
This man reigning but three years, in that short space took Damascus the
chief City of Siria, and made it the seat of his kingdom. Likewise after
two years siege he took and spoiled Gaza, and Jerusalem. His successor, and
the third King or AMIRA of the Sarracens was HAVMAR or OMAR, Haumar the third
king of the Sarracens, and first Caliph of Babylon.
who beginning his reign in the year of Christ. 634. continued the same for
twelve years with great prosperity and good fortune. In which time he subdued
to his obeissaunce all Siria and Egypt: Afterward inuading Persia, he
conquered that kingdom: and then having added also Cilicia, Cappadocia,
Mesopotamia, and the Isle of Cyprus unto his conquests, Caliph what it
signifies.
he chose Babylon for the seat of his Empire. And from thence forward the
Sarracens called him their Amiras and Calipha of Babylon: which in their
language signifies a chief Prince having souereigntie both of Empire and
Religion. Over his other provinces, (wherein himself could not be resident)
he appointed several governors or Deputies, Suldan or Sultan what it
signifies.
whom the Sarracens called Suldans: which word since that time has been
used in another sense, as a title of greater and higher dignity: by reason of
the excessive power and sovereign authority whereunto some of those Suldans
afterward attained in many of those provinces. Which being by them converted
and augmented into great and mighty kingdoms: the name of Sultan grew to be
taken for an absolute Lord and Prince: and so is used at this day by the
Turks, who have subdued and annexed most of those kingdoms and provinces to
the Dominions and Empire of the Ottomans.

But to our purpose; HAVMAR thus ruling over the Sarracens, Orimasda or
Hormisda king of Persia.
at such time as they undertook the conquest of Persia: ORIMASDA or HORMISDA
reigned over that kingdom. Who being sore pressed in those wars, and not
able of himself to withstand the fury and violence of so great an enemy: He
sent for the Turks then inhabiting within the Caspian mountains: requesting
them to come unto him into Persia, and that he might have their aid and
succors against the Sarracens. This was the first occasion that brought the
Turks into Asia, who before that time were a people unknown and not heard of:
In so much as even to this day it is doubtful and uncertain, whence they had
their beginning: And the opinions of their original are very diverse and
different. Of the Original of the Turks.
Some think them to be descended of the ancient Troyans, but without any
probability or good reason of their opinion: others derive them out of Turca a
City of Persia: And some from that part and province of Asia which is called
Turquestan. But it is thought that both those places had their denomination
rather from the nation of the Turks, then that this people should be so named
of those places. Haiton a king of Armenia: his history.
HAITON a King of Armenia (in an History which he has written) and some other
also do affirm them to be of the cursed seed of those ancient Israelites,
who being carried into captivity by SALMANAZER King of Assiria, and placed by
him in diverse parts of Media and Armenia, afterward by ALEXANDER the great
were shut up within the straights of the Caspian mountains: where they
continued till this time that they first came to be known in Asia. And the
reason which they yield for this opinion is, because the place where they
lived so long hidden and concealed, was near the Tartarians: Turk a Tartarian
word and what it signifies.
In whose language the word Turk (being a Tartarian word) signifies one that
is accursed and a vagabond. But the most probable opinion, and that which
comes nearest the truth, is: That they are naturally descended from the blood
and brood of the ancient Scythians called Nomades: who, using to wander up and
down in Tents, (as do at this day many of the Tartarians in their Hordes) not
having any towns Cities or villages, and without any certain habitations: did
inhabit that part of Scythia which bordereth upon the North part of mount
Caucasus not far from the river Tanais: where (according to Pliny, Pomponius
Mela and other ancient writers) their dwelt a people then but obscurely known
by the name of Turks. The which Country being now also inhabited by the
Tartars, It is to be presumed that both these peoples are of one and the same
descent: their language not much differing or disagreeing each from other. And
either of them having at first used and imitated the manners, life, and
customs of those ancient Scithians: And therefore it may well be that the
name of Turk was given them in regard of the wandering course of life used by
them. And whereas both the Scythians in times past, and the Tartars after the^,
have ever ben distinguished into many and sundry peoples: It seems that the
Turks were one special people of the Tartarians, whose seat and dwelling
seemed to be either very near, or within the straights and deserts of the
mount Caucasus, which being also called the Caspian streights, are adjoining to
that part of the Country which is near Tanais. But how so ever it be, whether
they be of ye Scythian brood with the Tartarians, or descended of those
ancient accursed Israelites: Certain it is that this people in formerages had
long continued and lived shut up and enclosed in that place as in a desert,
separated and disseuered from all the famous peoples of Asia, by most vast and
wild mountains: By reason whereof, and for that they followed a barbarous and
savage life, according to the Scythian usage and far different from the
civil customs and manners of the Asians, they remained long unknown unto
these parts of the world until this time of their first descent into Persia.

Those Turks (as we have said) being now sent for by HORMISDA King of the
Persians to aid him against the Sarracens, The Turks their first coming into
Asia,
prepared themselves presently in huge numbers to come to his succors: But by
that time they were in a readiness and began to march, HORMISDA and the
Persians were overcome by their enemies, their Country was conquered, haried,
and spoiled, and their kingdom utterly suppressed and brought under the
command of the Sarracens. The Turks finding their purpose and journey thus
disappointed by the over throw and ruin of their confederates, fell presently
to parley and composition with the conquerours: And concluding a peace and
league of amity with the Caliph of Babylon and the Sarracens, they were not
only content to join with them as their friends and companions in arms, but
they did voluntarily accept and freely embrace the doctrine of MAHOMET,
conforming themselves in all points, both to the manners, The Turks embrace the
Religion of the Sarracens.
customs and Religion of the Sarracens. Thus were the Turks and Sarracens
become (as it were) one people: And they did communicate together both in rheir
armies and in their Counsels. Howbeit they made choice of a seat for
themselves to inhabit in severally and alone, in a most pleasant and fertile
soil near the Hircan sea within the land and Country of the Chorasens in a
province called Sogdiana: where they remained without any great fame as long as
the Empire of the Sarracens flourished in Asia, which was well near for the
space of two hundred years: All which time they did most firmly adhere and
stick unto them in faithful friendship and society. But after that the
estate and power of the Sarracens began to decrease, by means of civil
discord and dissension: The Turks (taking the advantage of that opportunity)
encroched upon them and their territories: And (their former fortune beginning
once to fail them) by little and little they wrought themselves into their
Empire: The manner whereof, we will briefly lay down, and then will proceed
to discover the sum and substance of their Religion. (...) the Empire of the
Saracens to be decayed in the East: and being fallen to a most mighty
downfall, the majesty thereof was wonderfully empaired, and in a manner utterly
abolished, by reason it was divided into diverse and sundry kingdoms. For
besides this Empire of the Turks raised in the hither parts of Asia, Saracens
raise new kingdoms in Egypt and Afrique.
some of the Saracens had erected also a new kingdom in Afrique now called
Barbary: from whom the Moors at this day do derive both their descent and
religion: and the Sultans of Egypt, growing great in the South parts of Asia,
raised another mighty kingdom about the bottom of the midland sea in Siria,
Palestine, Egypt, and Arabia: by means whereof there was nothing left
remaining to the Caliphs of Babylon, but only Mesopotamia, Chaldea, and some
other countries near adjoining: so that in regard of their former power,
sovereignty, and dominion, their kingdom came to be of small puissance, and
of little account or reckoning.

But to return from whence we have somewhat digressed. This Empire of the
Turks continued not long. For after five discents of their emperors in the
year 1098. Godfrey of Builoyne his expedition into the holy land.
about the time that Godfry of Bulloin and other christian Princes made their
expedition into the holy land, the Georgians and other Christians in Armenia,
hearing of the journey purposed by those of Europe: and perceiving that the
Turks were then divided and distracted into factions amongst themselves,
Belchiaroc the fifth and last emperor of the Turks before the time of Ottoman.
and that they had murdered the brother of BELCHIAROC their fifth and last
Emperor: they did suddenly assail and set upon them in diverse places, and so
expelled them out of all the territories of the kingdom of Persia, enforcing
them to keep within the bounds of the lesser Asia. Where under the government
of their Sultans, ARTOLVS, SOLIMAN, and others, they held long and sharp
wars against those Christians that came out of Europe to the conquest of the
Holy land. By whom, Soliman and Artolus Sultans of the Turks in Asia.
though they were notably distressed, and were expelled out of many of their
greatest and chiefest cities, territories, and kingdoms (the same being long
possessed by the Christians,) and though they lost the glory of their Empire,
and their power of command and sovereignty in those parts, yet did they not
cease still to maintain most cruel and bloody wars against them in many parts
of Asia, by the aid and help of the Sarracens. Both the one and the other of
those people holding the christians for their common enemies. In this estate
and manner did the Turks continue without any notable alteration of their
fortune, til the year 1290. Tartarians raise an Empire in Scithia and Asia.
About which time the Tartars (whose name was then first heard of) having
erected a great and mighty Empire in Tartaria the Greater, of old called
Scithia) made a notable invasion upon Asia. And then extending the bounds of
their dominions, they did in a manner utterly suppress the name and power of
the Turks, keeping them in extreme bondage and servitude, till the Sultans of
Egypt (who had reconquered the kingdom of Jerusalem and Syria from the
christians, Turkish Empire in Asia decayed.
and were the^ lords of Egypt, Siria, Palestine, and part of Arabia) and the
emperors of the Tartarians, prosecuting each other with furious and cruel wars,
did give leisure, liberty and opportunity to the Turks once again to lift up
their heads, and both to recover and to increase their former puissance. The
manner whereof was as follows

Ottoman restores the Turks Empire.
About the year of Christ one thousand three hundred, one OTTOMAN a Turkish
captain, serving under the Tartarian Emperor, had (by his appointment) the
charge of a certain Castle in the Confines of Asia toward Tartary: or (as
others affirm) he served under SALADINE then Sultan of Egypt: from whom being
revolted, he surprised a certain Fort in the streits of Cappadocia. Where
having a while continued, and perceiving that the Tartars and Saracens on the
one side were entangled with a most blody and cruel war: And that the Empire of
Constantinople and the Christians on the other side were busily occupied with
intestine and civil Arms: He having conceived an assured hope to advance his
own Fortunes, gathered together a regiment of Turks and others, whom he drew
unto him upon hope and desire of pray and pillage: and seizing upon many
Towns in Cappadocia and Bithynia, partly by force, and partly by composition:
(of which some he wanne from the Christians, and some from those of his own
sect and profession) he came in short time to have so great a name and report
over all the lesser Asia: that by means thereof there flocked unto him daily
infinite troops of Turks, in hope to restore the name and honor of their
nation, and to recover their former fortune. With these forces within a while
had OTTOMAN subdued diverse Provinces in Asia: as the greatest part of
Bithynia, and al Natolia now named Turkey, besides many cities upon the
Euxine sea. Through the happy success of his fortune in these conquests and
victories, he purchased so great an opinion, both of his wisdom and courage,
that the Turks with a general consent and incredible joy elected and
proclaimed him for their King or Amira. And so strangely did they grow in
process of time to affect him; Ottoman made king of the Turks.
that they decreed and ordained from thencefoorth never to admit nor endure any
other to reign over them, but such a one as should descend of the line and
seed of OTTOMAN. Thus was the empire of the Turks revived out of their former
ruins by the rare virtue and fortune of this OTTOMAN, and by the civil
discordes and dissentions which were then rise both amongst the Mahometists,
and the Christians. Since which time it has so wonderfully increased by the
valor and prowess of his successors, and by the resolution and good
discipline of that Nation, and our own intestine divisions (the most pestilent
poison and plague of all kingdoms and commonweals) that the whole estate of
Christendom has at this day just cause both to deplore the miserable
condition and calamities of the Christians, from whom these miscreants have
extorted infinite kingdoms, estates and empires: and also to fear and suspect
the violent course of their fortune, the excessive greatness of their
puissance, and the cruel disposition of their courages, as being fatal to the
christian religion. For this people being more eager and zealous (than ever
were the Sarracens, or any others Pagans or Barbarians) in the propagation and
extending both of their empire, and of their damnable sect and profession: do
openly, and as it were, by nature profess themselves the sworn and vowed
enemies of Christ and his Gospel. And holding it a meritorious deed to
tyrannize over his members, they do bend and employ all their Forces, Studies
and Counsels, how they may utterly extirpate the name, memory and faith of
the Christians: And how they may plant and establish the blasphemous traditions
of their prophet MAHOMET in all the regions and kingdoms of the world. But
for the more particular discovery and manifestation of al these matters, as
also touching the manner of the rising, increase, and augmentation of the
Turkish Empire, out of so mean and base a beginning, to that glory, height,
and puissance of dominion, whereunto we see it now grown and exalted: we will
refer you to a Discourse which we have written of the lives and acts of the
OTTOMAN Kings and Emperors: wherein all the former matters are sufficiently
and at large laid open. In the mean time we will now proceed to the unfolding of
the sum and secrets of their religion, and to discover the quality of their
law, ceremonies and traditions.

Of the Turkish Alcoran, and of the great reverence which the Turks bear unto
it. Cap. 3.
HItherto have we delivered the invention and first beginning of the Turkish
religion with the continuance and establishment thereof, both under the
Sarracen and Turkish Empire, whose original also and increase has in part been
touched. Now are we to consider of the substance of their religion: wherein
first we will speak somewhat of their Alcoran, in which their law and
traditions are contained and delivered: and then will we proceed to the grounds
and principles of their religion.

The whole sum and substance of the Turkish religion, Alcoran of the Turks
contains the whole sum of their religion.
laws and ceremonies, together with the manner and form of their prayers,
sacrifices and alms, and whatsoever else they do hold needful and necessary to
the salvation of their souls is derived and drawn out of a certain book,
which in their language they call Musaph. This book is divided into 30 parts or
Tomes: The Arabians call the same Curaam, which is as much to say, as, The
Beginning and end of the Turks law. And it seems to be the very same word
which is usual amongst other Nations, though with some difference, it is most
commonly called by the name of Alcoran.

Upon this Book, as upon the very groundworke and chief foundation does the
whole religion and law of the Turks seem to rely and depend. And it is a
common and general tradition constantly held and affirmed by all Turks
whatsoever, that the Archaungell GABRIEL and their prophet MAHOMET did by the
singular grace and favor of God first of all publish and disperse this book
throughout al parts of the world. And that MAHOMET together with his disciples
did frame and put the same in writing in the same manner and form as it is now
received amongst them. But howsoever the Turks do dream of the first writing
and invention of this their Alcoran, and attribute the same to their prophet
MAHOMET: yet it is more the^ probable by many co^iectures even out of their own
books and writings, That neither the religion now professed by the Turks, nor
that Alcoran, Alcoran of the Turks not made by Mahomet.
out of which they do now derive their superstitions and ceremonies, is not the
same that was first inverted and written by MAHOMET: besides it is apparent, by
the testimony of many, and those most approved Histories: that at such time as
the Sarracen empire (being risen to some strength and perfection) was first
established under their Caliph in Babylon: and that the Turks came to be
united and incorporated into the society and religion of the Saracens: there
was a new Draught made by the authority of their chief Governors, and with
the advice and consent of their priests: who secretly amongst themselves caused
an other Book to be devised and written of such traditions, rites and
ceremonies as were thought requisite and needful to be used and observed
amongst them. And because that form of religion which had been at first
conceived and invented by MAHOMET and his disciples, was found in many things
greatly repugnant in it self, and full of contrarieties and absurdities: it was
in most points either altered, or abrogated, and new traditions and ordinances
inserted in their places. The which for that it was done in secret, and without
the notice and knowledge of the common sort (from whom it was purposely
concealed:) al those that are of the Mohammedan sect and religion have ever bin
and are yet still persuaded (their Priests and Governors still norishing and
feeding that conceit in them) that it was the same which was first supposed to
be written by their great Prophet MAHOMET: And that there was no change nor
innovation made of any of their ancient traditions, laws, or ceremonies, but
that all things did continue and remain entire and vnaltred in their Alcoran
according to the first prescript and invention of them. Which opinion, although
it be current amongst them, yet it is thought, that not only the Saracens
(as has been already touched) in the time of their Empire did in many points
alter their Religion and frame a new Alcoran: But that the Turks also (even
since their Monarchy began to rise to that flourishing estate wherein we now
see it under the house of OTTOMAN) have in some sort done the like. And it is
not to be doubted but that their Religion as well as their Empire is drawn
and reduced into another manner and form both of order and perfection, then it
was at the first beginning. For it is written of MAHOMET the second (he that
took and conquered the City and Empire of Constantinople, and was the first
of the line and house of OTTOMAN that took upon him the name and tittle of
Emperor of the Turks) that he also did in many things alter and change the
laws and Religion of the Turks, abrogating and abolishing many of their old
and ancient traditions: And instituting and ordaining new in their place.

But how so ever it be: whether that this Alcoran, The Alcoran: how it is
reverenced of the Turks.
were written at first by MAHOMET himself or by some others his successors,
this is one thing most assured and certain: That the Turks generally in
outward show and appearance, do hold and esteem this their Musaph or Alcoran
in no less honor and reverence, then the ancient Jews did their Books of
the old Testament written by Moses and the Prophets, or the Christians do
the whole Bible and sacred books of holy Scriptures, written by the spirit of
God himself, and by the pen of his Prophets and Apostles. This may we
manifestly perceive by their outward gesture and usage, when they come either
to the handling or reading of any part of this book. For first there is none of
them whosoever, that dares to touch or handle it, unless he be first either
clean washed with fresh water, from the top of the head to the soul of the
feet: or that he do wrappe and cover his hands all over in some clean and
fine piece of lynen, The manner and gesture of the Turks in handling reading
and hearing of their Alcoran.
before he adventure to lay hands upon it. Besides, as often as they repair
to the Temple to hear any part of this Book publicly read unto them, the
same being done with a loud and clear voice, all of them do most attentively
hearken and give ear thereunto with a singular and notable show and devotion.
And they do hold it a very devout and religious part, a little to move and
incline their bodies whilst they do intend to the reading of the same. The
manner and fashion of him that reads it is to hold the Book aloft between
both his hands: And he deemeth it a most sinful matter, and an act of great
impiety to hold the Book at any time beneath his wast. Whilst he is reading
it unto the people, he stands as a man ravished in spirit and besides
himself, seeming to have his mind wholly bent and fixed upon those things
which he reads and pronounces unto them. When he has signified and made an
end of his reading, he kisseth the Book with great reverence, and casting his
eyes down upon the same in a most sober and devout manner, he afterward
lays it up with great solemnity in an high place purposely provided for the
keeping of the same: as being a most sacred and holy Relic, and of far
greater account and reconing, then all the residue of their Books any way
appertaining to their Law and Religion. Thus we see, that the curiosity of
these misbelieuing Turks is greater in their Idolatry and superstition,
covering their inward deformities with outward appearances of holiness and
pretended shows of devotion: then the reverence used by many Christians in the
right worshipping of God, and the observation of true Religion.

Of the principles and grounds of the Turks Religion: and of the Eight
Commandments prescribed in their Alcoran. Cap. 4.
AMongst infinite matters contained in the Turkish Alcoran, though there be
many things delivered touching their faith and doctrine: yet is it for the
most part full stuffed and replenished with vain and fantastical conceits of
feigned dreams, apparitions, visions, and revelations: And it abounds
(throughout all the volumes thereof) with a number of fond tales and fables,
which are every where entermingled with the delivery of their superstitions.
All which do tend rather to make some colorable show and pretense of truth in
their religion, and to give a grace and countenance of their Sect, then to
prescribe directly any matter of doctrine, or to deliver the sum and
substance of their traditions. And it seems that that Book was purposelye
invented, to induce and draw all men that shall read or have the same, (by
the strange revelations, and forgeries therein contained) unto an opinion and
belief, that all things therein prescribed, are enjoined unto them by a kind
of divine ordinance and institution: And that their Prophet MAHOMET (the
supposed Author of their Alcoran) was a most holy and singular deuote man, and
one whom God highly favored and loved. Now touching the sum and substance of
their Religion, The grounds and principles of the Turks law and religion.
and the chiefest matters of doctrine deliuerd in their Alcoran, they do
depend upon certain grounds and principles, and they may be reduced to three
special points. Of which the first is: that they observe diligently and
devoutly certain laws and commandments prescribed unto them: The second,
that they shun and avoid certain notable vices which they term deadly
sins, and which they are commanded likewise by their law to have in special
hatred and detestation: and thirdly, that they do precisely conform
themselves to the observation of all such rites and ceremonies, as are either
taught in their law, or received amongst them by tradition. Of each of these we
will discourse severally and in order: beginning first with their precepts or
commandments prescribed in their Alcoran. For as the Jews had a particular
law given unto them and published by God himself in mount Sinai, the which
being written in two Tables and containing ten Commandments, is received also
by all Christians as a most sacred and holy law, and is held to be a certain
rule of justice and piety, whereunto all their actions are to be conformed and
directed, teaching them what is to be done or left undone: So have the Turks
(in imitation of the same) certain laws and precepts or Commandments laid
down in their Alcoran, the observation whereof is so necessarily required in
their lives and conuersations, that whosoever shall transgress or violate any
of them, is held by their law to be a most sinful and wicked person: And they
repute it very hard and difficult for such a man to be saved. Contrariwise,
they do believe that who so does observe and keep those commandments, and
escheweth those sins which they esteem to be mortal, he shall be sure to be
saved: be he either Turk or Christian. Which argues that their confidence and
hope of salvation consists chiefly in the piety and merit of their
virtuous life, and good deeds: And that they do not much differ in that point
from the opinion of some Christians, who do attribute their salvation unto
their merits. But of this we shall have occasion to speak hereafter in the
particular discovery of their opinions. For being now to show what those
precepts are, which be commanded in their law, we will here set them down in
such order as they are reported out of their Alcoran.

THe commandments of the Turks law are eight in number: The eight
commaudements of the Turks law.
The first of which in their language is thus written.
La Illa Eillala Mehemmet Resullala. That is to say: There is but one God alone
and Mahomet is his Prophet. Their second Commandment is, Honor thy Father and
thy mother with all possible love reverence and fidelity: And attempt not any
thing against the good will and liking of thy parents. Their third Commandment
is, That which thou would not should be done unto thee do not thou to any
other. Their fourth Commandment wills, That every man at the time limited
and appointed thereunto, do repair unto their Mosche, or Temple to public
prayers. Their fifth Commandment is, That each man do within the compass of
every year orderly consecrate and spend one Month in abstinence and fasting.
The sixth Commandment exacteth, That every man according to his estate and
calling do give Alms liberally out of his goods and substance. The seventh
Commandment requires; That each man do embrace and frame himself to
marriage: And that he do diligently observe all such solemnities rites and
ceremonies, as are ordained and required in the solemnizing thereof, which are
hereafter expressed in the exposition of this Commandment. The Eight
Commandment charge, That no man kill another in any case by no means what
so ever, but upon violent compulsion or by order of law and public justice.
The Exposition of the first Commandment of the Turks law, containing the
sum of their belief. Cap. 5.
THese Eight Commandments in the Turks law, do contain (as it seems) two
especial matters. In four of them, namely in the first, fourth, fifth, and
sixth precepts, is set down their faith and duty toward God: And in the other
four is contained their duty toward man. Their first precept consists of
two parts: For it comprehends their faith and belief which they have of the
Godhead, and their opinion or belief which they have of their Prophet MAHOMET.
Touching the Godhead, The belief of ye Turks touching the Godhead.
they acknowledge both with the Jews and Christians that there is one only
God: Wherein they differ from the Gentiles, who had their multiplicitie of
Gods. And they hold that God alone is to be worshipped: And all adoration to
Saints, Idols, Images they abhor and condemn: as being an honor proper and
peculiar to God alone, contrary to the traditions of some Christians. Howbeit
this their knowledge of the Godhead, is but in a general, confused, and gross
manner, and only (as it were) by conceit and imagination. For what God should
be, and what is the nature and Essence of the Deity, they know not: Neither
do they acknowledge any distinction of persons in the Godheade either of
Trinity in Unity, or of Unity in Trinitye as do the Christians. Albeit they
do acknowledge that there is a holy Ghost: and they do confess that the
Spirit of God does inspire good motions into the heart of man, Opinion of the
Turks touching the holy Ghost.
and incite us to good and holy deeds: And yet do they not acknowledge it to
be a distinct person in the Godhead: but they do by a gross conceit imagine
it to be only a bare power and virtue in God working by a secret kind of
inspiration. Likewise touching Christ, although they do hold him for a great
and holy Prophet (as shall be elsewhere declared) yet with the Jews they deny
him to be the Son of God, Opinion of the Turks touching the divinity of
Christ.
and the Messiah and Savior of the world: For they say, that God has no
sons: and with the Arrians they deny his divinity, and the conjunction of his
divine nature with his humanity. Notwithstanding they do in a sort acknowledge
the power wisdom and justice of God, as also his goodness, his mercy, and his
providence. For they believe that he made the heavens and the earth: That he
created all things, and that by his providence he rules and governs all
things: That he has ordained a heaven or Paradise for the reward of those
that live well and godly, and a hell for the wicked and ungodly. All this they
do constantly confess and believe, yet so as they seem to conceive of them
by a gross, carnal, and outward consideration, Opinion of the Turks touching
the providence and goodness of God.
and by contemplating of the Godhead only in the external workmanshippe of
his creatures; and (measuring the divine bounty and goodness only by the
multitude of his corporal blessings and benefits bestowed upon mankind, and
not by his spiritual graces) they do honor, serve and praise him only for
his providence, in providing for their earthly bodies. And therefore as they
do hold it notable impiety any way to doubt of the grace and favor of God: So
does their faith altogether rest and depend upon this confidence and opinion:
That God has appointed unto every man the manner, means, and certainty of his
living and sustentation forty years before his birth. And because man is made
after the image and similitude of God, that therefore God has made certain
and sure provision for him. For this cause they do teach, that God is to be
honored and worshipped in a decent and comely manner with praise and
thanksgiving. To which effect these words of their Alcoran are accounted of
great reverence and solemnity. Acta, Alla, Bisigus, Verdi, Colarc, Verdi,
Diuerdi, Agfluerdi. The meaning of which words is thus: There is no other
cause why God did endue and adorn mankind with reason and understanding above
other of his creatures, but only to the end we should diligently and
effectually consider in our minds the infinite largenes of the divine grace
and bounty, and the omnipotency of the eternal Deity: And for this cause
only did he place the eyes in man's body, that he should behold and
acknowledge his admirable works and creatures, which he has made in great
abundance by his divine power and omnipotency: And therefore also did he
fasten ears to the head of man, that he should attend and hearken to the
words of the heavenly law, and that, having heard and well understood them,
he should diligently keep and observe them: Moreover God has distributed
diverse and sundry tongues and languages amongst men, to the intent one should
instruct and teach another in the knowledge of the divine law. Besides they do
observe also these words of their Alcoran, with great solemnity. Acta, Alla,
Bisi, Sagluc, Chuerdi. That is: God has given unto men health of body, as one
not the least of his gifts and graces to the intent we should not suffer sloth
and sluggishnes so to take root and to be grounded in us, that we should
thereby in any sort neglect that duty and service which we owe unto him: nor
that we should be so addicted to the following of our worldly affairs or
business, that we should be withdrawn thereby from the worship and service of
God. All these sentences, and many other of the like kind, dispersed
throughout their Alcoran, do show, that though the Turks in many things do
conceive aright of God and his works: Yet the knowledge and meditation which
they have of the wisdom, power, and goodness of God, is only by an
external consideration of worldly benefits: And they do apprehend the same
only by the natural powers and faculties of their mind and understanding. But
as for that heavenly and divine contemplation, which ought to be inwardly and
spiritually in the heart and soul of man: by which they should acknowledge the
infinite love of God toward mankind both in and after our creation: by freeing
us from the power of death, Hell, and damnation: By which also we are to
consider the mystery of our redemtion, the wonderful work of our salvation,
the powerful working of Gods holy spirit within us: by kindling in us a true,
lively, and quickening faith in his mercies, by reviving and conforting us in
the hope of his promises, by sanctifying our thoughts and cogitations, by
mortifying our sinful lusts and affections, and by raising of us to the hope
and expectation of immortal, heavenly, and spiritual joys. Of this they have
no apprehension nor knowledge, no sense nor feeling. And the reason is, for
that they reject the means whereby God does impart those spiritual graces and
blessings unto us: namely, the acknowledging of his beloved son, in whom
only he is well pleased with us: and the knowledge of his holy Scriptures,
which being given by inspiration, are the only mean to instruct us.

Of the former part of this Commandment, namely, Opinion and belief of the
Turks touching their Prophet Mahomet.
of the belief of the Mahometists touching the godhead, we have spoken
sufficient: Let us now examine the other part of their belief, and see what
the Turks do think of their Prophet MAHOMET. Whom as they have
blasphemously joined and associated with God himself in this commandment: so
do they attribute unto him no less then divine and holy worship: by reason
that from him they derive their law and Religion, as they think that he had
it from God by special grace and revelation. Notwithstanding though the Turks
do hold that their law prescribed and written in their Alcoran is now the
only true law of God, wherein his will is revealed, Opinion of the Turks,
touching Moses, Christ, and Mahomet, and the laws of each of them.
and according to the which they are bound to serve and worship him: Yet do
they not deny, but that God did heretofore give a law unto the Jews by
Moses, after the which he commanded himself then to be served: And that
all the Jews that lived before the time of Christ, and did frame their lives
according to the same, shall be saved by the observation of that law. And they
acknowledge also that that law continued in force until the time that Christ
came into the world. Whom they confess likewise to be the Son of the
Virgin Marie: and to have been sent from God as a most holy Prophet with a
new law for the reformation of the world: And that from thencefoorth men were
bound to observe the doctrine, Gospel, and Commandments of Christ, till
such time as it pleased God afterward to send his Prophet MAHOMET: by whom
(they say) God last of all made known his will and pleasure, how and in what
sort he would be worshipped: And that all other laws should from
thencefoorth be abolished: and that the law taught and written by MAHOMET
should only be received and observed: which (as they pretend) is the same law,
and no other then such as God gave of old unto Abraham: from whom MAHOMET,
being descended directly of the line and feed of Ismael, he was appointed by
God himself to revive and to restore the same: And therefore having it
revealed unto him by special grace and favor from God, he was commanded to
publish and to reestablish it in the world. And for this cause they call
MAHOMET in their language: Acurzamam Penegaber, That is to say: The last
Prophet sent from God. Hereupon it is a common opinion and tradition amongst
the Turks: that Moses, Christ, and MAHOMET are three of the greatest
Prophets, and of principal account and reconing above all others: That they
were each of them sent from God, and were most excellent, holy, and good men,
all of them highly favored and beloved of God. They affirm also that both
Moses, Christ, and MAHOMET are of equal and like account and estimate in the
sight of God: not one of them having pre-eminence above another. And therefore
if any one do happen to blaspheme either Christ, or his mother the Virgin
Marie: Blasphemy against Christ, or his mother how punished amongst the Turks.
He is by their law to sustain the like punishment, as is inflicted upon
them that blaspheme the name of MAHOMET, especially if it be a Jew, he is sure
to be burned. Besides they will not admit any Jew to become Turk, unless he
be first professed a Christian, and do eat Swines flesh: notwithstanding that
it be forbidden both to Jews and Turks by either law as well of Moses as
of MAHOMET. For they affirm that the law of the Christians is far better and
to be preferred before that of the Jews. Which argues that they do attribute
much unto Christ and to his Religion. Howbeit in regard of their own law
(which they do think to be most excellent both for goodness and profit) they
do utterly disallow, condemn and hate it. And notwithstanding the equality
which they acknowledge in these three Prophets: Yet they do hold that
MAHOMET is to be loved, honored and reverenced in the highest and chiefest
place next to God himself. Because he is the last Prophet that God will send
into the world: And because the law which God has revealed by him, is now
only in force, and so ought to continue, and to be observed unto the end of
the world. And this is the cause, why they are taught and enjoined out of this
commandment, not only to love and honor God, but also to reverence and love
his Prophet MAHOMET before all other things whatsoever. Whereunto the Turks
do accordinglye with notable vehemency intend all their thoughts and
endeavors, using all possible reverence and devotion both in naming and
speaking of him. In so much that if there be any one that blasphemeth God,
Blasphemy against God and and Mahomet how punished by the Turks.
and another do blaspheme MAHOMET, the former shall be punished only with a
hundredth stripes and blows of the Bastonado, but the latter is sure to loose
his life for it. And they yield this reason for it. Because God, being
omnipotent, can and will plague the blasphemers of his holy name with any
plagues what so ever, as it shall seem good unto him: But MAHOMET being no God
but a poor Prophet cannot revenge that injury done unto him. For which cause
they say, that they (who profess, and are to observe the law given by
MAHOMET) are bound to see it most severely punished. Besides, they do think
by virtue of this commandment, in regard of their love, devotion, and duty
to MAHOMET, that they are bound by all means as much as in them lies, to
amplify and increase their Religion in all parts of the world, both by arms
and otherwise: And that it is lawful for them to enforce and compel, to
allure, to seduce, and to persuade all men to the embracing of their sect and
superstitions: and to prosecute all such with fire and sword, as shall either
oppose themselves against their Religion, or shall refuse to conform and
submit themselves to their Ceremonies and traditions. And this they do to the
intent the name and doctrine of their Prophet MAHOMET may be every where,
and of all nations reverenced and embraced. Hence it is that the Turks do
desire nothing more then to draw both Christians and other to embrace their
Religion and to turn Turk. And they do hold that in so doing they do God
good service, be it by any means good or badde, right or wrong. Practices and
devices of of ye Turks to draw men to the law of Mahomet and to turn to Turk.
For this cause they do plot and devise sundry ways how to gain them to their
faith. And many times when they see that no other means will prevail, then they
will frame false accusations against them; saying, that either they did
blaspheme the name of MAHOMET or some of their Prophets: or that they did argue
and dispute of their law and religion, or some such like matter: which being
strictly forbidden by their laws, is punishable by death. And to prove them
guilty they will find many, sometimes forty, or fifty false witnesses to
testify and aver the accusation. For there be certain of their Priests (of
whom we shall speak hereafter) who for a Ducat or some such small reward, will
swear a thousand untruths, especially if it be to condemn a Christian: against
whom they think it a great honor to forswear themselves: because it may be
an occasion to make him forsake Christianity and to turn Turk. For being thus
convicted by the testimony of those false wretches, they have judgment
presently given either to suffer death by being burnt, or else to abjure their
religion, and to embrace the law and profession of Mahometism: whereof it
ensues that there scant passes any one year, but there is some one or other
which does suffer martyrdom for the faith of Christ, but many more for fear
of death do change their religion, and deny their faith. Of whom they do
afterward make so great reckoning and account, that they are not only
rewarded with store of money, livings and other necessaries for their
maintenance: but commonly they are preferred and advanced to great offices,
dignities and honors. All which shows most apparently, how reverently and
devoutly they do esteem of their Prophet, and how vehemently they are
addicted to the maintenance of his superstitions: seeing they make no
conscience of such wicked and detestable practices to gain men to their sect
and religion, and to procure them to be circumcised: which is the proper mark
and (as it were) the badge and cognizance of a professed Turk or Musulman. For
that they think not any man to be rightly religious as a true Mahometist,
unless he take upon him this mark of Circumcision: as shall be discovered in
the Chapter next following.

Of the Ceremony of Turkish Circumcision. Cap. 6.
YOu have heard wherein the Turkish faith and belief consists, and what
opinion they have touching the essence of the Godhead: You see also how
superstitiously they are addicted to to the reverence and honor of their
Prophet MAHOMET: whom having jointly placed with God himself in their first
Commandment, they do also in a sort make him partaker of his divine
worship. And because they hold it requisite and necessary that all the
world should acknowledge him as a most holy and heavenly Prophet, purposely and
expressly sent from God to teach and instruct mankind in the law and will of
God, according to such ceremonies and traditions as are commanded and
delivered in their law: therefore they do suppose that al men are bounden both
to do him divine honors, and (acknowledging him for Gods Prophet) to embrace
his Sect and superstitions, as being to be preferred before all other laws and
professions whatsoever. In regard whereof they do also esteem and
professors thereof to be a people peculiarly beloved and highly favored of
God. Thus as they have made and coined a several and particular law unto
themselves, making MAHOMET the sole Patron of their Sect, and the only Object
of their Devotion: so have they taken up the ceremony of Circumcision,
Circumcision used by the Turks, as a token that they co^secrat themselves to
the law and love of Mahomet.
as a special badge and token of their sect and religion. By the which they do
seem to consecrate and dedicate themselves to the profession of Mahometisme,
and do (as it were) vow all honor, love and reverence unto MAHOMET, Imagining,
that no man can please nor believe in God aright except he honor and worship
him as his best beloved Prophet. Hence it is that they do hold all other
nations and peoples for profane and irreligious, who are not incorporated by
this ceremony into the society of their faith and religion: and they repute
none for true and perfect Turks, who have not taken upon them this mark and
seal of Turkish Circumcision, which in their language they call Tsuneth. The
nature whereof, that it may the better be discerned: we will briefly show,
both what it is, and how it first began, and yet is continued amongst the
Jews: next, how, and in what manner it is used by the Turks: and lastly shall
be touched wherein these two people do differ each from other in the use and
observation of this ceremony.

Circumcision what it is, and the first institution and end thereof. Genes. 17.
Touching the thing or act it self of circumcision, it nothing else but a
cutting away of the foreskinne of the flesh of a man in his secret parts. And
it was ordained to be done only upon those of the male-kind. The first
institution thereof was by Gods command and appointment to Abraham the father
of the faithful: to whom it was enjoined as a peculiar sign or sacrament of
the covenant between God and him, upon that promise which god had made him,
that he would multiply and make his seed as the dust of the earth, as the sand
of the sea, and as the stars in heaven: also, that many Nations should
proceed out of his loins, and that in him all the nations of the earth should
be blessed. For the assurance of this promise and covenant unto Abraham, God
instituted the sacrament of Circumcision: and commanded that all the male-kind
of his seed should be circumcised throughout all their generations. For God
having determined to select and choose unto himself a peculiar people out of
the seed of Abraham, by whom he would be served and worshipped according to
the sincerity of his own law and commandments, and from whom also should
proceed a blessing upon the whole earth; he did therefore ordain this sign
of circumcision, both to distinguish those of the seed of Abraham from the
other profane peoples of the world: as also to be for a token and remembrance
of the blessing promised to them, and by them to the world. Howbeit though all
those of the posterity of Abraham had this sign of circumcision amongst
them: yet amongst infinite Nations descended out of his loins, he made
especial choice of the Israelites, who came of Jacob the nephue of Abraham by
Isaac, choosing them only for his peculiar people. And amongst the Israelites
also, Genes. 28. and Genes. 35.
out of the twelve Tribes descended from the twelve sons of Jacob, he preferred
the Jews, being of the Tribe of Judah; from whom he would have the Messiah
and Savior of the world to descend: in whom only, and chiefly his promise
made to Abraham was fulfilled and finished. Wherefore as the covenant of
Circumcision was purposely instituted at the first to be a sign of a blessing
promised to Abraham in his seed, and for the distinguishing of Gods people
from the profane and heathen Nations of the world: So was the same to
continue only until such time as all nations should be gathered into one
faith and society under Christ the Messiah; who by his coming in the flesh of
the seed of Abraham, and by the preaching of his Gospel, having brought that
blessing upon the world which was promised, and having broken down the
partition wall that was between the Jews and the Gentiles, the ceremony of
Circumcision was from thencefoorth utterly abrogated, and ought to have ceased,
and to have been discontinued.

But the Jews (amongst whom especially circumcision was ever and most
religiously continued) in the stubburnnes and blindness of their hearts,
opposing themselves against the Divinity of Christ the Messiah, and against
the truth of Christian religion, and persisting with obstinacy in the
observation of their ancient rites and traditions: they have still retained and
observed this ceremony of Circumcision, and do even to this day continue the
same amongst them in all parts of the world, wheresoever they live dispersed.
And they will not see, that the same is now converted from a holy and sacred
sacrament, to a most idle and vain ceremony. And that it is left unto them by
the just judgment of God, as a worthy clogge and burden to their faithless
souls and consciences, rather than as a token of any Good or Blessing to be
expected from him.

Now, as the Jews have showed themselves most obstinate in the blindness of
their hearts by the retaining of this ceremony and their old traditions: so
the Turks likewise, no less vain in the idleness of their own
imaginations, have and do use Circumcision, as a special token or mark of
their fond and superstitious sect, even by the institution and ordinance of
their prophet MAHOMET: who therein (as in many other things, Circumcision of
the Turks first instituted by Mahomet.
having immitated the Jews) did either take it up, and borrow it from them: or
else being himself an Ismaelite by descent, and so derived from Abraham, and
his mother also being a Jew borne, and so both his parents being come of two
circumcised nations, he did therefore in the invention and framing of his new
law and blasphemies, show his great affection to this ceremony of
Circumcision: and inserting the same amongst his other traditions, he
commanded it to be observed of his disciples and followers. In regard whereof
the Turks also observing the law of MAHOMET, do impose and obtrude it upon
all those that shall be any way admitted into the society of their religion.
And their order is, that not only all the male children of natural borne
Turks should in their infancy be circumcised: but that all others also both
men and children shall be the like: who shall either voluntarily or by constraint
be brought to the embracing of their religion.

Touching the order observed by the Turks in the circumcising of their
children, it is in this manner: When the child is come to be of eight years
of age (which is the usual and ordinary time appointed for to circumcise them)
they do first of all inuit all their friends, kinsfolks, The manner of the
Turkish Circumcision done upon their children
and familiar acquaintance to a great and solemn feast: against the which they
do make provision of diverse kinds of flesh (such as they may lawfully eat)
and of others the most dainty and and costly cates that can be gotten. The
richer sort do commonly use to kill a fat Ox, within which being dressed,
they do enclose the carcas of a sheep, and within it an hen, and in the same
an egg. Al these thus enclosed each within other, they do cause to be roasted
whole and all together for the greater glory and honor of that day. The feast
usually is kept in the dwelling house of the father whose child is to be
circumcised: where also the ceremony of circumcision is to be performed. For in
the midst of their festival dinner, the child being brought in amongst the
guests, there comes unto him a Surgeon, who being skillful and expert in that
Art, takes the foreskin of his flesh between his fingers, and drawing it
close together does hold it fast with a little pair of tongs. Then does one
of their Talismanni or Priests, will the Child to pronounce the Confession of
his Faith and Religion, wherein he has been formerly taught and instructed,
according to their manner. Who thereupon (lifting up his eyes and the
forefinger of his right hand toward Heaven) with a loud voice utters these
words; La Illah, Illelath Mehemmet Iresul Allah: Taure Begamber Hach: that is,
There is but one only God, and MAHOMET his Prophet; one Creator, and his
Prophets are equal. This done, (to the intent he may take away all fear from
the Child) he says, that he will not meddle any farther with him at that
time, but that he will defer the Circumcision till the next day: and so
makes show that he will depart. But presently returning, and feigning that he
has forgotten and omitted something which is requisite in the preparation of
that Ceremony, he begins again to handle the Child as before: and then
(upon a sudden) cutteth away the skin, putting upon the wound a little salt
and fine bumbast; and so (from that time forward) the party is accounted for a
Musulman, that is, One circumcised, or a professed Mahometist. After this, (the
solemnity of their Feast continuing three whole days together) they do lead
the Party circumcised to the Bath with great pomp and triumph: and as he
goes homewards, he is led in the midst of all the Guests; who (at his
return into the house) do present him with great Gifts and Presents: some
bestowing on him rich Garments of silk, velvet, and such like; others giving
him standing cups or boules of silver or other plate; some presenting him with
money, and others with horses: and the women give him shirts, hand-kerchers,
and such like; every one according to the ability of their estate and
calling. The Females amongst the Turks, though they be not circumcised indeed
as the men, yet they are made or admitted Musulmans with the like solemnity,
by pronouncing the same words that are before rehearsed. But when any
Christian or other Stranger is by his own choice and voluntary motion to be
circumcised, The manner of Turkish circumcision done upon Christians, and other
Strangers.
(which happens often, by reason of the excessive tributes and exactions laid
upon them) there is some difference in the form of the Ceremony. For he is
brought into some public place, in the open sight of the people; and there
after he has pronounced the words of the first Commandment, in the law of
MAHOMET (before recited) with his eyes and forefinger lifted up toward the
heavens, then is he circumcised, and has also a new name given him, his
former name being changed; whereas the Turks do use to give the names to
their own children at the time of their birth, and so continue them after
their Circumcision. Now after that any Christian is thus circumcised, he is
carried about all the quarters and streets of the City, with great triumph
and joy of the people, who have drums and trumpets sounding before them: and
besides diverse gifts and rewards bestowed upon him, he is made free for ever
after from all tributes and exactions. Through the desire of which gain and
privilege, many of the Greeks (whom the Turks call Vrmular) and many
Albanezes (whom they call Arnantlar) do willingly offer themselves to be
circumcised. Howbeit, if any happen to be circumcised by compulsion for any
offense committed: as for striking of a Musulman, or for blaspheming of
MAHOMET, or any such like trespass (which has happened to diverse.) To such a
one, they do not give any gifts or presents. And yet he shall be freed from
the payment of taxes and tallages, as other Musulmans are.

By the manner of the Turkish Circumcision here recited and discovered: it
appears, that though in the substance and matter of this ceremony, they do
agree with the Jews: yet in the form thereof, they do differ and disagree in
many things. The difference between the Turks and Jews in their Circumcision
As first in the time: For whereas they circumcise not their children till the
eight year of their age: the Jews used it the eight day after the birth of
their infants: to whom also they gave their names at the time of their
circumcision, contrary to the order and custom of the Turks and other
Mahometists. Next, they vary in the place also: for the Jews did it openly in
their Temples, and not in their private houses, as do the Turks. Again, the
Jews did never bring any to be circumcised, but they did it with singular
reverence and solemnity, and with great religion and devotion, esteeming it as
a most holy and sacred ceremony or sacrament: and as a part of their divine
service to be performed toward God, and using it as a visible and assured
sign of his grace, love, and favor toward them: whereas the Turks
(although they repute and take it as a special mark of their religion, and of
their duty and service to MAHOMET their Prophet,) yet in the doing thereof
they show little or no devotion: neither do they take it as a signification
of any special benefit expected from God: but they mark it rather as an
occasion to satisfy their own delights and pleasures, by feasting,
banqueting, and such like kind of triumphs: and for an outward show and
bravery in a glorious ostentation of their sect, and to grace it in the eye of
the world, more than for any holiness or religion which they imagine or
conceive in it. Last of all, the Jews did never constrain any strangers to
be circumcised, but only used it to their own children, or to such as did
willingly conform themselves to their religion or ceremonies; or such as were
bought and sold unto them to be their servants, and so were to be incorporated
into their nation: but the Turks contrariwise do seek by all means both to
draw, and to enforce all persons of all Nations to communicate with them in
the observation both of their religion, and of the ceremony of circumcision,
supposing it to be one of the chiefest things wherein they can make show of
their honor and love to MAHOMET, according to the prescript rule of their
first commandment. In the explanation whereof, for that (I doubt me) we have
exceeded, we will therefore proceed to the exposition of their second precept.

The explanation of their second Commandment, touching the obedience of
children toward their parents. Cap. 7.
IN their second Commandment is required such dutiful regard and obedience of
children toward their parents, that they are forbidden to oppose themselves
against them, or any way to contradict them either in word or deed. It
enioyneth them also to take careful heed, and to use al possible diligence,
that they do not give them any cause or occasion of complaint, grief or
lamentation. And if by chance it happen that their parents fall into poverty,
or be pressed with any wants or penury, or with any mishap or misfortune
whatsoever, their sons stand charged by virtue of this commandment to succor
and relieve them both with their substance, and with their best advise and
counsel: Insomuch that they must not stick to employ and spend all their wealth
for the good and welfare of their parents. Moreover, this do they add unto
this commandment, that the children do in any case take heed how they do draw
the just and lawful curse of the parents upon them: for they are of opinion,
that the curse that proceeds from parents against the children will light upon
them so heavily as it will cause their utter ruin and destruction: Opinion of
the Turks touching the curse of parents upon their children
and that all the water of the bottomless sea, nor of all the rivers in the
world will not be sufficient to wash or rid away that curse from them: nor
that any sorrow, repentance or contrition of the heart, nor any reformation or
amendment of life, nor yet any punishment or plagues sustained for the same,
(how great and grievous soever they be) will be able by any means to take away
the burden thereof from them. Besides, it is expressly affirmed in their
Alcoran, That God will never pardon and forgive those children who are so
accursed by their parents: unless that the parents themselves do voluntarily
of their own accord, and in express terms first remit and pardon them, and
do remove their curse from them. And in very truth both parents and children
do amongst themselves well agree in this point: for the parents do so use
and accustom their children even from their infancy and tender years, The
notable care of parents in the education of their children, and the great
obedience of children to their parents among the Turks.
That they hold nothing more dear and precious, than to yield due honor and
reverence to their parents. And they be so careful in the performance thereof
according to the prescript rule of this commandment, that this piety seems
to be engendered with them even at their birth: or to be infused into them (as
it were) in the cradle. Insomuch as it is a very rare and strange thing amongst
them, to see any examples of disobedience in the children against their
parents. The which their singular virtue and piety in this behalf, cannot be
imputed to any other thing than to their great care and regard which they take
in the education of their children. For they have a saying amongst themselves:
Sentence of the Turks.
That if a tree be planted in a barren soil, it can not bring forth fruit of a
pleasant taste, but that the tree will be of the nature of the ground, and the
fruit will be of the nature of the tree: therefore their principal care and
endeavor is, that by how much the more the age of their infants is subject to
te^dernesse and simplicity, so much the more carefully to train them up to
modesty and good behauior, to piety and to virtue. And they hold it necessary
that the parents should in this thing specially make a show of their love and
affection toward their children: because having once brought them by moderat
chasticement to tread in the path of virtue: it may be a mean afterward when
they grow to years, that the discipline of their parents will be still before
their eyes, and will remain so deeply imprinted in their minds, that they
will never forget their fatherly admonitions, nor pretermit that obedience
which is due to them.

The Explanation of the third Commandment of the Turks law, touching their
behauior toward all men. Cap. 8.
The behauior of the Turks toward all persons, required in their law.
THe third Precept of the Turks Law, is derived out of the Law of Nature, and
consents also with the Rules of Christianity: Both which do will, That no
man do that unto another, which they would not have done unto themselves.
Upon this Commandment they do imply thus much; That every man is bound to
carry himself toward his neighbor with all kind of piety, faithfulness,
and amity; That they live peaceably and quietly together in unity and
concord; That each man love other as him self; That they use loyalty,
plainnes, and good dealing one to another, without fraud or dissimulation; and,
That they yield their due obedience to their Superiors and Magistrates, and to
deal faithfully and uprightly with every People and Nation, with whom they
have any affairs or business, either by traffic, bargaining and selling, or
in any other kind of contract whatsoever. Besides, if any man do chance to
be tempted to hurt or defraud another, and that he do find his thoughts and
cogitations enclining and yielding thereuntoo: he is commanded by this Law
presently to bethink himself, and to enter into this consideration; That if
another should intend the like injury and purpose the like matter against him,
whether he could or would be contented (without any impatiencie, and with a
quiet mind) to suffer and endure it. For by such cogitations and good
meditations, they say, It is easy for any man so to frame and inure his
affections, that he shall soon abstain from doing any harm, injury, or
outrage unto his neighbor.

Upon the equity of this commandment (as it seems) is the civil Justice
of the Turks (for the most part, and in most cases) grounded: Civil Justice
of the Turks for the most part grounded on the third Commandment of their
law: and yielding like for like.
excepting only certain principal cases, as of theft, perjury, treason,
murder, and some other of that kind. For in all other matters of private and
particular injury done between party and party, they do proceed (in their
punishments) per legem talionis, by the law of like for like: as tooth for
tooth, eye for eye, hand for hand, according to the ancient law and usage,
ordained in the Jewish estate by God himself in the law of Moses. According to
the which, they do hold it a sovereign and especial point of justice; That
every man do reap that measure, which he meateth unto others: and in all
offenses of lesser consequence, that the same proportion of punishment be
observed and done upon the Offendour, which was by him intended or executed
against the party violated and offended. So precise and upright is the law and
religion of the Turks in this behalf, teaching them to have a special regard
of justice and equity in all their actions and dealings between man and man:
howsoever in the barbarousnes of their own cruel savage, and corrupt natures,
they do seem altogether to be perverted and alienated from the sincerity of
that law, through a natural hatred and enmity to Christians, toward whom in
most of their Actions they do make show, that they have little regard of that
justice, equity, or humanity, which is so commended unto them in this
Commandment.

The exposition of their fourth Commandment, touching the manner and
ceremonirs of the Turks in their prayer. Cap. 9.
IN their fourth precept it is enacted, That the Turks do repair five times
every day at the hours and times limited and appointed unto their Temples,
which in their language are called, Meschit or Mosche: and that they do come
prepared thereunto, with their minds well disposed, and with good devotion.
The ordinary times of prayer used by the Turks.
The first of those appointed times for their coming to the Church, is before
the sun rising: which time they call Tamzit, or Salanamazzi. The next is
about noone or midday, of them called Hulenamazzi. The third hour is a little
before sun set, which they term Inchindi namazzi. The fourth is after sun
set, and they call that time Acsannumarri. The fifth and last hour of their
devotion, is at the time that they prepare themselves to sleep, being about
the second hour of the night, which in their language is named I at si
namazzi: Al these hours are ordained by a solemn rite and ordinance for the
Turks to betake themselves to their prayers and orisons. And therefore at all
these times, when they are to go unto their Mosches or Meschits: certain of
their Priests who^ they call Meizin, get up into the towers of their Temples,
which are built round in the manner of watch-towers, or lanternes, and are of a
wonderful height: and there they do sing out aloud a certain Hymn or Song:
The manner of the Turks, both how they are assembled, and how they prepare
themselves to their Prayers.
after which they do pronounce aloude a certain prayer (which they call
Exenochmach) wherein they pray to God to send discord and dissension amongst
the Christians. Then do they three times repeat these words: Allah Hethber,
that is, God is God alone. This done (which is as it were) a summons or means
to call the people together to their prayers (for that they have no use of
Bells:) Then they that are disposed to pray make themselves ready to go to
their Temples, which they do in this manner. First they go to the necessities
of nature, to empty their bodies from inward filth. That done, they wash
themselves all over with fair and fresh water. And this custom do both men
and women observe very religiously: having done bathing of themselves according
to their usual order, they do thrice ouer-wash their hands, and three several
times also do they wash their mouths, and so their nose, and their face
likewise, and after that their arms even to their elbows, and then their
ears. And with both hands together do they use to wash and rub their necks,
each of these after other. Whilst they are thus washing of all these parts of
their bodies: They do recite these words of one of their Psalms, Eleache,
motte ohi affro. Then last of al they wash their legs up to the knees. And
whilst they are girding themselves and putting on their waste, they do
pronounce another psalm in these words, Li illa phi circison. Thus having
made themselves all clean and pure as they suppose: Then do they set forwards
toward the Temple with a very soft and easy pase, for they do think it an
unseemly thing for a man to be immoderately hasty in his going: and that it is
as if a man were flying and running away. And they are of opinion also, that
such speediness and swiftness of pace does hinder the devotion of their
minds, and does make them less intentive to their prayers. If any of them, as
they go, happen to belch or break wind, they think that all the former
washing and cleansing used by that person is in vain, and to no purpose: and
they hold it requisite, that he return home again, and new wash himself as
before. If any of them through sloth and laziness do neglect this ceremony
of washing themselves, they are fully persuaded, that the prayers of such are
not only not heard, but that they draw upon them by this sin the wrath and
indignation of God more grievously, than they could obtain grace and mercy by
their prayers made unto him. So great holiness do they impute to this outward
ceremony, being more than pharisaicall superstition. After they have in this
manner prepared themselves to their prayers, and that they be assembled in their
Temple, they do altogether, and all at once turn their faces toward the
South, contrary to the guise and order, both of the Jews and Christians, who
use to pray toward the East. The manner of the Turks prayers in their temples.
Then their Meizin, or some one of their Priests standing up, with their bodies
straight and upright, do openly read those same Hymns or Psalms, which they
before sang upon the top of their Towers. Upon the first hearing of their
voice, every man does presently thrust both his hands between his waste and
girdle, so that they stand as if their hands were tied and bound to their
bodies. And they cast down their heads toward the ground with a wonderful
show of devotion: and without any moving or stirring of any part of their
bodies at all, as if they were in a most profound study or contemplation. Then
rises up another Priest of another order (whom they call Imam) and with a
high voice reads a Psalm. And the Meirin answers him in manner of a
Clarke. As soon as this Psalm is ended, all of them do forthwith fall flat
upon the ground crying Sabanalla, Sabanalla, Sabanalla: That is, O God be
merciful unto us most miserable Sinners. Then one of their Priests (who is as
it were master of the ceremonies) begins a prayer which (as they affirm)
was first invented and used by MAHOMET himself, and by him taught to his
Disciples: All the people likewise lying still prostrate upon the ground, do
with a loud and high voice say the same prayer together with their Priest in
this manner. In the name of the religious and merciful God: A prayer used by
the Turks supposed to be made by Mahomet.
praised be the Sovereign Lord of the world, the pitiful, the merciful:
The Lord of the day of judgment. Thee we serve, from thee we look for help.
Show unto us the right way, that which thou have showed unto thy Prophets: not
that for which thou art angry with the wicked. Amen. Thus do they continue
lying prostrate on the ground upon their faces, till such time as their Imam
have again repeated and read over the Himne or Psalm last before received.
Which being done, all of them do rise up together and at one instant: and this
manner of praying do they reiterate oftentimes, three, four, or five times
more or less according to the solemnity of the time, in such order as is
prescribed unto them in their law. At the length, all of them fall down upon
their knees: And then their Meizin with a loud and audible voice, and with
great ceremony prays unto God, that it would please him to grant his grace
and spirit unto the Christians, Jews, and Greeks, and to al other who are
Aliens and strangers from their faith, that they may embrace the law and
religion of MAHOMET. This prayer ended, they do draw their hands all at once
from under their girdles: And then lifting the^ up toward heaven, they do
cry with a loud voice, Amin, Amin. Afterward having wyped or stroked their
eyes with their hands, they do return every man to his home.

Fridaies kept for holyday by the Turks.
On the Fridaies: (which they call Glumaagun, and is by them observed for a holy
day in the same manner as the Christians do keep the Sunday or Sabbath day,
for that MAHOMET (as they say) was borne upon that day.) And likewise upon
their fasting days, they have an order in their prayers somewhat different
from their other days. For upon that day certain of their Priests (whom they
call Antippi) having used diverse and sundry ceremonies in a certain place,
which (being in the midst of their Temple) is some 30. steps high, and is
more eminent then the other parts of their Temple: from thence (as it were) out
of a Pulpit he reads unto them somethings concerning the life of MAHOMET:
After which, two little boys stand up singing certain prayers: who having
ended their songs, then begins the Priest and all the people to sing a
Psalm with a low voice. And then for half an hour together they cry Illah
Illelath: That is, There is but one God. Thus when they have made an end of all
their prayers: One of the Antippi, out of that high place before mentioned
shows forth unto the people a Lance and a Cimitary: And so exhorts them to
be ready with sword in hand, and to use both their swords and their Lances for
the defense of their religion, against all such as are enemies to the law of
MAHOMET. What persons may not enter into the Churches of the Turks, nor be
present at their prayers.


You have heard in what manner the Turks do behave themselves, and what
ceremonies they do use both before their coming to the Temple, and whilst
they are at their prayers: Now in a word or two shall be showed, what persons
may lawfully resort and enter into their Churches, and be present at their
prayers, and who they be that be forbidden so to do. First themselves do
never enter into their Meschits, unless it be of purpose to pray either in
private, or at their usual hours of prayers. Besides it is not lawful for
all sorts of people to come thither: But many are interdicted and debarred
both from entering into their Meschits, and from communicating with them in
their prayers. Such are all those that have committed murder or manslaughter,
or are infected and polluted with any known and notable vices. Besides all
notorious drunkards, and all gamesters and ruffians, all adulterers and
vsurrers: all such as are deformed and diseased, or of an unsound constitution
of their bodies. Moreover all kind of women unmarried, and those that are of a
lewd and unchaste life, as bawdes, whores, curtizans and such like, they are
debarred from entering into their Temples, for they hold them to be filthyly
polluted and unclean. Howbeit married wives, maidens, and such as have been
widows but of five weeks continuance, may have lawefull access, and be
present at their prayers. Notwithstanding all the women do stand apart by
themselves and severed from the men, in a peculiar place purposely appointed
for them: so as they may not be seen nor perceived by them. And this they
do, least that the men by the sight of the women in the time of prayer, be
drawn away with unchaste and unclean thoughts, whereby both themselves and
their Temples should be defiled with the sin of uncleanness. All this are
they bound to observe by the law of MAHOMET: And all in general are enjoined
diligently to repair to the Temple and to be present at their ceremonies:
Howbeit the women use not to go every day to the Church to prayers, but only
on the Fridaies, and at their feast of Easter. Yet if any man either for sloth
or for the care of worldly matters, do neglect to frequent the Church at times
of prayer (especially on such days as are appointed for their solemn Fast)
They do hold that man far worse then any Christian: And after his death,
they will not vouchsafe him any honest burial, but casting forth his body
among the carcases of such as have been quartered and dismembered by the
executioners, they do leave him to the pray to be devoured and eaten of
dogs, and of the fowls of the air.

The Exposition of the fifth Commandment touching the manner of fasting amongst
the Turks. Cap. 10.
IT is a duty necessarily required of the Turks by the fifth Commandment of
their law, That in every year they do consecrate one whole month to
solemn fasting, The time and order of fasting amongst the Turks.
allowing thirty days to the month. Yet they do not always observe one and
the same month for their fast: But if their fast be this year in January,
the next year it is in February. And so they go on in that order, altering
every year from one month to another. This time of their fast, (being not
unlike to the time of Lent observed by the Christians) they call Remezan. And
they do observe and celebrate it with exceeding ioyfulnesse, and (in their
kind) with a wonderful show of Religion: the manner whereof is thus: During
all that day which is dedicated to fasting, they do abstain not only from
eating and drinking, but they are very careful also to keep themselves from
any sin: And they taste not of any meat or drink till such time as they see
the stars shining in the firmament. Then do they fall to banqueting, and
making of good cheer almost all the night following: gorging themselves with
the most delicate and dainty meats that can be gotten: Not unlike those
savage beasts, which lurking all days in their Dens, do raunge abroad in
the night season to seek their food. If any Turk what so ever (after he is
past ten years of age) be found during the time of their fast to taste of
anymeate or drink, The punishment inflicted up onthose that obseru not the
custom of fasting amonst theTurkes.
he is sure to be punished most extremely. For heewhich will not chastise his
body by fasting, shall be grieuouslychastised either with the Bastonado, or
with whipping: And theorder is, that he shall have two and thirty stripes at
the least. If any be absent from the Temple upon their day offasting, upon him
shall that punishment be doubled. Who soever tastes of any wine on that day,
he is put to open shameand infamy, and being made a scorn and laughing
stock to all men, he is carried about with a certain Hat on his headlike a
Myter, upon the which is written in paper the fault that he has committed. And
then do they give him double thepunishment before specified: And besides for
every stripe orstroke which he endures, he is enforced to lay down an Asper,
(which is a piece of money used amongst theTurkes, of which four and fifty
make an Italian Duckat.) Andthis punishment is inflicted upon him by one of
theirMagistrates, whom they call Cadi. They say thatMAHOMET did first
institute and ordain these days of fasting:And that he himself did so
religiously and devoutly obseruethem, that (as they pretend) by means thereof
he obtained a law from God, by which he should rule and govern his people.
When the thirty days of their fast are expired: Then (in token oftheir joy,
for that God did hear the prayers of their ProphetMAHOMET, and did reveal
unto him the laws, according as hedesired) They do with great triumph and
solemnity for threewhole days together celebrate a feast, which is as their
Easter, and they call it in their language, Vlubairam. At whichtime they do
use to annoint the nails of their fingers with a kind of ointment which they
call Chena or Chua: which makes their nails very red: And with the same do
they die the feet and tails of their horses: And the women besides their
nails, do anoint both their hands and feet therewith.

Two months and ten days after this feast they have another Easter which they
do use to celebrate in the city of Mecha in Arabia, where they do go on
pilgrimage, and by the way do reverence and visit the Sepulcher of MAHOMET.
This their latter Easter they call chucci, or Chazi: Bairam. But it is with
less solemnity then the former, and without the observation of any fasting
days going before it. Howbeit it is very religiously solemnized by all those
that go on that pilgrimage, and do use to visit the Sepulcher of their
MAHOMET. From whence grew the first institution of the Mechits: whom the Turks
call Chazi, or Chare, which is an order very reverent and greatly esteemed
amongst them. Touching the manner of those pilgrimages with the ceremonies
therein used, and other matters appertaining thereunto we shall have occasion
hereafter to express.

The Ezposition of the sixth Commandment: concerning the sacrifices and Alms
of the Turks. Cap. 4.
BY the sixth precept of their law: The Turks are bound once a year during the
solemnity of their feast of Easter to offer up some sacrifice, every one
acccording to the proportion of his wealth, and the means of his ability. This
their ceremony of sacrificing is in the nature of an Alms: And (as they say)
MAHOMET was the first author and inuentor thereof, The cause and manner of the
Turkish sacrifice.
upon this occasion. Whereas there was an old and ancient prescribed by
MAHOMET: That every one of his Disciples and the professors of his Religion
should be bound to pay an yearly pension or sum of money out of all their goods
and substance, after two of the hundredth, to be distributed and bestowed for
the relief of the poor. His subjects thinking this tax or payment to be very
grievous and burdensome unto them did request him to ease the^ of that charge
and to mitigate the same. Where upon MAHOMET abrogating that law of contributing
of money, did in stead thereof ordain this law of sacrifices. The manner of
which is as follows, every man being to prepare some beast to be sacrificed,
the use is for those which are of the better sort to provide either a young
Steer or a young Horse, of an excellent shape and form. The which being killed
in a place publicly ordained of purpose, the flesh of the slain beast must be
given amongst the poor: and the owner (whose offering it is) must not in any
case reserve any part thereof to himself; for they are of this belief: That
the sacrifice is not pleasing nor acceptable unto God, if any part of the same
(be it never so little) be detained from the poor. And therefore the manner is
at that time for one neighbor to be guest unto another, and they do inuit
each other to eat and drink together. The common sort of people do use to
offer up a goodly fat Ram, the mouth and feet whereof must be black, all
the rest of the body white, and the Horns great and big. They do make great
account of a Ram thus marked and of his form: And every householder does
take great pleasure and delight, to offer up such a one for his sacrifice. They
are wonderfully zealous and forward to this kind of sacrifice; for they are
fully persuaded, that they do therein notable service to God; and, that this is
a deed of Mercy, very pleasing and acceptable to him. When they are to make
their sacrifice, they do make choice of the best and goodliest beasts that can
be gotten, and they buy them with their best money, and that which is well and
honestly gotten: for, to buy it with money gotten by usury, by the sale of bad
wares, by stealth, or by any unjust or fraudulent means, they hold it a very
wicked and ungodly thing: and they do certainly believe, that such a sacrifice
will not be available to him that offers it; but rather, that God will accept
it as the offering of him, from whom the money was wrongfully gotten and
detained. The place where the beasts are killed they call Canaara, that is, the
place of sacrifices. They do use (according to the manner and custom of the
Jews) to cut the throat of the beast which they sacrifice: and in the doing
thereof they pronounce these words, Bicimilai, rhuhemun echint ac Ioluna
corbumala chebul chela: the meaning whereof is this, In the name of him that
made heaven and earth, and whatsoever is in the world; and to his praise and
honor be this sacrifice offered: who of his unsearchable and infinite goodness,
vouchsafe to accept the same as a pleasing and acceptable sacrifice. As soon
as the beast is slain, they cut the flesh into very little or small pieces,
and (having sprinkled them with salt) they distribute them amongst the poor;
which being done, they pay the Butcher for his pains, and so do return
homeward glad and joyful. They are persuaded also, that if any do offer up
any other sacrifice in secret and unknown to others, that the same is double
acceptable unto God. This Ceremony of sacrificing, they hold to be derived
from Abraham: for that when he was to offer up his only son Isaac by Gods
commandment, it was the will of God that an Angel should present unto him a
goodly Ram, to be offered in steed of his Son. The which Ram (they say)
was like in form unto that which is before described.

Besides this public order of sacrificing used by the Turks for alms, they
have another kind of sacrifices; which being usually done in private, Of
sacrifices done by the Turks in the nature of vows.
are in the nature of vows: which in their language are called Chorbon. For
whensoever any one of a Family falls sick, or is in any other danger or
extremity; they do promise to offer up some beast in sacrifice upon the
recovery of their health, or their delivery out of that danger. For they do
imagine, that this is a ready mean to recover the party diseased, and to
restore him to his health; as also, to free them from all dangers and
extremities: even as that ram (showed unto Abraham by the Angel) did save the
life of Isaac. Howbeit they do think, that they are not bound to perform their
vows, unless the party do find health or safety after the vow made. Which
if he do, and that thereupon such sacrifice be to be offered: Their manner is
to divide the flesh of the slain beast into 4. parts: one of the which, with
the skin, feet and head is given to the Priest for his fee; another part is
given to the poor; the third is imparted to their next neighbors; and the
fourth part of the flesh is eaten by them of the house where it is offered: who
do use to feast and banquet therwithal, which it is lawful for them to do.
And they are undoubtedly persuaded, that in this action also (as in the
residue) they do yield unto God very good and acceptable service.

As concerning their private alms, the law of MAHOMET does prescribe; That
they should be voluntarily given, and of the proper motion and private
disposition of the party. For they do hold that those almsdeeds are not in any
sort pleasing nor gratefully accepted of God, which are given unto men who do
crave or beg them. The common people, and such as are of the meaner sort, are
enioined by their law to part with somewhat to every beggar that they meet
withal: but for the richer sort, there is no such certain and precise order
set down; but that they are commanded to extend their bounty and liberality to
the poor, according to the measure and proportion of their wealth and ability,
every man as his conscience shall lead him: Charity of the Turks to the poor.
and therefore they hold it requisite, that they make diligent search and
inquiry, whether that any of their neighbors (through age or poverty) be in
want, and have need of relief: and whethet there be any widows or orphans,
whose estate requires to be relieved by others, and are not able to help
themselves. If they find or hear of any such, they do endeavor presently to
supply their wants and necessities; and that in the most secret and close
manner which they can possiblye devise: imagining this kind of alms to be the
cheifest work of mercy, and to be (above all other) unto God most acceptable.
For this cause they do use to send abroad their servants secretly and
purposely to enquire amongst their neighbors, and know which of the^ have any
need either of money, or of any other thing necessary for the sustentation of
themselves or their families. Yea more than that, their Charity is so great
toward the poor, that many times they will not disdain to lodge them in
their own houses, and to feed them with their own meat. And herein they make
no difference to whom they do extend their charity, whether to Turks, Jews
or Christians: for they have these words usually and often in their mouths;
That the naked are to be clothed, and the hungry are to be fed; for that
these are the true works of mercy. In their Musaph or Alcoran they have these
words; If any man did well and thoroughly understand, how worthy and heavenly a
deed it is to give alms largely and abundantly, he would not make spare of his
own flesh, but would even tear one piece of his body from another to give it
unto the poor. And again, If Beggars, and such as for sloth and lazines do
get their living by craving of others, Opinion of the Turks of alms and
beggars.
did know how great plagues and punishments were provided for them, they would
rather eat their own flesh, than to get their living by loitering and
begging. For they have this written in their Law, Sade ceatul Balla Ali: the
meaning whereof is, That alms deeds do deliver the giver from all troubles
and calamities, and do impose the same upon the poor that receive their
alms. And this is the cause (as they believe) why beggars are seldom or never
without sores or malanders in their bodies, but are always full of infirmities
is if one disease did follow still after another, and one calamity did ever
hasten in the neck of another.

The exposition of their seventh commandment concernning the manner of
marriages amongst the Turks. Cap. 12.
IT is a duty necessarily imposed upon all Turks by the seventh Precept of
their law: That each man as soon as he attaineth to five and twenty years
of age, do presently betake himself to marriage: and that every one do make
choice of a wife by his own liking and contentment, to the intent he may
increase, Opinion of the Turks touching the necessity of marriage in all men.
and multiply the Mohammedan sect and religion. For this cause in their
marriages (which they call Eulemmech) they are commanded, not to have a respect
to the satisfieng of their carnal lusts and appetites, nor to the gathering
of wealth and riches: But that (having in mind how the first man Adam was
joined unto Euah only for procreation sake, for the multiplication of
mankind upon the earth) they should therefore in contracting of their
marriages, follow that same order, and do it to that end for the which God
did first institute and ordain it. For they do hold, that it is a manifest
sign of the love and favor of God toward them to have store of children.
And therefore they do not only condemn the error of the Moonkes and Nuns
amongst the Christians: who do seem to reject and contemn the blessing of
God, by leading a single life, and not observing the commandment given by GOD
unto man at his creation when he willed him to increase and multiply: by the
which (as they say) all men are bounden to marry. But they do affirm also,
that even the bruit beasts, the trees of the field, and other insensible
creatures, which bring forth their fruit in their due times and seasons, are
far better, and more highly to be esteemed than those men, who leading a
single and unmarried life do not augment the number and society of mankind.
And they think it a thing impossible for any man living out of matrimony,
either to please God, or to be accounted just and honest, or else to observe
any of the laws or commandments of God.

The ancient order of marriages amongst the Turks
Touching the solemnity of their marriages: they esteem it an unseemly and
profane thing for the Bride to be brought home to the Bridegroom with sound
of Trumpets, vialles, and other musical instruments. But they think it meet
that it be done rather with holy and devout prayers, and with thanksgiving
unto God. Moreover, when the spouse is come to the house and dwelling of her
husband, and that the time is come for them to be joined and linked together in
wedlock, then they hold it requisite, that the married couple do present
themselves before god with great reverence: and that in all humility they do
pray unto him to grant them a long, quiet, and peaceable life: and that it
would please him to keep and preserve them from al discord and diabolical
dissension, from wrath and furious anger and debate, and from all other
mischiefs and misfortunes: and that she do devoutly pray unto God to make her
fruitful, and bless her with the happy increase of children. After that all
these ceremonies and solemnities are ended, then are the married couple brought
to their chamber where their bed is provided and made ready for them in a very
dark and obscure place, because they may not discover each others shame and
secrets. The next morning at the break of day, the husband is bound by their
law, to demand of his wife whether she have the knowledge to read or not.
If she be so ignorant that she can not read, then is he from time to time to
teach, and instruct her. Likewise, if the wife be skillful in reading, and the
husband not, then is she bound to learn and instruct him: and both of them
are strictly commanded, before all things, to reverence and embrace piety and
virtue, and to abstain from all kind of vice and wickedness. For they have
this saying, Tirciur Birici I edices I chisi, Ciuccura Duscer: that is, If the
blind lead the blind, both of them fall into the ditch. This was the ancient
manner of contracting of marriages amongst the Turks, and many of them do yet
observe and use the same even at this day, as being loath to forgo their old
custom, and to exchange it for a new usage. Howbeit the common sort of
Turks have now taken up an other manner of marriage, and they do observe a
new order, the which does seem to resemble a beastiall and brutish kind of
voluptuousness rather than the sanctity of a pure and lawful matrimony. The
manner whereof is as follows.

If any man be in love with any maid whatsoever, he does presently demand her
of her father in marriage: if the father do like of the man, and be contented
to make him his son in law, he demands of him a piece of money for the
marriage of his daughter, The common usage and ceremonies of the Turks in
their marriages at this day.
more or less according to his ability, which they call Chebin, and is in the
nature of a dowry. For amongst the Turks it is not the custom for the women
to have any portion or marriage money given with them: but the husband is
compelled to give a portion for his wife: the which sum he is to pay unto
the father of the Bride immediately before the solemnizing of their nuptialles,
or to her next kinsman, or to him that is Guardian unto her (if her father be
not living) who does forthwith bestow the same, and lay it out upon apparel
and other necessary furniture for the Bride. The fathers consent being had, and
after that they are agreed upon the marriage, then must they acquaint the Cady
or magistrate with their purpose of marriage, to whom they are to pay a
certain quantity of money in nature of a Tax imposed upon marriages, which
they call Naip: Whereupon the Cadi having recorded the names of the parties who
are to be married, they may procceede with their marriage: otherwise if they
should mary before they have acquainted the Cadi with it, he has authority to
punish both of them. This being done, when the marriage day approaches, the
mother of the bride being accompanied with other women of her blood and kindred,
does four days before the wedding go from house to house to inuit all those
women and maidens to the marriage of her daughter, whom they do desire to have
present at the wedding. And they do use to bid a hundred or two hundred,
sometimes more, sometimes fewer, as they are able, to honor them with their
presence. Afterward, the day next going before the marriage the bridegroom
sends certain of his friends to the father of the spouse, earnestly
entreating him to prepare for the sending of his daughter unto him with all
speed possible: and to signify unto him likewise that he has appointed and
taken order with some of his friends to see her conuayed to his house. Each of
these messengers thus sent from the Bridgroome, have either a fine shirt or a
handkercheife bestowed upon them from the Bride. In the mean time, the
parents of the Bridegroom do make great preparation for most curious and
dainty cates, and for all such things as are necessary for the entertainment
of the marriage guests. And they do make a certain kind of sweet powder or
perfume, both in smell and color like unto spices or drugges pounded together,
which in their language they call Chenu. After that all things are in a
readiness decently and finely prepared, they do put all their delicates and
provisions in platters and dishes of silver: which being covered over with rich
and costly clothes, are carried by a company of young youths gallantly and
gorgeously apparelled, unto the house and dwelling of the Bride, with an
exceeding great noise of Drums, Tabers, Trumpets, and other instruments of
music going before them. Being on their way, the whole troop of women and
maidens, (who had been before invited to the wedding, and are there assembled
with the Bride to keep her company) do go forth all together to meet those
young men. Of whom receiving the said dishes and cates with great reverence
and solemnity, they carry them into the house of the Bride: who having made
merry and refreshed themselves, every one returns to her own home, being
appointed to return thither again the next day, at such an hour as the
father of the Spouse does then nominate and set down unto them.

After all this comes a great troop of men (whom the father of the
Bridegroom has formerly invited:) All which being mounted on goodly and fair
horses, bravely and richly trapped, do repair unto the Bridegroom and his
father: and as soon as the Sun is set, they do begin to make great
sportes and pastimes with fire-workes and other artificial devises, which they
do with great pomp and solemnity. Their sportes being ended, all the women
taking their places according to their calling, do seat themselves on the
ground (in the manner of a Round) upon cloths of Tapestrie richly and curiously
wouen: and placing the Bride in the midst of them, (as it were in a circle)
then do they suppe and take their repast together. After supper some of them
take harpes, vialles, or such like musical instruments: upon the which
playing very sweetly and cunningly, they do hold on this their mirth and
pastime, even until midnight. Then disroabing the spouse out of all her
garments, they lead her all naked into a Bath, washing her with water of a
most excellent and pleasant savor. And afterward putting some of their
powder Chena before mentioned in hot water: and having made a kind of mixture
thereof in manner of an ointment, they do annoint the hair, hands, and feet
of the bride there withal: and upon her legs they do paint (as it were) the
form of flowers and other curious works. And every one of the women do
anoint also the thumb of their own right hands with the same ointment. By
the which as a nuptial sign they make show, that they were called and invited
by the Bridegroom to his wedding. After all this when they have rested an hour
or thereabouts, they do return again to bathing and washing of themselves.
Whereupon those parts of their bodies which had bin before anointed with
their Chena, do show and glifter as if they had bin painted with gold. Then
having clothed themselves with their apparel, they begin to dress and make
ready the bride, trimming her and curling her hair, and imbrodering it richly
with gold, jewels, and such like ornaments. And thus do they lead her from
the Bath with greater triumph and noise than before: some of them playing on
sundry instruments with diverse sorts of music, others singing most sweetly
love Songs and Sonets in Meeter, tuning their voices to the instruments, and
some also leading of daunces and Rounds in a most pleasant and stately manner.
And thus do they without intermission spend the night in mirth and meriment
till the time of Cocke-crowing: which being once heard, all of them do with a
loud voice cry aloft, Caccialum, Caccialum, that is, Away, away, for the
Cocks begin to crow. And thus being wearied with excessive sporting, and
with good cheer, they betake themselves for a time to their rest. Afterward
at the Sun rising they do hasten from their beds: and repairing to the
Brides chamber, they do help to make her ready: In doing whereof, as they are
dressing and attiring her, and putting on of her garments and ornaments, they
do ever and among with pleasant iestes and love toys mock and laugh at her,
twiting her with the pleasures that shall pass between her and her husband the
next night following. Thus do they continue in passing and sporting away of the
time, Sagdich one that gives the Bride to the Bridegroom amongst the Turks.
till that the Sagdich (who is the next and the nearest kinsman of the
Bridegroom) do come to carry away the Bride, for that it is his office to
bring the married couple together, and to give the Bride unto her husband. Thus
the day being now come, wherein the marriage is to be accomplished: Earelie
in the morning the Bridegroom sends unto the Cady two presents with a
Testimonial, wherein is set down what dowry he gives to the Bride, and to
agree with him also for the payment of the Naip, and for his own fees, the
which being done, the Cadi sends immediately to the Bride to know if she
be contented: who (having kept house for eight days together before the
marriage: and having her face all that time covered with a veil, for that she
may not be seen of any but the father of the Bridegroom) returns her
answer to the Cadi, signifying, that she is content. By this time (being the
appointed hour for his coming) the Sagdich in great pomp and bravery
repaireth to the Bridegroom, having in his company all the men that are
invited to the wedding, each of them well be seen in most rich and sumptuous
apparel, and mounted upon their horses, excellently well appointed: they do
all of them follow him as their chiefest leader and conductour; and so
presenting themselves before the house of the Bridegroom, they demand of him,
if it be his pleasure that they shall go for the Bride, and bring her unto
him? Who willing them so to do they set forward in order two and two toward
the house of the Bride, carrying with them a fair and gentle Palfray, with
furniture curiously and finely trimmed for the Bride to ride on, with diverse
Mules also for the carriage of her stuff, and such Presents as have been given
her.

When they are come to the house, the Sagdich dismounteth from his horse; but
he is not permitted to enter in at the doors, before that he have bestowed
some gifts or presents upon the women that are in company with the Bride; who
(in the mean time) do draw on upon the Brides legs a pair of buskins of
crimson taffata or fine Cypress, which is tied and fastened with so many
intricate knots, that the Bridegroom (whose part any it is to pull them off,
for that no other besides him dares adventure to meddle with them) though he
labor both with hands and teeth (as the use is) to undo them; yet he shall
be hardly able without great difficulty to effect it. This being done, and
the Bride thoroughly attired and trimmed, her Father delivers her to the
Sagdich; who brings her forth of doors, she being accompanied both with all
the women that were bidden to the marriage, and with a great train also of
other women not invited, who go on with her all the way, playing on harpes,
violins, and other instruments; many of them crying aloft with a loud voice,
Cialla, Cialla; that is, The Bride comes; the Bride comes. As soon as she
is issued forth of doors, she is set upon her horse, and so conducted along
under a goodly fair Canopie made Archwise in manner of a vault: which being
supported by 4. staves or Lances, is carried by four young men gorgeously
attired: each of them having a fine handkercheif most curiously wrought, tied
unto the staff or lance which he bears; the same being given unto them as a
wedding gift. The Bride is covered all over with a veyle of crimson taffata,
and all the way as she rides, she lays her right hand upon the head of her
horse. In her passage through the streets are showed diverse goodly shows and
pleasant spectacles of sundry sorts in token of joy and merriment. When they
are come to the house of the Bridegroom, he himself comes forth to receive
her: and all the way as he goes, the ground is covered with clothes of
Tapestrie richly wrought in silk. Then does he give every one great thanks
for their good company, and for their great pains and labor: and the Guests
likewise having returned like salutations unto him, as soon as they are ready
to depart, do cast their Presents (which they bestow upon the Bride) into a
silver Basin, which stands before the door ready provided for that purpose.
Evening being come, the Sagdich makes the Bridegroom unready, and the Bride
is unclothed by a woman called Tengegola; both which bring them to their
bedchamber: where, if the Bride be nobly borne, she is received by an Eunuch;
otherwise by the next of kin to the Bridegroom. Thus both of them being left
together all alone, the Bridegroom takes away the veyle from the Bride, and
setleth himself to undo and take off her buskins, which she faineth her self
unwilling to suffer, so that they pass a great part of the night in disporting
themselves thus together, till such time as they do betake them to their rest.
The next morning, some of the Bridegroom his friends and certain otheir bidden
Guests, do repair again to the house: and having caused him to arise, his
Wife being left in bed, they lead him into the Bath: where (whilst he does
continue washing of himself) they do secretly convey away his clothes,
leaving him in the Bath all naked; so that he cannot depart thence, till that
he have some other apparel sent him from his Father. After which, they do
pass away the rest of that day also, with diverse sports and triumphs, and in
feasting and banqueting, tending altogether to pastime, pleasure and recreation.

These be the Nuptial Rytes and Ceremonies used at this day amongst the most
part of the Turks: howbeit that (in very truth) this manner of Matrimony is
far different from their former custom, observed in the solemnizing of their
ancient Marriages: and does altogether disagree from the Commandments and
prescript Rules of their Law. Besides they are now grown to this pass, and
to such excess of licentiousnes, that if they be not satisfied and contented
with one wife, they do marry either two or three. The licentiousnes of the
Turks in having many wives: and in the manner of their divorces
And yet if any of their wives be barren, or if they do otherwise mislike of
them, then (having contented them with a sufficient portion) they do divorce
themselves, and put them away at their own will and pleasure, and do marry
others in their places. Howbeit afterward (upon the assurance of a new Dower)
they may take them again unto them, notwithstanding their former Divorce and
Refusal, if she be not before that married to some other Turk. And all this
chopping and changing, taking and refusing of wives by marriages and by
divorce, they do hold to be lawful; and that they may lawfully use it, only
for the multiplication and increase of their nation, sect, and Religion. Thus,
what in regard of their sensuality, and of the voluptuous manner of their
marriages: as also for the multitude of their wives, and the licentious
diuorcing and putting of them away at their pleasures, it seems that the
Matrimony of the Turks (at this present) does not much differ from the
coiture of brute and savage Beasts. For that as these are guided only by
Nature to follow their sense and appetite: so this People (giving the bridle to
their loose and beastly affections) do abandon their minds to all
voluptuousnes, and do seem to be led only by the sensuality of their lusts
and filthy appetites.

The Exposition of their eighth Commandment touching murder and
manslaughter. Cap. 13.
THe eight and last Commandment of the Turks Law, does give a strict charge
and prohibition; That no man do pollute and defile his hands in the blood of
any other man, For they say, That this is an office or prerogative which God
has reserved as proper and peculiar unto himself, to abridge or cut off the
date of man's life: because that he only in his divine and eternal providence,
according to his own good will and pleasure, has set down and limited a
certain term and prefixed time, wherein each man's life and days are to end
and to be determined. In their Alcoran they have this Doctrine delivered; That
GOD has Murder in great hatred and detestation: and, that there is no one
sin more odyous and abominable. And they say, The opinion of the Turks
touching murder and murderers.
that this was the second sin that crept into the World after the Creation;
being first committed by cursed Cayne (only upon envy and despite) against
his brother Abell, because that his Sacrifices were more acceptable unto God
than his own. That the first therefore that defiled and besprinckled the Earth
with man's blood, was Cayne; and that he did fall from this sin into many
other most filthy and detestable vices. For they say, that he which durst
commit so great and notorious a wickedness, did not fear to offend in other
sins less heinous: and therefore, God (having laid his curse upon him) did
in the end punish him with the like plague and took him away with the same
kind of death, by which he had before made away his brother. Moreouet it is
said in their Alcoran; That in the last Day of the General Judgment, Cayn
shall be the foremost man of all other sinners, that shall first go to hell: for
they are of opinion, that there shall not any Soul come into hell before the
Day of Judgment; but that all the souls of wicked men departed, are reserved
in the fire of Purgatory: but in the last Day (they say) that Cayne shall lead
the way to all others, and be cast into hell before them: and that then all
other murderers and manquellers shall follow after him. Moreover, they do
affirm; That when GOD cursed Cayne, he did then also pronounce a Curse upon
all those that should commit Murder and Homicide: and that al those upon whom
the Curse of God is fallen, are continually so tormented and disquieted in their
Consciences, as their minds can never be quiet nor in rest, but their hearts
are so overwhelmed with care, sorrow and vexation, that they are afflicted with
all extremities of torments; so that many times by the just judgment of GOD,
they do work their own destruction, and imbrewe their hands in their own
blood. Besides, they say, That as soon as any Murder is committed, the blood
of the Party murdered, does presently (even from the Earth) cry and call to
Heaven for vengeance. And they are of a firm belief, That God will never
pardon this sin, being so heinous and detestable: howsoever he be merciful
and gracious in remitting other sins and offenses. In what cases the Turks
do think that manslaughter is tolerable.
Howbeit, if any man do kill and take away the life of another, either by
mere chance without malice pretended, and not in choler; or in his own
defense, and for the preservation of his proper life; or else in Fight, against
the enemies of the Mohammedan Religion; or in a just and lawful War,
undertaken for the service, safety and defense of his Prince and Country: in
all these cases, they think that God will easily show mercy unto such a one.
Notwithstanding they hold, that there ought to be had a diligent and careful
regard, that none willingly shed the blood of any man, nor incur the guilt
of this sin; where they may by any reasonable means shun and avoid it.

These Opinions and Traditions of the Turks touching Murder and Slaughter,
The severity of the Turks in p^nishing of quarreling fighting, manslaughter,
etc.
(being not much amisle, nor far dissonant from the truth) do show how
greatly they detest and abhor it. And as their Opinions are most precise, in
hatred and detestation of this Vice: so are they wonderful extreme in the
punishment of such Malefactors. Insomuch, that if one do but set hand on his
sword to strike another, he is presently apprehended and carried to the
Magistrate; who causes his skin and flesh to be mangled and cut (with
knives) in two, three, or four places, either more or less, according as the
quality of his offense does deserve: and afterward they lead him up and
down the Country for a spectacle, that others (by his example) may abstain
from the like misdeedes. The severity of which punishment, does so terrify
them from this offense, that you shall oftentimes see most mortal Enemies to
pass by one another, and they dare not (for their lives) offer to draw their
weapons: which they do not of cowardice (for they are a most courageous kind
of People) but for fear of the Law, and the displeasure of the Emperor.

If it happen that any Murder or Manslaughter be committed in any place;
the Inhabitaunts and Neighbors (near adjoining) are bound to apprehend the
Malefactor, and to deliver him safe Prisoner into the hands of the Magistrate.
Which if either they do refuse to do, or that by any occasion they suffer him
to escape; or if he save himself from being taken by flying away (though it
be against their wills) yet are they then bound to pay unto the next kinsman
of him that is slain, the sum of four and twenty thousand Aspers, as the
price of his blood that was slain and murdered. But if the Murderer or
Manslayer be apprehended, and sentence of death given against him; he is sure
to be executed with most terrible and extreme Martyrdom: and the next
Kinsman of the Party murdered, has full Authority given him to see
Execution done, with as great Torments as it shall please him. To this effect
it is Theodore Spaudugin.
written of a certain Woman in the time of the Emperor Solomon; who (having
her Son slain in Constantinople) took so great a pleasure and delight to
be revenged for his death, that she went to the place of Justice to see him
executed: where, when she saw that the poor Wretch was not able to endure the
Tortures inflicted upon him, but that the exceeding pain of his torments did
quickly end his life; she was not contented with his death, but (with an
incredible kind of cruelty) even with her own hands she plucked the heart
out of his belly, and did presently eat it in open view of all the People. A
strange and inhumane act in the execution of Justice; yet lively discovering,
in what horror and detestation that barbarous Nation holds Homicides and
Murderers: upon whom they account it not a sufficient revenge, that the Law
does shorten and cut off their lives, but they do think them also worthy to
be abandoned to the merciles cruelty of their accusers and adversaries; as if
no torments and punishments were sufficient to expiate the heinous guilt and
hatefulnes of their bloody trespass. Wherefore, seeing this barbarous and rude
people (who in many things are guided only by Nature, and do live after the
manner and guise of brute beasts, and are strangers from the true knowledge
of God, and of his word) do so strictly enjoin men to beware of murder, and
do so severely punish such malefactors: how much more earnestly ought all
christians professing piety and christian charity, endeavor to abstain from
this hateful sin of homicide? The practice whereof shows men to be more
cruel and unnatural than the brute and savage beasts: and to be little better
than Furies or Deuilles incarnate.

Of the doctrine and opinion (...) ^^e Turks touching the seven deadly sins,
(...) first of the sin of Pride. Cap. 14.
AS the transgression and breach of those eight Commandments formerly
delivered in the Turks law, is held by them to be mortal, and subject to
pains perpetual: so there are seven other sins which the Turks do hold
to be capital and deadly: and those are, Pride, Covetousness, Lust, Gluttony,
Sloth or Laziness, Wrath, and Envy. In the committing of all which sins,
they do think that there is such surpassing great impiety, that they do
suppose it to exceed the guilt of all other manner of misdeedes whatsoever.
For they do hold that all other offenses be of a inferior nature, and are
easy to be pardoned: but they do repute each of these former sins to be
mortal, and that they draw upon the offenders necessary punishment of
damnation. And herein it seems that they do agree with the error of some
Christians, who do imagine some sins in their own nature to be venial: and
othersome in their own kind to be deadly, and not pardonable. But, that we
may see what the Turks do think of those sins in particular, we will set
down that which is written of them severally in their Alcoran.

The opinion of the Turks touching pride and proud men.
First, this is a common saying amongst all Mahometists, that Pride of all the
deadly sins is the greatest: For that, as those which are proud and
high-minded, would be preferred, and go before other men: so does that sin
march in the forefront, and has the chief place above other sins. They show
also, how that Lucifer for his pride was thrown down from the glorious
estate of an Archangell, and from the highest heavens into the bottomless
deapth of hell: and that whereas he was at the beginning a most excellent
creature far surmounting all other creatures in glory and beauty: he
became even in a moment, a most vile and base abject, full of loathsomeness and
deformity, and much more contemptible than any creature either in heaven or on
earth, or under the earth. Howbeit they say that he has many followers upon
the earth: namely, those proud and disdainefull rich men, who do not only not
acknowledge, that their wealth and riches comes from God: But when they are a
little crossed with adverse and contrary fortune, they do straightwayes pour
forth their blasphemies against the God of heaven. And notwithstanding that
for the most part, they be causers and authors of their own calamities,
either by their ill government, or by the abusing of their goods, or else by
their dishonest and corrupt lives: yet they do impute the cause of their
misfortune unto God, (ungratefully exclaiming and inueighing against his divine
majesty) whereas they ought with patient and thankful hearts praise and
magnify him for his goodness. In the same number also do they reckon those
rich men, who do use wrongfully and injuriously to oppress the poor, and to
scorn and contemn them with intolerable disdain; little thinking (though
their consciences do tell them otherwise) that the poor man which is
religious and godly, does much more deserve to have their wealth and riches,
than themselves which have them in possession. For though the poor be exposed
in this world to the scorn and reproof of all men, yet they hold them to be
far more rich in the grace and favor of God: And that in the last day of
judgment these worldely proud rich men shall lie prostrate at the feet of
the poor whom they have contemned, whilst they hear the grievous Sentence
of their wrathful Judge pronounced against them for their pride. Which (say
they) if rich men would well consider and ponder in their minds, they would
then labor both to show themselves thankful unto God for the riches which
he has given them: and with most bountiful hands and willing hearts, to
supply the wants, and relieve the necessities of poor distressed persons.

The opinion of the Turks touching Covetousness. Cap. 15.
TOuching Covetousness they do think: and affirm it to be the root of all
euilles: And therefore they do teach that it is carefully to be avoided. To
this effect they do report a notable Fable of Moses. Who (as they say) at his
being with God in Mount Synai, did pray unto God, that it would please him to
reueile, and make known unto him, what kind of man was of all others most
abhorred and detested in the sight of God. Whereunto it was answered him by a
vision from heaven, that in that city which he should first come into, he
should find an Hermitage, seated in an out corner of the city, and far
removed from the inner parts thereof: in which Hermitage was abiding an
Hermit called BAVSESA a Chaldean, who used to spend his time incessantly in
private reading, and did never come abroad in the sight of people, but once
only in every ten days. Unto whom for his daily sustenance, there was
given by divine providence from day to day, two Citrons or Pomegranates: of the
which notwithstanding, he did eat but one every day: And laying up the other
in store for fear lest he should in time have some want whereof to eat, he did
most wretchedly defraud himself of that which God had most bountifully given
him. Afterward Moses coming to this city, and having this vision still in
memory, did seek out the dwelling of this Hermit, whom he found very busy
and intentive to his reading: and in his Cell he did perceive a huge heap of
Citrons piled up one upon an other, which (for the most part) were perished and
rotten: whereat Moses greatly maruelling, did demand of him in good terms
what life it was that he led? Unto whom this Hermit (as one poor in wisdom
and understanding, though rich and abounding in the humor of covetousness)
made this answer: That he did there lead a Dogs life. Whereunto Moses
replying, did ask him what he meant by that answer? For (quoth he) in that
thou art so busily given to thy Book, It seems unto me, that thou show
thy self in manner of a wise man and a Philosopher: but by the manner of thy
answer, I can conjecture thee to be little less than a fool, who knows
not what belongs either to wisdom or learning. Truly (said the Hermit) I
do continually spend my time in study to no other end, but only to the
intent I may obtain of God a certain living and assured means of sustenance:
For during all the time that I have followed my book, I never knew what it was
to want. Well then (quoth Moses) and are not two of those citrons every day
sufficent to sustain thee? How is it then that I see more then the half part
of thy allowance left uneaten, and that thou can suffer them rather to rotte
and perish, than, that thou would spend them for thy own sustenance. Mary
(quoth the Hermit) that is the cause that makes me afraid to eat all my
store, lest if God should with-holde his hand, and not continue his bountiful
provision toward me, I might then lack wherewithal to feed me. By this
answer Moses perceiving that this Hermit had more confidence in the
covetousness of his own wretched humor, than in the grace and goodness of
God, of whose largess and liberality he had had so good experience: He did
soon judge that there was not any vice more detestable than the sin of worldly
covetousness. In regard whereof he reputed this Hermit to be a man most
detested and abhorred of God above all others. For this cause do all
Mahometists firmly believe, that all covetous men are utterly destitute of the
grace and favor of God: For that they do as well want even that which they have,
as that which they have not. And true it is, (say they) that the philosophers,
and all such as are held to be wise, do not know how to wish any greater
plague unto covetous men, than that God would grant them to live long: For
the longer they live, the greater is their want and misery, if not in regard
of their outward wealth and substance, yet by reason of their cares and grief
of mind wherewith they are incessantly perplexed and tormented.

Of the opinion of the Turks touching the sin of Lust. Cap. 16.
IT appears by the Turkish Alcoran, and other Books of their law: That the
Mohammedan religion does esteem the sin of lustor uncleanness to be no less
hateful and abominable than any other of the deadly sins whatsoever. In
regard whereof every man is precisely commanded by their law to take a
lawful wife, and to be married, to the intent they may eschew and avoid all
occasions of fornication and uncleanness. Notwithstanding at this day the
severity and strictness of that law is utterly neglected, and the memory
thereof seems to be altogether abolished or laid asleep: insomuch as that
Nation is not more inclined to any one sin, than to this sin of lechery. For
they are so polluted with the filth of unclean lusts, that they are not
contented with the abuse of women, for the satiating of their beastly humors:
but they are so outragiously given over to the abominable sin of Sodomie, that
it is impossible without horror to be uttered. And albeit the law of MAHOMET
does command that Sodomites should be stoned to death: yet the contagion of this
detestable sin and enormity has so ouerspread all degrees of men: and the
practice thereof is grown so common and usual amongst them, that this law of
theirs seems either to be abrogated, or forgotten, or clean neglected and
contemned. For they are altogether careless to put the same in execution,
either for the punishing, or for the restraining of this abomination: neither
do they any whit regard that which is written in their Alcoran, to wit, How
that those which are polluted with this corrupt and filthy vice, are sure to be
tormented most extremely, not only in this world, but in the world to come
both in soul and body. Besides, in one of the Books of their Prophet
MAHOMET, they have an example propunded and laid down unto them: by which
they are learned, and taught (as it were) by experience, how severe a judgment
is reserved for such offenders, and how terribly the divine justice does
plague such unclean and profane persons. For there it is written, That in the
days of MAHOMET there was one which was very importunate upon a young youth
to have abused him: whom finding unwilling to yield unto his desire, and
seeing that by fair means and entreaty he could not obtain his purpose, he
began to press him by force and violence. But the young man still refusing
to condescend unto him, at length fled from him, and sought by flight to
avoid the abuse offered him. But being hardly followed and pursued by the
other, and finding little hope or means to be rid of him, he drew his dagger,
and suddenly turning about upon him, he stabbed him into the belly: and so
having given him a mortal and deadly wound, he saved himself from the injury
intended against him.

Hereupon the brethren of him that was slain, accused the young man of murder:
and causing him to be apprehended and imprisoned, sought to have had him
executed (by public order of Justice) for the death of their Brother.
Insomuch as being brought to his trial, he there showed upon what occasion
he was drawn to do that deed. Mahomet having heard the whole discourse and
the manner of the fact, presentlye gave sentence for the young man, and
pronounced him to be guiltless, and that the other was justly slain. And he
affirmed openly, That such men were for ever damned both in soul and body,
that were defiled with such damnable lusts and unclean desires.
Notwithstanding, the Accusers denying that to be the cause of the Homicide, did
therefore still importune him, that the Prisoner might have the Law. Whereupon
Mahomet commanded them presently to see the body of their Brother buried, and
that they should set good watch and ward about the grave or sepulture where he
should be laid; saying, that the next day he would give a final judgment upon
the Manslayer, according as the Law required. This done, the day following
the Accusers came again before Mahomet, and pursued the cause against the
Prisoner. Then Mahomet demanding of them by what death they would have the
Party executed? They answered, even with the same with which he made away their
Brother. Whereupon Mahomet commanded them to repair presently to their
Brothers sepulture, and to see how many wounds their Brother had received;
saying, that he would take order, that the Murderer should be put to death
in the same manner, and with the like number. They having opened the sepulcher,
found not any body within it, but saw the empty place all filled with a
dark fog or mist, and with a most filthy stench. Whereat being greatly
abashed and astonished, they returned back again to Mahomet; and (not without
horror) reported unto him what they had seen. But he demanding of them, if
they had thoroughly searched all the corners of the sepulcher? And they
affirming that they had. Then may you plainly see (quoth he) and you have just
cause to conjecture, that Satan has taken away your Brother both body and
soul, as being a most impure and lewd man: and that this young man is
guiltless of your Brothers blood; and is therefore to be dismissed without
any punishment. By this example did MAHOMET (say they) make it evident; That
without all doubt there is a Plague ordained of God for all those who do defile
themselves with any unclean and filthy lust. Notwithstanding, because that
MAHOMET in this case did commit the punishment of this sin unto the divine
justice and vengeance: Therefore do not these Miscreants the Turks at this day
appoint or set down any pains for that vice; but do refer the same to the
Judgment and Tribunal Seat of God: not sparing (in the mean time) to
pollute themselves with all kind of viciousnes and unclean lusts; wherevntoo
they do abandon themselves with all loosenes and licentious liberty.

The Opinion of the Turks touching the sin of Gluttony. Cap. 17.
THe sin of Gluttony they do repute nothing inferior to any of the other
dead-sinnes: For they hold the same to be very odious in the sight of God;
because (as they say) this was the first sin that man committed after his
Creation: and therefore they teach that the same ought to be avoided: and that
men ought to abstain from it with all their study and endeavors. For seeing
the first Parents of mankind Adam and Euah were expelled out of Paradise for
the sin of gluttony in eating of the forbidden fruit, where they had
abundance of other fruits, to have satisfied both their hunger and appetites:
they do therefore firmly believe, That the same punishment is prepared for
all those that are given to surfeiting and gurmandize, or to excessive feeding.
They have a Tale also (in their Alcoran) of a certain Hermit; who (living a
solitary life, in a place far removed from any City or resort of men) did
seem (in regard of his hard and austere life) to be more like a beast than a
man: and yet he was so addicted to continual prayer and devotion, that he was
held to be a very holy and religious man. This Hermit having (upon a time)
fed upon certain herbs and roots more greedily than he was accustomed;
and having filled his belly with more the^ ordinary, he fell into a sound and
heavy sleep. During the which he dreamed, that he had the company of a
certain woman, with whom he committed sin and folly. Afterward, awaking from
his sleep (which had been longer than his wonted use) a little before Sun
set, he beheld aloft in the air above him a certain Devil or Fiend of hell
making a great noise in the air, and carrying a great Bundle or Roll of
writings. Whereupon the Hermit having coniured the Spirit to answer unto
that he should demand, used these words unto him: Bremelcon vecchialer,
Durchini, Indumirsin: That is; O thou Enemy of our Faith, what writings are
those which thou carriest there with thee? Whereunto Satan answered; These
(quoth he) be the sins which have been committed this day within the
compass of this place: and I have been licensed to collect them together, and
to record them. Whereupon, the Hermit (his conscience somewhat touching him, as
being in doubt of himself) demanded the Spirit, if he had found and
observed any fault that he had committed? Yea (quoth the Devil) this day
have thou sinned in Gluttony, in eating herbs more greedily and licentiously
than thou wast wont; which was an occasion that thou have also exceeded in thy
sleep, and have offended in sloth and sluggishnes. Thereof also it has
insued, that thou have polluted thy self with uncleanness, and have abused
thy body in lust with a Woman. Last of all, thou have all this while neglected
and left undone thy Prayers and Devotion: whereunto thou ought earnestlye to
have betaken thee. Wherefore hold on, and continue still in thy sin of
Gluttony; and then it will be easy enough for me every day to register not
only one sin but many committed by thee. Having thus said, the Devil
departed from him with great noise and fury. After which the Hermit bethinking
himself of his fault, became very pensive and penitent, and prayed earnestly
to God to pardon and forgive him this error wherein he had offended. Now out
of this tale or old wives fable, the Turks do gather this doctrine: That if
the Hermit did sin so grievously in eating of a few herbs, and drinkinge of a
little water more then ordinary: how much greater care and regard ought those
men to have, who feed usually upon other meats and drinks more delicate and
delicious, least they fall into this dangerous sin of gluttony and gurmandise,
which will indaunger their souls and bodies to everlasting death and damnation.

Of the opinion of the Turks touching sloth or Laziness. Cap. 18.
COncerning sloth they say it is a secreate and unknown sin, caused and
engendered by a certain diabolical and filthy Idleness which makes men both
forgetful and negligent in all their affairs: not only in those that
concern both their public and private estate: but even in their service and
duty toward God, making men altogether secure and careless of the salvation
of their souls: And inducing the mind of man to a most wicked and profane
contempt, both of God himself, and of all his creatures. To this effect, they
have in their Alcora^, a fable not much vnlik to ye others above recited, of a
certain King that lived in the time of MAHOMET, and was altogether drowned in
this sin of sloth and security: In so much that he did not only neglect all
the matters and affairs of his estate and kingdom, but he was grown to that
excessive Lazines, that he was loath to take the pains, or to employ any time,
in observing the necessities of nature: till at length it happened, that he
was brought to see the enormitie of this sin, and to perceive what hold the
Devil had gotten of him by means of this security, wherein he had of a long
time held him tied and enchayned. For one morning as this King lay Idle in his
bed, and loath to arise: Beating his brains and devising upon many vain toys
and light fantasies, as he was always accustomed: He chanced to epsy an
Angel in the shape and likeness of a man, running and coursing hither and
thither about the house top and still removing from one side of the house to
another: At last seeing him somewhat near him, he demanded him what he meant
in that manner to run up and down? Unto whom the Angel presently made answer:
That he had the charg and keeping of certain Camels, some of which he had lost:
and that he did go to seek them out and to see, if he could possibly
discern them in any place there abouts. The King replied: Truly I think that
either thou art mad, and out of thy wits, or else thou art a thief purposely
come hither to rob and steal. For how is it possible for any Camels to be
going or walking upon the top of the house? And yet I do not so much marvel at
the folishnes of thy speech, as to see, how thou could get up thither so
high without the help of any ladder. The Angel speedily answered: Much more
difficult and impossible a thing it is to fly into Paradise without wings. And
having so said, he vanished suddenly out of sight. The King being both
astonished at the strangeness of this sight, and musing also at the manner of
his speech, continued a long time in a deep and profound study, what should be
meant by that which he had seen and heard. At length considering that the
persons who had thus spoken unto him, did not in all things resemble a humane
shape, and confering both his person and his speeches together, he began to
imagine and conjecture that it should be some Angel come from Paradise. And
thereupon having often and better advised himself of the words, he understood
that by wings the Angel meant good works. As if he had told him: That it was
impossible without good works to mount up into heaven. Wherefore from that time
forward condemning and detesting his own slothful and Lazy kind of life, he
began to reform himself: And he not only applied his studies and earnest
endeavors to the good government of his kingdom and estate: But he gave
himself wholly to good and charitable deeds. By means of which his diligence
and piety, he subdued at the last his old humor of sloth and lazines: and he
was fully persuaded, that God had sent his Angel in that strange shape and
manner, only to impart his good grace and favor unto him, and to recall him
from so heinous and deadly a sin. These and such like fantasies and
fantastical fables, are every where delivered in the Turkish Alcoran, and in
the other books of their law for want of better and sounder instructions: And
they have no other means, then by rydiculous tales, and feigned visions and
revelations, and by other such like Idle toys and illusions, to teach and
admonish men to have those vices in detestation which they think to be the
hindraunces and impediments of their Salvation.

Of the opinion of the Turks touching the Sins of wrath and Envy. Cap. 19.
AMongst the other sins which the Mahometists account mortal and deadly:
That of wrath and anger is not held to be the the least, for that it is an
occasion oftentimes of many other most heinous and cruel wicked deeds, and
does breed many foul in conueniences amongst friends and neighbors, as
slanders, hatred and enmity, with fighting and quarrelling, yea many times
murders and manslaughters. For this cause they say: That any man carried away
with rage and choler, is not his own man, nor is master of himself: But
being governed by his rage and fury, his anger does violently transport him
from himself (as it were) an hideous storm and tempest. Moreover they affirm
that this must needs be a most heinous and grievous sin: For that when men
are assaulted with choler, and do give place to their anger, they do not only
forget God their creator, and all the blessings and benefits which his divine
Majesty has bestowed upon them, and which they ought to have continually in
remembrance: But they are also utterly forgetful both of themselves and of
others: whereof it ensues, that being as men blinded, and having lost al
sense, reason and understanding: they have no care nor regard either of their
neighbors friends or brethren, but with all their powers and endeavors, many
times they seek their utter ruin and destruction: whereas in reason they
ought to have an especial care of their safety, welfare, and preservation.
And therefore as this passion does make men to degenerate from humane nature,
and does (as it were) transform them into brute and savage beasts. So does it
utterly remove and cast them out from the grace and favor of God, when they do
with such outrageous minds and wrathful violence persecute their brethren and
poor neighbors. For this cause they hold it most need full and necessary for
men to cut off and eschew al occasions that may draw them unto wrath and anger.
For they think and affirm: That by how much the farther they do keep
themselves from this vice, so much the nearer they are knit and joined unto
God. In so much, that this is held for a most certain and infallible truth in
their law: That whosoever is angry with his neighbor for seven hours
together, and does happen to die in that time, not being reconciled unto him*
He is surely damned to infernal pains and torment.

Touching Envy, they say: That it is the most secret and privy sin, that a
man can possibly commit: And that it does dwell inwardly in the mind of the
sinner, being always hidden and concealed in the bottom of his heart. For
this cause they have a most true saying: Saying of the Turks touching the
envious man,
That it is impossible for the Envious man to be glad and merry from the heart,
nor to take any joy, pleasure, or contentment of any thing what so ever:
Because it is the nature of Envy continually to gnaw and bite, to torment and
consume the heart of that man in whom it is rooted, by the sight of the welfare
and prosperity of him whom he enuieth. And therefore they compare and
resemble the envious man unto a tree which in outward show and apparaunce
seems to be most pleasant, and beautiful, and is full of green leaves and
fair blossoms, but inwardly is worm eaten, growing by little and little to
wax rotten, dry, and withered. And they have these words usual amongst them,
derived from their Prophet MAHOMET El Becchialo Laien Cadul Genetti Veleuchiane
Zaidem: The mening whereof is: That no Mahometists whatsoever shall ever see or
com to the joys of Paradise, although in all other things he be never so
diligent and dutiful to please God, unless he be very pure and thoroughly
cleansed from this sin of Envy. In regard whereof to prevent the danger of
their damnation, they are wonderfully religious in abstaining from this vice,
and they be very careful that it do not seize and take hold upon them.

Of the Pilgrimage of the Turks to Mecha in Arabia: and of their ceremonies
used in the same. Cap. 20.
HItherto has bin showed upon what grounds and principles the Religion of the
Turks is founded, and what manner of doctrine is contained in their law. By the
discovery whereof it is most clear and manifest, that the chief hope of
their salvation does depend and consist in the outward practice of moral
virtues and good deeds: in the avoiding of sin and such vices as they
esteem to be mortal: and in the devout observation of those superstitious
rites and ceremonies, which are prescribed and propounded unto them in their
law. The which that it may be more apparent, we will now proceed to lay open
unto you some other of their opinions touching such ceremonies and traditions
as they do principally rely upon for the remission of their sins and
transgressions, and for the furtheraunce of the salvation of their souls.

It is a common tradition taught unto al Turks, Moors, and other Mahometists
out of their books: That whosoever shall once in his life time go on
pilgrimage to Mecha, in Arabia, he shall be most assured of everlasting bliss
and happiness: And that his soul shall never come to feel either the pains of
the fire of Purgatory, or the torments of hell fire. And therefore all such as
have any sufficient leisure or opportunity to undertake that voyage, they will
be sure not to pretermit it. The time of this their pilgrimage is certain and
prefixed every year once, at such time as they are to celebrate ye feast of
their latter Easter, called Chucci, or Cazi bairam (of which we have before
spoken) the solemnity whereof is always performed at Mecha in Arabia by the^
only that go thither on pilgrimage: which Pilgrims they call Hagsilar or
Chazilar: And of the^ consists the Turkish order of the Mechits. Those
persons that dwell in Greece, Barbary, and other regions far distant: when they
have a determination to go that iourny, they do use to set forward six months
or more before the time appointed for the solemnity of that feast: Because ye
order is that they must meet altogether at Modin or Modina a City not far
from Mecha where they are to perform certain ceremonies in visiting the
Sepulcher of MAHOMET: and thence do they proceed on toward Mecha for the
celebrating of their Easter. But for the better discovery of the manner of this
Turkish pilgrimage, we will show upon what ground and reason they have taken up
this use and superstitious custom: next we will declare how they do proceed in
the same: And last of all, what ceremonies they do use in the fulfilling and
accomplishing of this solemnity.

The cause of ye Turks pilgrimage to Mecha in Arabia
It is written in the books of the Mahometists, that God gave commandment
unto Abraham to erect and build a Temple for the remission of the sins of the
whole world: And that he did promise unto him, That who so ever should repair
to the same Temple there to bewail and deplore his offenses and sinful life,
and to demand pardon for the same, they should surely obtain their desire
and petitions. Whereupon they say, that Abraham having received this
commandment, did presently begin to make that Temple, which they now use to
visit and frequent in the City of Mecha in Arabia. The Temple of Mecha in
Arabia visited by ye Turks: supposed to be built by Abraham,
And they affirm moreover, that as soon as Abraham had plotted out the site
and fashion thereof, and had laid only the foundation of it in the whole
circuit and compass of the same: God did confirm his work by a most strange
and wonderful miracle, making the hills and mountains adjoining to bring
together the stones and other things necessary for the building: In so much as
Abraham needed not to pain himself more then for the making and raising of
the wall only. They say also that as often and as soon as the wall was reared
two Cubits in height: so often did it always sink down into the earth, and
was swallowed up of the ground, so as the last row or rank of stones that
had been laid could scant or hardly be discerned. Moreover they say that the
Devil appeared unto Abraham, as he was busily laboring about the wall, of
purpose to fear and terrify him from the work new begun: But that Abraham
being of a stout and good courage did drive him away by casting three several
stones at him. At the length, Abraham having continued long at this work, when
the wall was brought so high above the ground, as it came to be near about the
height of a man's stature: That then God commanded Abraham to set on the roof,
and to cover it. Which Abraham having done accordingly, the wall (by little and
little) began to raise it self again (by miracle) out of the ground, where
before it had been sunk; and day by day did grow higher and higher, like a
Tree or Plant that had sprung up out of the earth. Thus this Temple being
finished, and brought to his full height and perfection, Abraham entered into
the same: and being greatly astonished at the goodlye and wonderful beauty
thereof, he prayed unto God, and desired of him, That whatsoever man or woman
should come to pray in that Temple, their prayers might be heard, and their
requests granted; and that they might be delivered from the pains of Hell, and
from the punishment of the Fire of Purgatory. Neither was this Prayer (say
they) made in vain; but that God did yield and grant unto his request. After
which, Abraham being departed out of Mecha, they tell, How he was commanded
by God to go up into the next Mountain, where he should find a Marble stone,
being on the one side black, and on the other side white: which stone he was
willed to take and place before the gate of the Temple. Whereupon Abraham
endeavoring to carry it away, according as he was willed, the stone of it self
did move and follow after him to the gate of the Temple, into that very place
where it is now seen at this day. Those that go thither in Pilgrimage, do use
with great religion to kiss this Stone at their coming thither: being fully
persuaded, that in the last day, they shall be guided by this Stone into
paradise. For there be some of a Belief, That this Stone is that Angel, unto
whose custody Adam and Eve were committed by God in Paradise: who (for that he
was negligent in his office and duty) had this punishment laid upon him, to
be turned into a Stone; and there to remain for his fault and negligence, till
the Day of Judgment. This, and infinite other fabulous and forged miracles do
they report to have happened at the Building of the Temple of Mecha: in regard
whereof, and for that MAHOMET (as they suppose) there ended his life: they do
attribute so great holiness and sanctity to this place, as thereupon they have
grounded this their order and superstitious usage of going thither on
Pilgrimage, hoping thereby to have remission of all their sins and offenses.

Now that we have showed the cause of this Pilgrimage, let us see in what
manner these Pilgrims do prepare themselves toward their Journey, The manner
and usage of the Turks when they go to Mecha on Pilgrimage.
and what order they observe in proceeding on the same. First, they that are
minded to travel on Pilgrimage to Mecha, do hold it requisite and needful,
before they set forward on their Journey, that they do lay aside all hatred,
malice and enmity out of their hearts; and, that they do sincerely and
unfeignedly reconcile themselves unto their adversaries, forgiving and
forgetting all injuries, quarrels, and causes of debate and contention between
them: for they are of opinion; that if there do remain and abide any sparks
of offense or malice in their minds; or, if their adversaries do refuse to
be accorded and reconciled unto them, al their labor and pains taken in their
Journey and Pilgrimage, would be in vain and to no purpose. When the time
comes that they are to begin their Journey, the Pilgrims of each country do
meet together in one place, and so do they set forward in great Troops and
Companies. And if there be any amongst them so poor, that they are not able
bear their own charges; then do the richer sort defray it for them: and
every man does indifferentlye make provision of victuals one for another: and
in so doing the rich men are persuaded, that they do God good service. When
they are come to Cayr in Egypt, (which of old was named Memphis) they do
find there great numbers of Moors and Ethiopians, who (being ready prepared
for the same Journey) do in that Place expect their coming. Then all of them
(joined together in one Company) do proceed on their Journey, and take their
way toward Mecha: and for three days together are they entertained in certain
Hospitalls upon the way, where their costs and charges are born and defrayed
for them: which (before such time as the Sultan of Egypt and that Country came
to be subjected to the Turkish Empire) was then paid and discharged by the
Sultan; but since that time has been at the charge of the Great Turk, whose
Deputy in Egypt, does see these Pilgrims to be furnished with all necessary
provisions at their departure from Cayr. For, from thence they were conducted
on their way by the Admiral; whom the Sultans did always command to
accompany them, appoynting a great number of his Mameluckes or Soldiers,
both on horseback and on foot to attend upon the Admiral, and to
safe-conduit the Pilgrims even to Mecha: to the intent they should see them
safely protected against the violence of the Arabians, who do use to lie
hidden upon the sides of the High ways in Rocks and Caves, of purpose to rob
and spoil men as they pass. For that Country, having very few or no woods
at all, is a very Desert, and like a Sea of sand: the which many times the
wind does so violently take and blow too and fro, that in a moment it will
gather into huge heaps like mighty Mountains; and suddenly again it will be
scattered and dispersed into smoothe and plain ground. By means whereof the
Pilgrims are oftentimes in great danger and hazard of their lives. Besides
there is so great scarcity and lack of water, that for three days iourny
they cannot have any upon the way by reason the Country is altogether void of
Springs and Rivers: which want is supplied by the care and liberality of the
Sultan or Governor of Cayre; who does not only provide them of a great
number of Water-bearers to carry water along with them; (for which they have
an yearly allowance of ten thousand Ducats for their pains, and is paid unto
them out of the Public Treasury and Revenues) but He also sends with
them many Camells, both laden with their water, and for the Pilgrims also to
ride upon for their more ease, and speedier passage over that Desert: to the
intent they may have the less need and want of water than otherwise they
should. The nature of the Camel to endure thirst and labor more than any other
creature.
For there is not any beast or creature living more patient and able to endure
thirst than the Camel: who though he never taste neither of meat nor drink
for five days together, yet will never faint nor give over in his travel.
Besides, he is of such strength in his legs, that he will stand for many days
without lying or resting himself on the ground: especially about the spring
time: at which season he will continue standing for forty days together.
Thus do they travel over the deserts of Arabia, till they come to Modin, or
Medina, which is three short days journey from Mecha. There do they provide
themselves of lodgings in a fair Plain before the walls* or else they rest
themselves upon the ground, having great store of victualles provided and
brought unto them by the citizens and inhabitants of Modin: where also they do
meet with infinite numbers of people, both Merchants and others assembled out
of Persia, India, and all other Nations in that part of the East, which are
addicted to the law and religion of MAHOMET. The next morning after their
coming thither, their whole company is numbered: for they do hold it a very
profane and unlawful thing to perform the solemnity of this feast with less
than 60000. men at the least. But by how much the more their company does
exceed that number, so much the better and more solemn do they esteem it.
After they have thus taken a view of the whole multitude: all of them do go up
into the next mountain called Arefetagi: where putting off their garments,
they do wade stark naked into a river running thereby, till they be covered up
to the neck: and in the mean time they mutter certain superstitious prayers
to themselves in secret. And they say that they use this ceremony, because
that Adam (as they persuade themselves) did in the same place, and in the like
manner, thrice wash and cover himself in that water: where having deplored his
sin which he had committed, he obtained of God remission for the same. After
this ceremony ended, having clothed themselves, they return down again into
the Plain before the city of Modin: and then do they prepare themselves to the
celebration of their feast which they begin here at this city: the cause and
manner whereof with the course and order which they observe both there and at
Mecha, and elsewhere, we will as briefly as we may make open and manifest.

After that MAHOMET was departed this life at Mecha, his Disciples conveyed his
dead body to this City of Modin. Of the sepulcher of Mahomet at Modin in
Arabia, and how it is visited by the Turkish pilgrims.
And according as he had commanded them before his death: they caused a
sepulcher to be dug for him very deep, in the midst of a temple which
himself had there caused to be builded. In the which, being walled round on
all sides, his body was laid, the same being enclosed in a coffin made of
wood, and so covered over with marble work, even from the botome of the grave,
and rising as high as the stature of a man above the ground. Over his sepulcher
do hang two Tables of marble; one aloft at his head, and another somewhat
lower, at his feet. And his sepulcher is covered with a vault, having a
covering of green water chamblet cast over it. Upon the marble wherein he
lies entombed, are written these words in the Arabian tongue, This is the
Sepulcher of Mahomet.

In times past, the Armenians had thought to have stolen thence the body of
MAHOMET: and for that purpose had begun to undermine the ground, near about
eight furlongs from the place where it lay, and so thought to have gotten into
the sepulcher: but their purpose being strangely discovered, they were
apprehended and executed. Thereupon was the sepulcher enclosed with iron grates
on every part, both over etc under, and on all sides, to the end the body of
their Prophet should not at any time be stolen nor conveyed from thence. The
Turks affirm, that Mahomet in his last will and testament prophesied, that his
body should not continue there about 1000. years: and that then both his
religion and empire should have an end: but to our purpose.

This sepulcher is so reverenced and honored by the Turks, Moors, and all
Mahometists, that they do frequent the same with great religion and devotion,
thinking that they shall obtain pardon and forgiveness of their sins, if
they do once kiss the Sepulcher of their Prophet: One of the first things
therefore that these pilgrims do observe in their peregrination to Mecha, is to
visitt this Sepulcher of Mahomet. For the which cause having washed themselves
(as we have said) in the river upon the Mountain aforementioned: and being now
entered into Modin to perform their devotion at MAHOMET his Sepulcher; they
do use first of all with great solemnity to lay down upon his Tomb their
Alcoran: which Book (as they say) was the same that MAHOMET wrote with his
own hand. Then the hour of their prayers and ceremonies approaching, their
Meizin getting up into the Towers and Turrets of the Temple, do with a loud
voice sing their woonted Psalms, and do inuit the people to their
ceremonies. When they have spent three whole hours in the Temple at their
prayers, they issue out suddenly, and with great speed, and with all their
force, they run to the top of the next mountain so hastily, that all their
body runs on a sweat. For they are persuaded: That with this sweating, all
the spots and deformities of their sins do distill likewise and vanish away from
them. As soon as one company is thus gotten out, others do succeed in their
places, and so follow on after them, doing as the former have done before them.
And after that al have finished this ceremony, then presently do they repair
to the sepulcher of MAHOMET to kiss it. These things thus done, they repair
again to the next mountain, to offer up their sacrifices, which are fat and
goodly rams: which being killed, they do wrap up the carcases in the skins:
and then every man may lawfully take away a piece thereof at his pleasure. Then
does each of them fill a little vessel (which they carry with them of
purpose) with certain water springing out of a rock there adioining, which
they call Abemzem sui, that is, The water of Purification. And they do esteem
the same as a most holy relike; because they imagine and affirm, that this
water did first begin to issue out of that rock, by reason of a stoke that
MAHOMET gave it with his foot. In regard whereof they do use to carrye of this
water home with them into their countries. And if any of them happen to die on
the way, they do with that water besprinckle the garments, wherein the dead
body is wrapped: supposing thereby the party deceased does obtain pardon of
all his sins. During the time and solemnity of this their feast: if it happen
that any one who is a slave either by purchase or by inheritance, do enter
into the Temple: he is by his entry presently enfranchised: and his Master
cannot from thenceforth by any means deprive him of his liberty. If any woman
be desirous to enter into the Temple during this feast, the order is, that the
husband must lead her thither, holding her by the hand: if she be a widow
any other man may supply the roomth of a husband in that behalf. But if she
be a maid, the custom is by their law, that she be led thither by a young
man. After they have ended their ceremonies in the Temple, they spend all the
rest of the day in singing, dancing, and such like kinds of mirth and
merriment, to testify and make show of their exceeding joy, for that they
hold themselves to be delivered that day from the pains of the fire of
purgatory. Howbeit they are of a belief, That for all such as do again
pollute themselves with the committing of new sins, God has prepared another
purgatory in hell: Opinion of the Turks touching double purgatory
the torments whereof (being with all extremity of cold) they affirm to be
far worse than the fiery purgatory: and that there is no delivery of those
souls from thence which are once brought i^to that place, but that they are to
continue there for ever, without al hope of redemption. These things being thus
ended, and accomplished at Modin in honor of MAHOMET his sepulcher, the next
morning early they proceed on their journey toward Mecha, to visit the
Temple there builded by Abraham, and to consummate the rest of this their feast
of Easter. Where being come, for that the place is not capable of them al at
once, part of them do stay without before the Temple, until such time as those
which be first entered, have performed their devotion, and then others do enter
and succeed still in order after them, doing as the rest have done before
them: For there also they use many and diverse ceremonies, besides most ardent
and vehement prayers made unto God, that it would please him to hear them, and
to grant their petitions which they there make unto him, The Mohammedan and
Turkish pilgrims visit the sepulcher of Christ at Jerusalem.
as he heard and granted the prayer of Abraham at the building of that temple.
From thence (all their rites and ceremonies being ended) taking their iourny
homewardes, they go first to Jerusalem, which place they call, Cuzu Mobarech:
And then also using certain prayers, they visit the sepulcher of Christ, for
they have an opinion, that unless they visit that sepulcher and the holy land,
as well as the sepulcher of Mahomet, their pilgrimage to Mecha would little
avail or profit them, nor that it would be pleasing or acceptable unto God

All things being now finished, which do in any sort appertain to the
solemnity of their feast and sacrifices, The manner and ceremonies of the
Turkish pilgrims at their departure homewardes from Mecha.
the next morning they do depart all together in troops and companies, and in
the same order that they first set forward, taking with them all their
carriages, beasts, camels, and other provisions; the first troop that marches
are the Indians, after them the Persians, and so every nation each after other
in several troops. The morrow after the day of their departure comes the
Admiral of Egypt with a great multitude of Mameluckes and soldiers, who
having first taken that Alcoran which was laid upon the tomb or sepulcher of
MAHOMET at Modin, and set the same upon a Camel richly trapped, and covered al
over with scarlet: he causes it to be carried along with him under a rich and
beautiful canopie. Before the Camel march the Mameluckes and soldiers; and
after follows a huge multitude of other people: who being come within a days
iourny of Caire, the Sultan commands all the rest of his Mameluckes and
soldiers, and all the Citizens of Caire to go forth of the city to meet
with them. Then do they altogether accompany the camel to the Sultan his
palace, where the Sultan himself coming forth, after he has saluted them,
does receive and entertain them with great courtesy. Whereupon the Camel
with the Alcoran being brought near unto him, presently kneeleth down, being
taught aforehand so to do. And in the mean time all the pilgrims do sing
certain psalms or hymns after their manner. Then approaches one of their
priests called Imam: who being clothed in most precious and perfumed garments,
and having his arms and hands covered with crimosin taffata, takes down the
Book from the Camel, with notable reverence and solemnity. And having
himself first kissed the same with great devotion, he offers it to be
kissed likewise by the Sultan, and afterward holds it aloft, so as it may
be plainly seen of all the people: who as soon as they have a sight thereof,
suddenly, and with great force and violence do assault and set upon the
Camel, and with their swords, daggers, and knives do cut him in a thousand
pieces, so that even in a moment, there is not any thing left, either of the
Camel, or of his furniture. For every man gets unto himself some little
portion thereof, as a most holy and sacred Relike of great price and
estimation: supposing themselves by the possession thereof to be most blessed
and happy. This done, they do immediately separate themselves, and each man
prepares himself with all speed to return home into his own country.

Of the Temples and Hospitalles of the Turks, and other works and edifices
builded and made for their souls health. Cap. 21.
BEsides this pilgrimage used by the Turks to Mecha, and elsewhere for the
remission of their sins, there be many other things, wherein they do repute no
small religion and holiness, supposing that by them likewise they shall merit
great favor at Gods hands: and that the same are special and ready means for
the furtherance of their salvation. Of this kind are their temples and
religious houses builded for the celebrating of their Mahometisme and
superstitious ceremonies: and their hospitals founded for the relief both of
poor and impotent persons, and of travelers and pilgrims, with many other
like works done to that intent and purpose: for the manner and usage of the
Turks is, Of the last wills and testaments and legacies of the Turks.
when any of them falls sick, and thinks that they shall die, to send for
their friends, neighbors, and kinsfolks, to the intent they may in their
presence make their last will and Testament. The most part of the Legacies
which they do give and appoint in their wills and Testaments, are to such
holy, religious, and public uses, as they do think will be very meritorious
and beneficial to their souls, for some of them give largely toward the
making or repayring of highwayes, Bridges, and Cawseyes, for the ease of
Passengers; others for the making of Conduicts, Cesternes, and Water-pipes, for
the conueyance of water from places far distant to such of their Hospitalls
or Temples, as being situated in dry and barren Places, are ordinarily
frequented upon Devotion and Piety. Some also do give large Legacies for the
redemption of Prisoners and Slaves from bondage and imprisonment. And there be
many of their Women (which kind exceeds all others in Superstition) who do
bequeathe great store of money to be distributed amongst such Soldiers, as
have slain any certain number of Christians; for that they hold this to be a
Deed very pleasing and acceptable unto God. Upon these and such like Works
and public Deeds do the most part of the inferior sort of People bestow
great sums of money by their last Wills and Testaments: but the Emperors of
the Turks, and some of their Bassaes and chief Nobles, when they make their
Wills, and do appoint any Legacies to such uses, they do it commonly for the
building of Temples or Hospitalls, or some other such like great and sumptuous
Works: supposing, that by the largenes of their bounty and liberality, and
by the greatness of this their devotion and deeds of piety, they shall merit
the more grace and favor at Gods hands; and, that it will be the more for the
safety and benefit of their souls. Wherefore, seeing they have both their
Temples and their Hospitalls in so great regard, and do attribute so much
holiness and merit unto those Works; it shall not be amiss (in a word or two)
briefly to describe the form and order both of their Temples and of their
Hospitalls.

The manner of the Turkish Temples.
Their Temples or Meschits are (for the most part) quadrant and four square,
not much unlike to our Churches; yet greater and larger in length, and then in
breadth: and some of them are more large and ample and more sumptuous than
others. The Temple of Saint Sophy at Constantinople is (of all their other
Temples) the most beautiful and excellent. The form and fashion thereof is
round, like unto the Temple of Santa Maria in Rome: which being builded by the
ancient Romans, was by them called Pantheon: But that this at Constantinople
does greatly excel the other, both in largeness, The description and
excellency of the Temple of Saint Sophy in Constantinople.
height, and beauty. The Roof thereof (being made arch-wise) is covered al
over with lead, having one only Light or Window in the top thereof, made
round like a Loouer. Within, it is beautefied on all parts with curious work
of Porphiry and fine Alablaster; having two rows of goodly Marble Pillars each
over other: of the which, those of the first row are so big in compass, as
two men hand in hand can scarce clip and embrace them; their length also being
proportionable to their breadth. Above them stand the others, somewhat of a
lesser size, supporting the Loouer in the top of the Temple. The Gates
thereof are fair and stately, aunswerable to the beauty of the Building, and
are covered all over with plates of brass. One of those Gates (as they imagine
and give out) was made of the wood of Noah his Arc: for which cause, there are
in it three several places or partitions, left uncovered without any bras, to
the intent such as repair thither, may come to kiss the wood of that Gate: by
which ceremony, they do assure themselves to have their sins pardoned. This
Temple was first builded by Justinian the Emperor: but after that
Constantinople came to be conquered by the Turks, they threw down all the
Altars within it, and took away all the Images and Pictures. For that they
say, God only is to be adored and worshipped: Opinion of the Turks touching
the having and worshipping of Images.
and that there is not any reverence at all to be given to Stocks and
Stones, neither to Brass, Gold, n^r Silver, nor to any Images of any kind
whatsoever. All the Belles of that Temple they made into Great Ordenaunce,
because they have no use of Belles amongst them: but the Temple it self they
have converted to their own superstitious use, making it a Mosche or Meschit,
for their profane Prayers and Ceremonies: and they have it in that account and
reverence, (notwithstanding it was builded by Christians) as it is very much
frequented, and that with great Religion by infinite multitudes of Mahometists;
who (in regard thereof, as also for the beauty and greatness thereof, do now
esteem it as the principal of all their Meschits. In the Reign of Baiazeth
the second, there were numbered (at one time) six and thirty thousand People
that resorted thither at one of their Easter Feasts, upon Devotion to visit
it, and to pray within it. Mahomet the second (after he had conquered that
City, and had made choice of it to be the chief Seat of his Empire) did
erect there another Temple, in all points like to that of Saint Sophy: which is
also without any Images or Pictures within it; but it is set out and adorned
with golden Letters, after the Morisco fashion.

And there is another Temple likewise, which was builded by his Son Baiazeth,
and is adorned in the same manner. The rest of all their Meschits, are of
diverse sorts, some high and some low, of several fashions. The Turrets of
their Temples (upon which their Priests use to sing their Hymns when they call
the People together to their Prayers) are of a very great height, and are all
of them made in the manner of Watch-towers; their greater Churches having two,
and their lesser but one of them. Upon the tops of those Towers or Turrets
is set an half Moon or Cressaunt; which is the Ensign of the Turks, as the
Cross is the Ensign of the Christians. Within their Temples, they have no
kind of Ornaments, besides bare and naked walls fair whited; save only their
Books and their Lamps burning with Oil, (of which they have great store) and
their Clothes of Tapestrie: on the which (being spread over mattes upon the
pauement) they use to kneel down and prostrate themselves at the time of
their Prayers. Howbeit upon the walls of their Churches, are written commonly
these words; La Illah Illelah, Mehemmet Irresul Allah: Taure Bir, Begamber
Hach: that is, There is but one only God, and Mahomet his Prophet: There is
one Creator, and his Proph^ts are equal. Or else these words Fila, Galeb,
Illelah: that is, There is none so mighty as is God.

Having sufficiently discovered the manner and fashion of the Turkish Temples;
let us now (in a word or two) show the order of their Hospitalls, which they
call Imareth. The order of the Turkish Hospitalls.
Of these (throughout most of their dominions) they have as great store as of
Temples: and they are ordained purposely, for the relief of poor People, of
Pilgrims, of Travelers, and of sick Persons, with meat, drink, and other
needful necessaries, both for themselves and their horses. Howbeeit they do
not in all their Hospitals use to give one kind of diet, but diverse and
sundry sorts of meats, according to the diversity of the places. In some,
they use to give them Ryce, which they call Pirinct Tsorba; and some allowaunce
of flesh: in others, they feed them with a kind of meat, called Boghdatas;
which is made of wheat, with a certain quantity of bread, and water for
their drink. They have places appointed for them to lodge in: some priuatelye
and several, others openly and in public: howbeit they sleep not upon beds,
but on straw or hay, under the covering or roof of some house, provided of
purpose. This allowance (in most of their Hospitalls) is common to all persons
both poor and rich, be they Christians, Jews, or Turks; and they have it
freely, and without paying for any thing: to which end, there are great Rents
and yearly Revenues given for the maintenance of those Hospitalls, and the
relief of such as resort unto them. In Constantinople be many of those
Hospitalls; one of which (builded by their Emperor Mahomet the second) is in a
manner the chiefest: and another, begun to be builded like unto that by his
Son Baiazeth, which was afterward finished by his Son Selim the first.
Both of these have about five and twentye round Turrets covered with lead: one
of which being in the midst of the other, is larger and greater than the
rest; and under it are lodgings and dwellings appointed for the Priests. On one
side of the Hospital are set beds for Pilgrims, where they are entertained
(together with their servant) very courteously, and may continue there for
three whole days together. And so may all Travelers, having both meat and
lodging allowed freely, both for themselves and their horses. On another side
of the same, are beds and lodgings ordained for Leapers, and other sick and
diseased persons; which are there attended and nourished very carefully: for
they spare for no costs or charges to help them; but the greater that is their
misery, the more care and compassion they take of them. And therefore they have
there purposely provided to attend them, both Physicians, Surgeons and
Apothecaries, lodged and maintained in those Hospitalls. Three times a day may
any man that will come and eat there in a place severally provided of purpose.
They have also in each of those Hospitalls a certain allowance for fourteen
Scholars and Doctors that study the Laws of MAHOMET, who have their
lodgings apart seven on the one side, and seven on the other side. The
Governors of the Hospitals, have their lodgings likewise several to
themselves; and they have the care and disposing of the rents and Goods which
are given and bequeathed to the Hospitalls. Some say, that the Revenues of
that Hospital which was builded by Mahomet, amounts to an hundred and fifty
thousand Ducats by the year; and that the other has rather more than less.
In either of these Hospitalls, there is a fair Meschit or Church builded; each
of which has a little Chapel builded close adioining unto it, wherein the
Founders of those Hospitalls lie buried, both Mahomet and Baiazeth, each in his
own Chapel which himself had builded. For themselves having taken order
before their deaths, and made choice of those places for their Sepultures,
they did ordain those Meschits or Temples in either of those Hospitalls,
because they would have those Priests (which were maintained there upon their
allowaunce) and all such Pilgrims and others (as should come to take and
enjoy the benefit of their bounty and liberality) after they had fed and
refreshed themselves, there and then to pray to God to have mercy upon their
souls.

There is another Hospital in Constantinople, which was builded after these by
the Emperor Solomon the Son of Selim; which does so far surpass all the
former, both in greatness, beauty, and riches, that it exceeds them beyond
all comparison. As for others of a meaner sort and lesser proportion, it were
both an endless and a needless matter to entreat of them. For all the
Bassaes, Nobles, and better sort of people amongst the Turks, are generally so
addicted to these kind of works; and they are so wonderfully possessed and
carried away with this humor of building both Hospitalls, Temples, Common
Innes or Hostells, Bridges, Cawseys, Conduicts, and Water-coutses, and such
like Edifices; that there is almost none of their Cittyes, Provinces, or
Countries, but you may see in them sundry (yea infinite) Testimonies of their
bountiful and liberal Dispositions toward these kinds of Works and
Buildinges. In so much, that if any man should behold the multitude of them,
both in Constantinople and elsewhere within the Turks Dominions; and should
therewithal consider the manner and quality of those works, both for
sumptuousnes, cost and curiosity; the great and strange provisions and
expenses made and laid out upon them; their excessive rents and yearly
revenues, and the huge sums of money, which are daily given from time to
time for their increase and maintenance: he might make a question; whether
were more to be wondered at, either the multitude and magnificence of those
buildings; or the Superstitious Opinion and Conceit of this Nation: who do
repute such singular piety and devotion in the making of them, that they think
they cannot in any of their actions either do God better service; or find a
more ready and better means to bring their souls to the bliss of Paradise.

Of the Sepultures and manner of Burial amongst the Turks. Cap. 22.
Whenever any Turk is at the point of death, his friends and kinsfolks do
come to visit and to comfort him: and (putting him in mind of his sins) they
do advise him, with a contrite and repentaunt heart to bewail and deplore his
fore-passed life and offenses. Then do certain of their Priests rehearse and
read over certain himnes or Psalms. By which time, if the Party be not
already dead, but that the pangs of death do still continue and hold him,
they do bring thither their Alcoran; out of the which they do read a
certain prayer, repeating it seven times: which prayer in their language they
call Thebara echelezi: for they are of opinion, that before they can say that
prayer thrice over, the party will have yielded up the ghost. But if they do
as then perceive any token or show of life in him, they do recite an other
Psalm, which they call I asinnell Curanil Hecin. And this they do, to the
intent the Devil may not any way endommage nor hurt his soul, whilst he is
in the extremity and pains of death. After that the breath is departed out of
his body, they lay forth the corpse upon the ground in the midst of the house
upon tapestrie clothes, turning it upon the right side, with the face toward
the South. Then does there assemble certain of their priests which are to bury
him: who (having brought with them a certain cord or string, whereon are a
multitude of little Beads, made of the wood of Aloes, not much unlike those
which are used in the church of Rome for their Pater nofter Beads,) they do
tie the same round about the dead body, turning it some four or five times. In
the doing whereof, still as they come to touch every one of those Beads or
roundels after other. The Priests (who are to the number of twenty or vpwardes)
do all at once turn their faces toward the standers by, and say,
Subanasella, that is: God have mercy upon him. Then do those Priests take up
the corpse and carry it out into the Garden, where (having laid it upon a Table
two hands breadth above the ground,) there be certain who are appointed to
make ready the corpse to the burial, who first of all do take away the shirt
from it. And then covering the secret parts with a new cloth made of fine
bombaste, they do wash the body all over from the head to the feet with warm
water and soap: after which they do wipe and dry the same again with two other
very fine and white clothes made likewise of bombaste. In the which (as it
were) in a funeral or winding sheet they do wrap the corpse: and after they
have sprinkled it with rose water, perfumes, and other odoriferous things,
then they put upon it the best and most precious garments that the party used
to wear whilst he lived. And at the head thereof, upon a piece of wood made
and fitted of purpose, they do set his hat or turbant trimmed with roses and
sundry sorts of flowers, and so do they lay it upon a beer.

These ceremonies about the dead body (if it be of a man) are done by men: but
if it be a woman, they are performed by women. The Priests in the mean time
having begun the ceremonies of the funerals, at the last, some of them do
take up the corpse upon their shoulders, and do carry it toward the Church
with the head forward after the fashion of the Jews, and contrary to the use
and manner of the Christians. Before the corpse do go their Monks with candles
burning in their hands: after it follow the Priests singing still as they go
this Hymn: God is God, and the true God; and Mahomet was sent from God: after
them follow the men, first the kinsmen of the party deceased, and then the rest
of his friends and neighbors. The women in the mean time staying at home
mourning and lamenting for the dead, do prepare a banquet for the Priests, who
when they have brought the corpse to their Temple or Meschit, do set it down
before the Temple door, till they have performed all the ceremonies of their
funeralles. Which done, they take up the corpse again: and going on all
together, they carry it out of the City to the place ordained for burialles:
Of the place of burial amongst the Turks, and the manner of their sepulchers.
for neither is it lawful amongst them to bury in their temples, neither do
they use to bury any within their Cities: howbeit their Emperors and their
Bassaes, and other grand Seigniors, that do build any hospitalles or Mosches
for their souls health, do prepare sepulchers for themselves in some little
chapel near unto those Temples and Hospitalles, where they do give order to
have their bodies buried. And it is a common and usual thing amongst them for
the better sort to provide their own sepulchers in their life time:
notwithstanding that the greater number have them made by their friends and
kinsfolks after their death. Many of them do make their sepulchers in their
Gardens, or in some other solitary places: and yet they have certain
several places of burial appointed for the common sort (like unto the
churchyards of the Christians) where you may see infinite Toombes one adjoining
to another; some made of Brick, some of Marble, some of other stuff,
according to each man's state and ability. They have a use at their funeralles,
that (if the party deceased be a Gentleman) or nobly borne, his horses and
coursers shall be led with his corpse; and his toome shall be adorned and trimmed
with many Epitaphs: and if he be a great seignior or captain, his horses are
sadled with steel saddles set on the contrary way, and with their best and
richest caparisons: and they use to hang certain things at their noses, which
do make the horses to go continually neying, to make a show, as though they
did it for the loss and death of their lord and master. Moreover, they use to
carry with them the truncheons of their lances, with their Standards also and
ensigns trayled along upon the ground. The great personages have a use to
plant about their sepulchers sundry sorts of plants, with store of violets,
and other sweet and pleasant flowers: but the poorer sort buried in their
common graves, have their toombes only made of plain marble stones, with
certain letters or caracters engraven upon them after the Turkish fashion. But
to proceed with the manner of their funeralles. When they have brought the
corpse to the place appointed, and that it is laid in the sepulcher, then do
they cast some earth upon the face of it, and so closing up the grave or tomb,
they return back again to the dwelling house of the party deceased, where
the priests (after that they have said certain prayers for his soul) do make
merry with a dainty banquet provided for them of purpose, and every one of
them has five Aspers given him for his pains, by the friends of him that was
buried. But if the party be poor, then is there a collection made for money,
wherewith to pay the priests, and to discharge the expenses of the funeralles.
The manner and time of mourning for the dead amongst the Turks.
This also is not to be pretermitted, that the Turks do use at their funerals
to wear Blackes, notwithstanding that they do not continue the wearing of
them above eight days. And those that are of great account and estimate, do
not use to wear them any longer than for three days: at which time all the
kinsfolks and friends of the dead, do assemble themselves together, and having
used some comfortable speeches, and words of consolation each to other, they do
from thencefoorth clothe themselves in their woonted habit and apparel.
Howbeit the friends of such as are departed, do not forbear for all that
oftentimes to visit their sepulchers, especially their mothers, sisters, and
wives, and some other women of their kindred and familiar acquaintance, who do
oftentimes make repair to their toombes, and frequent them, of purpose to
weep and lament over them: in token and remembrance, that the like lot and
fortune is one day to befall and happen unto themselves.

Of the opinions of the Turks, touching the state of the souls departed out
of this life, and of the general judgment and resurrection of the dead: as
also of the joys of Paradise, and the pains of hell. Cap. 23.
THe faith and belief of the Turks concerning the Godhead, and by what means
they do hope and expect the salvation of their souls, has sufficiently been
expressed in the precedent discourses It now rests that we deliver their
opinions touching the estate of the soul after it is departed out of this
life: and what they think of the general Judgment and resurrection of the
dead: as also what kind of joys they imagine to be reserved in Heaven for
such as live well and godly; and what torments be prepared in Hell for the
wicked and ungodly. For they do generally believe and confess, that there is
a time wherein the world shall have an end: and that there is a day ordained
for the general judgment of all mankind, wherein the bodies of the dead shall
be raised and revived by the power of God: and that each man shall then appear
before the majesty of God both with their souls and bodies, to receive the
reward of their good and evil deeds done in this life, with an endless
recompense, either of eternal bliss, or everlasting unhappiness. In all which
points of their religion, albeit the Turks be to be esteemed far better than
the Epicures and the Atheifts, who deny the immortality of the soul, and do
acknowledge neither God, nor Devil, heaven nor hell: And though they go far
beyond the heathen Philosophers, and all the Gentiles and pagan Infidelles, who
thought the world to be eternal, and held the resurrection of the body to be
an idle dream and fable: yet for that their opinions in this behalf do
notwithstanding differ in most points from the doctrine and traditions, both of
the Jews, Gentiles, and Christians, and are full of most gross absurdities and
fantastical toys, and vile impieties, far differing from the truth and
sincerity of true religion: we will therefore briefly set down, how, and in
what manner they do imagine of these matters.

Opinion of the Turks of the state of the soul presently after the departure
thereof out of the body.
First this is one opinion and vain persuasion of the Turks, that when any dead
person has laien and rested about the third part of an hour in the sepulcher,
God does then send and put into it a new spirit: and that thereupon also there
do repair unto him by the appointment of God two Angels: of the which one
(as they say) is called Nechir, and the other Remonchir: who (being of a most
terrible aspect and fearful countenance, and having burning firebrarnds in
their hands) do examine the dead man of his fore-passed life in this world.
Which if they find to have bin very wicked and sinful, they do then scourge
him with fiery whips: But if his life were good and godly, they do then
transform him into the shape of a goodly and beautiful Angel, and they give
him good and comfortable speeches: telling him, that he shall rest and remain
there (accompanied with all his good deeds) until the last Day of the
General Judgment. The manner whereof (according to the Tradition of the
Mahometists) is as follows.

It is an opinion generally embraced, The opinion of the Turks touching the
manner of the worlds end.
and constantly affirmed by the Turks; That there is an angel above in heaven
named Israphill; who (having a Trumpet in his hand) is appointed to stand
always in the presence of God, and to be in a readiness (when God shall command
him) to sound his Trumpet, and to make an end and consummation of the world.
As soon as this Trumpet shall be sounded, all those that are then alive upon the
Earth shall in a moment fall down dead to the ground: and the Angels also
which are in Heaven shall die likewise. And this their Opinion they do
confirm out of these words of their Alcoran: Opinion of the Turks that the
Angels are mortal.
Culumen, Alleiafan, ve, geb, tab, vegei, roebic, tull, gela, li velle I
cheram: that is, God has spoken it with his mouth, That all mankind is
mortal: and that all creatures shall have an end, either by age, or by some
accident. Hereof the Turks conclude; that not only men, but that the Angels
also are mortal. And although many of their doctors, and such as are best
seen in their religion, do oppose themselves against this opinion, and do
contradict it upon good reasons, and with no absurd arguments: yet when those
words are alleged against them, Alcoran of the Turks must not be
contradicted by any man upon pain of death.
they are soon put to silence, and do subscribe to this opinion. For that no
man must gainsay or deny any thing contained in their Alcoran: But whosoever
shall dare either to dispute against that book, or to doubt of any article
therein written, he shall be sure, either to have his tongue pulled out of his
head, or else his body to be burnt and consumed with fire.

But to our purpose. They hold also, that immediately upon the sound of the
trumpet by the Angel, there shall be so great and terrible an earthquake, that
the whole frame of the world, both earth, and heaven shall be ruinated:
insomuch as the rocks and mountains shall fall and tumble together with such
force and violence, that they shall be broken into powder and dissolved into
dust, and heaps of sand: and that then God will create a new Light, and new
Aungelles, equal in glory and dignity to the former. After which he will
cause to fall a pleasant and svveete rain, which they call, Rehemet sui: that
is, The rain of mercy: with the which the earth then lying in dust shall be
watered: and so shall it remain for forty days together. Howbeit, they say,
that those days then shall be longer than are the days at this present. And
many of them hold also, that from thenceforth, there shall not be any
darkness of night as is now usual; but that the night shall be most clear
and lightsome, and that there shall be no need of sleep for the sustentation of
their bodies. And they say; That after the end of those forty days, God will
command the Angel Israphyll to sound his Trumphet again the second time: and
that at the sound thereof the dead shall suddenly arise and bereuiued from
death to life. For when Israphyll has thus blown his Trumpet, the sound
thereof (say they) shall be with such an exceeding noise, that it shall be heard
over the whole World: and that thereupon all the Dead (even from Abel unto the
end of the World) shall immediately be raised, and rise again in the same
manner and habit as they were buried. The opinion of the Turks touching the
manner of the Resurrection of the Dead.
At which time there shall appear great variety and diversity of
countenaunces: for some shall shine clear and beautiful as the Sun, others
as the Moon, and many like the Stars: some again shall have ugly visages
black and darksome; others shall have the heads of swine with great and
swollen tungs, and such like deformities. And at that time, all in general
shall cry and exclaim with a loud voice; Nessi, Nessi: that is, Woe is me
most miserable and wretched man, who have suffered my self to be overcome with
my filthy lusts and lewd desires. Whereupon the Angels shall show and point
at each man with their fingers, revealing and manifesting either their good
works or wicked deeds. Then all those (whose faces shall be found to shine like
the lights in heaven) shall stand and appear most glorious in the sight of God,
The opinion of the Turks touching the manner of the General judgment.
by reason of their virtuous and good deeds; whereat the wicked shall have
envy and despite. As for those who shall then be seen with deformed faces of
hogs and swine, they are such as have been greedily addicted in this life to
the getting of riches by usury and other unjust and unlawful means: and they
who shall have their tungs swollen great and loathsome, are such as have bin
liers, deceivers, blasphemers, periurers and such like: and they that have been
puffed up with pride and arrogancy in this world, shall then be trodden under
foot, and trampled upon by others. They say moreover, that GOD will then
question with the mighty Potentates of this world, both Emperors, Kings,
Princes, Tyrants, and other Signiors and great Personages, who have reigned
with force and violence, and have tirannized over their subjects and inferiors
with oppression and injustice. Besides, they do imagine and affirm, That GOD
will then separate and divide all the wicked and ungodly into seventy several
Companies, and will examine every man of all their deeds in particular, both
good and bad; which shall (at that time) be laid open before the^, so as there
shall not need any testimonies to be brought against them: for that there is no
part or member of their bodies, but will then openly and voluntarily confess
the truth, what evil it has committed; and each man will accuse himself of
all his own misdeeds, yea even of their wicked thoughts and cogitations,
though they never came to be executed and put in action. They say also, that
Michael the Archangell will be there present, having in his hand the Balance
of the Divine Justice, with which he will weigh the Souls, and so will discern
the just from the unjust. Moreover, they have a conceit, that Moses shall
stand thereby with a Standard; under the which all those shall be assembled who
have observed and fulfilled his Law: and that next to him there shall be Jesus
Christ the Son of the Virgin Mary with another great Standard; under which
shall be assembled all those Christians that have kept and observed his
Gospel; and that he shall then be Judge of the deeds of al men, and of al
things done in this world. On the other side (at the right hand of Christ) they
say that MAHOMET shall be with another Standard, having all his Followers about
him, whom he shall there show unto Christ. Thus all those that have done good
in this life, shall appear under their several and proper Standards, where
they shall find a most sweet and pleasant shadow to comfort and refresh them:
But as for all those who are not under the shadow of some one of those Banners,
they shall be most extremely scortched with the burning beams of the Sun,
according to the quantity and proportion of their misdeeds: and that both the
one and the other shall remain in this estate, till their Doom and final
Judgment be given upon them.

As soon as the Souls have heard their Judgment pronounced by the divine
Sentence, they say, That the^ the Angels shall appear on all sides, in a most
glorious and beautiful habit, distributed and divided into several troops and
companies; each of them having his place assigned unto him, the Cherubins on
the one side, and the Seraphins on the other: some of them playing upon
instruments of music, and some singing of psalms and hymns: The opinion of
the Turks touching the felicity of the souls in Paredice.
and that many of them shall attend singing and rejoicing at the Gates of
Paradise, to welcome the blessed Souls of such as have observed the divine
Commandments. And they affirm, That there shall be no difference between
Turks and Christians, Jews and Moors; neither shall one be known from
another, but all such as have lived well, and have done good deeds in the
sight of god, shall be of equal beauty and blessedness. howbeit that amongst the
wicked and reprobate there will be evident and apparent difference, and that
each shall be discerned from other. Moreover, they dream, that God will appoint a
large and spacious place in heaven for those souls that shall be admitted into
Paradise: where (according to their merits and deserts) every one shall have
a perpetual Habitation, and a goodly mansion place of a most glorious and
beautiful brightness: and that they shall have many Sun beams appointed for
them; upon which they may (at their pleasure) ride up and down about Heaven,
to take a view of those delights and precious things, which God has there made
and created. Besides all this, they do dream of other pleasures in Paradise
both of venerie, and also for the belly. For they imagine, that they shall have
there certain apples and fruits of a most heavenly taste: and that as soon
as they have eaten one of those Apples, God will immediately cause others to
grow in stead thereof. Likewise (for the quenching of their thirst) that they
shall have certain Rivers in Paradise, clear as the Crystal, and sweet as
sugar. Of the which after that they shall have tasted, both their sight and
their understanding shall be so quickened and enlarged, that they shall be able to
see from the one Pole to the other; and that both the meat and drink which
they take, shall consume within their Bodies, only by a fine and subtle kind
of sweat distilling from them. Moreoouer, they do imagine that they shall
have there, delicate and choice wives (which they call Vri): that is, Women
shining bright and beautiful as the Sun. For you must note, that the Turks
do hold, that none of the women living in this World, shall enter into
Paradise, but that such as have lived well, Opinion of the Turks, touching the
estate of women after this life.
shall have a place without the Gates of Paradise, where they shall ever remain
in great joy and blessedness: and, that the residue (who have lived wickedly)
shall go into a place of torment in Hell, which is there also provided for
them. Moreover, they say; That those their new Wives which they shall have in
Heaven, will every day become Virgins and Maids again; and, that they shall
continue and dwell with them for ever, without growing old or aged: and, that
every man in Paradise shall continue to be still of thirty years of age and
no more; and the women of fifteen or twenty years: and, that they shall
continue and remain for ever and ever in that joyful and happy estate, still
praising and lauding God for this grace and favor granted unto them. These be
the celestial joys, which the Turks do dream of, and promise unto
themselves in Paradise: where they do affirm, that those three
Standard-bearers (afo^e mentioned) Moses Christ and Mahomet are the chiefest
amongst the whole company of the blessed souls; and that each of them has
(by Gods appointment) a particular and peculiar part of Paradise allotted unto
them for their Dominion.

It is written in the Alcoran, That all those who are damned by the justice of
God for their sinful and wicked lives, The opinion of the Turks touching the
pains of hell,
are particulerly known and discerned by their names; for that they carry
them written upon their foreheads; and every one of them has a pack or
sachell laid upon his shoulders, containing both the greatness and number of the
sins which he has committed. Being thus laden with the burden of their
sins, they are led between two great Mountains through a straight and
narrow passage: and that from both those Mountains there leads a Bridge of
thirty miles in length; which being made arch-wise, one part thereof is
mounting upwards, in the midst it is smoothe and plain, and at the farther
end thereof it has a great downfall. This Bridge (they say) was made (by
Gods appointment) of keen and sharp iron, cut out and indented with many
short pricks and points in it. They call it, Sera Cuplissi, that is, The
Bridge of Justice: upon the which, all the sinful Souls are to pass with the
weighty burden of their sins upon their shoulders. And that on the one side
of this Bridge shall tumble down (headlong into hell) al those which have been
drowned in sin and wickedness in this world: where being consumed with extreme
torments in flames of fire, they shall be revived again to the same pains and
torments anew; and so shall they continue everlastingly without end. On the
other side of this Bridge, all those (who have not been altogether given over
to sin and wickedness) shall fall down, not into Hell, but into a certain
Purgatory: out of which they shall be at length freed and delivered sooner or
latter, according to the quantity and quality of their sins: and from thence
they shall be taken up and received into the joys of Paradise. Moreover they
believe, that there is in the midst of Hell a certain Tree growing, which they
call, Zoacum Agacci, that is, The Tree of bitterness: which though it grow in
the midst of the fiery flames of Hell, yet (such is the will of God) that it is
always green and flourishing, with great abundance of apples continually
growing on it: which Apples (they say) are like to the heads of devils; and
that of these apples the damned Souls shall eat, hoping to cool themselves,
and to find some refreshing of their burning heat; but what with the bitterness
and poisoned taste of the fruit, and with infernal pains which they endure,
the anguish of their tortures shall rather increase and be augmented more and
more; and their torments shall be most grievous and unspeakable: the Devils also
shall bind them with fiery chains, and so drag them up and down Hell for their
greater plague and torment. Howbeit they affirm, That all those Souls which
in the midst and extremity of their torments do call upon the name of God, and
crave aid and help from his Majesty, afterward they shall be released, and
received up into Paradise. And, that none shall rest or remain for ever in
Hell without hope of redemption: but only such as do utterly despair of
salvation, and do continue hopeless of Gods favor and mercy.

These be the opinions and blind fancies of the Turks concerning the estate of
the souls departed, the general resurrection, and last judgment of the dead,
with the ioies of heaven and hell torments. All which being (as it seems)
derived unto them by tradition from the corruption of their forefathers, and
confirmed in them by the erroneous instruction of their priests and teachers,
they do most religiously receive: embracing it rather in a blind zeal to the
law and religion of MAHOMET, than upon any good ground or foundation. For
being given over to delight in filthy lusts, and vain imaginations, they do
swerve clean away from the purity of sound religion; neither knowing the true
blessedness and felicity of the Soul, nor apprehending aright the mysteries
and truth of their salvation.

Of the several Orders of Religious persons amongst the Turks: and first of
their Priests. Cap. 24.
Having sufficiently unfolded the Doctrine and Traditions of the Turks Law,
with the most part of the ceremonies and superstitious opinions: it is now
requisite (before we conclude this Book of the sum of their Religion) that we
say somewhat of their Priests and religious person: for having made often
mention of some of them in sundry places of this Treatise; it shall be very
needful that we show unto you, what and how many kinds of Priests and
religious Orders there are amongst them: and what difference and diversity
there is between them.

There be two sorts of Religious or Ecclesiastical persons (if we may so
term them) amongst the Turks; namely their Priests: all which (by a general
name) they call Talismanni; and are little or nothing differing from secular
persons: and their Monks or rather begging Friars, which being in the nature
of Regular persons) are tied to certain orders and superstitious rules and
obseruances. Of each kind, there are diverse and sundry sorts, as hereafter
shall be particularly declared. Their Talismanni (or Priests) are married, having
wives and children, as other Turks: and they go clad after the manner of the
secular sort. They are chosen by the People, and have a certain Fee or Stipend
allowed them for their maintenance from the Emperor. And if their charge of
children be so great, that their ordinary allowance is not able to maintain
them: then they do exercise some one Mechanical trade or other (such as
befitteth men of a free estate and calling) either by teaching of some school,
or by writing of Books (for Printing is not in use amongst them:) and some of
them also use meaner crafts, as of Tailers, Shoomakers, or some such manuary
occupations, They have not for the most part any great knowledge or learning;
but they are held to be sufficiently skillful and learned, if they can read
the Alcoran or Musaph. Which being at first written (as they say) in the
Arabian tongue, they do repute it a very ill deed to have it translated into
the vulgar Turkish language. Such of them as have the knowledge to make any
interpretation of the Text, and to expound the meaning thereof unto the people
are held to be most profoundly learned, and are esteemed as great doctors.
For that such kind of interpreting is the best manner of preaching which they
have amongst them. These Talismanni are highly reverenced and regarded of all
men: Insomuch, as if any Turk do either strike, or do otherwise offer any
outrage to any of them in his person, he is punished with the loss of his hand
for his offense: and if such an offendour be a christian, he is sure to be
burned.

Of these Priests or Talismanni, there be diverse and sundry sorts: some of
which are of higher dignity and estimation than others, according to the
difference and diversity of their places whereunto they are called, For as in
the christian clergy (besides the common and ordinary sorts of Priests and
Ministers attending only upon divine service, and the mysteries of our
religion:) there be also Bishops, Archbishops, and others, who are worthily
admitted to have public government and authority, both in the church and
common wealth. So have the Turks likewise in their priesthood sundry offices,
functions, and degrees; some of which being only and ordinarily attendant upon
the rites and ceremonies of their religion, are reverenced only in regard of
their calling and prosessio^: And others having public authority and
jurisdiction over all estates and persons, both in causes concerning their
religion, and in matters of estate and civil government, are more highly
honored according to the dignity of the place or office wherein they rule and
command.

The office of the Muphti the chief or high priest of the Turks.
The chiefest and most principal of their Talismanni is one whom they call
Muphti or Mophti, whose office and dignity amongst the Turks, is not much
unlike to that of the high Priests amongst the Jews, and of the Popes in the
church of Rome: their estimate and reckoning in their several places being in
a manner all one and alike: and each of them having no less pre-eminence and
authority than other over the people of his own peculiar sect and religion:
howbeit this dignity goes not by hereditary succession, as did the high
priesthood of the Jews; but the Muphti is always elected by the Ottoman
emperor himself, as were the Popes in times past by the Roman Emperors. And
none is lightly preferred to the degree of Muphti, but such a one as is most
profoundly studied, and well seen in the laws and doctrine of MAHOMET, and is
reputed also of a most holy and sincere life. In regard whereof, as he has the
hiest and supreme place of honor above all the other Priests; so is he most
highly reverenced and honored of al estates and persons in the Turkish Empire.
And the emperor himself holds him in that reverence, honor, and account that
he does none other of his subjects. For whenever the Muphti goes abroad
forth of his own house (which he uses to do very seldom) his use and custom
is first of al to go and visit the emperor: who (as soon as he sees him
coming to salute him, and to do him reverence) presently arises out of his
seat; and embracing him with great kindness, entertaineth him very friendly and
lovingly: And causing him to sit down by him, he gives him the honor of the
Place. Besides, in all matters of consultation wherein the Emperor finds
any great doubt or difficulty, be it touching the estate, either of their
religion, wars, or civil policy, he will never resolve nor determine of
any thing absolutely without the advice and judgment of the Muphti.

Next to the Muphti is the Cadileschier, The office of the Cadileschier among
the Turks.
who being chosen also by the Emperor, may be compared in his degree and
calling to those whom the christians call Patriarchs: or else to the Primates
and Metropolitans of any kingdom. Of these there be three only in the Turkish
Empire; each of which has a several part of the empire allotted him to be
under his command and jurisdiction. For to one of them are appointed the
Turkish Provinces in Europe: the second has those in Natolia or Turquy once
called Asia the lesser: and the third his authority is over Egypt, and other
Provinces in the East of the lesser Asia. Out of all which Provinces whatsoever
causes come to be determined by appeal or otherwise, they are brought to be
decided before the Cadileschier of that same province whence they arise:
notwithstanding that the abode of each of these Cadileschiers be continually,
or for the most part, at Constantinople, or elsewhere wheresoever the Emperor
holds his court. The honor and reverence done to these is little less than to
the Muphti, both for that they have power and authority as well over the people,
as over the priests, and are reputed great Doctors, and deeply learned in the
laws and religion of MAHOMET.

The office of the Cadi amongst the Turks.
Next in degree to the Cadileschieri are the Cadi, who are as Bishops or
doctors in the Turks Law: of these there is a wonderful great number
dispersed in every province of the Turkish Empire: every city, town, and
village having one Cadi at the least, for the teaching and instructing of the
people in the laws and traditions of MAHOMET. Besides that they have the power
and authority of Justices and Magistrates in their several jurisdictions: and
they are ordained for the execution of Justice under the Cadileschieri, by
whom they are elected, as shall be elsewhere more at large declared. For all
these three offices of the Muphti, Cadileschieri, and Cadi being instituted and
ordained, as well for the administration of civil Justice and government of
the estate politic of the Turks, as in matters of their law and religion: we
shall hereafter have occasion more aptly to discourse of their office and
calling, and to discover more fully the nature and power of them, when we come
to entreat of the civil policy and government of the Turkish state and
Empire. In which respect we have in this place, only glaunced at them, to
show that they be Priests, which are placed in these high offices and
dignities, rather than to manifest at full the nature and quality of their
places. Wherefore we will proceed from these superior offices of the Turkish
Priesthood, to set down in order the other degrees of the meaner sort of
Priests, used about the law and ceremonies of the Turks.

The next degree of Priests after the three former: Of the ofice of the
Modecis or Governors of the Turkish hospitals.
and which is also of more estimate and honor than the ordinary sort of
Priests, albeit far inferior to the former, are the Governors of their
Hospitalles: whom they call Modecis, whose chiefest charge and duty consists
only in the government and careful ordering of their Hospitalles, in
receiving and disposing the rents and revenues of their particular houses: and
in seeing that all persons maintained within them, or repairing thither, have
their due allowance and necessaries ministered and distributed unto them: and to
see that every man do perform and observe those duties which are requisite,
according to the order and customs prescribed by the foundation of their
Hospitalles.

Now touching their ordinary and common sort of Priests. Of the ordinary sorts
of Priests amongst the Turks.
First they have their Meizin, whose office is (as has been already touched)
to go up into the top of their Turrets within their Mosches a little before
the usual hours appointed for public prayers: and there by singing of Songs
and Hymns to sommon and call together the people unto their prayers and
accustomed service. Next to them are their Priests, The Meizin, or Turkish
Priest which calls the people to prayers.
whom they call Imam: who do only attend and are employed within their Temple
about such ceremonies as are there used before the people at the times of
public prayers. Imam are Turkish prists having care of their cemonies.
Antippi, are Turkish prists that read and interpret their Alcoran
Then have they others called Antippi whose Office is upon their festiual days
and some other times to get up aloft upon certain steps or stairs purposely
prepared within their Temples: and there out of some chair (as it were) out of
a pulpit, openly to read unto the people out of their Alcoran or some other of
their Books the chief points and principles of the Mohammedan religion. And
these are they (as we have said elsewhere) that do in the end of their
service show forth, in the one hand a naked Cimitary, and in the other hand, a
Lance; exhorting them for to use and exercise their weapons against the
Ennemies of their Religion. Besides these Antippi, they have other Priests
whom they call Sophi: Sophi, Turkish priests employed in singing of Psalms at
their times of prayers.
who are appointed only for the singing of Hymns and Psalms after their
manner within their Temple, at the times of public prayers. They have also
another kind of Priests, whom the Turks and Tartarians call Seiti, or Sithi,
but the Moors and Sarracens call them Seriffi, and though they be little or
nothing attendant upon the ceremonies or duties of their religion: yet for
that they are thought to descend directly from the line of MAHOMET their
archprophet, Seiti, priests descended of the live of Mahomet.
they are therefore reputed for very holy men: and being reckoned in the number
of their Prists, are highly reverenced of al Mahometists. Chagi or Fachi,
priests of the Turks living by alms.
Another sort of Priests among them, are the Chagi or Fagi, who though they be
of the Turkish Priesthood, and not of any monastical or regular profession,
yet are in a manner as begging Friars, for that they live altogether of alms
like unto the Friars Mendicants in the Papacy. Their Office is not only to
attend in their Mosches upon their divine service, but also to look unto the
Relics of their Saints, of which the Turks have many and diverse, whom they
do hold in most high reverence, and are greatly esteemed by them. Besides, they
are to attend upon the corpses of the dead, and to accompany them at their
funeralles. Both of these sorts of priests the Seiti and the Chagi, are for
the most part, a most wicked and detestable kind of men. For being much and
often called, or rather hired to testify as witnesses in matters before the
Magistrate, they will for a Duckat take a thousand false oaths, especially if
it be against a Christian; against whom to use perjury or false witness, they
hold it no impiety, but rather a good and meritorious deed. And therefore
the christians (who are acquainted with their manners and conditions) do seek
both by good words and gifts, to keep and retain them for their friends,
because they will not be drawn into danger and extremity of the law by their
malicious and villainous disposition to the hazard both of their goods and
lives. Thus have we laid open unto you all the several sorts and orders of
secular priests amongst the Turks: now will we briefly show you the
diversity of their professed religious persons, or begging Friars.

Of the sundry Orders of religious professed persons, or begging Friars amongst
the Turks. Cap. 25.
THere be four kinds of religious Orders amongst the Turks: al which do
seem to be in the nature of Monks or begging Friars, for that they tie
themselves to a regular kind of life differing from other men: notwithstanding
that the profession of few or none of them is not rightly monastical nor
religious, either in solitariness, or in strictness, or austerenesse of life,
neither do they show any holiness or devotion in any of their Orders or
Professions: but though they seem to sever themselves from all other men under
a colorable show and appearance of religion: yet in very deed they are but as
a company of vagabonds, or idle and parasiticall persons: who seeking by ease
and a loose loytring kind of life to get their livings, do insinuate
themselves, and creep into the minds and affections of the superstitious
Mahometists by fained shows and pretenses of devotion: and so by the bounty
and benevolence of the ignorant and superstitious multitude, do maintain both
their estates, and the reputation of their licentious orders: abusing the
liberality of the people to the maintenance of their sensuality and lewd lusts,
whereunto they are most filthily addicted. And though they be polluted with all
kind of unclean and unnatural lusts, and be a most base and contemptible
kind of people: yet does the pretense and color of their religious Orders,
shield and protect them, yeedling them both tolleration and favor amongst the
Turks. But that you may more plainlye see what manner of people they be, we
will discourse of each of their Professions and Orders seuerallye by
themselves, yet with as much brevity as may be. Of the Giomailer, a kind of
religious order among the Turks, and of their habit manners, and Customs.


The first of those four professed Orders of Religion, the Turks call
Giomailer. These are a Sect altogether given and addicted to a voluptuous kind
of life, and do seem to repose their chiefest felicity in the enjoying of
worldly pleasures and delights: little or nothing differing from the old Sect
of the Epicures amongst the ancient Ethnicks. The most part of them which are
professed of this Order, are Gentlemen born and descended of noble blood: and
they stand much both upon the Nobility of their Birth, and the greatness of
their wealth and riches, as also upon their learning and knowledge. They are
(for the most part) men of a goodly stature, and of an excellent comelines and
beauty of body. They are possessed with a singular delight and desire of
travail, giving themselves both to see diverse foreign and strange
Countries, as also to learn the studies, manners, and customs of all
Nations: of the which, (to the intent they may the more fully discourse and
make report) whatsoever they do see or hear in their Travail worthy of
memory and observation, that do they most diligently set down and take note
of. Their upper garment is of a violet color, which being wouen without any
seame, is fastened close to the neck: and is girt unto them with a girdle
richly embrodered or otherwise trimmed with gold, having many silver belles
hanging at the same, the which do yield a most sweet and pleasant sound;
howbeit, some of them wear them fastened to their knees, and not to their
girdles. About their necks they do wear a skin, either of some Lion, or
Leopard, or of a Panther, with the legs and claws thereof hanging over their
shoulders, or else fastened unto their backs by the ears. The hair of their
heads they do use to wear very long, and hanging down over their sholders,
wauing and curled: and they keep it marvelous fair and beautiful; for in
the Trimming thereof, they employ more pains and labor, than upon any other
matter of what importance soever: and that it may show and shine the more
beautiful, they do use to trim it with a certain glewe or ointment, made of
Rosen and certain hairs, such as they use in the making of their water
Chamblets. Commonly they do carry a Book in their hands, written in the
Persian Tung, in which is contained pleasant Songs and Sonnets of Love, made
in rymes and meeter. Their manner is to go bare-headed, and with shoes made
of small cords or ropes. When many of them do meet together, there is a
wonderful sweet Harmony and Music made with the noise of their Bells. If
they happen to meet with any young man of a beautiful and fair complexion,
their manner is to fall into a Round, joining hands together, and so to enclose
him in between them (as it were in a Circle) endeavoring to delight and ravish
him with their music; which they do make so to agree with the sound of their
bells, that it causes a most excellent and wonderful sweet consent of music,
insomuch: as the People (of all hands) come running and wondering at it. With
this sweet and melodious kind of music, they do use to frequent and resort
to men's houses, especially of Artificers; who do give unto every one of them
that sing, an Asper. These Giomailer are wonderfully addicted to the love both
of women and of young men: and they seek by all means and devices possible, to
draw both the one and the other of them to the fulfilling of their leaud and
beastly lusts. For being thus given over altogether to their plesures, they
do wander up and down throughout all Cities, Towns and Countries where they
list, seeking opportunity to fulfill their sensual and filthy appetites.
They are termed generally by the Turks, The Religious Brethren of Love: but
are indeed fitter to be compared to swine and hogs; as being given over to
sensuality, voluptuousnes and Epicurisme, rather than to be reckoned in the
number of men devoted to holiness or religion.

The second Order of religious Persons amongst the Turks, are called
Calenderi: Of the Calenderi, a kind of religious order amongst the Turks: and
of their habit, manners, and customs.
and are a Sect quyte contrary to the former: for these do profess
perpetual Virginity, and precise Continency and Chastity. They do use
certain Temples peculier and proper to their Sect only, (differing from the
other Mosches of the Turks) which they call Tecchio. And upon the Gates of
those Temples, they have these words written; Caedan ormac, Dil Ersin
Cusciunge, Alcha checciur: which is, Whosoever is disposed to enter into our
religion, he must conform himself to our order and manner of living: and must
not in any case, nor at any time violate his vow of perpetual chastity and
Virginity.

Their upper Garment is a Gown fashioned like a sheet foure-square, which is
made of wool and horse-haire wouen together. Commonly they wear not any hair
on their heads, but keep them shaven, and covered with a kind of broad hat,
such as the ancient Priests of Greece were wont to use: which being made of
horse-hayre, are unshorn, not much unlike our thrummed Hattes, but having the
ends of the hairs hanging down from them the length of a span or more; and
are of such stifnes, as they can hardly be bent any way. Upon their cares, and
about their necks and arms, they use to wear certain iron Rings; and they
have also a hoale boared through the skin under their priuities, where they do
wear a Ring either of iron or of silver, of three or four pound weight: by
means whereof (howsoever they be otherwise by nature addicted) all desire and
opportunity of luxuriousnes and incontinencie is taken from them; and so they
do the more easily keep their chastity, according to their profession. These
also do use to go wandering up and down the Country, reading unto the people
(out of certain Books) Verses written in Ryme or Meeter by one Nerzimi;
Nerzimi, one of the order of the Turkish Calender i^ martyred for confessing
the deity of Christ.
who (in former time) was a man of principal account and fame in their Sect and
Profession: and (as they report) was put to death, having his skin flayed off
his body, for writing and teaching certain Points of Doctrine contrary to
the Law of MAHOMET: and (as some write) for acknowledging the Deity and
humanity of Christ, and confessing him to be both God and Man. They do
observe very precisely and deuoutlye the Orders and Institutions of this
Nerzimi: and they live altogether upon Alms. There have been some Christians,
who have seen and read part of those Books written by the said Nerzimi, and
they say, that they do favor more of Christianity than of Mahometisme; and
that there are many things comprehended in them, which both for excellency
of art and cunning, and for elegancie of Rythmes and Verse (according to the
manner of that language) are very commendable and praise-worthie.

A third Order of Religion amongst the Turks, Of the Daruisses or Deruisi, a
kind of religious Order amongst the Turks: and of their habit, manners, and
customs.
is that of the Deruisi or Daruisses; whose chiefest care and profession is
mirth and pastime: as affecting and studying nothing more, than how to spend
their time, and pass away their days in merriment and solace. Their guise is,
to go clad or covered with two Sheeps skins dried in the Sun; one of which
hanging behind at their backs, and the other before at their breasts, and
reaching down to their knees, are fastened together about their necks. Other
apparel they wear not any but go altogether naked: and (because they love
not to have any hair seen upon any part of their bodies) they use to shave
themselves often, and all over. They carry in their hands a Club full of
knots, and of a reasonable bigness: and upon their heads they wear a kind of
hat of two spannes long. They have hoales boared in their ears, wherein they
hang rings set with rich and precious Stones. Throughout all parts of the Turks
Dominions, they have Monasteries or Houses wherein they dwell, and do use
great Hospitality to all Travelers and Passengers. In the Summer season they
seek their living by begging: al which time they spend not any thing at home
in Housekeeping. When they do ask the alms of any person, they do it in
these terms; Sciai mer Daneschine, that is: Give us our Alms for the love of
that worthy man Hali: Hali the son in law of Mahomet and Scidibattal, two
Patrons highly honored of the Daruisses.
who being the son in law of Mahomet, was always the foremost man in Battle,
amongst our Predecessors, professing the Mahomet an Faith and Religion. They
do celebrate the memory of another also, whom they have in great reverence
and estimation: and they call him Scidibattal, whose Sepulcher they do much
glory and boast of in Natolia or Turkey: And they say that he was the first
that conquered a great part of the Turkish Empire by his prowess and force of
Arms. There is a Monastery adjoining to that Sepulcher, in the which do live
above 500. of that sect and order. And every year thither do assemble out of
diverse nations above 8000. of these Daruisses: where they do hold a
convocation or Synod: and for seven whole days together do spend the time
only in the recreating of themselves with great pleasure and delight. Their
chief governor or General (as they term him) they call Assambaba: that is,
The father of all fathers: There are amongst them very many young men of
greater learning and judgment then the residue, who being clothed in certain
white garments hanging down to their knees, do every one of them severally
repeat some notable and worthy History, in their general assembly before
the whole company. All which Histories they do register down, and collect
together in one Book: setting to each History the name of the party that
repeated it. This book do they present to their Assambaba: And in those
Histories for the most part are contained such strange and admirable things, as
themselves have seen and observed in the course and time of their Travel and
Pilgrimages made throughout several Counties. During their abode in that
place, upon the Frydaie (which is with them a great Festival Holy day) they
do repair into a green Meadowe, not far distant from their Monastery, and
there they do Feast together, having a notable banquet or feast, with
variety of daynties purposelie provided for them: In the which the Assambaba
first takes his place in the midst, and next to him do sit the most learned
of those young men which are clothed in white, and so the residue in order.
When they have dyned, the governor arising upon his knees, and all the
company doing the like with him; they do (after their manner) use a solemn
Prayer, wherein they do call upon God: Which prayer being ended, all of them
with a loud and high voice do cry all at once, Alacabull Eilege: that is, O
God let this our prayer be acceptable unto thee. Then comes to the Governor,
certain young men called Cuccegler, who do use to carry always about with
them in a Skin, the powder of a certain herb beaten very small; the virtue
whereof is such, that it will procure mirth and gladness in any man, as if
he were drunken with excellent good Wine: This herb in their language they
call Asserai. Out of this Skin, Asserai, the name of an herb used by the
Turks: and the virtue thereof.
first the Governor, and then every man in order each after other, takes a
part of that powder and eats it; which done, they cause certain histories to
be read out of the book which was presented to their governor. After this,
they depart from thence into another place near their Monastery, where is
prepared for them a huge fire, having as much wood as a hundredth beasts or
more can well carry. About this fire they dance in a round hand in hand
altogether, singing songs in praise of their Sect and Order. Their Dance being
ended, every man takes a sharp poynted knife, wherewyth they do raze and
cut the skin either of their arms, legs, thighs, or breasts, engrauing
upon them the forms and pictures either of boughs, leaves, or flowers, or of
a heart, or some such like figures, as if they were cutting and imprinting the
same in wood. In the doing whereof they do utter this speech; This I cut for
the love of such a woman. When they have thus done they set the^ down by the
fire, and drying their wounds with the warm ashes, they bathe them with their
own vryne (which they have provided ready before hand) and then cover them
with cotton or bombast wet and moistened with the same; wherewith as soon as
their wounds are well and thoroughly dried, they are perfectly sound and cured.
Upon the last day of their feasting, (having taken their leave of their
Governor) they depart thence in Troops or Squadrons (after the manner of
armed Soldiers) with their Banners displaid and Drums sounding before them:
and so do they return every one to their own Dwelling or Monastery,
craving the alms of all persons, and in all places, wheresoever they pass in
their journey. Of the Torlacchi, a religious order of the Turks, and of their
habit, manners, and customs.


The fourth and last religious Order of the Turks, are those whom they call
Torlacchi; who using the like habit with the Daruisses, are clothed likewise in
sheepskins, having all the other parts of their body naked. Howbeit they use
not any kind of hats, or covering on their heads: but being close shaven do
go bare-headed both winter and summer: and against the inconvenience and
violence of the cold, they do use to anoint their heads with oil. They
have a custom also to burn their Temples with old clowtes and rags, to the
intent they may prevent the falling of the rheum into their eyes, to the
endangering of their sight. Their life is altogether brutish, and little
differing from wild beasts, being not unlike to the most miserable and
wretched sort of Beggars amongst us. They are altogether unlearned, and
without askill, knowledge, or experience in any Art or or mystery: and
being utterly deuoyde of virtue and all goodness they have no means nor
course to live by, but only by begging. They go up and down the towns and
villages of the Turkish empire, daily and hourly haunting and visiting the
Tauernes, Victualling houses, the common Baths, and such like places, taking
every where, and in all places occasion and opportunity how to fill their
bellies at the charge of others. Many times also they do wander in troops and
companies in the country, frequenting desert and solitary places: where if
they happen to meet with any having clothes or money in their purses, these
fellows being naked, poor and needy, will soon lighten and dispoyle them of
the same. As they go up and down the towns, villages, and hamlets, if they
chance to come in place or company with any simple women, they profess
themselves to be cunning and skillful in Palmestry and telling fortunes: and
whilst in looking upon their hands, they do promise to foretell what shall
afterward betide and happen unto them; they do in the mean time search for
their purses with a purpose to pick or cut the^, by that means, either
robbing, or else cosining and deceiving them of their money: Not much unlike that
kind of people which with us are commonly known by the name of Egyptians.
With these their cunning and shifting devises, they do often get of foolish
women, and such other simple and ignorant persons both bread, eggs, cheese,
and other victuals; enabling themselves by these means to the practicing of
new and greater villainies. Sometimes they will lead about with them some old
man of a great age, whom they will worship and adore, as if he were endued with
some divine holiness and sanctity, and as one sent from heaven; using the
fained and dissembled holiness of this supposed Saint, for the furthering and
advancing of their wicked fraud and cosinage: For when they come into any
village, and happen to approach near any house wherein they suppose any to
dwell that is rich and wealthy, they cause this old man suddenly to bend down
his body, whilst themselves in the mean time standing about him with great show
of humility and devotion, do in great admiration observe his gesture and
speeches. Then the old Fox framing his countenance to a kind of austeritie
and sadness, does feign great devotion and holiness, yet using very few words;
but when he does speak, his speeches are full of darkness and obscurity,
pretending great gravity, and tending in show to the revelation of great
secrets and divine mysteries: Sometimes he lifts up suddenly his eyes and
hands unto heaven, faining himself to be in a trance or ecstasy, as one
ravished in spirit, and rapt (as it were) out of himself into some heavenly
contemplation: And then will he use great and glorious speeches, but somewhat
more plain and open, and not so obscure as the former. After which turning
himself about to those that stand near him (whom he seems then to take as
his disciples and followers) he says unto them: O my Sons, convey me speedily
from this place, for when as even now I did cast up my eyes unto the heavens, I
found by divine revelation, that there is a great plague ordained for this
village, and that a most cruel and fearful destruction does hang over the heads
of the inhabitants. His disciples having heard him utter these words (like a
company of false knaves that are cunning in all kind of deceit and mischief)
do craftily entreat him with great earnestnes to pray unto God in their
behalf, that it would please his divine majesty to remove and turn away both
from that place and people, the plague imminent upon the^, and to have mercy
and compassion on them. This old cosining companion seeming to be won by their
entreaty and persuasion seems nothing difficult in condiscending to their
requests, but with singular shows of hearty zeal and devotion, makes as if he
did pray unto God for their safety and preservation, by which cunning and
deceitful practices, the simple and foolish inhabitants are soon and easily
induced to bestow their alms and charity, with great bounty and liberality
upon these lewd and shifting mates whom they repute for great prophets, that at
their departure, they go away laden with the rewards that are given and
bestowed upon them. Thus do they go wa^dring and raging up and down in all
places, making good cheer, and recreating themselves at other men's costs and
charges, taking great pleasure to jest and scoff at the foolish simplicity of
the ignorant multitude whom they have so abused and cousoned with their iugling
tricks and devises. These Torlacchi do use at their meals, to eat of the same
herb which the Daruisses do eat of, to the intent they may be the more merry
and pleasant at their meat. Their manner is to sleep upon the bare ground: being
as void of shame, as they are bare and naked of apparel. They fear not, like
brute and savage beasts, to commit any kind of filthiness, not only each
with other, and amongst themselves without any respect or difference: but
sometimes also with brute and unreasonable creatures. And yet notwithstanding
these their lewd and abominable villainies and brutish customs: they will not
spare to brag and boast of their order and profession as if it were most holy
and religious. And the Turks likewise, for the most part do repute these
Torlacchi so much the more holy and religious, by how much the more they are
addicted and inclined to their brutish wickedness.

Of the villainous disposition of these Torlacchi, there is extant a strange
and memorable example, happening in the time of Baiazeth the second, Emperor
of the Turks: one of their Order coming to crave the alms and devotion of
the Sultan as he was riding abroad, suddenly from under his garment drew a
sword, wherewith he assaulted the Emperor, with full purpose to have murthred
him; but by reason that the horse (whereon Baiazeth rode) was terrified and
started back, Baiazeth the second emperor of the Turks in danger to have bin
murdered by one of the Torlacchi.
the blow fell short, and the Emperor escaped without hurt, howbeit that the
horse was wounded with the stroke. Whereupon one of the Bassaes then in
presence with the Sultan (named Schender) with an iron Mace (which the Turks
call Busgodan) striking the Villain upon the head, beat out his brains, and so
slew him dead on the the place. By reason of this desperate attempt, and for
that the whole Order of these Torlacchi was generally given to murders,
robberies, The Order of the Torlacchi banished by Baiazeth the Second, and
restored by Selim the first.
and such like heinous and detested villainies; Baiazeth caused all of them to
be banished out of his Empire and Dominions. Insomuch, as their order was at
that time welneere extinguished and destroyed; had not Selim the First (the Son
of that Baiazeth) granted them afterward leave and liberty to return:
Ordaining, that from thenceforth they should be punished for their wicked and
mischievous misdeeds, according as the quality of their offenses should
require. Marin Barletius (in his History of the life of Scanderbeg) writes,
that it was the order of the Daruisses that were thus exiled by Baiazeth, for
their manifold and wicked misdeeds: but the evident testimonies of other
histories (which have recorded this Accident, and do seem to have bin well
acquainted with the estate and affairs of the Turks in that age) and the
wicked manners of these Torlacchi, (addicted to all kinds of mischief and
villainy, contrary to the Order of the Daruisses, whose chief profession is
their pleasure) do show apparently, that it was the Order of the Torlacchi
that was thus exiled: although that afterward it was again revived and
recontinued. By means whereof, both the practice and memory of their wicked
and beastly manners, and of their profane and irriligious customs, is (at
this day) still nourished and maintained; which (otherwise) had been either
quite forgotten, or else worthily suppressed and extinguished.

Thus are we come to a Conclusion of this Book: wherein we have laid open
unto you (with as much brevity as may be) the whole sum and substance of the
Turks Religion, out of the true Grounds and Principles of their Law: with a
Relation of their most notable Ceremonies, Traditions, and Opinions; and of
their diverse Orders of their Priests and Religious Persons. By the Discovery
whereof (if it be lawful to compare their Sect with the Profession of
Christianity) you may see as great and evident difference between them, as
there is between light and darkness, and between the glorious brightness of the
Sun, and the obscure darkness of the Night. For like as the pleasant and
sweet herbs and fruits set and planted by the art and industry of man in
fruteful gardens and orchyards, are of a far more delicate taste and savor,
than the wild weeds and herbs of the fields, growing at randon on the barren
Rocks, Mountains and Deserts: so the Christian religion is of a most
excellent and divine nature, and full of heavenly comfort and consolation to al
those that know God aright according to his word; and it leads them the true
way to endless and perfect felicity: whereas the Mahometists (following the
vanity of fond and fantastical illusions (little differing from the impiety
and infidelity of the Ethnicks) do err and wander in the Labyrinth of
strange superstitions. In the which, whilst they seek after an imaginary
felicity, they do plunge themselves into the depth of all blasphemy and
idolatry: wherein sticing fast, (as Flies entangled in a Spiders web) they do
miserably perish in the blindness of their hearts, and so make shipwreck both
of their souls and bodies. Notwithstanding, howsoever their Religion be
erroneous and abominable: and though God himself have it in hatred and
detestation (as being opposite to his truth, and derogating from the majesty
of his Deity): yet has God suffered these reprobates to prevail against the
Christians, because they have not walked in the right way and truth of his
religion: not with that sincerity, reverence and due obedience, as becomes
the Professors of Christian piety. For the cry of their sins having pierced
the Heavens, has brought down upon them a most heavy vengeance; and has
drawn the sword of these Miscreants against them, and against the places of
their Habitation; as a just plague for all their unthankfulness, security and
negligence. Whereof we have at this day too too lamentable a proof and
experience by the prosperous success which that People has had in their
Conquests gotten upon many great Kingdoms, Nations, and Provinces of
Christendom. The manner of whose ruin and miserable subversion, shall be ere
long represented unto you in our History of the Ottoman Kings and Emperors.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for William Stansby. 1597.


