A SERMON OF CVTHBERT Bishop of Duresme, made upon Palm sunday last past,
before the majesty of our sovereign lord king HENRY the.VIII. king of
England and of France, defensor of the faith, lord of Ireland, and in earth
next under Christ supreme heed of the Church of England.

Hoc sentite in uobis, quod et in Christo Jesus. etc. Ad Philippen. 2.
SE THE SAME mind be in you, that was in Jesus Christ, who being alredye in
the form of god, thought it no rauyne to be equalle with god, but he did abase
him self, taking upon him the form of a servant, borne in similitude of
men, and in shape found as a man. He did humble him self, and became obedient
unto death, ye unto death of the cross. Therefore god has exalted him, and has
given him a name above all names. so that in the name of Jesus, every knee
shall bow down, of things that be in heaven, of things that be in earth,
of things that be in hell, and that every tongue may confess, that Jesus
Christ is our lord, to the glory of god the father.

THIS IS IN English the sentence of the epistle of this day. And first I do
entende by your patience to declare particularly the lytteral sense thereof,
conteynyng the infinite and inestimable humilytie and obedience of our savior
Jesus Christ. Secondly I do entende to speak of disobedience of men by pride
done to man against goddis law. And how that may be eschewed. Thirdely I
entende to speak of disobedience of al men by pride done to almighty god,
ageynste goddis law. And how that may be amended. And so to make an end. And
to return to the first.

Saint Paul in the second chapyter to the Phylyppiens next before the
words, of the pistle of this day, commaundyng humylitie with charity to be
used, says. Ye must think by humilytie every man to be your superyour, not
considering every one of you his own furtherance, but the furthera^ce of
other. And therefore he exhorts all men by the example of Christ, not to
regard nor to take heed to their own aduancemente, but the advancement of
other, saying. See the same mind be in you, that is in Jesus Christ, that is
to say, Show humility and patience for the wealth of other, as Christ did.
Whose hye degree the apostle Paul here first speaks of. From which he was
content to comme down for our sake. For he being in the form of god
thought it no rauyn to be equalle with god. what is this to say, in the form
of god? The sense thereof is this. He was in full substance, in full essence, in
full glory, in eternity, equal with his father. As for to put for our better
erudition of things incomprehensyble far above our capacity, an example of
things that we may understand, to dyrecte us in some part to the attaynynge
of higher things. As the bryghtnes is in the fire, and as the image or print
is in a seal, and as a word is in the mind, so the son of god is in the
father. For the brightness is as soon as the fire is, and the prynte is within
the seal, as soon as the seal is. And the word that man will express is in
the mind, as soon as the mind has conceived it. Saint Paul in the
beginning of his epistle to the Hebrews says, that the son of god is the
shynynge of the glory of the father. As in the foresaid example, the brightness
is of the fire, and figure of his substance, as the prynte is of the feale,
supporting all things by the wrde of his strength and virtue, as the mind
brings forth the word. And where saint Paul says, that Christ thought it
no rauyn to be equalle with god, He means, that he made not him self equal
to god by usurpation, but god the father begatte him in the beginning equal to
him self. For if he should have made him self equal to god, not being so by
nature, he should have fallen by rauyn, as Lucyfer did. For he because he would
make him self equal to god being but a creature, did fall, and of an
angel was made the devil. And this his pride he persuaded to man, by which
he was overthrown him self, saying to Eve before the fall of Adam. Taste of
the fruit that is forbidden you, and ye shall be as goddis. That is to say in
effect. Take upon you by usurpation that thing, that ye have not by creation,
for so was I overthrown. But Christ was borne in the beginning equal to his
father, not made after equal, and borne of the substance of the father.
Wherefore he did not usurp equality unto god, but was in that equality, in
which he was borne in the beginning.

It follows in the text. But he did abase him self, taking upon him the
form of a servant, which he did, not lesyng the form of god, in which he
was before, but taking the form of man, which he was not before. And thereby
he was made inferior to his father. And yet he abode stylle equal with him
both in one person, that is to say, by reason that he was the word of god,
equalle to his father, and by reason, he was man inferior to him, one son of
god, and the same son of man. One the son of man, and the same the son of
god. Not two sons of god, god and man, but one son of god and manne, god
without beginning, man from a certain beginning our lord Jesus Christ. For
as god does grant to his creatures, being temporal and subject to
sufferynge, that they may begette the same thing that they are, how much
more god the father being eternal and impassible did begette his son, not
of an other substance than he him self is, but of the same. Which is yet to
our great admiration, because he begattte him without any alteration, and in
such equality with him self that neither in power nor in aege, the father
gothe before the son.

But the son does attrybute unto the father, and not to him self all that
he has, and may, because he is not of him self, but of the father. He is
equal to the father, but he had that same of his father. Nor he took not of
him self to be equal, but he is equal by nature. As he was ever borne, he
was ever equalle. Wherefore the father bygatte him not inequalle to him self.
And after he was borne, gave to him equality, but in bygettynge him, gave it
unto him, because he begat him equal, not inferior to him self. But yet he
says. his father is superior to him, because he took the form of a servant,
not lesyng the form of god. by which form of a servant he was made
inferior, not only to his father, but alsoo to him self, as to the son of
god, and to the holy gooste. Nor only he was inferyoure to the Trynytie, in his
form of manhod, but also he was made inferior under angels. And he was also
inferyour unto sum men, that is to say, to his mother, and to Joseph, whom
men took to be his father, to whom he was subject, as it is written in the
second chapter of Luke. And for the form of a servant, he said. My father is
superior unto me. And for the form of god. which he never left, he said in
the tenth chapter of John^. I and my father are one thing, that is to say,
one substance.

In form of god, he was superior to him self, and in form of man, he was
inferior to him self. And therefore not without a cause, the scripture says
both the son equal to the father, and the father superior to the son, the
one for the form of god, the other for the form of man, without confoundynge
the oone nature into the other, both natures of god and man, being in one
person. In the form of man, which he took for us, he was borne, and he
suffered, and he arose from death to life, and ascended into heaven. By the
first two, that is to say, by his birth and his passion he showed to us our
estate, By the two last, that is to say, his resurrection and his ascension,
he showed to us an exaumple of our reward. The two first, all that be borne
do feel, and the two last we shall attain, if we do believe in him.

And as the apostelle says, Christ thought it no rauyn to be equal with god
so saint John in the beginning of his gospel says, That the word, which is
the son was god. And as Paul says here. That he did abase him self to
take upon him the form of a servant, so saint John says. The word of god is
made Flesh, that is to say, Man: and has dwelte amongst us, god and man in
one person. For as the number of persons is not increased, when the soul is
knyt to the body, to make thereby one man, so is not in Christ the number of
persons increased, when man is knytte to the word of god, to make one Christ.

It follows in the text. He was made in simylytude of men, that is to say, he
took all our nature upon him, al be it, he was without sin, and he left no
carnal procreation, by generation carnal. Nor that only was in him, that
appiered in outward vysage, his manhood but godheed also was in him. For he
was not only man, but in his person, godheed was knytte with manhood. And
therefore he says here, that he was like to men. but more was in him, than is
in men. For we be made of soul and body. He had both soul and body and
godheed. And therefore he says here, in similytude of men. As saint Paul
says in the.viii. chapter to the Romans. God sent his son into the
world, in symylytude of sinful flesh, not because he lacked flesh, but
because the flesh that he took, lacked sin, and yet was it like to our
flesh, which is subject to sin, like by nature, but not like by wyckednes.

It folowethe in the text. That in shap he was found as a man. That is to say,
where he was without bodyly shappe, he took upon him the form and shappe of
a man, abiding stylle god as he was before, but in figure, that is to say, in
flesh, he was made a man, and cledde with manhood, as with a clothing, not
that his godheed was changed thereby into manhood, as the members of a man be
not chaungyd by puttyng on of a new garment. And he says, that he was found in
shappe as a man, because he seemed outwardly but one of the common sort of men,
and yet he was more than so. For he was god therewith. And yet was he a very
man in nature, not in phantasy and ymagination. Saint Paul also in the second
chapyter of the first Epistle to Timothe, callyth him a man saying. There
is one mediator of god and man, A man Christ Jesus. And as he is in the form
of god, perfyte god, so is he in the form of man, a perfyte man.

It follows in the text. Christ has humbled him self, and became obedient
unto death. Here we may learn humility as Christ does teach us in the.xi.
of Mathewe, saying, Learn of me, for I am meke and humble in heart. He was
made for the a man without sin. And thou sinful manne, why will thou not
come to him, that callyth the, and says? Come to me all ye that do travail,
and be ouercharged, and I shall refreshe you. Thou proud synful man, why art
thou so proud? Christ became obedient for thy sake to be incarnate, and to
take part of the mortality of man. He was obedient so far, that he suffered.

First to be tempted of the dyuell. He was obediente to suffer the mocking of
the people of Jews. He was obedyente to suffer to be bound, bobbed, and
spitted at, to be stryken, and to be scourged. And yet he was further obedient
to die for the thou sinful man.

It was a great humility at his birth to lie in the maunger with beasts, for
lack of a cradell. It was a more humylitie to live.xxxiii. years amongst
sinners, he being without spotte of sin. The most abundant humilytie was
that he suffered upon the cross betwyxte two murderers.

It was a hard suffering, that he suffered for wicked men. It was more hard
that he suffered of wicked men. And the most hardest of all was, yt he suffered
with wicked men. and the same death, that wicked men and murderers do suffer.

It follows in the text. That he suffered the death of the cross: which
death was worste of all other kinds of death. For those that were put to
that death, were first nailed upon the cross, hands and fete drawn on
length, and stretched abroode, hanged up in the air, quycke, naked, and
bledynge, not because longer life should follow thereby, but because the death
it self was prolonged to make the pain the more, lest the shortenesse thereof
should less have been felt. Hanging, or drownyng, or stryking of, of the
heed, be peynes soon ouerpassyng. But the death of the cross long time
does endure: In which they were wont to break their legs, to make them
dye more peynfully, as we read in the.xix. chapter of John^.

This death of the cross was the worste death, that the Jews could ymagyne
for him to dye. but yet Christ did chose this death. and intended to make it
to be his sign, And to make of it his badge, that all men beleuynge in him,
should in their forheaddes make his sign of the cross, as it was prophesied
and fygured before in the.ix. chapter of Ezechiel: and glory in the cross of
Christ. As sayncte Paul in ye last chapter to the Galathies says. God
forbid, that I should glory in any thing, but in the cross of our lord Jesus
Christ, by which the world is crucified to me, and I to the world.

There was nothing before more intolerable to the flesh of man, than death of
the cross. And there is now nothing more glorious set forth in the forheade
of a christen man, than the sign of the cross. Here we may note, what hye
reward in heaven is reserved to a christen man, when Christ has given such
an honor to the form of the cross, representynge to us his passion. for now
the form of the cross is so honored amongst christen men, that if a man
worthy to dye should be crucified, it should be thought amongst christen
men, that he should thereby rather be honored than punished. The cross is now
every where amongst Christen men erected and set up as an arche triumphal
against the devil, declaryng unto us the vyctorie and triumph, that Christ
upon the cross obtained against the devil in cancellyng the bond of our
sin, wherein we were bound to the dyuell, and fastenynge it cancellyd to his
cross, as sayncte Paul says in the second chapter to the Colossians.

It follows in the text. Therefore god has exalted him, and has given to him
a name, that is above all names. Here it is to be noted, that God gave to
Christ his exaltation, as to man, and not as to god. For there was never no
time before he was made man, that he in the form of god was not exalted, nor
no time that all things did not bow down to him, that be in heaven, earth,
and hell. And for that cause he says, Therefore. that is to say, for his
manhood and form of a servant taken upon him, and united to his godheed, and
for his obedience unto death of the cross. For in the same form of man, in
which he was crucified, in the same he was exalted. And a name was given to
him above all names. That he being in the form of a servant, rysynge from
death of the flesh to life, and ascendynge up into heaven, should be called
the only begotten son of god, which name he as the word and son of god
eternally begotten of god, and equal to god, had before. Whereof the angel
sent to the blessed vyrgine Marye before his birth prophesied, saying, in the
first chapter of Luke. That holy birth that shall be borne of the, shall be
called the son of god. This high exaltation of Christ given to him for his
manhood and sufferaunce of death for mankind, is like to that, that Christ
him self spoke in the last chapter of Mathewe, saying. All power is given
to me in heaven and in earth. which he spoke of his manhood, and not of his
godheed. for by his godheed, he had it, before he was man.

It follows in the text. That in the name of Jesus every knee shall bow down of
all things that be in heaven, or that be in earth, or that be in hell. That
is to say, of angels, of men, and of dyuelles. For the aungelles of heaven at
his ascension gloryfied in him the nature of man, and bowed down to him
exalted above all angels. And men in earth do glorify in him, and do knele down
to him, and adore him, as their redemer, and god and man. The deuylles do
stowpe down to him for fear, and one of them whom he expelled from a body
possessed by him, said to him. I do know that thou art the holy man of god.
And all the deuyls shall know his power, when he shall sit in judgment,
rewardyng good men, and punyshynge the evil. And the bowynge down of every
knee, is meant the submyssyon of all creatures to their maker, not that either
angels or deuylles have bodily knees, but because we men, that have bodies in
our submission do bow our knees. And therefore submyssyon of all creatures
to their maker is meant thereby. The deuyls alsoo feared his power, and bowed
down to him, when his soul with his godheade descended into hell, there to
deliver the sowles of all ryghtuous men, which were deed before Christ, and
descended thither, because heaven gates were not yet by him opened. His godheed
ones knytte by his incarnation to his body and his soul, never departed after
from either of them both, but still abode with them, that is to say, with his
body in the sepulcher, and with his soul descendyng into hell, never
departing from neither of them, after his incarnation.

It follows in the text. And every tongue shall confess and knowledge, that
Jesus Christ is our lord, to the glory of god his father. That is to say, to
the hye preferrement thereof. for the glory of the father is to have such a
son, lord of all, maker of all, and god of all. To whom all be subjects and
do obey. To whom all creatures do bow down, and whom all tongues do exalte
and glorify.

The glory of god the father is, that the son every where be gloryfyed. like
as where god the son is despised, there god the father is despised. and
blasphemy spoken against god the son, is spoken also ageynste god the father.
Like as amongst men, dishonor done to the son sounds to the dishonor of
the father. For betwyxte god the father, and god the son, there is no
difference, but that that ryseth and comes by dyuersitie of their persons.
And therefore the honor or dyshonoure of god the son, stretches to the
honor or dishonor of god the father. Where the son is perfect in all
things, it is the honor of the father, that so begat him, of whom he had it.
And where he needs nothing, it is the honor of his father, of whom he has
all plenty. And where he by his godheed is not inferior to his father, it is
the honor of his father, of whom he has the same substance, and the same
essence. and where he is wise, it is the honor of the father, whose wisdom
he is. and where he is good, it is the honor of the father, of whom he has
it. And where he is almighty, It is the honor of the father, whose arm he is.
In all these things it is the high honor of god the father, that he
eternally begatte a son of so much glory.

And it is a great demonstration* that Christ the son of god is god by
nature, because he humbled him self, taking man's na^^^e upon him. For he
knew, that by his humilytie he could suffer no damage in the highness of his
godly nature. For his godly nature could not be hid, nor ^^pte under, nor
oppressed by any humility. His humility therefore is an evident argument of
his natural god heed. And therefore if any man do desire to be great in virtue,
let him humble him self. for humility shows the greatness of virtue. Let
him follow Christ in humility, and he shall gain great things thereby. He
that is pore in virtue fears to humble him self, lest he should fall from
hs feyned and dissembled height. And he that is rich in virtue, does humble
him self, knowing that he has in him virtue, whereby he shall be exalted,
which virtue can not be hyd. As a candell bournynge can not be hyd in a dark
house, nor a sweet smell hid in any corner, but it will by the good flauour
thereof disclose where it is, and allure men to take up the thing that so
smells.

So we do se in the epistle of this day, That Christ for his humylite has
received exaltation, as he him self says in the gospel in the.xxiii. chap. of
Mat. And for his obedience he has received high honor, to have a name above
al names. And for his patience and passion, he has receiuid power over al,
that al creatures do bow down to him. And for his infinite charity against
mankind, he does receive of al faithful people, laud, praise, and glory.
And thus have we hitherto declared the lytterall sense of the epistle of this
day. by which ye may se, that the humilytie and obedience of Christ, does
surmount all examples of humility and obedience of the old testamente, as
far as the bryghte shynynge of the son is above the dymme light of an old
lantern. For if we should compare the humility and obedience of Abraham, who
left his country of Chaldee by goddis commandment, and went forwards, not
knowing whither he should goo, to the humility and obedyence of Christ, who
descended from heaven to be incarnate and suffer death for us in form of man:
there is almooste no comparison. for where all the world is full of myserie,
Abraham went but from one wretched place thereof, to an other much like. But
Christ, being the son of god, from the beginning ever in glory, and in
heaven with his father, where no misery never was, nor none can be, came down
from heaven to be incarnate, and to live in this wretched world, knowing it
before to be the valle of mysery.

Likewise if we should compare Isaac. who when his father went to sacrifyce
him, bare the fagote, that should make the fire of his sacrifyce, to Christ
bearing his cross, when he went to his death (whereof Isaac was a figure)
The obedience of Isaac is far beneth Chrystis obedience. For Isaac going with
his father, knew nothing what his father did mean, when he badde him bear
the fagotte. which appears by that when he asked his father, where the
sacryfyce was, that should be burnt. But Christ the son of god, before he
was incarnate, knew all the counsel and secrets of the father of heaven, and
yet he was content wyllyngl^ for our s^ke to be incarnate, and to ^uffer
deat^e upon the cross, and showed before to his ^^sciples, that he would and
should so do. so that in comparynge the great and infinite humility and
obedience of Christ, with the humilytie and obedyence of other, that were in
the old testament, we shall find them to be as sayncte Paul says, but
fygures and shadows, as fygures of men painted, be far under the living
bodies of men. And as the living body of a man far passes in substance the
shadow of the same, so the virtues of Christ, so far do excede the virtues
of good men, that were in the old testament fygures of him, that his virtues be
ferther above theirs, than heaven is above the earth.

HITHERTO we have declared the true sense of the epistle of this day, read
in the church, containing so great humilite and obedience of our savior
Christ, that nether by the tongue of man it can be worthyly expressed, nor yet
in any wise by man's thought comprised. But now let us somewhat speak of the
vice and sin of Disobedyence, which shall more set forth the incomparable
virtue of Christis humility and obedience, and also open unto us, how far
they be from Christ and how contrary to his doctrine, that do give them
selfs to disobedience. Which disobedyence was the first ^^nne, that man
after his creation did commyt, and is always joined with all other sins, as a
companyon never departing from them. For every sin that men do fall in,
is done against gods law, so that the transgression and dysobeysaunce of
goddis law is coupled with every sin. For if we obeyde goddis law, as we
ought to do, than we should not sin.

And that dysobedience was the first sin done by man after his creation, it
plainly does appear in the third chapter of Genesis. where after Adam was
put in Paradyse by almyghtye god, and commanded to eat of all the fruits in
the same, except the tree of knowledge of good and evil. Which he was
commanded to forbear, and not to towche nor eat of the fruit of it, the
dyuelle in the serpent, said to Eve. God that forbad you to eat of that tree,
knows, that what day so ever ye do eat of that tree, your eyes shall be
opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and euylle. By which falls
persuasion, the woman induced did eat of the tree forboden, and gave unto
her housbande, who eat also of the same, disobeyenge goddis commandment. who
commanded that in no wise they should touch it, upon peyn of death to follow
for their disobedience. for which disobedyence not only they were forthwith
expelled out of Paradise, but also they and all mankind was by the sentence of
almighty god made subject to death, and to mortality.

Disobedience has also pride evermore annexed unto it, which makethe him,
that disobeyeth to contemn to obey, and to care nothing at all to disobey, as
does appear by the fall of the dyuell, described unto us by the holy ghost in
the person of Nabugodonosor the very child of the devil, in the.xiiii.
chapter of Esai. where Lucifer an high and bright angel, full of beauty and
all clerenesse, as soon as he was create, not gyuynge thanks to almyghtye god
for his natural gifts, given to him in his creation, but by pride reputing
to have them of him self, and not of god, said in his heart. I shall ascend
into heaven. I shall exalte my seat above the sterres of god. I shall ascend
above the height of the clouds. I shall be like to almyghtye god. But his
fall and ruin is forthewith there described, where the prophet adds,
saying. But yet for all this, thou shalt be plucked down to hell in to the
bottom of the lake. And Christ also in the gospelle of Luke, in the.x.
chapter testifies his fall, saying. I saw Satan fall from heaven as a
lyghtnyng. So we se, that disobedience of the devil, not keeping the order of
his creation, but surmountynge far above it, and contempnynge the degree that
his maker had put him in, was the cause of his fall.

Now what shall we say of those. whom god has create to be subjects,
commandyng them by his ^orde to obey their princis and governors? Who not
only do refuse to obey goddis commandment, but contrary to his word, will
be above their governors, in refusing to obey them. and farthermore also woll
have their pryncis prostrate upon the ground, to whom they owe subjection,
to adore them by godly honor upon the earth, and to kiss their fete, as if
they were god, where they be but wretched men. And yet they look, that their
pryncis should do it unto them, and also all other christen men, owing them
no subjection should of duty do the same. do not these, as ye think, follow
the pride of Lucyfer their father? Who make them selfs fellows to God,
contrary to his word. But who I pray you be these, that men may know them?
Surely the bysshoppes of Rome be those, whom I do mean. Who do exalte their
seat above the sterres of god. and do ascend above the clouds, and will be
like to almighty god. The sterres of god be mente the angels of heaven, for as
sterres do show unto us in part the light of heaven, so do aungelles sent
unto men, show the heavenly light of the grace of god, to those to whom they
be sent. And the clouds sygnifyed in the old testament. the prophets, and
in the new do sygnyfie the apostels and prechers of the word of god. For as
the clouds do conceive and gather in the sky moisture, which they after
power down upon the ground to make it thereby more fruitful: so the prophets
in the old testament, and the Apostelles and preachers in the new, do power
into our ears the moisture of their heavenly doctrine of the word of god, to
make therewith by grace our sowles being seere and dry, bring forth fruit
of the spirit. Thus do al ancient exposytours, and among them sayncte
Augustine, interpret to be meant in scripture, sterres and clouds, in
thexposytion of the.xlv. psalm.

But saint John evangelist writes in the.xix. chapter of the apocalips, and
in the.xxii. also, that when he would have fallen down at the aungelles foot,
that did show him those vysions there written, to have adored him with godly
worship, the aungelle said unto him. See thou do not so. for I am the
servant of God as thou art. Give adoration and godly worship to god, and
not to me. Here it appears, that the bishops of Rome sufferynge all men
prostate before them, to kiss their feet, ye the same princis, to whom they
owe subjection, do cl^mme up above the aungelles, which refused such godly
worship and adoration. We do read in the gospelle of Luce. in the.vii.
chapter, that as Christ satte at dinner in the house of the pharysee, a
sinful woman of that city came into the house, having a box of precious
ointment. Who kneled down, and under the bourde with wepinge tears washed
his fete, and dried them with the hear of her heed, and kyssed his fete, and
anointed them with her precious oyntmente. which adoration Christ being
both god and man there did accept, forgyuynge the synful woman her sins for
her faith and her repentance. Whereby he did show his godheed to the
pharisee, which took him but as a holy man. for only god does remytte sin.
We read also in the.xii. of the gospel of John^, that Mary the sister of
Martha likewise did annoint his feet, and dry them with her hear of her
heed. Which godly honor, Christ as god received. But neither we can find in
scripture, that such godly honor of that sort has been done to man only, nor
we read not in any historis, that christen princis have admytted such
adoration due only unto god* Christen princis be content to see their subjects
knele unto them. And if they suffer their subjects to kiss their hands, when
they put forth their hands to them, it is the most worldely honor, that
they suffer to be done unto them. But yet Christ offered his fete being bare
to be washed with tears and kyssed, as appears by the gospel of Luke. for he
said to the pharisee, that bad him to dinner, and wondered why he suffered the
sinful woman to approach so nere unto him, that all be it, he had made him a
good dinner, yet the synful woman had done more than he. For he had not
given him water to weshe his fete, but she sens he entered into his house had
not cessed to wesshe his fete with her tears. And fete be washed to no man,
but when they be naked, so that it appears, that Chrystis feet than washed
with teres and kyssed were bare. But the bishop of Rome offers his fete to be
kissed, shod with his shoes on. for I se my self being than present.xxxiiii.
year ago, when Julius than bishop of Rome stood on his fete, and one of his
chamberlaynes held up his skyrt, because it stood not as he thought with his
dignity, that he should do it him self, that his show might appear, whiles
a noble manne of great age did prostrate him self upon the ground, and
kyssed his shoo. Which he stately suffered to be done, as of duty. Where me
think I saw Cornelius the Centuryon capytayne of the Italyons bend spoken of
in the tenth chapter of the acts, submyttynge him self to Peter, and much
honourynge him. but I saw not Peter there to take him up, and to bid him rise,
saying. I am a man as thou art. as saint Peter did say to Cornelius. so
that the bishops of Rome, admyttynge such adoration dew unto god, do clymme
above the heavenly clouds, that is to say, above the apostels sent into the
world by Christ, to water the earthlye and carnal hearts of men, by their
heavenly doctrine of the word of god.

And that by the word of god all men ought to obey the potestates and
governors of the world, as emperors, kings and princis of all sorts, what
name so ever the said supreme powers do use for the countries, in which they
be, saint Peter plainly does teach us, in the second chapter of his first
epistle, saying. Be ye subject to every humayn creature for goddis sake,
whether it be king as chief heed, or dukes, or governors, as sent from god
to the vengeance and punyshemente of evil doers, and to the laud of good
doers. for so is the will of god, so that saint Peter him self in his Epistle
commands all worldly princes in their office to be obeyed, as the minysters
of god by all christen men.

And according unto the same, saint Paul in the.xiii. chapter to the
Romans says. Every living man be subject to the high powers. for the high
powers be of god. And who so ever resists the high powes, resysteth the
ordynance of god, and purchases thereby to him self damnation. for the high
powers be the mynysters of god, to succor and lawde well doers, the mynysters
of god, to punysshe evil doers. and the mynysters of god, to do justice to
all men. for which cause they received tribute. and lest men should forgette
their duty of obedyence to their princis, it is there thryse repeted, that
they be the mynisters of god, whose place in their governance they do
represent. so that unto them al men must obey, apostels, patriarchs, primates,
archebyshoppes, bishops, priests, and all of the clergy. And all noble men
of what degree so ever they be, being within their governance, with all the
people also. And therefore the bishop of Rome owes likewise to his souerain and
superior, like subjection by the word of god taught unto us by Peter and
Paul, as other bishops do owe to their princes, under whom they be. And
therefore Agatho the bishop of Rome, in whose time was the vi. synod and
counsel general, after his election sent to the emperor then being at
Constantinople to have his election allowed before he would be consecrate, after
the old custom at that time used. And an other bishop of Rome called
Uitalianus did the same, as it is written in the decrees, in the.lxiii.
distinction, in the chapitre beginning, Agatho. and as saint Gregory and
saydte Ambrose had done before them, as it is written in the chapter. Cum
long. in the same distinction. the bishops of Rome at that time followed the
doctrine of sayncte Peter and saint Paul left unto them, to be subjects,
and to obey their princes.

The gospelle also teaches us in the xxii. chapter of Luce, how the apostels
fell at contention among them selfs the night before the passion, who among
them should be superior, and above the other. Which their contention Christ
discussed. saying on this wise. The kings of people and nations have dominion
over them, and those that have power over them, be called benefactors of them.
But so it shall not be amongst you, but who so ever amongst you is the
greater, shall be as the younger: and who so ever amongst you shall be chief,
shall be as a servant and a minister. For who is superior? he that sytteth at
the table, or he that serves at the table? is not he superior that sytteth?
But I am amongeste you as he that mynystreth and serves. And ye be those that
have bydden with me in my temptations. and I ordeyn for you, as my father has
ordained for me a kingdom, that ye shall eat and drynk at my bourde in my
kingdom, and shall sytte upon seats, iudgyng the.xii. tribes of Israel. Here
we do see, that Christ would have the mekeste and most humble to be chief
in his flock, by humility and by service done to other. As Christ by example
had washed the fete of his apostelles the same night a little before. And it
appears also, that he would not leave amongst his apostelles a worldly
kingdom, whereby they should worldely reygne over other, but that he ordained
for them a heavenly kyngedome to reign with him in heaven, and to sytte with
him in judgment, to judge the.xii. tribes of Israel, that is to say. by
thexample of their faith, who believed in Christ, to condemn the infidelite of
the Jews, that would not believe in him, but shamefully put him to death. So
that herby it is proved plainly, that Christ left to his disciples no
worldely kyngedome here in earth to have princis under them. A like dyscussynge
of this contention of superiority, which an other time rose also, emonge the
apostelles, is contained in the tenth chapter of Mark, and the.xx. chaptre of
Mathewe, and by like words absolved, that mekenes and not superiorite should
be regarded among them. for the apostels before the coming of the holy ghost,
after the time of the resurrection, even at the time of Christis ascension,
asked him, whether he would restore again the worldely kyngedome of Israel.
for which kyngedome at that time they did look, as Cleophas said in the last
chapitre of Luce unto Christ apperyng to him and his fellow goinge in to Emaus.
we trusted that he was the man, that should have redeemed Israel. And yet unto
this day the jews do look for their Messiah to come and to reign among them
by a worldely kyngedome in Jerusalem as David did. but Christ left to his
disciples no such worldelye kyngedome, but said. it should not be so among
them, as it was amongst the princis of the world.

And where Christ in the last chapyter of Mathewe said after his
resurrection. All power is given to me in heaven and in earth. so that both in
his godheed and in his manhood also inseparably unite in one person, that is
to say, in one Christ, and two natures, god and man. he had all power given
to him as man, which from the beginning he ever had as the son of god, with
god his father. Yet never the less he never changed the authority of worldly
kings and princis. but by his own word commanded them stylle to be obeyed by
their subjects, as they had been before his incarnation, saying in the.xxii.
chapyter of Matthewe, when the Jews axed him whether they should pay tribute
to Ceasar or no. he bad them give to Caesar those things that be his, and to
god those things that be his. sygnifyenge unto them, that tribute was dew to
Caesar, and that their sowles were due to god. And in the.xvii. chapter of
Mathewe it appears. that Christ bad Peter pay tribute for him, and his
disciples, when it was demanded of him. And Christ as man, would not change
the order of obeysaunce to worldly princis by their subjects. Which he as god
with his father had ordained before his Incarnation, as sayncte Paul
testifies, saying. Worldely powers be ordained of god, and therefore who so
ever resysteth them, does resyste god.

And that Christ him self would not reign here in earth, by a worldly and
temporal kyngedome, it appears in the.vi. chapter of John. Where after he
had fed five thousand Jews, besides women and chylder, with five barley
loves and two fyshes, and the Jews would have taken him, and made him their
king, he fled from them, and would not consent unto them, For the kingdom
that he came to search here in earth, was not a worldly and temporal kyngedome,
but a heavenly and spyrituall kyngedom, that is to say, to reygne spirituallye
by grace and faith in the hearts of all christen and faithful people, of what
degree or of what nation so ever they be, and to turn al people and nations,
which at his coming were carnal, and lived after the lusts of the flesh,
to be spiritual, and to live after the lusts of the spirit. that Christ
might spiritually with his father of heaven reign in the hearts of all men.
which heavenly kyngedome sayncte John Baptist in the deserte preached often to
the Jews, saying. Repent you, and amend your lives, for the kyngedome of
heaven is at hand. After whose death Christ intending to manyfeste him self
to the world, began his prechyng likewise, saying. Do penance, for the
kingdom of heaven is at hand. And it is plainly expressed in the.xiii. chapter
of Matthew. in the parable lykening the kingdom of heaven to a man, which did sow
good sede in his field, and after whiles he slepped, his enmy did sow evil
sede in the same. for Christ expou^dyng that parable, says. The good sede be
the chyldern and inheritours of the kyngedome, so the kyngedome, that Christ
seeks here in earth, is a spiritual and heavenly kyngedome. And Christ
said to Pylate in the.xviii. chapter of John^. My kingdom is not of this
world. And therefore those that go about to make of Christis spyrytuall
kingdom, a worldly kingdom, do fall into error of some heretykes, that look
that Christ after the day of judgment shall reygne with all his saints here
in earth carnally in Jerusalem. as the Jews do believe, that Messiah is yet
to come: and when he shall come, he shall reign worldly in Jerusalem.

So we do see, that Christ left the worldely kyngedomes to princes of the
world, as is before expressed. But he committed the preaching of this
heavenly kyngedome to his apostels, gyuynge to them like commission and equal
authority to preach and teache the same, through all the world, saying in the
last chapyter of Mathewe, after the words before declared, that all power was
given to him in heaven, and in earth. Go ye forth and teach all nations,
baptysynge them in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy
ghost, teaching them to keep all those things which I have commanded you.
Christ also in the.xx. chapter of John said the evening after his
resurrection, when he appeared to his disciples, the doors being shut. As my
father has sent me, I do send you. and after he had so said, he brethed
upon them, saying. Whose sins so ever ye shall forgive, be forgyuen. and
whose sins ye shall reteyne be retained. And likewise had said to them all
before his death. in the.xviii. chapter of Mathewe. what things so ever ye
shall bind upon earth shall be bound in heaven, and what things so ever ye
shall lose upon earth shall be leused in heaven. which power he gave to them
all equally and like, as well to all the resydewe, as to Peter. which
authority Christ declares in the x. chapter of Luke to be high, and to be
regarded of all men, and not to be contemned in any wise, saying. He that
herith you, herith me, and he that herith me hereth my father of heaven, that
has sent me. And he that despises you, despyseth me, and he that despyseth
me, despyseth my father of heaven, that has sent me. At the day of judgment
Sodoma and Gomorra, which hard not of Christ, shall be in better case, than
such despysers shall be.

But here the bishop of Rome steppeth in, and says. Peter had auctorite
given to him above all the resydue of the apostels, for Christ said to him in
the xvi. chapter of Matthewe. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I shall
bylde my church, and I shall give the, the keis of the kyngedome of heaven. and
what so ever thou shall bind upon earth, shall be bound in the heuens. This
said Christ. And sayncte Peter is buried at Rome, whose successor I am* and
ought to rule the church as Peter did, and to be porter at heaven gates, as
Peter was. And Christ said also to Peter, after his resurrection. Feed my
sheep. which words, he spoke to him only. so that thereby he had authority
over all that be of Christis flock. and I as his successor have the same. and
therefore who so will not obey me, king or prince, I will curse him and deprive
him his kyngedome or seignorie. for all power is given to me, that Christ had:
and I am his vicar general, as Peter was here in earth over all, and none but
I, as Christ is in heaven.

This ambitious and pompouse objection is made by him and his adherentes: and
has of late years much troubled the world, and made discention, debate, and
open war in all parts of Chrystendome, and nourysshed the same. But if the
bishop of Rome would take those places after the right sense of the^* as
both the apostels them selfs taught us, and all the ancient best learned,
and most holy interpretours do expound them, the world should be more at
quietness than it is. where now by wrong interpretation the scripture is
perverted. and an other gospel in that point preached unto us, than ever the
apostels preached. so that though an angel came fro heaven, and would tell
us such new expositions of those places, as is now made, to turn the words,
which were spoken for spiritual authority, of preaching the word of god,
and ministringe of the sacraments, to a worldly authority, we ought to
reiecte him. as saint Paul says in the first chapter to the Galathiens.

But to open the true sense of the scripture in the places aforesaid, it is to
be observed that Christ in the said.xvi. chapter of Mathewe, asked his
dyscyples, whom men did say yt he was. whereunto after answer given by the^
diversely, some saying, that he was John^ Baptist, some saying yt he was Ely,
some saying that he was Jeremy, or oone of the prophets. Christ asked them,
whom do ye say that I am? whereunto Peter answered for the^ al, for of al them
the question was asked, as he was always ready to make answer, Thou art Christ
the son of god that lives. Jesus answered. Blessed be thou Simon the son
of Iona. for flesh and blood has not reveled this unto the, but my father,
which is in heaven. And I say to the, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I
shall bylde my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.
that is to say, upon this rock of thy confession of me to be the son of
god. I shall bylde my church. For this confession conteyneth the hole summarye
of our faith and salvation. Which confession first was spoken by the mouth
of Peter. Who of all the.xii. apostelles that Christ chose to send into the
world to preach his word, was the first that with his mouth uttered that
confession and knowlegynge, by which all Christen men must be saved. and
without which no man can be saved. as it is written in the x. chapter to the
Romans by Paul. The word of faith that we do preach, is at hand in thy
mouth and in thine heart. for if thou confess with thy mouth our lord
Jesus. and with thy heart do believe that god raised him from death to life.
thou shall be saved. Upon this first confession of Peter, and not upon the
person of Peter, the church is bylded. As Chrysostom expounds that place, in
the.xxvi. sermon of the feast of Pentecost, saying. Not upon the person of
Peter, but upon the faith Christ has bylded his church. And what is the
faith? This. Thou art Christ the son of god that lives. what is to say,
Upon this rock? that is, upon this confession of Peter. And with this saying
of Chrysostom, all ancient exposytours treating that place, do agree. For if
we should expound that place, that the Church is bylded upon the person of
Peter, we should put an other foundation of the church than Christ, which is
dyrectedly against saint Paul, saying in the.iii. chapter of the first
epistle to the Corinthians. no man may put any other foundation, but that
which is put already, which is Christ Jesus. and therefore that exposition,
that the person of Peter should be the foundation of the church, should make
of the trinity a quaternitie, and put a fourth person besides the trinity, to
be the foundation of the church.

And this first confession of Peter by faith, that Christ is the son of
god, is the preemine^ce and primacye, that Peter had before the other spoken of
in the tenth of Mathewe, where in recitynge the names of the.xii. apostels
chosen by Christ, it is written. The first is Simon Peter. For he first
confessed that faith, that all men must be saved by. For who so does agree
with Peter in his said first confession, as all the apostels did, and as al
we that purpose to be saved must do, shall be saved. and who so does not
agree with that confession, shall be damned.

And where he is called by many ancient and holy interpretours of the
scripture for his faith, sometime the chyefe of thapostels, sometime the
mouth of the apostels, sometime the prince of the apostels, sometime the
presydente of the hole church, all these honorable names be attribute by them
unto him for his forsayde first confession, wherein all our faith is contained.
And because he was of all the apostels most ardent in faith. and feared not
being in great tempeste on the sea, upon Christis word, to come out of the
ship, and go to him upon the water, being in great rage. Which his deed
declared his faith to be meruailously vehement in Christ.

The greatness and vehemence also of his faith was declared in the.ii.iii. and
iiii. chapiters of the acts, when the Jews in the beginning, withstode the
apostels preaching the faith of Christ. For tha^ Peter as most ardent in
faith of all the apostels was ever most redye to defend the faith against
the impugners of it, speaking for them all unto the people in defense of it,
for the feruente love that he bare to Christ.

And as Peter was most ardente in faith, in which he had of god a most
syngular gift, so was Paul most feruen in zele both to win the Jews to
Christ. desiring the salvation of his country to win them to Christ, and
wysshynge him self in a manner to have been separate from Christ, so that they
might have been saved thereby: as it is written in the.ix. chapter to the
Romans, and also in zele to win all the gentyles and other nations to
Christ, as he writes in the second epistle to the Corinthians in the.xi.
chaptre, saying. who is weak, and I am not weke with him? who is offended, and
I am not offended with him? where he speaks also of the care that he took for
all churches. which his fervent zele does appear in many places of all his
epistles.

And as Paul was fervent in zeal, so was John the Evangelist most excellent
in innocence and in charytie. Whereunto he chiefly exhorts al me^ in his first
epistle. And al other thapostels had their special gifts dyuersly given unto
them. as the gifts of almighty god be given diuersely, and not all to one man,
as it is written in the.xii. chapter of the first epistle to the Corinthians.
And as Christ is called by sayncte Paul in the.xv. chapter of the first
Epistle to the Corinthians the first fruit of those that rose from death to
life. so is Peter called the first in faith, for he was the first that with
his mouth confessed it. And Epenetus is likewise called by saint Paul the
first, that believed in the church of Asia, in the.xvi. chapter to the
Romans. And the household of Stephan is the first that believed in Achaia, in
the last chapter of the first epistle to the Corinthians.

And that Peter should not have a rule above all other the apostels in all
places, saint Paul plainly shows in the.ii. chapter to the Galathia^s.
where he says. that as the apostelshyp of the Circumcision, that is to say of
the Jews, was given by Christ to Peter, so was the apostelshyp of the gentyls
given to me among the gentiles. so that there they divided them self is asonder
yt Peter, James, and John, should go preach the faith to the Jews, and Paul
and Barnabas, should go preach to the gentyls, as they did. Here it appears,
that Paul knew no primacie of Peter, concerning people or places, but among
the Jews. For which cause Peter dissembled in Antioche to eat of the gentyls
meats, when the Jews came thither, lest he should offend his flock of the
Jews committed to him. in which matter Paul defending the liberty of
meats that he had preached to the gentyles, withstode him. And saint
Ambrose expoundynge that place says. The prymacye of the Jews was given
chyefly to Peter, all be it James and John^ were joined with him, as the
prymacye of Gentyles was given to Paul, Albeit Barnabas was joined with him,
so that Peter had not a rule over all.

And also that sayncte Peter him self knew no such primacye over all people
and places given unto him, it appears plainly in the.x. of the acts. Where
saint Peter after the coming of the holy gooste, being at Ioppa, and sent
for by Cornelius to come to him than being in Cesarea, durst not go to him
without a vysion of a shete latten down from heaven, containing all manner of
beasts, birds, and serpents, whereof he was bydden eat, and repute not
those meats unclean, that god had purged. Which vysion opened unto him, that
he should not refuse the gentyls, whom the Jews did abhor as unclean. Now
if he had known his commission to be over all, he should not have neded any
such visyon. but he him self understood it, not so large or above the other.
But he remembered well, that Christ in the last chapyter of Luke, badde them
begin first at Jerusalem to preach to the Jews, as he did. And after his
return to Jerusalem ageyn from Cesarea, he made a great excuse to the Jews
of his flock offended with his goinge thither, written in the.xi. chapter of
thactes. so it apperethe, that Peter him self does agree with saint Paul,
that his commission and authority was among the Jews, as Paul's was among
the gentyls.

And that all the apostels had like dignity and authority, it appears by
saint Paul in the.ii. chapter to the Ephesians, where he says. Now ye be
not guestes and strangers, but ye be citisens and domestikes of almighty god
bylded upon the foundation of the apostelles. and the prophets, Christ being
the corner stone upon whom every edifyce bylded grows to be a holy temple in
our lord. Here he says, that they be bylded not upon the foundation of
Peter only. but upon the foundation of the apostelles. so that all they be in
the foundation set upon Christ the very rock. whereupon the hole church
stands. So likewise in the.xxi. chapter of the Apocalypse it is written. that
the wall of heavenly Jerusalem, the city of almyghtye god, which is the
church, Christis espouse, has.xii. foundations, and in them the names of
the.xii. apostels written. so that the name of Peter is not there written
only. for the.xii. apostels through all the world, as well as Peter preached
Christ to be the son of god, who is the very rock whereupon all our faith is
founded.

Sayncte Cyprian also says in his book of the simplicity of prelates, that
all the apostels had equal power and dignity given to them by Christ. And
because all should preach done thing, therefore the beginning thereof first
began by one. which was Peter. Who confessed for them all, that Christ was
the son of god that lives. saying further, that in the church there is one
office of all bishops, whereof every man has a part allotted holly unto him.
Now if the bishop of Rome may meddle over all, where he will, then every man
has not holly his part. for the bishop of Rome may meddle in his part with
him, so that he has it not holly, which is agein Ciprian.

And where Christ said, that he would give to Peter, the keys of heaven, that
was said to him not for him self only, but for the hole church. Which
confessing the faith that he did, should have the keys of heaven as well as
he. as saint Augustine says, expoundynge the gospel of John in the fyfty treaty.

And as to the authority of the last chapter of John^, where Christ said
thrice to Peter. Feed my sheep. after he had confessed to love Christ, thrice
asked. that place is, as Cyrillus says, expoundynge the same, thus to be
understand. that because Peter had thrice denied Christ, whereby he thought
him self he had lost his apostelshyp, Christ to comfort him again, and to
restore him to his office, that he had lost, asked him thrice, whether he
loved him, and so restored him again to his office. Which else he durst not
have presumed unto. saying to him. Feed my sheep. With which exposition the
ancient holy expositours of that place do agree.

And where it is said, that those words were spoken only to Peter, whereby he
ought to have a preemine^ce above the other. Saint Paul in the.xx. chapter of
thactes proves the contrary. Where saint Paul said to all the bishops
assembled at Milete. Take heed to your selves, and to all your flock, in
which the holy gooste has put you to govern his church. which word, To
govern, is in the origynall text of Greek Pimenin, the same word that
Christ spoke to Peter, and does signify to feed and govern the sheep, as the
shepeherde ought to do. so that saint Paul says, that the holy gooste has
ordained all bishops to feed their flock, as saint Peter was bydden do. Saint
Peter also in the last chapter of his first epistle says. Ye that be
priests, feed the flock of god emongeste you. which word there spoken to
all pristis is the same word that Christ spoke to Peter.

So it appears plainly by the scriptures before said, conferred to gether,
that another the.xvi. chapter of Matthew, nor the.xxi. of John do prove, that
Peter had power authority or dygnitie given by Christ over all the other,
that they should be under him. and yet his primacie that he first of all the
apostels confessed our faith, that Christ is the son of god, with which his
confession all the apostels did consent, and preched the same, stands
still. And all that will be saved must follow that lesson that he first taught
us to confess. And so the bysshoppes of Romes power over all, which he would
prove by those places wrong alleged for his purpose, utterly qualeth, and is
not proved.

Besides this when Faustinus legate to the bishop of Rome alleged, in the.vi.
counsel Carthaginense that the bishop of Rome ought to have the ordering of
all great matters in all places by his supreme authority, he alleged no
scripture for him, for at that time no scripture was thought to make for it.
but he alleged untruly the first general counsel Nicene, in which Arrius
the heretyke was condemned, to make for that purpose. Which after the book was
brought forth and no such article found in it, but the contrary. yet the
counselle at that time sent to Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antioche, where
the patryarchall sees were, to have the true copye of the counsel Nicene.
Which was sent unto them, and also from Rome, whether they sent alsoo for
that purpose. And after they found no such article in it, but in the fyfth
chapyter thereof, the contrary, that all causes ecclesiastical, should either
be deterymned within the diocese, or else if any were grieved, than to appeal
to the counsel provincial, and there the matter to take full end, so that for
no such causes, men should go out of their province. the hole counsel
Carthaginence wrote to Celestine at that time being bishop of Rome, that sens
the council Nicene had no such article in it, as was vntrewely alleged by
Faustinus but the contrary, they desired him to absteyn after to make any more
such demand, denouncynge unto him, that they would not suffer any cause great
or small to be brought by appele out of their country. And thereupon made a
law, that no man should appeal out of the countreye of Aphrike, upon pain to
be denounced accursed. Wherewith the bishop of Rome ever after held him content,
and made no more busynes with them, saying he had naught to say for him self
to the contrary. And at this counsel amongst other saint Augustine was
present, and subscrybed the same. which he would not have done, if he had
known or taken any part of the gospel, or of the scripture to be contrary.

It is also determined in the.vi. article of the said counsel Nicene, that in
the orient the bishop of Antioche should be chief. in Egypt the bishop of
Alexandria. About Rome the bishop of Rome. and likewise in other countries
metropolitans should have their preemynence, so that the bishop of Rome never
had medlynge in those countries.

And in the next article following, the bishop of Jerusalem, which city
before had been distroyed and almost desolate, is restored to his old
prerogative to be the chief in Palestyne and the country of Iure. which
church of Jerusalem, if places should be regarded, should be the chief, for
there was accomplysshed the mystery of our redemption, and Christ him self the
eternal word and son of god there preached in person, and after his
ascencion, all the apostels and disciples, and sayncte Paul also preached
there in person. the hole.xii. apostels began first there, as Christ had
commanded, to have the saying of Esai the prophet in the.ii. chapter
fulfilled, where he says. The law shall go forth out of Sion, and the word of
god out of Jerusalem. Which place saint Hierome there expoundyng says, that
the church first founded at Jerusalem did sow abroad al other churches of
the world. And at that time, and a good season after, Rome had not hard tell of
Christ. so that the Church of Rome must needs confess, that they came out
of Jerusalem, which was their mother as she was to all other churches. as Esai
had prophesied.

And now sens the purpose and ambycious objection of the bishop of Rome is
clearly avoided, let us return to our purpose to declare, what co^myssyon was
given by Christ to his apostels. We showed before that he bad them preach and
teach to all men all things that he had commanded them. and in the.x.
chapyter of Matthew and of Luce, he shows them how they shall enter their
charge, saying. Into what house or place so ever ye shall arrive, first ye
shall say. Peace be to this house. and if the child of peace be there, he
shall receive you, and if they will not receive you. than go forth out of the
house or city, and wype the duste of your shoes against them, in witness of
your labor. for Sodoma and Gomorra shall be in better case at the day of
Judgment than they, that wol not here you. And as Christ commanded them to
make their enter with mention of peace so did he him self after his
resurrection, apperynge to his disciples the evening next after, when the
doors were shut, saying to them. Peace be with you. And the apostels in
their epistles do begin with desiring grace and peace to be with them, to
whom they write. Christ says also in the.xiii. chapter of John. By this
shall all men know, that ye be my discyples, if ye love each other. For where
charity is, there can be no debate, but all peace. and where it lacks,
discord does ensue. Christ said also to his apostels in the.ix. chapter of
Marc. Have peace amongst you. Saint Paul says also to the Hebrews in the.xii.
chapter. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall
see god. And in the.xii. chapter to the Romans he says. As much as is in
you, have peace with all men. and in the.xiiii. he says. That the kingdom of
god is justice and peace and joy in the holy ghost. And Christ when he should go
out of this world, left to his disciples peace. so that peace and charity
hught to be emongeste al christen men, and who so preaches not peace, but
debate, comes not from Christ, but from Satan.

But the bishop of Rome because he can not longer in this realm wrongfully use
his usurped power in all things as he was wont to do, and suck out of this
realm by auaryce insaciable, innumerable sommes of money yerelye, to the great
exhausting of the same, he therefore moved and replete with furiouse ire and
pestilente malice goth about to stir all Christen nations, that will give
ears to his diuellishe inchantmentes, to move war against this realm of
England, gyuynge it in pray to al those that by his dyuellysshe instigation
will invade it. which few words, to give it in pray, how great myschefe
they do conteyne, I shall open to the thou true english man. First to make
this realm a pray to al venturers, al spoylers, all snaphanses, all
forlornehopes, all cormerauntes, all rauenours of the world, that will invade
this realm, is to say. thou possessyoner of any lands of this realm, of
what degree so ever thou be fro the highest to the lowest, shalt be slain and
dystroyed, and thy lands taken from the by those, that will have al for them
selfs, And thou may be sure to be slain, for they will not suffer the nor
none of thy progeny to live to make any claim afterward, or to be revenged,
for that were their vnsuertie. Thy wife shall be abused before thy face, thy
daughter likewise defloured before the. thy chyldern slain before thine eyes.
thine house spoiled, thy cattle driven away and sold before thy vysage. thy
plate, thy money by force taken from the. All thy goods wherein thou have any
delight, or had gathered for thy children, rauened broken and distrybute in thy
presence, that every rauenor may have his share.

Thou merchant art sure to be slain, for thou haste either money or ware, or
both, which they search for. Thou bishop or priest, what so ever thou be, shall
never escape, because thou woldeste not take the bishop of Romes part, and
rebel against god and thy prince, as he does. If thou shalt flee, and scaape
for a seasone, what so ever thou be, thou shall se and here of so myche
myserye and abhomynation. that thou shalt judge them happy, that be dead
before. For sure it is, thou shalt not finally escape. for to take the hole
realm in pray, is to kylle the hole people, and to take the place for them
selfs. As they will do if they can.

And the bishop of Rome now of late to set forth his pestylent malice the
more, has allured to his purpose a subject of this realm Raynolde Pole,
commen of a noble bloudde, and thereby the more errant traitor, to go about
fro prince to prince, and from country to countreye, to stir them to war
against this realm, and to distroy the same, being his native country. Whose
pestilent purpose albeit the princis that he breaks it unto have in myche
abomination, both for that the bishop of Rome (who being a bishop should
procure peace) is a styrrer of war, and because this most errant and unkind
traitor is his mynister to so diuelyshe a purpose to distroy the countreye,
that he was borne in. Which any heathen man would abhor to do. But for all
that without shame he stylle gothe on, exhorting thereunto all princis that
will here him. Who do abhor to se such unnaturalness in any manne, as he
shamles does set forwards. whose perniciouse treasons late secretly wroughte
against this realm, have benne, by the work of almighty god so meruaylously
detected, and by his own brother, without lokynge therefore so disclosed, and
condygne punyshement ensued, that hereafter god willing, they shall not take
any more such rote to the noysaunce of this realm. And where all nations of
gentiles by reason and by law of nature do prefer their country before
their parents, so that for their countreye they will dye against their
parents being traitors, this pestilent man worse than a pagan, is not
ashamed to destroy if he coud his natyue country. And where as Curtius a
hethen man was content for saving of the city of Rome, where he was borne, to
leap into a gapyng of the earth, Which by the illusions of the dyuell it was
answered should not be shut, but that it must first have one. This
perniciouse man is content to run heedlynge in to hell, so that he may
destroy thereby his natyue country of England, being in that behalf
incomparably worse than any pagan. And besides his pestylent treason, his
unkindness against the kings majesty, who brought him up of a child, and
promoted both him, and restored his blood being attaynted, to be of the peers
of this realm, and gave him money yearly out of his coffers to find him
honorably at study, makes his treason myche more detestable to all the
world, and him to be reputed more wild and cruel than any tygre.

But for all this thou english manne take courage unto the, and be nothing
affrayd. Thou have god on thy side. who has given this realm to the
generation of englyshemen, to every man in his degree, after the laws of the
same. thou have a noble victorious and virtuous king, hardy as a lion, who
will not suffer the to be so devoured by such wild beasts. only take an
english heart unto the, and mystruste not god, but trust firmly in him. And
surely the ruin intended against the, shall fall in their own necks that
intend it. And fear not, though the dyuell and his disciples be against the.
for god thy protectoure, is stronger than he and they, and shall by his grace
give him and them a fall.

And to show unto the, that god is on thy side, consider, that it is written
in the vi. chapter of the proverbs, that amongst many crimes there rehearsed,
that god hates. chiefly he does deteste those persons that sow dyscorde
among their brethren. As all we christen men be brethern under our heavenly
father. Also it is written in the.viii. chapter of John, yt those that do stire
men to murder, be childern of the dyuell, which was from the beginning of
mankind a murderer, and brought Adam to sin, and thereby to death. As the
Jews his childer stirred the people to put Christ to death. saint Paul also in
the last chapter to the Romans warns the^ to be ware of those, that do
make dissension and debate among them ageynste the doctrine, that he had
taught them, and byddeth them eschew their company. Wherein the holy gooste
wrought in Paul. for these many years paste, little war has been in these
parts of Christendom, but the bishop of Rome either has been a styrrer of
it, or a nouryssher of it. and seldom any compounder of it. unless it were
for his ambition or profit.

Wherefore sens as saint Paul says in the.xiiii. chapter of the first
epystel to the Corinthians, that god is not god of dissension, but of peace,
who commands by his word peace always to be kept, we are sure that all
those that goo about to break peace between realms, and to bring them to
war, ar the chylder of the devil. What holy names so ever they pretend to
cloak their pestilent malice withal. which clokynge under hypocrisy is double
dyuellisshenes, and of Christ most detested. because under his blessed name
they do play the deuyls part. And therefore sens Christ is on our side against
them, let us not fear them at all. But putting our confidence in almyghtye
god, and cleauinge fast to the kings majesty, our supreme head in earth next
under Christ of this church of England, as faithful subjects by goddis law
ought to do. Though they go about to stire Gog and Magog and all the rauenors
of the world against us. we trust in god verily, and doubt not, but they shall
have such a ruin and overthrow, as is prophesied by Ezechiel in the.xxxix.
chapter* against Gog and Magog going about to distroye the people of god,
whom the people of god shall so vanquish and over throw on the mountains of
Israel, that none of them shall escape, but their carkases there to lie to be
devoured by kytes and crows and birds of the air. And if they shall persyst
in their pestilent malice to make inuasyon into this realm, than let us
wyshe, that their great capteyne Gog, I mean the bishop of Rome, may come
with them, to drink with them of the same cup, that he maliciously gothe
about to prepare for us. that the people of god might after surely live in
peace.

And now that we have spoken of disobedience done to man against goddis law,
let us somewhat speak of disobedience daily done to god by us al against
goddis law. which our disobedience is so great, that the tongue of man can not
express it. for Christ says in the.xix. chapter of Matthewe to him, that
asked what he should do to come to everlasting life. If thou wylt enter into
everlasting life, keep the commandementes. which he there rehearsed unto him,
when he asked which they were. they be written in the.xx. chapter of Exodi,
ten in number. And because I doubt not, but ye know them, for brefenes of
time I shall omytte to rehearse them

In the old law, which expresses rewards temporal for the capacity of
the gross carnal people of Israel, many worldly pleasures and rewards be
promised to the kepers of those commandementes, and meruaylous great troubles
and peynes be threttened to the breakers and transgressors of them. All which
be contained in the.xxviii. chapter of the Deuteronomye. in so myche that in
the viii. chapyter of that book, the people of Israel is thretned by almyghtye
god, to be expellyd out of the land promised unto them, if they should not keep
those commandementes and laws by him given unto them. The prophet David
says also in the.lxxxviii. psalm. If the chylder of David leave my laws,
and keep not my commandementes, I shall with a rod vysite their iniquities
and their sins with beatynges. But our savior Christ regarding the
forgetfulness of man's memory, lest he should not remember the hole number of
ten, has brought them all into two co^mandementes, comprysynge in effect
the hole ten. of the which two expressed in the.xxii. chapter of Matthewe,
the first is. Thou shall love thy lord god with all thy heart, with all thy
soul, with all thy mind. This is the first and greattest commandment,
conteynyng in it.iiii. commandments of the first table, which be these.
Thou shalt have no other gods in my sight. Thou shalt grave no image of
things that be in heaven above or in earth benethe, or in the water under the
earth, nor with adoration worship them. Thou shalt not take the name of god
in vain. Thou shalt sanctify thy sabbotte day. No man will break any of
these.iiii. commandments that loves god above all thing.

The second commandment given there by Christ is like unto the first, that
thou shalt love thy neighbor as thy self. Which comprehends all the vi.
commandementes of the second table. which be these. Thou shall honor thy
father and thy mother. Thou shalt not commytte auoutrie. Thou shalt not
steal. Thou shall not bear falls witness. Thou shalt not lust to have thy
neighbors house, nor his wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor any of his
goods. No man that loves his neighbor as him self, will offend him in any
of these, for sens he loves him self so well, that he can not be content,
that his neighbor shall offend him in any of these, he in loving his
neighbor as him self will not offend his neighbor in any of these.

In these two commandementes says Christ, all the law and the prophets be
contained.

But for all this we thus plainly being taught by Christ do fall heedlynge
into all kinds of vices* for where we ought to love god above all thing, we
love the world and worldly things above god ayenste the counsel of sayncte
John, in the.ii. chapter of his first epistle. For we be so given to
concupiscence of the flesh, that what so ever it lusts to have, we minyster
it unto it, to the concupiscence of our eyes, that what so ever we do see,
that likes us, we will have it by one means or other. We be so high also of
mind and proud in heart, that we will mount above our degree, sufferynge none
to be above us. which three fautes do comprehend all vices of the world. so
that we may say with the prophet Osee in his iiii. chapter. There is no
truth, there is no mercy or pity, there is no knoweledge of god left upon
the earth. Backbytynge, lyinge, murder, theft, aduoutrie has overflowed the
world. Perjury reigns every where. and great pytie it is to see, how the
preciouse name of almyghtye god is taken in vain in all places. No oath
should be given, but three things concurrent, as Hieremy the prophet in
his.iiii. chapter teaches us. that is to say, In judgment. When a man is
called thither to show the truth. And for justice there to be mynistred, to
put away wrong doing. And for truth, that falsehode may take no place
there. Else no oath should be given by goddis law. but we should affirm our
saying by ye ye, and deny by nay nay, as Christ taught us in the.v. of
Mathewe. But now every thing that we affirm or deny, must have an oath
coupled with it, when men do bye or selle any thing, moo oaths be oftetymes
enterchanged betwyxte them, than pens that the thing is sold for. In
communication and all pastimes as many oaths, as words be used. In playenge
at any games there the tearing of goddis name and particular mention of all
the wounds and peynes, that Christ suffered for us, be contumeliouselye in
vain brought forth. If a muster should be taken of swearers, I think that
some crooked pieces should be found, not able to take the kings wages, that
would swear as greatte oaths, and as many of them, as the best and most
able man on the field. They think that greatte oaths do make them to be of
more estymation. and therefore they swear at every word. but surely they be
fowelye deceived. for oaths be ordained where need is, that trewthe shall not
perysshe, and that they may fynysshe debates among men. as Paul says in
the syxth chapter to the Hebrews. But he that at every word swears,
declares plainly, that no credence is to be given to any his words, and
therefore he ioynethe to every word an oath, as a suertie of the trewthe
thereof, knowledgyng the lack of trewthe to be in his words. As if a man
would offer a greatte substantial surety, when he would borowe a penye of his
neighbor, he plainly should make his neighbor, thereby to think, that he
were of no credence, that would for so small a matter offer so great a
suertie, where no need is so to do.

I fear me, the great role of.xx. cubits in length and.x. cubytes in
bredthe, which the prophet Zachary saw fleinge in the air in the.v.
chaptre. which as the angel showed to him, did contein the great malediction
of god against thieves and against swearers, that should be iuged by it, do fly
now over our heedes. I pray god we may avoid the danger of it, and absteyn
hereafter so to take the name of god in vain as is now commonly used.

We do profess the faith of Christ, and do speak of the gospel with our
mouth, and have the book often in our hands. but we learn it not, as we
should do, for the gospel is given to us to know god thereby, and to be a rule
to live by. but we much do talk of it, which is very well done. and yet we
nothing regard to amend our lives thereby, and to live as it byddeth us. but we
do use the gospel, as if it were a book of problemes to dyspute upon* and
care not to amend our living, as it teaches us, which shall be to our
great punyshement. For a servant that knows his lords pleasure, and not
fulfyllynge it, is more greuousely to be punished than he that knows it not,
as Christ says in the.xii. chapter of Luce. We myche extolle faith, as it
is myche worthy. But works and deeds many men care not for, saying, god
regards them nothing: for faith alone justifies us, and not our works.

Here first of all it is to be observed, that no deed nor work that is done
by man without faith, can ever help him to heaven, for like as a man, that
renneth out of the race, where the course is set, though he run never so
fast, wynneth no game, so a man that does good deeds moral, without faith,
deserves of god no reward. for without faith it is impossible to please
god. as sayncte Paul says the.xi. chapter to the Hebrews. But if he do good
deeds with faith, than they be acceptable to god, and he will reward him for
them. And saint Paul teaches us always to be occupied in doing of good
works. for albe it no man may be justified by his works, alone. Yet after he
has faith he must join good works with it, if he have any time thereto, orels
his faith is unprofitable unto him, for the faith that by grace does
iustyfie, is the faith that works by Charytie, as saint Paul says to the
Galathians in the fyfte chapter, and not an ydell faith, which saint James in
his epistle calls a deed faith.

Saint Paul says also in the second chapter to the Romans, that the herers
of the law be not justified before God, but the doers of the law. And saint
James in his epistle in the first Chapyter does lyken him, that hears the
word of god, and does not thereafter, unto a man, that looks in a glass,
and after he has so done, lays it down, and forgets that he looked in
it, and thinks of other matters.

And where they say, that faith alone justifies. that is untrue. and against
sayncte James in the.ii. chapter of his epistell, saying, that a man is not
justified by his faith alone. Also to justification of a sinner repentance of
his euylle life paste is necessarilye first required, and must needs be
joined with faith before he be justified. for else if he repent not, he
remains still in sin, and so he is not yet justified, and all the preaching
of Christ and his apostelles, begins at repentance and penance. so that
faith without that can not help. Wherefore it is never true, that faith alone
iustifyeth, for grace of god must goo before faith, and on our behalf
repentance and charity must be joined with faith. And as faith is the gift
of god, so is penance, and so is charity, so is hope. but the grace of god
who grants all, goth before all.

Truth it is that out good deeds done before faith, do not justify for lack
of faith. but joined unto faith, they do help: or coming after faith, they
help to make us more justified, as it is written in the.xxi. of the apocalipse.
Let him that is ryghtwyse, be yet more justified.

And that almyghtye god requires of us good works, it appears in the.xxi.
chapter of Mathewe, and the.xi. of Marc. where Christ coming to a fig
tree, full of leaves, having no fruit, which he sought in it, by his curse
did make it sere. so if we being the tree, bring not forth fruit of good
works, having time thereto, neither the root of faith, nor the leaves of
words can alone help us. An other parable in the.xiii. of Luc proves the
same. Where a man having a vyneyarde, and in the same a fygge tree, that bare
no fruit, badde cut it down. And at the request of his gardyner, suffered it
yet longer, to se if donge laid to the root would help it. As often almighty
god being the lord of the vyneyarde, suffers us being bareyne to have space
to repent, and bring forth fruit of good works. For it is written in the
third of Matthewe, that every tree, that brings not forth good fruit,
shall be cut down, and cast into the fire.

After as our deeds be, so shall our judgment be, as Christ says in
the.xvi. of Matthew, the son of man shall come in the glory of his father with
his angels, and shall reward every man after his works. Saint Paul in
the.ii. chaptre to the Romans says also likewise, that god will reward
every man after his deeds good or evil. And in the.iiii. chaptre of the
first epistle to the Corinthians he says. that every man shall receive his
hyre, after as his labor is, so that for good deeds done with faith he shall
receive reward, and for euel deeds done after faith, or out of faith, he shall
receive punishment.

Therefore those that say, that god regards not our works done with faith,
do say against Christ, and his doctrine given to us by him, and by his
apostelles. For sens our works done with faith be the measure of our reward
to be greater or smaller, as they shall be found to be greatter or smaller,
who so says, that god regargeth not them, says he regards not the
measure of our reward. and yet he says it shall be measured after our deeds
done with faith. and so he says against Christ. Saint Paul says also in
the.ii. chapter to the Ephesians. that by faith which is the gift of god, we
be of new create in Christ, and in good works that we may walk forwards in
them. and sens he has create us in good works to walk in them, he must needs
regard them. or else he cared not what he create, which is blasphemy and
denial of his high providence.

Now this holy weke we be bydden and called to come to the great supper of
our blessed lord Christ Jesus, and to eat of the heavenly meat and of the
bred of life, that came from heaven, the blessed body of our savior Jesus
Christ in the sacrament of the altar. Unto which we may not go in our fylthy
and spotted cote, lest we coming thither, not having the clean garmente of
our soul, that we received at our baptism, be expelled out of the feast. And
therefore we must make clean our garmente, before we be bold to goo thither.
But I fear me sore, lest many shall make such worldly excuses, as be written
in a parable, in the.xiiii. chapter of Luke. some saying, they be new married,
and therefore they may not come. Which do sygnifie men given so to carnal
pleasure of the body, that they care not to come to heaven. some saying, they
have boughte five yoke of oxen. which do sygnyfye those, that follow the
sensuality of their five senses and worldly busynes. some saying, that they
have bought a vyllage. Which sygnifie those that purchase lands here in
earth, and care not by faith and good living to purchase heaven. All which
sort of men shall not taste of that supper, as it is there written. But god
forbid, that any of us should be of that sort. And therefore let us every man
prepare our self, and make clean our spotted and filthy garment. Let us
purge and purify the tabernacle of our soul, and make it a lodging worthy to
receive Christ into our house, and not to dysdayn us, for the fylthynesse of
our unclean living.

But how may this be done, and by what means? surely surely by no mean but
by penance, and repentance, and calling for mercy to all mighty god with a
sorrowful heart, that we having received so innumerable benefytes of god, so
little have regarded our obedience to his co^mandementes, proudly and unkindly
despysyng him, and more regarding our own wretched concupiscence and pleasure
in all worldly delytes, then god. Let us follow the exhortation of almightye
god, spoken to us by the mouth of Iohell in the.ii. chaptre, saying. Turn ye
sinners again to me by fasting, by weeping, by myche lamenting your
miserable estate, and tear sunder your hearts, and not your clothes. Almighty
god will rather regard a sorrowful and contryte heart to dwell in it, than all
the temples that we can bylde for him. As it is written in the last chapter
of Esai. Let us knowledge and confess our own fautes first, before we be
accused of them at judgment. Let us weep for our ungracious life: and sure
it is, god will regard our tears. David says in the.lv. psalm. Almyghtye
god, I have showed my life to the, and thou haste put my tears in thy
syghte. We that have used our eyes all the year in regardyng worldly pleasures,
so that through vehemente joy somtymes the tears have braste out with myche
lawghynge. now latte us weep. as David techeth us in the Cxviii. psalm,
saying to almyghtye god. The tears have braste out of my eyes, because they
have not regarded and kept thy law. Let us follow the counselle of saint
Paul in the.vi. chapter to the Romans saying to us. As ye have given your
members to serve to iniustyce, to do wrong: so likewise give your members to
serve justice to your sanctifienge. David says also in the.vi. psalm, I have
trauayled in my waylyng. I shall wash every night my bed with weeping
tears. And after that he says. God has herd the voice of my weeping. for
god does regard tears coming forth out of a sorrowful and contrite heart.
If thou say, thou canste not weep: thou doeste confess thy folly. For if thou
lose by example any substance of worldely goods, as if thy house be robbed,
thy ship laden with marchandyse perysshed in the sea, thy wife that thou did
love, departed. thy son dead. than thou canste weep myche more thanne
enough. and where thy soul is by sin departed from almighty god, which
departing from him is the very death of the soul, and lies stynkynge in
sin, not four days as the body of Lazarus did in his grave, but myche more
than four months, ye thrice four months, can thou not weep? Surely thou
haste great cause to lament thy self. For what exchange can thou deuyse to
make, so dear to the, as thy soul is?

Wherefore let us with the sword of the spirit, which as saint Paul says,
is the word of god, make a quycke sacrifice of our selfs, with a sorrowful
heart, because we have broken goddis comman^^mentes, applienge the sharp word
of go^ ^o our sinful life, that we may therewith kill our concupisce^ces and al
fleshly and worldly lusts, and so making of our sorrowful heart a sacrifice to
almighty god, obtain his mercy thereby, as he has promised to us by David in
the fyfty psalm saying. The sacrifyce to god is a spirit troubled with
sorrow, and thou God will not despise a heart contryte and mekened.

We must bring forth fruits of our penance and repentance by the amendment
of our synfulle lives, as sayncte John^ Baptyste said to the Jews in the
third of Mathewe. For God can not be deluded with the fair words only of a
sinner, saying. I am a sinner, and yet will not amend. For God looks whether
those words come fro the heart being contrite. Which if they did,
amendment of the evil life should ensue, and good works should spring out,
where the evil did grow before. which new spring of good works is the
fruit of penance.

We must also go forward in the way of our lord, and not stand still. for
else we can not come to our iourneys end. David says in the.Cxviii. psalm.
The immaculate and unspotted men be blessed, that do go forward in the way of
our lord. He that says, that he dwells in Christ, must walk after
Christ in his way, which is his commandementes, as he him self did. As
saint John^ says in the.ii. chapter of his first epistle. and therefore we
may not stand still, but go on in doing good, to our journeys end, as he
did. Saint Paul says to the Galathians in the.vi. chapter. Se that ye
err not, god can not be mocked, such as a man does sow, such shall he
reap. he that sows in the flesh, shall reap thereof corruption. and he
that sows in the spirit, shall of the spirit repe life everlasting. Let
us not cease in good doing, for we shall reap it, not failynge, when the time
comes. Therefore whiles we have time, let us do good to all men, and chiefly
to the domestykes of our faith. And as we should study to be rich in faith:
for Christ did chose such to be of his flock, though they were poor in
worldly goods. As saint James says in the.ii. chapyter of his epistle. so
must we study to be rich in good works. As saint Paul says in the.vi.
chapter of the first epistle to Timothe, where he byddeth him teach the rich
men of the world, to be redye with their abundaunce of goods, to help the
poor. and to make thereby a treasure in heaven: and to study to be rich in
good works. so for these.ii. rychesses, the one the richesse of faith, the
other the richesse of good works, we should chiefly study.

Also Christ in the.vi. of Mathewe does teach us three chief exercises,
which will confer greatly, to the amendment of our life, that is to say,
fasting to tame thereby the inordynate lusts of the flesh. Alms deed, to
refrain covetousness, and to help to redeem our sins therewith, as Daniel
says in the.iiii. chapter. And prayer to almyghtye god, thereby to abate our
pride and outrequydaunce and arrogance, that we not trusting of our selfs,
but of his help, may ask of him things necessary for us from time to time.
And that we should often pray, Christ teaches us by the parable of the
wydowe, which by her importunity and often cryenge to the wicked Judge, that
feared neither god nor man, obtained at the last Justice of him. As it is
written in the.xviii. chapter of Luc.

We read, also of Christ, that he some time prayed all night to god. as it is
written in the.vi. chapter of Luke. And saint Paul says to the Colossians in
the.ii^i. chapter. Give you to prayer being vigilant in it. And to Timothe he
writes in the.v. chapter. She that trewely is a wydowe, let her give her
self to prayer night and day. And to the Thessalonicense he writes in the.v.
chapyter of the first epistell, saying. Pray without any day leaving of, not
that we should do nothing else, but that we should often amongst other
things that we do, pray to almighty god, lauyng him and calling him to
remembrance, that he may help us, putting in all our deeds, our confidence
in him. Which we might easily do, briefly saying diverse times on the day,
though it were but one Pater noster at one time. so that Christ thereby
should be not far from our remembrance. nor we should not by worldely pleasures
or business straye abroad far from him. nor the devil should not so boldly
approach us, saying us always under the wynge and protection of our heavenly
father. And surely if we could thus dyspose our self, our affairs should
prosper the more in this world, and we should also thereby please almighty
god, and come to the glory ever lasting. Whereunto our savior Jesus Christ,
who has redeemed us, bring us all. Qui viuit and regnat cum deo patre in
vnitate sancti spiritus per omnia secula seculorum. Amen.

LONDINI in aedibus Thomae Bertheleti typis impress. Cum priuilegio Ad
imprimendum solum. ANNO. M.D.XXXIX.


