A Brief declaration of the sacraments, expressing the first oryginall how
they came up, and were institute with the true and most sincere meaning and
understanding of the same very necessary for all men, that will not err in the
true use and receiving thereof / Compyled by the godly learned man Wyllyam
Tyndall.

Imprinted At London by Robert Stoughton. Dwelling within Ludgate, at the
sign of the Bisshoppes Miter.

TO understand the pytthe of the Sacraments, how they came up and the very
meaning of them / we must consider dylygentlye the manners and facyons of ye
hebrwes / which were a people of great grauyte and sadness / and earnest i^ all
their doings if any notable thing chanced among the^ that they not only
wrote, but also set up pyllars and marks and diverse signs to testify the
same unto their posterite / and named ye places where the things were done,
with such names as could not but keep the deeds in memory. As Jacob called the
Place where he saw god, face to face: pheniel: yt is, gods face: and the place
where the Egipcians murned Jacob.vij. days, the people of the contre called
Abell miram. The lamentacion of the Egipcians to the intent ye such names
should keep the gestes and stories in mind. And likewise in all the
couenauntes, they not only promised one to an other and swear thereon. But
also set up signs and tokens thereof and gave the places names to keep the
thing in mind: And they used thereto such circu^staunces, protestacyon and
solemn facyons, and ceremoneys to confyrme the couenau^ts and to testify that
they were made with great erne^t advise and delyberatyon: to the intent that it
should be to much shame. and to much abhomynacyon both before god and man to
break the^ ever after. As abraham Ge. xx when he made a couenau^te of peace with
abymeleck ki^ge of the phylistians: after they had eaten and dronkne to gether
and sworn. he put.vij. lambs by the^ selves / and abemeleck reseaued the^ of
his hand to testyfie that he there had dyged a certain well, and yt the well
thereof pertayned to him. And he called the well Barlabe: the well of sauerynge
/ or the well of sevyn: because of the oothe and of the seuyn lambs: and by
that title did abraham's children chalengyt many a hundred yers after. And when
Jacob and laban / made a covenant to gether Genesis 31. they cast up an heap of
stones in witness and caused it Gylyad: ye heap of witness and they bound
either other / for the^ and there posterite / that nether part should pass ye
heap to ye otheres co^treward, to hurt or co^quir ye land. And laban bound
Jacob also yt he should take no mo wives to his daughters. And of all that
covenant they made that keape witness, callenge it ye wetnes sheppe. that the
children should enquyr ye cause of the name / and ye father should declare them
the story. And such facyons as they used amounge the^ selves did god also use
to the^ ward / in all his notable deeds / whether of mercy in delyuerynge them,
or in wrath, i^ ponyshynge there dysobedyence and transgressyon: in all his
promysses to them and couena^^s made between the^ and him: As ^hen allerthe
ge^rall floude, God mad a covenant ^ Noe and al ma^kynd and with living
ereatures also, yt he would nomye drown y^ world with a general floude / He
gave them the rain bow to basygne of ye promysse fure^ make it the beter
believed and to keep it i^ mind for eu^ and said / when I bring clouds upon
ye earth* I will put my bow in the closes and will look i^ it and remember ye
everlasting covenant made between god and al living creatures.

And Abram which signifies an exellent father he named him abraham the father
of a great multitude of people because he had promissed hy^ to make hi^ eue^ so
and yt his seade should be as ye stars and as the sand of the sea innumerable
/ and that name gave he him as a seal of ye promises to co^fyrme it / and to
stre^gthen ye faith of abraham and his posterity, and to keep the promise in
mind yt they might have wherewith to bind god and to romure him as Moses and
the holy prophets ever do holdyng hi^ fast to his own promise and byndyng
him with his own wories and brynging fourth the oblygation and seal thereof
in all times of necesite and temptation, After that he made a covenant with
abraham to be his god (and the god of his posteryte and the stylde and
defender: And Abraham promyssd for him and his sead to be his people and to
believe and trust in him and to keep his commandments: which couenau^te god
caused to be wryte^ in the flesh of Abraham and in the males of al his
posteryte, co^maundyng the males to be circu^cysed y^ viij. day or to be
slain, with cyrcu^sycyon was the seal and oblygacion of the said covenant / to
keep it in mind and to testifi it that it was an ernest thing, whereby god
challenged the^ to be his people, and required the keeping of his laws of the^
and faith to trust in him only / and in no other thing, For help and
sucoure / and all that ca^ be needful and necessary for man, And where by he
commands the dysobedient and rebellyous and promises the^ and thereby also
they chale^ged him to be the god and father / and to help and sucoure at nead
and to mynistre al things unto them / according to all his promysses. And
though ye seal of this couenaunte were not written in the flesh of the
females: yet it served the woma^kynde and bound them to god, to trust in him
and to keep his laws, as well as it did the men children, and the womankynde
not cyrcu^sysed in the flesh, yet through the help of ye sign written in the
masys, loving gods law and trusting holy in him were truly circu^cysed i^
the heart and soul before god. And the maid children beleuynge and loving god,
where unto the outward circu^sisyo^ bound / the^ were truly cyrcumsised before
god: Eue^ so the males having the flesh cyrcu^sysed, yet not beleuinge nor
loving god (whereunto ye owtward circu^sycion bound the^) were vncircu^syded
before god. And god not bound to them but had good right thereby to pu^yshe
the^* So that nether circu^sycion or to be vncircumsised is owght worth (as S
paul says To. 2.) save for the keeping of the law, for if circu^sicion help
not to keep the law* so seruyth it for nawght* but to condemn. And as the
woman kind vncircu^siced were i^ as good case as the males yt were
circumsiced: Eue^ so the infantes of the maidens wc dyed uncircumcised, were in
as good case as the infantes of malys that dyed cyrcu^cised / and in as good
case by the same rule were the me^ children that dyed before ye viij. day or
eles let the^ tell why / The couenaunte made between god and abraham saved the
maid child as soon as it was before the^, ye, as soon as it lyui^g in the
mothers womb for the covenant y^ god would be ye god of abraha^s sed went over
the fruit as soon as it had life: and y^ is no reason but that ye co^uenau^t
must needs perteyn to the males as soon as to the femals, wherefore the covenant
must needs save the males unto the.8. day and the^ the covenant was yt the
ruler should sley the males only, if the fryend did not cirscu^cyse the^, not
that the cyrcu^cyon saved the^, but to testyfy y^ covenant only, and then it
follows: yt the infa^ts that dye vnbaptysed of us chryste^ that would baptize
the^ at due time and tech the^ to believe i^n christ* are in as good case as
these that dye baptized, for as that covenant made to the faith of abraham
went over his sede as soon as it had life and or the sign was put on the^:
eue^ so must needs the covenant made to all yt believe in christ's blood / go
over that sede as soon as it has life in ye mothers wo^beyer the sign be put
on^, for it is the covenant only and not the sign yt saves us though yt
sign be commanded to be put o^ at due time to styr up faith of the covenant y^
saves us: and in stead of cyrcu^cysio^ came our baptism whereby we be received
i^to ye religion of christ and made pertakers of his passyo^ and me^bres of his
church and whereby we be bound to believe in Christ and in the father through hy^
for the remissyo^ of sins and to keep ye law of Christ to love each other as
he loved us, and whereby (if we thus believe and love) we calling God to be our
father and to do according as he has promised Christ. So now by baptysme we
be bound to god / and god to us, and the bond and seal of the covenant is
written in our flesh by which seal or writing God chalengeth faith and love /
under pain of just dampnacyon: And we (if we believe and love) chaleng as it is
above rehearsed al mercy and what so ^v we neade or else God must be an
untrue God. And god has bounden us chryste^s to receive this sign for our
infyrmities sake, to be a witness between him and us and also to put this
sign upon our children not byndi^g us to any appointed time / but as it shall
seame to us most convenient to bring the^ to ye knowledge of God the father and
of christ and of their Duetye to God and to his law: and as the cyrcu^sysed in
the flesh and not in the heart, has no part in gods good promysses: Even so
they baptized in ye flesh and not in ye heart has no part i^ ^strysts blood.
And as the cyrcu^sised in ye heart and not i^ ye flesh, had part in gods good
promyses: Even so a turck vnbaptysed (because he either knowethe not y^ he oght
to have it or ca^ not for tira^ny) if he believe in christ, and love as christ
did and taght has his partin christ blood.

And though that the outward cyrcu^cision by the wc god chalengeth the^ to do
hi^ service ye whether they would or not and by wc they were taught to believe in
god and in ye sede of Abraham yei should come and bliss all the world and to
love the law / and certifyed the^ on the other side of the good will of god, if
they so did it though (I say) it was the chief and most pri^cypall sign, for
so are such ceremonies called in ye Hebrew, by cause they yet signyfy other
things tha^ appears to the outward se^ce, yet god gave the^ diverse other
signs both to stir up faith to ye promys made the^, and also to keep ye
benefyt of the mercy of God in mind, As Exo. 13. All the first borne both of
man and best are santifyed and dedicated unto the lord for a remembrance yt
the lord slew all the first bore^ of Egypt. This did god command to be
observed yt the children should axe why / and commanded their fathers to teach
their children when they should axe what was meant thereby And Exo. 30. The sabot
is commanded to be observed, to be asigne, and to testify ye god had
sanctified and dedicated or chose^ the^ / yt they should be his people to keep
his laws and yt he would be their god to keep the^: and to testyfye also that
god has created al things of naught.vi. days and rested ye.vii. Number. x god
commanded ye children of ysrael to blow a tro^pet, when they Entered into the
Battle against their enemies, and promised that their should be thought upon
before the lord yeir god and saved from their enemies. And like wise in the
sole^pne feasts god commanded to blow trompets over the sacrifice to be a
sign unto the^ ye god would think on the^ according to the covenant made in
the blood of the sacrifice. Lo ye tro^pets were comanded to be blowe^, not ye
god delyted in the noise of ye tro^pets but in faith of his people. Nu. 15. the
Israelytes are commanded to make yelow gardes upon their garments / to put
the^ in remembrance to keep his commandments yt they should do nothing
after their own Imaginacion, nor observe any fation yt pleases your own
eyes, whereby ye se that ceremonies are not a service to god, but a service to
man, to put hi^ in mi^de of the covenant and to stir up faith and love wc are
gods spyrytual sacrifyce in man's heart. etc. And Joshua 4. when the water of
Iordane had given them place to go over by dry ground God commanded Joshua to
take.xij. stones out of ye botto^ of Jordan, and to pitche the^ on the land,
to keep the deed in memory, and commanded when the chylderen should are what
the stones mente, that the father should teach the^. In the.iij. of the
kings.xi. Aiastare ye clok of Iheroboha^ i^ xij. pieces and bad hi^ take.x^ in
sign y^ he should raygne over x. of the tribes. In.4. Reg. 13. Elyseus made
Johan king of Israel upon a wi^dow eestward toward the Syria^s and made hi^
to shoot out an arow and said it is ye arow of victory through ye lord against
ye Syria^s: and yt did he to stablysh the kings fayht in God, yt he should with
gods help overcome the Siria^s: and the^ he bad the king smite the ground with an
arow and the king smot it thryse whereby he prophesyed and certyfyed the king /
yt he should thryse ouercom ye Sirians. And Esayas in his.xij. chapter
commanded to go naked and barefot to be a sign yt Egypt in whom the children
of Israel trusted. should be so carried a way captyue of Nabugodonoser. And
Hieremias in his.27. chapyt. commith among the People with bounds and yocke
bows abowte his neck, and shows them unto all the kings of those contreys
/ In token that they must be al under the yocke of Nabugodonoser king of
babilo^ / god so used to give the^ signs that they would not believe without
signs as ye may se not only in ye old testament but also in the new, how the
Jews asking christ sayng what sign do you ^howe us etc And Paul.j. Corj.
the Jews asked signs.

Also Sacharyas Iho^ baptystes father axed a sign and the angel gave it him
Christ's mother also askyde a sign* and the angel gave her Elysabeth to a
sign. And unto the sheperdes gave ye angel a sign as ye read in ye first
of luke. And Exodi. xji. god gave ye children of Israel the sign pesahl, which
we call ye Ester lamb for which time was come that the children of Israel
should be delyueryd out of Egypt god sent Moses and Aaron to them with wrought
many miracles among them / to stir up faith to the promise of that
delyueraunce against the manyfolde and sore te^ptacyons to the contrary through
the most strayt and grievous bondage / most cruelly contrary and mercylesse
oppressyon, And in that most specially ye Pharao was waxed.x. times worse to
them after the coming of, Moses and aaron the^ before, yet in ye last night in
with he had promised to smyt ye first born of Egypt both of man and of beast /
and to delyuere them / he commanded the^ to take for every house a la^be or a
kyd, and to slay them / and to strike the door posts with the blood, to be a
sign to them and a Seal of the promysse that God would deliver them that
night / both out of the hands of Pharao / and also from the smyting of the
Angel that went about all Egypt and slew the first borne in every house.

And this sign Pesah, beside that it was a seal of the promise to be
delivered the same night, to stablisse the faith, and commanded to be observed
ever after yearly to keep the benefyte in memory, it was also a very prophesy
of the passion of christ, describi^g ye very manner and facyo^ of his death, and
the effect and virtue thereof also. In whose stead is the sacrament of the
body and blood of Christ commen as baptysme in the room or stead of the
cyrcumsysyon.

To se how Christ was prophesyed and descrybed therein / consider and mark /
how that the kyd or lamb must be wythowte spot or blemisse, and so was christ
only of all mankind in the sight of god and of his law, it must be taken up
the.x. day of the first monethe / which is with us the.x. day of y^ first new
moan in march. for so co^pte they there months from new moan to new moan, and
begin there in the time of march with us. And the same day came christ to
Jerusalem, there to be offered and to suffer his passion.

It must be offered the.xiiij. day of the same month at night, and the same
hour began chrysts passion, he was the same hour betrayed, persecuted al
night and taken in the morning erlye. The fear of death was the same hour
upon hi^ Nether slept he any more after. But went immedyatly as soon as he
had conforted his dyscyples into the place where he was taken / to abide his
persecutours, where also he sweat water and blood of a very agonye conceived of
his passion so nigh at hand.

The blood stryken on the posts sauid them that they were not plaged with the
Egypcyans. And delivered them out of the captyuyte of pharao / And ye blood of
christ stricken on the posts of our conscyens with a ^ure faith, delyuereth us
out of captyuyte of pharao ye deuell, and smytyng of his Angels etc There
might not a bone of it be broken / no more were there of christes^ Though the two
that were hanged with Him, had either of them his legs and his arms broken.

Morouer that it was a very propheci of the death of christ, and of the virtue
of his passion is more the manifest by the words of christ him self. Luke.
xxij. where he says. The night before his passion when he had eaten Pesah with
his dysciples, I will no more eat of it hence forth / till it be fullfylled
i^n the kingdom of god. As who should say. This memoryall which we yerly have
hither to observed / was ons fulfilled in the kingdom of this world when your
fathers were delivered out of the bondage and seruitut of the egypsyans. But it
has yet another sygnifycacion hitherto unknown unto you, which must be
fulfilled spyrytuallye in the kingdom of god by my passion that is at hand /
and blood that now shall shortelye be shed, by which ye shall be delivered
out of the power of satan, sin and hell, and made heirs of the kyngedome of
heaven. Nether was it the lames blood that delivered you then. For what
regards God the blood of sheep and calves / but the blood of christ / whom
that lamb fygured and described his innocencye / pureness and obedyence to his
father, and compassyo^ to man ki^d ward, whose feeble nature / he had put on
with all the infyrmytes of the same (save sin) did then delyuere you / to
bring you to the faith of this delyuerau^ce. And to make you through faith
partakers thereof.

Many things there be in the scryptur which has a carnal fulfyllynge* even
there where they be spoken or done, and yet have an other spu^al sygnificacion to
be fulfilled long after, i^ christ and his kingdom And yet never known till
the thing be done / As the serpent of brass, which moses hanged up in the
wilderness, though it took effect carnally in the wilderness, yet it so
descrybeth ye lifting up of Christ upon the cross / and the virtue of his
passion, that no tongue could declare it to make the heart feale it.

If ye axe why they may not be known till they be done, and what such prophesy
may help. I answer if they understand before they were done it would let the
fulfyllyng of them, and when the sygnifycation is fulfilled, the^ to se how
plainly it was descrybed in the scripture does excedingly confyrme the faith
thereof, and makes better to be understood.

And when this Pesah was fulfilled spyrytually in the kingdom of heaven by the
death and bloudsheadynge of christ it ended there. And in the room thereof
(concerning that spyritual sygnifycaion) came the sign of the sacrament of the
body and blood of our Sauyoure Christ. As baptysme came in stead of
circumcisyon things more easy and less paynful and tedious to be observed,
and more Gentle to provoke and entyse the heathen. For as the lamb descrybed
the death of Christ to come / and the manner of his passion, by which we should
be delivered. Even so does the ceremonye of the body and blood of Christ
testyfye unto us, that he has given him self to death for us, and redeemed us
already. If we believe and cleave fast to the profession of our baptysme to
walk therein / or will (if any tempest have driven us out of the right
course) return to the right way again.

This to be so the words of the institucyon declare / which are these.1. Cor
xi / The lord Jesus the night he was betrayed / took bread and gave thanks
and broke it, and said: Take and eat, this is my body that shall be given for
you this do in the remembrance of me And likewise he took the cup, when supper
was done saying. This cup is the new testamente in my blood / this do as
often as ye drink it, in the remembrance of me.

Here ye se by these words, that it was ordained to keep the death of Christ
in mind, and to testyfy that his body was given and his blood shed for us

And Luke.xxij. This is my body that is given for you: this do in the
remembrance of me. And this Cup is the new testament in my blood, which shall
be shed for you: Loo here ye see again that it was instituted to keep the
death of Christ in mind, and to testifye wherefore he dyed / even to save us
from sin, death and hell, that we should seek non other means to be delivered
with. For there is none other. Acts.4. For as the chylderen of Ireaell stonge
of ye fyrye serpents cold have none other remedy to save them from present
death, then to go and behold the brason serpent hanged up by moses in the
wyldernes which lokyng on only healed them / eue^ so if the styng of daeth,
which is sin i. Corr. xv / have wonded the soul with the workyng of the law
in the conscyences / there is none other remedy, then to run to Christ
which shed his blood hangyng upon the cross. And to his everlasting
testament and merciful Promysse that it was shed for us, for the remyssyon
of our Sins, if this be stonge with conscience of sin, and they coketryse
of thy Poisoned nature has behold her self in the glass of the ryghtuous
law of God, there is non other salve or remedi, the^ to ru^ne to Christ
immediatli and to the Father throw him / And to say father I have sinned
against ye and the godly and holy and ryghtuous law, and against my brother,
whom I ought of all right to love for thy sake / as well as my self, for give me
o father for the dear son Jesus blood sake according to the most merciful
promyses and testament, and I will axe my brother for geuenes (if the peace I
mean be not made already) and will make to my* power such satysfactyon to him
as shall seame right in his eyes, if he be reasonable or as the congregacyon
should assygne, or faithful men thereto appointed by the congregacyo^, or such as
I and he shall agree upon, and will endeavor my self to do so no more (...)
the help of the grace. And will submit my self to the holso^ ordinance of the
congregacyon / acordy^ge to the doctrine of the sone Jesus and of his faithful
apostles / for there is none other name under heaven, then Jesus given to me^
that we may be saved by / Act.4. Here of ye se yt the sacrament is an
absolucyon of our si^nes as often as we receive it, where it is truly taught
and understand / and receued a right, Here of ye se also yt as the Ebrewes
wrote their stories and couenaunts / and signs / giving there signs such
names as cold not but keape them in mind. And as god the father did follow the
ensample of the people (or they following him) and commanded his Promysses*
couenauntes and prophesyes to be wryte^ in gestes. Signs and cecrmonyes,
geuynge them names that cold not but keep his couenauntes in mind. Even so
christ wrote the covenant of his body and blood in bread and wine / geuynge
them that name ye ought to keep ye covenant in remembrau^s, And hereof ye se
that our sacraments are bokys of stories only and that there is none other
virtue in the^ then to thestyfye the couenauntes and promysses made in chrysts
blood. And here of ye perceive that where naught is understand by the sacrament
or ceremonies / there they be clean unprofitable

And as ye circumcisyon in the flesh, there hearts stylle vncyrcumcysed / But
hatynge the law of god and beleuynge in there oune ymagynacyons: were
circu^cysed unto their great dampnacyon. And as they baptized in the flesh
only, the heart still unclean / nether beleuyng in christ for the forgeuenes of
there si^nes Nether love there neyboure for christ's sake are baptized also unto
there greatter dampnacyon (for though god have right to all men because he has
creaed and made man* yet to all such persons by the reason of the sign and
bage / and of there own consent, grant and promysse has he more right to
calling of them the keeping of his law, And yt they trust in him only (or to
dampne them because when they know their duty, or might if they would (the
sign mouynge them and geuynge them an occasyon to axe thereafter and yet do
not. Even so all that comme to the sacrament for any other purpose then it was
ordained and instytuted / for that is to say so fette absolucyon of their
sins with a set purpose to sin no more as nigh as they can / and to call
to memory the Benefyttes of the Passion of Christ, with the medytacyon to
weak the flesh / and strenght the Spyrite against her: And to give thanks*
again / that is to say / to call to mind, How much he is bounden for
Christ's sake / to love his neighbor, to help his neade, and to bear his
infyrmitye, and to forgive him if he have offended and desire forgeuenes,
promysyng to amend, where unto Christ byndeth all that will be partakers of
his Blood

The same I say came thereto to their greatter dampnatyon: I pass over with
silence the wicked and dampnable Doctrine of these Servants of Mammon, which
for lucre, peruerte the true use of the sacrament and hyd it from the people
for neante, teaching it to be a sacryfyce instituted of God to help the souls
of the dead in purgagatory, and that it will make men rich and bring them to
such promocyon as Christ never promised his discyples but forbadde it them.

Some will say. This sacrament neaded not Baptism is Enough, Baptysme as a
receyuyng into relygyon / and there is the couenantes made what we shall do and
what we shall have: And Baptyme as a sign whereby god has right to us and we
to god and to christ and whereby every man has right to call other to do there
dutes, and to rebuk them that will not, Nether owr salvation so greatly
stands in there or any other sacrament / that we could not be saved with out
them / By preaching the word only, Never the later god as right is will have
his benefittes kept in memory to his glory and our benefyte and namely this
benefytte of all benefittes / wherein only the pythe of our saluatyon rests:
therefore though the affecte of it be sygnyfyed by baptysme. And though we be
Baptized to believe in the death of Christ, and to dye with him by mortyfyeng of
the flesh / yet does this sacrament through the rehearsynge of the covenant and
breakyng of the bread and pouryng out of wine, much more lively express the
whole storye, and keep it better in memory by daily repetyng thereof, and has
more might and veheme^cye to heal the conscience stonge with fresshe sin.

For the nature of man is so weak / so feeble and so frail yt he ca^ not but
sin. As there is no man that lives and syneth not the third to the kings
the.iiij. And when he is so fallen, then the law looks upon him with so
terryble a co^tynaunce, and so thundreth in his ears that he dare not abide
but turns his back and to god, and the enemy assayleth him on the other
side to persuade him that god has cast him away saying They that be Gods have
power to keep his law, thou have not but breakest them, ergo thou art cast
away and dampened creature.

And hell gapeth and sets open her mouth beneth to devour him. And the
flesh also wresteleth with the Spyrite to keep him down, and to take him
prisoner and to stop his mouth, that he cry no more upon her, to unquiet
her / that she myghtte sin at pleasur and with out all fear.

The carles swyn that consent unto si^ne feel not these things, neither yet
the hypocryts yt have put a visare on the face of the law, and make her look
with such a contenaunce as please them. It is but loss of wind to talk with
them, but the poor folks that have the eyes open, and consent and feign would
do the law. They feel that ca^ not be expressed with tongue. Neither is there
living any man that fealyth the virtue and power of the blood of Christ
which has not first felt the strong pains of hell. Seeing then that man is so
sick / so prone and ready to fall / and so cruelly invaded, when he has
sinned, of the find the flesh and the law, that he is often put to flight and
feared and made to run away from his father. Therefore has the God of all
mercy and of Infynyte pytye and botomlesse compassyon / set up this sacrament
as a sign on an high hill / whence it may be seen on every side far and
near / to call again them yt be fled and run away. And with this sacrament,
he as it were clocketh to them, as an hen does for her chyckens, to gether
them under the wyngs of his mercy. And has commanded his sacrament to be
had in contynuall use to put them in mind of mercy laid up for the^ in
Christ's blood. And to wytnes and testefy it to them / and to be the seal there
off. For the sacrament does much more vehemently prynt lively the faith and
make it synke down into the heart, then do bare words only. As a man is
more sure of that he hears / seythe, feleth, smells and tastes, then that
he hears only.

Now when the words of the testament and Promises is spoken over the bread.
This is my body that shall be broken for you. This is mi blood yt shall be shed for
you. They confirm the faith / but much more when the sacrament is seen with
the Eyes, and the bread broken the wine powered out or looked on / And yet more
when I Taste it and Smell it.

As ye se when a man makyth a promise to an other with slyght words between
them selves. And as they be departid, he to whom the promysse is made,
begins to doubt whether the other spoke earnestlye or mocked / And whether
he will remember his promise to bide by it or not: But if any man speak with
aduysemente and delyberacyon, the words are more credyble if he swear, it
co^fyrmeth ye thing yet the more if he strike hands: if he give erneste, if he
call record* if he give his hand writing and seal it, so is the promysse more
and more beleuid. For the heart gatheryth

Lo he spoke with aduysement and delyberacyo^ / and with good saddenes he
swear, he clapped hands, called records put to his hand and seal, the man can
not be so faint without the fear of god / as to deny all this. Shame shall make
him bide by his promysse, Though he were such a man that I cold not co^pel him
if he would deny it. If a young man break a ring between him and a maid does
not the fact testyfye and make a presumpcyon to all men, that his heart meant
as his words spoke.

Monaha Samsons father / when he had seen an angel. Iudic. xiij. he said to
his wife, we shall suerli dye by cause we have seen the lord. But his wife
gathered other comfort of ye cyrcu^staunces and said / if the lord would kill
us, he would not have receued such offrynges of our hands.

Nor shoued us such things as he has nor told us of things to come, Eue^ our
hearts gather of ye cyrcumstances, protestacyons as oaths miracles and ernest
ceremoneys of god, good arguments And reasons to stablyshe owre weak faith
wythall, such as we cold not gather at bare words only.

And this we dyspute: God sent his son in owr nature and made him feale all
our infyrmytyes that mow us to sin. And named him Jesus (that is to say)
Savior, because He should save his peopli from there sins Matthew. j. And after
his death, sent his apostles to preach the things or tidings, and to thruste
it in at the ears of us / and set up ye sacrament of it to testify it to be a
seal of it to thruste it in, not at the ears only, by the rehersynge the
promysses and testament over it, nether that our eyes only in be holdi^g it,
but beat it in through our fealyng tastynge and smellyng also. And to be
repeted daily and mynystred to us. He would not (think we) make half so much
a do with us / if he loved us not, or if he would not have us feign come, and be
as marcyful to us as he was to his frindes in the old time that fell and rose
again. God so the^ used to ye Jews (to who^ a ceremonies were first given and
from whom they came to us) even such facyons as they used among them selves /
in all his promyses and couenauntes not for his necessitye, but for ours, that
such things should be a witness and testymony between him and us / to
confyrme ye faith of his promys, yt we should not waver or doubt in them, when
we look on the seals of his oblygac^o^s, where with he has bound him self,
and to keep the promyses / and couenauntes beter in mind, and to make them the
more deep synke into our hearts, and to be more earnestlye regarded, and that we
should axe what such things mente, and why god commanded them to be observed /
that ignorance should not excuse, if we know not what we ought to do and
believe For natural reason ought to teach us, that the outward corporal and
bodylye thing can not help the spyrytual soul, and that god has no
delectacyon in such fantasye. Now if we were dylygent to search for the will
of God. And would axe, what such Ceremonies meant It were impossyble / but
there god which has promised. Math. vii / If we seek we shall find, would send
us true interpreters of his signs or sacraments.

And he that being of a laufull age observes a ceremony and knows not the
intent to him is the ceremonye not only unprofitable but also hurtfulle and
cause of sin. In that he is not careful and dylygent to search for it: and
he there observes them with a false faith of his own Imagynacyon thynkyng as
all ydolaters do and ever have done / that ye outward work is a sacryfice and
a service to God. The same synneth yet more deper and more dampnable. Neither
is ydolatry any other thing the^ to believe that a vysyble ceremonye is a
service to the inuysyble god, whose service is spyrytuall as he is a spyryte.
And is none other, thing then to know that all is of him, and to trust in
him only, for all things and to love him for his great goodness and mercy
above all. And our Neighbors as our selves for his sake unto which
spyrytuall serving of God to bring us to, were old ceremonies ordained.

These be now sufficyente concerning thyntent and use of the ceremonies and
how they came up.

Now let us consider the words of this testament and promysses as they be
rehearsed of three Evangelists matthew mark and Luke and of ye apostle paul.
For Ihon which wrote last touched nothing that was suffisyently declared of
other. Matthew in the.xxvi says thus. as they sat / Jesus took bread and gave
thanks and brake and gave his dyscyples and said, take and eat this is my
body, And he took the cup and thanked and gave it them sayynge, Drink of it
all / for it is my blood of the new testamente, which shall be shed for
many, for the remyssyon of sins. First ye se by these words yt the body was
given to death / and the blood shed for ye remyssyon of si^ns and yt for many.
But who are these mani? verily they yt turn to God to believe in him only /
and to endeavor the^ selves to keep his law from hense forth, which many, yet
in respect of them that love not the law, are but very few, and even that
little Flock that gave them selves whollye to follow Christ, wherefore if any
man think he believe in Christ / and have not the law wryte^ in his heart to
consent yt his duty is to love his brother for Chrysts sake, as Christ loved
him, And to endeavor him self so to do. The faith of that same man is vain
and bylte upon sa^d of his own Imagymacyon / and not upon the roke of gods
word / for his word / unto which he has bound him self, is that they only,
wc turn to god to keep his Laws shall have mercy for chrysts sake.

dri^k of it al / for it is my blood of ye new testament for it is (yt is to
say) the dri^k yt is in the coppe, or if ye list, the cup is my blood of the
new testamente, taking the cup for the drink, by a manner of speaking used in all tongues ^s when we say. I have dronk a cup of wine we take there the cup
for the wine. My blood of the new testament, that is to lay my blood for whose
shedynge sake this new testament and covenant forgeuenes of sin, is made you.

The old testament made between god your father in mount synay / in which life
was promised to them only that keep it (and to be ye breakers death / wrath /
vengeauns) to be accursed only no mencyon made of mercy (with co^fyrmed with
blood. Exodi. xxiiij. Moses offered half the blood to god and sprynkelyd the
people with the other half, to confyrme the covenant and to bind both parties.
Neither was there any covenant made that was not confirmed with blood as it is
rehearsed Ebre. ix. and as we se in the books of Moses, whose custom of
bloudshedyng was not only to confirm those old couenau^ts / but also to be a
prophecy of the blood that should be shed to confyme this testamente, That
old cruel and fearful testament. which draw the people away (they durst not
abide the voice of the thunder, nor the terrible sight of ye fire* But went and
stood a far of / was co^fyrmed with the blood of calves, But this new ande
gentle Testamente which calls again and promyseth mercy to al yt will mend,
as it is a more better testament, so it is confyrmed with more better blood, to
make men se love to love again / and to be a greater confirmacyo^ of the
love promyssed, For if he gave us his son, what will he deny us? if god so
loved us, when we were sinners and knew him not, that he gave his son for us
/ how much mor loves he us? now when we love again and would feign keep his
commandments, in the old couenauntes, the people were sprynkeled with blood
of calves without in there bodies, to bind them to keep the law, else were bound
unto just dampnacyon for the breakyng of it. Here it is said / drink of it
every one that your souls wtin may be sprynkeled and washyd through faith with
the blood of the son of god, for the forgeuenes of sy^ne and to be partakers
of a more easy and kind testame^te, under wc if you sin through fragylyte.
you shall be warned louingli and received to merci if you will turn again and
amend.

Mark in the.xiiij. as they did eat. Jesus took bread and blessed and brake
and gave them and said. Take you, this is my body: And he took the cup and
thanked and gave them / and they drank of it all. And he said, This is my
blood of the new Testamente, there is all one with Mathewe and to understand
as above.

Luke in the.xxij. He took bread / thanked and brake, and gave them saying.
This is my body that shall be given for you, this do in remembrance of me. Like
wise the Cup, when he had Supped saying. This cup is the new testament in
my blood which shall be shed for you. Here is also to be noted / that the cause
of the instytucyon was to be a memoryall to testyfye that Christ's body was
given and his blood shed for us, and again, where Matthew and mark said / this
is my blood in the new testamente. Luke says / This cup is the new
testament in my blood which shall be shed for you. This is a strange speaking
and far from the use of our tongue, to call the Sign and confyrmacyon with
the name of the thing that is sygnyfyed and confyrmed.

The testamentis that Christ's blood is shed for our sins. And christ says /
This cup is that testament / sygnyfying thereby, that the thing that is me^te
by this ceremony is that we believe yt his bloudsheadyng is the remyssyon of
our sins, which is the very testament

Paul.1. Cor. x. says on this manner. I delivered unto you that I received of
the lord. How that the lord Jesus that same night he was betrayed. took bread
and gave thanks and brake and said. Take ye and eat, this is my body that
shall be delivered for you / this do in the remembrance of me. Likewise also,
the cup / when he had supped / saying / This cup is the new testament in my
blood, this do as often as you shall drink it in the remembrance of me. As often
says paul as you shall eat of this / Bread and drink of this cup ye must
declare or preach the lords death until he come.

As matthew and mark agree in these words. So do lucas and paul. And as it is
above declared upon the words of luke, and so here by so often repeting one
thing. This do in the remembrance of me, This cup is the new testament in
my blood. This do as often as ye drink it in the remembrauns of me. Again, As
often as ye shall eat of this bread and drink of the cup as ye must declare
the lords death, By this often repetyng (I say) ye may euyde^tlye perseyue / yt
the cause / intent and whole porpose of the Instytucyon of the sacrament was to
testyfye and confyrme the faith of the testament made in the death of christ
How that for his sake our sins shall be forgeuen.

So do this in the remembrauns of me that is to say, Take bread and wine and
rehearse the covenant and testament over them / How that my body was broken and
mi blood shed for the^ and the geuethe^ the people to eat and drink, to be a
sign an earneste and the seal of the testament, and cry upon them withowt
sesing to believe in me only for remyssyo^ of si^nes, and not to dispraue how
weak so ever they be, only if they hang on me and desire power to keep the
law after my doctrine and ensample of my life / and do morn and be sorry by
cause they ca^ not do that good thing which they would.

Forth says paul. Who so ever eatyth of the brade and drynketh of ye cup
unworthily, is gylty of the body and blood of the lord, that is to say, Whosoever
receueth the sacrament of the body and blood of christ with an unclean heart /
not forsakyng the old lust of his flesh. Nor porposynge to follow christ, and
to be to his neyboure / as christ was to him, only mercyful. The same sins
against the body and blood of Christ In that he makyth a mock of ye ernest
death of christ. And as it is written Ebru. x. Treads christ under foot and
compteth the blood of the testamente wherwyth he was washyd / as an unholy
thing, and does dyshonor the sprite of grace.

of this ye may perceive again / what ye sacrament means, and what the
intent of the ordinance was / and how such ceremonies came up. And whence
they had theyte beginning / and what the fruit thereof is / and what is therein
to be sought And thought were Enough. So that I might here well cease, yet
because the unquiet Scrupulous and Superstycyous nature of man holy given to
ydolatry, has styrred up such tradycyons about this one sacrament most
specially, I can not but speak thereof some what more and declare what my
conscience thinks in this matter

Ye shall understand therefore that there is great dyssention / and three
opynions about the words of Christ, where he says in prononcyng the
testament over the bread: this is my body / and in pronoucynge it over the
wine, this is my blood. One part say they that these sayings this is my body,
this is my blood co^pelle us to believe under pain of damnatyon that the bread
and wine are changed into the very body and blood of christ ryally. As the
water at Cana Galylee was turned into very wine.

The second part says / we be not bound to believe that bread and wine ar
changed: but only that this body and blood ar there presentlye.

The third say, we be bound by these words to believe only tha / christ's
body was broken and his blood shed for the remyssyon of our sins and yt there
is no other satysfaction for sin then the death and passion of christ.

The first say these words (This is my body. this is my blood) compel us to
believe that the things there showed are the very body and blood of christ
really / but bread and wine say they ca^ not be Chrysts natural body. therefore
the bread and wine, are changed / turned altered and transsubstancyat in to
the very body and blood of Christ. And they of this opinyon have busyed them
selves in seeking subteltes and symylytudes to prove how the very body and
blood might be there under the symylytud of bread and wine only. The very bread
and wine thus transsubstanciat, and so occupied in sl^ynge all that will not
captive their wits to believe them / that they never taught nor understood
that the sacrament is an absolucyon to all that therbi believe in the body and
blood of Christ. The second part grant with the first that the words compel
us to believe that the things showed in the sacrament, are the very body and
blood of christ But when the first say bread and wyn can not be the very body
and blood of christ There they vary and dyssent from the^ / affyrmyng that
bread and wine may and also is Christ's body ryally and very blood of
Christ. And say that it is as true to say, ye bread is Christ's body, and
that wine is his blood / as it is true to say Christ being a very man / is
also very god. And they say. As the god head and ye ma^hod in christ are in
such manner coupled together, ye man is very god and god very man / Eue^ so the
very body and the bread are so coupled y^ it is as true to say / ye bread is ye
body of christ and the blood so a^nexed there with ye wine, yt it is eue^ as true
to say ye wyn is chrysts blood The.i. though they have slain so mani. in for the
defense of there opinyon yet they are ready to receuethe second sort to
fellowship, not greatli stryuynge with the^ or abhorryng ye presens of bread and
wi^, with the very body and blood, so that they yet by that means may keep him
there still, and hope to sell him as dear as before, also some to bye him and
not and to mynyshe the price.

The third affirm that words will no more, but only that we be leave by the
things that are there showed, ye christ's body was broken and his blood shede
for our sins if we will forsake our sins and turn to god to keep his law,
And they say that these saynges. this is my body and this is my blood.
Showing bread and wine are true as christ mean them / and as the people of
that co^tre (to whom christ spoke) were acustomed to understand such words,
and as the scripture uses in a thousand places to speak, as when one of us
says I have dronk a cupp of good wine ye sayynge it is true as the man mente:
that he drank wine only and not the cup which words happelye in some other
nacyons ears would sound that he drank the cup to, And as when we say of a
child. This is such a manes very face / the words ar trwe as ye manner of
owr land is to understand them, that the face of the one is very like the
other And as when we say he gave me his faith and his treuth in my hand / the
words ar true as we understand them yt he stroke hands with me or gave ernest
/ in sign or toke^ yt he would bide by his promysse. For the faith of a man
does al way rest i^ his soul, and can not be given out though we give signs
and tokens of them: Even so (say they we have a thousand ensamples in the
scripture. where signs ar named with the names of things sygnyfyed by them, As
Jacob called the place where he saw ye lord face to face. Phenyel: that is
gods face when he saw the lords face to face. Now it is true to say of that
fylde that it is gods face / thowghe it be not his very face*

The same fylde was so called to sygnefie that Jacob there saw god face to face
The chief hold and pryncypal: Ancre yt the two first have is these words, this
is my body. This is my blood / unto these, the third answeryth as is about
said, other textes they alege for them selves, wc not only does not strenght
there cause, but rather makyth it wors. As ye syxte of John which they draw
and wrest to the carnal and fleshly eating / of christ's body in ye mouth when
it only meanyth of this eating by faith, for when christ said. Except ye eat
the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood ye shall have no life in you,
This ca^ not be understand of the sacrament. For Abraham had life and all the
old holy fathers, chrysts mother. Elysabeth zacharyas. John Baptystes Simion.
Anna / and all the apostles had life alredye by faith in christ, of which not
one had eaten his flesh and drunk his blood with there bodily mouths. But
though it is that the ryghtuos lives by his faith: ergo to believe and trust
in christ's blood is ye eating that there was mea^t as ye text well proves,
if they say we grant that life co^mythe by faith / but us all that believe
must be baptized to keep the law and to keep the covenant in mind* even so
all that lives by faith, must receive the sacrament. I answer, The sacrament
is a confyrmacion to weak co^scyences, and in no wise to be despised how beyt
many have lived by faith in ye wyldernes. which in.20.30 or 40. yers have not
received the sacrament, Notwythstanding this oracyon is nothing to the
porpose. For Christ spoke to the blind and unbelieving Jews. testyfyenge to
them that they cold have no life Except they should first eat his flesh and
drink his blood. ergo this eating and drinking is meant only of that thing /
that.i. bringith life in to the soul and that is faith by yowr own
co^fessyon. And therefore must it be understand of faith only and not of ye
sacrament. And Math. ye last. I am with you into the end of the world, wc may
well be understand and so was it of old doctors: by his spiritual being with us
bifayth and in his spryte and so may that text of Mathe. xviji. be understand
where ii or iij of you be gatherid to gether in my name / there am I in the mydes
of of you. There is many times ii or three good men that mete to gether in
christ's name / where the sacrament is not. And Ephesians. iii. boweth his knees for
the Ephesians to god, that he would give them his riches to be strengthened with
his spryte. that christ may dwell in there hearts through faith. Where the
heart. then believes in Christ there dwellyth christ in ye heart. though there
be no bread in the heart, nether yet in the mawe / The two fyreste parts
taking the old doctores to be on there side. I answer Many of the old doctors
spoke so mistycallye that they seame sometimes to affirm plainly, yt it is but
bred and wine only concerning ye substans, And yt it is a fygur of the body
and blood of christ only, and some time that it is his very body and blood.
wherefore it were here to long to wade to far in them. And unto the^ of ye
second opinion yt ye bread is his veribodi. I a^swere ye old doctores ye must
remember that the old doctores as earnestly calle^ it a sacryfyce as they do
christ's body. But that ye deny and say with the epistle to the Ebrew, that
he was but ones sacryfyced for all to gether, when he offered and sacryficed hi^
self to the father for owre sins and can now no more be sacryfyced. Christ
dies no more ore now, and therefore is no more sacrafyced. Nether do we properly
offer hi^ to God

But he in his mortal flesh offered him self for us to god the father: and
Purchased therwyth a general pardone for ever. And now does god the father
profer him and gives him to us. And the pryest in gods stead proferyth him
and gives him unto the people for a remyssyon and an absolucyon of there sins
daily / if there by the mouynge, and sterynge of the sacrament: believe in the
body and blood of christ. Wherefore yt owght of no right to be angry with the^
of the Third Opinion though they deni the doctors, where they seem to say, yt
the sacrament is ye very body of christ As they be not angry with you* when ye
deny them. where they as ernestlye affirm that it is a sacryfice, Never ye
les they answer that doctors call it a sacryfyce only because it is the
memoryall y^ Earneste and seal of that everlasting sacryfyce offered ones for
all. And even so say they that the doctores called the sacrament the body and
blood of christ after the same manner only because it is the memoryal / the
erneste and the seal of his body and blood as the use of the scryptures is to
call signs by the names of the thing sygnyfyed thereby / and unto them of the
first opinion I answer with the same reason that it is impossyble that the
sacrament should be a very sacryfyce. For nether the sacryfices of the old law
which prophesyed sacryfyenge of christ. Neither yet our redempcyon was
fulfilled that night. For if the scryptures and prophesyes were then
fullfylled, and we then redeemed. Christ dyrd on the morrow In vain / and falls
are the apostles and Euangelystes that preach his body breaking and his blood
sheadynge under Poncius Pylate, by the persecutyon of Cayphas and Annas to be
our redempcyon.

Moreover for all the breakyng and dyuydyng of the sacrament of his body among
his Apostles. His body abode still alive. And for all that the pouryng out of
the sacrament of his blood of ye pott into the cup and out of the cup into
the mouths and belyes of his discyples, he blede as fresh on the morrow as
though he had then blede nothing at al He was verily much more easily
sacrifyced that night in the brrekyng and dyuydynge of the bread and pouring
out of ye wine, the^ he was on ye morrow. the sarament was that night (no dowte)
but a descrypcyo^ of his passion to come As it is now a memoryall of his
passion paste. He instituted the manner of the sacrament then / and taught his
dyscyples also that they after understood when he was risen again / and not then
/ as they never had capacyte to understand him, when he spoke of his death. For
they the^ ymagyned carnally of christ, as ye Jews yet do, that Christ should
never dye As he did not concerning his godhead, but should live ever bodylye,
as he now does concerning his ressurection.

Wherefore seeing that all the doctors with one accord call the sacrament so
ernestly h sacrifice, and they can not other wise vndsta^d / the^ yt they so
say after ye use of the scripture only / Because it is the memoryall of the
Sacryfyce of his death and bloudsheadyng, Why should they of right be offendyd
if we understand the doctors after the same manner when they call it his body
and blood / how they so call it after the use of scryptur because that it is
only a memoryall of his body and blood.

As concerning the tra^ssubstanciatyon I think that such a speech was among
the old doctors though they that came after understood them amysse, their
hearts waren gros through busying the^ selves to much with worldly busynes, for
the bread and wine are but only bread and wine till ye words of ye testament
be rehearsed over the^: and the^ they begin to be no more bread and wine in
the hearts of the true beleuers, for ye heart after these words ones spoken
thynkith only upon the covenant made in the body and blood of christ and
through faith eatyth his body and drynkythe his blood / though the eyes and
other Senses perceive no thing but Bread and wine. As when a man some time
sekyth for a text in the bible / se paper and ynke and the fygures of letters,
yet his heart not ons thinkith on any other thing Then on the words and sense
of this text. And hereof no dowt came up this transsubstancyatyo^ through falce
understanding. An other thing is this; no^ of those wyked heretyks, which
denied christ to be very god or any of them that denied christ to be man* or to
have a very body / save a phantastycall body, did cast the true beleuers in
ye tethe at any time of the faith of christ's body present in their sacrament
eueri where. which thing it is not like but they would have done, if that
opinion had been then a general article of the faith.

Neither was there any heresye. or dyuersytye of opinion, or dysputing about the
matter, till the pope had gathered a counsel, to confyrme this
transubstancyacyon, Wherefore it is most lykelye, that this opinion came up by
them of latter days.

Further more all the law and prophettes seek all that christ did or can yet do
/ is to bring us to believe in him / and in god the father through him, for the
remissyon of si^nes / And to bring us unto that, which immedyatly follows out
of that belefe to love owre neighbors for his sake as he loved us / Wherefore
if christ did put his bodylye presens in the sacrament and would we should
believe it / It is done only to bring us to this faith, Now is this faith no
where less had, then where that opynion is most strong. Nether so cruelly
persecuted of Jew or turk / as of the^ that most feruentlye defend that
opinion. True faith makes a man to love his brother: but that opinion makythe
the^ to hate and to sley there brethern that beter believe in christ than they
of that opinion do, and ye murder do they for fear of losyng that they have
gotten through that opinion. Item they of this opinion in sted of teaching us to
believe in christ, teach us to serve christ with bodily service, which thing
only is ydolatry. for they preach that all the ceremonies of ye mass are a
service to god by resone of the bodeli works / to obtain forgeuenes of sins
thereby, and to deserve and merytte there with, And yet christ is now a
spyryte with his father both in body and soul / and with the father to be
worshypped in spryte only. And his service in the spryte / is only to believe
in him for the remyssio^ of sin and to love our neyboures for his sake, Now
all works done to serve man, and to bring him to this point to put his trust
in christ / are good and acceptable to god. But done for any other purpose they
be ydolatrye and image service, and make god an ydoll or bodily image. Again
seyeng the faith of the testama^t in chrysts blood is the life of the
rygthtuos from the beginning of the world to the end, And for as much as
the sacrament was instytuted only to bring to this life. Now when they which
think not the body to be present in the sacrament (a thowsande ensamples in
the scripture concerning there judgment) have by the preaching and
confyrmacyon of The sacrament obtained this life or steadfast says in christ's
blo^d, and by the daily use of the sacrament are more and more hardeneyd
therein and in the love that spryngeth thereof. What reasonable cause have the
contrary party. which believe the body present and the bread turned in to the
very body (as flesh / bones / here. Synewes nails and all other as he was
born or put o^ ye cross. of length and of quantyte I can not tell what) to rail
on as heretykes / hate, persecuted / and fley most cruelly, as enymes. christ
says Qui non co^tra me est* me cum est j. He that is not against me, is whith
me. Now they that believe in christ for the remyssyon of there sins and for
his sake love there foes / are not chrysts enmyes* ergo they be on christ's
side. Why than should they that bost them selves to be christ's friends slay
them? Faith in Christ's blood and in the father through him / is gods service
in the spyryte. And so have they which believe not the bodily presence served
god a long time. And there to been helped by the sacrament. The other Part
fallen there from through preaching the body present seruyng god wych bodily
service (which is Idolatrye) and to make god an ydoll or Image in that they
trust in the goodness of their works (as they do which serve tyraunts) and not
in the goodness of god through trust in the blood of Christ ergo they that
believe not the bodily presence, not a little thereto compelled through the wicked
Idolatrye of the contrary belefe, are not to bethoght, so euel as the other
would have them seem to be.

Paul teaches.i. Corri. xiij. that if a man had al other gifts that god ca^
give man and had not charyty to love his neighbor it helps not. For all
other gifts and the remyssyo^ in christ's blood also are given him of god to
bring hy^ to love his neighbor (which thing had) a man has all (which not
had). A man has nothing. And Philip. ij. how swetly and how vehemently
coniureth he them to draw all one way, to be of one accord, and one mind or
sentence. And to do nothing of strife or of vayn glory, that is to say / of
heart or dysdayn of other or of affectyon to him self for to seem glorious:
but each to prefer other through meakenes and to have his opynion suspecte,
and to fear least he had not obtained the understanding, rather then of
presumption. to his own wit to despise and hate the contrary party / and
persecute as a tyrant. And in the third of the same. Paul says. let as many
as be parfecte, that is to say be truly taught and know the law truly and her
office and ye office or effect of faith and know which be good works before god
and what thyntent of them is (Li^ says he) so far as we become proceed in one
rule / that we may be of one accord. Now hitherto we be all come and this
general rule have we gotten, that faith only Iustyfyeth, that is to say,
that the Sin is forgeuen only for Chr^stes sake: and again that our duty
is to love our neighbors no less then Christ loved us, wherefore let us
proceed forth in this rule / and exhort ^che other to trust in christ, and
to love each other as Christ did, and in this where in we all agree let us be
wise only and fervent, and strive who shall be greatest and go formoost. And in
yt which is not opened to all parties / let us be meke, sober and cold and keep
our wisdom secret to our selves and abide pacye^tly till god open it to other
also. The cause why ye third part say yt this word. IS. co^pelleth us not to
believe the bodily presence of Christ to be there is this. The Jews (say they)
are wont ever to name the memoryall and signs of things with the very name
of the thing sygnyfyed, that the very name might the better keep the thing in
mind. As when Jacob. Ge. xxxij. turned hom again out of mesopotania, saw the
angels of God come against him He called the place where he saw them Mahanaim:
an host, because that his posterytye in time to come / when they herd the
fylde, which was none host / yet so called, should axe why it was so named,
that their elders might thereby have an occasyon to teach that Jacob saw there
the host of angels.

And again in the same Chapyter when the angel that wrastled with hi^ had
blessed him and was departed. Jacob called the name of the place phiniell Gods
face that the people in time to come / should axe why it was called gods face,
and their elders should answer / byca^ Jacob there saw God face to face that ye
name should keep the thing in mind,

And again in the same Chapyter / where he had made bowthes or houses of bows
for his Beasts, hy named ye place Syncoth that is bowthes.

Item Genesis.xxxiij. He boughte a parcel of Land and buylte there an alter
and called it ^ll Eloth.

El Eloth Israel / the mighty god of Israel.

Item Gene. 35. he called the place, El Bethell the god of Bethel. And Genes.
the last chapter Joseph hold a lamentacyon for his father vij days and the
people of the country called the name of the place Abel Masraym / the
lamentacyons of the Egyptya^s. Now the place was not ye lamentacion, but so
called to keep the lamentacyon in memory.

Item Exodi. xii. The Lamb is called Pesah a passing by / because the angel
did pass by the houses and hurted not where it was slain and the blood
stryken on the posts, that the name should keep the thing in memory.

Item Exodi. xxix. and leuitie. almooste every where the beast offered for sin
/ is called sin which use of speaking Paul uses. Roma. ix. and.ij. Corrin
v. and calls Christ sin, when christ yet is neither sin nor neither yet
sy^full, but an acceptable offering for sin and yet he is called our sin.
Because he bare our sins on his back and because our sins are consumed
and made no sin in him, if we will forsake our synes and believe in Christ
for the remyssyon thereof. Christ is also called our ryghtuousnes to certyfy us,
that when we have no righteousness of our own / yet that his ryghtousnes is
given us to make satysfactyon for our vnryghtuousnesse, if ye will believe it.

Item Exodi. xxx. The sin or sin offering is called de Attonomente. And it
was yet but a sign certyfyinge the conscience, that the atonoment was made,
and that God had forgeuen the sin.

Item Iudicum. x. They called the name of a certain city Horna. As ye were an
utter destruction. Because that they had utterly destroyed man woman and child
and all that bare life.

Item Iudic. xv. the place where samson killed men with an ass Iawe was called
Lehy, that is iawe bone to keep ye act in mind.

Item Iudic. xix There went a company out of the trybe of Dan and pytched
besides Kyryath Ieari^mi^n Judah and the place was called ever after Mahond
Dane, the host of dan only to keep the thing in mind.

Item.i. Reg. vi. A great stone where God slew fyftye thousand was called the
great lamentacyon. In so much y^ the text says. They put the arc on ye
great lamentacyon.

Item.i. Reg. vij. Samuel pytched a stone on an end: and called the help
stone / Because GOD had there helped them* and given them vyctory of the
philystyans.

Item the last of the.3. of the kings Sedechias came to Achab with a cople of
horns on his head: saying. With these horns shall thou sle the Assyria^s he
meant not that Achab should take these horns and gore at the assyryans. But
would that he should believe only that as a beast scathered a cock of hey with
his horns so should Achab scather the host of the Assyryans with his host.

Item Number. vi. He that voyth abstinence must let his here grow / to keep his
abstynence in mind And his abstinence is out. He is commanded to shave the
head of his abstynence / and to offer such offerynges as are there appointed
after yt he has shaven of his abstinence. Lo there ye here is called his
abstinence, and is yet but a memory of his abstinence.

Item Iere. vii. The prophet was commanded to shere of his abstynence and to
cast it away, which abstynence is but his here

Also Ezechiel xij. God commanded the prophet to remove with al his goods after
such manner as conquerers carry away the people captyue from contre to contry,
and when he had done, The lord said unto him this prophesy is the capyteyne or
prince of Jerusalem* when yet it was but an ensample to him how he should be
served.

Fynallye where Mathewe and Mark say. This Cup is my blood of the new
Testamente. PAUL and Luke says. This cup is the new testament in my blood.
Now must the sense of the words of the two first Math and mark be all one
with the senses of the words of the two last / luke and paul, The words
of luke and paul are. This cup is the new testament made in my blood: or for
my blood sake / Now the testament is y^ his blood was shede for owre sins,
but it is impossyble y^ the cup or his blood should be that promysse,
wherefore the Sense must be needs. that it is the memoryall and seal of ye
testament only. And therefore where Math. and mark say. This cupp is my blood of
the new testament, the sense must needs be also. that it is ye memoryall and
seal there of only calling after the use of the Hebrwes the sign with the name
of that. which is sygnifyed, that is to say. Calling the wine. which only
sygnyfyeth the blood with the name of the blood. And then it folowyth that the
bread is called his body. After the same manner, because it is a sign of his
body,

These and like ensamples move the part to affirm that we be not bound to
believe that the bread is the very body of christ Though it be so called. Nor
that the bread is transsubstancyat in to the bodi. No more then the things here
rehearsed are, that they be called or transsubstancyat in to the very thing
which they be called.

The other will answer, though (...) memoryal were not the things whose names
they bear / yet it will not follow that it should be so here in the sacrament,
for they which gave such other names, Had no power to make the things so to
be. But christ is very god and has power to make his Body to be every
thing and every where. I answer that god can not make every of his creaturs god
to / nether ca^ it be proved less repugnaunt that a creature should be every
where then that he should be God. morouer though God / where he appeared to
Jacob had pytched a stoone on an end, and called it gods face, yet had he
not been any more bound to believe that yt had been the very Face of God /
then if Jacob had don it. The allmyghtynes of god standythe not in that he is
able to do all ye owre ^osyshe lewd thougtes may ymagyne. But by cause all
power is his and of him. and that he does al he will and has made al of
nawght. and can bring all to nawght again. And ca^ do all that includes not
contrary to the truth and veryte that god has put in his ceatures, And by
cause he can do things impossible for ma^or any other Creatur to do or to
think how they shude be do^ therefore he is called the lord almighty. But
because to braule a bowt such possybylyte or impossibylyte is the lust of
Sophysters and also the desire of ye devil to quench the professyon of owre
baptysme and to wipe ouc the image of christ out of owre hearts. And a thing
endeles. Therefore I compte it wickedness to wade forth in it, And to give them
that seake it an occasyo^ perpetually to skold The negatyue may a man hold
till they can prove the affyrmatyue. More over if bread be ye very body of
christ whether abydyng the very body still or eles transsubstancyat, and
enjoy the glory of the soul of christ, and also of the godhed?

It semith impossible to be avoydyd but that Christ was made man and dyed. Also
bread / which semethe to some a great inconuenyence.

Howbeit that great promocyo^ of bread and also that high power of prists
above all angels I amytte also: to avoid all braulynge.

But one reason I have unto which I cleue some what and it is this.

All that is between god and man in the scryptur is for man's necessytye and not
for any neade / that GOD has thereof / and other Spyrytuall profit can none
have by that FAITH in the sacrament, than to be taught there by to believe in
Christ our Savior and to do good to his neighbor, now is that belefe and
love had as well and rather beter (as it is above proved) without such faith,
then with, it. Ergo where the scripture compels to no such belefe it is
wyckednes to make it a necessary article of our faith. And to sley the^ that
can not think that it ought to be believed.

Notwythstandyng all these reasons and the dampnable Idolatrye which ye
papists have committed with the sacrament / yet whether they affirm the body
and blood to be present with the bread and wine, or the bread and wine to be
turned and transsubstancyate into the body and blood, I am there with content
(for vnityes sake) if they will there cease, and let him be there, only to
testyfye and confyrme the testament or covenant made in chrysts blood and body
for which can se only Christ instituted the sacrament But and if they will rage
farther with their blind reasons of their subtyl sophystry and deuelysh Idolatry
and say. Where Christ's blood is there is his body: and where his body is there is
his soul / and where his soul is, there is the godhead and the trynitye / the
father, the son, and the holy ghost / and there me^ ought to pray and say. O
Father which art preset with the son Christ under bread and wine, or in form
of bread and wine. If (I say) they so rave, the^ as the old prophet for like
Idolatry denies God to dwell in the temple, or to have pleasur in sacrifyce of
blood of gotes, sheep and calves, Even so deny I the body of Christ to be any
more in the sacrament the^ God was in the golden calves which Ieroboham set
up to be prayed to the one in bethell, and ye other at dan / for though god be
present every where yet if heaven of heuens can not compass hi^ to make hi^ a
dwelling place (as ye scryptur testyfieth) and much less the temple that was
at Jerusalem / how should he have a dwelling place in a little wafer or crome
of bread God dwells not in the temple. Neither did our fathers which were of
the true faith in the old Testamente pray to god as present in the temple, but
the name of god only was in the temple.iii of the kings.viij. and his law and
couenauntes and wonderful deades were therein written in signs / and were
there preached and testyfyed continually of the true prystes and Prophets unto
the people the fathers of the true faith came thither.

Furthermor for the fervent love which they had toward the laws and
couenauntes of god. For the which prophets / Solomon prayed so earnestly unto
ye lord God, sayng: Hear thou (O God) in heaven thy dwelling place, and do all
that the Stranger calls to the for: that all nacyons of the earth may know
the and fear thy name: as do this people Israel. etc.

Read the third book of the kings the.viij. Chapter

When god delytyd only in ye faith of ye offerer / which believed in god only
for all mercy taking ye sacryfyce for a suer token and ernyste of the Mercy of
god. sertyfyed by that sign / that god loved them / and was at one with the^.
for christ sake to com. As we should be certyfyed by the sacramnet of god is with
us, for christ's death yt is past, and christ taught us in owre prayers to look
up to heaven and to say. Owre father which art in heaven and he him self in
all his prayers did lift up his eyes to heaven to his father, and so did he when
he Instituted the sacarme^te and rehearsed ye words of ye covenant ouere
bread and wine as it is wryte^ Math. 26. mark* 14. luke 22. 1. Cor. xj. in
these words Jesus took bread. etc

Christ though he affyrmed him self to be the son of God and his father to
be in him / yet he taught not his dyscyples to dyrecte the prayer to the father
in him, but up to the father in heaven nether lift he up his eyes or prayer to
his father in ye sacrament. but to his father in heaven. I know diverse and
diverse me^ knew me, which love me as I do the^ yet if I should pray them when
I met them in the stret openly, they would abhor me / but if I pray them where
thy be appoyntyd to mete me secretly* they will here me and accept my request,
eue^ so though Gods presence be every where, yet will he be prayed to, up
to ye place only, where we shall se him. and where he would have us to long for
to be

More over if I grant you that the blood of christis in ye cup, it will follow
that his bodi is there also, Neither when I grant that his body is in the bread
or vnderforme of bread / will it follow that his soul is there to, Christ made
ye bread the sacrament of his body only wherefore as the bread is no simylytude
of the sacrament of his blood / So am I not bound or ought to affirm, that
his blood is there present. And he did instytut the wine to be ye satrament of
his blood only. And happelye it was red wine the more lovely to represente yt.
Now as the wine in no symylytud does represent the body / so am I not bound or
ought to affirm that his bodi is there present.

Ye say that christ is so mighty, That though he stood mortal before his
dyscyples eyes, yet he was able to make ye same body, that same time to be in
the sacrament immortal. and to be under every little piece of the bread, or of
the sacraente, though yt be no greatter then a mote in the son. and that as
long as great and thycke as he stood before the^ if he were so mighty, why is
he not as mighty to make his blood to be alone and his body alone / his blood
/ body, and soul, were each alone at his death. and while the body lay in
the sepulcher.

Fynallye Christ said this is my blood that shall be shed. Ergo. it is now
true. this is* his blood that was shede Now the blood of hayles. and ye blood
that is in many other places, men say is the blood that was shede Ergo that
blood is in the sacrament^^ any be, but I am not bound to believe: or ought to
affirm, that the blood that is at hayls is anymate* with the soul of
christ, or that his body is there present.

Wherefore to avoid this endeles bralynge which ye deuelles, no dowbt, has
styrred up, to turn the eyes of our souls from the everlasting covenant
made us in christ's blood and body and to no sell us in ydolatry, which is
trust and confydence in false woorshyppynge of god and for to quench. first
the fayt he to Christ ward and then the love dew to owre neyboure / therefore me
thinks* that the Part that has professed the faith of christ, and the
love of his neybour ought of duty to Bear each other as long as the otheres
opinyon is not plain wicked. through false ydolatrye nor contrary to the
salvation that is in Christ. Nor against the open and manifest doctrine of
christ and his apostls Nor contrary to the general artycles of the faith of
the general church of christ which are co^fyrmyd with open scripture. In
which artycles Never a true church in any land dyscentyth There be many
textes in the scripture. And therefore dyuersly expound of holy doctores. and
taken in contrary senses, when no text has contrary senses in in deed. or
more then one sengle sense / and yet that hurts not. Nether are ye holy
doctores therefore herytykes. as ye exposytyo^ destroys not the faith i^
chrysts blood, nor is co^tary to ye open: scripture or general artycles. No
more does yt hurt to say, that the body and blood are not in the
sacrament. Nether does it help to say they bethere. But hurt excedynglye, if
ye infer that the soul is thereto, and that God must be there prayed to, when
as our kingdom is not on the earth: Even so we ought not to dyrect our
prayers to any god in earth, but up where our knigdom is. And whether our
redemer and sauyoure is gone, and there sytteth on the right hand of his father
to pray for us and to offer our prayers to his father and to make the^ for his
sake acceptable, nether ought he yt is bound under pain of dampnation to Love
his brother as Christ loved hi^, to hate / to persecut, and to fle his brother
for blind zeal to any opinion that nether lets nor hyndereth to Saluatyon
that is in Christ, As they which pray to God in ye sacrament, not only do. But
also throw ye opinion / as they have lost love to their neighbors even so have
they lost the true faith in the couenaunte made in Christ's blood and body,
which covenant only is that which saves and wc testyfyeth, was the sacrament
instytut only.

Finis.

