PETER'S FALL. Two Sermons upon the History of Peter's denying Christ. Wherein we
may see the causes of man's falling from God, and the manner how, both of the
wicked thorough incredulity, and of the godly by infirmity: and also the way
that God has set down in his word to rise again. By JOHN VDALL, Preacher of
the word of God at Kingston upon Temmes.

Proverbs. 24, 16. A just man falls seven times, and rises again, but the
wicked fall into mischief. Printed at London by John Windet, and Thomas Iudson
for Nicholas Lyng. Anno. 1584.

To the right Honorable Lord, Frauncis, Earl of Bedford, Knight of the noble
order of the Garter, one of her Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel, JOHN
VDALL wishes increase, and continuance of virtue and godliness.
THE greatest difference that the Philosophers could find (right Honorable)
between man and beast, was the rule of reason, whereby they could perceive that
man could give judgment of things present and things past, and comparing them
together, could (after a sort) prognosticate of things to come, which moved
them according to their power and understanding, to labor night and day in
continual meditation of the excellency of the same, to seek the adorning and
beautifying thereof, with all those things which brute beasts for lack of
reason could not have: as namely, the continual searching out of natural
causes, the daily consideration of the effects, and operations of things in
this world: and the particular qualities of every several beast, bird, fish,
tree, herb, worm, fruit, stone, and every other creature whatsoever. The
benefit of whose diligence redoundeth even to our great good, and consolation,
as the Physician very well knows, and the diseased patient sensibly feels:
yea, and (which more is) they stayed not themselves in this alone, but
laboring still to beautify that same divine part of man's mind (I mean
reason) they invented another kind of flower, which they called Moral
Philosophy, wherewithal their meaning was, to have the effects of reason
rightly ruled, to shine forth most brightly in every particular action of man's
life, putting all their contemplations by this means, in assiduall and daily
practice: wherein, how excellent they were, and how forcibly they used it in
their conversation, and also how equally it directed all their deeds by
justice and equity, their own writings remaining yet, and their notable acts
recorded in histories, do better and more plentifully declare, then either I
can, or my present purpose may suffer me. Only thus much is to be said, that
their virtues were so excellent, that we aim still at them, and their common
wealths so well ordered, that we make them our continual platform and
pattern: and the nearer we come unto diverse of the^, the better we think our
government established. Now it is not unknown unto your honor, nor to any
other that have the true feeling of Gods grace working in their hearts, and the
Sun of righteousness shining in their consciences: that the Lord our God, the
creator of all things, our redeemer, preserver and sanctifier, has given unto
us not only the knowledge of all these things (in some measure) which they had
in great abundance, but (which more is) a far surpassing and more excellent
difference, to sever us withal from the rest of his creatures, then ever they
had, or once thought of, to wit, the knowledge of his love and favor toward
us in his Son Jesus Christ. For albeit it be true that reason is the
essential and formal difference, as they call it, between man and beast, yet
we see even in them some spark, and as it were, some special kind of reason:
for to try the same in particular effects, we see that a Dog can discern his
master from another man, yea, though he be twenty years from him, if it be
true that Homer reports of Ulysses his dog, Odiss. 17.
and him that uses to hurt him he can shun, and can fawn on him that
cherishes him. The bird also can foretell when rain will fall. The Emit in the
time of summer, makes provision for winter. Many there be, such like as these
which we read of in Pliny and Aristotle, writing of the nature of beasts, and
which by our own experience we daily see. But this is so far from seeming
to be revealed to any other creature, that it is a paradox, and a strange thing
to many of us, that differ from brute beasts by reason, and therefore which is
the drift of this whole discourse, it stands us upon which profess the name
of Jesus Christ, which do acknowledge him to be given of God the Father, and
sealed unto us by God the holy Ghost, for our eternal salvation: to have an
especial care, that as Christ says of the wicked, (that they be wiser in
their generation, then the children of light) so it be not said of us, Luke.
16, 8.
that the Paganes, Heathen, and Gentile Philosophers, be not found in the sight
of God more diligent in their humane profession, then we in the profession of
Jesus Christ: I mean more glorious in showing forth the fruit of their
Philosophy in their actions, then we of our divinity in our life and
conversation. And surely, I would to God that we could truly and rightly follow
their steps in one thing, which is this: I read of them that the more
knowledge they obtained in their Philosophy, the more they abandoned themselves
from the vanities of the world, so that one casts his gold into the sea,
Crates.
another carried all his substance with him wheresoever he went: another
contented himself with a tub or tun to dwell in, Bias.
in steed of his house: Diogenes.
all of them whatsoever they possessed, they did willingly employ it to the
increase of knowledge in themselves and others. But do we so? no. We seek how
to serve God and Mammon too: Matthew. 6, 24.
we labor to become religious in show, and covetous in deed: We desire to
come to Christ by night with Nicodemus, John. 3, 4.
for fear of worldly losses, we seek to cry Lord, Lord, but we have no care
to do the works of the Lord. Matthew. 7, 21. 2. Tim 3, 5. Matthew. 20, 22.
We make a show of godliness, but we deny the power thereof: we wish to sit
at the right and left hand of Jesus in his kingdom, but we are loath to drink
of his cup. (All in one word) We profess Jesus Christ, Jude verse. 4.
but turn the grace of God into wantonness. Hence it is that wickedness does
so abound, that Satan has prevailed so much, and that so few endeavor a godly
life: even for that the enemy can persuade them that profession will serve,
that a show is sufficient. But howsoever it be, that so many be drunk with
this cup of Satan's poison, against whom in truth, the Heathen Philosophers
that never knew God, shall rise in the day of judgment and condemn them, for
that they have been more careful to show the fruit of their profession in
upright dealing (though it was in vain) then these have been, yet it behooves
all them that see these things, and are grieved with the consideration thereof,
and are not spotted with the same brand, to be so much the more careful, as
the evil is common, that they smell not of their abomination, that they
depart from them, Revel. 18, 4.
and be not partakers of their sins, that they hate the garment spotted by
the flesh, that they fashion not themselves like unto this world, Jude verse.
2, 3. Romans 12, 2.
but that they be changed in their shape, by the renewing of their minds, and
that thereby their profession may be adorned, Tit. 2, 10.
and the truth thereof in their hearts and consciences forcibly established.
When I considered these things (right Honorable) and sought out of Gods book
(which is the looking glass discovering all enormities) wherein the chief
cause hereof should consist: I perceived (so far as my small knowledge could
atteyne unto) that the lack of the right use of Gods word, and heedefull care
to be governed by the same, did engender these, and infinite other
abominations: and therefore for mine own comfort, and the instruction of
others, I did make choice of the history of Peter's denying of Christ to
entreat upon: which being ended, for certain considerations hereafter
mentioned, I have so near as I could, penned it according as it was spoken:
Most humbly beseeching your Honor, that the same may proceed under the wings
of your defense and protection, which I doubt not shall be by that means of
the godly sort, the better accepted, and of the cankered caterpiller the less
touched, so shall I be bound (which notwithstanding is my duty) to pray unto
the Lord God of heaven, for the increase and continuance of the graces of his
holy spirit unto your honor, to guide and direct the same in all your good
and godly enterprises whatsoever, that thereby Gods holy name here upon earth
may be glorified, his children maintained and cherished, sin and iniquity
cut down and quenched, Jesus Christ his Gospel promoted and advanced, and
your own conscience unfeignedly comforted. Amen.

Your Honors most humble to command. JOHN VDALL.

To the Godly and well disposed Reader.
Having taken in hand to entreat of this place of Scripture (according to my
poor talent, wherewith God has enabled me) I was very earnestly requested by
some of my friends (such as fear God unfeignedly) to put the same in printe
for the benefit (as they said) of others But considering with my self, the
great number of learned and godly treatises already extant, and how
unnecessary it should be for my green and untimely blossom to appear in this
age of the ripe Harvest, and also how ready man's nature is to cavil at the
doings of others: and like the spider to suck poison out of the finest Flowers,
I was fully determined it should never show it self in the world: yet being
moved with their earnest suite, and at length being overcome with their
forceable persuasions, I have penned the same as near as I can remember. Now
(good Reader) if thou be desirous to know what benefit thou shall reap by
the same, I am very loath to indent with thee before hand for if I should
promise nothing, I were to be blamed to trouble thee, which else might be
better employed. If I should promise that which peradventure thou may
find: I might seem to arrogate too much unto my self, and therefore I commit
it to thy godly consideration and judgment. But for the place of scripture it
self, thus much I dare say (and that I trust with the consent of all the
godly learned) that if thou desire to understand how the wicked do begin to
fall from the Lord: what causes do concur, and in what order they proceed
unto the height of iniquity: If thou desire to know what it is that moves
the godly to fall and offend god And lastly if thou be willing to understand
what things be necessary and expedient for thy self, being fallen to return
unto god, and to stand in his favor when thou art in it, I am sure thou may
learn it out of this history. Now if I have not so fully discoursed of every
point, as thou could wish, nor so learnedly proceeded, as the matter does
require: I pray thee bear with me, and pray to the Lord to increase his
beginnings in me, and supply my want? concerning the last part of al, which is
repentance, I have of purpose been sparing in it, because others have
learnedlye and at large entreated thereof: whoseful entreaty if thou desire,
have recourse unto those their writings. To conclude, if any thing do here
please thee, give God his due for it (to whom all honor belongs) If ought
be lacking, help me I beseech the with thy prayers to God our father, that it
would please him to direct al our indeauoures to the advancement of his glory,
the benefit of his Church, and comfort of our consciences that we may walk
warily and circumspectly amongst this froward and crooked generation.

Amen.
The Text out of Saint Matthew and S. Luke conferred both together.
Jesus said unto Peter, verilye I say unto thee, Mat. 26.34.
that this night before the Cock crow thou shall deny me thrice.

Peter said unto him, though I should dye with thee, 35.
yet will I not deny thee.

And Peter followed a far off, and when they had kindled a fire in the midst
of the Hall, Luke 22.54.55.
and were set down together, Peter also sat down amongst them.

And a certain maid beheld him as he sat by the fire, 56.
and having well looked on him said, this man was also with him.

But he denied before them al saying: 57.
woman, I know him not, 58.
And after a little while another man saw him, and said, Mat. 26.72.
thou art also of them

But he denied again with an oath, saying: I know not the man.

Then after a while came unto him those that stood by, 73.
and said unto Peter, surely, thou art also one of them, 74.
for even thy speech bewraieth thee.

Then began he to curse him self, Luke 22.60.
and to swear, saying: I know not the man.

And immediately while he yet spoke, 61.
the Cock did crow.

Then the Lord turned back, and looked upon Peter, and Peter remembered the
words of the Lord, how he had said unto him before the Cock crow, thou shall
deny me thrice.

And Peter went out and wept bitterly. 62.


The Method and order of the whole matter in this book.
Peter his fall, the causes, within himself, presumption, in forsaking Gods
word. 1. leaning to his own power. 2.
following a far off. 3.
without himself, the company, the high priests servants. 4. the place, the
warm fire. 5.

the manner how, 1. By bare denying. 6. 2. By swearing. 7. 3. By execration.

rising again the causes. without himself. the crowing of the cock. 9. the
looking back of Jesus. 10.
within himself what Christ had said. 11. what he had done. 12.

the manner how. his going out. 13. his sorrowing. 14.




Math. 26, 34. Jesus said unto Peter, verily I say unto thee, that this night
before the Cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice, etc.


AS there is nothing set down in the word of God, which is not in his
singular wisdom propounded unto his children, either to teach them the will
of the Lord, 2. Tim. 3, 16.
and the religion that they must profess, or to furnish them with sufficient
armor, to convince their adversaries, or to instruct them how to frame their
lives and conversation according to his will, or to reprove them that walk
inordinately, or lastly, to comfort them being distressed and afflicted in
this world: Romans 15, 4.
so there is no example set before our eyes, in the whole book of God, more
necessary for us continually to be meditated upon, then this of Peter's fall.
For in the same, is first painted out unto us, the miserable estate of man,
being left unto himself: then the exceeding mercy of God toward man.
Secondly we may see in it the beginnings, proceedings, and manner how all men
do sin, whether it be the godly falling by infirmity, or the wicked
transgressing thorough infidelity, and then how and by what degrees the godly
be reclaimed and restored again. So that in this history we have two things
offered to our considerations. First, Peter's fall. Secondly, his rising again.
In his fall we note the causes that moved him thereunto, and the manner how it
was. The causes be either in himself, or accidentarie without himself: within
himself, his presumption* in departing from the word of God, and leaning upon
his own power, and his slow following: the causes without himself be his
company, the high Priests servants, and the place where he was, ye warm fire.
The manner how he did fall, is first in bare denial: then with binding it with
an oath: and lastly, by curssing himself if ever he knew Christ. In his rising
again, are likewise the causes and the manner how: the causes without himself
and within himself: without himself, the crowing of the Cock, and the
looking back of Jesus: within himself, his remembrance what Christ had said,
and what he had done, the manner how he rise, his going out, and his sorrowing.

The first cause of his fall (as you see) was his presumption, and that is
their fall.

The father of mankind, the first founder of his mystery Adam, having
received this especial commandment (of the tree of knowledge of good and
evil, Genesis 2, 17.
thou shall not eat.) Yet this being put out of his heart, partly thorough
the subtlety of Satan (wherewithal he was assailed) partly by the
provocation of the woman (whom greatly he loved) and partly with the beauty
and delicacie of the Apple (with which he was allured:) He notwithstanding did
take of it, and eating of the tree forbidden, fell from the Lord his God, and
was cast out of that place of pleasure, 3.23.
where before he dwelled. So did Caine, 4.8.
forgetting the commandment of God, yea and the law of nature, kill his
brother Abell. 2.24.
Lamech not considering that the Lord God had made man and woman to be one
flesh, 4.19.
took unto him two wives, and so fell from the Lord. Saul having received a
precept to destroy Amalecke, and all that pertayned unto them, 1. Sam. 15, 3.
that he should have no compassion on them, but should slaie both man and
woman, both infant and suckling, both Oxen and Sheep, and Camels, and Asses:
yet directing not his doings according to his commission, but yielding unto
his own fantasy, in sparing the King Agag, and the better Sheep, and fat
Oxen to sacrifice, (as was pretended) unto the Lord, was rewarded with
deprivation from his Kingdom. The like may be said of the rebellious
Israelites in the wilderness, Exo. 16, 2.17, 3.
(who having the promise of Gods special protection) yet murmured often times.
The same is plain in the rebellious Jews in the time of the Prophets, and
briefly thorough out the whole book of God: that when soever the Prophets be
resisted, the Apostles persecuted, or any other sin whatsoever committed:
whether it be of the godly falling by infirmity, or by the wicked offending
of obstinacy. The first original and beginning is this, that the word of the
Lord in that respect, is either not known, or not remembered, and therefore
Satan struck very deep, and in very deed, at the surest root of man's
safegarde, when he put it into the head of his son and heir Antichrist, the
child of perdition (the Pope of Rome) to keep the people from the knowledge
of Gods word, for he knew well enough, that the word of God being manifest
unto all the world, as the instrumente to keep man from gross sins, for
very shame and fear of punishment, and many in faith and obedience unto the
Lord for love, and zeal unto his glory, and desire of their own salvation,
which otherwise should wander in darkness, and in the shadow of death:
because that they being blind for want of knowledge, should have swallowed
many moates of iniquity: but to let him go, and come nearer unto our selves:
what is the cause that even in this light, and glorious Sun beams of Christ
his Gospel, so many be so softed and drowned in idolatry and superstition,
that they are not ashamed with whorishe faces, not blushing to maintain, and
defend the heathenish fashion of worshipping of God in Images (for their own
shame has fomed out the worshipping of the Image it self) but only this, that
the second Commandment is blotted out of their heart, Exodus 20, 4. Deuteronomy. 5,
8. John. 4, 23. 2. Cor. 3, 17.
and also out of their books, and the true exposition that our savior Christ
gives unto the same: that the true worshippers shall worship in spirit and
truth, that as he is a spirit, requiring spiritual service, is either not
known, or else misconstrued: or what is the cause, that the blasphemer of Gods
name has such delight and pleasure in swearing, cursing, and profaning (or
rather renting in pieces) the dreadful name of the most glorious God: but only
this, that the commandment is not before his eyes, which is enjoined unto all
them that be (or be desirous to be called) the children of God, that they never
presume to take his name into their mouth, without a singular reverence of his
Majesty, or the threatninges thereunto annexed. For GOD pronounces them that
swear (by those which were no Gods) to be none of his: Jeremy. 5, 7. A note
for them that swear by faith* Mass, Saint, etc. Eccles. 23, 11. Zach. 5, 4.
for he says they have forsaken him in so doing: also a man that uses much
swearing, shall be filled with wickedness, and the plague of God shall not
depart from his house, until it be utterly wasted and consumed. The
whoremaister goes on in his filthiness, because he forgets the commandment
of God: Thou shall not commit adultery, and the threatening: that whoremongers,
and adulterers, God will judge. Heb 13, 4.
To conclude the like is truly to be thought of all other sins, that the
casting off the word of God behind their backs, and treading (Gods vengeance
threatened against sin) under their feet, is the first step unto that
iniquity which they commit. Now if we will apply this to our edification
and benefit, we must learn by the harms of other men, to be more wary and
circumspecte: If we see that others begin their transgressions, by neglecting
the word of God, that we must begin our obedience in embracing it, in learning,
meditating, and exercising our selves in the same continuallye. Psalm. 1, 2*
For the Prophet David makes it the only joy and delyght that Godly men can
find in this world. Whereunto appertains it, that the Lord appointing unto
his servant Joshua the government of his People in stead of Moses, Joshua. 1.
8,
says: let not this Book of the Law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate
therein day and night, that thou may observe, and do according to all that
is written therein. Where you see, that he sets meditation and continual
exercise therein, to go before the service of the Lord, and indeed by very
good reason, for the word of God being his will, and the thing that he
enioineth us to do, how can it be that we shall do it before we learn it,
and how can we learn it if we never give our selves thereunto, nor regard
it. Well, howsoever the wicked of the world care not for it, nor the preaching
thereof: because through the hardenes of their hearts it seems foolishnes
unto them, yet surs we are it is the power of GOD unto salvation, unto all
those that believe it, Ephe. 6.17. 1. Cor. 1.21,
It is the sword of the Spirit that cutteth away the bonds of sin: Mat.
13.31
it is the grain of mustarde seed, that at first is very small, but taking
root, and increasing in the children of God, it grows up to such an height,
that it possesses the whole heart and mind: It is the fire which burns and
co^sumeth the dregs of iniquity. Ier. 5.14. Exec. 4.3.
It is also that Honye, the sweetenes whereof does both delyght the soul, and
also temper the troubles of this world, that they become tolerable and easy:
it is the rain, showers and dewes moistyng the stonye heart. Deuteronomy. 32.2 Luke.
8.15.
And lastly, it is the seed whose roots do take so deep hold, and are so
surely fastened, that it never ceasseth from growyng, until it bring the Soul
which it possesses into the kingdom of heaven. This being so precious, and
yet not believed, to be so by them that are not called unto the Faith of
Jesus Christ. Therefore the Lord God, to allure them whom he has elected, and
to take all excuses from them that be rejected, has set down most
excellent and singular allurementes, and sweet speeches unto them, to inuit
them unto a love and lyking of the same. The wise man Solomon brings in the
Lord speaking, or rather speaking himself in the name of the Lord: says,
let thine heart hold fast my words, keep my commandments and thou shall
live, Pro. 4 4.5.6.7.8. etc. to the 15.
get wisdom, get understanding, neither declyne from the words of my mouth.
And there he shows what the word of GOD shall bring unto the lovers thereof:
namely honor, riches, long life and such like: which indeed figureth unto us
al joys whatsoever, which the Godly shall have in the life to come: if I
should stand upon this, I might show many most excellent places for this
purpose, as the excellencye thereof described by the Prophet David, and the
great benefits that he professes himself to have received by the same.
Psalm. 19.8.5.10 11.12.
As that he had perished in his troubles, if the comfort thereof had not
supported him, and thinks it no brag to say, Psalm. 119, 99.
he has more understanding than his teachers, because his meditation was in
the word of God, and understood more than the ancient, because he kept Gods
precepts, and he was made wiser than his enemies, because Gods precepts were
always with him. The whole 119. Psalm, is concerning this argument. And was
it so excellent, so precious, and so fruitful in David for him self only: no,
but it is also for our instruction, that we might be stirred up by the example
of David, to take so great delight in it, as he did: For God is the same he
was, and his word of it self as forcible (if not more forcible) then it was.
So that we need not to despair of gods goodness in this cause. For sure the
cause why we come so far behind David in zeal and godliness, is our own
carelessness, and hardness of heart, and our presumption in that we (with
Peter here) persuade our selves better of our selves, than indeed we either
need or should. Let us then awake, Heb. 12 1.
and shake off the drowsines of our soul, let us unload our selves of all that
presses down, let us look unto that which GOD commands, and not to that
small proceedyng which we have made, and so much the rather (my dear beloved
Brethren) because we see the world more lulled in securitye, than ever it was
before, that we can either read or hear of. The word of God has no more
force with the greatest number, than if they were stocks or stones: whereas
the threatenyng of Gods vengeance against Sin should prick their hearts,
and move them unto repentance, it brings them a sleep: whereas the
Preaching of the Gospel, should bring them to Faith in Christ, it seems
unto them a Fable and a mere invention of men: now the case standing
desperatelye with them (for this is the cause why I speak it) it behooves us
to be more circumspecte and careful, that the love and likyng, and continual
exercise and obedience, in, and unto the word of GOD do so possess us, that
we never be drawn from the same, but so surely fasten our souls, hearts,
and wyls thereunto, that we may thereby have a sure testimonye in our
consciences, that we be the Children of GOD, because we keep his
commandementes. Whereas contrary, the wicked have within them a note of
condemnation, John. 8.47.
in that they regarded not Gods word, neither have any regard in hearing, or
learning, or practicing the same in their life and conuersations.

Peter's presumption consists in this, that he says: I am ready to go with
thee into prison, and unto death. Peter thought he was strong enough to be a
Martyr, when indeed he had scarce learned the principles of his faith, nor
that which is most necessary for all men to know: namely, his own power and
hability, and how he must learn to stand before the Lord. Here you see
Peter thynking him self a valiant Soulder, and yet is not so: out of which we
note the pride of man's heart, and confidence that flesh and blood conceiueth
of himself: For by nature we are so blind that though we be naked, yet we
vaunt our selves, as though we were gorgeously apparrelled, though we be of
no force to do any thing. Yet we follow Nemrode and his wicked accomplices,
Genesis 11, 3
and think to build a tower to heaven. If we view the stories of the word
of God, concerning them that have thus bragged of their own power, Exodus
5.2.3.14.27.
we shall see their success most miserable. Pharaoh being so proud in him
self, that he contemned God even in flat words, yet the reward of his pride
was his destruction in the red sea. Goliath who rayled on the living Lord and
his children, 1. Sam. 17.8.49
was overthrown with a stone, by (the weak man) little David. Yea and some of
them that seemed to be great pillars in the Church of GOD, 2. Chron. 10.14
15.16.
as Rehaboham the son of wise Solomon, who through pride says unto his
subjects that he would make his little finger heavier unto the^, than al his
Fathers body: but for his pride, ten parts of his kingdom was taken from him.
And therefore the Lord both knowing, and foreseeyng, that we are most fit and
ready to be infected with this disease: has provided by special
commandment for his Children in this case. Beware says he, least thou say
in thy heart, Deuteronomy. 8, 17.
my power and the strength of my own hand has prepared me this substance:
but remember the Lord thy God: it is he that gives thee power to get substance.

And to this purpose it is: when the Lord ordained Gedeon, to deliver his
People, and he had gathered a great multitude together: GOD commanded him to
send many of them away, least Israel (says he) vaunt against me and say,
mine own power has saved me. Judge. 7.2.
And therefore it behooves us, seeing the shameful fall of the proud and high
conceited people: and contrariwise, the special commandment that God has
set down unto us in this behalf, that we shun and beware the one, and
diligently embrace and follow the other. And the better to apply our selves
unto this humility of Spirit, let us mark what reasons the holy Ghost uses
to persuade us thereunto. They be especially two most forcible and strong. The
first is the consideration of our estate by nature: as namely the metal where
of we be made. It is not only Earth, which we daily tread under our feet,
but even the very duste and slime of the Earth: Genesis 2, 7.
we are robbed and utterly spoiled of all our good gifts whatsoever, and so
lie wallowyng in the mire of Sin. There is no man that sins not: 1. King
8, 46.
All are gone astraye, and are become unprofitable, there is none that does
good, Psalm. 14, 3. Job. 7, 1.
no not one: our condition in this world is most miserable. A continual
warrefare: our age is as the length of a spanne, Psalm. 39, 5, 6.
our substance remaining we know not to whom, and which of all other is
most miserable after this life (not called to grace in this Pilgrimage) the
pray of Satan, the firebrande of Hell. So that the right and due
consideration of this, is able for to pull down the stouteste Champion in the
world, and to consume all the fig leaves of vanity, and pride of man's heart
whatsoever. And indeed it is most effectual in the Children of God. Genesis 18,
27.
It moved Abraham to term him self duste and ashes. It made Moses say,
Exodus 3, 11.
who am I that I should go to Pharaoh: the same is to be seen of David,
having the Kings Daughter offered to wife: 1. Sam. 18, 18.
who am I (says he) or what is my Fathers house in Israel, that I should
be the Kings son in Law. So then if they being moved with the
consideration of their natural estate, have thus passed their time with all
humility: much more it is our duty so to do, considering that our
infirmities be many mo than theirs, which ought to abase us lower than they. A
second argument: the Spirit of God uses in the whole Scriptures to move all
men to humility, and that is this: to consider whence they have that good
thing which they possess, whither it be riches, honor, pleasure, life, or
whatsoever it is, all comes from the Lord. And therefore no man may arrogate
any thing unto him self in any respect of them. Which reason the Apostle
Paul uses in express words, to beat down the pride of the Corinthians, 1.
Cor. 4.7.
saying: what haste thou ye thou haste not received: if thou have received it,
why reioycest thou as though thou haste not received it. So then this argument
ought to be in force with every one of us. For if thou be rych, who did give
it unto thee: Job. 1.21.
The Lord gives and is able to take away. If thou be in estimation in the
world: 1. Sam. 2.7.
The Lord sets up and pulls down: Exodus 31.3.
If thou haste cunning or skill in any thing whatsoever: And if thou art come
to the knowledge of Gods word and faith in Christ Jesus, Ephe. 2.8.
It is the gift of GOD, and not of thy self. So that in all things whatsouer,
thou art to humble thy self, knowing this, that thou have nothing of thy self
but a lump of Sin. And if god has bestowed his gifts upon thee in greater
measure than upon others thy Brethren, that are as dear unto him, as thou
art, thou have no just occasion to be puffed up therewithal: but
contrariwyse. For if thou be the steward of much, thine account shall be for
much: if thou have five Tallents the Lord will look for the increase of fine:
If thou have more riches than others, it is bestowed upon thee, Mat, 25.20
that thou may relieve and succoure those that want. Not to lay up in store
for thy self for many years: or to bestow it in excess of pride or
banqueting. Luke. 12.19.
If thou have more wisdom or learning, more knowledge or feeling of Gods
graces in thee than others have it is not only for thy self, but also for ye
benefit of that body whereof thou art a member. If the graces and gifts of
god be thus first considered from whence they came, then employed to those ends
where unto the Lord has ordained them: they will be so far from exalting him yt
has them by making him proud, that they will engender in him a great and
singular humility.

Peter followed a far off. When our savior Christ walked at liberty, many
thousands followed him, and seemed very desirous of his doctrine: but now when
he is apprehended and like to suffer troubles for his doings, they all forsake
him, only Peter follows peaking a loufe.

If Christ had been nothing else but a familiar friend unto them, yet this
had been great ingratitude in them: Pro. 17, 17
But he was their master, their Lord and their GOD, therefore their fault the
greater. But let us leave them all, and consider Peter his doings only. Not
long before his courage was so stout, that he would stand when all fled,
he would lay down his life for him, and seemed to be displeased with his
Master, that he would not suffer him so to do: saying: why can not I
follow thee now. Ioh. 13, 37.
But when he sees plainelye that his Master is in troubles indeed, then he
pulls in the shoulder, the burden is heavy unto him: before he feels it,
he is very desirous to serve Christ, but he is not willing to take pains with
him. Exodus 17, 3.
So were the Israelites very desirous to come to Canaan, but loath to be
troubled by the way in the wilderness. Number. 13, 28.29
They that went to view the land of Canaan, with Caleb and Joshua, confessed
it to be a Country so fruiteful, that it flowed with milk and honye, and did
desire to come thither, nevertheless they were unwilling to enter combat with
the Iebusites, Amalachites, Cananites, and other people that should be
overcome before they should possess it. The Sons of Zebedee did desire to
sit at Christ's elbowes in his kingdom but they had forgotten that they must
first drink of the cup that Christ did drink of, Math. 20, 21.
and to be baptized with his Baptism. And therefore it is, that our savior
Christ terms those hearers, 13.21.
whom tribulation does drive from the gospel to be like unto the stony ground
into the which the word of GOD can send no root, because of the hardenes
thereof. Many also did depart from Christ, which before did follow him
willingly, because their gross capacity could not conceive how they should
eat the flesh of the son of man, John. 6*
and drink his blood and truly the world is full of such people at this day,
that be very willing to hear and learn the word of God, because that they
know that it is the way to eternal life, but if any troubles should seem
to arise for the same, they are gone: they are willing to come to Christ by
night, because they fear troubles by day: but they are not discerned in
these days, by their reuolting in time of persecution: because (the Lords
name be praised for it) all men may freelye profess the Gospel, Mat, 7, 16,
but by their carnal and fleshly conversation, their contrary life and
dealing, for the tree is known by the fruit: they love to hear how to come
to Heaven, but they like not this, that they must address themselves to
obedience, that they must forsake their wicked conversation, and frame their
doings to the rule of Gods word, and therefore they turn the grace of God
into wantonness. Jude. 4.
So there be a great number that be followers of Peter in this point: for he
followed, because of his promise, but it was a far off, so they follow the
Gospel, because of their present safeguard, which else they could not enjoy.
But as Peter durst not come near for fear of troubles, so dare they come no
faster on, for fear of after clappes: they think that keeping themselves a
loofe, they may be safe at all seasons, if a change comer (for which they
gape) then they think they may with honestye change: likewise: whereas if they
should be desirous to pull down Papistrie (if they be in any authority) and
earnestlye e:+stablishe the preaching of the Gospel, they should ^e ashamed
in those dries, which I trust shall never be, but in the mean while, let
them know that they have well profited toward the Devil, when they be in
that case: for many deny with Peter, but few weep with him. Well, howsoever
it be that the world do thus fall from the Lord, and pull away their
shoulder from his obedyence, yet they that fear God in deed, and do
unfeignedly believe that which they profess, do together with the profession
thereof undergo, and willingly receive all troubles which follow the same. They
first sit them down and cast their accounts (as Christ counsaileth them) and
not rashly adventure, Luke. 14, 28.
they know not what, as Peter did: Hebr. 11, 25.
So did Moses though he might have had great preferment in Pharaoh his Court,
yet he chose rather to suffer affliction with the children of the Lord, then to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, knowing this to be most true: that
it is better to be a dorekeeper in the house of the Lord, Psalm. 84, 10.
then to dwell in the tabernacles of wickedness. Then if we desire to come unto
that place whereunto these are gone, we must follow their good examples. I
know it for a most certain truth, that all that will live godly in Christ
Jesus, shall suffer persecution. And therefore we must endeavor our selves to
endure the same, 2. Tim. 3, 12.
for we shall have Satan continually to assail us with diverse temptations, we
shall have the world, alluring us unto the devises thereof by sundry
entisements, yea and our own flesh (through the condition of our corrupt
nature) incessantly pricking us forward into all kinds of vanity: so true it
is that Ecclesiasticus says, Eccles. 27, 5.
that temptation tries the hearts of men: now as the Lord has ordained, that
these trials should befall his children in this world, so he has also left
especial consolation unto them, and ordained means how they must be overcome.
That one place of the Apostle Paul to the Ephesians is sufficient for this
matter to furnish the soldier of Christ with complete armoure. Ephesians. 6, 13.
First, his ioynes should be girded with the truth, that is, a sincere mind
and affection, putting away all dissimulation whatsoever. Secondly, his breast
must be fenced with righteousness: that is, his life and conversation must be
holy, and upright. Thirdly, the preparation of the Gospel of peace, that is,
the determination to depend upon the reconciliation that the Gospel
affoordeth. Fourthly, the shield of faith, that is, the safe protection, that
you may have thorough an undoubted faith. Fifthly, the helmet of salvation, that
is, an earnest desire of the kingdom of heaven. Sixthly, the sword of the
spirit, which is the word of God: It is called a sword, because thorough it,
Satan is beat back, the world crucified unto us, and our own sins cut
away. Seauenthly, the last and chiefest, is continual prayer unto God, for
thereby his grace is obtained to overcome all temptations, and his protection
to shield us from falling: so that these things being taken unto us aright,
they will help us to pass through all troubles or affliction in this world,
whatsoever.

And when they had made a fire, etc. It they having done their feate, came into
the hall, and making a fire there to warm them, Peter sat down also amongst
them: mark how fitly Peter applies himself to the time, and company: with
the professors of Christ he professes, but with persecutors he denies. Peter
is not the first of the children of God, that has been ouergone, and taken
tardie in this case of being corrupted with wicked company. For the servant
of God, Genesis 19, 8.
Lot, being sore oppressed with the rigorous dealing of the wicked Sodomites,
was constrained to pass the compass of his religion, and to use unlawful
means to keep the strangers (whom he had lodged) from violence, offering his
daughters to be used at their filthy pleasure. So faithful Abraham was
compelled to make a lie for his own safeguard in the country of Gerar, Genesis 20,
2.
reporting his wife to be his sister, because the inhabitants had not the fear
of God before their eyes. Godly Joseph dwelling in Egypt amongst the wicked,
through custom and long continuance, Genesis 42, 15.
was brought to break the chiefest point of his religion the worship of God,
and to swear by the life of Pharaoh: holy Daniel, by reason of continual
familiarity with king Darius servants, used also that kind of flattering
speech, Dan. 6, 21.
O King live for ever. Zealous Peter (in this place) abiding with godless
persecuters, is become a denier of his master. The consideration of this:
namely, that the company of the wicked is forcible to pervert even the godly,
Prou. 4, 1^.
moved the wise man Solomon to give his son this counsel, Enter not into the
way of the wicked, and walk not in the way of evil men, and in another place,
24, 1.
Desire not to be with them. It was a special precept set down to the
Israelites, that they should especially take heed that they make no covenant
with the inhabitants of the land whether they went, Exodus 34, 1^.
least they be the cause of their ruin. But they little regarding this
commandment, Joshua. 9, 15.
made league with them: therefore the punishment did also fall upon them, for
the spirit of God says, they shall be as thorns in their sides: and how
sharply they pricked them, it appears through the whole books of Judges,
Samuel, and the Kings. ^. Cro. 16, 9.
King Asa, because he made a league with Benhadad, King of Aran, was therefore
punished with wars all his life time. But the example of Iosaphat the King of
Judah, is notable to this purpose, 18, 31.
who because he joined with Achab, being a wicked King, they both were
discomfited in battle. The consideration of this moved the Apostle S. Paul to
exhort the Church of God, Romans 16, 17.
that they should mark those that made dissension, and fly from their company:
and likewise S. John, that we should not bid them God speed, ^. John. 10.
that is, have so little to do with them, that we should show them no sign of
familiarity: and surely he showed an excellent example of the same himself,
for (as we read in the Ecclesiastical history) he coming into a bath to
wash him, and espying the wicked and great heretic Cirin^hus in the same,
Eusebius. 3, 25.
leaped back suddenly, and said to them that were with him, let us go hence,
least the Bath fall upon us, wherein is Cirinthus, the enemy of God and his
truth. The same in the foresaid story is reported of Policarpus, Eusebius. 4.14.
Saint John's scholar, who meeting Martion in the face, said nothing unto him:
but when the proud heretic said, Do thou not know us? he answered: Yes,
I know thee to be the first begotten of Satan. To conclude, the Prophet
Jeremy lamenting his own case, that he should be reserved to live in so
wicked a time as that was, protests that he did not sit in the assembly of
mockers, but sat alone. Jeremy. 15, 17.
Now if this infection be so dangerous, that it ouertaketh the children of
God: if the spirit of God has given us so many caueats: if the godly have so
warely looked unto themselves to avoid it, how much greater ought our care
to be in this case, because the infection is now more dangerous, the plague
more common, and the evils more rise in all places. And notwithstanding all
these precepts and examples, yet if we consider the trade of the world, and
dealing of the most in this respect, we shall find, that it is a thing made
indifferent, and (as it were) at a man's choice, to choose his familiarity, to
marry the daughters of God to the sons of men, Genesis 6, 2.
(so that they be rich) is thought no sin: that is, if he that professes the
word of God, match his daughter to an idolatrous Papist of sufficient lands and
revenues, it is accounted no crime. The man that is in the world a buier or a
seller, cares not with whom he make his match, so that it be for his profit.
The gamester, so that he may have his pleasure in gaming, cares not whether it
be Turk or Jew, Gods servant or Satan's, that bear him company. Nay, it is
grown to that, that David's son can not be nourtered aright, unless he be
sent to Pharaohs Court. The Merchant of England can not be rich enough,
unless he make his continual abode in Spain, and such other idolatrous
nations, where he can not continue without daily service unto Baal. The English
Gentleman can not be sufficient civil, unless he go over into Italy to fetch
home the practices of Machiuel. And yet the proverb is not unknown in
England, though it did arise in Italy, that an Englishman Italinate, is a
devil incarnate. Well, the word of God allows no such dealing, but
commands the contrary: so that it behooves all them that fear God, to
look unto themselves, and if they find their own consciences accusing them
in this respect, that they reform it: and as for the other, it will seem but
a mockery unto them, but they shall bear their own shame. The Prophet David
being in strange lands, because he was banished from his own Country, by
the rigorous dealing of King Saul, lamented his own estate: saying, Woe is
me, that I am constrained to dwell in Meshech, Psalm. 120, 5.
and to have mine aboade amongst the tents of Cedar. And the great grief
that he had in his heart then, moved him to pronounce the sparowes estate to be
most happy, Psalm. 84, ^.
to build her nest near to the Alter, so great was his desire to go away from
the wicked, and to come thither where God is deuoutely served: I would to God,
that all they that have any feeling and taste of Gods truth, would have that
care in this respect, that is expedient, and so much the rather, for that we be
mingled so with Antichristians, profane persons, Papists, and others of Satan's
brood, that we can not utterly avoid them, unless (as S. Paul says) we will
go out of the world: yet for all that we ought to bear them aloof, to use no
familiarity with them, but seek to adioine our selves to the^ that fear God:
and surely if we observe this order, we know not what great good we may do
even to the wicked, for he may by occasion thereof think thus with himself:
why do these men shun my company? what am I? what foul enormitie is in me,
that they detest: and I know, I am a drunkard, or I am a whoremonger, or I am a
swearer: if men will not come near me, because of my sin, sure God will
reject me much rather, therefore it is best for me to amend. I am persuaded,
that where this order is observed, the wicked come into such consideration of
themselves very often, and the Lord may work so, that it may be the beginning
of their conversion, whereas if we keep them company, if we banquet, eat and
drink with them, and show them a familiar countenance, we keep them secretly
in their sins, and so we being hinderers of their repentance, by this means
are partakers of their sins. Then let Lot go out of Sodom, Genesis 19, 15.
least he be burned: let Noah get him into the Arc, verse. 7, 18.
least he be drowned: let them that fear the Lord God of heaven, go out from
the company of the wicked, least they be partakers of their sins, and so
consequently of their punishment: I know what this works in the reprobate,
and how they account of the godly for so doing: they say, they be proud,
strange, and disdainefull persons, but I had rather they should think and
speak so of me falsely, then (being familiar with the wicked) to provoke the
Lord my God unto anger wilfully.

Peter also sat down, etc. Now follows the last cause, which is the place
to wit, the warm fire, a very forcible thing, to overthrow the strongest
servant of God, unless Gods especial favor do support him, for what a great
temptation was this, Peter when he followed Christ at his heels, did suffer
hunger, cold, and much trouble. But now when he follows a far off, he
comes to the warm fire: no doubt sata^s devise, was to bring him to this
mind. Is it true, yt when I do but slack a little from my usual zeal, my
condition is so much bettered? Doubtless if I leave it altogether, I shall come
to some excellent estate. And surely, satan has used this temptation to many
of Gods children, and does also use it daily. For he yt is poor, shall have
the devil put these things in his heart. I stand now in need: I want many
things that others have: and I might have the same, if I would leave off this
precisenes, in following Gods word in all points: and what need is it ye I
should do so: did not Christ die for sins? etc. Then when he is come to this,
his tempter will not leave him, til he have brought him to the depth of unjust
dealing. So the lecherous man, he will tempt with the sweetenes of ye sin: the
ambitious man, with excess of honor: ye proud man, with bravery of raiment: to
say al in one word, he tempts all men, either with that that their corrupt
affections do lust after, or else with yt, which they seem to want in this
world. For so was the beloved servant of God David tempted: Psalm. 73, 2, 3, 4,
5, etc.
he says plainly, that when he did see the wicked prosper, not being in
trouble as other men were: having all things at their hearts desire, and yet
setting their toungs and deeds eue^ against heaven, and the hiest: that his
foot was almost gone, and his steps had welnie slipped, and that he had then
cleansed his heart in vain, and washed his hands in innocence, for he was
daily punished. Let us weigh this diligently, and sure it is a sore temptation,
if we compare ye state of ye wicked, and the condition of the godly in this
together, and have no further respect, we shall surely be brought to say, it is
a vain thing to serve God: Job. 21, 15.
David being pressed with this distress, was very careful to search out the
cause of it. But though he did beat his brain never so much, yet it was too
painful a thing for him to search out by natural reason, (for it is a thing
that man's wit can not reach unto) what did he then? until I went unto the
Sanctuary (says he) then did I understand their end. Psalm. 73, 17.
Then we see, how David was tempted, and how he avoided it, the which thing we
must apply to our selves in this case: for Satan does even at this day use this
engine to batter the faith of man, but we must go into the Sanctuary of God,
that is, into his word, and pray to God that his spirit may be our guide, and
then we shall see that they shall stand in slippery places, and perish as a
dream, and flourishing as a flower, be quickly cut down, and cast into the
furnace of eternal condemnation: contrariwise, the godly being troubled here
for a time, shall quietly be released, and enjoy the sight of God for ever.
This being that shield wherewithal many of the children of God, have driven
back ye blows of this temptation, yet notwithstanding diverse have been
overtaken with it: for the warmth of worldly promotion is a sweet poison, and
very delicate at the first, so was this fire very pleasant, and prevailed with
Peter. The like is plain in David, 1. Sam. 19, 8.
who when he was troubled, did fight the Lords battle most valiantly, and
overcome the Philistians triumphantly, and doubtless framed his conversation
according to Gods word very sincerely. But being settled in the Kingdom of
Israel, 2. Sam. 11, 1, 2. 3, etc.
and fighting against his enemies by his Lieutenants and Captains, and he
quiet at home, committed those two most gross sins, of murder in killing
Vriah, and adultery in taking unto him Bethsabe his wife. His son Solomon at
the first served God very devoutly, 2. Chro. 1, 6.
and God blessed him with all wisdom, honor, wealth, and dignity that his
heart could desire. But being besotted in the sleep of security, 1. King. 11,
4.
fell from the Lord into maine idolatry, from which it is not read in the word
of God, whether ever he departed by repentance or no. 2. Chro. 14, 1.2, 3, 4.
etc.
King Asa in the beginning was very zealous for the glory of the Lord God,
and broke down Idolatry, and did that which was good in the sight of the
Lord. But afterward forgetting Gods goodness toward him, and sleeping in
worldly delights, forsook God, and put his trust (when he was sick) in
Physicians. 16, 12.
Vzziah sought the Lord in the days of Zachary the Prophet, 1. Chro. 26, 1.
etc. 16. verse.
and prospered. But in the same Chapter it is reported, that when he was
strong, his heart was lifted up to his destruction. So hard it is to flow in
the prosperity of the world, and enjoy the warmth of worldly delights, without
reuolting (or at the least) slack proceeding in the service of the Lord. And
to this purpose is that of the Prophet, speaking of the backsliding of the
Israelites, they were filled, Hose. 13, 6.
says he, and their heart was exalted, therefore have they forgotten me. The
consideration hereof moved the wise man Solomon, or rather the Prophet Agur,
to pray unto the Lord, that he would neither give him poverty nor riches,
least (says he) I be full and deny thee, Prou. 30, 8.
and say, who is the Lord: and least I be poor and steal, and take the name
of my God in vain. Psalm. 119, 71.
It moved David to say, It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I
may learn thy statutes. For before thou did humble me I went astray, but now
I keep thy word. Job likewise seeing both the inconvenience of continual
success, and also the necessity of correction, says in the midst of his
misery. Job. 5, 17.
Blessed is the man whom God corrects, he makes the wound, and binds it
up, he smites, and his hands makes whole, he shall deliver thee in six
troubles, and in the seventh the evil shall not touch thee. The reason hereof
is evident: for that we by nature are of our selves so stout and so proud,
that without correctio, we run on as an untamed Heyfer. Therefore the Lord to
reclaim us unto him, uses this school of his rod to bring us home with all,
least we should perish with the world. And verilye if we had neither example
nor sentence in the whole book of god, yet our own experience would
sufficiently show this unto us most plain and evident. For many there be
that at the first when they are not settled in the warmth of this world, but
follow christ into woods and deserts over Sea and la^d, never resting in one
place: then they be so zealous and forward in the co^bate against Satan that
they do with great praise unto Gods name, and singular utility unto Christ's
Church, proceed in their business of godliness. But when they come to sit down
at the warm fire of worldly wealth, and be hedged in with promotions of this
world, then they be so clogged and cloyed therewith all, that they seem as
far gone from their integrity and zeal. as Peter was when he sat by the
fire. But let them beware in what state they stand. For when Peter came to that
estate, he was quicklye overthrown. And let all other that see the same, and
be not guilty, resist at the first entrance of this cold stomach, and provide
preseruations and restoratiues out of the word of the Lord.

Let us pray.

The second Sermon.
Luke. 22, 56. And a certain maid beheld him as he sat by the fire, and
having well looked on him, said: This man was also with him, etc.


ANd a certain maid, etc. We have seen the causes of his fall, and how by
degrees he comes to the fall it self. For when once he had rejected Gods
word, and was puffed up in the persuasion of his own power, set amongst the
wicked, and swadled in the warmth of prosperitye, what remains now for Peter,
but even at al assaies, and by every light occasion to deny his profession
and forswear his master. And in truth, the first assault was not strong:
for it was but a woman, a party very weak. But indeed if she be bent to trouble
Gods children, very ready to compass her matters. As we may see in Iesabell,
Herodias, Irene the Empress and such like, mark this well: The high Priest
persecuteth Christ, his servants apprehende him and bring him to their
Master, yea and his maid also helps the matter forward. Here we may see
the patron of a family rightly disposed in his kind, as is the master, so be
his servants. All agree in this to persecute Christ: and indeed it has
been, is, and ever will be, that the wicked householders, yea the wicked
Kings have had generally all their servants and subjects of their own
disposition. Ahab being a wicked King, they did so generally follow him, that
Eliah thought only himself to serve God, 1 King. 19, 10.
and all the rest of the land to have followed Baall. So it was likewise in all
the time of the wicked Kings, and so it is in all wicked householders. For if
he be a Papist, his Servants be so, or else they abide not with him long. If
he be a Neuter and care for no religion, his servants are not kept in order,
and so they likewise become of the like condition: so that the saying of
Solomon is verified in this case, Pro, 29, 12.
if the Prince be given to lies, all his servants are wicked. And what have we
to learn by this? Surely a profitable doctrine for all them that have
government of families, that they fearing God and professing his Gospel,
beware that the children of this world be not wiser in their generation than
they: Luke. 16, 8.
that is, that the wicked be not found more careful to dispose their
families to their own humor, than the Godly be. And I know not how they
can look unto this better, but by following the example of David in choosing
Servants, and of Abraham in teaching them. For the prophet David knowing that
he should be King, casts in his mind a forehande, what kind of persons he
will retain into his service. Mine eyes (says he) shall be unto the faithful
of the Land, Psalm. 101, 6.7.
that they may dwell with me. He that walks in a perfect way, he shall
serve me. There shall no deceitful man dwell in my house, he that tells lies
shall not remain in my sight. Thus we see what kind of persons David will
have. This ought duly to be looked unto of all them that do profess the same
God that he did: but we shall see it far otherwise in the most, for so that
he may serve his turn for that purpose, whereunto he will allot him, It is not
regarded whither he be Papist or Atheist, godly or faythlesse, whither his
Religion be toward GOD or the devil. But David had this consideration in his
mind, that none could do him faithful service saving they only whose hearts
were true to the Lord, which is a thing most sure. For well he may do his duty
for a time in his calling, but surely he will at length play the slipperye
merchant with thee in one thing or other. Now to Abraham whom we must follow
in instructing of our Servants, Genesis 17, 13.
who at the commandment of God, did circumcise all the men children in his
family, they were (no doubt of it) well instructed in the Religion of the
Lord, that obeyed thereunto so willynglye without any resistaunce. And
therefore it is, that the Lord makes this especial reason, why he should
show the punishment intended against Sodom and Gomorrah to Abraham, Gen., 8,
19.
because he knew that Abraham would command his sons and his household after
him, that they keep the way of the Lord. So that the thing which we are to
follow in Abraham is this: that every householder be diligent to teach his
servants their duties out of Gods word, and train them up in the fear of the
Lord. It is a thing worthy to be marked, that we find diverse families in the
scriptures converted unto the Lord with their masters, as namely the captain
and the Jailer, Act. 16, 32, 10.2
to show unto us, that all the Servants ought to be taught the way of the
Lord, as well as their Masters. Well notwithstanding, it was but a simple
Gyrle: yet Peter flatly says, I knew not the man. Peter had not such a
politic head as the denyers now a days have: Those I mean, that in heart
and deed deny Christ, but in word deny him not. For if you come to him that
is greatly suspected of Poperye, and known to have been of that stamp, if
he be a formal fellow, such a one as will not stand to the danger of
professing the same, and tell him that he is verily a Papist, for he has
been seen at Mass, and his deeds and other dealings bewray him: he will not
say I know not the Pope, I never came in company with massemongers, but his
answer will rather be thus: Sure I must confess I have in my time leaned that
way, but I am not now of that mind: I have reneued my copy (only because
of his new Landlord) and my opinion is altered: And so he being an Academicke,
rather than a sure believer, makes Religion to be but an opinion. O Peter
thou lackest this subteltie: for thou might with this have stopped the
Damsels mouth at the first, thou myghtest have said: Surely I confess I did
follow this fellow, because I had some pleasure in his wonders that he did:
But now I hold with the Scribes and Pharisees, and do believe the Law of
Moses. But subteltie had not entered so far into the Church of GOD as now
it has: the veil of Hypocrisy was not so close as in these days it is. And
truly that kind of people is now the rifest, and yet the woorste of all
other. For David had many great injuries done unto him: but that which his
pretended friend did, was the greatest grief of all, in so much that he
says: if it had been his enemy, he could have born it. But it was even he
with whom he had singular consultations in the word of GOD. Psalm. 56, 12,
And therefore if David were so troubled with such, then we have greatly to
look unto our selves, and to avoid them as near as we may. For most certain
it is, that the Church of God has not at this day a greater enemy than they
that be nourished, kept, fostered and promoted in her own lap, that
through pretense of Religion, become even betraiers of Christ, and hinderers of
the procedings of his gospel. And sure it is to be wished that all men would
boldelye profess that which in heart they embrace: that the one party might be
utterly confounded. For he that with a Papist is a Papist, with a professor is
a professor, like the weathercocke turning with the wind: an unconstant
Camelion, every where and no where, is the sorest enemy to Religion, and
therefore guilty of no small punishment. And therefore God says thus of such,
I know thy works, thou art neither hot nor nor cold: Revel. 3, 15.
I would thou were cold or hot. Therefore because thou art luke warm, and
neither cold nor hot. It will come to pass that I shall spewe thee out of my
mouth. 1. Kings. 28.21.
Let every one (to conclude) set the saying of Elias the Prophet before his
eyes. If the Lord be God, follow him, if Baall be he, go to him and follow
him, and halt not between two opinions, but stand fast to the one.

He denied before them al, etc. Now the holy Ghost sets down the parties,
before whom he denied: namely, before them all: which circumstance aggrauateth
greatly the sin of Peter. For he had heard his Master teach this lesson.
That whosoever should deny him before men, Mat. 10.33,
him would he deny before his heavenly father. But he not regarding this, did
boldly deny him before them all. This ought to move us to labor in the
word, and prayer most earnestlye. that our confession and certainty of Faith
may be constant and surely grounded, that we never deny our Savior before
any man: For denying him before weak believers, (besides that we procure
Christ to deny us before God) we do as much as in us lies, to overthrow so
many souls into Hell. And if it be before the wicked which be the enemies of
God, and his truth, we do set open the window to their blasphemye, and so we
be the means whereby the word of God is evil spoken off. Contrariwyse, if
our confession be steadfast, it vpholdeth our own Faith, Romans 2, 24.
confirms our Brethren, and makes the enimye ashamed.

And after a while, etc. Now come we to the second denial, for when that he
affirmed that he knew him not, thinking thereby to escape: They were not
contented with that, for presently an other came unto him: Matthew reports it
was another Damsel, and so does Mark, but all is to one effect. For the
first voice being uttered by one, and received by a common applause, no
doubt many did speak the same at once, as John records. But whither it were
one or more, sure it is that he was not long quiet till they had tried him
further: John. 28, 25.
where we may behold the malice of persecutoures, that be never contented with
any answer, until they have utterly overthrown the parties persecuted. So
Paul before his conversion being a persecutour, was not contented to make
hauock of the servants of the Lord in Jerusalem. But because some had escaped
his hands, Act. 3, 3.
he procured Letters of commission to follow them to Damascus, utterly to
extinguishe them. Act. 9.2.
Likewtse the Scribes and Pharisees being often put to silence by our savior
Christ and convicted, Mat 22.46.26.4.
yet their rage never ceased until they had put him to death. The Papists
also in time of persecution here in England, could neither be satisfied with
stocking, imprisoning, racking nor scourging, until they had burned the bodies
of ye poor saints.

Denied with an oath, etc. Peter had thought that he had bin quiet, and
therefore it was that he first denied: but seeing that that would not serve,
for his credit sake he will not call back his former denial (which is a right
propertye of a worldelye man, who thinks it a discredit to call back that
which first he has set down) but tieth it with an oath, that he knew not the
man. This is the let to reformation at this day.
Where we see that they which once crack the bonds of conscience in hope of any
benefit in this world, are very like to go further, rather than they will
miss of their purpose. The end that Peter looked unto in his first denial, was
his own safeguard: but seeing that would not serve, he proceeds further, and
ceasseth not until he have satisfied the adversaries (a practice indeed
common to those that be backe-sliders, who being urged to yield in small
matters, for their quietness be content so to do. If they be put unto a
great trial, and pricked at to slide from their whole profession (I pray God
they follow not Peter, and content them selves to do any thing) so that they
may be quiet, and the other parties not displeased. And therefore it shall be
very good for us to keep the profession of Faith most sincere, and to stand
as stoutelye, and defend as constantly the small matters as the great: knowing
this, that we may not seem to yield unto any thing, whereunto the spirit of
God has commanded us to stand fast.

Then came they unto him, etc. The first assault is noted to be but by one,
and that a Maid. It is now augmented, that they came in greater numbers,
which thing we see practiced continually, that if any one godless man have,
or pretend to have any quarrel against such as fear the Lord, all the birds
of that Uiperous Feather, do violentlye flock together against that poor
servant of God: yea if they heretofore have been foes, they agree together to
persecute the Godly: Luke. 23, 12.
for Herod and Pilate will be made friends, that their power may be the more
against Christ, that their policies may be conjoined to determine his
Death. Behold here again, the wicked wiser in their generation than the
Godly: for if a godly thing be motioned in an assemblye or conference, the
rest should be very forward to help it, but (alas) the remnauntes of old
Adam do stick so fast on, and private considerations do so violentlye carry
men away, that they will rather be hinderers than furtherers, casting doubts
and inconveniences in the way, though the motion be drawn out of the
Fowelles of Gods own word: against which, no mouth should once dare to
speak: whereupon it comes, that Religion is received, according as man is
dyrected by his own natural reason, and Gods word is obeyed, so far as we
think it convenient for the maintenance of our own honor, dignitye and
estate: yea though our honor dishonor the Lord, and our dignity bring
discredit to our profession, and our wealth procure want to the church of
GOD: but they whom the Lord has truly converted unto him self, whose
hearts the holy Ghost has seized upon for the Lord to dwell in, and whose
minds he has enlightened to attend unto the truth, Acts. 16.14.
are careful that the will of god be performed, that reason be restrained and
all their affections ruled by the line of his most blessed word, whereby every
one of us may have good occasion to examine our selves, how far we have
profited, or whither or no we have entered into the way of true religion.

For thy speech bewraieth thee, etc. when they see that he denies it, they go
about by circumstaunces to prove it against him: to wit, that his speech be
wrayed him, for you must note that as in our Nation, the property of the
speech in the North does differ from that of the Southe, whereby a man is
known, what country man he is, even so the speech used in Galile, differed
something from that which was in use about Jerusalem: by which they gathered,
that he was a Galilean: note the mark whereby Peter is known, even his
speech: he was a Minister of the word, he had learned the doctrine of the
Gospel, and government of the Church, from the mouth of Christ: and yet he is
not discerned by his apparel, from another man: whereby we learn, that in the
primitive time of the Gospel, the Ministers of the word were known by their
doctrine, and other notes belonging unto them, and not by any outward form:
but as religion decayed, so the true notes of Gods Ministers vanished away, and
because the people were become blind, in discerning the spirits, they must
have notes applied to their sight: to wit, to know him by his garment, which
(they thinking to be the sheep clothing) did deceive the people, by the
effects of ravening wolves: and this fond, or rather obstinate blindness (the
more is the pity) remains yet among us, that carnal men, whose knowledge is
fleshly, must have a sensible and pompous show in the world, to persuade them
that such and such be ministers: but (my brethren) as this argues in them,
that they be altogether carnal, so contrariwise, let us labor to find out, by
the marks that God has set upon them, and not the badges of men (that may
deceive us) who be the true shepherds of Christ's sheep, and upon whom we
may be bold to receive the food of our souls, least in stead thereof we
receive rank poison: for the most infecting venime, that ever polluted the
soul of man, has been covered with the veil of those marks, which now the
world would have the ministers of Gods word discerned by.

Then began he to curse, etc. They are not yet contented, although he has
sworn unto them (as faithles persons make no reckoning of an oath.) For now
they come together, and affirm that he was verily with them. Now Peter seeing
their importunate suite, is determined to feed their humor, though it cost him
the loss of his own soul, for he cursseth himself, if he knew the man:
here we may see the just judgment of God, that they that think best of
themselves, and boast most of their own ability, do most evidently declare
the contrary by the effect. For Peter who before would never forsake Christ,
is now gone so far from him, as any man can: for he is now thrown into the
very deapth of sin, into the gates of hell, and into Satan's claws, nothing
remains of his own part unfinished, that can increase his eternal
destruction, a case most lamentable, and yet it is the state of all mankind,
not vpholden with Gods spirit. A question for a Papist to answer.
I would very gladly be resolved of this doubt by any Pelagian Papist, or
any other that maintains freewill in man, how much Peter had left within
him, when he did fall. For this I am sure, he had all his natural power
remaining within him, so that if he had any, how then came it to pass, that he
had no benefit by it, if he had none, then sure it is that by nature we have no
inclination to do well: for if any have power of himself, to stand in that
grace that he is placed in, then Peter might (for he had profited well in
godliness.) But if none can stand when he is set upon the feet of Gods mercy,
without the special upholding of the Lord, then much less can any being
thrown down in the mire of their natural corruption, do any thing of
himself that is good toward his own salvation: away then with all such
freewill, and let us by the example of Peter's downfall, begin to learn
another lesson: namely, that man of himself can not think a good thought, 2.
Cor. 3, 5.
and therefore, in so much that every good thing comes from the Lord, Iam.
1, 17.
that we in all humility submit our selves, confessing our nakedness, that by
his merciful goodness we may be preserved. And again, where we see that
Peter a very upright man, and zealous in the service of God, having once begun
to depart from the Lord, has no stay of himself, but runs headlong into
the bottom of iniquity, we are especially to take heed that we use those
means which God has appointed in his word, to stay the beginnings of sin, for
if it enter once with the head, it is that Serpent that will easily wind in
the whole body: if Satan had plainly said to Peter at the first, curse thy
self, if ever thou did know Christ, I am persuaded, that he would have
loathed it extremely, and not have hearkened unto him, but he was subtiler then
so, for he brought him unto that at the last without any stay, which at the
first, he greatly detested: so likewise when he goes about to persuade any
man to adultery, he will not at the first throw him into the harlots bed, but
bring him to behold her, then to have a liking of her, then to have familiarity
with her, then lastly to commit the heinous fact of whoredom: if he go about
to bring one man to murder another, he does not bring him unto it at the
first, but begins by sowing of discord, then of hatred, last of all to
actual murder, his practice is the like in all other sins, especially if he
deal with those that seem to make some conscience of sin, and have in their
heart any detestation of iniquity. Such was his dealing in erecting up the
kingdom of Antichrist, for it was a thousand years at the least in patching,
before it came to his height, and top of iniquity. Therefore let all them that
desire to avoid the actual sin, endeavor also to cut off all occasions of
his beginning. If thou will not commit adultery, cut off thy wanton looks: If
thou be loath to murder any man, pull down thy haughty heart, and root out
the affections of disdain from thy mind, and learn out of Gods word, how to
apply thy self to singlenes and humility: let the example of young Daniel
never go out of thy remembrance, who refused even the portion of meat that was
allotted unto him by Nabuchadnezar, Dan. 1, 8.
(which of it self was lawful to be received with giving of thanks,) because
the King should not entice him thereby to forsake the true God, and lean to
his religion: so it is our duty, not only to keep our selves undefiled from
every sin, but also from every thing that may be a means to bring us unto
it. Thus we see the causes that moved Peter to fall, and indeed they be the
same that move all me^ to sin, whether it be the godly that fall through
infirmity, or the wicked that proceed on in sinning daily, and never return
unto the Lord. And we see also by what steps and degrees Peter came to the
height of his offense, whose trace we do all tread so often as we fall,
although every one go not so far as he did, because Gods grace preuenteth
him sooner: behold then in him thine own frailty. But now we come to make a
separation between them that fall and never rise again, and them that be
renewed by repentance.

And immediately, while he was a speaking, etc. Now we come to the beholding
of the exceeding mercy of our good and gracious God, who though he suffer us
for a time to go after our own fantasies, yet at the last his outstretched
arm will help those that be his, he suffered Peter to fall into sin: yet he
is ready to help him up again: yea, even when Peter was a curssing, God
intended toward him a blessing: and surely it is not without the special
providence of the spirit of God, set down here by Luke, that while Peter yet
spoke, or was a speaking, the Cock did crow: because the enemies of Gods
grace and their own salvation, the Papists (who will play at small game
rather then they will sit out) when they can not wring it from us, that man
has free will to do well, or merit his own salvation: yet they must have it
granted, that we be copartners with GOD in that work: I hope they will grant
unto us, that Peter, who was called, and now is fallen, had as much power,
and did as much further his restoring again, as they that have never tasted
of the sweetness of Gods word and grace. Now Christ did begin Peter's
conversion when the Cock did crow, and what was Peter then doing, helping:
yea, helping himself to hell-warde, for he was then curssing himself. So that
if Peter could not help himself into Gods favor again, sure it is that
none can: away then with that fond imagination, that any thing is in man to
further his own salvation, for God must first convert us, and then we shall be
converted, God must be merciful unto us, Iere. 31, 18.
and then we shall be saved.

The cock crew, etc. This is ye first cause Peter. For the Lord beholding in
what desperate case he was went about to deliver him out of it, and that in all
haste: for God knew very well, that if he should continue any space in the
sweetness, wherein sin had swadled him (for it is sweet to all them whose
hearts God has not called from it by the grace of his holy spirit) he had
been hardened in the same, as the wicked sort of the world be, who tasting
thereof, and finding their corrupt and sick senses delighted with it,
commit the same with greediness, and do so greatly please themselves with
it, that they conceive an earnest lothing of all godliness and virtue: and
that is the cause that many (of whom we may read) who having once tasted of
the sweet word of God, and after reuerted from the same, Heb. 6, 5. Saul,
Julian the apostata, and all heretics.
have become the greatest enemies that ever the Church of God has had at any
time: and (if it were Gods will) I would we felt it not in present experience:
and therefore the Lord God (as he is most careful for his children) makes
haste to deliver Peter quickly. This crowing of the Cock was the same unto
Peter, that the preaching of Gods Ministers is unto us. (For God does not
always use his ordinary means) so that when soever we have the word of God
preached, at what time soever we hear our sins laid open before us, and
rebuked, we must think with our selves that God does with us, as he did to
Peter, namely, uses means to call us from sin, and bring us to repentance
and amendme^t of life. This means the Lord uses generally unto all (for his
Gospel must be preached, throughout the whole world, for a witness unto all
nations) and yet we know, Matthew. 24, 14.
though many be called, yet few are chosen. Therefore it behooves us to know
whether ye Cock do crow unto us to our salvation or no: 20, 16.
and the first trial consists in this, that the Cock of Gods word croweth
unto all men, and yet only they embrace his sound aright that shall be saved:
if then thou feel thy self to hear the same with all due reverence, if
thou beleeuest the promises thereof to belong unto thee with all stedfastnes,
and endeuourest to frame thy life according to the same, Matthew. 7, 24.
with all diligence, thou may assure thy self, that thou art the child of
God: for they be of God that do thus hear his word: contrariwise, if thou
hear the word preached, and perceiuest thy secret sins thereby laid open,
and thy own conscience in thy self is witness, 1. John. 4, 6. John. 8, 47.
Wisd 2, 14.
that thou art convinced, and yet art so far from believing it, or framing
thy life according to it, that thou do both mock it (as many now a days
delight to do) and also seek to pull the cock down from the perch, that he
crow no more: thou may assure thy self (for sure it is) thou art in the way
of destruction: a necessary meditation for all men.

The Lord looked back, etc. The second cause follows: the cock had crowen,
and yet Peter had not remembered himself, neither was he awaked out of his
sinful sleep, until the Lord turned back his countenance upon him: but
when once he looked upon his face, whose knowledge he had denied, then began he
to remember himself, and consider that things were amiss. But was it the
turning back of his face that wrought this in Peter? No, for then it might
have converted Judas, whom he looked upon, when he betrayed him. Luke. 22, 47.
But it was his grace, and holy spirit, which did mercifully fall down into
his heart, when the cock did crow. Whereby we see plainly, that it is not
the outward ministry of the word of God only that brings salvation unto
mankind: for Paul planteth, 1. Cor. 3, 6.
Apollo waters, but God gives the increase: and this is the reason, that so
many hear the word, and so few profit therein, because it belongs to the
Lord to show mercy to whom he will show mercy. Exodus 33, 19. Romans 9, 15.
And therefore when the Gospel was preached to them of Antioch, by S. Paul,
Acts. 13, 48.
it is said, that so many as were ordained to salvation, believed: so that if
thou hearing, or reading Gods word, With what mind we should hear or read
the word.
do desire that it may work to thy salvation, pray earnestly unto the Lord,
that it would please him of his infinite mercy to look back upon thee with
the eyes of his grace, and so framing thy self in a true faith and a single
heart, to apply it unto that end wherefore it is given thee, thou shall
surely feel in thy soul an especial operation of the spirit of God, to thy
great comfort. Thus much briefly concerning the first two causes of Peter's
conversion, where note by ye way, that the two first causes of his fall were
within himself, but the first that work to his rising again, are without
himself, to teach us that all our sins proceed of our selves, and come from
our selves: but all goodness, not of us but from the Lord, that his name only
may be praised for all good things, and we our selves blamed for all evil.

Peter remembered, etc. Now follow the causes within himself, but mark this
first, the Cock did crow, no doubt of it, more did hear him then Peter: but
because he was ordained as a means to call Peter home, therefore he only being
guilty, was pricked in heart, and none else moved. So God has ordained the
Preaching of his word to be an instrument to put all men in mind of their
faults, and that they might amend. And such is the force thereof, that the
word preached generally, does move every man's conscience which is guilty of
that crime, which is reproved. And therefore there be many wicked men of the
world, that do imagine the Preacher to harp only upon them, because they
be guilty: as if he speak against Papistrie, every massemonger thinks he
points at him: if he inneigh against Swearers, Usurers, whoremaisters, or
thieves, every swearer, Usurer, Whoremaister and thief, thinks his own
doings to be touched. And in deed (though they turn it to a fault in the
Preacher) this shows unto us the wonderful virtue of Gods word, that can
speak so to every man's heart and thought. Therefore when thou hear thy own
faults rebuked, and even that which thou thoughtest all the world had not
known, openly revealed: do not think that he speaks it of choler, or has
learned it of thy trusty familiars, but think rather that Gods spirit which
searches all men's thoughts, does speak unto thee, that thou should amend
it. For as Peter being guilty alone, was only pricked in conscience and did
repent, so it is thy duty to consider thy own estate, and repent thee of thy
fault, that God may be merciful unto thee.

Peter remembered, etc. The word do bring Peter to remembrance. First that
Christ had said, Before the And secondly, that he had so done in deed, (for
they must be handled together:) let us then note this diligently: before the
crowing of the cock, and the looking back of Jesus, there was no such thing in
his mind: but they two coming together, do bring him into consideration of
his estate. Adam and Heuah, when they had transgressed the law of the Lord,
made no care of it at the first. But when the word of the Lord and his spirit
said, Genesis 3, 8, 9.
Where art thou, he remembered what God had said, that he should not eat of
the tree of knowledge of good and evil, and that he had eaten of it. King
David when he had committed those heinous sins of murder and adultery, slept
quietly therein, until the Prophet Nathan came to rebuke him, 2 Samuel 11, 4.12,
9.
and the spirit of the Lord withal wrought in his heart, then he remembered
his grievous sin, and the law of the Lord God to the contrary. Manasses the
son of godly Ezechiah, 2 Chro. 33.3 2. King. 21, 16.
thought Idolatry no Sin, and to make the streets of Jerusalem swymme with
the blood of innocents no offense. But when the troubles that he sustained in
the time of his captivity (which were in stead of the preaching of gods word)
did pintch him, 1. Chro. 33.12,
and the Lord stretched forth the hands of his mercy to receive him, then he
saw the horriblenes of his sin. Act. 9, 3.4.
The like is evident in S Paul, who before his conversion thought he did god
good service in seeking the utter extinguishing of the saints of god. But when
the light did show him the blindness of his mind, and the voice of Christ did
ask him why he did so persecute him, he was stricken down in consideration of
his offense. To leave off to reckon any more examples out of Gods word. The
same is most true in all ma^kinde, and even in our selves, For before we be
called unto the truth in Jesus Christ, we walk in the ways of our own
imaginations, we live without god, Ephe. 2, 12.
and be strangers from the covenant of the promise of GOD. But when it pleases
him of his goodness to call us unto the knowledge of his grace by preaching his
word unto us, and that he look back upon us with the eyes of his mercy.
Ephesians. 1.13.
Then we see plainelye what is the rule of righteousness that God has enjoined
unto all the sons of Adam, and comparing the same with our deeds, we see how
great is our debt that we have unpaid, how many be our Sins that we have
committed, and how vain our former conversation has been: whereas before this
be revealed unto us, we proceed securely in our own iniquity, and as all
worldlings do, think our own ways to be right and honest. Wherefore if this
be the way and first entrance into the school of Christ (to wit the word of
God preached to show us our sins). What a great care ought we to have, so long
as we live in this body of clay, where we sin continually, to use al ways and
means that we can lawfully devise, that we may have ye same continually
sounding in our ears, to awake our drowsy affections, and put us in mind of
our daily misdeeds, that we being moved therewithal, may begin to loath our
own evil lives, and turn unto the Lord. And what an earnest care ought we to
have also when we have the same, that we make the fruit and benefit of it to
settle into our own hearts and consciences, to the amendment of our wicked
ways. But this being the first gate to enter in at, toward ye school of
Christ: the wicked (because they will not enter) do here part company with the
godly, who knowing the necessity of ye word of God preached, do labor
earnestly to have it established amongst the^. But the ungodly who have neither
care to learn the will of god, nor conscience to frame their lives according to
the same, be either negligent in this behalf, or slat hinderers of it: for
they do know before hand, that it will reveal their sin, and make their
doings known to all the world. The papist which is an Idolater does know,
that if the Ark of God be brought into the Temple, Dagon will fall down: 1.
Sam. 5.4 Deuteronomy. 23.19. Nehem. 5.8.
that is, if Gods word be preached, his superstition will be known. The
usurer fears that it will discrie his crueltye, for he sells his brother
for money. The covetous man doubts that his corrupt dealings will be espied:
through it the worldling thinks that it will detect his carelesnes toward the
service of god. Briefly whosoever is addicted to any notorious sin, and
determines to continue in it, he cannot away with the word preached, and
therefore you shall hear the^ utter these speeches: have we not our 10.
co^mandeme^ts have we not the Articles of our belief, and our Pater noster:
have we not homilies appointed to be read: Let us learn the^. First we know
that we must love god above al things, and our neighbor as our self, and can
the preacher teach us any more. Nay they will go yet further and say, where is
more preaching tha^ in London? and yet where is more pride, whordome, and all
kind of villainy commitmitted, as though Gods word were the cause thereof. As
if I should say in such a place is most store of meat and drink, and there
is most drunkenness, I will therefore neither eat nor drink at all, least
I be so too: but then I shall starve for lack of food. And worthily: so thou
(O wicked man) because some of thy livery (satan's servants) under the visar of
Gods word do commit naughtines. Therefore thou will not have Gods word
preached at all. They will tell you and swear it too, that they believe as well
in Christ, as the proudest prattling Gospeller of them al: (for these be their
terms) what a stir then keep you with your preaching, thus they think they
prove themselves sound Catholics: Revel. 12, 11.
but if they will be filthy, let them be filthy still, and let us leave them
to gods judgment. Sure we are, that there is none ye has any spark of gods
grace, or seed of faith in his heart, that speaks or thinks so: but rather
thus, god has given us his word, to the end that we might learn it, and we
must daily learn it, that we may continually practice it God says, they that
be blessed have their meditation in it day and night. Psalm. 1, 2.^9.10
It is sweeter in the children of God, than honey, they desire it above al
treasure of the World, they are taught thereby to be wary and circumspect in
all their doings, and I am very desirous to be one of Gods children: therefore I
must put my chief delight in it, I am forgetful, slow and dull, and therefore
need it is that I be rowzed with it continually, and though many abuse it to a
liberty for the flesh, and to live carelessly, yet I must not follow them, nor
be dismaide from the food of my soul, because many surfeit with it. But I
must so exercise my self in it, so lay it up in my mind, and so seek to know
it, that every thing that I do, may have his warrant out of it, that al my
doings may be directed by the same so long as I live in this miserable world,
least the deceits of satan, or the enticements of this wicked world, or the
desires of the flesh do pull me from my God.

Peter went out, etc. Now follows the manner how he was converted in his going
out, and his weeping. For the first, Peter is now brought to ye consideration
of his sin: for he sees both the way of the Lord which he should have
followed, and also how horrible his offense is: now he begins to amend, and
that is, first in his going out. He began to deny in ye wicked company, and
therefore that he may the better repent and amend, he breaks company and
bids the^ farewell, minding to have no more dealing with them. So did S.
Paul, who knowing by the grace of Christ, that the high Priests, Scribes and
Pharisees, were wicked men men and persecutours of gods servants, Act. 9.19.26.
continued at Damascus: afterward returning to Jerusalem, sought rather to win
him self to the brethren, and forsook his former companions so quite that
they were gone quickly out of his knowledge and remembrance. And truly this is
a thing very meet, that all the children of god do not only forsake the^, Act.
25.5.
with whom in time of their infidelitye they walked familiarly: but also all
the^ whose company have been unto them occasion of falling, and do yet abide
in enmity to ye truth. For if an infant having been heretofore burned with
fire, will beware that he come no more near it: If a horse will refuse that
ditch, whereinto he has been plunged: and if a Dog will not come near that
man who has used to beat him: then much more it behooves the Children of God
to avoid the company of those persons, by whose occasion they have been
allured to sin. If then thou have been familiar with mockers and deriders of
gods word and his ministers, and desire to frame thy self from that vice,
and determinest with thy self to leave it, see yt thou shake off the society of
deriders. If thou haste been a blasphemer of gods holy name, and now seeing
the hainousnes of that offense, wilt amend: use no manner of familiar
countenance to such persons as have been thy fellows in such wickedness: If
thou have been a drunkard, and now wilt be so no more, part from the company
of tospots: If thou will leave thy former whordome, shake off the familiarity
of that kind of people, and so of all other sins: if thou detestest ye fault
keep thy self from them that delight therein. Pro. 6.27.
For can a man (says Solomon) take fire in his bosom, Eccle. 13.1.
and not burn his clothes, or go upon coals and his feet not scorched? and
whosoever touches pitch must needs be defiled therewithal: even so, they that
use the society of the wicked must needs smell of their wickedness as is proved
before.

Wept bitterly, etc. Now Peter being convicted of his sinnne, and considering
through the grace of Gods holy spirit, that the guilt thereof deserves great
and endless punishment, begins to repent and turn unto the Lord. This
conversion and turning, is contained in this word wept, the outward token of
his sorrow, expressing the inward grief of his mind: for we must not think
that his weeping was the repentance it self, least we make Judas and Esau to be
converted unto the Lord by repentance. But that the exceeding sorrow of his
mind did wring out his weeping. This repentance (to pretermit all our
adversaries fond devises concerning the same) may be rightly thus defined. The
definition of repentance.
It is a true turning of our life unto god, proceeding from a pure and earnest
fear of God, which consists in the mortification of ye flesh and quickening
of the spirit. This was in Peter when he wept for his fault, it is in all them
that be truly called unto the faith in Jesus Christ, and ought to be in us all
continually, because we cease not to transgress the laws of the Lord
continually. Now to explane the parts of this definition, it is called a
turning unto God, Genesis 6, 5.
because so often as we sin, we depart from God, walking after the desires of
our own flesh: this turning must begin at the heart: for the thoughts of man's
heart are altogether wicked naturally, therefore ye turning unto god must begin
at the renewing of the same: so commands the Lord by the Prophet saying:
Ezekiel. 18, 31. Iere. 4, 4.
Make you a new heart, and in another place, break up your fallow grounds, sow
not your seeds among thorns: that is, pluck out of your hearts your wickedness
and impiety, and do not receive Gods mercies into your souls, delighting
still in wickedness: this turning must be tried without any dissimulatio^, or
hypocrisy, that if it be begun aright, it makes the heart to loathe, detest,
and abhor his former life and to sighe, sob and lament that his ungodly
demeanor has so hainously transgressed the laws of his gentle and merciful
GOD, and deserved such extreme pain and torments this is that terror, and
fear that the prophet speaks of. Have mercy upon me O Lord, for I am weak:
O Lord heal me, Psalm. 238, 2,
for my bones are bruised, and there is nothing sound in my flesh because of
thine anger, neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my sin: and so
forward in that psalm, David declares how grievously he was troubled in his
body and mind, because he considered Gods judgments against sin, which
indeed is in all the children of god (in some measure) but utterly unknown,
and strange to secure and careless persons, that sleep in their own
iniquity, and for lack of this, do never come to any remorse in conscience
but do wax worse and worse: 1. Tim. 3, 13.
but it is unto the Godly a great coo^fort: for although they feel the heavy
wrath of God against their sin yet they know that is the beginning and first
entrance into Gods favor again: for ye rigor of his wrath drives us back
from our selves, and makes us seek unto his mercy This must proceed from an
earnest fear of God, that is, (as before is declared) from the consideration
what God in justice requires of us, and how far contrary we have lived, and
also that he will execute judgment against all Sin and Iniquitye.

The fear of this makes us to seek what way to have Gods wrath appeased
against us, which is only done by Faith in Jesus Christ, who came into ye
world for that purpose, that he might be a mediator and reconciler of sinners
unto God his Father: so that every one that shall come to the favor of God
again, must certainly and steadfastly with out wavering believe, that Christ his
blood has been shed for the satisfaction of Gods wrath against him for his
sins. And so being persuaded, his conscience is at quiet with god, and the
terror of Gods wrath, which before did appear, is now pacified and
satisfied in Jesus Christ. But because man's heart is full of hypocrisy, and a
beast in his own knowledge, being blinded through vain confidence, may
persuade himself, that God has received him into his favor, when in deed it
is not so. Therefore it is said, that this repentance consists in the
mortifying of the flesh, and quickening of the spirit: that is, in crucifying
and killing within himself the world and flesh, to wit, all sin whatsoever,
and the quickening of the spirit, Gal. 5, 19, 20. 22, 23.
which is by continual endeavor to frame our lives precisely, according to
Gods word. And because this can not be done perfectly, no not in the best, by
reason of sin and iniquity, that cleaves so fast unto them, therefore they
think it their duty, so long as they carry about with them this body of
sin, to groan under the burden thereof and to use all those means that God
has set down for them in his word: to continue and abide in repentance and
amendment of life without ceassing, that Gods holy name may be glorified, and
their consciences surely settled in the mercies of the Lord, and sin daily
more and more abolished, the which the Lord God of his infinite mercy grant
unto all them that earnestly seek and labor for it, Amen.

Let us pray.
O Eternal GOD, and our most loving and merciful father, which of thy great
mercy have revealed unto us, by the example of thy holy Apostle S. Peter, that
of our selves and in our own imaginations, we wander daily further and
further from thee. Pour down thy spirit (O Lord) into our hearts, to persuade
and certify us unfeignedly of the truth hereof, and to bring us by
consideration of the same, unto a true acknowledgement of our own misery, and
thereby, to that humility, which may declare unto us our wretched estate
without thee, that by the weying of the same aright, we may know the
necessity of thy holy and blessed word, which not only discovers unto us all
our natural blemishes and corruptions, but also teaches how to know thee,
and to worship thee truly, and thereby be moved to have an especial care to
hear the same taught publicly, to read it privately for our comfort, and to
meditate in it continually: that we learning out of the same the absolute
uprightness that thy law requires, may be cast down, and the mercy that
thou offerest to repenting sinners, may ground our unfeigned faith upon thy
promises, and by the consideration of thy great mercies offered unto us in thy
Son our Savior Jesus Christ, may endeavor diligently to glorify thy holy
name with that obedience that thou requirest, and to shun all things both in
our religion and conversation, that has no warrant out of thy blessed will,
that abandoning all fancies of man's traditions, and will-worshippers (pleasant
in the eyes of flesh and blood) we may cleave unto thy perfect will, revealed
unto us by thy Prophets and Apostles, and showing forth thy praise according
thereunto, here in this world may thorough thy mercy be glorified in the
world to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior.

FINIS.

