JACOB. MAG. BRIT. REG. MATTER. SERENISSIMA MARIA REGINA
The most excellent Princess Mary queen of Scotland and Dowager of France
Mother to our Sovereign lord James of great Britain France and Ireland king



THE HISTORY OF THE LIFE AND DEATH OF Mary Stuart QVEENE OF SCOTLAND.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland for Richard Whitaker, and are to be sold at
the sign of the Kings Head in Paul's Churchyard.

1624.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
Most Dread Sovereign,
ZENO the Philosopher, being asked how a man might attain wisdom, answered,
By drawing near unto the dead. O the Sepulchers of our Ancestors, how much
more do they teach than all the study, books and precepts of the learned!

And herein due praise must needs be ascribed unto History, the life of
memory, and the mirror of man's life, making those Heroic acts to live
again, which otherwise would be buried in eternal forgetfulness, whereby the
mind (a greedy hunter after knowledge) is enflamed, by affecting the several
perfections of others, to seek after excellent things, and by fervent
imitation to attain to that glory which is gotten by virtue.

For these causes, (most renowned Sovereign) when I considered Plutarke,
laying aside the study of Philosophic, to think the time well employed in
writing the lives of Theseus, of Aristides, and of other inferior persons; and
knowing how far the luster and splendour of Princes shines beyond the
brightness of others; every one standing for a million of the common people:
And being sensible that it is infused even by nature, every man to desire, and
to be delighted with the relation and story of his own Ancestors and
predecessors:

For these reasons I presumed to present unto your Highness this Treatise of
the life and death of your Royal Mother, the Lady MARY STVART Queen of
Scotland; A History most fit for this your Meridian of Great Britain, and yet
never published in the English tongue before: Wherein, although I confess the
slenderness of my skill in the exornation and beautifying of the style, and
thereby may worthily incur the reproof of the learned; yet if your Majesty
vouchsafe your gracious and Princely acceptance, all faults therein shall
easily be covered and blotted out. Therefore I become your humble Orator,
praying no other thing than the Sun Dial of the Sun, Aspice me vt
aspiciar: most humbly beseeching the Almighty to bless your most Excellent
Majesty, with a long, happy, and prosperous reign.

Your Sacred Majesty's most humble subject, WILL. STRANGVAGE.

THE PREFACE TO THE ENSVING HISTORY.
IT is a thing most true, and some find it by experience, that here below in
this world, there is nothing eternal: And how can it be otherwise, when the
great Kings and Princes of the earth, who seem to be created of the most pure
substance of the Elements, of a matter, as may be said, for their excellency
incorruptible, of the fine gold of Euilath, and of the best mould, to the
pattern of the fairest Ideas, and bear and carry the Image and Seal of all
puissance, as the chief impression of natures work, in the plain greatness
of Majesty, which engraueth their forehead with a gracious stateliness. Yet
do we see them every day, who seem unto men to be lasting and durable, as
eternity it self, to quit the arches o^ triumph, and to yield themselves unto
the triumph o^ death. And more than that, the most part of them finish their
days, not in the sweet and calm waters, like Pourcontrells, but by a death
disseasoned, sometimes in their green youth, and flourishing age, by the
storms and tempests, as do the Dolphins, within the torrents, billows, or
waves of the sea, tossed by diverse factions. And it seems that this fatality
pursues ordinarily the most worthy and virtuous persons: so that they finish
their lives many times with violence or precipitation; and not to go unto
their death in a smooth path, but to be interrupted with some strange
accident, which cclipseth the bright shining luster of their greatness, which
dasell the minds of men, that from below beheld them sitting aloft on the
throne of Majesty. All which appeared most plainly and evidently to be true in
the most worthy and royal Princess MARY STVART Queen of Scotland, who in all
her life being tossed and turmoiled with infinite misfortunes, concluded it
with an untimely death, as follows in the sequel of this History of her
life and death.

MARY STVART Queen of Scotland, was daughter unto James the fist, King of
Scotland, a wise and valiant Prince, and of the Lady MARY, of the Illustrious
family of the Dukes of Lorraine, (whose fame for valor is renowned through all
Christendom,) was borne on the eighth day of December in the year of our Lord
1541. She was not above eight days old when her father died: being left thus
young, the Noblemen of Scotland being divided (whereof the family of the
Hamiltons and the Earl of Lynnox being the heads,) the one side supported by
King Henry the eighth of England, and the other by the French King Henry the
second* she was by the care of her mother who inclined unto the French King, at
the age of six years or thereabouts, sent into France in the Galleys of
Villagagnon a Knight of the Rhodes appointed by the French King unto this
service, in the which voyage by the West Seas (for in the other passage near
the Straits of Calice, the Englishmen had laid a strong Navy to intercept her)
she hardly escaped drowning by means of a storm or tempest that happened,
near unto the coast of little Britain in France, where she afterward took
land, from whence she was conveyed unto the Court of France, where she was
brought up under her Curators the French King and the Dukes of Guise, and by
their exquisite care she drew in with the air the sweetness of the humors of
the country, and in the end by the singular grace of nature, and carfulness
of her friends and Kinsfolks, became with her age the fairest and goodliest
Princess of our time. And beside this her rare beauty, she had her
understanding and intendment so pure and perfect, her judgment so certain,
surmounting, and above the condition of her age and sex, that it bred and
caused in her a greatness of courage, which was yet mixed and qualified with
such sweetness and modesty, that you could not see any thing more Royal, any
thing more gracious. Her manners and private actions were such, and were so
well liked of generally, that it caused King Henry the second of France, and
his Queen (who was admired for her prudence) to marry their eldest son,
Daulphin of France and heir of their Crown, unto this Lady, as unto one well
deserving to be joined in marriage unto their son, heir apparent of the
greatest kingdom in Europe: And so upon the four and twentieth day of April,
in the year of our Lord 1558. Francis the Daulphin of France and MARY STVART
Queen of Scotland, were married in the Church of Nostra Dama in Paris. One
cannot declare with what applause of all the people, with what congratulation
of all the neighbor Princes, with what Magnificence, this marriage was
solemnized. By this her marriage her husband obtained not only the Title of
King of Scotland in the right of his wife, but also another more rich and
great, which was, of the most contented Prince the earth then beheld, for that
he was joined in marriage with a Princess who besides many other great virtues
composed her self wholly to please and to give content unto her husband, and
therein used not the ordinary care of a Princess, but more travel and
solicitude than do the women of mean condition and quality married unto
great Princes, as also appeared after his death (which befell not long after)
by her immeasurable mourning, not being able to find any consolation for her
sorrow in that place where she had lost that which she had loved better than
her self, so much that the amity of her kinsfolks and allies could not
retain her, nor the sorrow and regret of all France could not call her back,
nor the sweetness of that Court which invited her could not stay her, but that
she would depart from thence.

After this on the seventeenth day of November the same year deceased Mary of
England; at which time the Parliament was holden at Westminster, being certified
of her death, with a universal consent, in regard of her most certain right
unto the Crown of England (of the which none could doubt,) both the Prelates
and Nobles with the Commons agreed to have the Lady ELIZABETH proclaimed
Queen, which was done with the general applause and consent of them and all
the people.

Queen ELIZABETH being established and having taken order for things at home,
and domestical affairs, applied her mind next to settle her affairs abroad:
For which end it was thought fit to send Ambassadors unto Princes to signify
unto them the death of Queen MARY, and her succession unto the kingdom: Unto
Ferdinand the Emperor was sent Thomas Challenor with letter^, wherein the
Queen, under her own hand, certified him that her sister Queen MARY was
dead, and that she by the goodness of God was succeeded as her rightful
heir, and with the general consent of her subjects, in the government of the
Realm; and that she desired nothing more, than that the ancient League and
amity between the families of England and Austria, might not only be
conserved but also increased. Unto the King of Spain, being in his Low
coun^ries, was sent the Lord Cobham with instructions to the same purpose.

King Philip understanding the decease of Queen MARIE his wife, fearing lest
England, Scotland, and Ireland, should be adjoined unto France by m^anes of the
Queen of Scotland her Title, d^lt seriously with Queen ELIZABETH by the Conde
of Feria, whom he had sent before to visit his sick wife, and the then Lady
ELIZABETH also, about his marriage with her, promising to procure a dispensation
for the same. This motion troubled her much, for to reject the most mighty
King of Europe (having deserved well of her) and suing to her for marriage upon
his own motion: This thing no less disquieted the French King, who was also
fearful that England and Spain should be conjoined again i^ one by
marriage; therefore ^ee did all that was possible to be done at Rome, by the
Bishop of Angulesme, that no such dispensation should be granted, but yet very
secretly, lest he should provoke the Englishmen against him: but she put him
off with a modest and shamefast answer. And when he saw that he could not
obtain his suit for himself, and had also given it quite over, being agreed
with the French King to marry his daughter, yet that the kingdom of England
might be retained in his family still, he moved the Emperor Ferdinand to
commend one of his sons to be a suitor unto Queen ELIZABETH, which motion he
willingly entertained, and for that purpose sent unto her very loving letters,
and by Gaspar Preynerus, free Baron in Stibing, diligently followed and
prosecuted the same, the King of Spain himself also, to bring it the sooner
to pass, and to further it, most courteously offering and promising unto
Queen ELIZABETH his singular love, kindness and affection.

THE LIFE, DEATH, AND VARIABLE fortunes of the most gracious Queen, MARIE
STEWARD Queen of Scotland.
Anno 1559.
THe French King, Henry the second, for the benefit of his son the Dolphin
King, and MARIE Queen of Scots (casting his eyes upon England) did not
withdraw his French Soldiers out of Scotland, as he had promised, but sent
secretly more daily into Scotland, and dealt vehemently with the Pope, to
pronounce Queen Elizabeth an Heretic, and illegitimate, which the Emperor and
the King of Spain, most diligently, but covertly, sought to hinder: yet had
the Guises drawn the French King into such a sweet hope of adjoining England
unto the Crown of France, by the title of their Niece the Queen of Scots,
that he openly claimed the same in the right of his son and daughter in law:
And commanded them, when he could not obtain his purpose at Rome, to use this
title in all their Letters patents; FRANCIS and MARIE by the grace of God, of
Scotland, England, and Ireland, King and Queen, and caused the arms of
England, together with the arms of Scotland, to be painted in the walls,
buildings, and in the household stuff: and also to be put into the Heralds
coats. The English Ambassador in vain complained, that herein great wrong was
done unto Queen Elizabeth, with whom he had made lately a league, and had not
done this to Queen MARIE of England, who had proclaimed war against him. But
Henry's sudden death, which happened shortly after, made an end of his attempts.

But Francis the second (who succeeded him) and MARIE Queen of Scots his wife
(by the counsel of the Guises, who were then of great authority in France)
bore themselves openly as Kings of England and Ireland, neither did they
abstain from claiming the arms, but set them out more and more. And unto
Nicholas Throgmorton the Lieger Ambassador, a man both wise and stout, it was
first answered: That it was lawful for the Queen of Scots to bear them with
some little difference, to show the nearenesse of her blood unto the royal
line of England. He stiffly denied it, saying that by the Law of Arms, none
who was not begot of the certain Heir, might bear the arms of any family.
Afterward they said they bore the arms for no other cause, than to cause the
Queen of England to abstain from bearing the arms of France. Yet at length
he obtained at the intercession of Mont Morancy, who loved not the Guises, that
they left off the arms of England and Ireland altogether. But yet from this
title and usurpation of arms, which Henry made the young Queen of Scots to
take on her (moved thereto by the Guises) proceeded all the evils, which came
so thick upon her afterward, as from the original cause. For from hence
Queen Elizabeth was an open and professed enemy to the Guises, and bare a
secret hate against her, which the crafty malice of men did so nourish, the
emulation increasing between them, and new occasions arising daily, that they
could not be extinguished, but with her death.

Anno 1560.
THen followed the Treaty of Edinburgh, wherein amongst many other things, it
was agreed, that the King of France and Queen MARIE should leave off the
bearing of the title and arms of England and Ireland: but when the time of
confirming the same came, and Queen Elizabeth sent into France to have it
ratified (as she had done) Throgmorton the Leiger Ambassador could not bring
them to do it by any means; and whilst the matters hung in suspense, and
rested undetermined, Francis the second, King of France, not being eighteen
year old, and in the second year of his reign, deceased, and left the Queen
of Scots a widow, whether to the greater grief of the Romanists, or joy of the
Protestants in Britain, I cannot say.

Anno 1561.
FRANCIS Earl of Bedford, was sent into France, to deplore the death of King
Francis, and to gratulate Charles the ninth, his successor, and by himself,
and together with Throgmorton the ordinary Ambassador, he importuned the
Queen of Scots to confirm the treaty of Edinburgh, but in vain, for she
answered no other thing, but that she could not, nor would not determine on so
great a matter, without the consent of the Nobility of Scotland.

The Queen of Scots entending to return into Scotland, sent Monsieur d'Oysell
to request a safe conduct of Queen Elizabeth for to pass by Sea, and for
d'Oysell, to pass through England. Queen Elizabeth before a great multitude of
people, denied both the one, and the other, for this cause, she said that she
had not ratified the treaty of Edinburgh, which if she did, she promised to
show all kindness that might be expected from a Queen, from a Cousin, and
from a neighbor. The Queen of Scots being vexed at this repulse, sent for
Throgmorton, with whom she had long speeches about this matter, which I will
briefly set down out of the letters of Throgmorton, (though I shall make
rehearsal of some things already said) that the original and progress of the
privy malice which was between the greatest and wisest Princesses of our time
or age, may more evidently appear. She sending all the standers by away, said
thus to Throgmorton: What is my womanly weakness, and how far the passion of
my mind may carry me, I know not, yet it likes me not to have so many
witnesses of my weakness, as your Lady lately had when she talked with
Monsieur d'Oysell my Ambassador: nothing grieueth me so much as that I did ask
those things which were not needful: by Gods favor I can return into my
Country, without asking her leave, as I came hither in despite of her brother
Edward. Neither want I friends which can and will bring me home, as they
brought me hither; but I had rather have used her friendship, than of any
other. I have often heard you say, that the amity between her and me was
necessary to both our Kingdoms, yet it seems that she thinks otherwise,
or else she had not given me the repulse in so small a matter: but perhaps
she bears more favor unto the Scots, which rebel against me, than to me
the Queen of Scots, equal to her in princely royalty, her nearest kinswoman,
and most certain heir unto her. Do thou think that that good will and
love can be between my rebellious subjects and her, that may be between her
and me? What? Does she think that I shall be destitute of friends? Assuredly
she has driven me to ask help of them of whom I would not willingly. And
they cannot wonder enough for what purpose she gave aid lately unto my
subjects, and now to hinder the return of me a widow unto my subjects. I ask
nothing of her but amity, I procure no trouble unto her, nor meddle not with
the affairs of England. But yet I am not ignorant that there be many in
England who are not content with the estate as it is now. She twitteth me, and
says, that I have small experience; I confess it: Age brings experience
with it; yet I am so old, that I can behave my self friendly, kindly, and
justly toward my kinsfolks and friends, and keep my tongue from speaking any
thing, not beseeming a Queen and a kinswoman. But by her leave, I may say,
that as well as she I am a Queen, neither destitute of friends, and to bear
no less high mind than she, and it may beseem us to measure our selves with
a certain equality: but I forbear comparison, which is little better than
contention, and wants not evil will. As for the treaty of Edinburgh, it was
made in the life of the King my husband, whom it was my duty to obey in all
things, and since that he delaied the confirmation of the same, let the blame
remain in him, and not in me.

After his death, the Counselors of France left me to mine own Counselors,
neither would mine Uncles meddle with the affairs of Scotland, because they
would not offend Queen Elizabeth, nor the Scots. The Scots that be with me be
private men, nor such fit men that I should ask counsel of them in such great
matters. As soon as I shall have the advice of the Estates of my Realm, I
will make a reasonable answer; and I will make all the haste I can home, to
give it the sooner. But she determines to stop my way, lest I should give it,
so she is the cause that I cannot satisfy her; or else she would not be
satisfied perhaps, for the intent that there may be no end of discord between
us. She casts often in my teeth, that I am a young girl, as a reproach, and
truly she may justly think me an unwise girl if I dealt in these weighty
affairs, without the advice of the Estates. A wife is not bound, as I have
heard, with the deeds of her husband, neither in her honor, nor in conscience:
but I do not dispute this thing, yet I may say this thing truly; I have done
nothing to my dearest sister, which I would not have done to my self; I have
used all offices of courtesy and kindred, but she either believes not, or
contemns them: I would to God I were so dear to her as I am near of blood,
for this were a precious kind of kindred. God forgive them that sow the seeds
of dissension between us (if there be any such.) But thou who art an
Ambassador, tell me in good sooth, for what cause she is so displeased with
me, who never hurt her hitherto either in word or deed.

To these speeches Throgmorton made answer. I have no commission to answer you,
but to hear what your answer is, about the confirmation of the treaty of
Edinburgh. But if it please you to hear the cause of displeasure, I will lay
it down in few words (laying aside the person of an Ambassador.) As soon as
the Queen my Lady and Mistress was crowned, you did usurp the title and
arms of England, which you did not take in the reign of Queen MARIE; Judge
you in your discretion if a greater wrong can be offered unto a Prince: Such
injuries as this, private men cannot digest, much less Princes.

But, said she, my husbands father, and my husband himself would have it done,
and commanded it to be so. After their decease, when I was at mine own hand,
I left off wholly both those arms, and the title, but yet I know not how it
can be any wrong to the Queen, if I also a Queen, whose Grandmother was
eldest sister unto Henry the eight, do bear these arms, since others farther
off than I bore them: I am sure, Courtney Marquess of Exceter, and the
Duchess of Suffolk, Niece unto Henry the eight, by his younger sister, did
bear the arms of England, with borders for a difference, by a special favor.

When these things did not satisfy Queen Elizabeth, who was fully persuaded
that she put in delays still upon some more hopes, since she had not proposed
unto the Estates of Scotland, who had once or twice assembled since her
husbands death, any thing about the confirmation of the treaty; She being upon
her way, sent for Throgmorton again unto Abbeuille, where she courteously
asked him, how she might satisfy Queen Elizabeth in word or deed; he said, by
ratifying the treaty of Edinburgh (as I have often said) unto whom she said:
Now hear and judge, if there be not most just reasons, which she calls
delays and vain excuses: The first Article in it, of ratifying the treaty of
Chasteau Cambresy, between England and France, pertains nothing unto me. The
second, of ratifying the treaty between England and Scotland, was ratified by
my husband and me; neither can it be ratified again, when my husband is
expressedly named in it. The Articles 3, 4, and 5. are already performed, for
the preparations for war are ceased. The French Soldiers are called back
out of Scotland, and the Fortress of Aymouth is demolished, I have not borne
nor used the title nor arms of England since my husbands death. It is not in
my power to put them out of the household stuff, buildings, and Letters patents
through France, as it is not in my power to send into England the Bishop of
Valence, and Randan, who are not my subjects, to dispute about the sixth
Article: And for the last Article, I hope my seditious subjects shall not have
cause to complain of my severity. But as I perceive, she will prevent me by
stopping my return, that they shall not have trial of my clemency: what
remains now in this treaty, which may be wrong to the Queen? Yet that I may
give her satisfaction more abundantly, I will write larger Letters of this
business with mine own hand, though she does not vouchsafe to write back
unto me, but by her Secretary: But I pray you my Lord Ambassador, do the part
of an Ambassador, that is, rather mollify than exasperate the matter.

But yet Queen Elizabeth was not satisfied with these letters, in whose mind
the injury for the using of the arms and title of England was deeply
imprinted, and still she was afraid, lest she should challenge them again,
if she were not bound and tied thereto by the confirmation of the treaty and
the religion of an oath.

In the mean while the Q of Scotland getting a good gale of wind, departed
from Calice, and in a foggie mist passing by the English ships, which some
thought were sent to Sea to convey her with honor; others, to suppress
Pirates, and as others said, to intercept and take her, arrived safe in
Scotland: For James the Bastard very lately returning by England, had secretly
willed Queen Elizabeth to take her by the way, if she had a desire to provide
for Religion, and her own security. And Lidington being glad that d'Oysell
was detained in England, persuaded it also. She being returned into Scotland,
used her subjects with all courtesy, changed not their religion (though it had
been brought in by tumults) and began to settle the common wealth by
enacting good Laws: But unto Queen Elizabeth she sent Lidington with her
own, and the letters of the Scottish Nobility, in the which she promised all
care to make and conserve amity with her; and requested that a certain form
of peace might be made between England and Scotland, and that there was none
more certain, than if Queen Elizabeth (if she should have no issue) would
declare her by the authority of Parliament, the next heir to succeed her in
the Realm of England.

This thing seemed strange unto Queen Elizabeth, who looked for the
confirmation of the treaty of Edinburgh, promised by word, and by her hand
writing: yet she answered; As concerning the succession, she hoped the Queen
of Scotland would not by violence take her Crown away from her and her
children, if she had any: she promised not to derogate any thing of her right
unto the Crown of England, although she had claimed the title and arms of
England, through the too much hasty ambition of other men, for which injury
it was meet that she made satisfaction. By setting down her successor, she
feared lest their friendship should be rather disseuered than consolidated,
for that unto men established in government, their successors are always
suspected and hated: the people, such is their inconstancy upon a dislike of
present things, do look after the rising Sun, and forsake the Sun
setting; and the successors designed cannot keep within the bounds of Justice
and truth, their own hopes and other men's lewd desires: Moreover, if she
should confirm the succession unto her, she should thereby cut off the hope
of her own security, and being alive, hang her winding sheet before her own
eyes, yea, make her own funeral feast alive, and see the same.

After she had answered these things thus, she did again, sending her
letters unto her by Peter Mewtas, mildly will her to confirm the treaty.
Neither did the other directly deny it, but insinuated, that she could not
do it, until she had set the affairs of Scotland in good order.

Anno 1562.
MArgaret Countess of Lynnox, Niece to King Henry the eight by his eldest
sister, was delivered as prisoner to Richard Sackuill, and her husband the
Earl of Lennox was assigned unto the Master of the Rolls in the like manner,
for that he had secret intelligence by letters, with the Queen of Scots, in
which custody both of them were kept a good space.

Not long after, Henry Sidney was sent unto the Queen of Scots, whose message
was, that the enteruiew which he had desired to have with Queen Elizabeth
might be put off unto the next year, or until the French wars were waxen
colder.

At this time it was consulted, whether it was for any good purpose, that these
two Princesses should come unto an enteruiew or conference: For, that the
Queen of Scotland required it, bred a suspicion, that she did it for some
commodity or benefit, and to epsy some advantage, either to strengthen her
right in England, or else to give a hope, and erect the minds of the Papists in
England, and her Cousens the Guises in France. On the other side, others
thought hereby a most firm amity might be concluded between them, the
league between the French and the Scots weakened by little and little, and the
Queen of Scots won by fair words unto the Religion of the Protestants.
Others noted, that out of such enteruiewes or conferences, grew the seeds
rather of emulation, than of love, when one should hate and repine at the
ostentation of the others bravery, wealth and power, and for that many times
the presence and view is not answerable unto report and opinion; and so of the
comeliness of the body, of the beauty of the face, and of the gifts of the
mind: And that one might have cause and occasion to find fault with the
other. Neither did the Queen of Scotland think it safe to deliver her self
into the hands of Queen Elizabeth, with whom she had contended for the right
of the Kingdom: It made her to stagger, and to doubt in the matter, and also
to which side to incline and sway, when she heard that Queen Elizabeth stood
openly for the Protestants in France: whilst she considered (as she wrote her
self) that she came by her father from the English blood, and by her mother
from the French, that she was crowned Queen, and Dowager of France, and the
most rightful Heir of England, and withal expected the Kingdom thereof: That
she was much indebted unto her Uncles in France, which had brought her up, and
that she much desired the love of Queen Elizabeth.

Yet she feared, such was her piercing understanding, lest if she joined her
self with her in a very strict kind of amity, she might procure the evil
will of the French King, be abandoned by her Uncles, and lose her dowry out of
France, by preferring the uncertain friendship of Queen Elizabeth (which, to
use her own words, passed not beyond the person) before the certain love of
the French. Hereupon the conference (which had been treated of many months,
and the Articles also drawn) came to nothing, especially when she by her
letters did utterly refuse to come unto the enteruiew, except she might be
designed heir apparent of England by authority of Parliament, or else be
adopted by Queen Elizabeth to be her daughter, to lay a foundation of a most
certain peace and union of both the Realms, so often desired. If these things
were granted, she promised to addict her self wholly to Queen Elizabeth, yea,
and not to respect and regard her Uncles the Guises. Also in these lettes she
insinuated that she urged these things the more vehemently, for that she had
heard that many did secretly devise to set in another successor, and that only
for the cause of Religion, though she did tolerate in Scotland the Religion of
the Protestants.

But when the Cardinal of Lorraine, at the same time dealt with the Emperor
Ferdinand, that she might marry with his son Charles the Archduke, who then
sued unto Q. Elizabeth for marriage; Queen Elizabeth threatened her by Thomas
Randolph, that if she did consent unto the Cardinal (the mortal enemy of
England) about that marriage, both that the amity between England and Scotland
might be dissolved, and perhaps she excluded from her hope of the Realm of
England: and if she would not miss thereof, she in friendly manner willed her
to choose such a husband in England, in whose choice she might principally
give her self content, and then give satisfaction to her own Subjects, and
also to the English men, in the conservation of the peace, and make the way
smoother and plainer unto her assured succession in England, which cannot be
published and made known until it was certainly known whom she would take to
her husband.

Anno 1563.
WHen in the heat of the civil wars of France, the Duke of Guise, Uncle unto
the Q. of Scotland, was slain, her dowry out of France was not paid, Hamilton
D. of Chasteauleroy was deprived of his Duchy, and the Scots were displaced
from the Captainship of the Guard, which things she took in very evil part:
The Cardinal of Lorraine, another of her Uncles, fearing lest hereupon she
leaving the French, should cleave unto the amity of England, he proposed
again by Crocus, the marriage with Charles d' Austria, offering to her the
County of Tyrole for her dowry. She acquainted Queen Elizabeth with the
matter, who by Randolph gave her those former admonitions about the choosing of
a husband (as I have said before) and then in plainer terms commended Robert
Dudley (whose wife being the heir of Robsert, was killed a good while since,
by falling down a pair of slaires) and promised that if she would marry
him, she should be declared by the authority of Parliament, sister, or
daughter, and heir apparent of England, if she died without issue. As soon as
the Queen mother and her Uncles heard this by Foixius the French Ambassador in
England, they did so disdain the marriage with Dudley, as altogether unequal
and unworthy to match in a royal stock and lineage, as they promised not only
to pay her dowry, but also to restore unto the Scots all their former
liberties, and morelarge also, if she would persist firmly in the friend^hip
of France, and refuse the marriage offered unto her: and also they suggested and
put in her head, that Queen Elizabeth did propose this marriage not seriously,
but colourably, as though she had assigned Dudley for her own husband: And
that there was no cause why she should put any trust or confidence in the
authority of a Parliament, since that in England one Parliament may repeal
that which another has enacted. Moreover, that the purposes of the English men
were no other, but by one means or other to keep her always from marriage.
But yet she referred this matter unto conference, being wonderfully vexed and
troubled at home, when Murrey cast into prison the Archbishop of Saint
Andrews, because he abstained not from saying Mass, unto whom she hardly got
pardon, with shedding of tears. And the hot spirited Ministers of the Church,
bolstered by the authority of Murrey, offered violence (without any
controlment) unto a Priest who had said Mass in the Court (which was permitted
by the Law.) Neither was she able to repress the tumultuous persons, though
she applied all her mind about the good of the common wealth, by granting a
general pardon, increasing the fees or wages of the Judges, by making wholesome
Laws, as making Adultery to be death, and sitting herself in judgment,
thereby to make by Law the highest equal with the lowest.

Anno 1564.
IN this year Queen Elizabeth created Robert Dudley Master of her Horse, a
man in high favor with her, whom she had in her secret purpose appointed
husband for the Queen of Scotland, that he might be more worthy of that match;
Baron of Denbigh, giving unto him Denbigh, with the demeasnes, and the next day
Earl of Leycester, to him and his heirs males lawfully begotten: For whose
sake also she had before created his elder brother Ambrose Baron Lisle, and
Earl of Warwick; and to his heirs males lawfully begotten, and to Robert his
brother, and to his heirs males of his body lawfully begotten. Dudly advanced
to these honors, to purchase favor and grace with the Queen of Scotland,
unto whom he made suit in marriage, studied with all kind of offices to
deserve well of her, and forthwith accused Bacon keeper of the great Seal,
unto the Queen, that he had dealt in the matter of succession against the
Queen of Scotland, and that he was privy and accessory unto a Pamphlet made
by one Hales, who endeavored to prove the right of the Crown of England, to
belong unto the family of Suffolk, if the Queen died without Heir: for the
which he had been put in Prison; but Bacon (though he denied the same) was
with much ado, and after a long time restored unto the Queens favor by
Cecill, who kept his own judgment in this point secret to himself, and
always determined so to do, unless the Queen (as he would say) commanded
him to speak his mind, for she could not endure of all things to have the
right of succession called into question and dispute: but the wiser and the
richer men, were troubled with nothing more, whilst in the controversy of
Religion the hot Protestants thought the Q. of Scotland was to be put by, and
rejected, because she was of another Religion, though her right was undoubted
(out of some querks and words of their Law books.) Some of the Romanists, and
most that regarded equity and justice, thought she was to be received, as the
true and certain Heir by the Law. And many preferred Margaret, Aunt to the
Queen of Scotland, the wife of Matthew Stewart Earl of Lennox, and her
children, as those of whom they hoped the best, as borne in England. These
things were not unknown unto the Q. of Scotland, who to prevent it as much as
she could, by the advice of the Countess of Lennox her Aunt, sent for Matthew
Earl of Lennox, to come into Scotland, under pretense to restore him into his
ancient Patrimony, but indeed to ask him counsel in these affairs, who by
his wives means, obtained leave, and also letters of commendations from Queen
Elizabeth, after he had been banished from his native Country now full
twenty years.

He (for I will for more perspicuitie and light to the matter, rehearse the
same somewhat higher) was borne of the same stock of the Stewarts, as the
royal family of the Scots was: For Marie daughter unto James the second, King
of Scotland, bore unto James Hamilton, James the first of this stock, Earl of
Arran, and Marie his daughter, wife unto Matthew Stewart Earl of Lennox, the
first of this Christian name. James Earl of Arran, his first wife being
divorced, and yet living, married Ienet Beton, Aunt to Cardinal Beton, by whom
he had James D. of Chasteauleroy, whom his adversaries hereupon accounted a
Bastard. Marie sister to the Earl of Arran, bore unto Matthew, John Earl of
Lennox, who being slain by the Hamiltons, at such time as he would have
restored James the fourth to his liberty, left this second Matthew Stewart (of
whom we speak) Earl of Lennox, most dear to James the fifth, in regard of his
father. But Matthew (the King being dead, and the Hamiltons having all the
government in their power) departed secretly into France, from whence he was
sent by Henry the second, the French King, to see that the common wealth of
Scotland took no harm by Hamilton the Regent; and herein he behaved himself
worthily: but being a plain and honest minded man, (and entangled by the craft
and policy of Cardinal Beton, and Hamilton,) he fell out of the favor of the
French King in a short time: And when he could neither tarry at home, nor
return into France, he came into England and submitted himself to King Henry
the eighth, who accepted him as a man well beloved in the West borders, and
acknowledged him as next heir to the Crown of Scotland, after MARIE then an
infant, (though the Hamiltons confiscated all his possessions, as of a Traitor
condemned) and married him unto the Lady Margaret Douglas his Niece, by his
eldest sister, giving him lands in England, worth yearly of the old rent 1700.
Marks, he promising for his part, to deliver into the hands of the King of
England, the Castles of Dunbritton, the I Will of Butha, and the Castle of
Rothsay, which pieces being courageously and valiantly attempted, could not yet
be gotten.

This man, the Queen of Scotland (a woman prudent and circumspect, and who
applied all her studies upon the hopes of England) sent for to come into
Scotland (as I have said) pardoned his banishment, restored him unto his
ancient possessions, as well that she might oppose him against the attempts of
James the Bastard, as also to put other folks out of hope of the succession of
England, by his son, Henry Darly. For if that young man borne of the royal
blood in England, and well beloved of the English Nation, should marry with
some of the great families of England, she secretly to her self feared, that
he bolstered up with the power of England, might be a block in her way, in
the right of her succession in England, since he was accounted in most men's
opinion, the second heir of the Crown of England after her: and there was
nothing she more wished, than that the Realms of England and Scotland might
deuolue by her means unto some of the Scottish race, and by him might be
propagated unto posterity, in the ancient surname of the Stewarts.

This came to the knowledge of Queen Elizabeth, and to prevent her purpose,
she declared unto her by Randolph, that that marriage was so universally
disallowed by the English men, that she adiourned the Parliament against the
will of her Council until another time, lest the Estates, moved unto wrath
for this cause, should make some act against her right in succession: which
lest it should afterward come to pass, she willed her not to do so, but to
give satisfaction unto the English men, by thinking upon some other match. And
now again she commended Leicester, (whom she had advanced unto the degree of
an Earl, and especicially for that cause) with more earnestness, to be her
husband.

Upon this occasion at Barwicke, in the month of November, there talked
together about the marriage with Leicester, the Earl of Bedford and Randolph,
and for her were Murrey and Lidington Commissioners. The English men promised
firm amity, perpetual peace, and certain hope of the succession, if she
would marry with Leicester, for upon this condition, Queen Elizabeth had
promised to declare her daughter adoptiue, or sister by authority of
Parliament. The Scots stood hard to it, that it was not for the dignity of a
Queen desired for wife by Charles the son of the Emperor Ferdinand, the King
of France, the Prince of Condy, and the Duke of Ferrara, to abase her self
unto the marriage of a new-made Earl, and a subject of England, upon a hope
only, and no dowry being offered, saying also it was neither honorable unto
the Queen of England, to commend so mean a husband to so great a Princess,
her next kinswoman; but that this should be a most certain argument of love,
if she would permit her at her own choice to elect her self a husband, who
shall keep peace with England, and withal assign a good annuitie unto her,
and confirm the right of succession by the authority of Parliament. In all
this business Queen Elizabeth earnestly desired, that the succession of both
the Kingdoms might be established in the English Nation, though she was slow
in the same. The Queen of Scotland (when the matter had hung thus in talk for
the space of two years) now determined to take Darly unto her husband, did
suspect that Queen Elizabeth did not deal sincerely with her, but that she
did propound this marriage for no other end and purpose, but that she might
make the first choice of the best suitor or wooer for her self, or else might
marry with better excuse unto Leicester. But the Scottish Delegates looking
also for their own purposes, determined by one way or other to thrust some
obstacle or other in any marriage, that ^hey might retain still their
authority with the Queen. Queen Elizabeth had willed the Commissioners to
hinder the marriage with Darly; and Leicester himself, accounting himself most
sure of Queen Elizabeth, willed Bedford secretly by his letters, not to urge
the matter much. And upon this hope it is thought he favored Darly in secret.

Anno 1565.
IN the mean time Darly got leave with much ado to go into Scotland, and to
stay there three months, by the earnest and humble suit his mother made unto
Queen Elizabeth, under the color, that he might be present at the restoring
of his father: and so he came unto Edinburgh, in the month of February. He
was a young man, of personage most worthy of an Empire, of a comely stature, of
a most mild nature, and sweet behavior. As soon as the Queen of Scotland
saw him, she fell in love with him, and to cover her love she talked now and
then with Randolfe the English Ambassador in Scotland, about the marriage with
Leicester, and at the same time sent to Rome, for a dispensation, because Darly
and she were so near of kin, that a dispensation was necessary by the Canon
Laws. But when these things came to light, she sent Lidington unto Queen
Elizabeth, that she might marry with Darly by her consent, and not be kept
any longer unmarried upon vain expectations. Queen Elizabeth propounded the
matter to her privy Council, who out of the secret suggestions of Murrey,
easily believed, that the purpose of the Queen of Scotland tended by this
marriage to strengthen, and again to claim the title, and her right unto the
Realm of England, and withal to deduce it unto the Roman Religion again,
and that many would incline unto them, upon the certainty of their succession
coming of this marriage, and others out of the love unto the Roman Religion,
and forasmuch as they understood, that most of the Justices of Peace were
addicted unto it. To prevent these things, they thought it most necessary,
first to win the Queens good will, to marry speedily some husband, that out
of the certainty of succession by her and her issue, and from none other, the
affairs and hopes of English men might depend, for they feared that if the
Queen of Scotland married first, and had issue, the most of the people would
incline and bend toward her side, because of the certainty of the succession
and security. Secondly, that the profession of the Roman Religion should be
infringed, or weakened, as much as might be: and that of the reformed,
diligently advanced and established; this by dealing more moderately with some
hot spirited Protestants about things indifferent; and the other, by calling in
the deprived Bishops unto their prisons (for they had been dispersed into the
Countries in the time of the great plague) by giving unto the Bishops more
ample authority, to exercise the Ecclesiastical laws against that terrifying
bugge of the Praemunire, (which the Lawyers objected against them) by
suppressing books coming from the Low Countries into England, set out by
Harding, and the Divines that were fled over the Seas, by removing away
certain Scottish Priests that lurked in England; by depriving the English
fugitives of their Ecclesiastical livings, which they enjoyed until this
time; by compelling the Judges of the land, who for the most part were Papists,
to take the oath of Supremacy. But to disturb the marriage with Darly, it was
thought best to put them in fear, by mustering Soldiers upon the borders
toward Scotland, and by putting a greater Garrison into Barwicke: that the
Countess of Lennox mother to Darly, and Charles her son should be committed
unto Prison: the Earl of Lennox, and Darly his son, should be recalled out
of Scotland, upon pain to forfeit all their goods, before that any league
could be made by them with the Kings of France, or Spain: that the Scots
enemies to the marriage, should be maintained, and Catharine Gray, with the
Earl of Hertfort, should be received into some favor, of whom as of her
competitor in the succession of the Kingdom, she seemed somewhat to be
afraid. And this was all that they could devise to hinder the marriage.

Hereupon Nicholas Throgmorton is sent unto the Queen of Scotland; who should
advise her to deliberate long on that which was to be done but once, that
repentance always followed hasty marriage, and to commend instantly the
marriage with Leicester, and that the marriage with her Aunts son was contrary
unto the Canon Law: for Queen Elizabeth very much desired, that by her, some
of the English Nation might succeed in both the Realms: although some men
there were, that thought it would be the best for Religion, and both the
Realms, if she died without issue. She answered, the matter could not be
recalled, and that Queen Elizabeth had no cause to be angry, when according
to her counsel, she had chosen not a stranger but an English man, and one
borne of the royal blood of both the Kingdoms, and the noblest man of birth
of all Britain. Lidington lying in England, did often propose the marriage of
the Queen of Scotland unto Leicester colourably, and also to the D. of
Norfolk, as to one more worthy of a Princesses marriage, who at that time put
off the same with a modest refusal.

The Queen of England, to interpose some impediment unto this hastened
marriage, called back Lennox and Darly, as her subjects, according to the times
expressed in their license. The father excused himself most modestly in his
letters: the son desired that she would not be against his preferment, and
insinuated, that it may be that he may be profitable to his dear Country of
England: and openly professed himself a lover and honourer of the Queen of
Scotland above all others, who to give correspondencie to his love, first made
him Knight, and afterward Lord A^^^^och, Earl of Rosse, and Duke of Rothsay,
and the fifth month after his coming into Scotland, took him to her husband,
with the consent of the most of the Noble men, and proclaimed him King. Murrey,
who applied all his wit to his own private ambition (and under the goodly
pretense of Religion) had drawn in the Duke of Chasteauleroy, an honest minded
man, unto his side, fretting, and others raising tumults, and arguing these
questions:

Whether a Papist was to be received to be their King?

Whether the Queen of Scotland might choose her self a husband at her own
election?

Whether the Noblemen of the Land, might not by their authority appoint her a
husband?

The Queen of England, who knew the mild nature of Darly, and the plain and
honest mind of the father, taking compassion of the young man her Cousin, and
of the Queen a young woman also, who had to deal with most turbulent persons,
who being above this twenty years loosed from the government of Kings, could
not now endure any Kings, took it more quietly.

Neither had she any fear of them, when she saw the power of the Queen her
adversary not increased by that mean match, and had the mother of Darly in
her hand: and foresaw, that troubles would arise hereupon in Scotland, which
began incontinently: for many Noblemen of Scotland, as Hamilton and Murrey,
chafing and fretting at the marriage, this man for that the marriage was made
without the consent of the Queen of England, the other upon a spite or privy
malice against the family of Lennox, but both of them under the pretext of the
conservation of Religion, displaied their banners in manner of war, to
disturb the marriage, so that the Queen was of necessity enforced to levy
forces, that the mari^^^ might be celebrated with security: and then she did
so fiercely pursue the rebels, by the help of the King her husband, that she
made them fly into England, before the bands of English men, promised to them,
could come; but the Queen of England did covertly grant a lurking place unto
Murrey, who was wholly addicted unto the English, and secretly maintained him
with money by Bedford, until he returned into Scotland, which was the day
after the murder of David Rizius. The causes which Queen Elizabeth alleged,
why she admitted Murrey, and the Scottish rebels into England, were, for that
the Queen of Scotland had received Yaxley, Standen, and Welsh, English
fugitives, into Scotland, and received O-Neale, a great man of Ireland, into
her protection, had intelligence with the Pope against England, and had not
done justice on the thieves on the borders, and on Pirates.

Queen Elizabeth not forgetful of the Scottish affairs, a month or two
after the marriage, sent Tamworth, a Gentleman of her privy Chamber, unto the
Queen of Scotland, to warn her not to violate the peace, and to expostulate
with her, for her hasty marriage with the native subject of England, without
her consent, and withal, to request that Lennox and Darly might be sent back
into England, according to the league, and that Murrey might be received again
into favor. She smelling his arrand, admitted him not to her presence, but in
articles delivered in writing, promised in the word of a Prince, that neither
she nor her husband would attempt any thing to wrong the Queen of England, or
her children lawfully begotten, or the quiet of the Realm, either by receiving
fugitives, or by making league with strangers, or by any other means; yea,
most willingly that they would make such league with the Queen and Realm of
England, which might be profitable and honorable for both the Realms, neither
that they would innouate any thing in the Religion, Laws, and liberties of
England, if at any time they should possess the Kingdom of England; yet upon
this condition, that Queen Elizabeth would fully perform this thing on her
part toward her and her husband: viz. by Parliament establish the succession of
the Crown of England in her person, and her lawful issue, and if that failed,
in Margaret Countess of Lennox, her husbands mother, and her children lawfully
begotten. As for the other things, she answered: That she had acquainted the
Queen with her marriage with Darly (as soon as she was fully determined to
marie him) and had received no answer from her: That she had satisfied the
Queens demands, forasmuch as she had not married a stranger, but an English
man borne, who was the noblest in birth, and most worthiest of her in all
Britain that she knew: But it seemed strange, that she might not keep with
her Darly, whom she had married, or not keep Lennox in Scotland, who was a
native Earl of Scotland. As for Murrey, whom she had tried to be her mortal
enemy, she in fair words besought her to leave her subjects unto her own
discretion, since that she did not intermeddle in the causes of the subjects of
England. With this answer Tamworth returned not respected (as he thought)
according to his estate and place (for to say the truth, the malapert fellow
had touched the reputation and credit of the Queen of Scotland, with I know
not what slander, and had not vouchsafed to give her husband the title of King.

Anno 1566.
IN June the Queen of Scotland in a happy hour, and to the perpetual
felicity of Britain, was delivered of her son James (who is now the Monarch
of Britain) which she signified forthwith unto Queen Elizabeth by James
Meluin. Who although she was grieved at the heart, that the honor to be a
mother was borne away before her by her adversary, yet she sent Henry
Killigrew incontinently to congratulate with her for her safe deliverance, and
the birth of a son: And to will her not to favor any more Shane O-Neale,
then rebelling in Ireland, nor to entertain Christopher Rokesby fled out of
England, and to punish certain thieves upon the borders.

Shortly after the estates of the Realm in the Parliament holden at London,
moved the Queen earnestly to marry, and to set down and nominate her
successor: but she by no means could be drawn to it. Yet that it might
appear to the world, whom she thought most rightful successor, she cast
into prison Thornton the Reader ^f the Law, at Lincolnes Inn in London, at
that time, of whom the Queen of Scotland had complained, that he in his
reading had called into question, and made a doubt of the right of her
succession.

The time being come for the baptizing of the Prince of Scotland, the Queen of
England being requested to be Godmother, sent the Earl of Bedford with a Font
of massy gold for a gift, and commanded expressly, that neither he nor any
English men that accompanied him, should vouchsafe to call Darly by the name of
King.

That Ceremony being finished, the Earl of Bedford dealt with the Queen of
Scotland about other things contained in his commission: that is to wit, That
the domestical contentions between her and her husband might be compounded
(for some malicious sworn enemies to them both, had craftily broken asunder
that most pleasant society of life and love between them) and the treaty of
Edinburgh ratified. This last thing she utterly denied, alleging, that in the
treaty was much matter that might impeach and derogate from her own and her
childrens right unto the Crown of England. Yet she promised to send
Commissioners into England, who should talk about the confirmation thereof,
changing some words, namely, that she should forbear to use the title and
arms of England, whilst Queen Elizabeth lived, and her children: As though
it were meant in the treaty, that she should forbear to use them for ever.
And also should declare unto her, how injuriously she was used by their
villainous devices, that abused the simplicity and credulity of her husband,
more than was to be suffered. And now she being sickly and weak, in her
letters commended her young son unto the fidelity and protection of Queen
Elizabeth: in which letters (though she knew, I use the words of the letters,
that she is the undoubted rightful heir of England, after Queen Elizabeth;
and that many imagine and devise sundry things against that right) she
promised that she would not urge any more any declaration of her right, but
that she will help, assist, and cleave unto her always with all her power,
against all persons.

Anno 1567.
But before those Commissioners came from the Queen of Scotland, and a month
or two after the Prince was Christened; the King her husband in the one and
twentieth year of his age, in the dead time of the night, by a hateful and
abominable villainy (which all good men do detest) was strangled in his bed,
and cast into a garden, and the house blown up with Gunpowder. A rumor
forthwith was diuulged in all Britain, and the fault laid upon Mourton,
Murrey, and their confederates. And they insulting upon the weakness of her
sex, laid it from themselves upon the Queen. What George Buchanan has written
hereof, as well in his History, as in a Pamphlet called the Detection, is
known to all men by those printed books. But since he, carried away with
partial affection, and with the gifts of Murrey, wrote in that manner, those
books were condemned of falsehood, by the Estates of the Realm of Scotland,
unto whom more credit is to be given: And he himself lamented and bewailed
unto the King (whose Schoolmaster he was) reproving himself oftentimes (as I
have heard) that he had written so spightfully against the well-deseruing
Queen: And at his death, wished that he might have lived so long, until he
might wipe out with a recantation, or with his blood, the spots and stains he
had falsely laid on her. But that (as he said) would be to no purpose, since he
should seem to dote for old age. Let it be lawful for me (that the other
part may also be heard) in few words to lay open all the matter as much as I
can understand without any hate or love, as well out of the writings of other
men which were set forth at that time, but suppressed in favor of Murrey, and
upon hatred unto the Queen Captive in England, as also out of the letters of
Ambassadors, and of men of good credit.

In the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred fifty and eight, at the
marriage of Francis the Dolphin, and of MARIE Queen of Scotland, James the
Queens Bastard-brother, commonly called the Prior of Saint Andrews,
disdaining that Religious appellation, sued for a more honorable title: which
when she, by the advice of the Guises her Uncles, would not grant, he returned
into Scotland much offended, and began to make broiles under a goodly pretense
of the reformation of Religion, and assuring the liberty of Scotland; and
effected it so far, that Religion was changed in an assembly of the
Confederates, without the Queens priuitie: And the French men were removed out
of Scotland by the help of the English men they had brought in: Francis the
King of France being deceased, he poasted into France, unto his sister, and
laying from himself whatsoever had been done in Scotland against her profit
or credit, calling God to witness, solemnly promised to do all the kind
offices which a sister could expect at the hands of a brother. And conceiving
also a hope, that she being bred up from her tender years in the delights of
France, would not return into Scotland, dealt with the Guises, that some one
of the Scottish Nobility might be named Regent of Scotland, and as with his
finger, showed himself as the fittest man. But when he was sent back into
Scotland, with no other authority, but only with Letters Patents, wherein the
Queen gave authority to assemble the Nobility, and to advise and confer
about the good of the common wealth; he being dejected and ^ustrate of his
hope, returning through England, in a rage and fury put into their heads, that
if they desired or had a care of the preservation of Religion in Scotland, the
tranquillity of England, and security of Queen Elizabeth, they should hinder
the return of the Queen of Scotland into Scotland, by one means or other.
Yet she arrived safe in Scotland, passing by the English Fleet in a thick
mist, and using her brother with all courtesy, commended the government of all
the affairs into his hands.

Yet these things did not cut off the branches of his ambition, which daily
sprang out, both in words and deeds: For neither could he contain himself,
but that oftentimes amongst his friends he would lament, that the warlike
Scottish Nation, no less than that of the English men, was subjected to the
government of a woman, and out of the doctrine of Knox (whom he accounted as a
Patriarch) he would often discourse that Kingdoms were due unto virtue, not
unto kindred: That women were to be excluded from the succession of Kingdoms;
and that their rule was monstrous. He dealt also with the Queen by his
friends, that she would substitute some out of the family of the Stewarts, who
if she died without issue, should succeed one after another in the Kingdom;
and not to have any regard whether they were legitimate or illegitimate, hoping
that he should be one of them, being a Kings son, although illegitimate. But
the Queen, when she out of her wisdom weighed, that such a substitution was a
thing contrary to the Laws of the Land, and would be a wrong unto the right
heirs, a most pernicious example, and perilous also for the substitutes
themselves, yea and a bar unto her to keep her from marriage again. She
answered mildly, that she would take deliberation in the matter, and consult
with the Estates of the Realm about it. And to show herself courteous and
bountiful to her brother, she created him Earl of Mar, and afterward Earl
of Murrey (because Mar was in controversy) and advanced him to an honorable
marriage: All this she did, being all this while ignorant that he affected the
Kingdom, (bragging that he was the lawful son of James the fifth.) And to
make the way thereunto, he through the fauourwherein he stood with the Queen,
oppressed the most noble family of the Gordons, who had very many vassals,
tenants and retainers, whom he feared much, both in respect of himself, and
of their religion: And banished from the Court the Duke of Chasteauleroy (who
was accounted the next heir to the Crown) imprisoned the Earl of Arran his
son, banished Bothwell into England, and put all them that he thought might
cross him, out of office: And he as a Guardian kept the Queen as his Ward,
and at his command, being most careful and diligent to keep her from marriage.

And as soon as he understood, that on the one side the Emperor sued to her
for his brother, and the King of Spain for his son; he dissuaded her utterly
from them both: because (forsooth) the liberty of Scotland would not, nor
could not endure a foreign Prince. And whenever that government descended
unto women, that they married no other husbands, but of the Scottish Nation: But
afterward, when all the Scots generally wished to see her married, and he
found out that the Countess of Lennox had so prouidently wrought, that she
inclined to marry Darly; he also commended him as a good husband for her,
hoping the young man, being of a soft nature, would be ruled by him in all
things. Yet when he saw the Queen to love Darly exceedingly, and he himself
to grow out of her favor, he repented him of his counsel he had given, and
willed Queen Elizabeth to hinder her marriage by one means or other.

The marriage being made up, and Darly proclaimed King, when the Queen revoked
the donations made to him and others, against the Laws in her minority; he
with other, put himself in arms against the King; alleging, that the new
King was an enemy unto the Religion of the Protestants; and that he was married
without the consent of the Queen of England. But he fled into England (as I
have already said) never aduenturing to fight: And being frustrate of all hope
of help from thence, he dealt by letters with Mourton, a profound subtle
man, who was as his other self, that since the marriage could not be
dissolved, yet that the love between the parties might be broken by some
secret devices: and a fit occasion offered it self; for she upon the arising
of some private discontent, to keep under the swelling mind of the young man,
and to conserve her royal authority whole to her self, had begun to set
her husbands name last in the Proclamations and Records, and to omit it utterly
in the coin.

Mourton being a cunning man to breed discontents, with his flattering words
crept into the Kings good liking and opinion, and then persuaded him to take
upon him the Crown of the Realm, yea, in despite of the Queen, and to make
himself free from the government of women; for that it is the condition of
women, said he, to obey, and of men to rule. By this counsel, if it were
taken, he hoped not only to draw away the love of the Queen, but of all the
Nobility and commons also from the King, to estrange the Queen, and with
diverse slanders first heartened the King to murder David Rizius a
Piedmountoys, lest that politic fellow should prevent their purposes (this man
was a Musician by profession, and came the last year with Moret the Ambassador
of Sauoy; and by the Queen for his wit and dexterity received into her
household and favor, and preferred to write her French letters, and unto her
privy Council in the absence of the Secretary.) Then to estrange her love
the more, he persuaded the King to be present at the murder, with Ruthen and
the rest, who rushing together with him in to the Queens dining Parlour, at
supper time (she sitting at the table with the Countess of Argile) assaulted
the fellow with their naked swords, as he tasted meat taken from the Queens
table, at the Cupbord (as the servants of the privy Chamber use to do) before
her face, being great with child, trembling with fear, setting a Pistol at
her breast; so that she was in danger of abortion, and dragged him into the
utter Chamber, where they most cruelly killed him, and shut up the Queen into
a Parlour: Mourton all this while guarding all the passages.

This murder was committed the evening before the day appointed unto Murrey to
appear for his trial in the assembly of the Estates for his rebellion, who
came in on the next day, when no body expected him, and no man appeared against
him in that troublesome time: So that it may seem that the murder of David was
hastened of set purpose to procure the security and safety of Murrey. Yet the
Queen at the earnest suit of the King, received him courteously, and continued
in brotherly love toward him. But the King when he considered the enormitie of
the offense (and seeing now the Queen to be very angry) repented his
rashness, and in humble manner submitted himself unto her clemency, weeping
and lamenting, and asking pardon, did ingenuously confess, that he committed
that heinous offense by the instigation of Murrey and Mourton: and from
thenceforth did so hate Murrey, (for Mourton, Ruthen, and others, were fled
into England upon the murder, with the commendatorie letters of Murrey unto
Bedford) that he devised to kill him. But when out of wrath and rashness, he
could not conceal his purpose, nor (such was his respect unto the Queen his
wife) durst execute it; he told her how profitable it would be for the
commonwealth, and also for the security of the royal family, if Murrey were
rid out of the way. She detesting the thing, terrified him even with threats,
from such enterprises, putting him in hope of reconciliation. Yet he when he
saw, to his hearts grief, the Bastard to be of such power with the Queen, out
of his impatience he plotted the same matter with others; which when it came
to the ears of Murrey, to prevent him, under color of duty, he lays
closer snares for the young man, using Mourton (though absent) for his
counselor.

They thought it requisite above all things, utterly to auert the Queens mind
from the King; and by flattery to induce Bothwell, lately reconciled unto
Murrey, and in great favor with the Queen, into their society, showing him a
hope to be divorced from his wife, and to marry with the Queen, as soon as
she was widow. And for the performance of these things, and also to defend him
against all persons, they bound themselves under their hands and seals, being
persuaded, if the matter hit right, that they might by one labor kill the
King, utterly discredit the Queen amongst the Nobility and Commons, undo
Bothwell utterly, and bring the government of all the affairs unto their hands.

Bothwell being a lewd minded man, blinded with ambition, and therefore
venturous to attempt, quickly laid hold on the hope offered unto him, and
villanously committed the murder. But Murrey had secretly gone home a pretty
way off, fifteen hours before, that he might no way be suspected; and that
he might from thence give aid unto the Conspirators, when any need was, and
all the suspicion might light upon the Queen. As soon as he returned unto
the Court, both he and the Conspirators commended unto her Bothwell, as most
worthy of her love, for the Nobility of his family, his valor showed against
the English, and his approved fidelity. They put in her head, that she being
alone and solitary, was not able to repress the tumults that were raised,
prevent secret plots, and uphold the burden and heavy weight of the Kingdom.
Therefore she might do well to take as a Companion of her bed, counsel, and
danger, the man that could, would, and durst oppose himself against all
trouble. And they drove and enforced her so far, that the fearful woman,
daunted with two tragical murders, and remembering the fidelity and
constancy of Bothwell toward her and her mother, and having no other friend
unto whom to resort, but unto her brothers fidelity, gave her consent: Yet
upon these conditions, that above all this, provision might be made for the
safety of her little son; and then, that Bothwell as well might be cleared
from the murder of the King, as also from the bond of his former marriage.

What George Earl of Huntley, and the Earl of Argile, men of great Nobility
in Scotland, did forthwith protest of this matter, I think good to set down
in this place, out of the original, with their own hands, sent unto Queen
Elizabeth, which I have seen. Forasmuch as Murrey and others, to cloak their
rebellion against the Queen (whose authority they usurp) do slander her
openly, as privy and consenting unto her husbands death: We do publicly
protest and swear these things. In the Month of December, in the year of our
Lord God one thousand five hundred fifty and six, when the Queen lay at
Cragmyller, Murrey and Lidington did acknowledge before us, That Mourton,
Lyndsey, and Ruthen killed David Rizio, for no other end, but to procure the
safety of Murrey, who was to be attainted at the same time. Therefore lest
they should be unthankful, they wished that Mourton and the rest, banished
for the death of David, might be brought home again: And this they insinuated
could not be done, except the Queen were separated by a divorce from the King,
which they promised to effect, if we would grant our consents. And afterward
Murrey promised unto me George Earl of Huntley, the restitution of my ancient
Patrimony, and perpetual favor of the banished men, if I would favor the
divorce. Then they went unto Bothwell, that he should consent thereunto.
Lastly, we came unto the Queen, and Lidington in all our names besought her
exceedingly to remit the sentence of exile against Mourton, Lyndsey and Ruthen:
He exaggerated the faults and crimes of the King with bitter words; and showed,
that it was much for the good and benefit of the Queen and the Commonwealth,
that a divorce were speedily sued out: forasmuch as the King and she could not
live together with security in Scotland. She answered, she had rather depart
into France, and live privately for a time, until her husband acknowledged his
faults: for she would have nothing to be done that should be wrong to her
son, or dishonor unto her self. Hereunto Lidington replied, saying: We
that are of your Council will provide for that. But I command you (said she)
not to do any thing which may be a blemish to my honor, or a stain to my
conscience. Let things be as they be, until God above do remedy it: That
which you think may be good for me, may prove evil. Unto whom Lidington
said, Commit the matter unto us, and you shall see nothing done but that which
is good, and that which shall be allowed in the Parliament. Hereupon, since
that within a few days after, the King was most shamefully murdered; We out
of the inward testimony of our conscience, are most assured, that Murrey and
Lidington were the authors and perswaders of this murder of the King, whosoever
were the actors of the same. Thus much Huntley and Argile.

Now the Conspirators applied all their skill that Bothwell might be cleared of
killing the King: Therefore without delay, the Parliament is summoned for no
other cause, and Proclamations are set out to apprehend the persons suspected
for murdering the King. And when Lennox, father to the murdered King, accused
and charged Bothwell as the Regicide, and was very importunate that Bothwell
might be brought to trial before the Parliament began: This also was granted;
and Lennox commanded to come in with his accusation within twenty days. On
which day, when he heard nothing from the Queen of England, and could not be
present in the City full of his enemies, without danger of his life; Bothwell
was brought to the Bar, and arraigned, and acquitted by the sentence of the
Judges; Mourton also upholding and maintaining his cause, and openly taking his
part.

This business being finished, the Conspirators wrought so, that the most of
the Nobility gave their consent unto the marriage, under their hands and
seals, lest he (frustrated of the promised marriage) should appeach them as
contriuers of the murder. But of this marriage of the Queen with Bothwell (who
was created Duke of the Orkeneis) the suspicion increased with all men, that
the Queen was consenting to the Kings death: which the Conspirators increased
by letters sent into all places, and in their secret meetings at Dunkelden they
conspired forthwith to kill Bothwell, and deprive the Queen: Yet Murrey, that
he might be thought clear of this conspiracy, obtained leave of the Queen
(but hardly) to travel into France. And that he might put all diffidence out
of her head, he commended all his affairs and estate in Scotland, unto the
fidelity of the Queen and Bothwell. He was scarce gone out of England, but
behold the same men which had cleared and acquitted Bothwell from the murder,
and consented unto the marriage under their hands and seals, took up arms
against Bothwell, as meaning to apprehend him: And indeed they secretly willed
him to save himself by flight, for no other intent, but that he should not be
taken, and discover all their plot, and withal, that they might lay hold of.
his flight, as an argument or reason to accuse the Queen of killing the King.
But she being taken, they used her most contumeliously, and in most unseemly
fashion, and putting on her an old cloak, thrust her into prison at Lochleuyn,
under the custody of the mother of Murrey, who had been the Concubine of
James the fifth, who most malapertly insulted over the calamity of the
imprisoned Queen, boasting that she her self was the lawful wife of James
the fifth, and that her son Murrey was his lawful issue.

As soon as Queen Elizabeth understood these things, in her mind detesting
this barbarous insolency of Subjects (whom she called oftentimes Traitors,
Rebels, unthankful and cruel fellows) against a Princess, her sister, and
neighbor; She sent Nicholas Throgmorton into Scotland, to expostulate with the
conspirators for this insolency used against their Queen, and to take some
course how to restore her into her former liberty, and for the severe
punishment of the murderers of the King; and that the young King might be sent
into England, that order might be taken for his security, and not sent into
France. And what I shall hereafter declare (during his abode in Scotland) take
ye upon the credit of his letters, which is approved.

He found the most part in Scotland incensed against the Queen, who in plain
terms denied access unto her, both to him, and also to Villeroy and Crocus
the French Ambassadors. Yet could not the Conspirators agree among themselves
what to do with her: Lidington and a few others would have her to be restored
upon these conditions: That the murderers of the King should be punished
according to Law; The Princes safety provided for; Bothwell divorced, and
Religion established. Others would have her to be banished for ever into
France, or into England: So as the King of France or Queen of England, did
give their words, that she should resign the Kingdom, and transfer all her
authority unto her son and certain Noble men. Others were of opinion, that
she should be arraigned publicly, and condemned unto perpetual prison, and
her son crowned King: Lastly, others would have her deprived both of her life
and Kingdom, by a public execution. And this Knox and some Ministers of the
Word, thundered out of their Pulpits.

On the other side, Throgmorton out of the holy Scriptures brought many places
to prove, that obedience was to be yielded unto the higher powers, that carry
the sword: And wittily argued, that the Queen was not subject to the judgment
of any, but only of the celestial Judge: That she could not be arraigned or
brought to trial before any Judge on the earth: And that there is no
Magistrate had any authority in Scotland, which is not derived from the
authority of the Queen, and reuocable at her pleasure. They opposed the
peculiar Law of the Kingdom, among (...) both the parties, before the
Commissioners at York.

On the fifth day after the resignation, James the Queens young son was
anointed and crowned King, John Knox making the Sermon: The Hamiltons putting
in a protestation, that it should be no prejudice unto the Duke of
Chasteauleroy in the right of succession against the family of Lennox. But
Queen ELIZABETH forbade Throgmorton to be present thereat, that she might not
be thought to allow the unjust abdica^ion of the Queen, by the presence of
her Ambassador.

On the twentieth day after the resignation, Murrey himself returned out of
France; and the third day after, he with many of the Conspirators came unto the
Queen, against whom he laid many heinous crimes, and persuaded her to turn
unto God by true repentance, and to ask mercy of him. She showed her self
sorrowful for the sins of her former life, she confessed some things he
objected, others she extenuated, others she excused by humane frailty, and
the most matters she utterly denied. She required him to take upon him the
government of the affairs for her son, and required him earnestly to spare
her life, and her reputation. He said, it lay not in his power, but it was to
be sought for of the States of the Realm; yet if she desired to have her
life and honor saved, he prescribed these things for her to keep: That she
should not trouble nor disturb the tranquillity of the Realm; That she
should not steal out of prison, nor move the Queen of England, or the King of
France, to vex Scotland with foreign or civil war; That she should not
love Bothwell any more, or devise to take revenge on the enemies of Bothwell.

The Regent being proclaimed, bound himself by his hand and seal, to do
nothing concerning peace or war, the person of the King or his marriage, or
the liberty of the Queen, without the consent of the Conspirators. He willed
Throgmorton by Lidington, not to entreat any more for the Queen; for that he
and the rest had rather endure all things, than that she being freed, should
keep Bothwell company, bring her son into danger, her Country into
trouble, and also proscribe them. We know (said he) what you English men can
do by war: You may waste our borders, and we may yours; and we know
assuredly, that the French men in regard of our ancient league, will not
abandon and forsake us. He denied also Ligneroll the French Ambassador, to have
access unto the Queen, until Bothwell was taken; and every day he used the
distressed Queen worse and worse, whereas she had deserved well at his hands,
and contrary to his promise he had made unto the King of France. Thus much out
of the Letters of Throgmorton.

Shortly after, Murrey put to death John Hepborne, Paris a French man, Daglish,
and the other servants of Bothwell, who had been present at the Kings death:
But they (which Murrey little expected) at the Gallows protested before God
and the Angels, that they understood by Bothwell, that Murrey and Mourton were
the authors of killing the King, and cleared the Queen from all suspicion; as
Bothwell himself prisoner in Denmark all his life time, and at his death, did
with many solemn oaths and religious protestations, affirm, that the Queen
was not privy nor consenting to it. And fourteen years after, when Mourton
was to suffer death, he confessed, that Bothwell dealt with him to consent
unto the murder of the King, which when he utterly denied, except the Queen
did command it under her hand; To that Bothwell did answer, that could not be
done, but that the deed must be done without her knowledge.

This rash, precipitate and ouer-hastie abdication or deprivation of the
Queen, and the overthwart stubbornness of the Conspirators toward the
Ambassadors, both Queen ELIZABETH and the French King took very hainously, as
a thing tending to the reproach of royal Majesty, and began to favor the
Hamiltons, who stood for the Queen. Pasquier also Ambassador from the French
King, dealt with the Queen of England, that she might be restored by force of
arms; but she thought it the better way to forbid the Scots all traffic in
France and England, until she was delivered; and so by that means the common
people might be disioned from the Noblemen, who (as it seemed) were united in
the conspiracy against the Queen.

Anno 1568.
IN Scotland the captive Queen upon the second day of May, escaped out of
prison in Lochleuin, by the means of George Douglas, whose brother had the
custody of her, unto the Castle of Hamilton; where, hearing the testimony of
Robert Meluin and others, a sentence Declaratorie was made by the whole consent
of all the Noblemen which were there met, being very many: That the Resignation
extorted by fear from the Queen, was void from the beginning; and that the
same was extorted, is confirmed by the oath of the Queen there present.
Hereupon such a multitude came unto her from all places in a day or two, as
she had an army of six thousand valiant men, which yet Murrey easily put to
flight, because they were so fierce, and would not be ordered in the fight.
The fearful Queen, terrified with this unfortunate success, betook
herself unto flight, riding that day threescore miles, and afterward, by
iournies in the night, came unto the house of Maxwell, Lord Herris; and was
more willing to commit her self unto the protection of Queen ELIZABETH, than
to trust her own Subjects. Yet she sent before one John Beton, unto her (with
a Diamond, which she had before received of her, as a token between them of
benevolence) who should signify unto her, that she would come into England,
and ask aid of her, if her Subjects pursued her any farther by war: unto
whom Queen ELIZABETH promised very largely all love and sisterly kindness.
But before the messenger returned, she went into a little Bark (her friends
much dissuading her) with the Lords, Herris and Fleming, and few others, and
landed the seventeenth day of May at Worlington in Cumberland, near unto the
mouth of the River Derwent; and the same day wrote Letters in the French
tongue, with her own hand, unto Queen ELIZABETH: Of the which the chief
heads (since they do comprize a longer Historical narration of the things
done against her in Scotland, than I have declared) I think good to set down
out of the original, which is in this manner.

You are not ignorant (my best sister) how many of my Subjects, whom I have
advanced unto great honor, have conspired to oppress and imprison me, and my
husband; and how at your intercession I received the same men into favor, whom
I had expelled out of my Kingdom by force of arms. But yet these men brake
into my Chamber, and cruelly killed my servant, I being great with child,
beholding it, and shut me up in prison. When I had again forgiven them,
behold, they laid upon me a new crime, which themselves had wrought, and signed
with their own hands; and shortly after were enranked in battle against me in
the field: but I trusting in mine innocence, to avoid the shedding of blood,
put my self into their hands; forthwith they thrust me into prison, sent away
all my servants, but one or two maids, a Cook, and a Physician, enforced me by
threats and fear of death, to resign my Kingdom, and in the assembly of the
Estates called by their own authority, denied to hear me and my Agents,
spoiled me of all my goods, and kept me from the speech of all men. Afterward,
by Gods help, I escaped out of prison, and accompanied with the flower of the
Nobles, who came ioifully unto me, from all parts, I admonished mine enemies
of their duty and allegiance; I offered them pardon, and proposed that both
parts might be heard in the assembly of the Estates, that the Commonwealth
might not any longer be torn in sunder by these intestine mischiefs. I sent
two messengers about this matter, they cast them both into prison; they
proclaimed them that assisted me Traitors, and commanded them forthwith to
leave me. I requested that the Lord Boyd might talk with them under a safe
conduct, about a composition; but they also denied the same utterly. Yet I
hoped they might have been recalled to acknowledge their duty by your
intercession. But when I saw I was to undergo either death or imprisonment, I
intended to have gone unto Dunbritton; but they met me in arms upon the way,
and put my friends unto flight. I gat me unto the Lord Herris, with whom I am
come into your Kingdom, upon a certain hope of your approved benevolence,
that you will help me friendly, and by your example excite others to do the
same. Therefore I earnestly request you, that I may be brought unto you
speedily, for I am now in great distress, which I will tell you more at large,
when it shall please you to have compassion on me. God grant you long and
happy life, unto me patience and comfort, which I hope and pray I may obtain
of him by your means.

Queen ELIZABETH in her Letters by Francis Knowles, and others, comforted her,
and promised to protect her according to the equity of her cause, but denied
her to come to her presence, for that by report she was charged with many
crimes, and commanded that she should be conveyed unto Carlisle, as unto a safer
place (if her enemies attempted any thing against her) by Louder Lieutenant of
the place, and the power of the Gentlemen of the Country. She having received
this answer, and the access denied, both by her Letters, and also by Maxwell
Lord Herris, she earnestly besought her, That she might as well show the
injuries received by her, as also clear her self of the crimes objected
against her in her presence: That it was most just that Queen ELIZABETH her
nearest kinswoman of blood should hear her in her presence, being banished;
and also restore her unto her Kingdom, against those whom being banished for
their villainies committed, she had restored unto their estates, at the
intercession of Queen ELIZABETH, and that to her own destruction, except it
were speedily auerted. Therefore she humbly requested, that either she might
be admitted to her speech, and helped, or that she might speedily be
permitted with her leave and favor to depart out of England, to crave help
from some other place, and not to be detained any longer like a prisoner in the
Castle of Carlisle; forasmuch as she came voluntarily into England, trusting on
her love, oftentimes promised by Letters, Messengers, and tokens.

Through these letters, and the words of Herris, Queen ELIZABETH seemed (for
who can reach into the secret cogitations of Princes? and wise people conceal
to themselves their own purposes) from her heart to have compassion of this
Princess her kinswoman, being in very great distress; who was taken by her
Subjects by force, thrust into prison, brought into danger of her life,
condemned, and yet never heard speak in her own defense (which is never
denied to a private man) and had fled into England unto her upon an assured
hope of help and relief. Moreover, she was much moved, that the distressed
Queen had voluntarily offered, to have her cause argued and disputed of before
her, and had taken upon her to prove her adversaries guilty of all the crimes
whereof they had accused her, who was innocent.

Whether the pity of Queen ELIZABETH was unfeigned or not, is not known: But
certain it is, the Counselors of England did enter into a mature
deliberation, what should be done with her: If she should be kept still in
England, they feared, that she which had an alluring eloquence, would daily
draw to her part many more to favor the right she pretended unto the Crown
of England, who would kindle her ambition, and leave nothing unattempted to
purchase the Kingdom for her. That foreign Ambassadors would help and
assist her purposes; and that then the Scots would not fail her, when they saw
such a fair prey. Moreover, the fidelity of keepers was uncertain, and if
she should die in England by sickness, it would give occasion of slander, and
the Queen should be vexed and turmoiled every day with new molestations. If
she should be sent into France, they feared, lest her Cosens the Guises would
again pursue the right and claim she made unto England, upon a conceit and
opinion that she could do much in England with some for Religions sake, with
others by the probability of the right, whereof I speak; and with many upon a
mad desire of innovation. Besides that, the friendship between Scotland and
England, which is very profitable, might be broken, and the ancient league
between France and Scotland renewed; which might be more dangerous than in
former times, when Burgundy was tied unto England in a stricter league than at
this present; England having now no assured friends but the Scots. If she
should be sent back into Scotland, they feared lest the English faction should
be put out of authority, the French faction raised to the government of
affairs, the young Prince expoled unto danger, the Religion in Scotland
changed, the French and other forrainers brought in, Ireland more vexed and
annoied by the Irish Scots, and she her self brought into danger of her life
by her adversaries at home. Hereupon most of them thought best to detain her
as a lawful prize, and not to be let go, until she had satisfied for the
challenging the title of England, and answered for the death of DARLY her
husband, who was a native Subject of England; for the mother of DARLY the
Countess of Lennox, long since, blubbered with tears, in her own name, and
her husbands also, had made a grievous complaint against her, and had besought
Queen ELIZABETH that she might be arraigned for the death of her sonne^^:
but she comforting her with courteous words, willed her not to lay such a
crime upon so great a Princess her nearest Cousin, which could not be proved by
any certain evidence: That the times were malicious, and unjust spite blind,
which does lay crimes upon innocent persons, but that Justice which is the
punisher of offenders was open eied, and sits by God.

On the other side, the Lord Herris humbly besought the Queen, not to believe
rashly any thing against the truth, against the Queen unheard, and that in
Scotland Murrey should not precipitate the Parliament, to the prejudice of the
expulsed Queen, and to the destruction of good Subjects. Which though she
urged exceedingly, yet Murrey in the Kings name, held the Parliament, attainted
many that stood for the Queen, spoiled and destroyed their houses and
possessions. Hereupon the Queen of England being moved with indignation,
signified by Midlemore unto the Regent in bitter words; That she could not
endure, that by a most pernicious example unto Kings, the sacred authority of
royal Majesty should be contemned by Subjects, and trodden under foot at the
pleasure of factious people. And howsoever they had forgotten the duty and
allegiance of Subjects toward their Princess, yet she could not forget any
duty or office of good will and piety toward her sister and neighbor Queen.
Therefore it was best for him then to come himself, or else to give commission
unto fit and apt men for this business, who should make answer unto the
complaints of the Queen of Scotland, against him and his accomplices; and also
yield just reasons for their deprivation of her; if he did not, that she
would set her at liberty forthwith, and restore her to her Kingdom, with all
the power she could make. And withal, willed him not to sell away the Queens
apparel and precious ornaments, though the Estates had permitted the same.

Murrey did as she willed him, since he had depended upon no other place, but
only upon England, for this course of his fickle government, and the Noblemen
of the Realm refused to be sent on that message. To York therefore (the
place appointed for the meeting) came he himself and seven of his dearest and
most familiar friends, as Commissioners for the King infant, namely, James
Earl of Mourton, Adam Bishop of Orkeney, Robert Commendator of Dunfermellin,
Patricke Lord Lindsey, James Mangill, Henry Balnaw: and Lidington (whom Murrey
with fair promises enticed to come with him, fearing to leave him at home) and
George Buchanan, one that would swear it if Murrey spoke it, accompanied them.
The same very day came thither Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Ratcliff,
Earl of Sussex, a little before made President of the North, and Sir Ralph
Sadleir Knight, one of the privy Council, appointed Commissioners, to hear
the cause of the deprivation, for the Queen of Scotland, (who took it most
unkindly that Queen ELIZABETH would not hear her to speak, and yet commanded
her Subjects to be heard against her, before Commissioners; forasmuch as she
being an absolute Prince, could not be bound to answer but at pleasure, unto
her Subjects accusing her.) There appeared John Leslie Bishop of Rosse, William
Lord Leuingston, Robert Lord Boyde, Gawen Commendator of Kilwiming, John
Gordon, and James Cocburne, for her.

When they were met on the seventh day of October, and showed each one to the
other their Letters Patents of their Commission; Lidington standing up, and
turning to the Scots, with a wonderful bold speech admonished them: Forasmuch
as it should seem by the Commission granted to the English men, that the
Queen of England had no other purpose, but that they should defame, disgrace
and discredit the reputation and good name of their Queen mother to their
King; and that she as an vmpire and Judge should give sentence; that they
should consider with themselves discreetly, what hate and danger they might
draw upon themselves by accusing her of crimes, and bringing her in danger and
loss of reputation in this iuridicall and public form, before English men,
the professed enemies of the Scottish Nation, not only with the Scots that
loved the Queen, bu^ also with other Christian Princes, and her Cousins in
France: and what reason they could yield for this insolent accusation (not
without the wrong of the Scottish Kingdom) unto the King, when he being riper
in years, shall think this action a reproach and dishonor to himself, his
mother, and his Country also. Therefore he thought it most fit to leave off
the odicus accusation of so great a Princess, except the Queen of England
shall make a mutual league offensive and defensive against all persons that
shall trouble them for this matter. And thus the Secretary of Scotland advised
them in the way of friendship. They looking one on another, said not one word.

The Commissioners of the Queen of Scotland (for the first place of honor was
given unto them) before they took the oath, protested although the Queen of
Scotland was content that the causes between her and her rebellious Subjects
should be argued in the presence of the English men, yet that she did not
therefore acknowledge her self to be subject to any, or under the rule of
any, being as she is, a free Prince, and vassal and holding of none. The
English men protested likewise, that they by no means admitted that
protestation, to the wrong of that right which the Kings of England of long
time have challenged and claimed as the superior Lords of the Kingdom of
Scotland.

On the next day, the Commissioners of the Queen of Scotland by writing
declare, How James Earl of Mourton, John Earl of Mar, Alexander Earl of
Glencarne, Hume, Lindsey, Ruthen, Sempill, etc. had levied an army, in the
Queens name, against the Queen, taken her, used her vilely, and thrust her
into prison in Lochleuin, had forcibly broken into her minting house, taken
away the minting irons, and prints, all the gold and filuer coined and
vncoined, and had crowned her son (being an infant) King; whose authority
James Earl of Murrey, under the name of Regent, had usurped, and had taken
into his hands all the muniments, riches and revenues of the Kingdom. And then
they show, how she as soon as she was escaped out of prison, after eleven
months, bad publicly declared, and taken her oath, that whatsoever she had
done in prison, had been extorted from her (unwilling thereto) by force,
threats, and fear of death; but yet for the conservation of the public
tranquillity, that she gave authority to the Earls of Argile, Eglenton,
Cassile and Rothsay, to make a composition with her adversaries, who yet set
upon her with their men of war, as she intended to travel to Dunbritton by
unknown ways, killed very many of her faithful subjects, lead others away
prisoners, and banished others for no other cause, but for that they had done
faithful service unto their lawful Princess. That she enforced by these
their vile and lewd injuries, retired and withdrew her self into England, to
require help, which Queen ELIZABETH had oftentimes promised her, that she
might be restored into her Country and former estate.

After a few days, Murrey the Regent and the Commissioners for the King Infant
(so they called themselves) make answer: That HENRY DARLY the Kings father,
being murdered) James Hepborne, Earl of Bothwell (Who was accounted to be the
murderer) obtained such favor of the Queen, that he took her being not
unwilling, in the show of violence, and carried her to Dunbar, and took her to
his wife (having put away his former wife:) That the Noblemen moved thereat,
thought it their duty to punish Bothwell the contriuer of the murder
(forasmuch as that murder was in every place laid upon many Noblemen
Conspirators) to restore the Queen unto her liberty, to ^nloose her from her
unlawful marriage, and to make provision for the young Kings safety, and the
tranquillity of the Realm. And when the matter was now ready almost to come
unto a bloody fight; That the Queen sent Bothwell away, thundered out threats
against the Noblemen, breathed revenge. So that it was of necessity to keep
her in their custody, until punishment might be taken of Bothwell, if he
could be found. And that she, wearied with the trouble of government,
voluntarily resigned her Kingdom, and transferred the same unto her son,
appointing Murrey to be Regent. Upon this her son was with the due rites
anointed and crowned King; and that all these things were approved and
confirmed by the Estates in the Parliament. And that the Scottish Commonwealth
by the just administration of justice reflourished, until certain persons
envying the public quietness, subtly gat the Queen out of prison, and
violating their fidelity toward the King, took arms, of whom, though the
King (by the favor of God) gat the victory, yet they bear still the mind to
work and threaten all the hostility they may. And therefore it is very
necessary that the Kings authority may be conserved and established against
such turbulent subjects.

To these things the Commissioners of the Queen answer in their Replication
(having first repeated their former protestation,) and say; Whereas Murrey and
the Conspirators do say, that they took arms against the Queen, because
Bothwell, whom they charge with killing the King, was in great favor with the
Queen, they cannot with that gloss clear themselves from the mark of
traitorous subjects; since it was not certain to the Queen, that he killed
the King. Yea contrariwise, that he was acquitted, by the judgment of his
Peers, of the murder; and that verdict was confirm^d by the authority of
Parliament, with the consent also of them who now accuse him; and at that time
persuaded the Queen to marry him, as a man more worthy to bear rule, than
any other; and gave unto him their word under their hands. Neither did they
disapproue the marriage, so much as in word, until they had by fair words
enticed the Captain of the Castle of Edinburgh, and the Provost of the Town
unto their side: For then late in the night, assaulted they the Castle of
Borthwicke (where the Queen lay) and when she, by the darkness of the night,
escaped, forthwith they levied an army under the pretense to defend the
Queen, and met her going toward Edinburgh, with Banners displaied, ready to
fight; and by Grange, whom they sent before, they willed her to send away
Bothwell from her company, until he should be brought to trial: which she
to avoid the effusion of blood, willingly did. But Grange secretly willed
Bothwell to depart away, and gave his word that none should pursue him; so that
he whom they might easily have taken then, departed with their good leave. But
now having taken the Queen, they passed not upon him, that they might advance
their ambitious purposes and designs. And whereas they charge her to have used
them with rough and rigorous words; it is no wonder, since they being her
subjects, having sworn their allegiance unto her, had used her more rudely and
vilely than becomes any to use the Majesty of a Prince. And when she most
willingly referred the cause unto all the Estates of the Realm, and signified
so much by Lidington the Secretary, they would not so much as hear the
motion, but by night conveyed her secretly unto Lochleuyn, and put her in
prison. In that they say she voluntarily made a resignation of the Kingdom,
for that she was wearied with molestations in the government, is altogether
untrue; forasmuch as she was not outworne or decayed by age, nor weak by
sickness, hut both in mind and body able to discharge the most weighty
matters of Estate. But this is most certain, that the Earl of Athold,
Tullibardin and Lidington (who were also of their counsel) did will her to
subscribe unto the Letters Patents of the resignation, that she might avoid
death, assuredly intended, and that this would be no wrong nor bar to the
prisoner, or her heirs; forasmuch as prison is a just fear, and a promise
made by a prisoner (by the opinion of the Lawyers) is of no force, and utterly
void. And that Nicholas Throgmorton did persuade her to the same, by a schedule
written with his own hand, whom she also requested to signify unto the Queen
of England, that she had subscribed by coaction, and against her will.
Moreover, that Lindsey when he brought the Letters Patents of the Cession to
be subscribed, threatened her with death, and drove her by force to subscribe
unto it, which she never read, the tears running down from her eyes. And
that the Lord of the Castle of Lochleuyn refused to subsigne it as a witness,
because he saw and knew for certain, that she subscribed against her will.
Also that resignation and renunciation is most unjust, in which nothing is
assigned unto her, whereon she may live, nor liberty granted, nor security
of life promised. So that to men of indifferency such like unjust resignation
cannot seem to prejudice her royal Majesty; which as soon as she was free
at liberty, openly declared, she did it by compulsion, making a Declaratorie
thereof before many Noblemen of the Realm. Neither ought those things which
they brag they did by the authority of Parliament, be any prejudice unto the
Queen; for where in the Parlaments of Scotland about an hundred Earls,
Bishops, and Barons have their voices, in this tumultuarie Parliament, there
were present no more but four Earls, one Bishop only, one or two Abbots, and
six Barons; and of that small number, some did put in a protestation, that
nothing should be done to the wrong of the Queen, or her successors, because
she was a captive. Neither were the Ambassadors of England nor France admitted
to know of her, whether she resigned her Kingdom voluntarily, although they
made earnest suit sundry times. And that it is so untrue, that the usurping
Regent has justly administered the Commonwealth, it is most apparent, that
impiety did never reign more, and with less controlment, in throwing down
Churches, ruinating worshipful families, and afflicting the miserable
commonaltie. Therefore they request earnestly, that the Queen of England would
speedily help the Queen her Cousin, most unjustly and vilely oppressed, with
her favor, advice, help and assistance. Thus much out of the original copies
of the Commissioners, written with their own hands, which I have seen.

When the English Commissioners had heard these things, they required that
Murrey should produce and prove more sound causes of this great severity used
against an absolute Queen: Forasmuch as whatsoever had been hitherto showed,
was not strengthened with witness, but with letters of small credit, and
Lidington had insinuated that he had oftentimes counterfeited the Queens
hand. He refused to accuse his sister any further before strangers, except the
Queen of England did repromise to undertake the protection of the Infant King,
and utterly to relinquish the Queen of Scotland. When they by the authority
of their Commission could not promise it, one or two of either part are sent
for unto London; unto whom Queen ELIZABETH declared: That she could not yet
clear the subjects from fault against their Princess; yet that she would
entreat her for them, and hear if they had any thing else to say for their
excuse. Murrey who followed them, in plain terms refused to accuse his
sister, but upon the condition he had spoken of at York. Then were the
Commissioners called back, and put out of Commission, the Duke being glad at
his heart, who had always favored the Queen of Scotlands right in the matter
of succession, and thought that all this doing was nothing, but to brand her
with the mark of eternal infamy, and thereupon to exclude her as an unworthy
person with her little son, of all her right of succession in England. And
he thought he had thereby escaped two perils; for he feared, if he had
pronounced against her, he should do against his conscience, and undo her
for ever; and if he spoke for her, lest he should incur the implacable
indignation of the Queen, and the hate of all them that loved her not for
Religions sake.

But whereas at that time the affairs of Scotland were much troubled by the
friends of the expulsed Queen, and the presence of Murrey was needful there;
he began his accusation before the Queen, Bacon Keeper of the great Seal, the
Duke of Norfolk, the Earls of Arundell, Sussex and Leicester, Clinton, Lord
Admiral, William Cecill, and Ralph Sadleir Commissioners appointed by new
Letters Patents; and produced Articles standing upon conjectures, the
testimonies of some men, and the decrees made in the Parliament, but especially
certain amatorie Epistles and Verses written (as he said) with the Queens
hand, to prove her privy to the death of her husband, and Buchanans book
(called the Detection) he gave them to read, which was of small credit with
the greater part of the Commissioners, because he was one of that side, and
won by money to write. But as for the Epistles and Verses (which wanted
names, subscriptions, and notation of the time; since that, there be every
where many forgers which can so cunningly imitate and counterfeit other men's
hands, that hardly the true can be known from the false) Queen ELIZABETH gave
small credit, though there was womanly privy hatred (which carries away that
sex far from the right) between them, and she was well content that some
blot of reproach by this accusation was left, and remained on the Queen of
Scotland.

But when her Commissioners heard that she was contumeliously accused by
Murrey, they were most ready to answer; but she (being secretly instructed by
many English Lawyers, that it was lawful so to do; forasmuch as the former
authority and Commission given to the Duke and others was abrogated) had
already taken away their Commission: and she in plain terms, refused the new
English Commissioners; of whom one or two she thought to wish her no good, but
rather ill; except the French and Spanish Ambassadors might be added unto them,
and she herself might be publicly admitted to defend her innocence before
the Queen, and Murrey detained and brought to trial, whom she affirmed might
be proved to be the contriuer of the murder of DARLY. Which things, when
Norfolk, Arundell; Sussex, Leicester, and Clinton, thought not to be unjust;
Queen Elizabeth somewhat angry, said openly, that the Scottish woman should
never want an Advocate, as long as Norfolk lived; and thought it enough to
impart the crimes objected by Murrey, unto every one of the privy Council,
and also unto the Earls of Northumberland, Westmerland, Shrewsburie,
Worcester, Huntington and Warwick, called together with an oath of secrecy,
lest they should prejudice either party. And when Murrey was called home, and
Boyde (as it was commonly reported) plotted to steal away the Queen of
Scotland out of prison, the matter was put off unto another time; Queen
ELIZABETH from her heart hating the insolency of the Scots, in depriving of
their Queen.

Murrey a little before his departure, had craftily proposed unto Norfolk, the
marriage with the Queen of Scotland, and also secretly by Meluin to the Queen
a hope to be restored into her Kingdom (as we shall declare anon) and at the
same time to draw the love of Queen ELIZABETH from the Queen of Scotland, he
had spread rumors that she had transposed her right unto England unto the Duke
of Anjeou, and that the transcription was confirmed at Rome; and showed also
letters (whether true or forged I will not say) which the Queen of Scotland
had written unto her friends, in which she both charged Queen ELIZABETH as
though she had not used her according to her promise, and bragged of hope of
aid from some other persons. This put Queen ELIZABETH in great fear, yet
could not she conjecture from whence this new hope should arise, the civil
war increasing so in France, that the Bishop of Rhedon was sent unto her by
the King, to request her not to intermeddle with the affairs in France, and
the Duke of Alba who was come the last year into the Netherlands to profligate
the Protestants Religion, had very troublesome business come upon him.

But, as it came to light afterward, Robert Ridolphus a Florentine, who had
lived long at London, as a Merchant Factor, was suborned by Pope Pius Quintus
(who durst not send a Nuntio openly) to stir secretly the Papists in England
against Queen ELIZABETH, which he did both diligently and secretly. A small
suspicion was also grown out of the secret conferences at York, between
Lidington, the Bishop of Rosse, and Norfolk, whom they besought to join his
advice and care to help the most distressed Queen, offering unto him also her
in marriage, which he, as a thing full of danger, rejected, with a modest
answer: yet he promised not to abandon the distressed Queen, in as much as was
lawful for an honorable man to do, saving his allegiance to his Queen and
Country. Ligon the servant of Norfolk, a great Papist, much increased the
suspicion, by his often going to Bolton (the Lord Scroopes Castle) where the
Queen of Scotland was kept by Francis Knolls, under the pretense of visiting
Scroopes wife, who was sister unto Norfolk. Although no certainty was of
this, yet for more surety, the Queen of Scotland was conveyed from Bolton,
where all the bordering neighbors were Papists, farther into the Realm, unto
Tutburie, and delivered unto the custody of George Earl of Shrewsburie.

Anno 1569.
NOw Murrey, who had made himself a secure way to return into Scotland, by
the hope made to the Queen of Scotland of her restitution, and to Norfolk,
and to others in England (for she had repressed the Scots that lay in wait to
kill him, and charged them not to impeach his return) As soon as he came
unto Edinburgh, he called the Noblemen friends to the Queen, under the color
to consult with them about her restitution. And when Hamilton Duke of
Chasteauleroy, appointed Lieutenant by the Queen, and Herris persuaded by the
letters of the Queen, too much credulous, came thither first, Murrey fearing
some traps, circumuented them; and staying for no more, put them in prison, and
forthwith annoied and vexed the friends of the Queen with fire and sword.

Hereupon were rumors spread in all places of England against Murrey, namely,
that he had made a pact with Queen ELIZABETH that the young King of Scotland
should be delivered unto Queen ELIZABETH, to be brought up in England: That
the Castles of Edinburgh and Sterling should be furnished with Garrisons of
English men: That Dunbritton should be won for the benefit of the English:
That Murrey should be proclaimed successor unto the Realm of Scotland, if the
King died without issue, and should hold the Kingdom of Queen ELIZABETH, by
fealty and homage. These reports increased, and with a certain probability
did so possess men's minds through all Britanie, that Queen ELIZABETH thought
good, for the conservation of her own credit, and for the good of Murrey, to
wipe away these blots. Therefore in a writing printed, she declared in the word
of a Prince, that these reports were most untrue, and devised by them who
envied the tranquillity of both the Kingdoms; and that there had been no
pact either by word or writing between her or her Agents and Murrey, since he
came last into England, that she knew of; but that the Earl of Lennox
Grandfather of the young King had requested, that the King if he could not be
safe in Scotland from the plots of wicked men, might be sent into England.
Moreover, she affirmed, that whatsoever is said of the paction between Murrey
and the Earl of Hertford, namely, that they would give mutual help the one
to the other, to get the Crowns of both the Kingdoms, to be utterly false and
untrue. Lastly, that she was not the cause why the transaction between the
Queen of Scotland and her little son was not concluded; and that she will
labor all that she may, that it may be effected. And indeed she did her best
endeavor, though she was tossed on the one side with fear out of the
inueterate emulation, which does never die between women Princesses; and on
the other side, with compassion remembering oftentimes the frail^ie of mankind.

The Queen of Scotland kindled more this compassion and minished the fear
with her often and loving letters; in which she solemnly promised, both for
the courtesy which she had found at her hands, and also for the near blood
of kindred which was between them; that she would attempt nothing against
her, and that she would not be beholding to any other Prince for her
restitution, but only unto her. Insomuch that Queen ELIZABETH dealt earnestly
with Murrey, by Wood his Secretary, and with other Scots about the restoring
of her unto her former dignity and estate, and if that could not be granted,
then that she might be joined with her son; and if that could not be
granted neither, yet that she might live a private life at home among her
friends, freely, securely, and honorably. But she could not stir or move
Murrey (who had all the government in his hand) to yield a jot.

About the same time, a still rumor went up and down amongst men of the better
sort, that the Duke of Norfolk would marry the Queen of Scotland, which was
a thing well taken of many, but in sundry manners, according as men wished. For
the Papists hereby hoped to have some good for their religion; and others hoped
some profit would arise thereby unto the Commonwealth. But many men, who saw
the Queen was not minded to marry, and that foreign Princes, enemies unto
England, did cast their eyes upon the Queen of Scotland, as the most certain
Heir of England, thought it would be a better way to establish quietness,
and to contain the Queen of Scotland within bounds; that she were married to
the Duke of Norfolk, the greatest and most honorable man of England, and a
man in the love of the people, and bred up in the Religion of the Protestants,
rather than to a foreign Prince, who might bring both the Kingdoms into
danger by her means, and also come so to inherit both the Kingdoms, which
they heartily wished might be consolidated in a Prince of the English Nation,
if the King of Scotland should happen to die, whom they also purposed to bring
into England, that he being the true heir of England, being brought up
amongst the English, might be better loved of the English men. And thus all the
scruples about the succession might be taken away, Queen ELIZABETH should have
no cause to fear the Duke, and the Queen of Scotland; when she had the King
in her hands. Moreover, that the Duke should attempt nothing against him, but
love him more dearly; They determined to espouse Margaret the Dukes only and
little daughter unto him, to be married together when they came to riper
years. Amongst these were the Earls of Arundell, Northumberland, Westmerland,
Sussex, Pembrooke, and Southampton,, and very many Barons, yea, and Leicester
himself, whether in policy, and to work the Dukes destruction, it is
uncertain: yet all these thought it good to acquaint the Queen with the
matter, and to leave the decision thereof to her pleasure, and that she should
prescribe the conditions for the full security and safety of her own person,
Religion and the Realm. But now take the matter briefly if you please, from
the very beginning out of the written confession of the Duke, which I have
seen, and the memorials of the Bishop of Rosse, who was the greatest dealer in
this business.

When the Commissioners met at York the last year, Lidington and the Bishop
of Rosse to win his favor, talked with the Duke of a marriage to be made
bebetweene him and the Queen of Scotland: and so did Murrey himself with the
Duke at Hampton Court, who in private talk with the Duke, and also with many
others, fained that he wished nothing more, than that matters in Scotland being
set in good order, the Queen of Scotland his dearest sister, might be restored
unto her former dignity and estate, so that only she would sincerely and
unfeignedly receive into her former favor and grace her subjects, and that all
the remembrances of all offenses might be quite forgotten. Yet he feared, if
she married a husband out of her own choice, from France, Spain, or Austria,
that she would revenge the injuries she had received, change the Religion
received in Scotland, and procure great danger unto Engl^^d. To prevent these
things, he promised to bestow all his labor, that where she who had first
married a boy, then a rash and heady young man, and lastly too a madbraine
(those were his very words) might now be married to the Duke, a man of
discretion; which thing might turn unto the tranquillity of both the Realms,
the security of both the Princes, and especially to the establishing of
Religion, since he (such was his respect unto the Queen of England) might more
prosperously contain Scotland in the amity of the English, and might with the
more ease draw the Queen of Scotland unto the true Religion which he
professed. With these same things Murrey also secretly acquainted the Queen of
Scotland by Robert Meluin, and offered his labor very officiously, toward the
effecting thereof. But the Duke answered, that he could determine nothing about
the marriage, before that she did clear her self of the crimes objected
against her; yet Rosse as diligently as he could, ceased not to draw him to
it, being unwilling.

A few days after, Nicholas Throgmorton met the Duke in the Court at
Westminister, unto whom he profesled and offered his service very kindly, and
signified that Leicester would talk with the Duke, about the marriage between
him and the Queen of Scotland, which Throgmorton said, seemed strange to him,
since Leicester himself sued for the same marriage not long since. But he
willed the Duke in friendship, if it were so, that he should give the honor of
that marriage unto Leicester, who had been before time a suitor therein. But if
he stood stiffly in it, to deny and refuse it, because that the Scots did
charge her with very many heinous crimes. But yet, said Throgmorton, I wish
from my heart, that she were married unto you, as well for the good of
Religion, as also that she may not depend of any other but on our Queen. Yet
this I forewarne you, if you do any thing in this matter, let Leicester guide
you by advice; for you of yourselfe shall hardly get the Queens consent.

A day or two after, Leicester moved the matter to the Duke, who answered just
even as Throgmorton sorewarned him; and when he came to speak of the crimes,
Leicester extenuated the same, and called Richard Candish witness, whose
service (though suspected) he commended unto the Duke. Then Leicester told
Pembrooke of the matter, and the Duke told Arundell; and they together with
Throgmorton in their letters commended unto the Queen of Scotland, the Duke as
a fit husband (which Murrey had done also before:) The Duke also wrote and
signified his love, and offered his service in very loving words. From that
time he imparted unto them all the letters he wrote unto her, or received from
her; and they talked oftentimes with Rosse about the manner of concluding it.
And by Richard Candish they propounded in the year one thousand five hundred
threescore and eight, unto the Queen of Scotland these Articles written with
Leicesters hand: viz.

That she attempt nothing to the hurt of the Queen of 1
England and her children in the succession of the Kingdom of England.

She should make a league defensive and offensive between 2
the two Realms.

She should establish the Religion of the Protestants in 3
Scotland.

She should receive into her favor the Scots which 4
were now her adversaries.

She should revoke the assignation of the Kingdom of 5
England made unto the Duke of Anjeou.

She should marie some English Nobleman, namely, the 6
Noble Prince Thomas Duke of Norfolk.

If she gave her consent unto these Articles, they promised to procure the
Queen of Englands assent, and that she should be shortly restored unto her
Realm, and also be confirmed in the succession of England. She readily
admitted them all, but only that she could say nothing unto the league, before
the French King was certified thereof. She protested that there was no
assignation made unto the Duke of Anjeou; yet she would procure him to make a
release and renuntiation (if they stood upon it.) And willed them above all
things, to get the consent of the Queen of England, lest some hurt did come
unto her and the Duke for want thereof, which she had experimented in the
marriage with DARLY without her consent. Yet they thought best to try first the
minds of more Noblemen; of whom most gave their consent, with this clause, So
that the Queen was not against it. Neither did the Kings of France and Spain
dislike it, only they feared Murrey, lest he that had first broached the
matter, and promised to further it all that he could, should first hinder it.
Yet they agreed on this, that Lidington who was then expected, should be the
first to try the mind of Queen ELIZABETH. In the mean time the Duke
imparted to the Lord Lumley whatsoever had been done in this business, and
with much ado obtained of Leicester to ask the advice of some other friends.
Yet a while after, he opened the matter by the consent of Pembrooke unto Cecill
also.

About which time, Leonard Dacres devised and compassed to steal secretly away
the Queen of Scotland out of prison at Whinfield, where she was kept by the
Earl of Shrewsburie Northumberland being privy unto this device, signified it
unto the Duke, who forbade them to do it; for he feared they would have
delivered her to be married unto the King of Spain, and hoped to obtain the
consent of Queen ELIZABETH, ^re it was long.

But the rumor of this marriage came more plainly to the Queens ear, by the
Ladies and women of the Court, who smell out cunningly and quickly these love
matters. Which when the Duke understood to be true, he dealt very earnestly
with Leicester, both by Throgmorton and by Pembrooke, to open the matter
speedily unto the Queen: he made delays, and lingered, as it were, to stay for
a fit time to speak. But Cecill willed the Duke (who was now full of care) to
open all the matter to the Queen himself, whereby all scruple might be
speedily taken away from the Queen and from himself also. Leicester was
against it, and promised to open the matter to the Queen in the progress. But
in the time that he put it off with smooth words, from one day unto another,
the Queen being at Farneham, set the Duke at her table, and bitingly willed
him to take ^eed on what Pillow he laid his head. Then at Titchfield Leicester
was somewhat sick, or else fained so to be: and unto the Queen that came to
see him, and cheered him comfortably, and perceiving his spirit and blood to
be drawn inward for fear, with sighs, and asking pardon of his fault, he
opened the whole matter from the beginning.

At which time the Queen called the Duke unto her in a gallery, and chid him
very much, that without her priuitie he had sued unto ^he Queen of Scotland in
the way of marriage; and commanded him upon his allegiance, to cease from
further meddling therein. He promised so to do willingly and gladly, and
doubted not to say (as though he cared not a whit for her) that his revenues
in England, were little less than those of the Kingdom of Scotland, at this
time lamentably impouerished by the wars; and also when he was in his
Tennis-court at Norwich, he seemed to himself to be equal, after a sort,
unto many Kings. But from that time, he began to be more dejected in mind,
and when he saw the Queen to look and speak to him more sternely, and
Leicester in a manner estranged, and most of the Noblemen to steal away out of
his company, scarce saluting or speaking to him, hasted unto London without
taking any leave, and went in to Pembrooke, who bade him be of good cheer, and
comforted him very much. And on that same very day Queen ELIZABETH rejected
with show of displeasure the Scottish Ambassador, entreating her very much to
deliver the Queen captive, and bade that she should behave her self quietly,
lest shortly she saw them on whom she chiefly relied to hop headless.

And now when the rumor of the marriage was hotter every day than other, and the
French Ambassador exceedingly urged her delivery (more by the persuasion of
some English men, than by the commandment of the French King, as it was after
known:) new suspicions from every place were laid hold on: and Cecill who
applied all his care for the good of the Republike and Religion, was very
diligent to find the depth of the matter; and therefore wrote unto Sussex Lord
President of the North, who was a familiar friend, and near allied in blood
unto the Duke, to certify the Queen what he knew of the Dukes marriage. But
his answer is unknown unto me. And where it had been observed, that the Duke
had many secret conferences with Murrey Regent of Scotland at Hampton Court;
George Carry son to the Lord Hunsdon was sent secretly unto Murrey, to learn
of him if the Duke had imparted unto him any thing about this marriage. The Duke
in the mean while, terrified with a false rumor spread, that there was a
commotion raised in the North, and being certified by Leicester, that he should
be put in prison, went out of the way into Norfolk, whiles his friends in the
Court (who had promised so much) might auert and turn aside the storm that
hung over his head, and he himself might mitigate the Queens displeasure by
his humble letters. But there were men set about him to mark and note all his
actions. When he found no comfort among his friends, and Heydon, Cornwallis,
and other worshipful Gentlemen of those parts, persuaded him, if he were
guilty of any offense toward the Queen, to fly unto her mercy; he wauered,
and was tormented with diversity of cares. In this while was the Court in
quandarie, suspicious and fearful that he would break out into rebellion;
and they say, it was determined to kill the Queen of Scotland presently if he
did so.

But he, out of his inbred good nature, and out of his conscience, that he
had not offended against any Law made treason (for that act of marying the
Kings sisters, or brothers, or aunts children, without the Kings knowledge,
made treason by Henry the eighth, was repealed by King Edward the sixth) and
also for fear lest the Queen of Scotland out of suspicion should be used more
hardly and extremely, he sent letters unto his friends in the Court, and told
them, that he stepped aside unto his house, that in time, and by his absence, he
might procure a remedy against malicious rumors, which are at all times
entertained with open ears in the Court, and asked pardon most humbly for his
offense, and forthwith took his journey toward the Court.

As he returned, at Saint Albans, Owen a gentleman belonging to the Earl of
Arundell, sent secretly by Throgmorton and Lumley, who were committed, willed
him to take all the fault upon himself, and not to lay it upon Leicester and
others, lest he should make his friends his enemies. There Edward Fitz-Gerard
brother unto the Earl of Kildare (Lieutenant of the Pensioners) met and
received him, and conveyed him unto Burnham three miles from Windsor (where the
Queen then lay.) Four days after, the Abbot of Dunfermelling delivered the
letters of Murrey, Regent of Scotland, unto the Queen; in which he showed
her, that the Duke dealt with him secretly at Hampton Court, to favor his
marriage with the Queen of Scotland; and that if he would not, he threatened
him exceedingly, and that he promised to favor it, that he might prevent and
avoid the await and ambuscado laid by one Norton to kill him; from whom and
others, the Duke gave his word he should return without danger. And that
shortly after, the Duke requested him by his letters written in Ciphers, to
give his consent unto the marriage. Moreover, that the Duke did signify unto
him by Boyd, that he would never forsake and abandon the Queen of Scotland;
and further, that the agents of the same Queen had almost persuaded the R^gent
that Queen ELIZABETH had consented to the marriage; and also that she had
offered to her the hope of the Kingdom of England. And Queen ELIZABETH also
found out, that she had signified unto certain Noblemen of England, to win
them unto her side; that she went about that business, which would be very
necessary for the most certain security of the Queen of England, and the
like safety for both the Kingdoms.

The Duke, who had secret and wary commerce of letters (which were sent
privily in Ale-bottles) with the Bishop of Rosse, Leicester and Throgmorton was
about this time examined about this marriage with the Queen of Scotland, and
his secret conferences with the Bishop of Rosse, and confessed most things, was
sent to the Tower of London, under the keeping of Sir Henry Neuill Knight,
being bitterly reproved that he had departed from the Court without leave
obtained, and charged as though he had intended to rebel. Two days after, the
Bishop of Rosse was examined in like manner, and Robert Ridolph, the Gentleman
of Florence, whom the Bishop of Rosse and others used familiarly, is delivered
unto the custody of Francis Walsingham. The Earl of P^mbrooke is commanded to
keep his house, and is privately examined; yet in regard of his Nobility and
old age, he had the favor, that his examination was not set down in writing.
Which thing he required, because he could not write. Some Noblemen were
forbidden the Court, as privy to these matters, who humbly confessed that they
with the Duke agreed to the marriage, which Murrey had first propounded; yet so
that the Duke, the Queen of Scotland and they, willed that the matter should
be referred unto the Queen before the marriage was to be solemnized, and
desired pardon for their offense. In like manner the Earls of Northumberland
and Westmerland, who were of this counsel, submitted themselves unto Sussex
Lord President of the North, and besought him to make intercession unto the
Queen for their pardon. Also sundry Pamphlets came out against this marriage,
and against the Queen of Scotland, and the right by which she claimed to
become heir unto England; wherein they showed their wits with such malapert
sauciness, that the Queen thought once to have forbidden them by severe
edict, and permitted the Bishop of Rosse (winking thereat) to make answer; who
forthwith set forth a book under the name of Morgan Philips, against them,
wherein he defended the honor of his Queen, her right to succeed, and the
government of women (for this also was impugned) but ingenuously acknowledged
afterward in his Commentaries, that he had his arguments for her right of
succession, secretly from Anthony Brown chief Justice in the common Place,
and Carrell an excellent good common Lawyer.

Shortly after, befell the rebellion in the North, raised by the Earls of
Northumberland and Westmerland, with many other Gentlemen. Who when they
understood for certain, that the Queen of Scotland (whom to set at liberty,
they had principally taken arms) was carried away from Tutburie unto Couentrie,
under the keeping of the Earls of Shrewsburie and Huntingdon; and also moved
with the great preparation of the Queen, they with a few others fled into
Scotland.

Anno 1570.
THe rebellion in England being now quenched, Murrey Regent of Scotland
labored diligently, that the Queen of Scotland might be delivered into his
hands, and for that cause he both offered hostages, and also to restore unto
them the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland; and brought to pass, that
the Bishop of Rosse, as the kindler of the rebellion, was committed unto the
custody of the Bishop of London. Then to purchase the good will of Queen
ELIZABETH, in the month of January he came with an army into the borders of
Scotland toward England, to hunt out the English rebels, of whom he took a
few, and those of small account; but at last he found the Earl of
Northumberland lurking about Hartlawe, amongst the thieves on the borders,
discovered by his host (one of the Grayhams, who betrayed him) and sent him
unto Lochleuin to be kept; and in this journey he annoied and spoiled the
borders exceedingly.

But in the same month, after he had taken great pains, and thought himself
in great security, he was shot from out of a privy place, through the body a
little beneath the navel, with a Bullet, as he rode through the streets of
Lithquo, by one Hamilton, who escaped by and by into France, and lived certain
years after, oftentimes protesting, that he did it to revenge himself of a
private grudge against him, he not being able to endure patiently the injuries
he offered unto him. For Murrey had banished the fellow, for that he had stood
for the Queen, and imprisoned him, threatening now and then to hang him, until
he resigned and gave away unto a servant o^ Murrey, a littleground which came
to him by his wife; whereupon his wife fell mad, and in a furious rage he brake
prison, and committed the murder. Neither could the man after be persuaded in
France (when he seemed to be a man fit for a desperate action) to attempt the
same against the Admiral Coligni; oftentimes saying, that he was the revenger
of his own just grief, for which he was sorry; but he would not be the
revenger of another man's, neither for gold nor request.

Hereupon was there much talk of the Regent that was slain, through all
Britain: The most wondering at vain matters, namely, the dream of his
mother, of the Lion and the Dragon fighting in her womb, after that King James
the fifth had had his pleasure on her. Among the wiser sort, according to their
partial affections, commended he was by some, for destroying the Roman
Religion in Scotland, the conservation of the King a child, the equal
administration of justice, and his munificence and liberality toward learned
men, and B^chanan above the rest. On the other side, he was reproved by others,
as though he took religion for a cloak, and enriched himself and his friends
with the spoils of the Church, and how he was not only injurious, but also
ungrateful unto his sister the Queen, that deserved well at his hands, and
insulted over her womanly weakness. And these men out of their suspicions, and
the lewd disposition of many bastards, did guess and conjecture, as though he
would not have spared the son, having already deprived the mother of her
Crown. The Queen of Scotland her self was very sorry, that he was taken away
by that sudden and violent death, before (as she said) he had purged his sins
against God, his Country and Princess, by hearty penitencie. But all the
English men that favored the Duke of Norfolk, accused him (as far as they
durst) for a crafty and false deceiuer.

The Noblemen of Scotland who stood for the King (not admitting the Hamiltons
and the rest, who had stood for the deprived Queen) being to meet for the
^lection of a new Regent, required the advice of Queen ELIZABETH. She
answered, she would not meddle in the creation of a Regent, lest she should
seem to prejudice the Queen of Scotland, whose cause was not yet decided and
judged. But they chose Matthew Earl of Lenox, the Kings Grandfather Regent,
Queen ELIZABETH being not discontent with it, for she knew that he would be
very loving unto his young Nephew out of natural affection, and kind unto the
English men, in regard of the benefits he had received at their hands. And she
did not doubt but he would be at her beck, since she had his wife in her
hands.

Whiles Queen ELIZABETH showed favor thus unto the Kings side in Scotland;
the King of Spain did not abandon the Queen captive; but by the means of
Hamilton Rector of the Church of Dunbar, he sent secretly out of the
Low Countries, great store of Armor and Gunpowder, and seven great pieces of
Ordnance, and some money unto Huntley the Governor of the North part of
Scotland for the Queen. In this while, he, the Duke of Chasteauleroy, and the
Earl of Argile, Lieutenants of the Queen, by a common consent, and with the
consent also of the Queen, sent George Lord Seton Ambassador unto the Duke of
Alba, who declared his message unto him in these words: That he was sent out
of a Kingdom deprived of public peace, and of a worthy Princess, through the
treachery of disloyal subjects, and that the substance of his Embassage
consisted on these points: That aid may be given unto them, whereby the Queen
may be redeemed out of miserable captivity in a foreign land, and the Realm
delivered from the oppression of strangers: That the Scottish rebels might be
forbidden to traffic in the dominions of the King of Spain: And that the
10000. Crowns assigned by him to the Queen of Scotland might be paid.

The Duke of Alba answered; That he would be ready and willing to further
this her cause, upon all occasions, unto the King of Spain, but that he could
not prohibit the traffic of the Scottish rebels (because it was contrary to
the liberty of the Low Countries) and promised that he would disburse the
money very shortly for her use. In the mean time the Lord Seton, the more to
purchase the favor of the King of Spain and the Duke of Alba, went in
disguised apparel unto the States, and drew many of the Scots that served
them, unto a revolt, by fair words, good cheer, and such like enticements.
And when he was at the point to be put to the torture, he hardly, and with
great danger of his life, escaped unto the Duke of Alba, who promised to pay
ten thousand Soldiers for half a year, but in vain, because he could not
send over the Soldiers into Scotland, the wars were so hot in the
Low Countries.

In the mean time, the Bishop of Rosse who had followed the business of the
Queen with good discretion, and was committed unto the custody of the Bishop
of London (because he had secretly kindled the rebellion in the North) being
now delivered, brought to pass, that the French King, by his Ambassador, to
wit, Montluc, dealt very earnestly with Queen Elizabeth about the deliverance
of the Queen of Scotland, who complained very much, that she was kept
straiter in prison, and that also under the Earl of Huntingdon, her professed
enemy and competitor (since he as openly made claim unto the right of the
Kingdom of England, as she did.) The same also was urged exceedingly by the
King of Spaines Ambassador, in his Kings name. The Queen made answer (after
she had rehearsed the crafty purposes and devices of sundry men for the
delivery of the Queen of Scotland, who as she closely insinuated, was privy
to the late rebellion) that it would be great inconsideration, and dangerous
folly to let her go at liberty, who does aspire so openly by such evil
courses, unto the Kingdom of England: That of necessity she was enforced to
keep her straighter in prison, to send away many of her servants from her,
whom she had drawn thither in great number, and to join the Earl of
Huntingdon (in whom she did acknowledge no right unto the Kingdom, but some
kindred with her) unto the Earl of Shrewsburie, whom she had appointed to be
her keeper, who long since began to suspect and distrust the fidelity of some
of his servants, and had perceived many of them daily won to favor the
Queen of Scotland, yet that the Earl of Huntingdon had been removed from her
a good while since. Moreover, she promised that she would omit nothing she can
do, to make an end and a composition between the Queen and the Scots; and
protested that she will not revenge the wrongs she has received at her hands.
But yet she hoped that the Kings of Spain and France, and the Queen of
Scotland also, will give her leave to make provision for the tranquillity both
of her self and her subjects; which nature, reason and her honor do claim
at her hands. If any of them shall devise any better and more evident means to
avoid peril and danger, that she would with a good will hear and embrace the
same.

After these things, the privy Council of England sat oftentimes, and
consulted whether it was best that she were sent back unto her own subjects,
or kept still in England, and what courses were best to be taken for the best
preservation of the Kingdom, the Queen and Religion.

About which time Pope Pius Quintus, had caused his Bull or Sentence
Declaratorie against Queen ELIZABETH (the pretensed Queen of England) and the
Heretics aduering unto her (I use the very words thereof) wherein also all her
subjects were declared to be absolved from their oath of fidelity, and all
other duty, etc. And they that afterward obeyed her, were ex communicated,
which was dated the five and twentieth day of February, in the year of our
Lord, one thousand five hundred threescore and nine) to be fixed on the gates
of the Palace of the Bishop of London, in the night. Hereupon suspicions
increased, that some dangerous matter was in working. And forthwith another
rebellion was about to break out in Norfolk, which was quenched in the
beginning; some Gentlemen of Norfolk desiring to deliver the Duke (who was
exceedingly loved of all men) had devised at Harleston Fair, by sounding of a
Trumpet, to gather a multitude, under the pretense to expulse strangers out of
the land.

John Felton, who had fixed the Popes Bull on the Bishop of Londons gate in the
night, being apprehended (for he would not fly when he might) being
arraigned, with a stout courage confessed the deed, which yet he would not
acknowledge to be any offense, was executed near unto the place where he had
fixed the same.

The same day Felton was arraigned, the Duke of Norfolk confessing his
offense, and showing great penitence, and having by his writing given his word
not to deal any more about the marriage with the Queen of Scotland without the
priuitie of Queen ELIZABETH, was brought back from the Tower of London, to
the great joy of the people, remaining at his own house, under the keeping of
Sir Henry Neuill. And indeed he could not be arraigned of treason by the
Statute of 25. of Edward the third, as Cecill said, who desirous of the Dukes
good, was earnest to have him marry another woman, whereby he might be less
feared, and the public tranquillity conserved. Yet some there were that
thought he was let out of purpose, that he might be thrust into some greater
danger. And indeed more things came every day to light than he suspected, and
the credit of his most secret counselors were corrupted with hopes, or with
bribes.

These times were full of suspicions and conspiracies; for there conspired to
deliver the Queen of Scotland out of prison Thomas and Edward Stanley, the
younger sons of the Earl of Derby, by the daughter of Thomas Duke of
Norfolk, Thomas Gerard, Rolston, Hall, and others in Derby-shire: But Rolstons
son, who was one of the Pensioners, opened the conspiracy, and they were all
cast into prison, but Hall, who escaped into the I Will of Man, and from thence
unto Dunbritton, where being taken at the winning of the Castle, he was
conveyed unto London, and there executed as a Traitor. And the Bishop of Rosse
himself lately delivered out of prison, was again delivered unto the custody
of the Bishop of London, for that he had secret conference with the Earl of
Southampton, a man wholly addicted to the Roman religion.

Queen ELIZABETH (her mind being in great doubt of trouble, upon the
publication of the Bull, and the insurrection intended in Norfolk) sent Cecill
and Mildmay unto the Queen of Scotland, who then lay at Chattesworth in
Derby-shire, to consult and devise with her by what means the division in
Scotland might in the best manner be compounded, she restored unto her former
estate, and provision made for the security of Queen ELIZABETH, and the
safety of her little son. She did nothing but deplore her most distressed
estate, complain of the crafty policies of Murrey, excuse Norfolk, and put
all her hope in the benignity of Queen ELIZABETH. They for the making and
establishing of a sincere league of amity between the Realms, propounded
these Articles.

1 The Treaty of Edinburgh should be confirmed: She should renounce her
title and right to England during the life of Queen ELIZABETH.

2 She should not renew nor keep any league with any Prince against England.

3 She should not admit or receive any foreign Soldiers into Scotland.

4 She should have no practice nor intelligence with any Irish or English men,
without the Queens knowledge.

5 She should restore the English fugitives and rebels.

6 She should make amends or recompense for the hurt done unto the English
borderers.

7 She should enquire, according to the Law, for the murders both of Darly and
Murrey.

8 She should deliver her son pledge into England.

9 She should not marry with any English man without the knowledge of the
Queen of England, nor with any other against the wills of the States of
Scotland.

10 The Scots should not pass over into Ireland without leave obtained out of
England.

11 For the confirmation and assurance whereof, the Queen and the
Commissioners to be appointed, should set to their hands and seals.

12 Six hostages, whom the Queen of England should name, should be sent into
England.

13 If the Queen of Scotland attempted any thing against the Queen of
England, by her self, or by any other, she should lose all her right (ipso
facto) which she claims in England.

14 The Castles of Hume and Fast Castle, to be kept by the English men three
years.

15 Some Fortress also in Galloway or Cantire should be delivered unto the
English men, lest the Irish-Scots should infest Ireland from thence.

16 Lastly, the Estates of Scotland should confirm all and singular these
things by the authority of Parliament.

To these propositions she out of her discretion did answer warily enough, upon
the sudden; but she referred them for a fuller answer unto the Commissioners
(sent by her Lieutenants in Scotland) who were the Bishop of Rosse, her
Embasladour in England, Alexander Gordon Bishop of Galloway, Uncle unto the
Earl of Huntley, and William Lord Leuingston, who afterward admitted some of
these Articles, and rejected others. They answered, That the treaty of
Edinburgh should be confirmed, the title renounced during the life of Queen
ELIZABETH: That they must consider of the ancient league with France, which if
they did not keep, the Queen should lose her Dowry; the Scottish Nation, of
the which one hundred men at arms on horseback, and one hundred four and
twenty Archers are maintained in the Guard, Merchants, Students, many that
possess land by inheritance, and that have spiritual livings, should be put
out, and lose their pensions, immunities and privileges which they enjoy, being
very great, and Scotland should be deprived of the amity and aid of a most
mighty Nation. Which things, except the English men did liberally and
bountifully recompense, they cannot renounce and forsake the French league by
any means: That they will not admit any foreign Soldiers, except in case of
such a rebellion that cannot be suppressed by Soldiers of their own Country:
That the Queen of Scotland shall have no intelligence with the subjects of
England, so that the Queen of England in like manner shall have none with the
subjects of Scotland, to the hurt of Scotland: If there be any English rebels
or fugitives, they be in the hands of the Scottish rebels, and are to be
demanded of them: The hurts done, are to be examined by Commissioners: For the
murder of DARLY and Murrey, let them be inquired of according to the Laws of
Scotland: That they cannot deliver the King for hostage, who is in the hands of
them, that use the Kings name as a color for their rebellion against the
Queeene: That it is strange, and a thing not heard of at any time, that a free
Princess should be prescribed in her marriage by a foreign Prince, and her
own subjects: That the Scots shall not be sent over into Ireland, if
reciprocally the Irish men be tied with the same condition, not to pass over
into Scotland. For the more firm assurance of these things, they consented to
give hostages whomsoever the Queen of England would name, except the Duke of
Chasteauleroy, the Earl of Huntley, Argile and Atholl. Moreover, they
consented, that the Queen of Scotland should be excluded from all her right
of succession in England, if she attempted any thing against the right of the
Queen of England; so that the Queen of England might again b^e tied in some
equal penalty also, if she attempted any thing against the Queen of
Scotland. Concerning the Castles of Hume and Fast Castle, they requested that
they may be restored unto the Lord Hume, the true Lord and proprietarie of
them, and that the English men would detain them no longer from him: And that
to deliver Fortresses in Galloway or Cantire unto forrainers, was no other
thing, than to give a new occasion of war.

When they could not agree upon these Articles, and the Commissioners came not
from the Regent of Scotland, and in the mean time it was reported and bruted,
that aid was earnestly requested by her friends of the Pope, the King of
France, and the Duke of Alba, for the deliverance and freeing of the Queen of
Scotland, and the English rebels, as Westmerland, the Countess of
Northumberland, and the rest, were conveyed secretly out of Scotland, nothing
came of this Treaty: but yet

The Bishop of Rosse sent the Articles of this treaty unto the Pope, and the
Kings of France and Spain, and insinuated unto them, that the Queen of
Scotland must of necessity yield unto them, unless they help her both with
advice and other aid very shortly, which he did most importunately request at
their hands, but in vain: for all they were earnestly busied with other
matters.

Anno 1571.
A Little before this time, Ridolphus the Florentine, before named (who had
used much merchandise and traffic at London fifteen years) sent very
secretly the Letters of the Pope unto the Queen of Scotland; in the which he
promised his care and study to the utmost of his goods and labor, to advance
the Catholic Religion and her; and required her to show favor, and give
credit unto Ridolphus in all things; and also that he may understand by him,
who now determined to return into Italy, by what means he may do any good,
and give any relief unto the Catholic Religion, and remedy unto the common
mischiefs in England and Scotland. Ridolphus also in his own private letters
requested the Queen to impart these things unto the Duke of Norfolk, and her
friends, and that she would commend him unto them. But she delaied her answer
(though the Kings of France and Spain, and the Duke of Alba, wrote to the same
effect) until she saw unto what end the treaty already begun, would come.

For there was come, as from the King of Scotland, to talk of the Scottish
affairs, the Earl of Mourton, Petcarne Abbot of Dunfermelling, and James
Mac-Gill, who unto Queen ELIZABETH (commanding them to lay down evidently the
causes of their depriving the Queen of Scotland, and to prove them to be just)
showed a tedious and long instruction or memorial, wherein with a most
insolent liberty and bitterness of speech, they endeavored to prove the
people of Scotland to be superior and above their Kings, by the ancient
privileges of the Kingdom of Scotland, by old forgotten and also late
examples, collected from all places; yea, and by the authority of Calvin they
also endeavored to prove, that the popular Magistrates are appointed and made
to moderate and keep in order the excess and unruliness of Kings; and that
it is lawful for them to put the Kings that be evil and wicke^ into prison,
and also to deprive them of their Kingdoms. But they spoke much of their
lenity used toward their deprived Queen, because they suffered her to set her
son in her place, and to appoint governors unto him. That it proceeded out
of the mercy of the people, and not for her innocence, that they suffered her
to live: and many other things which turbulent wits do malapertly devise and
invent against the royal Majesty of Kings. This memorial Queen ELIZABETH
read, but not without indignation; and as a libell written in the slander and
reproach of Kings, condemned it, though she said nothing: but unto the
Commissioners she answered, that as yet she did not see a just cause of their
abusing and vexing the Queen in that manner; and therefore her will was, that
they should take some speedy course for the quenching the division and discord
in Scotland.

Hereupon, at the house of Bacon Keeper of the great seal, it was proposed
unto the Bishop of Rosse, the Bishop of Galloway, and the Lord Leuingston,
Commissioners for the Queen of Scotland; That for to give security unto the
Kingdom and Queen of England, and unto the Noblemen that took the Kings
part, the Duke of Chasteauleroy, the Earls of Huntley and Argile, the Lords
Hume and Herris, and another Lord should be given for hostages; and the Castles
of Dunbritton and Hume delivered unto the hands of the English men for three
years: They answered, it was not to be doubted, but the Queen of Scotland,
who of her free will committed her self to the protection of the Queen of
England, would also most willingly give her satisfaction in all things which
might conveniently be done; but to deliver such great men, and such
Fortresses, was no other thing, but to spoil and deprive the distressed Queen
of the succor and strength of all her most faithful friends, and of most
strong places. But they offered two Earls, of whom one should be one of the
three named, and two Lords, to be hostages for two years; but that the Holds
and Castles by the league could not be delivered unto the English men, except
others in like manner were delivered unto the French men. But (said Bacon) all
the Realm of Scotland, the Prince, the Noblemen and Castles, are not all
sufficient to give security unto the Queen, and the most flourishing Realm
of England; and therefore the Queen of Scotland was not to be let go upon any
security the Scots could propose.

Hereupon they immediately gathered, and said openly, that now at length they
plainly understood, that the English were resolved fully to keep the Queen
prisoner for ever in England; and withal, to break off the Treaty, since
they exacted so earnestly such security, as Scotland could not by any means
perform; yet the other Counselors of England protested, that they earnestly
desired the deliverance of the Queen of Scotland, so that sufficient security
were given. And to that purpose, they also talked with Mourton and his
associates hereof, and of delivering the King into England, who in plain
terms answered, that they had no commission to treat or deal either to
receive home the Queen into Scotland, or to deliver the King into England. But
the Commissioners of the Queen of Scotland rejected this speech as a frivolous
excuse: For certainly they that had authority to deprive the Queen, had also
authority enough to restore and set her at liberty: neither needed they to
look for any authority from the rest of the Conspirators, since that their
wicked fact had made them equals (facinus quos inquinat, aequat.) As for the
Prince he could not, being but five years old, give them authority; and as
for the Regent, he had committed all the matter to Queen ELIZABETH, and to her
pleasure. Therefore they besought the Commissioners of England, that these men
might be compelled to consult thereof, or else the matter ended, and
compounded upon equal conditions, without these men. But Queen ELIZABETH,
when she saw nothing could be done to give her self, the King, and the
Realm security, except both the factions agreed together; She thought it
fitting that the Estates of Scotland which were shortly to assemble, did elect
and choose out men who should endeavor to make a composition. Hereupon Rosse
and his associates openly complained, that many of the Queen of Englands
Counselors did abuse the prudence of the Queen of England, and the patience
of the Queen of Scotland, and to have deluded foreign Princes with their
subtle policies, and brought the Scots in a vain hope, to their great hurt.
And indeed the Queen of Scotland stomacking and complaining of the same, and
weary of these delays, called away the Bishop of Galloway and Leuingston, and
commanded Rosse (whom the Queen of England had commanded to depart from
London) to stay at London, by the right of an Ambassador (which made a
suspicion to grow) and appointed her friends in Scotland to take arms, and not
trust any longer unto the truces which had been hurtful unto them.

For in the time when these things were done in England, they had sustained
great losses, many had been put to execution, more slain, and Dunbritton the
strongest Fort in Scotland taken, and James Hamilton Archbishop of Saint
Andrews, brother to the Duke of Chasteauleroy, as privy to the murder of the
King, not so much as arraigned or tried, was hanged, by the accusation of a
Priest, who affirmed, that he had heard it in confession by one of the
Regicides.

When now the captive Queen had no hope left, and was in great grief, and all
her servants but ten, and a Priest to say Mass, were sent away, and all her
hope to obtain her liberty was gone, she could not refrain, but did open
that which she had long concealed in her mind. She therefore sent secretly
unto the Duke of Norfolk, a long Commentary of her purposes, which she had
written before time, and certain loue-letters in a private Character known to
them two, and other letters to be carried to the Pope, and the King of Spain,
by Ridolphus, whom she commended as one very careful of her good: and her very
friend Higford the Dukes Secretary, who wrote out this Commentary and
letters, in an usual hand and letter, was commanded to burn it, but he hid
it under the Matt in the Dukes chamber, and that of purpose, as it seemed. This
Ridolph, once to the Duke himself, and more times by Barker, reasoned thus:
That he had observed, that there were many Noblemen and Commons in England,
that desired an Innovation; and those were of three sorts: Some that had bin in
credit in the time of Queen Mary's reign, and now were not accounted of:
Others, that were addicted to the Popish Religion, and grudged inwardly that
they might not use it freely: And others that were not content with their
estate, and hoped for better. These were ready, but wanted some Nobleman to be
their Captain or Leader, and foreign aid. There could not be a fitter man for
Captain, and more noble than the Duke, who had the love of the Realm: And he
had great reason to revenge the wrongs done unto him, by his long detention in
prison; and now to his reproach, not called unto the Parliament, in which he had
a place and voice, as the chiefest Nobleman, and Earl Marshall of England. And
to persuade him the more effectually, he showed him a roll of the Noblemen, who
had vowed to spend their lives and goods for him, if he would attempt it. As
for foreign aid, he assured him that the Pope (so that the Romish Religion
might be advanced) would defray all the charges of the war, who had already
laid in bank a great sum of money the last year when the Bull was
published; of the which money Ridolph himself had distributed a great part
among the English fugitives. He promised that the King of Spain, irritated by
the injuries of the English men, would send to help them four thousand horse,
and six thousand foot, which might be sent over and landed at Harwich, a Port
in Essex (whereabouts the Duke had many tenants and Gentlemen holding of him)
most fitly and without suspicion, in the beginning of Summer, when the Duke of
Medina Caeli was to come with a good Navy into the Low Countries. Lastly, he
concluded, that such a moderation might be used, that all suspicion of treason
in the Duke might be taken away, and provision made for the safety of the
Queen of England, if only she would embrace or tolerate the Romish Religion,
and consent to the marriage of the Queen of Scotland with the Duke.

The Duke gave ear to these things as likely, but yet refused to subscribe
unto the letters of credit (as they call them) which Ridolph, being ready to
depart, showed unto him. Neither would he hear the advice of Rosse, which he
had long studied, and put into his head by Barker; namely, that the Duke with a
selected company of Noblemen, to take the Queen suddenly, and to disturb the
Parliament, and by this means the marriage with the Queen of Scotland might be
finished, and the Romish Religion set in better state in England, without any
great stir, and without any foreign aid: Which might easily be done, having
so many Noblemen ready and prompt to enter into this action, as could not be
assembled again in one place without suspicion. And just cause there was, for
that the Duke was kept long in prison against the Laws of the Realm, and not
admitted into the Parliament; and also for that more rigorous Laws were devised
against the Papists. And to do this he brought in the example of Castrutio in
Italy, and others, who by sudden actions had prosperously effected great
matters; and how five Noblemen in Scotland, very lately, had disturbed the
Parliament wherein Murrey was to be attainted, and gotten the Queen into their
hands.

This advice the Duke (who was out of his inbred good nature far from any
villainy) detested and disliked, as pernicious and dangerous. But about the
same time, Henry Percy offered his service unto Rosse, for to deliver the
Queen of Scotland out of prison; so that Grange and Carre of Ferniherst would
receive her at the borders of Scotland, and his brother the Earl of
Northumberland might be delivered out of Scotland. But when his credit was
suspected, because of his private familiarity with Burghley, and also he
delaied the matter very long, that plot came to nothing: (For the which, upon
his submission he was notwithstanding fined in the Star Chamber at five
thousand Marks, which nevertheless the Queen pardoned.) As also the plot of
Powell of Sandford, one of the Pensioners, and of Owen, a Gentleman belonging
to the Earl of Arundell, who intended to adventure upon the same action, but
that Rosse did inhibit and hinder them, as not able to perform so great an
attempt, since they were not men of that ability and means.

Yet did many English men hasten the marriage between the Queen of Scotland
and the Duke of Norfolk as much as they could; for they had by their
persuasions brought him to think of the marriage with her again, contrary to
the promise he had made, which was first found out by these means.

Ridolph the Florentine (whom we have spoken of) being sent over Sea into
foreign Countries, to deal in the Queen of Scotlands business, had
acquainted Charles Bailiffe a Flemming, servant to the Queen of Scotland, with
all his speeches with the Duke of Alua, and had delivered unto him letters in
Ciphers unto her, the Spanish Ambassador, Norfolk, Rosse, and the Lord
Lumley, all put in one Packet, which Bailiffe brought over with him, though
Rosse had bidden him to leave them with the Captain of Calice to be sent
over. But as soon as he arrived in Dover Haven, he was apprehended and put
in prison; but his Packet of letters was sent to the Lord Cobham Warden of the
Cinque Ports; which things Rosse knew with the first, and dealt so diligently
and craftily with Cobham (who was not ignorant of the Dukes counsel) that that
Packet was delivered unto him, and another with other old letters wrapped up,
was delivered unto the privy Counselors: And this was also signified unto
Bailiffe. Yet he being upon the Rack, confessed some things, and amongst
other, that a Packet of letters came to the hands of Rosse. This came to the
knowledge of Rosse also, who forthwith very wisely sent away Cuthbert his
Secretary, and laid aside his Ciphers and privy Characters, with other things
which might bring trouble, at his friends houses; so that when Sussex,
Burgh^ey, Mildmay and Sadleir, searched his house most narrowly, they found
nothing, nor could wring nothing out of him with interrogations; who stood upon
it still, that an Ambassador was not to be compelled to yield reasons and make
answers to any but his own Prince. Yet on the next day Rosse was delivered to
the Bishop of Ely to keep, and shortly after he was sent into the I Will of Ely.
Also Sir Thomas Stanley, Sir Thomas Gerard Knights, and Rolston (of whom I have
spoken) were sent to the Tower of London. And Henry Howard (who had sued to the
Archbishop of York) upon suspicion, was committed to the keeping of the
Archbishop of Canterbury.

About the same time, the Queen of Scotland had sent a certain sum of money
unto the French Ambassador, for her friends in Scotland; he delivered it unto
Barker and Higford, who acquainting the Duke with the matter, delivered it to
one Brown a Citizen of Shrewsburie, a retainer of the Dukes, to be carried by
Banister and Lander into Scotland, unto the Lord Herris. Brown being
suspicious, when he perceived by the weight, that they had delivered the money
in gold, and not in silver; he delivered it and the letters to the privy
Counselors. Herein the wiser sort did observe, that this was the first time
that the Duke did commit treason, in that he had given aid unto Herris and the
Scots, proclaimed enemies, who had depopulated the English borders. Hereupon
Higford was cast into p^ison, who forthwith did voluntarily confess all the
matter concerning the money; and withal he told them in what places he had
hidden the letters, Ciphers and the Commentary of the Queen of Scotland (I
mentioned) under the Matt, and in the tiles.

The Queen of Scotland discoursed in this Commentary these things at large.
The French King allowed the conference appointed with the Scots, and that they
proposed the marriage of Anjeou with Queen ELIZABETH, for no other purpose, but
that they might with the better color deny their aid promised to restore her:
That they secretly sought to hinder her marriage with Don John d'Austria, and
that they favored exceedingly the marriage with Norfolk (upon malice to the
Spaniard:) That the Duke of Alba did disallow the purpose of sending back the
Queen of Scotland into Scotland, so much that he thought thereby would be
wrought not only the utter destruction of the Queen, but also of the Romish
Religion in all Britain; because that the Queen returned into Scotland should
be in danger of siege, or else of necessity put to the adventure of a battle
with the Rebels, who may easily get her into their hands, by the help of the
English men, before foreign aid could come to help her. Therefore since she
cannot be in safety in Scotland, and no hope of help was likely to be out of
France, turmoiled with civil wars, the most convenient course seemed for
her, to resort for succor unto the King of Spain, who had offered to marry
her unto Don John d'Austria, which yet she would refuse, upon condition that
the Romish Religion might be restored in Britain, by Norfolk. And also that
her son might speedily be conveyed out of Scotland, and sent into Spain; for
so he might be kept in safety, instructed in his tender years in the Romish
Religion, and withal, all pretext taken from the Scots, who use his authority
and name to countenance their rebellion. For the working of these things, and
the procuring of foreign aid, Ridolph was with speed to be sent away, and
admonished secretly to keep these things from the French King by all means.

When the privy Counselors had received this Commentary, the letters I spoke
of, and others sent from the Pope, and Barker being taken, had confessed all
these things; Sir Ralph Sadleir was commanded to watch the Dukes house (at the
Charter House in London) with a band of Soldiers. The next day the Duke
himself being examined (not knowing what his servants had confessed, and
thinking that the Commentary had been burned and the letters also) denied all
things stoutly: a day or two after, namely, on the seventh day of September, he
was conveyed to the Tower of London again, by Sir Ralph Sadleir, Sir Thomas
Smith, Sir Henry Neuill, and Doctor Wilson. And then Banister, who was the
Dukes Lawyer, and the Earls of Arundell and Southampton, the Lords Lumley, and
Cobham, and Thomas his brother, Henry Percie, Louder, Powell, Goodyeere, and
others were put in prison, who every one in hope of pardon, told all they knew.

As soon as the Commissioners showed to him the confessions of these men, the
letters of the Queen of Scotland, and of Rosse, with the Commentary, he was
astonished; but beholding the Commentary with the letters which he thought had
been burned, he brake out into these words: I am betrayed and undone by my
servants, because I knew not how to distrust, which is the sinew of wisdom.
But he besought the Commissioners very humbly to speak unto the Queen in his
behalf, promising that he would hide nothing that he knew; and solemnly
protesting that he approved nothing which might have been wrong unto the
Queen, or detriment unto the Realm; yea, that he utterly condemned the
purposes and plots to surprise the Queen and the Tower of London, and to set
free the Queen of Scotland; and that he never had a thought to bring in any
foreign forces, but only to suppress the Scots that rebelled against the
Queen. The same day, being examined of fifty Articles, more or less, he
concealed nothing. Then all the course of the business was laid down and
declared in the Starchamber, a great assembly of Noblemen, the Mayor and
Aldermen of London being present, and afterward to all the Citizens in the
Guild Hall, by William Fleetwood the Recorder.

But when the Bishop of Rosse was accused by the confession of every one of
them, and by the Duke himself also, as the contriuer of the business, a
serious consultation was had, what was to be done with him, that was an
Ambassador. For he whiles he thought it lawful for him (as such kind of men
use to do) to advance the affairs of his Prince by any manner of means, and
not to be brought in question of law upon the inviolable privilege of
Ambassadors in a strange Court, had done many things long since turbulently,
in kindling a commotion, and having nightly conferences with the Earl of
Southampton and others, and now again with the English f^gitiues in the
Low Countries, the Duke of Alba, the King of Spain, and the Pope, about the
invasion of England: Therefore the cause was put to David Lewis, Valentine
Dale, William Aubrey, and Henry Jones Doctors of the Civil Law.

1 First, whether an Ambassador that raises or procures rebellion against a
Prince unto whom he is Ambassador, may enjoy the privileges of an Ambassador,
and not be subject to punishment as an enemy?

They answered; Such an Ambassador by the law of Nations, and civil Law of
the Romans, has lost all the privileges of an Ambassador, and was subject to
punishment.

2 Secondly, whether an Agent of a Prince, who is deprived by public
authority, and in whose place another is crowned, may enjoy the privilege of
an Ambassador?

They answered; If such a Prince be lawfully deprived, his Agent cannot
challenge the privilege of an Ambassador, since none but they which have the
rights of an absolute Prince can appoint Ambassadors.

3 Thirdly, whether a Prince who shall come into the Kingdom of another
Prince, and be kept in prison, may have his Agent; and whether he be to be
accounted an Ambassador?

They answered; If such a Prince who shall come into the Kingdom of another
Prince, and be kept in prison, has not lost his principality, he may have
an Agent; but whether that Procurator may be reputed an Ambassador, that
depends on the authority of his Commission or delegation.

4 Fourthly, whether if any such Prince do denounce and tell to such an Agent
and Prince being in prison, That this Procurator shall be accounted no longer
for an Ambassador; whether this Procurator by the Law may challenge the
privileges of an Ambassador?

They answered, The Prince may forbid the Ambassador, that he do not come
into the Realm, and command him to depart out of the Realm, if he do not
contain himself within the bounds prescribed unto an Ambassador; yet in the
mean time he may use and enjoy the privileges of an Ambassador, according to
the authority given him by his Commission.

After these answers of the learned Lawyers, Rosse being brought back out of
the Isle of Ely, was sharply rebuked and told by the Counselors, that he was
no more to be acknowledged for an Ambassador, but as a plotter of treasons to
be severely punished. He answered, That he is the Ambassador of an absolute
Queen unjustly deprived; That he had dealt diligently according to his place
and duty, for the liberty of his Prince, and the good of both the Kingdoms;
That he came into England with a sufficient authority (which he showed) with
the most ample authority of an Ambassador; and that the sacred rights and
privileges of Ambassadors are not to be violated by any means. Burghley told
him in discreet words, that neither the privileges of Embassage, nor letters of
public credit did protect Ambassadors who offend against the public Majesty
of the Prince, but that they are subject to punishment; otherwise it might be
lawful for wicked minded Ambassadors to attempt any thing against the lives
of Princes. He on the other side stood still in it, that the rights and
privileges of Ambassadors were never violated by the course of Law, but (that
I may use his own words) by the way of fact: and bitingly willed them not to
use him with more rigor, than was used to the English Ambassador Throgmorton
in France, and to Tamworth and Randolph in Scotland, who had raised sedition,
and openly maintained it; and had not any other punishment, but only were
commanded to depart within a time appointed. When they urged him with the
testimonies of English men, he with fair words requested them not to do so,
since it was a long received custom, which was grown to a Law (as he said)
That the testimony of a Scot against an English man, and of an English man
against a Scot was not to be received. After much altercation, whether this
was to be allowed, but only between the Borderers of both the Kingdoms, and
that also in matters of the borders; and then whether the English Ambassadors
had raised and fostered rebellions; Rosse was committed to the Tower of London,
where he was kept very close, and answered in brief to all the
interrogatories, with that caution and wariness, that his answers could hurt
no body. He excused the Queen of Scotland, that she being a prisoner, and in
her best time and age, could not but seek all the means she could of
liberty, since Queen ELIZABETH excluded her from all access unto her, put
her out of all hope of her liberty, and openly maintained her adversaries. He
excused the Duke, that he had dealt nothing in the marriage with the Queen of
Scotland, but with the consent of most of the Queens Council; neither that he
could leave her (though he had promised so to do under his hand) for that
there had passed a mutual repromission of future marriage between them before
that time. Lastly, he excused himself, that he being an Ambassador, could not
without a great offense depart from his duty, and abandon his foueraigne
Princess in her affliction and adversity; and that he propounded the taking
of Queen ELIZABETH for no other cause, but to try the Dukes mind, whether
he stood constant and resolute. But the crimes of the other he wittily
extenuated, and by no means he could be induced to tell the names of the
Noblemen that promised to help the Duke to surprise the Queen; But he
confessed that he by the commandment of the Queen of Scotland, did ask
advice of the Duke, Arundell, Lumley, and Throgmorton, by their servants that
came to and fro, and the Vicount Mountague by Lumley, about the delivery of
the Castles in Scotland, the hostages, the delivery of the King of Scotland
unto the English men, and the restoring of the English Rebels. Thus much of
these matters this year, out of the Dukes confessions, and the Commentary of
Rosse himself, written with his own hand, sent to the Queen of Scotland.

Matthew Earl of Lennox, Regent of Scotland, Grandfather to the King, had
summoned an assembly of the Estates at Sterling, in the Kings name, where
living securely, he was taken on the sudden by the Noblemen of the contrary
faction; who held a Parliament at Edinburgh at the same time in the Queens
name. He had yielded himself to David Spense of Wormeston, who laboring
diligently to save his life, was slain, together with the Regent (who had
governed the Realm for the King his Grandchild but fourteen months) by Bell
and Caulder. In his place was substituted by the voices of the Kings faction,
John Areskin Earl of Mar, who died after he had been Regent but thirteen
months.

These dangerous times produced in the Parliament holden in England this Law: It
was made treason, if any attempted any harm or hurt, made war, or moved any
other to raise war against the Queen: If any affirmed that she possessed not
the Crown rightfully, but that others had more right to the Crown, or did say
that she was an Heretic, Schismatike or Infidel; did usurp the right of the
Kingdom during her life, or shall say, that any other has right to the
Crown, or that the Laws and Statutes cannot define and bind the right of the
Crown, and the succession of the same. If any in the Queens life, by written
or printed book expressly affirm, that any is or ought to be heir or
successor of the Queen, besides the natural issue of her own body; or shall
print or sell any books or schedules to that effect; he and his fautors for
the first time shall be imprisoned a whole year, and lose half his goods; and
for the second offense, incur Praemunire, that is, to lose all his goods, and
lie in prison for ever.

This seemed somewhat severe unto many who were of opinion, that the
tranquillity of the Realm would be established by the designation of a
certain heir. But it is wonderful what jests somelewd construers of words,
made of that clause, Besides the natural issue of her body; since the Lawyers
call them Natural that are borne out of matrimony, but the legitimate they
call out of the form of words used in the Law of England, Children of his body
lawfully begotten; insomuch, that being a young man, I heard it often said,
that that word was thrust into the Act by Leicester, to the intent that he
might at one time or other, thrust upon them, against their wills, some Bastard
son of his, as the natural issue of the Queen.

An Act was made also at this Parliament, that it should be treason in them,
who reconciled any to the Church of Rome, by any Bulls or Rescripts of the
Popes, or any that were reconciled: they that relieved the reconcilers, or
brought in any Agnus Dei, Grana, Crucifixes, or other things consecrated by the
Pope, into England, should incur the penalty of Praemunire. And that it
should be misprision of treason in them, that did not discover their
reconcilers.

It was moved in the same Parliament, that if the Queen of Scotland did offend
again against the Laws of England, that they might proceed against her,
according to the Law, as against the wife of a Peer of the Kingdom of
England: but the Queen would not suffer it to pass.

Anno 1572.
ON the sixteenth day of January, Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk was arraigned
at Westminster Hall, before George Talbot Earl of Shrewsburie, appointed for
that day Lord high Steward of England; and on both sides of him sat the
Peers, namely, Reynold Gray Earl of Kent, Thomas Ratclif Earl of Sussex,
Henry Hastings Earl of Huntingdon, Francis Russell Earl of Bedford, Henry
Herbert Earl of Pembrooke, Edward Seymer Earl of Hertford, Ambrose Dudley
Earl of Warwick, Robert Dudley Earl of Leicester, Walter Deuereux Viscount
Hereford, Edward Clinto^n Admiral, William Lord Howard of Effingham
Chamberlain, William Cecill Lord Burghley Secretary, Arthur Lord Gray of
Wilton, James Blount Lord Mountioy, William Lord Sands, Thomas Lord Wentworth,
William Lord Borough, Lewis Lord Mordant, John Powlet Lord Saint-Iohn of
Basing, Robert Lord Rich, Roger Lord North, Edmund Bruges Lord Chandois, Oliver
Lord Saint-Iohn of Bletneshoo, Thomas Sackuill Lord Buckhurst, and William West
Lord De La-ware.

Silence being made, the Letters Patents of the Commission was read; then a
white wand was delivered unto the Lord Steward, by Garter King at Arms, which
he shortly after delivered unto the Serieant at Arms, who stood by and held
it up all the while. Then the Earls and Barons were called by their names, and
every one made answer to his name. Then silence was made again, and the
Lieutenant of the Tower was commanded to return his precept, and to bring the
Duke to the Bar. Forthwith he was brought in, and Sir Owen Hopton stood on
the one side of him, and Sir Peter Carew on the other side; and next by him
stood a man holding an Axe, with the edge from the Duke: Silence being made
again, the Clerk of the Crown said thus to the Duke; Thomas Duke of Norfolk
late of Keningale, in the County of Norfolk, hold up thy hand: (which when
he had done, the Clerk read the Indictment with a loud voice, that is to say,
That in the eleventh year of Queen ELIZABETH and after, the Duke did
traitorously devise to put her from her Crown, and to kill her, and to raise
war against her, and to bring in foreign forces to invade the Realm. That
whereas he knew MARIE late Queen of Scotland to have claimed the Diadem of
England, with the title and arms thereof, yet he without the Queens
knowledge intended to marry with her, and lent her a great sum of money,
contrary to the promise he had made under his own hand. That whereas he knew
the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, Markenfield, and others, had
raised rebellion against the Queen, and were fled into Scotland, he relieved
them with money. That in the thirteenth year of the Queen, he by letters
requested aid of men from Pope Pius Quintus, the professed enemy of the
Queen, the King of Spain, and the Duke of Alba, to deliver the Queen of
Scotland, and to restore Papistrie into England. Lastly, that he gave aid unto
Herris a Scot, and other enemies of the Queen in Scotland. This being read,
the Clerk asked the Duke, whether he were guilty of these crimes or no?

He besought, that if it were lawful by the Law, he might have a Lawyer
appointed him to defend or plead his cause. Catlin Chief Justice answered,
that it was not lawful. The Duke said; It is meet that I submit my self to
the opinion of the Judges; but there be many dark and obscure points in this
business; neither understood I of my arraignment till within this fourteen
hours; I was kept from books; now I see, I am to fight for my life without
weapons: Yet I have heard, that a Lawyer was assigned unto Humfrey Stafford in
a case of treason, in the reign of Henry the seventh. Dier chief Justice of
the Common pleas answered, that a Lawyer was assigned unto Stafford about the
privilege of the Sanctuary, from whence he was taken away by force, and that
he answered for himself without a Lawyer for the treason. The Duke said, I
must speak this day for my life, my goods, for my children, and that which is
most to be respected, for my loyalty and honesty (let honor go by:) yet
let me ask one question; Whether that the enumeration of the crimes must be
holden for true in every part, and to which part I must answer? Catlin said,
When the causes be true, the enumeration is also to be accounted true. I do
desire to be told (said the Duke) whether every singular thing be treason; For
I have heard in the cause of the Lord Scroope, in the reign of Henry the
fourth. As he would have said more, the Clerk of the Crown interrupted him,
speaking aloud; Thomas Duke of Norfolk, art thou guilty, or not guilty? He
said, Not guilty. The Clerk asked him again; How wiltthou betried? I commend
(said he) my cause to God and to my Peers: The heinousness of my crimes
wounds my heart, but the benignity of her Majesty from whom I could expect
no more, does recomfort me: and I beseech you, my Lord Steward, that I may be
dealt withal according to Law, and that my memory, which is slipperie, may
not be oppressed with the confused variety of things. That I have you my Peers
and Judges, I acknowledge my self happy; for unto many of your integrities I
would willingly commit my life. I trusting unto mine innocence did not fly:
but yet I cannot but ingenuosly confess, that I have transgressed against the
Queen, but in no treason. I beseech you let not those things of smaller moment
be put amongst the other of treason.

Then said Barham the Queens Serieant at law; The crimes of treason whereof
thou art indicted are these: Thou did devise to deprive the Queen of her
Realm and of her life: Thou did intend to marry with the Queen of
Scotland: Thou did send for foreign power to invade the Realm: Thou gave
maintenance unto the Rebels, and did help the Scots, enemies to the Queen.
The Duke interrupted him, saying, Barham, I pray you do not aggrauate the
matter with words, in obiecting the marriage and other things which be not
treason. Barham turning to the Noblemen, urged the matter, saying; He that
would marry her that claims the Kingdom, the same man desires and seeks
after the Kingdom; but this the Duke began when he was one of the
Commissioners at York, to hear the cause of the Queen of Scotland; at which
time he was sworn to weigh indifferently and uprightly the accusations and
defenses on both sides. The Duke said; That cause has sundry parts, which be
without the compass of treason. The Steward of England bade the Duke not to
use such digressions from the purpose, who when Barham still urged it with a
loud voice, he acknowledged that the Queen of Scotland had claimed the Realm
of England as due to her, but that she had given over the claim long since.

Barham to the contrary showed how she had not left off the claim, because
she had not yet made a release or renunciation thereof; and he accused the
Duke hainously that he taught the Delegates of Scotland what to say; and this
out of the confession of the Bishop of Rosse. The Duke confessed that Lidington
moved the marriage unto him, and that he refused it, and that he told them
nothing; and requested that the Bishop of Rosse might be produced before him.

Then did Barham prosecute at large many things which I have mentioned before,
to prove that the Duke did vnmeasurably desire the Kingdom: and stood much
upon this point; What other thing could the Duke propose unto himself in his
mind, without the priuitie of the Queen, to marry the Queen of Scotland, a
woman without goods, without Kingdom (her son being now established in the
Realm of Scotland) but that he might get by her means or right the Kingdom
of England, and consequently deprive the Queen of her life and Kingdom? The
Duke said; These things are far fetched to convince me to have imagined the
deprivation and destruction of the Queen. I will come nearer, said Barham: It
is not unknown that you devised with others, to surprise the Tower of London
(which is the chiefest hold of England,) so that it is of necessity that you
then compassed the destruction of the Queen, since Kingdoms cannot endure to
have a partner. The Duke denied not, that one Hopton put into his head, the
surprising of the Tower, yet that he rejected the same: Why then, said Barham,
did thou ask the Earl of Pembrookes advice, who dissuaded thee?

Barham went on, and urged him, that when the Queen requested of the Infant
King of Scotland certain Castles, and the English Rebels out of Scotland to
be delivered; the Duke secretly willed the Scots not to consent thereunto. He
accused him also, that he attempted privily to steal away the Queen of
Scotland out of prison: And this was after he had solemnly promised to meddle
or deal with her no more.

Then Candish was brought in witness against him; that the Duke had a resolute
purpose to marry her, and that he asked him if he could draw his Uncle to
his side, if Queen Elizabeth died. The Duke utterly denied these things, and
rejected his testimony, as of a needy man, and a childish witness. Moreover,
it was showed, that the Duke sent secretly his man to the Earls of
Northumberland and Westmerland, to advise them not to rise in rebellion, as a
thing that would prove very dangerous. Also the letters of the Queen of
Scotland were showed, wherein she lamented that Northumberland was intercepted
before he was ready to rise. (For this flying news was brought to her,
perchance of set purpose.)

To these things the Duke answered: These reasons do not probably prove, that
he compassed the destruction of the Queen, and that nothing yet brought
against him, was of any moment, but only the testimony of the Bishop of
Rosse; neither was this to be received, since he was a forrainer, citing the
authority of Bracton, the most learned Lawyer of our Land; that he never made
such reckoning of Northumberland and Westmerland, that he would put his life
into their hands: he relied (he said) and trusted so much unto his innocence,
that he had never so much as a thought to fly.

Gerard the Queens Attorney said; It is most apparent that he did purposely
intend to marry the Queen of Scotland to work the Queens destruction: It is
also apparent, that he did advisedly consult of inuading the Realm, by the
letters unto the Pope, the King of Spain, and the Duke of Alba. All his
dealings with Ridolph are now well known, by the secret Ciphers and
Charactericall notes hidden under the tiles of Howard house; also by the
letters (which he commanded to be burned) found in the Matts in the entry of
the chamber; and all these things may be proved out of the examinations of
them who were not terrified with torments, nor attainted of treason. To these
matters the Duke said; Of the consultations of the Pope and the King of Spain,
I was neither author nor fautor; yea, I always disliked them. Let them be
punished that committed the fault, and let them not charge me, to excuse
themselves.

Furthermore Gerard accused the Duke, that he talked with Ridolph of the
landing of ten thousand Soldiers out of Flanders at Harwich, a Haven in Essex;
and this out of the examination of Barker: And also that letters were written
and sent by Ridolph unto the King of Spain, and the Duke of Alba, unto which,
although the Duke did not subscribe, yet that he sent by the counsel of
Rosse, Barker his Secretary unto the Spanish Ambassador, who should assure
them that they were his very letters. The Duke said; My memory fails me,
neither can it call to mind such intricate variety of matters. You Lawyers
have your brief notes, I am put to answer ex tempore. This is also improbable,
that I should deal with the Pope, unto whose Religion I was always an
adversary. I had rather be pulled in pieces by horses, than revolt from the
Religion I profess. The situation of Harwich does easily confute all this
accusation. Who sees not, how hard a matter it is to bring an army through
that Country, which is all enclosed, and most troublesome, with narrow ways?
If I had imagined to make war against my Prince, I should doubtless have
furnished my self with Armor; but in these whole ten years, I have not
bought any more than eight Corslets, and no Gunpowder at all; I would never
have committed such letters unto Barkers fidelity, but rather unto Banister,
whom I esteemed above many Barkers.

Now were brought forth the letters of the Bishop of Rosse, sent out of prison
unto the Queen of Scotland, and intercepted; out of which the former things
were confirmed. The Duke required to see the letters; for he seemed to doubt
that they were counterfeit. But the Lord Steward said, Doubt not, they be
written with Rosses own hand. Another short letter written with Oker by the
Duke, commanding his man to burn a bundle of letters hidden in a certain
place, and to lay the fault upon Rosse, who might easily avoid the Law, by the
privilege of an Ambassador, was also showed: To these letters the Duke said; I
being certified, that it was diuulged amongst the common people, that I had
accused many; I answered in that short letter; and when I saw all places to be
narrowly searched, I commanded that bundle to be burned, that I might keep
many men from trouble.

Bromley the Queens Solicitor, showed the letters of Ridolph, wherein he
signified, that the Duke of Alba approved their purpose; and also the Popes
letters unto the Duke, dated the tenth day of May. Then Wilbraham made an
cloquent speech of the credit of the testimonies of the Bishop of Rosse, and of
the Dukes servants. Unto which the Duke said; I have not the skill to refell so
polished and ornate a speech; yet the Orator as skillful as be is, for all
that, left out what the force of fear is, which oftentimes quaileth and
dauntoth a good courage; and again he commended and urged Bracton against the
credit of foreign witnesses. Catlin chief Justice made answer: In such causes
as these, the testimonies of forrainers are allowable, and that it was in the
will of the Peers to give credit or disallow such testimonies.

Now they were come to prove that the Duke had relieved the Rebels after they
were fled, which appeared out of the letters of the Countess of
Northumberland, in which she gave thanks to the Duke for the money secretly
sent unto her and her husband. As concerning the last objection, about the
releeuing the Scots, enemies to the Queen, was proved out of the Dukes letters
to Banister, out of the confession of Banister, and the money delivered unto
Brown of Shrewsburie. Here the Duke asked the Judges, Whether the subjects of
another Prince confederate with the Queen, may be accounted enemies to the
Queen? Catlin answered, they might; and that the Queen of England may make
war with some Duke of France, and yet at the same time be in amity with the
King of France.

When now it drew toward night, the Lord Steward asked the Duke what he had
more to say for himself? He answered; I put my trust in the equity of the
Laws. The Lord Steward commanded the Lieutenant of the Tower to take the Duke
aside; and then silence being made, he turned unto the Peers, and said: You
have heard how Thomas Duke of Norfolk has been indicted of high treason, who
has pleaded not guilty, and put himself unto God and to you; therefore it is
your part, to consider among you, whether he be guilty or no, and to declare
your opinion according to your conscience, and upon your honor: and withal,
he bade them to go aside, and to consult one with another. After a little
time, they returned unto their places: Then the Steward beginning at the
lowest, said: My Lord De La-ware, is Thomas Duke of Norfolk guilty of the
crimes of high treason, whereof he is indicted, or not guilty? He rising up,
laying his hand on his breast, said, Guilty. In like manner were each one
asked in their order. Then was the Duke brought again to the Bar, unto whom
the Lord Steward spoke in this manner: Thomas Duke of Norfolk, thou have been
indicted of sundry high treasons; and put thy self to be tried by God and thy
Peers, who have found thee guilty; have thou any thing to say why judgment
should not be given against thee? He answered, The will of God (who will judge
between me and my false accusers) be done.

All men now keeping silence, the edge of the Axe was turned toward him: Then
Barham for the Queen requested the Lord Steward to give judgment; which he
(weeping) did, in these formal words: Forasmuch as thou Thomas Duke of
Norfolk have been indicted of high treason, and have pleaded not guilty, and
have put thy self upon thy Peers, who have found thee guilty; therefore this
Bench does adiudge that thou shall be lead back from hence unto the Tower
(from whence thou came) and from thence laid on a Hurdle, shall be drawn
unto the place of execution, and there to be hanged, cut down alive, to be
bowelled, thy head cut off, thy body to be divided into four quarters, thy
head and thy quarters to be disposed of at the Queens pleasure: And so our
Lord have mercy on thy soul. The Duke hearing this judgment, said with a
good courage; Judgment is given against me, as against a Traitor; I trust in
God, that excluded from your fellowship, I shall enjoy the celestial
fellowship; I will prepare my self to die; I request this one thing, that the
Queen would be good to my children and servants, and see my debts paid.

A few days after Barney and Mather were executed, who conspired with Herle a
Ruffian, to kill some o^ the privy Counselors, and to deliver the Duke: But
Herle presently discovered the matter, unto whom Barney said smiling (when he
saw him brought forth to give evidence against him) Herle thou wentest but one
hour before me, otherwise I had stood there in thy place to give evidence, and
thou had stood here in my place to be hanged. These plots and the like, which
were many, were taken hold of to hasten the Dukes death, which yet was stayed
and deferred for four months. But on the second day of June, at eight of the
clock in the morning, the Duke was lead unto a Scaffold new builded on the
Tower Hill; and when he was gone up, and Alexander (...)

To these things she (first protesting that she was a free Queen and subject
to none) answered with a stout courage and countenance.

1 That she had not usurped the title and arms of England, but that the King
of France and her husband imposed them upon her, being very young, and under
the direction of her husband, and therefore not to be laid upon her for a
fault; neither that she did wear or use them after her husbands death; neither
that she will claim them as long as Queen ELIZABETH and her children lived.

2 That she never imagined any detriment or hurt to the Queen by her marriage
with the Duke of Norfolk, being persuaded it would be for the good of the
Commonwealth; and that she did not renounce it, because she had given her
faith and troth unto him.

3 That she willed the Duke by some means to get away out of danger and
prison, which she did out of the duty she ought to him as her husband.

4 That she had not raised rebellion, nor was privy to the same, who was
always most ready to reveal any attempts against the Queen if she would
vouchsafe to hear her speak.

5 That she never relieved the English Rebels, only that in her letters she
commended the Countess of Northumberland unto the Duke of Alba.

6 That she used Ridolph (whom she knew to be highly in the Popes favor) in
many matters, yet received no letters from him.

7 That she never moved any to attempt her deliverance; yet that she willingly
gave ear unto them that offered their labor therein; and for that purpose,
that she communicated unto Rolston and Hall a private Character.

8 That she had received sometimes letters from the Pope, very pious and
consolatorie, in which were no such phrases of speech.

9 That she procured not the Bull: That she only saw the coppie thereof
printed, and when she had read it over, that she burned it.

10 That if any in foreign Regions write or name her otherwise than they ought
to do, let them answer for it.

11 That she never by letters required aid of the Pope and the King of Spain,
to invade England, but only to be restored into her Kingdom by their means,
and that with the Queens priuitie.

12 But if any question or doubt be made of those letters of effecting the
marriage by force of arms, she requested (since she was borne of the royal
blood of England) that she might answer personally in the next Parliament that
was to be holden.

And at this time the French King favoring the Queen of Scotland and her
party (and the Queen of England the King and his party) earnestly moved
Queen ELIZABETH to deliver the Queen of Scotland, which the Queen of England
denied to do, saying, In very truth I keep the Queen of Scotland in custody
(after a fair manner) as a pledge of mine own security, and of the safety
of England. But when it was come to light that the Queen of Scotland intended
a secret confederacy with the King of Spain, by the Lord Seton, who landing
in Essex, disguised like a Mariner, had promised aid of men to the Scots, of
the Queens party from Alba; both she was kept straiter in prison, and the
kindness of the French men toward her waxed key-cold.

Shortly after, the league between England and France being concluded at
Blois, and the Duke of Momorancie being sent into England to confirm the same;
he in few words in his Masters name, requested that as much favor might be
showed unto the Queen of Scotland as might be without danger: That there might
be a cessation of arms in Scotland, and that concord might be established
there by Parliament. He was answered, That more favor was showed to the Queen
of Scotland than she deserved, and should be showed for the French Kings
sake; although the Estates of the Kingdom (who were now assembled) thought the
Queen could be in no security without some severity showed unto her. As for
the cessation of arms, the Queen had dealt diligently therein; and for that
purpose had sent very lately Drurie the Marshall of Barwicke, with Crocus the
French Ambassador; and that they by no persuasions could bring Grange and the
Garrisons in the Castle of Edinburgh to peace, being induced by hope of aid
from France and the Low Countries, though Huntley, and Hamilton Arbroth for the
Duke his father, had bound themselves under their hands to observe peace; and
the others of the Queens side had given their word also.

Anno 1573.
IN Scotland, James Douglas Earl of Mourton, by the means of Queen
ELIZABETH, was made Regent in the place of the Earl of Mar, who having his
authority established in the Parliament, did enact in the Kings name certain
Laws, against the Papists, and against Heretics; but the custody of the King
he confirmed to Alexander Areskin, for that the Earl of Mar (unto whom the
custody of the King of Scotland in his minority does belong by a peculiar
right) was under age, upon these conditions, that is to wit, That the Papists
and they of the other faction should be utterly excluded; an Earl might come
in with two men, a Baron with one man, other men alone, and every one of these
unarmed.

And whereas Queen ELIZABETH by Henry Killigrew, had drawn James Hamilton
Duke of Chasteauleroy, George Gordon Earl of Huntley, who stood for the
Queen, to these conditions, namely, To acknowledge the Religion established in
Scotland: To submit themselves to the King, and also to Mourton as his Regent,
and to his successors in the government: To renounce the authority of all
others: To account them Traitors by authority of Parliament, that attempted any
thing against the Religion, the King or Regent: That the sentence against the
Hamiltons and the Gordons should be repealed, etc. But these conditions William
Kircaldy Lord of Grange, the Lord Hume, Lidington, and the Bishop of Dunkelden,
and others, who thought the Queen of Scotland to be injuriously used, would
upon no terms admit; but fortified the Castle of Edinburgh, of which Grange
was Captain (placed therein by Murrey) looking for aid from France and the
Duke of Alba; but Sir William Drury being sent into Scotland with forces out of
England to join with the Scots, the same Castle was yielded in the three and
thirtieth day of the siege, and so the Castle and all the prisoners were
delivered unto the Regent, who hanged Kircaldy without mercy, spared Hume and
others at the request of Queen ELIZABETH; Lidington was sent to Lies, where
he died, not without suspicion of poison.

And to the end, that England might also be more secure from clandestine
attempts at home (on the behalf of the Queen of Scotland) John Lesly Bishop
of Rosse, who very faithfully had served his Queen (yet with the destruction
of many men, and danger of more) was delivered out of prison, and commanded to
depart out of England, and went into France, fearing Southampton, whom by his
appeaching he had brought in danger, and also Henry Howard the Duke of
Norfolkes brother; to mollify whose anger, he wrote an Apology. He was
scarce departed, but his secret Lettercarrier Henry Cokin was taken, and by him
was Morgan detected, who prompt to do some exploit for the Queen of Scotland,
and desirous to have done somewhat, forthwith fled away. Atsloe the Physician
for the Papists, and Goad, Doctors of Physic, and Francis Berty, because they
had secret commerce of letters with her, were put certain months in prison.
And for the same cause Henry Goodyer and Richard Louder were called into
question.

In the mean while Rosse did not pretermit any part or duty of a most
faithful subject to the Queen of Scotland toward the Emperor, the Pope, the
French King, and the Catholic Princes of Germany, who every one gave good
words and hopes, but yet performed nothing. And also the Duke of Alba, in whom
he put his greatest trust, did at this time depart out of the Low Countries, to
his great grief.

Anno 1574.
HEnry the third of that name, King of France, and his mother did all that they
could by secret devices to get the young King of Scotland into France, and to
get Mourton out of his office of Regent, sending secretly Scots out of the
French Guard for this purpose into Scotland; which thing the Queen of Scotland
desired much, being persuaded, that if her son were in France out of danger,
that she and the Papists in England should be dealt withal more mildly: For
hereupon she thought it would come to pass, that the faction in Scotland,
hitherto countenanced by the authority of the Kings name, would decay and come
to nothing; and that the English men would fear him more and more, as he grew
up in years, as well from France as out of Scotland. And as much did the
French men wish the same; secretly fearing lest the Regent of Scotland
depending wholly on the English, should dissolve the ancient league between
the Scots and the French. Yet when the Regent earnestly requested that a league
of mutual defense between England and Scotland might be made, he was not
heard; perhaps for that he requested withal, that an annual pension might be
assigned unto him, and unto certain other Scots. But they were heard, who with
a small suspicion touched the Queen of Scotland, the Countess and Earl also
of Shrewsburie, as though they had wrought a marriage between Charles Uncle
unto the King of Scotland (unto whom the King had lately in the Parliament
confirmed the Earldom of Lennox) and Elizabeth Candish daughter to the
Countess of Shrewsburie by her former husband, without the Queens knowledge:
For which cause the mothers of both them and others were kept in prison, and
all the fault was laid upon the Queen of Scotland. And when sundry suspicions
grew of the intent and purpose of this marriage, Henry Earl of Huntingdon was
made Lord President of the Council in the North, with new and secret
instructions concerning this matter.

Anno 1575.
THis year died in Scotland the most Noble Lord James Hamilton Duke of
Chasteauleroy, and Earl of Arran, who was the Grand-childes son of James the
second King of Scotland by his daughter, the Tutor of Queen MARIE of Scotland,
and Governor of the Kingdom, and heir designed, while she was in her
minority. At such time as he had delivered her unto the French men, he was
made Duke of Chasteauleroy in France; then chief of the three Governors of
Scotland appointed by MARIE in her captivity. Whose cause while he defended
most constantly, he being a plain and well-meaning man, was vexed with all
manner of politic and crafty devices by turbulent and unquiet minded people.

Anno 1577.
DOn John d'Austria had made a perpetual edict at Gaunt, to give satisfaction
to the Estates of the Netherlands for their aggrieuances; which the Prince of
Orange utterly condemning, opportunely heard, that Don John intended to marry
the Queen of Scotland; on which he willingly laid hold, and forthwith
certified Queen ELIZABETH thereof by Famier, thereby to withdraw her mind
from peace: yet she, as one ignorant thereof, by Daniel Rogers showed her
gladness of the perpetual edict of peace, though now she had certain
knowledge, that Don John by the persuasion of the Earl of Westmerland and the
English fugitives, and forward favor of the Pope and the Guises, had in hope
swallowed that marriage, and withal the Kingdoms of England and Scotland; and
had already appointed to surprise the I Will of Man in the Irish Sea, as a fit
place to invade England out of Ireland, and the West borders of Scotland,
wherein the Queen of Scotland had many assured friends; as also in the
opposite side of England, North Wales, Cumberland, Lancashire and Cheshire,
where most of the inhabitants were earnest Papists.

But indeed Don John (as we have learned of Perez Secretary to the King of
Spain) before now ambitiously minded, when he had lost the hope of the
Kingdom of Tunise, had dealt covertly with the Pope about the expulsion of
Queen ELIZABETH, the marrying of the Queen of Scotland, and the conquest of
England, and unknown to Philip, had prevailed so far, that the Pope as out
of the care of the common good, moved Philip to make war against England; and
Don John himself being to depart into the Low Countries, had prosecuted it
earnestly in Spain; and afterward by Escouedo, sent out of the Netherlands,
he had desired to have some Havens in Biscay granted unto him, from whence he
might invade England with a Navy: But Philip disliked their intentions, and
began to neglect him, as one over ambitious.

Yet Queen ELIZABETH understood not these things fully, until Orange informed
her.

In the mean time Don John covertly prosecuted the marriage, and at the same
time, to cloak the matter, sent unto Queen ELIZABETH the Viscount of Gaunt,
to show her the conditions of the peace, and to request longer days of payment
for the money lent unto the Estates: which she willingly granted, and dealt
with him again by Wilson, to recompense the Merchants of England, for the hurt
sustained in the sacking of Antwerpe. He eludeth the matter, and whiles he
seemed to attend about the Perpetual edict for peace, he brake out suddenly
into open war, and by policy gat into his hands many Cities and Castles; and
wrote unto the King of Spain, that he thought it best to subdue and conquer
the Islands of Zeland before the Inland Provinces: and believing that which he
hoped, endeavored to persuade him by his Secretary, that England was easier to
be conquered than Zeland.

Anno 1578.
ABout this time Margaret Douglas Countess of Lennox, Niece to Henry the
eighth by his eldest sister, widow of Matthew Earl of Lennox, Grandmother unto
JAMES King of Great Britain, ouerliuing her eight children, departed to the
ioies of heaven, in the threescore and third year of her age, and was buried
at Westminster with a solemn funeral, at the Queens charge: a Matron of
worthy piety, patience and chastity, who was thrice cast into prison (as I
have heard her speak it) not for matter of treason, but for love matters:
First, when Thomas Howard son to Thomas Howard first Duke of Norfolk (being
in love with her) died in the Tower; then for the love of Henry Darly her
son, to the Queen MARIE of Scotland; lastly, for the love of Charles her
younger son, ^o Elizabeth Candish mother to Arbella, of which marriage the
Queen of Scotland was accused to be a procurer, as I have said before.

About the same time the credit and authority of Mourton began to decay;
insomuch, that he was removed from his office of Regent, and the
administration of all things delivered unto the King, by the common consent of
the Estates, and (because he was not past twelve years old) unto twelve of
the chief Noblemen which were named, of whom three, every three months by
turns, should be present with the King, to give him advice, and Mourton was
one of them, that they might seem to bring him lower, not to cast him down.

Shortly after, Mourton trusting on his sharp wit, long experience, and many
dependants and retainers, thinking nothing well done, except he himself did
it, and also not brooking not to be the same man he had been, drew back all
the administration unto himself, not regarding his associates, and not
observing the consent of administration set down, he kept in his hand the
King within the Castle of Sterling, and shut out and excluded whom he pleased,
and admitted others at his own choice. Wherewith the Noblemen being moved,
made the Earl of Atholl their Captain, and made Proclamation in the Kings
name, that all men above sixteen, and under threescore years, should meet in
Armor, with victuals for fifteen days. There met very many, and with Banners
displaied they marched unto Fawkirke, where Mourton with his friends met them
in Armor ready to fight: But Robert Bows the English Ambassador by
entreaty, and moving honest conditions, kept them from fighting; and Mourton
forthwith, as weary of business, went home secretly, and the Earl of Atholl
died incontinently, not without suspicion of poison; which the minds incensed
against Mourton, took to his slander, and for this and other things, they
never ceased to persecute him, until they had brought him to his destruction,
as we will declare hereafter.

Anno 1579.
THe Scots were in fear of having their Religion altered by a French man
called Amatus or Esmaus Stewart, who came at this time into Scotland, to see
the King his Cousin; (for he was the son of John Stewart, brother unto
Matthew Earl of Lennox, who was the Kings Grandfather, and called Aubigney of
a Town in Berry, which long since Charles the seventh, King of France, had
given to John Stewart of the family of Lennox, who being Constable of the
Scottish Army in France, put the English men to flight at Baugy, and was
afterward, slain by them in the battle of Herrings; and ever since that time
it has belonged unto the younger son of that house.) This man the King used
with singular kindness, gave him good livings, made him of his privy
Council, and Lord Chamberlain of Scotland, and Captain of the Castle of
Dunbritton, and then Earl of Lennox, and after Duke. This extraordinary
favor of the King toward him, caused many to envy him; who murmured that he
was a favorer of the Guises, and of the Roman Religion, and sent purposely
into Scotland, by secret means to overthrow the true Religion. The suspicion
was much increased, in that he was familiar with the adversaries of Mourton,
and entreated to have Thomas Carre of Fernihurst recalled home, who was the
most assured friend to the Queen of Scotland of all others; Mourton resisting
the same with all his power, but in vain, for his authority was less and
less with all men; although it might seem that he deserved well, in
profligating the Hamiltons, and taking the Castle of Hamilton and Daffraine.

Anno 1580.
IN Scotland when many Ministers of the Word and Noblemen perceived that Lennox
was in the Kings high favor; first, they raised one James Stewart of the
family of Ochiltree, Captain of the Guard, and Earl of Arran (for he had
usurped that title from I know not what cession of James Hamilton Earl of
Arran, whose Tutor he had been when he was not well in his wit) to affront
him: But the King in a short time reconciled them. When this way served not
their turn, they procured him as much hatred as they could at home, and
accused him hainously unto the Queen of England, as one sent in covertly by
the Guises, to shake the state of Religion, to procure the liberty of the
imprisoned Queen, and to dissolve the amity between England and Scotland.
These men were soon believed, and upon this matter was kept a serious
consultation in England; though he in his letters cleared himself to the
Queen, and openly professed the Protestants Religion.

For the Counselors of England feared, lest he should suppress the Scots who
were friends to England, nourish excursions in the borders, and entice the King
to marry in France, or in some other place, unknown to the English men;
whereupon the young King trusting, might trouble England, and being grown to
mature years, assume to himself the title of the Realm of England, as his
mother had done before; which if he should do, there would be more danger in
him, than was in his mother; since he was borne to the certain hope of both
the Kingdoms, he might get many more fautors; and now the Scots being bred up
in their wars at home, and in the Low Countries, were more exercised and
skillful in marshall affairs. Hereupon they thought good to wring Lennox out
of the Kings favor, by one means or other, or else to drive him out of
Scotland, and that without delay; since it was bruted abroad, that he had sent
for one Balfure out of France (who had gotten I know not what handwriting of
Mourtons, wherein it was hoped, that Mourton might be convinced of the murder
of the Kings father) and also that he had obtained the Captainship of the
Castle of Dunbritton, for no other purpose, but either to let in foreign
forces into Britain, or else to carry over from thence the King of Scotland
into France. It was reported also, that he persuaded the King to resign his
Crown up to his mother, as if she had been deprived unjustly, and by a most
impious example or president by her subjects accepting assurance, to take it
from her by a lawful resignation; whereby he should most strongly confirm
his Kingdom to him, and extinguishing the factions thereby, be acknowledged
of all men for a lawful King.

Hereupon Robert Bows, Treasurer for the Garrison at Barwicke, was sent into
Scotland, who should challenge and charge Lennox with those things before the
King and his Counselors, and admonish them to beware of their imminent evils.
As soon as he was admitted to speak, he required to have Lennox removed from
the Council, which the Counselors utterly denied, as a thing strange and
never heard of, that a Kings Councellor should be put out of his place, and
his cause not heard or not known. They doubted also whether the Queen did
expressly command him so to do, and required him to show his instructions to
maintain his credit. He denied to show them, but only to the King, and unto
one or two more; whereupon he was unheard, forth with called home, and took
leave of the King, who thought of no such matter, complaining that the wholesome
admonishments of his Lady the Queen (who deserved well at their hands) were
rejected.

Immediately upon this was sent from Scotland Alexander Hume to excuse these
things, and to learn what these imminent evils were; but he was not admitted
unto the Queen, but was sent to Burleigh, who with a brief and discreet
speech showed him, That the Queen thought not good to admit him to her speech,
not that she did neglect him, whom she had tried to be sound in Religion, and
a man careful for the good of his Prince, Country, and the tranquillity of
both the Realms, but out of a just grief, that her Majesty and the credit of
her Ambassador was so contemptuously used, who had kept himself within the
compass and bounds of his Embassade, and had been commanded to show his
commission (which was a thing never heard of.) He cast all the fault upon the
new Counselors, and excused the King, who wanted experience through his young
years, and wished that he would give ear unto the wholesome and profitable
aduices of the Queen, who bare a true motherly mind unto him, and not to make
less account of her, than he did of his French Cousin, and a subject to the
French King, matched with a French woman, and a Papist in Religion; and who
perhaps does seek (the Hamiltons being at this time banished) to be designed
second person to the King: And said, Let the King remember, that there is no
affection more vehement than Ambition; and let the Scots remember what broiles
the French men had made in Scotland, if the Queen by her prudence and power
had not prevented them.

So Hume was sent back into Scotland, and all these things were done of
purpose to put the King in fear, and to make him believe, that Lennox had
undertaken dangerous plots and devices against the King and the Realm. Yet for
all this, shortly after, Mourton who was wholly for England, was accused of
treason by the Earl of Arran, and cast into prison.

Anno 1581.
HEreupon in the beginning of January, Sir Thomas Randolph general
Postmaster, was sent into Scotland, with instructions to conserve the Religion
and amity with the English men, and to labor all he could, that no violence
should be offered unto Mourton, to remove Lennox away out of Scotland, and to
comfort the Noblemen of the English faction. He made diligent and earnest
entreaty for Mourton, alleging his merits toward the King, the honor of
Queen ELIZABETH, if she so well deserving should have a repulse, and the
envy of his accusers. The King answered; That he could not out of his
Princely duty, but bring to trial a man appeached of treason; and that he
acknowledged by experience the Queens good will, and that he would not commit
any thing that might justly displease her by any means.

After Randolph was admitted to speak in the assembly of the Estates,
recounting the benefits of Queen ELIZABETH toward Scotland, and the King
himself, to wit; How she had delivered the Realm from the French men, with
the blood of English men, defended their Religion and King, and yet never
thought to convey him away (as it was falsely reported) or to obtain an Acre of
Scottish ground; when yet she had opportunity and means to conquer Scotland,
the King being in his Cradle, his mother prisoner in England, and the Noblemen
at dissension. But on the other side, she has bestowed all her care to
preserve in safety the King and his Realm, who was tied unto her with the
most strait bonds of blood, vicinitie and Religion: whose love she found most
sincere toward her, as she had done all the Regents successively before that
Aubigney Earl of Lennox came into Scotland. Since that time he has ruled the
King as a Ward, has auerted his mind from the friendship of the English men
unto the French men, who have not hitherto so much as acknowledged him for
King, has put out of their offices the most faithful subjects of the King,
and has put in others not so faithful, and has by his letters (which he
showed) dealt with foreign Princes about the inuading of England. He has
moved the King to hate and abhor the Ministers of Gods word, as if they were
railers and turbulent people, and has had no care of the administration of
justice between the borderers: All which things Queen ELIZABETH could not but
take in very evil part, when she saw a Prince of such virtue, and her nearest
Cousin, alienated and drawn forcibly away by these bad devices. Yet nothing
was then effected, either to help Mour^on, or against Lennox, who most men
thought was falsely charged with the crimes; and also that the letters which
were showed, were counterfeit.

Therefore Randolph attempted another politic way: He unto the adversaries of
Lennox, and unto the friends of Mourton, deploreth the unfortunate estate of
Scotland, and lays before them the dangers hanging over the heads of the
King, the Commonwealth, and themselves; he complains that the intercession
of the Queen of England is not regarded of the unthankful people, and
covertly advises them to try whether they can effect that by arms, which
they cannot obtain by other means, and promised them help of men and money
out of England. And so he drew to his side the Earls of Argile, Montros,
Angus, (Mourtons brothers son) Mar, Glencarne, Ruthen, Lyndsey, and others.
But they by and by after, their ends and purposes being several, when they saw
the King wholly to bend his favor toward Lennox, and not to be terrified
with the English forces which were on the borders, against which he had opposed
his, the most of them disagreeing and reuerencing royal Majesty even in a
young man, durst attempt nothing against Lennox, and thought it enough if they
took compassion on Mourton. Yet Angus and Mar secretly devised plots for
Mourton, and against Lennox; of which when the King had knowledge by
Wittingham, Angus was commanded to depart, and live beyond the River of Spea;
and Mar was commanded to deliver the Castle of Sterling unto the King.
Randolph doubting some danger to himself, slipped secretly away to Barwicke,
and willed Angus and Mar (things going against them) to look to themselves,
either by recovering the Kings favor, or else by resorting unto the protection
of the Queen of England. But the English forces were now called back from the
borders; and not long after, Mourton (as privy unto the murder of the Kings
father) was beheaded, being first found guilty of the same. For he had
confessed, as they say, That Bothwell and Archibald Douglas did communicate
unto him their intent and purpose to kill the King, and that he durst not
reveal the same in such a doubtful world as that was: neither could he deny
(after the murder was committed) but that Archibald Douglas one of the
murderers was one of his most inward friends; and that he gave his faith and
word under his hand, to defend Bothwell, if any man accused him for murdering
of the King. Angus and the other, who stood in defense of Mourton, fled into
England.

Anno 1582.
QVeene ELIZABETH, that she might be more secure at home, purposed to make a
composition with the Queen of Scotland by Walter Mildmay; but finding out that
the Guise was devising some secret practices with some English sugitiues, and
to gather forces together, under pretense to send them into the Low Countries,
to serve under the Duke of Anjeou, but indeed to be transported into England,
from Ewe an obscure part in Normandy, belonging unto him, the matter was put
off until another time, and she was not regarded.

But about the same time William Ruthen (whom the King had lately created Earl
of Gowry) not degenerating from his father, who bare a deadly hatred against
the Kings mother, and other conspirators devised to remove Lennox and the Earl
of Arran from the King, under the pretense to assure Religion, the Kings
safety, and amity of England, whereunto they were incensed and whetted on by
their Ministers. So when Lennox was departed from Perth, where the King lay,
unto Edinburgh, about some affairs of the Realm, and Arran also was absent;
Gowry, Mar, Lyndsey and others, taking the opportunity, invited the King
unto the Castle of Ruthen, where they detained him against his will, and would
not permit him to ride or walk into the fields, threatening him with death.
They put from him all his faithful servants, cast the Earl of Arran into
prison, and compelled the King to call home the Earl of Angus, who was
banished; the Queen of England (who was of their counsel) making intercession
for him; and to send back Lennox into France, who being a man of a mild
nature, gave over the Castle of Dunbritton, which he might easily have defended
(by the persuasion of the King set on by them) and refused not to return into
France. But they not content herewith, enforced the King against his will, to
approve this his surprise in letters to the Queen of England, and to pronounce
the assembly of the Estates, summoned and called by them, to be lawful.

When the French King heard this for a certainty, he dispatched Motfenelan by
England, and Manninguill by Sea, with one and the same instructions into
Scotland, to wit, That they should take some order by one means or other to
set the King free, and confirm the faction of France, to allure and win the
Kings mind unto the friendship of the French, and as ioifull news signify
unto him, that the Queen his mother out of her motherly piety, did grant and
bestow upon him the title of King, and admit him very willingly now into the
fellowship of the Kingdom, to the end that he might be taken and
acknowledged as a true and lawful King by all Christian Princes, and all the
Scots; and thereby the division and partaking of factions wholly taken away.

She in the mean time being vexed and troubled in mind, oppressed with
miseries, and pining away with the calamity of her long lasting imprisonment,
without any hope of liberty; in her long letters written in French (which her
motherly love and anxietie of mind extorted from her) deplored unto Queen
ELIZABETH her grievous and hard fortunes, and the most distressed estate of her
son, to this effect; for I will, out of the original written with her own
hand, abbreuiate them.

When I heard for certainty, that my son was taken and surprised by Rebels
(as I my self was certain years ago) out of a just fear lest he should
fall into the same and like unfortunate estate that I am in, I cannot but power
out my mournful complaints, and engraue the same (if it may be) in thy
conscience, that my innocence may evidently appear unto posterity; and also
their ignominy and shame, by whose iniquity I am cast into these miseries.
But since the policies and cunning reaches of these persons (though wicked and
lewd) have hitherto prevailed more with thee, than my just complaints; let the
right and justice now yield and give place unto thy power, and let force
oppress the truth with men, I will appeal unto the immortal God, whom alone
I acknowledge to be superior of us Princes of equal right and honor. And I
will call upon the same God (with whom gloses and deceits are not regarded, and
will not prevail) that at the last day he will reward us two as we deserve
each to other, howsoever my adversaries have skill to cloak their crafty and
deceitful policies with men (and peradventure also with thee.) In his name
therefore, and as it were before his Iudgementseat, I present unto thy mind,
by what policies, some spies using thy name, drew the Scots my subjects to
rebel against me, at such time as I lived in Scotland; and set on foot all the
evils which have happened there from that day to this. Which thing (not to
speak of other matters) is most evident and apparent, by testimonies openly
showed, and the confession of Mourtons own mouth, who was for that cause
advanced unto honor; against whom, if I had dealt by course of Law, and thou
had not given aid unto the Rebels, they could never have stood out so long
against me and my friends.

While I was detained in prison in Lochleuin, Nicholas Throgmorton persuaded me
in thy name, by sealing Letters Patents, to resign my Kingdom (which he
affirmed would be void, and indeed all the world accounted it void) until
thou by thy favor, countenance and forces, did give aid unto the beginners
and procurers of these Letters Patents. And tell me in good faith, whether thou
do acknowledge thy subjects to have any such authority over thee. And yet
from thenceforth was my royal authority taken away from me by thy counsel
and help, and my Kingdom transferred unto my son, incapable thereof by
reason of his tender years. And when I not long since, determined to confirm
the Kingdom unto him in a lawful manner, he was taken away by force, by
diverse Traitors, who questionless have an intent to deprive him of his
Kingdom, as they did me, if not to take away his life also. After I escaped
out of Lochleuin, and was now ready to fight and encounter with the Rebels, I
implored thy aid, sending back that Diamond which beforetime I had received
from thee, as a token and pledge of thy love, with a large promise of aid
against the Rebels; not once nor twice also giving thy fidelity, that if I
retired and came my self unto thee for succor, thou would come in person
unto the borders, and give me aid. And I trusting upon thy promise freely
offered, (although thy servants had oftentimes deceived me) resolved to flee
for help unto thee, as to my last assured Anchor, in my adversity; and so had
I done, if the way had been as open and easy for me, as it was for them that
rebelled against me. But before I could come unto thee, I was intercepted,
guarded with keepers, shut up into strong places, and from that time until
this, endured evils more grievous than death.

I know thou will object against me, the dealings that were betwixt the Duke
of Nor^olke and me; yet I do still deny, that they were any wrong or hurt to
thee, or to thy Realm, for they were allowed by the chief Counselors of the
Realm of England, and confirmed with their subscriptions; who also promised
assuredly to obtain thy consent. And how (I pray you) could such great men
promise thy consent unto that should deprive thee of thy life, honor and
Diadem? But yet thou will have all men to believe this.

But when many of those Rebels did repent, though late, and saw more plainly by
the conference at York, between our Commissioners, how unjustly they dealt
with me; they were forthwith besieged by thy forces in the Castle of
Edinburgh; and of the principal men, one (Lidington) was poisoned, and the
other (Grange) in lamentable manner hanged. And this, after that by thy
request, I had caused them once or twice to lay down their arms upon a hope
of peace, which God knows whether my adversaries ever imagined to keep.

From that time I was resolved to try whether I could mollify rigor by
patience, in suffering whatsoever they imposed on me a prisoner; yet I was
utterly barred from all conference with my son by letters or messengers, for
this whole year past, that the son might be disioined by this most
lamentable disjunction from the mother, if it might be.

I have oftentimes set down and proposed conditions of a peace and concord to
be made between us, as at Chattisworth eleven years since, with the
Commissioners, and with thy self by the Ambassadors of the most Christian
King, and by mine own: I dealt also sincerely with Beale the last winter; but
those conditions were always rejected, and delays made and interposed, my
aduices and counsels were suspected, and all the motions of my sincere mind
condemned and disallowed. Neither did I reap any other fruit of my long
lasting patience, than that it grew to a settled custom for me to be more
rigorously used, every day than other; not as a prisoner, but even as a
Kitchin-maid. Assuredly I cannot endure these things any longer, and hap what
hap will, if I die, I will make the procurers and causers of my death to be
known: but if I live, I shall find means, I hope, that all these wicked
attempts and slanderous calumniations against me, shall die, that I may spend
the rest of my life in more tranquillity.

Wherefore to take away all displeasure and hatred between us, let the
testimonies of the Spaniards, who were lately takenin Ireland, be showed, let
the examinations of the Jesuits be produced, let any body have free liberty
to accuse me publicly; yet so that in like manner I may have liberty to
defend my self, and that I be not condemned unheard. Malefactors and persons
of the basest sort and condition are admitted to speak and defend themselves;
and their accusers are brought before their face. Why am not I so used and
dealt withal, who am a Queen anointed, and thy next Cousin, and the lawful
heir of the Crown after thee? But this last thing is the matter which chiefly
vexes and stingeth my adversaries, which study to keep us still enemies, and
at contention. Alas, there is no cause why this should vex them. I take God to
witness, and upon mine honor, I have thought of no other Kingdom this long
time, but only the Celestial Kingdom. Yet thou art bound in Conscience, and
tied both by duty and justice, not to trouble or cross the most assured right
of my son after my death, nor to further their secret combinations, who as
well in England as in Scotland, do apply all their wit and power to work the
destruction of me and my son, which is evident and apparent by the
instructions of thy messengers in Scotland, who used and behaved themselves
most seditiously (doubtless without thy knowledge) but Huntingdon being
wonderful eager and diligent therein.

Is this just and right, that I a mother shall be forbidden, not only to give
counsel and advice to my oppressed son, but also to understand in what
distressed estate he is? If they had been sent for my sons good, perhaps if
they had taken mine advice with them they should have been for that cause the
more welcome unto him. Verily thou had bound and tied me unto thee more
strictly, and thou had no cause so much to conceal their going thither, or
to take away at that very time from me all my liberty: Yet that I may speak
freely; I desire thee not to use such Agents any more in the Scottish affairs:
For although I believe that Carry (Hunsdon) will not do or take any thing in
hand, which may be a blemish to himself or his honor, yet I cannot hope of
any good to come from Huntingdon, for his evil deserts toward me.

Therefore I earnestly request thee, by the most near alliance of blood that
is between us, that thou would seriously have regard to the safety of my
son, and not to intermeddle any more with the affairs of Scotland, without
the priuitie of me, or the French King; and that thou would account them, who
by force keep my son in prison (and compel him to do what they list.) none
other but Traitors. Moreover, I heartily request thee, by the Cross and
Passion of Christ our Redeemer; That I being (upon honest and reasonable
conditions) restored to liberty, may somewhat recomfort my languishing body,
for the small time of my life that (in some place out of England) after this
long-lasting and loath some inprisonment. In so doing thou shall for ever bind
me and my friends, and especially my son unto thee. Which I will never cease
with importunate request to demand at thy hands, until thou do yield and
consent thereunto. My body diseased and subject to infirmity, compels me
to be so earnest. I pray thee therefore cause me to be used with more
humanity, otherwise I cannot endure it, I tell thee in plain terms: And
poast me not over to be used at the pleasure of any other, but at thy
disposition. Whatsoever good or evil things happen unto me hereafter, I will
attribute and ascribe them only to thy self. Show me this favor, that I may
understand thy pleasure from thy self by a letter, be it never so short, or by
the French Ambassador. I cannot be satisfied in those things which
Shrewsburie does signify unto me, forasmuch as they may every day be altered.
When I very lately wrote unto thy Counselors, thou did command that I should
acquaint thee only with my affairs (but it was not just to give them so great
authority to afflict and vex me) yet I cannot but fear, that many of them
that be my deadly adversaries have procured this, lest the rest, after they
shall have heard my most just complaint, should oppose themselves, as well in
respect of thy honor, as of their duty to thee. Now rests my most instant
and importunate suit, that I thinking only of the life to come, may have some
reverend Catholic Priest, to direct me in my Religion, for the salvation of my
soul. This last office is not to be denied unto poor wretches of the basest
and meanest estate. Thou do permit unto the Ambassadors of foreign
Princes, the exercise of their Religion, and I voluntarily permitted it to my
subjects that were of a contrary Religion. If this be denied unto me, I hope,
I shall be excused before God. But I fear mine adversaries shall not escape
without punishment. Assuredly it will be a president unto other Princes of
Christendom, to show the like severity against their subjects that be in
Religion contrary unto them; if this severity be used toward me a free and
absolute Princess, and thy nearest Cousin, for so I am, and will be so to thee
whiles I live, in spite of mine adversaries, let them stomach it never so
much. I desire not to have my family increased, but I request to have only
two maids, which are necessary and needful to me in this my weakness and
sickness of body. And let not my adversaries fulfill their cruel minds
altogether against me, inbarring me of so small a courtesy. Whereas I am
secretly accused by Shrewsburie, that I have privily and without thy knowledge
practiced to transfer my right in Scotland unto my son, contrary to my
promise made unto Beale: I desire thee not to give credit unto the suggestions
of Beale, I promised nothing but under certain conditions, to which I am not
bound, except they be performed by thee. From that time hitherto, I have
received no answer; and there is not a word spoken of them; but yet the
practices in Scotland to destroy me and my son, have not ceased. That
long-lasting silence I cannot interpret to be any other thing but a plain
repulse and denial; and so I signified by my letters to thee, and to thy
Counselors; those things which the French King and his mother imparted unto
me, I also sincerely imparted unto thee, and asked thy advice in them, but I
heard not a word from thee again. I never had so much as a thought to submit
my self unto thy Council about mine affairs and my Country, before I knew
what it should be; for it might seem a mere folly so to do. How my
adversaries in Scotland do triumph over me and my imprisoned son, thou art
not ignorant; I attempted nothing there that may be hurtful unto thee, but
only to procure a firm peace in that Kingdom, which is more to be respected
by me, than by thy Councillors: forasmuch as I have more interest therein
than they. I earnestly and from my heart desired to bestow and confirm unto my
son the title of a King* and therewithal to bury in the earth all discords
and dissentions. Is not this to pull the Diadem from my sons head? But indeed
mine adversaries would not have it confirmed unto my family. This is the thing
they envy, when their conscience bears witness against them; and being
guilty of evil, they fear mischife will befall them.

Let not these and other mine adversaries so blind thine eyes, and in thy life
and sight, procure the death of thy next kindred, and bring to confusion both
the Crowns; for to that intent do they invent mischief against me, against
my son, and perhaps thy self also. Can it be any good or honor unto thee,
that I and my son should be secluded by their means and practices, and we
two between our selves so long? Remember thy inbred lenity, bind thy self
unto thy self; and being as thou art a Princess, by thy placabilitie mollify
thy mind, and abandon all displeasure and hatred toward me a Princess, thy
nearest Cousin, and one that loves thee most dearly; that all our affairs
being lovingly compounded between us, I may depart out of this life, and the
sobs and sighs of my distressed soul, may not penetrate unto God; unto whose
heavenly Majesty I offer my continual prayers, that my just complaints and
dolorous lamentations, may now at the last, find way unto thee. From Sheffield
the eighth day of November. 1582.

Vostre tresdesolee plus proche parente and affectionee seure, MARIE R.

Anno 1583.
WIth these letters Queen ELIZABETH was wonderfully moved and disquieted, and
sent unto the Queen of Scotland, Robert Beale one of the Clerks of the
Council, a man rude and uncivil; who should in sharp words expostulate with
her for her letters of complaint, and also jointly with the Earl of
Shrewsburie, to talk about her deliverance; forasmuch as she had of late in
other letters requested Queen ELIZABETH that she might after this time (upon
security to be given to Queen ELIZABETH) enjoy her liberty, and be joined
with her son in the government of Scotland.

About this matter was a serious consultation among the Council of England,
and most of them were content that she should be delivered upon these
conditions: To wit,

1 That she and her son should promise to practice nothing hurtful to Queen
ELIZABETH and the Realm of England.

2 That she should voluntarily confess, that whatsoever was done by Francis
the second, the French King her husband, against Queen ELIZABETH, was done
against her will; and that she should utterly disallow the same as unjust, by
confirming the treaty of Edinburgh.

3 That she should condemn all the practices ever since that time, and
ingenuously renounce them.

4 She should bind her self not to practice any thing directly or indirectly
against the government of the Realm of England, in Ecclesiastical or Civil
affairs; but by all manner of means oppose her self and resist such
practisers as public enemies.

5 That she shall challenge or claim no right unto her self in the Kingdom
of England, during the life of Queen ELIZABETH; and that afterward she will
submit her right of succession unto the Estates of England.

6 And to the end she may not hereafter use any cavil, and say: That she
condescended to these conditions (being a prisoner and by coaction) she her
self should not only swear unto them, but also procure the Estates of
Scotland to confirm them by public authority.

7 The King himself also should ratify them by oath, and by writing.

8 And that hostages should be given.

As for the consociation with her son, in the administration of affairs, it
was thought fit that the Queen of England should not interpose her self; but
this they referred to the King of Scotland himself, and the Estates of
Scotland. But if they were joined together, that they should talk about the
league with them jointly, if not, by themselves.

These things were consulted of, but with no success; For the Scots of the
English faction utterly rejected them, crying amain, that many Scots, deadly
enemies to the English Nation, were called out of France by the counsel of the
Queen of Scotland: And that Holt an English Jesuit was sent secretly into
Scotland, to take order for the inuading of England.

The French Ambassadors, which went into Scotland, not obtaining that they
came for, departed; whereupon the Noblemen that had surprised the King, grew
haughty in mind, as also for that Lennox died at that time, which putting
them into security, the King contrary to their expectation, disdaining to be
under the government of three Earls, recovered his liberty, and went to the
Castle of Saint Andrews; and with good words willed many of the surprizers to
depart from the Court, to avoid any stir, and promised them pardon, if they
would ask it within a certain time (which thing Gowry only did) and called
Arran back to the Court, but they were so far off from doing of that, as
they secretly practiced to take him suddenly again. Hereupon they were
commanded to depart out of the Realm by a day appointed; Mar, Glamis, the
Commendators of Dryburg, and Paslet, and others, went into Ireland; Boyd,
Zester-Weim, Locheluin, went into the Low Countries, and Dunfermellin went into
France: Angus was confined into Angus, only Gowry having a new plot in his
head, tarried after the time prefixed, to his own destruction.

And then the King to show himself a Prince, began to exercise his Regal
authority. And whereas these Conspirators in an assembly called by their own
private authority, had enacted and recorded, That this surprise of the King
was just; he on the contrary part declared, in a great assembly of the Estates,
that the same was traitorous. Although the Ministers (as if they were the
supreme Judges in the Realm) in a Synod called by their own authority,
pronounced the same to be just, and judged all them that did not approve and
allow the same, worthy to be excommunicate.

Anno 1584.
IN the beginning of the Spring, some of the Scots returned out of Ireland,
upon a pact made between them and Gowry, who had conspired anew with diverse,
to take the King again; professing that they set before their eyes nothing
else but the glory of God, the truth of Religion, the security of the King and
Realm, and the amity with England, against them who by sinister means (as
they gave out) abused the King, not yet come unto sufficient age. But the King
hearing hereof, sent Colonel Stewart to apprehend Gowry, who lay at the Haven
of Dondee, as if he had been going out of the land; who after he had
defended himself an hour or two in his house, was taken and carried away unto
prison.

In the mean time the other Conspirators took Sterling by sudden surprise,
and the Castle was yielded unto them; yet by and by they leave them both,
because the King displaied his banners, as ready to fight, not so many met, as
Gowry had promised, and their hope of English help failed them; and so for
fear, Mar, Glamis and Angus, who was come to them, and others fled into
England, humbly beseeching the Queen to relieve their necessities, and to
entreat the King for them: Forasmuch as they had lost all their goods and the
Kings favor, for showing their love to her and England, unto whom she thought
good to show some favor, that they might be opposed against the contrary
faction in Scotland, and the rather for that the Ministers bruted, that the
King was upon the point to fall from his Religion upon no other ground (though
they fained other matters) but for that he upon a fi^all love inclined to his
mother, and received into his especial favor and grace those whom he knew to
be most addicted unto his mother.

In the mean time Gowry was arraigned before his Peers at Sterling, upon
these points: That he intended and began a new conspiracy against the King,
whom he had also kept prisoner in his house beforetime: That he conferred by
night with the servants of Angus, to seize upon Perth and Sterling: That he had
resisted the Kings authority at Dondee; had conceived a conspiracy against
the life of the King, and his mother. Lastly, that he had asked counsel of
Maclena the Witch: and being found guilty by his Peers, he was in the evening
beheaded; but his servants sowing the head unto the body, buried it
incontinently.

About the same time were some practices in England, but with no success, in
the behalf of the Q of Scotland; of which the chiefest was Francis Throgmorton
eldest son to John Throgmorton Justice of Chester; who fell into suspicion
out of his letters unto the Queen of Scotland, which were intercepted. As
son as he was taken, and began to confess some things, Thomas Lord Paget,
and Charles Arundel a Courtier, fled out of the land into France, who with
other Papists, lamenting their estate among themselves, complained, that the
Queen by the wicked and crafty dealings of* Leicester and Walsingham, was
estranged from them: That they were abused with contumelies and reproaches:
That strange kinds of subtlety were inuen ted against them: That secret snares
were so cunningly laid, that whether they would or no, they should be brought
within the compass of treason; and that they had no hope of safety at home.
And to say the truth, very crafty tricks and devices were devised and used to
try men's minds; counterfeit letters under the names of the Queen of Scotland
and the fugitives covertly sent and left in the houses of Papists, spies
dispersed in every place, to hearken after rumors, and to take advantage of
words: bringers of tales, whatsoever information they brought, were received
and entertained; very many examined upon suspicion, and amongst them, Henry
Earl of Northumberland, and his son Philip Earl of Arundel commanded to
keep his house, and his wife delivered unto the keeping of Thomas Sherley;
William Howard, brother to the Earl, and Henry Howard their Uncle, brother
unto the Duke of Norfolk, oftentimes examined concerning letters from the
Queen of Scotland, from Charles Paget, etc. who escaped very narrowly for all
his prudence and innocence.

The Lord Paget and Charles Arundel being arrived in France, were watched and
observed by Edward Stafford the Queens Lieger Ambassador with the French King;
but yet he could not find out their purposes and practices. Yet dealt he with
the French King, that they, Morgan and other Englishmen, plotting against their
Prince and Country, might be removed out of France. He was answered, If they
practiced any thing in France, that the King would punish them according to the
Law; that the King could not take knowledge and do justice on them if they bad
plotted any thing in England. That all Kingdoms are free unto them that fly
thither for succor, that it behooves all Kings, every one to defend and
maintain the liberties of his Kingdom, and that Queen Elizabeth not long
since had received into her kingdom Montgomery, the Prince of Condee, and
other Frenchmen, and that at this very time the Ambassador of the King of
Navarre practicing some plots, lies in England.

About such time as these things were done, Bernardino de Mendoza, Ambassador
for the King of Spain in England, passed in great secrecy into France,
fretting and fuming as if he had been driven violently out of England, and the
right of an Ambassador thereby violated, when he himself being a man of a
violent and turbulent spirit, abusing the sacred right of Embassade unto
treason, was to be pursued (as many were of opinion) after the ancient manner
of severity, with fire and sword, and commanded to depart out of the Kingdom;
for he meddled and was accessory with the wicked plots of Throgmorton and
others, to bring in foreign power into England, and to dispossess the Queen.
And when he was mildly reproved of those things, he was so far from wiping
the objections away with a modest answer, that he re-charged again the Queen
and her Counselors with their detention of the money of the Genowayes, with
the succors given unto the Estates of the Netherlands, and unto the Duke of
Aniou, and unto Don Antonio the Portugal, and with the piracies and spoils
made by Drake.

Yet lest the King of Spain should think that the lewd parts of Mendoza were
not revenged, but the rights of an Ambassador violated, William Waad Clerk of
the Counsel is sent into Spain, who should plainly inform him how badly he
had discharged the office of an Ambassador, and withal should signify (lest
the Queen in sending him away might seem to renounce the ancient amity
between the Kingdoms) that all kind and friendly offices should be done on
her part, if he sent any other as his Ambassador, who was desirous and willing
to conserve the amity between them; conditionally that the same courtesies
might be shown unto her Ambassador in Spain. But when the King of Spain
would not vouchsafe to admit Waad unto his speech, but referred him to his
Counselors, he taking it in evil part, without fear spoke openly, that it
was a most usual and received custom, that Ambassadors should be admitted to
the presence of Princes, even by their enemies, and in the time of the hottest
wars: And that Charles the fifth the Emperor, father to the King of Spain,
admitted to his presence the Herald, who from the French King denounced war
against him, and in plain terms denied to acquaint the Counselors with his
errand. And when Idiaques Secretary to the King of Spain, could by no policy
get out of him what his message was, at last he received all the matter from
Mendoza lurking secretly in France. Then he laying aside his public person, in
familiar manner signified unto Waad, that he was very sorry that there were
some who cunningly labored to break the amity, and to nourish discord
between the Princes; that wrong was done to the Catholic King himself, not
unto his Ambassadors, first to Despes, and now unto Mendoza, and that there was
no cause why he should accuse unto the King any more Mendoza, who was
sufficiently disgraced by his ignominious sending out of England; or complain
that he was not admitted: And that the Catholic King did no more but like for
like, since Mendoza had been dismissed without audience; and as she had
referred Mendoza unto her Counselors, so the King in like manner put him off
unto the Cardinal Granuellan. When Waad answered, that there was much
difference between him who had never offended the Catholic King, and Mendoza
who had offended grievously against the Queen, and had a long time not
vouchsafed to come unto her, and had committed things unfitting an Ambassador.
Yet he could not be admitted; and not being heard, he returned home. The most
of the crimes which he was to object against Mendoza, were taken out of the
confession of Throgmorton: Who being ready to be apprehended, had secretly
sent a deske (wherein his secrets lay) unto Mendoza. His other desks being
narrowly searched, there were found two Rolls or Lists, in one of the which the
names of the Havens of England which were fit to land Forces, in the other the
names of the Noblemen and Gentlemen of England who professed the Roman
Catholic Religion, were written down. As soon as he saw them brought out and
shown to him, he cried out often that he never saw them before, and that they
were foisted in to work his destruction, yea even when he was examined upon
the rack: but laid again upon the rack, he denied not to answer unto their
Interrogatories. Being asked of those Rolls or Catalogues, and for what purpose
they were written, he made this historical narration: That he a few years
since going unto the waters at the Spaw, did consult and devise with Ieney and
Fra Inglefield how England might be invaded, and the form of government
thereof altered and changed, and upon that reason that he set down the names
of the Havens and of the Noblemen. That Morgan by his letters had signified
unto him out of France, that the Catholic Princes had now consulted and
determined that England should be invaded, and the Queen of Scotland delivered
under the conduct of Guise as General, who wanted nothing but money and some
bands of men in England to join with him to his help. To procure these
things, that Charles Paget under the counterfeit name of Mope was sent secretly
into Sussex, where the Duke of Guise determined to land his Army. That he
acquainted Mendoza, who had notice and knowledge of these things already by the
Conspirators, with the matter, and told him the names of the Havens and
Noblemen. Neither did he deny that he promised his furtherance, and withal to
have admonished Mendoza with what Noblemen he being a public person should
treat of this matter, which he being a private man could not do without great
danger: and that he showed a way to him how some principal Catholics as soon
as the foreign Forces were landed, might levy soldiers in the Queens name,
and then to join them to the foreign Forces. These things he voluntarily
confessed.

Yet at the Bar in the Guildhall of London, being accused of these things, he
precisely denied every one of these things, and auerred that they were mere
devices of his own head, to avoid the torment of the rack again; and openly
accused the Queen of cruelty, and the examiners of falsehood, devising an
escapatorie or starting-hole by the space of time which was between the fault
committed and the judgment. Forasmuch as in the thirteenth year of Queen
ELIZABETH certain things were made treasons, for the which none should be
arraigned except the delinquent were indicted within six months after the fault
committed, and the crime was proved by the testimony and oath of two men, or
by the voluntary confession of the offender, without violence; and that this
time was expired long since, and that therefore he was not to be arraigned for
the same. But the Judges told him that the crimes objected unto him, were not
of that kind, but that he was liable to the Law by an ancient law of treason
made in the time of King Edward the third, which admits no circumscription
of time or proof, and that by that law the sentence of death was pronounced
against him. Being afterward persuaded, he fled unto the mercy of the Queen,
and again confessed in a writing more fully, all things which he had said
before; which things, not perseuering in his words, he began to deny again at
the gallows, but in vain.

M. Waad being returned out of Spain, was sent to the Q. of Scotland, about a
treaty to be had between her and Sir Walter Mildmay, which was propounded two
years since, and interrupted, as is said before, unto whom she affirmed with
great protestations, with what sincerity she has dealt about this treaty,
and withal, deuoteth herself and all her labor unto the Queen, and
promises to depend wholly on her if only she would vouchsafe her so much
love and honor. Moreover, she firmly promised, so that the treaty might go
forward, that she would intercede, yea, and bring to pass that her son
should receive Angus and the other Noblemen of Scotland into favor; and also
that the Bishops of Rosse and Glasco, her Agents and Ministers in France,
should not plot any thing against the Queen and Kingdom of England, and that
she would have nothing to do with the Rebels or Fugitives of England.

Queen ELIZABETH was glad to hear these things, and whereas that Angus,
Mar, I Hamilton, and Glammys were fled into England, and making use of the
opportunity offered, sent Beale unto the Queen of Scotland, who together with
the Earl of Shrewsburie, should show her, that if she continued in the same
mind with which she had acquainted Master Waad, that Mildmay should come
forthwith unto her, and treat with her about her liberty, and then should
talk with her in the mean while to entreat her son the King to restore the
Scottish Fugitives, and to tell her that they had committed no fault against
the King, but against some violent Counselors who gave him evil counsel; and
lastly, that as much as they could they should get out of her the pract^ses of
the Guises. She being a wise woman, answered; That she much desired that the
treaty might go forward, and that she requested earnestly of Queen
ELIZABETH as of her eldest sister, unto whom she gave all honor. That she
had propounded nothing unto Master Waad, but upon condition, and that he whom
she thought to be an honest man would not say otherwise. For the restoring of
the Scots, that her labor therein would be very necessary, and should not be
wanting if she certainly knew any good would redound to her self and her
son, so that they would humbly submit themselves unto the King, and be
obedient unto him; but if that were not done, that then the Queen should give
aid unto her son, that they might be reduced unto their obedience. Moreover,
she does not cloak nor hide it, that she when she was sickly, committed her
self and her son unto the care and trust of the Guise her most dear Cousin,
of whose purposes or intents she knew nothing, neither would she discover them
if she knew them, unless a firm assurance were given her of her liberty; for
that it was the part of an unadvised person to forsake her assured friends, for
an uncertain hope. She requested that she being an absolute Prince; might be
no more dishonourably used, than Queen MARIE did sometime deal with her
self, being at that time her subject, and imprisoned; or than the French King
did use the King of Navarre, being also his subject, and bore arms against
him. She also requested that the treaty might be brought to an end before
any in Scotland were sent Ambassador about that matter. And for that the
French King had acknowledged her ordinary Ambassador, and Seton sent by her
son into France, as Ambassadors from Princes of the same authority and
conjoined, she gave that honor to the Queen, to publish this Association of
her and her son in Scotland, and besought her not to preiudicate the same.
These things were heard, but by terrors objected, shifted off and deluded by
the means of them who know how to nourish the hatred between the women that
bore no in ward good will one to the other, especially by the discovery of the
papers which Chreycton a Scottish Jesuit sailing into Scotland, and
intercepted by some Sea-rouers of Holland, tore in pieces: but the torn papers
cast out of the ship, were cast again into the ship by a contrary wind, not
without a miracle (as Chreycton himself said) and glewed together by the great
labor and singular skill of Waad, laid open and discovered new plots of the
Pope, of the King of Spain, and the Guises, about the inuading of England.

Therefore to occur unto and prevent the wicked counsels and secret policies
of seditious persons, and to provide for the Queens safety, upon the which
both the Kingdom and Religion depended: Many men (Leicester being the
beginner) of all estates in England, out of common charity, whilst they
feared not her, but were fearful of the other, bound themselves in a certain
Association with their mutual oaths, subscriptions and seals, to persecute
with all their forces unto death, them who did attempt any thing against the
Queen.

The Queen of Scotland who quickly understood that a way was made by it to
make her away, weary of her long misery, and fearing worse things, propounded
these things to the Queen and her Counselors, by Nauus her Secretary: If her
liberty might be granted, and that she might be assured of the sincere mind
and love of Queen ELIZABETH, that she would bind her self in a most strict
league of amity with the Queen, most dutifully honor and observe her before
all other Christian Princes, forget all offenses past, acknowledge her the true
and most rightful Queen of England, and that she would not challenge during
her life any right unto the Crown of England, nor practice anything against
her directly or indirectly; and utterly to renounce the title and arms of
England, which she had used by the commandment of Francis her husband; and
also unto the Bull of the Pope about her deposition and deprivation: Yea and
also enter into that Association, for the security of the Queen; and into a
defensive league (saving the ancient league between France and Scotland) yet
so that nothing be done in the life of the Queen, or after her death, which
may be hurtful unto her, her son, and their heirs in succession, before
they be heard in the Assembly of the Estates of England. For more assurance of
these things, that she will remain as an hostage in England, and if she may
have leave to depart out of England, that she will give pledges. Moreover, that
she will alter nothing in Scotland, so that the exercise of her religion be
permitted only to her and her family. That she will for ever forget all the
wrongs done her in Scotland, (but yet under that condition, that the things
published to her infamy may be repealed.) That she will commend unto the King
Counselors which were desirous to keep peace with England; and would
reconcile unto him as much as lay in her the Noblemen that were fled into
England, if they would humbly acknowledge their fault, and that the Queen gave
her word to give aid unto the King against them, if at any time they fell or
departed from their obedience. That she would do nothing about her sons
marriage, without the priuitie of the Queen; and that she would not do
anything without the priuitie of her son: so she requested that her son
might be joined in this treaty, whereby it may be made more strong. She
doubted not but that the King of France would be contented, and bind himself
by promise together with the Princes of the house of Lorraine, for the
performance of these agreements. She also desired that these things might be
answered with speed, lest any thing might happen in the mean while to hinder
it. Lastly she earnestly desired, that she might have the favor to have more
liberty, that therein the love of the Queen might appear more evidently to
her.

Out of these things, as matters of much honor and duty, Queen ELIZABETH
seemed to rejoice; and it was then thought she was inclined to deliver her,
although there were some in England who setting new fears before her eyes,
drew her from it. But the matter being well followed, and in a manner
concluded, was most of all hindered by the Scots of the contrary faction, who
exclaimed that Queen ELIZABETH was utterly undone, if she were delivered out
of prison, and both the Realms would be undone, if she were joined with her
son in the kingdom of Scotland; and if the exercise of the Roman Religion
were permitted unto her, if it were but in her Court.

And some of the Scottish Ministers in Scotland, out of their Pulpits, and in
their meetings, railed most vilely against their Queen: they spoke ill of the
King and his Counselors, and being commanded to appear in person, obstinately
and contemptuously denied so to do, as if the Pulpits were exempted from the
Kings authority, and that Ecclesiastical persons were not subject to the
King, but to the Presbytery; directly against the laws made this year in the
Assembly of the States, in the which the Kings authority over all persons
both Ecclesiastical and Laics, was confirmed for ever: viz. That the King and
his Counselors are competent Judges in all causes; and they who would not obey
the same, are to be accounted for Traitors. The assemblies of Pre^byteries (as
also those of Laics) as well general as particular, were prohibited, as
having arrogated without the Kings priuitie, boundless authority, and when
they list of meeting together, and of prescribing laws unto the King and unto
all the Realm. And also the popular equality of Ministers was abrogated, and
the dignity and jurisdiction were restored unto the Bishops, whose vocation
the Presbyteries had condemned as Antichristian. And the sla^derous writings
against the King, his mother, and Counselors, were forbidden, and by name the
History of George Buchanan, and his Dialogue, De iure regni apud Scotos, as
those which contain many things fit to be corrected and blotted out of memory.
And also many men blamed Patrick Gray the Scottish Ambassador in England, as if
he (won by br^bes) had babbled out much matter to the hurt of the King and his
mother, and had hindered that these most equal conditions propounded from the
Kings mother, and sent by Nauus, were not admitted.

Whereupon she having her patience oftentimes wronged, fell into a grievous
sorrow and indignation, and so great was her desire of liberty, that she gave
her mind and ears as well unto the treacherous counsel of her enemies, as
unto the pernicious devices of her friends: And so much the more, for that as
she had persuaded her self that the Association was made to endanger her life;
so now she had an inkling that by the policy of some men she was to be taken
away from the keeping of the Earl of Shrewsburie, (who being an upright man,
did not favor their plots) and to be committed unto new Keepers. And that it
might be done with a better color, and the credit of the Earl of Shrewsburie,
which was approved and well known, might not seem to be suspected, (for it
was not thought good to call in question the reputation of so great a man,
which yet they had cracked by secret slanders, upon the finding fault of his
unreasonable wife) suspicions were laid hold on, as if the plot of getting her
liberty had been begun, out of certain Emblemes sent by some unto her. Those
were, Argus with many eyes, lulled asleep by Mercury playing tunes on his
pipe, with this little sentence, ELOQVIVM TOT LVMINA CLAVSIT. Another was
Mercury striking off the head of Argus keeping Io. A graft or cyon engrafted in
a stock and bound with bands, yet flourishing, and written about it, PER
VINCVLA CRESCO. Another was a Palm tree much laden, but rising again, with
these words; PONDERIBVS VIRTUES INNATA RESISTIT. Also an Anagram, VERITAS
ARMATA, out of her name, MARIA STEVARTA, the letters being transposed, which
was taken in the worse part. Moreover, there were letters shown as if they had
been intercepted, in the which the friends of the Queen complained that all
their hope was quite cut off, if she was but put into the custody of the
Puritans. Under this color she was taken from Shrewsbury, and committed to the
custody of Amias Paulet and Drewgh Drury, and that of purpose (as some think)
that being driven into desperation, she might be more apt to take abrupt
counsels, and more easy to be intrapped. For Sbrewsbury in all that fifteen
years, had so prouidently kept her, that there was no place left of plots from
her or against her. And now also she dealt more earnestly with the Pope and the
King of Spain, by Francis Inglefield, to hasten that which was begun, and that
with all expedition, whatsoever became of her. And Leicester (who was thought
to study how to deceive the right owner of the succession) secretly sent
ruffians (as many said) to murder her. But Drury an honest minded and upright
man, detested the wickedness from his heart, and suffered them not to have any
access unto her. Yet some spies secretly crept in, and there were closely sent
as well counterfeit as true letters, by which her womanish weakness might be
thrust forward to her destruction, as we will say hereafter.

And to turn quite away the love of Queen ELIZABETH from her, it was
whispered in her ears, that Allan for the Catholics Ecclesiastics of
England, and Inglefield for the Laics, and the Bishop of Rosse for the Queen
of Scotland, with common consent, and with the consent of the Pope and the King
of Spain, had decreed that Queen ELIZABETH was to be deposed from her Crown,
and the King of Scotland was to be disinherited of the kingdom of England as
manifest and open Heretics; the Queen of Scotland to be married to some
Catholic Nobleman of England, he to be chosen King of England by the English
Catholics, and the election to be confirmed by the Pope: The lawful children
of this man by the Queen of Scotland, to be declared successors in the
kingdom. And all these things upon the credit of Heart a Priest. But who this
Englishman should be, Walsingham made diligent inquiry, but he found not who he
was. But the suspicion fell upon Henry Howard brother to the D. of Norfolk,
who was of the chief Nobility, a single man, and an earnest Roman Catholic,
and amongst them of great reputation and account.

Anno 1585.
IN the beginning of this year was a Parliament holden at Westminster, where
the aforenamed Association was confirmed by the common consent of both the
houses. And it was enacted, that four and twenty or more of the Privy Counsel
and Nobility of the land chosen by the Queens letters Patents, might inquire
of them, who shall invade the Realm, raise rebellion or attempt to hurt or
kill the Queens person for any whosoever, or by them whosoever, who may
challenge right unto the crown of England. But he for whom or by whom they
shall attempt, shall be made utterly incapable of the Crown of England, and
shall be utterly deprived of all right thereunto, and shall be pursued even
unto death by all the subjects if he shall be judged, and publicly declared by
those four and twenty men to be privy to such an In^asion, rebellion or hurt.

There were also acts made against Priests and Jesuits to this effect; That
they should depart out of the Realm within X L. days. That for them who from
thenceforth came into the Realm and stayed, it should be treason.

That they who knowing them to be such, do re^eeue, receive or help them,
should be fellons (so they call all capital offenses under treason.)

That they who are brought up in the Seminaries, if within six months after
proclamation made they do not return, and do not make submission unto the
Queen, before the Bishop, or two Justices of peace, shall be guilty of
treason.

But they who shall submit themselves, if within ten years they come unto the
Court, or nearer it than ten miles, their submission shall be void.

They, whosoever shall send any money by any manner of means, unto the
Students in the Seminaries, shall incur a Praemunire (that is, perpetual
imprisonment and loss of all their goods.)

If any of the Peers of the land, that is to say, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls,
Barons, Lords of the Parliament, shall offend against these laws, he shall be
tried by his Peers.

They who shall know any such Jesuits and others, to lie hid in the Realm, and
shall not discover them within twelve days, shall be fined at the Queens
pleasure, and put into prison.

If any man be suspected to be a Jesuit or Priest, and do not submit himself
unto examination for his contempt, he shall be imprisoned until he do submit
himself.

He that shall send his children or any others unto the Seminaries and Colleges
of the Roman profession, shall lose and forfeit a hundred pounds of English
money.

And they who are sent, shall not succeed in their heritages, nor enjoy the
goods that may fall unto them by any manner of means.

And so shall they also who within a year after they return home from the
Seminaries, except they do conform themselves unto the Church of England.

If the keepers of havens permit others, beside Sailers, Mariners, and
Merchants, to pass over the sea, without the Queens license, or six of her
Counselors, shall lose their places, and the Masters of the ship who shall
carry them o^t shall lose and forfeit their ships and goods, and be imprisoned
a whole year.

With the severity of these laws the Roman Catholics in England were very
much terrified, and amongst them Philip Howard Earl of Arundell, eldest son
unto the Duke of Norfolk, insomuch that he determined to depart out of the
Land, lest he should offend against them. This man by the benignity of the
Queen was restored in blood three years before this time, and a little after
he fell out of the Queens favor and grace by the secret insimulation of some
great Courtiers, had secretly reconciled himself unto the Roman religion, and
used a very austere life. Hereupon he was once or twice called before the
Counsel, and cleared himself of the objections laid to his charge, but yet he
was commanded to keep his house. After six months more or less he was
discharged, and came to the Parliament; yet the first day when the Sermon was
preached, he stole covertly out of the company. The Parliament being ended, as
being resolved to depart away out of the Land, in his letters written unto the
Queen, which yet he commanded to be delivered after he was gone over, he made
a long and lamentable complaint of the envy of his mighty adversaries, unto
which he was forced to yield, forasmuch as they triumphed over his innocence,
he repeateth the unfortunate deaths of his Ancestors, that is to say, of his
great grandfather, who was condemned and never called to trial, of his
grandfather, who was beheaded for trifling matters, and of his Father, who, as
he affirmed, was circumuented by his enemies, and who never carried any evil
mind toward his Prince or Country. But that he, lest he should run into the
same hard fortune his father had, forsook his country (that he might spend his
time in the service of God, and in the works tending to the salvation of his
soul) but not his loyalty and fidelity toward his Prince. Before these letters
were delivered, he went into Sussex, and being ready to take ship in an obscure
creek, was taken and apprehended by the treachery of his servants, and
discovery of the master of the ship, and committed unto the Tower of London.

At that time there was prisoner in the same place Henry Percy Earl of
Northumberland, a man of a lively spirit and cou^age (brother of Thomas
beheaded at York) suspected to be privy unto the plot of Throgmorton, the Lord
Paget and the Guises, for the inuading of England, and delivering of the Queen
of Scotland, unto whom always he had borne a great love and affection. In the
month of June he was found dead in his bed, shot through with three bullets
about the left pappe, the doors being bolted on the inside. The Crowners
quests according to the custom, taken out of the next neighbors, and sworn
by the Crowner, viewing the body, considering the place, having found the
pistol, with the gunpowder in the chamber, his man who bought the Pistall, and
the seller thereof, being examined, gave their verdict, that the Earl did
murder himself. The third day after, the Noblemen of the Realm came in great
number, and met in the Star chamber, where Thomas Bromly Lord Chauncellor of
England succinctly declared, that the Earl had plotted and devised treason
against his Queen and Country, which being now to come unto light, and to be
discovered, upon the guiltiness of his conscience had murdered himself. But
that the multitude and common people, who always conster things to the worst,
might be satisfied, he commanded the Kings Attorney, and the Kings Counsel at
law, to deliver and explain at large the causes why the Earl was kept and
detained in prison, and the manner of his death. Hereupon Popham the Queens
Attorney General, beginning at the rebellion in the North, shows out of the
Records, That he was arraigaed for this Rebellion, and for purposing to deliver
the Queen of Scotland, did then acknowledge his fault, and submitted himself
unto the mercy of the Queen, and that he was fined at five thousand marks (as
I have said before) and that the Queen, such was her clemency, took not a
penny, but remitted the same, and that after the execution of his brother for
the same fault, she confirmed him in the honor of Earl of Northumberland.
That he nevertheless entered into new practices to deliver the Queen of
Scotland, to conquer England, and to kill the Queen, and to destroy Religion:
That Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador had signified unto Throgmorton, that
Charles Paget, under the name of Mope had talked with him of these things
secretly in Suffex: That the Lord Paget had insinuated the same things almost
unto Throgmorton, and that the same things were evident and apparent by the
papers of C^^eycton the Scottish Jesuit, and that Charles Paget had told these
things unto William Shelley when he returned out of France.

Then Egerton the Queens Solliciter, argued witt^ly out of the circumstances
and the great care taken of concealing it, that the Earl was guilty of, and
privy to these things, that is to say, For that the Earl since that none in
England could charge him with these things, but the Lord Paget, who was very
familiar with Throgmorton, a few days after the taking and apprehension of
Throgmorton, made a ship ready for Paget by Shelley, in which he passed over
into France. When Throgmorton began to confess some things, he departed from
London and went out of the way unto Petworth, and signified unto Shelley whom
he had sent for unto him, that he was fallen into great danger of his life, and
of his estate, and requested him to conceal the business, and to send away
them who were acquainted with the departure of the Lord Paget, and with the
coming of Charles Paget, which was done forthwith. And he himself sent a good
way off, the man whom he had used about Charles Paget. Moreover the Solicitor
said, that he being now in prison, dealt oftentimes with Shelley (by the
Keepers whom he corrupted) to know what things, and of what nature he had
confessed. After that Shelley by a poor woman a secret messenger between
them, had certified him that he could not conceal matters any longer, that
their condition and estate were not like, that he should be put on the rack,
but that the Earl could not, in respect of his place and degree, and had
written those things which he had confessed, the Earl fighed grievously, and
sometimes said, as Panton who waited on him in his chamber confessed, that by
the confession of Shelley he was utterly undone.

Then the manner and reason of his death is declared, out of the testimony of
the Enquest, of the Lieutenant of the Tower, of some of the Warders, and of
Panton, and thereupon it was gathered, that he, for fear left his house and
family should be utterly destroyed, and a blemish and blot imposed thereon, had
laid his own violent hands upon himself Truly many honest men, as well for
that they favor Nobility, as also for that he was holden and reputed a man of
very great valor, were heartily sorry that such a man came to such a
lamentable and wretched death. What things the suspecting fugitives talked in
corners of one Balliue, one of Hattons men, who a little before was made Keeper
unto the Earl, I omit as a thing of small credit, neither mean I to set down
any thing out of idle reports.

Anno 1586.
IN this year Philip Earl of Arundell, who had lain now a whole year in
prison, was accused in the Star Chamber, That he had relieved Priests against
the laws, that he had had commerce of letters with Allan, and Persons the
Jesuit, enemies of the Queen, and that he had derogated in writing from the
Justice of the Land, and imagined to depart out of the land without license.
He pro^essing his duty and service unto the Queen, and his love and good
will unto his country, excused himself with great modesty, by the love he had
to the Catholic Religion, and by his ignorance of the laws, and submitted
himself unto the censure and judgment of the Lords, who fined him at ten
thousand pounds, and to be imprisoned during the Queens pleasure.

In the month of July a most pernicious Conspiracy against Queen ELIZABETH
was found out and came to light, which I will briefly describe.

At Easter, this year, John Ballard a Priest of the Seminary of Rhemes, who
had visited many Roman Catholics in England and Scotland, returned into
France, accompanied with Mawd one of Walsinghams spies, a most crafty
dissembler, who had bleared his eyes; and talked with Bernardino Mendoza, at
that time ordinary Ambassador of the King of Spain in France, and with
Charles Paget a man exceedingly addicted to the Queen of Scotland, about the
inuading of England, saying that now was a most fit time, all the military men
being absent in the Low Countries: and that they could not hope for a fitter
time, since that the Pope, the King of Spain, Guise and Parma, were determined
to set upon England, by that way to turn the war out of the Low Countries.
And though Paget held it clear, that it would be in vain as long as the
Queen lived, yet Ballard was sent back into England, being sworn to procure
aid and help unto the Inuaders, and liberty unto the Queen of Scotland, and
that with all speed, and as soon as he could.

At Whitsontide following this Ballard apparelled like a soldier, and called
by a counterfeit name, Captain Foscu, arrived in England, and talked at London
about these things with Anthony Babington of Dethick in Derbishire, a young man
well borne, rich, of an excellent wit, and learned above his years, who being
addicted to the Roman Religion, had a little before stolen ouerinto France,
without any license, and had been very familiar with Thomas Morgan, one that
belonged unto the Queen of Scotland, and with the Bishop of Glasco her
Ambassador, which two in extolling continually the heroical virtues of such a
Queen, had showed such certain hopes of great honors and preferments by her,
of which the ambitious young man quickly took hold: they also commended him,
thinking of no such matter, in their letters to the Queen of Scotland. For
when he was returned into England, she courteously saluted him by her letters,
and from that time Morgan used to send over, and to convey letters unto her by
his means, until such time as she was put over to be kept by Amyas Paulet.
For then the young man seeing the danger, left off: With this Babington, I say,
did Ballard deal about this matter. He was fully persuaded that the Invasion
of England would come to nothing so long as Queen ELIZABETH lived. But when
Ballard had insinuated that she should not live long, that Savage who had taken
an oath to kill her was already come into England; Babington did not like that
so great a matter should be committed only to Savage, lest he should fail in
his attempt, but rather to six stout Gentlemen, whereof he would have Savage to
be one, lest he should break his oath: and Babington devised a new way to have
the land invaded by strangers, of the havens where they should take land, of
the aid that should be joined to them, how to deliver the Queen of Scotland,
and to kill the Queen.

Whiles he studied earnestly about this matter, he received by a boy unknown,
letters in a character or ziffre samiliar between the Queen of Scotland and
him, which mildly accused him for his long silence, and bade him to send with
speed a packet of letters sent from Morgan, and delivered by the Secretary of
the French Ambassador: which thing he did, and withal by the same messenger
wrote letters unto her, wherein he excused his silence, for that he was
deprived of means and opportunity to send, from the time that she was put into
the custody of Amyas Paulet a Puritan, a mere Leycestrian, and a professed
enemy of the Catholic faith (for so he called him) He opened unto her, what
he had conferred with Ballard, and told her that six Gentlemen were selected to
execute the tragical murder: and that he with a hundred other, would deliver
her at the same time. He besought her, that rewards might be propounded, and
given unto the heroical actors in this business, or to their posterity, if
they failed or died in the action. Unto these letters answer was made the 27.
of July, the forward care of Babington toward the Catholic Religion, and her
self, is commended, but he was advised to proceed in the business warily, and
that an Association might be made amongst them as though they feared the
Puritans, and that no stir should be made before they were certain and assured
of foreign help and forces: that some tumult might be raised also in Ireland
whilst a blow or wound might be given in these parts, Arundell and his
brethren, and Northumberland, might be drawn into their side, Westmorland,
Pager, and some others secretly called home. And the way also of delivering her
is prescribed, either by overthrowing a Cart in the gate, or by burning the
stables, or by intercepting her self when she rode up and down in the fields
for her recreation between Chartley and Stafford. Lastly, Babington is
commanded to give his word and promise for the rewards unto the six Gentlemen
and the others.

He had already gotten unto himself some Gentlemen who were earnest Roman
Catholics, among the which the chiefest were Edward Windsore, brother to the
Lord Windsore a mild young man, Thomas Salisbury of a worshipful family in
Denbighshire, Charles Tilney of an ancient worshipful house, the only hope of
his family, and one of the Gentlemen pensioners to the Queen, whom Ballard had
lately reconciled unto the Roman Church, both of them very proper men,
Chidiocke Tichburne of Hamshire, Edward Abington whose father was Cofferer to
the Queen, Robert Gage out of Surrey, John Trauerse, and John Charnock of
Lancashire, John Jones whose father had been Tailor unto Queen Mary: the
aforenamed Savage, Barnwell, of a worshipful family in Ireland, and Henry Dun,
a Clarke in the office of the first fruits and tenths, into this society. Pooly
also insinuated himself, a man perfectly instructed in the affairs of the
Queen of Scotland, a notable and cunning dissembler, who is thought to have
discovered all their purposes and counsels unto Walsingham day by day, and to
have urged these young men, ready enough to do evil headlong, by suggesting
and putting worse things into their heads; though Na^^s, Secretary to the
Queen of Scotland, had secretly advised them to take heed of him.

Unto these men Babington communicated the matter, but not all things unto
every one: he shows his letters and those of the Queen of Scotland unto
Ballard, Tichburne, and Dun; he moves Tilney and Tichburne, to dispatch the
Queen. At the first they deny to contaminate and ^mbrue their hands in their
Princes blood, Ballard and Babington tells them that it is lawful to kill
Princes who be excommunicated, and if one offend, it is to be done for the good
of the Catholic Religion. Herewith they with much ado persuaded, do consent,
Abington, Barnwell, Charnock and Savage, readily and voluntarily swear to do
it. Salisburie could not be persuaded by any means to kill her, but for the
delivery of the Queen of Scotland, he offered himself voluntarily unto Savage
and the others; Babington designed Tichenor, of whose fidelity and valor he
had a great opinion, but he was gone to travel. Babington charged them not to
impart the matter unto any, before they had sworn them to be secret. The
Conspirators confer sometimes of this matter in Paul's Church, in Saint Giles
fields, and in the Tauernes, in the which they kept many feasts: puffed up with
the hope of great honors, now and then extolling the valor of the Nobility of
Scotland, who had lately intercepted the King of Scotland at Sterling, and
Gerard the Burgonian who had killed the Prince of Orange. And they proceeded to
that foolish vanity, that they caused them who were designed and appointed to
kill the Queen, to be painted in tables to the life, and Babington in the
midst of them with this verse:

Himihi sunt Comites quos ipsa pericula ducunt.

But for that this verse (as too plain) did not so well like them, they took
it away and in the stead thereof they put this:

Quorsum haec, alio properantibus? It is reported that these tables were
intercepted and secretly shown unto the Queen, who knew none of them by the
countenance but Barnwell, who had oftentimes come unto her about the causes of
the Earl of Kildare, unto whom he belonged; but by other tokens which she was
told she knew the man. Truly one time walking forth for her recreation, she
espied Barnwell, and looked earnestly on him without fear, and turning unto
Hatton Captain of her Guard, and others, said, Am not I well attended and
guarded, that have not in my company so much as one man that wears a sword?
These words Barnwell himself told after to the conspirators, and showed them
how easily she might then have been dispatched if the conspirators had been
there; and Savage affirmed the same.

Now nothing troubled the mind of Babington more, than lest he should be
deceived of the foreign forces: Therefore to make that sure and certain, he
determined to go over himself into France, and to send before Ballard over
secretly for that purpose: for whom he had got a license under a counterfeit
name by a bribe he had given, and that he might clear himself from all
suspicion, by the before named Pooly, he insinuated himself unto Walsingham,
and with great earnestness sued unto him to obtain of the Queen for him a
license to go into France, promising to do good service in searching and
discovering the most secret plots of the fugitives, for the Queen of Scotland.
He commended the purpose of the young man, and promised him not only a license,
but many and great matters if he performed it: Yet he delaied from time to time
the matter (which they thought that not so much as the Sun had known) having
gotten it out by the cunning wit of his own, and of others, but especially by
^he intelligence of Gilbert Giffard a Priest.

This man borne at Chellington in Staffordshire, not far from Chartley, where
the Queen of Scotland was kept, and sent about this time by the fugitives into
England, under the counterfeit name of Luson, to remember Savage of his oath he
had taken, and to lie hid to send the letters to and fro between them and the
Queen of Scotland: when they could draw neither the Countess of Arundell, nor
the Lord Lumley, nor Henry Howard, nor George Sherley, into so dang^rous a
busin^sse.

The fugi^iues, to try whether the conueying of letters by Giffard was safe,
first sent Blankes made up like packets, which when they understood by answers
to be delivered, they being more confident, sent also others in ziffres of
their affairs, now and then. But Giffard, whether tormented in conscience, or
corrupted by bribes, or ter^ified with fear, came secretly unto Walsingham,
and told him who he was, and for what purpose he was sent into England, and
offered all his service out of his love toward his Country and Prince, and
promised to communica^e unto him all the letters he received, either from the
fugitives or from the Queen of Scotland. Walsingham embracing the occasion
offered, used the man courteously, sent him into Staffordshire, and wrote unto
Powlet that he should suffer some of his servants to be corrupted by G^fford
and to wincke thereat. He as unwilling (as he said) that any of his servants
should be made a Traitor in a dissembling manner, yet as loath, he suffered him
to corrupt the Brewer, or the man that kept the prouender, who dwelt hard by:
Giffard quickly corrupted the Brewer for a few Angels of gold, who by a hole
in the wall, into the which a stone was put so that it might be taken out,
secretly sent in and received back letters, which by posts appointed came to
the hands of Walsingham, who unsealed and wrote them out: and by the rare skill
of Thomas Philips he found out the ziffres, and so sealed them again by the
skill of Arthur Gregory, that none could judge them to have been unsealed, and
so sent them unto those men unto whom they were directed. So were those former
of the Queen of Scotland unto Babington, and the answers of him unto her, and
others unto him (in the which was craf^ily added a postscript in the same
character, bidding him to send the names of the six Gentlemen (if not the
other) and also the letters sent the same day unto M^ndoza the King of Spaines
Embassader, unto Charles Paget, the Lord Paget, the Arch Bishop of Glasco, and
to Fra. Ingl^field, every one of which were copied out, and af^e^ and conuered
as they were directed.

Queen ELIZABETH, as soon as she understood by these letters, that such a
terrible storm hung over her head, on the one side from her subjects at home,
and on the other side from for^aine en^m^es, commanded Ballard to be
apprehended, thereby to suppress the conspiracy betimes. So on a sudden he
was taken in the house of Babington, in the very instant when he was ready to
go upon ^is journey into France. Hereat Babington was wonderfully perplexed,
and was in a thousand minds, and went to Tichburne, and asked his advice, what
was to be done: his counsel was, that the conspirators should scatter and fly
sundry ways, but his own was, secre^ly to send Savage and Charnock, and that
speedily to dispa^ch^th Queen, yet that they might come with mo^e facility
unto her, to provide some richer and more courtlike suits for Savage, and of
this matter he talked with them in Paul's Church: but by and by changing his
mind, and concealing his inward cares stinging his heart, he urged Walsingham,
being then absent and at the Court, that his license to travel into France
might be now at length granted; and withal entreated him, to let Ballard free,
whom he should have great occasion to use in that negotiation. Walsingham
delaied and held him on with fair promises from day to day, and as concerning
Ballard, and taking of him, he lays it upon Young, that cunning hunter out of
Romanists, and as it were in friendship secretly advised him to take heed of
such fellows, and easily persuades the young man to lie all night in his
house in London, until the Queen signed his passeport and he himself
returned to London, that they might talk of such important affairs with more
secrecy, and lest the fugitives when he came to France, should gather any
manner of suspicion, out of his often going to and fro thither.

In the mean time Scudamore, one of Walsinghams men was commanded to watch him
very diligently, and to accompany him in every place, under the color that he
might be the safer from the Purscuants. Hitherto had Walsingham contrived and
wrought the business, the other Counselors of the Queen being ignorant
thereof; and would have proceeded further and lengthened it, but the Queen
would not, lest, as she said, in not taking heed of a danger when she might,
she should seem more to tempt God than to hope in him. Therefore out of the
Court from Walsingham a scroll was sent unto his man, to watch Babington with
more care: This being not sealed, was so delivered, that Babington sitting next
to him at the Table, read it also. Hereupon being guilty in conscience, and
suspecting that all things were discovered, the next night, when he, Scudamore,
and one or two more of Walsinghams men had in the Tavern supped with good
cheer, he (as if he would have paid the reckoning) arose, leaving behind him
his sword and cloak, and got to Westminster by the darkness of the night,
where Gage changed clothes with him, who forthwith put on Charnocks clothes,
and together got closely into S. John's wood near unto the City, unto which
place came also Barnwell and Dun. In the mean time they were proclaimed
Traitors through all England. They lurking in woods and by-ways, when they had
in vain requested money of the French Ambassador, and horses of Tichburne,
they cut off Babingtons hair, and disfigured his face with the green shells of
walnuts, but being compelled by famine, went to the Bellamies house near to
Harrow on the Hill, who were much addicted to the Roman religion: there they
were hidden and relieved with victuals in the barnes, and apparelled in
husbandmens apparel, and being found after ten days, were brought to London,
the citizens witnessing their public joy, with ringing of bells, making of
bonfires in the streets, and singing of Psalms, so much that the citizens
received great commendations and thanks of the Queen for the same.

The other conspirators were soon after taken, most of them near unto the
city, Salisbury in Cheshire, his horse being thrust through with a halbard, and
Trauerse with him, after they had swomme over the riu^r of Weuer; and in Wales
was taken Jones, who being acquainted with the intended invasion, had also
hidden them in his house, after he knew they were proclaimed traitors, and had
moreover furnished Salisbury in his flight with a horse, and his man (who was a
Priest) with a cloak he lent him. Only Windsore was not found. Many days
were spent in the examination o^ these men, who in their confessions appeached
one another, concealing nothing that was true.

All this time the Queen of Scotland and her servants were so narrowly kept
and watched by Powlet, that these things were kept from her knowledge, though
publicly known in all England. As soon as these men were taken, Tho. Gorge
was sent, who in few words should certify her of these things, which he
purposely did unto her, nothing dreaming thereof, even as she had taken horse
to go on hunting; neither was she suffered to return, but under show of
honor, lead about to Gentlemen's houses that dwelt thereabouts. In the mean
time I. Manner, Ed. Aston, Rich. Bagot, and William Waad, by commission from the
Queen, kept Nauus and Curlus her Secretaries and other servants severally,
that they should have no communication with themselves nor with the Queen. And
breaking open the doors of her closet, sent all her cabinets and deskes
wherein her papers were laid, sealed up with their seals unto the Court. Then
Powlet so commanded, seized on all the money, lest she should corrupt any body
with bribes, and gave his word to restore it. The caskets and deskes being
searched before Queen ELIZABETH, there were found the letters of many
strangers, the copies also of letters unto many, about 60. kinds of Ciphers,
and also the letters of many noblemen of England, offering their love and
service, which yet Queen ELIZABETH dissembled in silence: but they smelling it
out, did afterward all they could against her, that so they might not seem to
have favored her.

Now Gifford having served their purpose in this manner, was sent into France
as a man banished, leaving first with the French Ambassador in England a paper
indented with this charge, not to deliver any letters from the Queen of
Scotland, or from the fugitives, and came to his hands unto no other man but
him that brought the counterpaine thereof, which he secretly sent to
Walsingham. Being returned into France, after some months he was cast into
prison for his wicked life, and suspected of these things died wretchedly,
confessing most of these things to be true, which were also found to be true
out of the papers in the deskes.

On the XIII. day of September, seven of the conspirators were brought to the
bar and arraigned, and acknowledged themselves guilty, and had judgment of
treason. On the next day the other seven were brought to the bar, and pleaded
not guilty unto their enditement, and put themselves to be tried by God and
the country, who were proved guilty by their own confessions, and were
likewise condemned. Pooly only, though he was privy to all, for that he
affirmed that he had told some things unto Walsingham, was not at all
arraigned. On the XX. day of the same month, the first seven were on a pair
of gallows set upon a scaffold in Saint Giles his field, where they had used
to meet, hanged, and cut down, and their priuities cut off, bowelled and
quartered as they were even alive, not without the note of cruelty, that is to
say, Ballard the contriuer of the wickedness, asking pardon of God and the
Queen, with this condition, if he had offended her. Babington (who without
fear beheld the execution of Ballard, whiles the other turning their faces
away, and on their knees were earnest at their prayers, ingenuously
acknowledged his fault, and being let down from the gallows, sundry times
plainly cried out in the Latin tongue, Parce mihi Domine Jesus. Savage (the
rope breaking) fell from the gallows, and was strait pulled away, and his
privy members cut off, and bowelled alive. Barnwell extenuated the fault with
the pretext of Religion and conscience. Tichburne humbly acknowledging his
wickedness, moved all the multitude to compassion, and so likewise did Tilney,
being a very proper man, and modest in behavior. Abington being of a turbulent
spirit and nature, casting out threats and terrors, of the blood that was ere
long to be shed in England. On the next day, the other seven were drawn unto
the same place, but used with more mercy by the Queens commandment, who hated
the former cruelty; for every one of them hung till they were quite dead,
before they were cut down and bowelled. Salisbury the first, was very
penitent, and advised the Catholics not to attempt the restitution of Religion
by force or arms, and the same did Dun who was the next. Jones protesting that
he had dissuaded Salisbury from this enterprise, and that he utterly condemned
and disliked the haughty and rash spirit of Babington and the purpose of
invasion. Charnock and Trauerse fixed wholly to their prayers, commended
themselves to God and the Saints. Gage extolling the bountiful liberality of
the Queen toward his father, and detesting his own treacherous ingratitude
toward a Princess so well deserving. Hierom Bellamy, who had hidden Babington
after he was proclaimed traitor (whose brother privy to the same offense had
strangled himself in prison) ashamed and silent was the last of this company.

These men being executed, Nauus the Frenchman, and Curlus the Scot, who were
Secretaries to the Queen of Scotland, being examined about the letters, copies
of letters, and little notes and Ciphers found in the Queens closet, of their
own will acknowledged by their subscriptions, that the handwritings were their
own, endited by her in French, taken by Nauus, and turned into English by
Curlus: Neither did they deny that she received letters from Babington, and
that they wrote back by her commandment in such a sense as is aforesaid. Yet
this is certain out of letters, that when Curlus did at this time ask
Walsingham for what he promised, that Walsingham did reprove him, as one
forgetful of an extraordinary grace, as that he had not confessed any thing
but that he could not deny, when Nauus charged him therewithal to his face.

The Counselors of England could not agree what should be done with the Queen
of Scotland: some thought good that no severity was to be used against her, but
to be kept very close, as well for that she was not the beginner of this plot,
but only made acquainted with it; and also for that she was sickly, and not
like to live long. Others for the security of Religion would have her
dispatched out of the way, and that by the course of Law. Leycester had rather
have it done by poison, and secretly sent a Divine to Walsingham, to show him
that this was lawful: but Walsingham protested that he was so far from
allowing that any violence should be used, that long ago he crossed and broke
the advice of Morton, who had persuaded to send her into Scotland, that she
might be killed in the very borders of both the kingdoms. They were moreover
of different opinions, by what law or Act they should proceed against her,
whether out of that of the XXV. year of Edward the third (in which he is a
traitor who deuiseth to kill the King or the Queen, or moves war in the
Kingdom, or does adhere unto his enemies,) Or whether by that Law or Act of
the XXVII. year o^ Queen ELIZABETH, which is set down before: At length
their opinion prevailed, who would have it by this latter law, as made for this
purpose, and therefore to be accommodated thereunto: therefore out of that law
enacted the former year, that enquiry might be made, and sentence pronounced
against them who raised rebellion, invaded the kingdom, or attempted to hurt
the Queen, many of the Privy Counsel and Noblemen of England were chosen
Commissioners by letters Patents, which was this after the Lawyers form and
style.

ELIZABETH by the grace of God, of England, France, and Ireland, Queen:
Defender of the faith, etc. To the most Reverend Father in Christ John
ArchBishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, and one of
our Privy Counsel; And to our beloved and trusty Thomas Bromley Knight,
Chauncellor of England, and another of our Privy Counsel, And also to our
well-beloved and trusty William Lord Burghley, Lord Treasurer of England, another
of our Privy Counsel, And also to our most dear cousin William Marquess of
Winchester, one of the Lords of the Parliament, And to our most dear cousin
Edward Earl of Oxford, great Chamberlain of England, another of the Lords of
the Parliament, And also to our most dear cousin George Earl of Shrewsbury,
Earl Marshall of England, another of our Privy Counsel, and to our most dear
cousin Henry Earl of Kent, another of the Lords of the Parliament, And also to
our most dear cousin Henry Earl of Darby, another of our Privy Counsel, And
to our most dear cousin William Earl of Worcester, another of the Lords of
the Parliament, And to our most dear cousin Edward Earl of Rutland, another of
the Lords of the Parliament, And to our most dear cousin Ambrose Earl of
Warwick, Master of our Ordnance, another of our Privy Counsel, and to our
most dear cousin Henry Earl of Pembrooke, another of the Lords of the
Parliament, And also to our most dear cousin Robert Earl of Leicester Master
of our horse, another of our Privy Counsel, And to our most dear cousin Henry
Earl of Lincoln, another of the Lords of the Parliament, And also to our most
dear cousin Antony Vicount Montague, another of the Lords of the Parliament,
And to our well-beloved and trusty, Charles Lord Howard our great Admiral of
England, another of our Privy Counsel, And to our well-beloved and faithful
Henry Lord Hunsdon our Lord Chamberlain, another of our Privy Counsel, And
also to our well-beloved and trusty Henry Lord of Aburgeuenny another of the
Lords of the Parliament, And to our well-beloved and trusty Edward Lord Zouch,
another of the Lords of the Parliament, And also to our well-beloved and trusty
Edward Lord Morley, another of the Lords of the Parliament, And also to our
well-beloved and trusty William Lord Cobham Lord Warden of our five Ports,
another of our Privy Counsel, And also to our well-beloved and trusty Edward
Lord Stafford, another of the Lords of the Parliament, And also to o^r
well-beloved and trusty Arthur Lord Gray of Wilton, another of the Lords of the
Parliament, And also to our well-beloved and trusty John Lord Lumley, another of
the Lords of the Parliament, And also to our well-beloved and trusty John Lord
Sturton, another of the Lords of the Parliament, And to our well-beloved and
trusty William Lord Sands, another of the Lords of the Parliament, And also to
our well-beloved and trusty Henry Lord Wentworth, another of the Lords of the
Parliament, To our well-beloved and trusty Lewis Lord Mordant, another of the
Lords of the Parliament, And to our well-beloved and trusty John Lord St. John of
Bletso, another of the Lords of the Parliament, And also to our well-beloved and
trusty Thomas Lord Buckhurst, another of our Privy Counsel, And to our
well-beloved and trusty Henry Lord Compton, another of the Lords of the
Parliament, And also to our well-beloved and trusty Henry Lord Cheney, another of
the Lords of the Parliament, To our well-beloved and trusty Francis Knolles
Knight, Treasurer of our household, another of our Privy Counsel, And also to
our well-beloved and trusty James Crofts Knight, Controller of our said household,
another of our Privy Counsel: To our beloved and trusty Christopher Hatton
Knight, our vice-Chamberlaine, another of our Privy Counsel, And also to our
trusty and welb^loued Francis Walsingham Knight, one of our chief Secretaries,
another of our Privy Counsel, And also unto our trusty and well-beloved, William
Dauison Esquier, another of our principal Secretaries, of our Privy Counsel,
And to our trusty and well-beloved Ralph Sadleir Knight, Chauncellor of our
Duchy of Lancaster, another of our Privy Counsel, And also to our trusty and
well-beloved, Walter Mildmay Knight, Chauncellor of our Exchequer, another of our
Privy Counsel, And to our trusty and beloved, Amyas Powlet Knight, Captain of
the I Will of Iersey, another of our Privy Counsel, And to our trusty and
well-beloved John Wolley E^quire, our Secretary for the Latin tongue, another of
our Privy Counsel, And also to our trusty and well-beloved Christopher W^ay
Knight, chief Justice of the Kings Bench, And to our trusty and well-beloved
Edmund Anderson Knight, Chief Justice of the Common Bench, Roger Manwood
Knight, Chief Baron of our Exchequer, Thomas Gaudy Knight, one of our Justices
of the Kings Bench, And William Peryam one of the Justices of our Bench,
Greeting, etc. And not to set it down verbatim: After the recapitulation of
the Act made the last year, these words follow: When after the end of the
Session of Parliament, viz after the first day of June, in the XXVII. year of
our reign, diverse things have been compassed and devised tending to the hurt
of our Royal Person, as well by Mary daughter and heir of James the fifth,
lately King of Scotland, and commonly called Queen of Scotland and Dowager of
France, pretending title unto the Crown of this Realm of England, as by
diverse other persons, with the priuity of the same Mary, as it is given us to
understand: and for that we intend and determine, that the said Act should be
executed rightly and effectually in all things, and by all things, according to
the tenor of the said Act; and that all the offenses aforesaid, in the
aforesaid Act, as it is said, mentioned, and the circumstances of the same
should be examined, and sentence and judgment thereupon given, according to
the tenor and effect of the said Act: We give unto you and to the greater part
of you, full and ample power, faculty, and authority, according to the tenor
of the said Act, to examine all and singular things compassed and devised,
tending to the hurt of our Royal Person, with the priuity of the said Mary,
and all the circumstances of the same, and all the aforesaid offenses
whatsoever mentioned in the said Act, as it is said, and all circumstances of
the same offenses, and of every one of them: And moreover according to the
tenor of the said Act to give sentence and judgment, even as the matter shall
appear unto you upon good proof; And therefore we command you to proceed
diligently upon the aforesaid things in the form aforesaid, at certain days
and places, which you or the greater part of you shall appoint, and provide for
this purpose, etc.

The most of these came to Fodringhay Castle in Northamptonshire, on the xj.
day of October, where the Queen of Scotland was then kept. On the next day the
Commissioners sent unto her, Sir Walter Mildmay, Sir Amyas Powlet, and Edward
Barker, a public Notary, who delivered into her hands the letters of Queen
ELIZABETH, which when she had read over, she with a Princely countenance and
quiet mind said: I am much aggrieued that the Queen my most dear sister is
wrong informed of me, and that I, who have so straightly been kept so many
years, and being now lame, after I have offered so many equal and fair
conditions for my liberty, have lain so long time neglected: Although I have
fully forewarned her of many dangers, yet I was not believed, but was always
despised, although I am most near to her in blood. When the Association was
made, and when it was confirmed in the Parliament, I foresaw that whatsoever
danger befell, either by foreign Princes abroad, or any harebraine fellows at
home, or for the cause of Religion, I should pay dear for the same, I having
so many deadly enemies at the Court. I may take it in evil part, and I have
cause for it, that a league was made with my son, without my priuity or
knowledge, but such like things I pretermit. But to come unto these letters; It
seems strange unto me that the Queen commands me, as if I were her
subject, to come unto a trial: I am an absolute Queen, neither will I do or
commit any thing, which may empaire or wrong the Royal Majesty of Kings and
Princes, of my place and rank, or my son; My mind is not so dejected,
neither will I yield and sink down under calamity, I refer my self unto
those things which I protested before Bromly and the Lord De la Ware. The laws
and statutes of England are to me utterly unknown, I am destitute of
counselors, I tell you plain I know not who may be my Peers: my papers and
notes of remembrances are taken from me, there is none that dare plead or
speak in my cause. I am free from all offense against the Queen, neither am I
to be called in question, but upon mine own word or writing, which can never
be brought against me; But yet I cannot deny but that I have commended my self
and my cause to foreign Princes.

On the next day returned unto her in the name of the Commissioners, Powlet and
Barker, who showed this answer put into writing, and they asked her if she
persisted in the same; After she had heard it distinctly read, she commended it
as truly and rightly conceived, and said she would persist in the same: But,
said she, I did not remember one thing which I wish may be put in: Wh^reas the
Queen has written I am subject and liable unto the laws of England, and am
to be judged by them, because I lived under the protection of them: I answer,
That I came into England to ask and crave aid and help, from which time I
have been kept and detained in prison, and could not enjoy the protection and
benefit of the laws of England, and hitherto I could not understand by any
body, what the laws of England were.

In the afternoon many chosen out of the Commissioners, with men skillful in
the Canon and Civil laws, came unto her: but the Chancellor and the Treasurer
declared their authority out of the letters patents, and showed her that
neither captivity, nor the prerogative of Royal Majesty could exempt her from
answering in this kingdom; and mildly he admonished her to hear the
objections made against her if not, they threatened they both might and would
proceed against her by the authority of the law. She answered, That she was not
a subject, and had rather die a thousand times, than acknowledge her self a
subject: since that by acknowledging it, she should do prejudice and wrong
unto the highness of the Majesty of Kings, and withal should confess her
self to be bound unto all the laws of England, even in matters of Religion.
Nevertheless she was ready to answer unto all things, in a full and free
Parliament, since that she is ignorant if only for a fashion and a show, this
assembly was appointed against her already condemned with their
fore-iudgements; therefore she closely admonishes them to look unto their
consciences, and to remember that the Theater of the whole world was far more
spacious than the kingdom of England. Lastly, she began to complain of the
injuries done unto her, and the Treasurer to rehearse the benefits of Queen
ELIZABETH bestowed upon her, viz. that she had punished many who did impugn
the right she challenged unto England, and had hindered that she was not
condemned by the Estates of the Realm, for the pursuing the marriage with the
Duke of Norfolk, the rebellion in the North, and other things: which things
when she seemed to make slight of, they went away.

After a few hours, by Powlet and the Solicitor they showed the heads of the
letters Pa^ents, and the names of the Commissioners, that she might see that
they were to deal formally and in good fashion, uprightly, and not according
to the qui^kes of law, and extraordinarily. She made no exception against the
Commissioners, but a bitter one against the new or late Act upon which all the
authority of the Commissioners depended; that is, to wit, that it was unjustly
devised purposely against her, and that there was no example of the like
proceeding, and that she would never submit her self to trial upon that Act.
She asked by what law they would proceed against her: If by the Civil or Cano^
laws, she said the expounders were to be sent for to Pauy or Poytiers, and
other outlandish Universities, since that fit men were not to be found in
England. Moreover she added that it was evident by plain words in the letters,
that she was accounted guilty of the fault, although she was not heard, and
therefore she had no reason to appear before them, and she required to be
satisfied of many scruples in these letters, which she had noted, confusedly
and in haste by her self alone, but she would not deliver them in writing,
for that it did not beseem a King or Prince to play the scribe.

About this matter those Commissioners selected came to her again, unto whom
she signified that she did not understand the meaning of these words, Since
she is in the protection of the Queen. The Chancellor answered, This to be
apparent enough to any one of understanding, but yet it is not the duty of
Subjects to expound what the Queen meant, neither were they made Commissioners
for that cause. Then she requested that the protestation which she had made in
former times, to be showed and to be allowed. It was answered, that it was
never allowed, neither that it was to be allowed now, for that it was a wrong
to the Crown of England. She asked by what authority they would proceed. It
was answered, by the authority of the letters Patents, and the law of England.
But you, said she, make laws as you list, unto which, it is no reason why I
should submit my self, since that the Englishmen in former times refused to
submit themselves unto the Salicke law of the Frenchmen. But if they proceeded
by the law of England, they should bring a president for their doings, since
that, that law for the most part consisted upon examples, and customs. But if
by the Canon Law, then no other men ought to expound the same, but the makers
of them. It was answered, that they would proceed neither by the Civil nor
Canon laws, but by the laws of England: But yet that by the Civil and Canon
laws it might be showed that she ought to appear before them, if she did not
refuse to hear this; neither did she refuse to hear, but as in way of
communication, but not by way of Justice or trial.

Hereupon she fell into other speeches, viz. that she never compassed or
devised any thing to hurt or kill the Queen, that she had been offended at
the wrongs and indignities done to her, that she should be a stumbling block,
if she were discourteously used; That she did by Nauus offer her labor and
best means for the reuocation of the Popes Bull; That she would have defended
her innocence by letters, neither was this permitted: And to conclude, that all
her offices of good will for this twenty years have been rejected; with such
like small digressions, her going on further they called back, and bade her to
say in plain terms, whether she would answer before the Commissioners; She
replied, That this their authority was given to them by the new act made to
ensnare her: That she could not endure the Laws of the Queen, which she upon
good reason suspected: That she having been hitherto of good courage, would
not now wrong her ancestors the Kings of Scotland, by acknowledging that she
is a subject of the Crown of England, for this is no other thing than openly
to confess them thereby to have been rebels and traitors. Yet that she
refused not to answer, so she be not reduced unto the rank of a subject: and
that she had rather die a thousand times, than to answer as a Criminal
offender.

Unto these speeches Hatton the Vice-Chamberlaine of the Queen said; You are
accused (but not condemned) to have conspired to kill our Lady and anointed
Queen. You say you are a Queen. Be it so. But the Royal estate of a Queen
does not exempt you from answering unto such a crime as this is, neither by the
Civil nor Canon law, nor by the law of Nations, nor by the law of Nature. For
all Justice would be of no force, yea be utterly overthrown, if faults of such
nature should be committed without punishment. If you be innocent, you do
wrong to your credit by flying from trial. You protest your self to be
innocent, but Queen ELIZABETH is of another mind, and not without cause, but
truly to her great grief: Therefore to examine your innocence, she has sent
with authority most honorable, most wise, and most upright men, who with
equity and with favor, are to hear you, and they will rejoice from their
heart, if you clear your self of this crime. Believe me, the Queen her self
will be very glad, who said to me at my departure, that there could not a
thing have happened more grievous unto her, than that you are charged with this
fault. Wherefore laying by the superfluous privilege of a Royal Estate, which
can be now of no use, make your appearance for a trial, show your innocence,
lest by searching of euasions you draw upon your self suspicion, and purchase
a perpetual blemish of your reputation. I do not refuse, said she, to answer
in a full Parliament, before the Estates of the kingdom lawfully called, so
that I may be declared next in succession: Yea and before the Queen and her
Counselors, so that my protestation may be admitted, and I may be
acknowledged the next kinswoman of the Queen. In plain terms I will not
submit my self unto the judgment of mine adversaries, by whom I know all the
defense I can make of mine innocence, will not be allowed and received. The
Chancellor asked her if she would answer, if her protestation were admitted:
She answered, I will never submit me to the new law m^ntioned in the letters
Patents. Hereupon the Treasurer (...), Yet we will proceed to morrow though you
be absent, and continue obstinate in the cause. She said, Search and examine
your consciences, have regard to your honor, God will requite you and your
heirs for your judgment upon me.

On the next day being the fourteenth day of October, she sent for some of the
Commissioners, and requested, that the protestation might be admitted and
allowed. The Treasurer asked her whether she would come to trial, if the
protostation were only received and put into writing without allowance. At
length she condescended, yet with an evil will, lest she (as she said) might
seem to derogate from her predecessors or successors, but that she was much
desirous to clear the crime objected, being persuaded by the reasons of
Hatton, which she had better thought on.

Forthwith met and assembled in the Chamber of presence, the Commissioners that
were present. There was a chair of Estate set under a Canopy in the upper part
of the Chamber, for the Queen of England: Against it lower and further off,
near unto the railes a Chair for the Queen of Scotland, hard to the walls on
both sides benches or forms, on the which on the one side sat the Chancellor
of England, the Treasurer of England, the Earls of Oxford, Kent, Darby,
Worcester, Rutland, Cumberland, Warwick, Penbroke, Lincoln, and Vicount
Mountacute; On the other side the Lords, Aburgeuenny, Zouch, Morley, Stafford,
Gray, Lumley, Sturton, Sands, Wentworth, Mordant, Saint John of Bletso,
Compton and Cheiney: Next to them sat the Knights of the Privy Counsel, as
James Croft, Christopher Hatton, Francis Walsingham, Ralph Sadleir, Walter
Mildmay, and Amias Powlet; Forward before the Earls sat the two chief
Justices, and the chief Baron of the Exchequer; on the other side, two Barons
and other Justices, Dale and Ford, Doctors of the Civil law; at a little table
in the middle sat Popham the Queens Atturny, Egerton the Solicitor, Gaudie
the Queens Serieant at law, the Clarke of the Crown, and two Clerks.

When she was come and had set her self in her seat, silence being made,
Bromly the Chancellor turning to her, made a short speech to this purpose: The
most high and mighty Queen of England being certified to her great grief and
anguish of mind, that you have plotted both the destruction of her and of
England, and also of Religion; according to the duty due unto God, her self,
and people, in the which lest she should fail, and out of no malice of mind,
has appointed these Commissioners, who may hear what things are objected
against you, and how you can clear your self from the crimes laid against
you, and show your innocence: She arising up said, that she came into England
to seek and request aid, which was promised her, nevertheless that she was
detained in prison ever since that time. She protested, that she was not
subject to the Queen, but was a free and absolute Queen, neither was to be
forced or compelled to be brought in or tried before the Commissioners or any
other Judge, for any cause whatsoever, but only God alone the Sovereign Judge
of all, lest that she should do wrong and injury unto her own Royal Majesty,
her Son the King of Scotland, her Successors, or any other absolute Princes:
But now she was there in person to refell the crimes objected against her. And
she requested her friends or servants to witness these things. The Chancellor
not acknowledging that help was promised, answered, That this protestation was
to no purpose, for that whosoever, of whatsoever rank or estate he were in
England, did offend against the laws of England, may be made subject to the
same, and may be examined and judged by the late new law. And that therefore
that protestation made to the prejudice of the laws, and of the Queen of
England, was not to be admitted. Yet the Commissioners commanded, as well her
protestation, as the answer of the Chancellor to be recorded. Then the letters
Patents, which, as I have often said, were founded upon the Act of Parliament,
being read aloud, she with a great courage made a protestation against that
Act, as made directly and purposely against her, and in this matter put it to
their conscience: And when the Treasurer answered, that every man in this
Realm was bound to the observation of the laws, though never so lately made,
and that she might not speak in disgrace of the laws, and that the
Commissioners would judge by virtue of that law, whatsoever protestations or
appellations she made: At length she said she was ready and prepared to answer
of any act whatsoever, done against the Queen of England.

Then Gaudy expounded and made plain the Act in every point, and affirmed,
that she had offended against the same, and then he made an Historical
Narration of Babingtons conspiracy, and concluded, that she knew of it, allowed
it, promised help, and showed the ways and the means. She with an undaunted
courage answered, that she knew not Babington, never received letters from him,
nor never wrote unto him, never plotted the destruction of the Queen: And that
to prove it effectually, the subscription under her own hand was to be
produced. She never heard so much as any man speak it: that she knew not
Ballard, never maintained him, but that she had heard that the Catholics were
much agrieued with many things; and that she certified the Queen therewith in
her letters, and had earnestly desired her to have pity of them. And that
many, utterly to her unknown, had offered their service unto her; yet that she
never moved any, to any wickedness: and that she being shut up in prison,
could neither know, nor hinder the things which they attempted.

Upon this, out of the confession of Babington, she was urged that there
passed an intercourse of letters between her and Babington. She acknowledged,
that she had speech with many by letters, nevertheless it could not be
gathered thereby, that she knew of all their naughty practices: She requested,
that a subscription with her own hand might be produced, and she asked, who
could have harm by it, if she had requested to have letters detained almost a
whole year. Then the Copies of the letters of Babington unto her were read, in
the which all the plot was described. She said, As concerning these letters, it
may be that Babington might write, but let it be proved that I received them:
if Babington or others have affirmed this, I say in plain terms they lie.
Other men's faults are not to be laid on my back. A packet of letters, which was
detained almost a year, came about that time to my hands, but truly I know not
by whom it was sent to me.

To prove that she had received Babingtons letters, there was read out of the
confession of Babington the heads of the letters which he had voluntarily
confessed that she had written back.

In like manner things taken out of the confessions of Ballard and Savage were
read, who confessed that Babington had communicated unto them letters received
from the Queen of Scotland. She affirmed, that Babington had received none
from her, yea rather that she had been angry with them that secretly
suggested, and gave counsel about the inuading of England, and warned them to
beware and take heed. Then were showen the Letters, in the which the plot of
Babington was commended and approved. She asked to have the copy of them, and
affirmed that they came not from her, but perhaps out of her Alphabet of
Ciphers in France, that she has labored to get her liberty, which is a thing
natural to all men, and to have treated with her friends to use means to
deliver her: Nevertheless unto many whom she was not disposed to name, who
offered their service, she had not answered a word, but that she much desired
to turn away the storm of persecution from the Catholics, and that she
entreated the Queen thereunto, that she would not get a kingdom with the
blood of the meanest of all the Commons. That there are many who attempt things
pernicious without her knowledge, and in some letters which she has received
very lately, some had begged pardon of her, if they attempted any thing without
her priuitie. That it was an easy matter to counterfeit the Characters and
Ciphers, as a young man, who had boasted himself to be the bastard brother to
her son, did very lately in France. That she also feared lest this was
contrived by Walsingham, who (as she had heard it muttered) had plotted
against the life of her and her Son. She protests that she never thought to
hurt or kill the Queen, but that she had rather more willingly bestow her
life, than that the Catholics should be afflicted so often, and lose their
lives with such grievous torments for her sake, and in hatred of her.

But, said the Treasurer, none who was an obedient subject was put to death for
Religion, but many were for Treason, maintaining the Popes authority and Bull
against the Queen. But, said she, I have heard otherwise, and I have read it
also in printed books. The writers of such books, replied he, wrote also that
the Queen was deprived of her Royal dignity.

Walsingham, who even now perceived himself nipped and touched, rose up, and
protesting that his mind was not possessed with any evil will, said, I call
God to witness, that I, as a private man, have done nothing not beseeming an
honest and upright man, neither for the public person which I bear have done
any thing which does not belong unto my place. I confess that I have been
careful of the safety of the Queen and the Realm, and have curiously sought
to find the plots against her. If Ballard had offered me his service, I had
not refused it, and had recompensed him for his travel and pain taken. If I
have plotted any thing with him, why did he not tell it out, that he might have
saved his life? She said that she remained contented with this answer: she
requested him not to be angry, for that she so freely spoke what she had
heard, and that he would not believe more them that slandered her, than she did
them that defamed him: That spies were men not to be trusted, for they
dissemble one thing, and say another. That he would by no means believe that
she consented to hurt or kill the Queen. And then weeping amain, said, I
will never cast away my soul in conspiring to kill my most dear sister. The
Lawyers made answer, that it would be soundly proved by testimonies presently.
These things were done before noone.

In the afternoon, for the more substantial proof thereof, the copy of the
letters which Charles Paget wrote, was brought forth and showed, and Curlus one
of her Secretaries, witnessed, that she received, of the conference between
Mendoza and Ballard about the counsel of inuading England. She answered, This
is nothing to the matter, neither does it prove that I consented to hurt or
kill the Queen. Moreover, the Lawyers went forward, to prove that she was
privy of the conspiracy, and also conspired to kill the Queen, out of the
confession of Babington, and the letters between her and Babington; in the
which he had saluted and styled her his high and mighty Lady and Queen. And
by the way they rehearsed, that there was a Counsel holden of assigning and
conferring over the Kingdom of England unto the King of Spain. She
acknowledged, that a Priest came to her, and said, if she did not stop it,
that both she and her son should be excluded from their inheritance: but
she would not tell the name of the Priest. And moreover, she said, that the
Spaniard challenged a right unto the Kingdom of England, and would not give
place unto any, but unto her. Then they pressed her with the testimonies of
Nauus and Curlus her Secretaries, out of the confession of Babington, and the
letters that past between Babington and her; and all the credit of their
proofs depended upon the testimony of them, and yet they were not brought
forth face to face. She did acknowledge Curlus to be an honest man, but not a
sufficient witness against her. That Nauus, sometimes Secretary to the
Cardinal of Lorraine, commended to her by the French King, might be easily
induced either by bribes, or hope, or fear, to bear false witness, as one,
who sundry times had made rash oaths, and had Curlus so tractable and at his
beck, that he would write whatsoever he bade. And it may be that they might
put into the letters, such things which she had not endired, and also that
such letters came to their hands, which yet she never saw. And broke out into
such or the like words: The Majesty and safety of Princes will be of small
authority, and be contemned, if they do depend on the writings and
testimony of their Secretaries. I did endite unto them nothing but that which
nature has taught me; that I might recover and get my liberty at last;
neither am I to be convinced, but out of mine own words or writing. If they
have written any thing that may be hurt and damage to my most dear sister,
unwitting to me, let them be punished for their inconsiderate boldness. I
certainly know if they were here present, they would in this cause acquit me
of this fault. And if I had my papers here, I could answer unto these things in
particular.

Amongst those things, the Treasurer objected, that she had determined to send
her son into Spain, and to assign over unto the Spaniard, the right that
she challenged in the Kingdom of England. Unto whom she answered, That she
had no Realm that she could give away, but yet it was lawful to give away her
own things at her will and pleasure. When the Alphabets of Ciphers conveyed
unto Babington, the Lord Lodouick, and to the Lord of Fernihurst, were objected
unto her out of the testimony of Curlus, she denied not, but that she had set
down more, and among the rest, that for the Lord Lodouick, at such time as
she commended him and another unto the dignity of a Cardinal, and as she
hoped without offense, forasmuch that it was no less lawful for her to have
commerce of letters, and treat of her affairs, with men of her Religion, as it
was for the Queen, with the professors of the other Religion: Then they
pressed her thicker, with the agreeing testimonies of Nauus and Curlus,
repeated again, and she also repeated her former answers; or else repulsed
them with precise denials, protesting again, that she neither knew Babington
nor Ballard. Among these speeches, when the Treasurer put in his verdict,
saying, that she knew well Morgan, who secretly sent Parry to kill the Queen,
and had given him an annual pension, she replied, she knew that Morgan had
lost for her cause all that he had, and therefore she was bound in honor to
relieve him, and that she was not bound to revenge an injury done by a well
deserving friend unto the Queen, but yet that she had terrified him from
making any such attempts. But yet pensions, said she, were given out of
England unto Patricke Gray, and to the Scots that were mine enemies, as
likewise to my son. The Treasurer answered: At such time as the revenues of
the Kingdom of Scotland were much diminished and impaired by the negligence of
the Viceroyes, the Queen gave some liberality unto the King your son, her
most near allied Cousin. Afterward was showed the contents of the Letters unto
Inglefield, and to the Lord Paget, and unto Bernardino de Mendoza, concerning
foreign aid. And when to those she had made answer: These things touch not
nor concern the death of the Queen; and if so be that strangers desired and
labored to deliver her, it was not to be objected against her; and that she
had sundry times signified unto the Queen, that she would seek for her
liberty: The matter was adiourned unto the next day.

On the next day she repeated again her former protestation, and requested
that it might be recorded, and a copy thereof delivered unto her, lamenting
that the most reasonable conditions which she had propounded oftentimes unto
the Queen, were always rejected, yea when she promised to give her son, and
the son of the Duke of Guise for hostages, that the Queen, or the kingdom
of England should take no harm by her. That she saw long ere now, that all
ways of liberty were stopped, but now that she is most basely used, to have
her honor and estimation called into question, before Petifoggers and Lawyers,
who draw every circumstance into consequences by their quiddities and tricks,
since that anointed and consecrated Princes are not subject, nor under the same
laws that private men are. Moreover when they have authority and commission
given them of examining Things tending to the hurt of the Queens Person; yet
notwithstanding the cause is so handled and letters wrested, that the Religion
which she professes, and the immunitie and majesty of foreign Princes, and
the private commerces between Princes, are called into question, and she below
her Royal dignity is brought to the bar, as it were to be arraigned, and to
no other purpose, but that she may be wholly excluded from the favor of the
Queen, and from her right in the Succession, when she appeared voluntarily to
confute all objections, lest she might seem to have been slack in the
defense of her honor and credit. She also called to their memory, how
ELIZABETH her self had been drawn into question for the conspiracy of Wyat,
when yet she was most innocent, Religiously affirming, that although she wished
the good and welfare of Catholics, yet she would not have it to be done by the
death and blood of any one. That she had rather play the part of Hester, than
of Judith, make intercession unto God for the people, rather than to take away
the life of the meanest of the people. And then appealing unto the Majesty of
God, and unto the Princes that were allied unto her; and repeating again her
protestation, she requested that there might be another assembly about this
matter, and that she might have a Lawyer assigned unto her, and that since she
was a Prince, that they would give credit to the word of a Prince; for it was
extreme folly to stand unto their judgment, whom she most plainly saw to be
armed with fore-iudgements against her.

Unto these speeches the Treasurer said: Since that I bear a twofold person,
the one of a Delegate or Commissioner, and the other of a Counselor; First,
take of me a few things, as from a Commissioner: Your Protestation is recorded,
and the copy thereof shall be delivered unto you. We have authority given us
under the Queens own hand, and the great Seal of England, from the which
there is no appellation: neither come we with a fore-iudgement, but to judge
according to the rule and square of Justice. The Lawyers aim at no other
thing, but that the truth may appear how far forth you have offended against
the Queens person. We have full power given us to hear and examine the matter,
yea in your absence; yet we desire to have you present, lest we should seem to
diminish your honor or credit: neither have we thought to object unto you any
thing, but that you have done or attempted against the Queens person. The
letters are read for no other purpose, but to lay open the practice against the
Queen, and other things pertaining thereunto, and are so mingled with other
things, that they cannot be separated. And therefore the whole letters, and not
parcels taken out of sundry places of them, are read, for as much as
circumstances do give credit unto the things of which you dealt with Babington.

She interrupting him, said, That the circumstances might be proved, but not
the deed, that her integrity depended not upon the credit and memory of her
Secretaries, though she knew them honest: but yet if they have confessed
something out of fear of the rack, hope of reward, and of impunitie, it is
not to be admitted and received out of just causes, which she may declare in
another place; that the minds of men are carried away by sundry kinds of
affections, that they would never have confessed such things, but either for
gain, or upon some hope: that letters may be directed unto others, than unto
whom they are written, and that many things which she had not dictated, had
many times been inserted: if her papers had not been taken away, and that
she had a Secretary, she could with more ease confute their objections.

But nothing (said the Treasurer) shall be objected, but from the nine and
twentieth day of June, neither will the papers do any good, since the
Secretaries and Babington himself, without torture have affirmed you to have
sent letters unto Babington; which thing, although you deny, let the
Commissioners judge, whether more credit is to be given unto their affirmation
or your denial. But to come to the matter. As a Counselor I tell you this,
you have made many propositions about your liberty at sundry times: that
nothing came thereof, was long of you, or of the Scots, and not of our Queen,
for the Noblemen of Scotland absolutely denied to deliver the King for
hostage. And when last of all there was a treaty for your delivery, Parry was
sent secretly by Morgan to kill the Queen. Ah (said she) you are my professed
enemy: Yea rather (replied he) I am an enemy to the enemies of Queen
ELIZABETH: but enough of these things; Let us therefore proceed unto proofs:
when she denied to hear, Yet we will hear (said he) and I also (said she) in
another place, and will defend my self.

Now were read again the letters unto Charles Paget, in which she told him,
there was no other way for the Spaniard to bring the Netherlands into
subjection, than by placing a Prince in England who might do him good: the
letters unto the Lord Paget to hasten aid and forces to invade England: the
letters of Cardinal Allan, in which he saluted her as his high and sovereign
Lady, and signified that the business was commended unto the care of the
Prince of Parma. As these were in reading, she interrupted them, saying: That
Babington and her Secretaries accuse her to excuse themselves; that she never
heard of the six Ruffians; that the other things were not to the matter; that
she esteemed Allan to be a reverend Prelate; that she did acknowledge no
other head of the Church, than the Pope of Rome; that she was not ignorant in
what regard and estimation she was with him and with foreign Princes, nor
could she hinder it, if they in their letters called her Queen; that her
Secretaries since they did against their office, faith, and fidelity,
confirmed by oath unto her, deserved no credit; that there was no credit to be
given to them that were once forsworn, though they swore again by all the
oaths of God; neither that they did think themselves tied with any oath
whatsoever in conscience, since that they have sworn unto her before that
loyalty and secrecy, neither for that they were not subjects of England: that
Nauus had written oftentimes otherwise than she had dictated, and that Curlus
had written all whatsoever Nauus had bidden, but that she would maintain and
uphold their faults in all things, but those that might blemish her honor.
Perhaps also these fellows did confess to do themselves a benefit, whilst
they might think not to hurt her, with whom, as with a Queen, they thought
mildness should be used; that she heard nothing of Ballard, but of one
Hallard, who had offered his service, which yet she had refused, for that she
had heard that the same man had been belonging to Walsingham.

Afterward, when the notes out of the letters unto Mendoza, which Curlus had
acknowledged that he wrote out in a private character, were read before her,
and she was urged out of them, as if she had compassed to transfer the right
in the Kingdom unto the Spaniard, and that Allan and Parsons stayed now at
Rome for that purpose and intent: She complaining that her servants had broken
their fidelity confirmed by oath, answered: When I being in prison, and
languished with care, A without hope of liberty, and there was not any more
hope left of ever bringing to pass those things, which very many expected of
me in my sickness and declining age. Many thought it sit that the Succession
of the Realm of England should be established in the Spaniard, or in a
Catholic Englishman: and a book was brought to prove the right of the
Spaniard; which being not admitted by me, I offended many. But all my hope in
England being now desperate, I am resolved not to reject foreign help.

The Solicitor admonished the Commissioners secretly what might become of
them, their Honors, goods, and posterity, if the Kingdom should be so
transferred: but the Treasurer showed them that the Kingdom of England could
not be transferred, but to descend by the right of succession according to the
Laws.

She requested that she might be heard in a full and open Parliament, or that
she her self might speak to the Queen (whom she hoped would have respect
unto a Queen) and the Counselors. And then rising from her seat with a
cheerful countenance, she spoke a few words aside with the Treasurer, Hatton,
Walsingham, and the Earl of Warwick. These things being done, the Assembly or
meeting was adiourned unto the five and twentieth day of October, in the
Star Chamber at Westminster. Thus much of this matter out of the Commentaries
of Edward Barker, principal Register to the Queens Majesty, and of Thomas
Wheeler, a Notarie public, Register of the Audience of Canterbury, and of
other credible persons that were present. And in this manner the Queen thought
good to have her tried, although the Lawyers, who are so curious in the
examining of words, and following of forms, rather than in the expounding of
the Laws themselves, that according to their form of law, she was to be
called to trial in the County of Stafford, and to be brought to hold up her
hand at the bar publicly before the Bench, and to be tried by twelve men,
saying this indeed was a sweet and goodly form of judgment against a Prince.
But to avoid and put away such absurdities, she thought it better to refer
so great a cause unto the Noblemen of the Land, and Realm, and to the Judges;
and this scarce suffices, when as (said she) all men's eyes are cast upon us
Princes, as being set aloft, as on a high scaffold, so that in us even the
least blemish or spot is seen afar off, so that we are carefully to provide
that we do nothing unworthy of our selves.

But to return where I left: At that day met all the Commissioners (but the
Earls of Shrewsbury and Warwick, who were then sick) and after that Nauus
and Curlus had affirmed and confirmed before them, that every and singular the
letters and copies of letters, which were produced before, to be most true
upon their oaths, viua voce, voluntarily without hope or reward; the sentence
against the Queen of Scotland was pronounced and confirmed with the seals and
subscriptions of the Commissioners; and recorded in these words: By their
assent, consent and accord, they do pronounce, give, and say their Sentence
and Judgment, at the day and place last rehearsed, that after the end of the
aforesaid Session of Parliament, specified in the aforesaid Commission, viz.
after the aforesaid first day of June, in the 27. year aforesaid, and before
the date of thesaid Commission, diverse things were imagined and compassed
within this Realm of England, by Anthony Babington and others, with the
priuitie of the said MARIE, pretending title unto the Crown of this Realm of
England, tending to the hurt, death and destruction of the Royal person of our
said Lady, the Queen. And to wit, that after the aforesaid first day of June,
in the seven and twentieth year abouesaid, and before the date of the
aforesaid Commission, the said MARIE pretending title unto the Crown of this
Realm of England, compassed and imagined within this Realm of England diverse
things tending to the hurt, death and destruction of the Royal person of our
Lady the Queen, against the form of the Statute specified in the aforesaid
Commission. Of this Sentence which depended wholly on the credit of the
Secretaries, neither were they brought face to face, according to the first
Statute of the 13. year of Queen ELIZABETH her self, was very much speech
and different amongst men, some judging them unworthy of credit, and others
again thought them worthy to be believed. I have seen the Apology of Nauus
written unto King James, in the year 1605. in the which he does laboriously
excuse himself, in protesting that he was neither the Author, nor perswader,
nor first discouerer of that plot or device, neither that he failed at all in
his duty through negligence or incircumspection, but rather that he stoutly
did impugn the heads of the accusations against his Lady this day. Which
thing yet does not appear by the public records. But the same day it was
declared by the Commissioners, and by the Judges of the Realm, That that
Sentence did derogate nothing from JAMES King of Scotland in his right or
honor, but him to be in the same place, estate and right, as if that Sentence
had not been given at all.

In a short time after there was a Parliament holden at Westminster, in the
which the Estates of the Kingdom who had approved and confirmed by their
voices the sentence pronounced against the Queen of Scotland, by one consent
and accord delivered by the Chancellor unto the Queen a supplication, in which
they most earnestly besought her, that for the conservation of the true
Religon, the tranquillity of the Realm, safety of the Queen, the good
estate of them and of their posterity, the sentence given against MARY Queen
of Scotland according to the Law might be published. They fetched their reasons
from the dangers hanging over the heads of their Religion, her Royal Person,
and Realm, by her who nursed up in the Religion of the Papists, and sworn one
of the Holy League to root out the Religion of the Protestants, had challenged
long the Realm as due to her, and had thought it a most just thing to oppugn
a woman excommunicate, and meritorious to deprive her of her life. She had
subucrted and overthrown the flourishing families of the Realm, and laid
fuel unto all plots contrived and tumults in England. To spareher, was no
other thing but to undo the people, who will take it in evil part if she be
suffered to escape without punishment, and will not believe themselves freed
from the oath of the Association, except she were put to death. Lastly, they
called to her remembrance what fearful examples of Gods punishment there were
against King Saul for that he killed not Agag; and upon Achab, for that he
killed not Benadad. Thus said the States of Parliament.

The Queen with a maiesticall countenance and voice answered unto this effect:
The benefits of Almighty God are so great and so many toward me, that I do
not only acknowledge them most humbly, but do admire them as miracles,
forasmuch as I cannot express them in words. Although there be no mortal man
more beholding to the Majesty of God than I my self, so often times delivered
from dangers not without miracle; yet I am not indebted more than for this only
thing, which I account as a miracle; that is to say, That as I received and
took upon me the government of the Realm with the full consent and good will
of all, so I see perfectly the same, if not your greater love and good will
toward me, after that XXVIII. years be expired: and if I should fail therein
now, and that it did not continue still, I might perchance be perceived to
breathe, but surely not to live. But now although attempts be made against my
life, nevertheless nothing troubles me more, than that she who is of the same
sex, of the same stock and lineage, and also of my blood and kindred, has
been accessarie to the same. And I am so far off from being malicious toward
her, as that when some plots against me came to light, I wrote unto her, that
if she would confess them in her private letters unto me, they should be
wrapped up in silence. Neither did I write thus with this mind, to ensnare
her, for that whatsoever she could confess, was known to me. Yet
nevertheless though things are come to this pass that they are, if she would
truly repent, and that none would undertake her cause against me, and that
hereupon my life only, and not the safety of all the people did depend (I
would not have you think I feign) I would truly most willingly forgive her:
yea if England by my death might flourish more, and have a better Prince, I
would most readily lay down my life; for I do desire not to live, but for the
good of the people, and not of my self. Neither is there any cause, having
lived in that manner as I have, why I should desire to live, or fear to die. I
am not ignorant of all kind of life's, for I have obeyed, and I have governed;
I have had good neighbors, and also evil; I have found treachery where I
trusted: I have evil bestowed benefits, and I have been evil reported of
when I have done well. When I call these things past to mind, see and behold
the things present, and expect future things, I think them most happy who die
soon: against such evils as these I put on a manly mind, that whatsoever
befall unto me, death may not take and find me unprovided.

As concerning these treasons, I will not so preiudicate my self, or the laws
of my Kingdom, that I do not think but that she the author and contriuer of
this treason, is a subject, and liable by the ancient laws, although this new
law had never been made; the which nevertheless was not enacted directly to
entrap her, as many folks that favor her do suspect and imagine. It was so
far off from being made to ensnare her, that it was rather done to premonish
and deter her from attempting any thing against it. And since that it has
the force of a law, it was thought meet to proceed against her by the same. But
you Lawyers be so curious and precise in examining the words and letters of the
law, and following your formalities, rather than in the expounding the laws
themselves, that by your forms she was (as is said before) within the County
of Stafford in person to be arraigned, standing at the bar, and holding up
her hand, and to be tried by the verdict of twelve men. Assuredly it were a
goodly form of judgment upon a Prince. To avoid such like absurdities, I
thought it most fit to refer so great a cause to be examined by the Nobility
and Judges; and this is scarce sufficient, for that the eyes of all men are
fixed on us that are Princes, standing aloft (as it were) on a Theater or
Stage, and in us the least blemish is seen, be it never so far off: so that
we are very carefully to provide and beware that we commit and do nothing
unworthy of our selves. But you by this new law have brought me into a very
great strait, that I should set down the determination for the punishment of
her, who is a Princess most near to me in blood, and whose attempts and plots
have so grieved my heart, that not to increase it by hearing the same
rehearsed, I willingly ablented my self from this assembly of Parliament, and
not for fear of some lying in wait to kill me, as some imagine: yet I will
utter this secret (though I be no blabbe) I saw with these eyes, and read the
oath wherein some have bound themselves to kill me within a mon^th space. From
hence I foresee your danger, and I will take a great care to refell the same.

Your Association for my safety I have not forgotten, yet I never so much as
thought of such a thing before the same was showed me under their hands and
seals. The same has tied me unto you in strong bonds of good will for your
love unto me, who seek for no other solace and comforts than from the love of
you, and of the Commonwealth. But for as much as the matter which is now
treated of, is seldom seen, and for that there be few examples thereof, and
is a matter of very great moment, I entreat you not to expect that I should
make an answer and set down my certain determination, for it is my use and
custom even in smaller matters, to be advised a good space in things which are
but once to be determined. I will desire earnestly Almighty God to power the
shining beams of his light into my mind, that I may perfectly see and b^hold
what may be best for the good and profi^ of the Church, the Commonwealth, and
your safe^ie. Yet lest delay may bring danger, I will in convenient time
signify unto you what my mind is.

And so the twelfth day after, when she had considered more advisedly on the
matter, she, as it were, in her doubtful mind distracted, and not able to
resolve what to do, requested them (sending the Chancellor unto the Nobility,
and Puckering unto them of the Lower house) more diligently to advise and
consult of so weighty a matter again, and to devise some more wholesome
remedy, whereby the life of the Queen of Scotland might be spared, and her
security procured.

When they had deliberated and consulted much, and a long time, and had judged
both the good and the evil of the Prince to concern all men, they fall again
to the same opinion with one voice, and for these causes: For that the Queen
could not be in safety, as long as the Queen of Scotland lived, except she
repented seriously, and acknowledged her crimes, or else was tied and kept in a
straiter prison, and with deeds of writing under her hand, or by oath, or
should give hostages, or depart out of the Realm. They hoped for no repentance
in her, since that she had evil requited the Queen, who had given her life
unto her, and had not yet acknowledged her crimes. They held and accounted
straiter custody, writings under her hand, oath and hostages as nothing, for
as much as these things vanished in smoke, presently as soon as the Queen
was dead or made away; but if she departed out of the Realm, they feared she
would forthwith advance her Standards to invade the Kingdom. When the
Chancellor, and Puckering, Speaker of the Lower house, had declared these
things at large, urging to have the sentence put in execution, For as much as
it was injustice to deny the execution of law, if it were to any one of her
subjects that desired it, much more to all the Englishmen efflagitating it so
much with one voice and one heart. Unto whom the Queen made a Speech in this
manner.

That journey is very grievous by the which both whilst it is going, and when
it is ended, nothing is gotten but trouble and vexation. I am very much
troubled and vexed this very day, as much as at any time, whether I should
speak or hold my tongue: If I shall speak and not complain, surely I shall
fai^e; If I hold my tongue, your labor is lost; but if I complain, it may
seem strange: yet I confess, I have much wished that for your security, and
withal for my safety, some other way might have been devised, than that
which is now propounded. So that I cannot but complain before you, though not
of you, since that I understand by your petitions, that my safety depends
wholly on the death of another. If any think that I have prolonged the time,
to procure vaingloriously the commendation of clemency, they do^ me much
wrong, which thing God who searches the secrets of al men's hearts, knows
best. It th^re be any that think that the Commissioners durst not pronounce
any other sentence, lest they should seem to displease me, or to have been
careless of my safety, they wrong me exceedingly; for either my servants
failed in doing their duty, or else they signified on my behalf unto the
Commissioners that my will was, and that I commanded that every one should do
freely according as they thought in their minds, and that they should privately
impart unto me those things which they would not utter publicly. It was out
of my abundant good will toward her, to desire to have another course or means
devised for this mischief. But now since it is most certain, that I and my
safety are in a deplorable estate, except she be rid and made away, I am
sorry at my heart, that I who have pardoned and given life to so many Rebels,
and have neglected so many Treasons, by conniuing or holding my peace, may
seem now at the length to use cruelty and ^eucritie toward so great a Prince.
Since the time I came unto the Crown, I have seen many Libels scattered
abroad against me, as against a Tyrant: God send the writers of them good
luck. I believe that they would say some new things, and truly it seems
strange to me, to be noted for a Tyrant, I wish it were as strange to hear of
their impiety.

What will not they publish in their writings, when they shall hear that I
have consented, that the hangman shall ^mbrue his hands in the blood of my next
Cousin? I am so far from cruelty, that to conserve my life, I would not use
any violence against her, neither have I been so careful to lengthen out mine
own life, as I have labored to conserve the life of us both, and I am
immeasurably sorry that now it cannot be done. I am not so void of wit, but
that I see the dangers that be near me, nor of that peevish folly^^^ whet and
sharpen the sword wherewith to have my throat cut, nor of that careless sloth,
that I will not stir to save mine own life. But I imagine this thing with my
self, that there be many who will put their lives in danger to save the life
of their Prince, of whose number yet I do not profess my self to be. These
things I have considered in my mind. But since that many have written and
spoken bitterly against me, let it be lawful for me to make an Apology for
my self, that you may see for the safe^y of what woman you have taken so much
pain. As I do make a thankful remembrance of your vigilancie and
watchfulness; so I cannot, nor shall not give you equal thanks, if I had as
many lives left as every one of you have.

As Soon as I took the Crown on me, not forgetting God the giver thereof, I
began my Reign with his worship and Religion, in the which I was brought up,
and in which, as I hope, I shall die: though I be not ignorant what dangers
environed me at home for the alteration of Religion, and what potent Kings of
the other profession abroad, showed themselves my enemies; yet nevertheless I
was not moved: for I knew that God, whom I chiefly respected, would defend me
and my cause. Upon this proceeded and grew so many plots and conspiracies
against me, that I might have wondered how I should escape, if God had not
helped me beyond my hope. Then that I might make greater progress in the art
of Government, I studied much and long what things were the fit parts for a
King, and I found out by search, that it was very necessary that they should
be furnished with those Cardinal virtues, Justice, Temperance, Prudence, and
Fortitude.

My sex does not permit me to arrogate unto my self these two latter, which
belong properly unto men, but of the former and the milder virtues (as I may
call them) I dare say this without vanterie, I have kept the highest and lowest
in awe alike, I have raised no man whom I have not thought worthy, I have not
been credulous of belief in hearing tales. I have not corrupted Judgment
with a fore-iudgement, without hearing the cause; yet I cannot say, but that
many things may be told me as truth,, upon the too much partiality of the
parties, For a good and wary Prince is often sold, for that he cannot hear
all things himself. But this I can auerre and auow for truth, According to my
capacity, I have always made Judgment subject unto Truth. As there was one
who admonished his friend to make no answer unto a question, before he recited
the Alphabet; so I did never determine any thing rashly and in haste.

Therefore, as concerning your consultations and aduices, I acknowledge them to
be studied, provident and wholesome for my better conservation, and to grow and
proceed from your hearts, both sincere and most devoted unto me, so that it is
my part to strive with all my power, not to seem, or to be ingrate unto them
that deserve so well at my hands. And as concerning your Petition, I beseech
and request you that you will be content with an answer without an answer. I
approve your judgment, I conceive your reasons, yet I pray you excuse the
doubtful care of studying and considering in this business which tormenteth
me. Take in good part my most thankful mind unto you, and also this answer,
if you think it an answer. If I shall say that I will not do that which you
request, perhaps I shall say that which I do not think; but if I shall say I
will do it, I shall precipitate my self, whom you wish to be conserved, into
utter destruction: which thing I assuredly know in your wisdom you would not,
if you consider thoroughly the places, the times, and the manners of men. After
these things done, the Assembly of the Estates of Parliament was prorogued.

About the same time the Lord Buckhurst and Beale are sent to the Queen of
Scotland to signify the sentence given against her, and that the same as most
just was approved and confirmed by the authority of Parliament, and that the
States did very much urge the same in reason of Justice, Security, and
Necessity; and therefore should persuade her that acknowledging her sins
against God and the Queen, she might by this repentance before her death,
purge and cleanse her from her sins; insinuating, that as long as she lived
the Religion received in England could not stand firm. Hereupon she with an
unwonted alacrity and cheerfulness seemed to triumph, giving thanks to God,
and rejoicing to her self, that she was accounted an instrument for the
re-establishment of Religion in this Island: And vehemently besought them that
she might have a Catholic Priest to direct her conscience and administer the
Sacraments: and utterly rejected the Bishop and Deane, whom they commended as
fit men for that purpose, and gave the English nation a bitter taunt, in saying
oftentimes, that the Englishmen had used cruelty toward their Kings in killing
them now and then, so that now it was not strange if also they exercised
tyranny on me borne and come also of their blood.

L'aubespineus the French Ambassador stopped and stayed a little the
publication of the judgment; but some Courtiers diligently laboring in it, in
the month of December it was publicly proclaimed through the City of London,
the Mayor, the Aldermen, and principal Citizens being present, and afterward
through all the Realm. In the preface the Queen did in earnest manner protest
that this Proclamation was wrung out and extorted from her, not without great
anxietie of mind, by great necessity, and the most vehement obtestations of
the Estates of the Realm, though there were some who thought this to be spoken
by a woman's policy, who desire to seem always to do that which they do by
coaction, though they desire it never so much.

The diuulging of this direful and doleful Proclamation being told unto the
Queen of Scotland, she was so far off from being dejected, that rather with
a resolved and stayed countenance she gave thanks unto God, with lifting up
her hands unto heaven. And although Powlet her Keeper deprived her of all
dignity and respect, and she was no more accounted of but as a mean woman of
the basest rank, yet she endured it with a most quiet mind. But having gotten
leave of him with too much ado, by letters unto Queen ELIZABETH dated the
nineteenth day of December, she declares her self free from all malice and
hateful mind against her, gives thanks unto God for that sentence of death,
who would have the end of her sorrowful life to come. She entreats her that
she may be obliged and beholden unto her only, and not unto others, for these
benefits that follow, since that she could expect and look for no good from
the hot-minded Puritans, who carried all away in England. First, that when her
enemies were glutted and satisfied with the shedding of her innocent blood,
that her body may be carried by her servants to be buried in some hallowed
ground, especially into France, where her mother rests in peace; since that
violence has been offered unto the ashes of her forefathers and ancestors in
Scotland, and the Churches either pulled down or profaned; neither could she
hope for a burial with Catholic rites in England, amongst the ancient Kings
the ancestors to both of them: so that at last her body may rest, which
conjoined to her soul did never rest nor had quiet. The second was (forasmuch
as she feared the secret villainy of many men) that she might not be put to
death secretly, without the knowledge of Queen ELIZABETH, but in the presence
of her servants and others, who might bear true witness of her faith toward
Christ, her obedience to the Church, and the end of her life, against the false
rumors which her adversaries might spread and devise. The third was, that her
servants might freely and peaceably depart, and might go whither they would,
and enjoy the legacies she had bequeathed unto them in her Testament. These
things she requested very earnestly in the name of Jesus Christ, by the soul
and memory of HENRY the seventh, progenitor to them both, by the royal honor
that she had borne. Then she complained, that all royal furniture was
violently taken away by the commandment of some of her Counselors, and
forebodeth that their malice would break out unto greater matters. And adds,
if they had shown the letters and papers taken away without fraud and
sincerely, that it would have plainly appeared, that there was no other cause
of her death, than the too scrupulous care of some men of the security of
Queen ELIZABETH. Lastly, she earnestly desired her to write a few words with
her own hand concerning these matters. But whether these letters came ever to
the hands of Queen ELIZABETH, I cannot say.

But sundry men talked in sundry manners according to their sundry wits, of
this matter; not to speak of the Clergy men of both sides, who are for the
most part vehement in their opinions.

There were some plain and indifferent weighers of matters, who thought they
dealt very rigorously with her, for that she was a free and absolute Princess,
above whom none had any authority but God alone, for that she was so very
near of kin unto Queen ELIZABETH, who also had promised very liberally in
the word of a Prince, unto her driven out of her Realm, as soon as she was
arrived in England, by Henry Middlemore, all humanity, courtesy, and rights
of hospitality; and yet on the other side had detained her in prison, and had
violated the sacred bonds of friendly familiarity. That she could be in no
other estate than of one taken in the war, and that all the means of getting
safety and liberty is lawful to them that be taken in the war. That she
could not offend in the case of treason, in that she was no subject, and the
like has no power over the like; and that thereupon the judgment of the
Emperor against Robert King of Sicilie was void and of none effect, for that
he was not subject unto the Empire. That the Ambassadors of Princes, if they
shall conspire against the King unto whom they are sent Ambassadors, are not
touched as Traitors, much less the Princes themselves. And that the Affect is
not to be punished, except the Effect follow. And it was never heard that a
Prince was put to death by the hand of an executioner. Moreover, that she was
condemned against the Law of God, the Civil Law of the Romans, and the Laws
of England; yea, against the first Statute of the Parliament in the XIII. year
of Queen ELIZABETH her self, in the which it was enacted, that none should be
arraigned for conspiring against the Queens life, but by the testimony and
oath of two lawful witnesses, to be brought forth face to face against the
party arraigned: and in this judgment no witness was produced, but she was
oppressed and cast by the testimony of her Secretaries, who were absent. Men
also disputed of both parts of the credit of servants, men in prison, and the
testimony of them of ones household. And that word of the Emperor Hadrian was
commended, Credit is to be given unto witnesses, and not unto testimonies.
These men also to themselves, or their assured friends, complained, that busy
fellows were suborned, who by dissimulation, counterfeit letters, and
contrived devices, had cunningly deceived a woman easy to be wronged, and
greedy of liberty, sp^ed out and prevented her purposes, and had drawn her
into the worser, which she had never thought on, if she h^d been kept with
fitting care, and such like secret and crafty plotters sent on purpose: That
it is an ordinary thing for Courtiers in all ages, to urge and drive them that
be hated, even against their will, into the crime of Treason, and craftily to
breed trouble unto unwary Innocence that is once impr^soned.

There were others who thought she was not a free and absolute, but only a
Titularie Queen, because she had made a Session, and passed away her Kingdom
to her son, and had submitted herself unto the protection of the Queen of
England, when she came first into England, and as by well doing she had and
enjoyed the benefit of the Laws; so in doing evil, she might be subject unto
the equity of the same laws, according unto that saying of the Lawyers, He
that offends against the Law, deserves not the benefit of the Law.
Otherwise, the condition of a Foreign Prince, offending in the Realm of
another Prince, should be better than the condition of a King reigning well.
They also thought her to be a Subject, although not Originary, yet Temporary,
for that two absolute Kings (as concerning Royal authority) cannot be at one
time in one Kingdom. That this is a received and ruled opinion of the
Lawyers, The King out of his Territory (except it be in a voyage of war) is
a private man, and therefore can neither bestow nor exercise any Regalities.
Moreover, that she has lost by her fault absolute Government, and that
subjects even in their habitation or house may commit treason. And as for
kindred, there is no Alliance nearer unto any one, than their Country, that is
to be unto us another God, and our prime and dearest Parent. And as for the
promises of humanity and courteous entertainment promised, that they be not
privileges to commit wicked facts afterward without punishment. That promises
are to be understood, Things remaining in the same state, and not changed. He
that has committed a fault, deserves not to enjoy the security promised: And
indeed that the law and right of a guest entertained are holy, but that the
right of our Country is more sacred: Princes do never bind their own hands,
and that all are bound and obliged more strongly unto their Country, than to
their own promise.

And if she were to be dealt withal, as with one taken in the war, they
objected, I know not out of what Author, Those captives are only to be spared,
from whom we do not fear any vexation or trouble and not any others. That the
equal has power upon the equal, as often as he does submit himself unto the
judgment of his equal, either expressedly in words, or covertly in
contractation, or in offending within the jurisdiction of his equal. That the
Pope did adnull and abrogate the sentence of the Emperor against Robert King
of Siailia, for that the fact was not committed in the Territory of the
Emperor, but in the Dominion of the Pope. That Ambassadors, because of the
necessity of Ambassades, are favored and allowed to be inuiolate by the law
of Nations, but not Kings practicing in the Dominions of another King.
Furthermore, that in treason the affect without the effect is to be punished.
And that to plot to kill the Prince, yea to know it, and to conceal the plot,
is accounted treason. That many Kings have been condemned and put to death,
namely, Rhescuporis King of Thracia, by Tyberius, Licinius and Maximianus, by
Constantine the Great, Bernard King of Italy, Conradinus King of Sicily, etc.
Moreover, which may stand in stead of all, That the safety of the people is
the chiefest law, and that no law is more sacred than the safety and welfare
of the Commonwealth. That God himself has enacted this law, that all things
that were for the good, profit, and benefit of the Commonwealth, should be
accounted lawful and just. Moreover, that Secretaries were not to be reckoned
amongst bondmen, and that the testimony of ones household is to be received
about those things which were done secretly at home. But it was argued more
narrowly, whether accusers voluntarily sworn, and accessarie in criminal
matters, are to be produced face to face, to defend and prove their accusation.
Lastly, it was granted that there is no great example extant, which has not
some iniquity therein. These and such like were debated and argued to and fro*
in every man's mouth.

In the mean time the King of Scotland, so great was his piety unto his
mother, labored all that possibly he could by William Keith, neither did he
omit any thing fit for a good and pious son, and a most prudent King, but
with no success at all, forasmuch as the Scots were torn in pieces with
factions amongst themselves, and more favored Queen ELIZABETH, than the
captive Queen, in so much that many of them did privily solicit Queen
ELIZABETH by their letters, to hasten her punishment; and the Scottish
Ministers being commanded by the King, to commend the safety of his mother,
unto God, in their prayers, in all their Churches; such was the hatred unto the
Religion she professed, that they obstinatly refused so to do: yet he, as he
had before, with often messengers, and almost continual letters, made request
unto the Queen. Now he plied her exceedingly, with more often and most
vehement messages and letters: In which he complained, That it was most unjust
and unfit for the Nobility, Counselors, and Subjects of England, to give
sentence upon a Queen of Scotland, and she borne of the Royal blood of
England, and a thing no less unjust, even but to think that the Parlamentarie
Estates of England, by their authority, had power to exclude the true and
certain Heirs of their right of succession and lawful inheritance (which
many men now and then threatened to fear him.)

He sent also Patrike Gray, and Robert Meluin, who signified to the Queen,
That he, for the great love and familiarity between them, cannot believe, but
she would conserve her famous renown, she had acquired in every place by her
virtues, but especially by her clemency, unspotted without all stain of
cruelty, and would not by any means defile and pollute the same with the blood
of his mother, who was of the same Royal condition, of the same blood, and of
the same sex, and the which he (for as much as the blood of the mother did
possess in him a great reverence) could not leave unto the tyranny of them,
who for a long time since have thirsted for the destruction of him, as well as
for his mothers destruction now.

In other letters, after he had at large discoursed, how he was grieved and
tormented in mind, and distracted, concerning so great a matter that touched
and bound him, both in respect of nature and honor, and into what danger and
loss of credit he was cast, if any violence was used unto his mother, he out
of his inward grief and filial affection propounded unto Queen ELIZABETH,
whereupon she might study attentively. How much it concerns his Honor, who
is both a King and her Son, if his most dear mother, and the same also an
absolute Prince, should be put to an infamous death by her, who is most nearly
joined by the bands of blood and league. Whether by the law of God any thing
may be done justly by form of law unto them, whom Almighty God has appointed
the sovereign Ministers of Justice, whom he has called Gods on the ^arth,
whom he has anointed, and being anointed, forbade to be touched, will he
suffer them to be violated without punishment? How prodigious a thing it is to
subject an absolute Prince unto the judgment of Subjects; yea how monstrous a
thing it were, that an absolute Prince should give first this pernicious
example, to profane their own and other Princes Diadems? Moreover, what
should urge her unto this severity, Honor, or Profit? If Honor, she might
acquire more honor by sparing her, for so with the eternal praise of
clemency, she might bind him and all the Princes of Christendom with a
benefit, whom otherwise she could not but alienate with loss of her good
report, and mark of cruelty. But if Utility moved her, she was to consider
whether any thing can be profitable, but that which is just and honest. And
ended beseeching her, that his Ambassadors might bring back such an answer,
that may be most worthy of a most pitiful Queen, and not unworthy of the King
and her most loving Cousin. But when as the Ambassadors out of season mingled
threats amongst their requests, they were less acceptable, and sent away
within few days with very small hope.

Pomponius Bellieurus, who was sent by the French King for the same cause, when
he was come unto the Queen, having in his company L'aubespineus of Castro
Nouo, the ordinary Ambassador, and had in few words signified, how the French
King was distracted on this side, for his singular love toward her, and on that
side, for the strait familiarity and affinity between him and the Queen of
Scotland, he propounded in writing these things and the like, once or twice.

The most Christian King of France, and all other Kings are interessated, that
a Queen, and free and absolute Princess be not put to death.

The safety of the Queen may be more endangered by the death, than by the
life of MARY: that she being delivered out of prison, can attempt nothing
against the Queen, for that she was sickly, and could not live long.

That she challenged and claimed the Kingdom of England, was not to be laid
to her charge as a fault, but was to be ascribed to the tenderness of her age,
and her naughty counselors.

That she came into England to entreat help and favor, and therefore the
less justly detained, and that now at length she was to be let loose upon some
ransom agreed upon, or else to have mercy used to her. Moreover, that an
absolute Prince is not to be called in question of his life, in so much that
Cicero said, It is so unusual for a King to be arraigned, that it is a thing
never heard before this time.

If she be innocent, then she is not to be put to death; if faulty, to be
spared, for this would prove more to her honor and utility, and it should be
the eternal example of the clemency of England. To this intent the history
of Porsenna was rehearsed, who pulled the hand of Mutius Sceuola, who had
conspired to kill him, out of the flames of fire, and dismissed him.

That the first precept of reigning well, is to spare blood, that blood calls
for blood, that it cannot be otherwise thought but to be cruel and bloody to
use tyranny toward her.

That the French King will do all his labor, and use all diligence, that the
attempts and endeavors of all that plot any thing against the Queen, may be
repressed and stopped: And that the Guises, the kinsmen of the Queen of
Scotland, would swear the same, and confirm it with their hands and seals,
who, if she be put to death, will take it in very evil part, and perhaps will
not suffer it to be unrevenged.

Lastly, they requested that she should not be used according to that rigorous
and extraordinary judgment, if not, that the French King could not but take
it in very evil part, and be much offended, howsoever all other Princes may
take it.

Unto these writings answer was made in the margin unto every article thus:

That the Queen of England does hope that the most Christian King of France
will have no less regard and respect unto her, than unto the Scottish Queen,
who plotted to kill an innoccnt Prince, her next cousin, and the Kings
confederate. And that it is behouefull unto Kings and Commonwealths, that
mischievous actions (specially against Princes) be not left unpunished.

That the Englishmen, who acknowledge only Queen ELIZABETH to be Supreme
Governor in England, cannot at once acknowledge two Sovereigns, free and
absolute Princesses in England: neither that any other whomsoever, whilst she
lived, was to be taken as equal with her. Neither could they see how the
Scottish Queen and her son that now reigns, can be accounted at one time
sovereign and absolute Princes.

Whether that the Queens safety may be exposed unto greater dangers, if she
be put to death, depends upon contingencie and uncertainty hereafter; that
the Estates of England, who have studied seriously on this point, think
otherwise, to wit, that there will never want occasions of plo^ting mischiefs
during her life, especially for that matters are now come to that pass, that
there is no hope left for the other, except the other be extinguished or taken
away; and this sentence may come often to mind, Either I her, or she me. The
shorter her life is, with the more speed the conspirators for this cause will
accelerate and hasten the execution of her plots.

That she would not hitherto renounce and give over the right she claims
and challenges unto the Realm of England, and that for that cause she has
been most rightfully detained in prison, and is still to be detained (although
she came for succor and help into England) until she have renounced and
given over the same: And that she ought to sustain punishment for the faults
she has committed in prison, for what cause soever she was put into prison.

That the Queen also has pardoned her most mercifully, when she was
condemned by the consent of all the Estates for the Rebellion raised in the
North, to make the marriage between her and the Duke of Norfolk, and to spare
her again were a fond and cruel kind of mercy. That none are ignorant of
that saying of the Lawyers: An offender in the territory of another, and there
found, is punished in the place where the ^ault is committed, without any
regard or respect of dignity, honor, or privilege. And that the same is
evident as well by the laws of England, as also by the examples of Licinius,
Robert King of Sicilie, Bernard King of Italy, Conradinus, of Elizabeth Queen
of Hungary, of Joan Queen of Naples, and of Deiotarus, for whom Cicero
pleading, said it was not unjust for the King to be arraigned, though it were
unusual. For the words go thus; Quod primum dico de capite fortunisque Regis:
Quod ipsum etsi non iniquum est, in tuo duntaxat periculo, tamen est ita
inusitatum, etc.

That she who has been found guilty by a lawful judgment, is to be put
unto execution, forasmuch as that which is just is honest, and that which is
honest, is also profitable.

That the History of Porsenna did not agree unto this matter proposed, except
one should think that there is a long train of them who seek to hurt the
Queen, and could persuade her to dismiss her without any hurt, out of fear,
and some little respect of honor, but no regard of her own safety: as
Porsenna sent Mutius away, when he had auowed that there were other three
hundred who had conspired to kill him. Moreover, that Mutius ventured upon
Porsenna in a war proclaimed, and by the sending of Mutius away, he persuaded
and assured himself, that he had escaped all danger.

Blood is to be spared, that is, the innocent. God commanded this: It is true,
that the voice of blood cries for blood, and that France, before the massacre
of Paris, and afterward, can witness this.

That a punishment justly inflicted, cannot be thought to be bloody, no more
than a medicine, prepared and made as it ought, fitly for the sickness, can be
accounted violent.

Howsoever the Guises, cousins unto the Scottish Queen, take it, the Queen
has more occasion, and it concerns her more, to respect and regard rather the
safety and good of her Nobility and people, of whose love she wholly
depends, than the displeasure of any other whosoever, and that matters were
now come unto that pass, that that old proverb of the two Princes, Conradino
the Sicilian, and Charles of Anjou, may be used and truly said of the two
Queens, THE DEATH OF MARIE, THE LIFE OF ELIZABETH, AND THE LIFE OF MARIE,
DEATH OF ELIZABETH.

That the promises of the French King, and of the Guises, cannot give assurance
of security unto the Queen and the Realm, much less make amends for her
death, if she be made away.

That the French King cannot find out the secret plots contrived against him
at home, much less against the Queen of England. For that treason is closely
handled, and therefore inevitable and unavoidable. If the wicked fact be once
done, what will it do good to challenge their promise? How may the loss for
the death of an incomparable Prince be repaired or recompensed, and what
remedy may be found for the Republike giving up the ghost with her, in a most
lamentable confusion of all things?

The hand-writings of the Guises, who think it a meritorious act to dispatch
them who are enemies to the Pope, and may very easily obtain and get
dispensations for their oath, be of small moment, or importance, or of none at
all. And what English man is it that will accuse them for killing the Queen
ELIZABETH after her death, and after that the Queen of Scotland being of the
Family of the Guises, is enstalled in the Crown of England? What? can one
recall her back unto life thereby?

But in that the Ambassadors have called this judgment rigorous and
extraordinary, they have said it without due consideration (for as much as
they have neither seen the process nor the probations) and have too bitterly
taxed the Estates of the Realm of England, men of great account, chosen for
their nobility, virtue, prudence and piety: yea moreover, that they have
absolutely spoken such like words, as if they came from the French King, very
inconsiderately, making show that they would fear with their threats and
menaces, the Queen, and the Estates of the Realm. That the Englishmen are
not accustomed to be terrified with threats of the Frenchmen, from taking a
course and means to establish and settle their security, for as much as they
in the mean time did not show nor demonstrate any fit or convenient way or
means of auerting or putting away the instant and imminent dangers of England.

But the malicious and spightful enemies of the Queen of Scotland, took
occasions all they could of hastening her death, and caused (the more to
affright Queen ELIZABETH, knowing well that in the greatest danger of safety,
fear does exclude all mercy) false rumors to be spread in every place of
England daily, with fearful outcries, viz. That the Spanish Eleet were
already arrived in the Haven of Milford, that the Scots had invaded England,
that the Duke of Guise was landed with a strong army in Sussex, that the Qu.
of Scotland was escaped out of prison, and had levied many soldiers, that the
Northern men were up in rebellion, that there were other Ruffians, who had
conspired to kill the Queen, and to burn the City of London, yea and that
the Queen was dead, and other things of like kind, which either crafty
people or men afraid, use to feign in their own conceits, or to increase out
of an inbred desire or humor, to nourish and uphold rumors; and Princes, who
are upon curiosity credulous, take quickly hold of.

By such like bugges and formidable arguments, the Queens mind wavering, and
in great care, was by them drawn so far, that she signed letters, by which
the mortal sentence of death was commanded to be put in execution, and one of
the chiefest perswader (as the Scots say) was Patricke Gray, a Scot, sent by
the King of Scotland to dissuade the Queen from putting his mother to death,
who oftentimes would beat into the Queens ears that old word (Dead men do
not bite.)

But she being by nature slow in her doings, began to balance in her mind,
whether it were better to take her out of the way, or to spare her. Not to put
her to death, these things moved her: Her inbred clemency, lest she should
seem to use cruelty against a woman, and she a Princess, and also her
kinswoman, fear of infamy with the posterity out of the histories, and the
dangers hanging thereon, as well from the King of Scotland, who should then
come a step nearer unto the hope of England, as from the Catholic Princes, and
desperate fellows, who then would adventure on any thing.

But if she spared her, she foresaw no less dangers at hand. That the
Noblemen, who had given sentence against the Queen of Scotland, would closely
purchase favor with her, and her son, not without her danger, that the rest
of her subjects that were very careful and desirous of her safety, would take
it in evil part, when they saw themselves to have lost their labor, and
thenceforth would neglect her safety; many more would join themselves unto
the profession of the Papists, and conceive greater hope, when they saw her
conserved, as it were, by the decree of heaven, unto the hope of the kingdom;
that the Jesuits and Seminarists, when they see her sickly, and fear she will
not live long, would bestirre themselves to accelerate the death of Queen
ELIZABETH, that their Religion may be restored.

The Courtiers also without any intermission, suggested these things and the
like. Why do thou spare her that is faulty and justly condemned, who
subscribed unto the Association for thy safety, yet forthwith resolved to use
cruelty against thee, being innocent, and by thy destruction, to tyrannize
over Religion, the Nobility and Commons? That mercy is a royal virtue, but
is not to be showed to them that have no mercy. Let the vain and idle show of
mercy give place, and yield unto wholesome severity. Your clemency has
sufficient cause of commendation in that it has pardoned her once before: to
spare her again, is no other thing but to pronounce her not guilty, and to
condemn the Estates of the Realm of injustice; to encourage the hearts of her
agents to hasten and accelerate the accomplishment of their wicked designs,
and to dishearten the faithful Subjects to conserve the Commonwealth.
Religion, the Commonwealth, thy own incolumitie, the love of thy Country,
the oath of Association, and the care of the Posterity, with conjoined prayers
do beseech thee, that she who overthrows and subuerteth all these several
things, may with all speed be rid and dispatched out of the way; and if they
cannot obtain their request at thy hands, SAFETY it self cannot save and
preserve this Commonwealth: and the Historians will publish to the succeeding
age, that the most clear shining days of England under Queen ELIZABETH,
ended in a loathsome evening, or rather into an eternal dark night. The
posterity will find lack of our prudence, who (which thing does accumulate
our misery) could see our evils, and could not prevent them, and will impute
the mass of our miseries not so much to the malice of our adversaries, as to
the careless and slothful negligence of these times. Let not the life of one
Scottish woman praeponderate and be of more weight with thee, than the
universal safety of England. Let there be no stay nor delay used in so great
a matter, for that forbearance and delay procures danger: neither let space
and time be given unto these wicked plotters and contriuers of mischief, who
now will seek their last succor and help. by bold and audacious adventures,
and besides their impunitie, will hope for a reward for their mischievous
action. He that does not beware to avoid a danger as much as he can, does tempt
God more than trust in God. All the dangers whatsoever hang over* our heads
from foreign Princes, by her death will be taken away, neither can they hurt
England, but by her. What will and power soever the Pope has to do hurt, will
cease and come to nothing when she is gone. The King of Spain has no reason
to be angry, for that he himself, for his own security, made away his only
son Charles, and at this time does lie in wait to take away the life of Don
Antonio the Portugal, to serve his own ambition. The French does religiously
observe and keep the amity with England, and it also much concerns his
good, that by the speedy death of the Scottish Queen, the hopes of the
Guises, who relying and trusting upon the hoped and future power of their
Kinswoman, do now more insolently insult over their King. The King of
Scotland, both by natural affection, and in respect of his honor, may indeed
be grieved or disquieted, yet in his wisdom he will expect rather to have
things long after with security, than to have things in overmuch haste with
danger. And the n^erer he is to his chiefest hope, the futher foreign Princes
will hold off from joining to help him, for as much as it is familiar and
ordinary for them, by one means or other, to stop and hinder the increasing
power of another Prince at the beginning.

They set before her eyes also domestical examples, (for as much as that which
is done by example, deserves the more to be excused) How the Kings of England
carried themselves toward their Cousins and Competitours for their own
security; namely, Henry the first toward Robert his eldest brother, Edward the
third, or rather his mother, toward Edward the second, Henry the fourth toward
Richard the second, Edward the fourth toward Henry the sixth, and his son
Edward Prince of Wales, and toward his own brother George Duke of Clarence,
Henry the seueuth toward the Earl of Warwick, the young son of the Duke of
Clarence, Henry the eighth toward De la Pole Earl of Suffolk, Margaret
Countess of Sarisburie, and Courteney Marquess of Exceter; who every one for
smaller matters, if the crimcs be compared, were put to death and made away.
Neither did the Courtiers alone buzze these things into the Queens head, but
also some Preachers very earnestly, and many of the Commons also out of hope or
fear, exercised the fantasy of their brains and wits too saucily and
malapertly in this Argument.

Amongst these pensive thoughts, which made the Queen so careful and
doubtful, that she delighted in solitariness, and sat without any cheer,
and sometimes without speaking a word, and oftentimes sighing, would mutter to
her self, Either bear it, or strike home; and out of some obscure Emblem,
Kill, lest thou be killed; she delivered to Dauison, one of her Secretaries,
letters signed with her hand, that a Mandate should be made under the great
Seal of England, for the putting of her unto execution, which might be ready,
if any danger were ready to fall, and commanded him not to communicate the
matter to any man. But on the next day she, whilst fear did not allow her
own counsel, changing her mind, commanded Dauison, by William Killigrew,
that the Mandate should not be made up. He forthwith came to the Queen, and
told her that the Mandate was made and sealed with the great Seal; She
chafing, reproved him for making such haste; nevertheless, he communicated the
Mandate and business unto the Queens Counselors, and persuades them, who
quickly believed that which they desired, that the Queen commanded that it
should be put in execution without delay: Beale, than whom there was none more
evil affected unto the Queen of Scotland for Religion, is sent with one or
two executioners and letters, in the which authority is given unto the Earls
of Shrewsburie, Kent, Darby, and Cumberland, with others, that she should be
put to death, according to the Laws, (unknowing to the Queen) and although at
that very time she had signified unto Dauison, that she would take another
way and course, about the Queen of Scotland, yet he did not call Beale back.

As soon as the Earls came to Fotheringhay, they came to her, with Amias
Poulet and Drewgh Drury, in whose custody she was; and signified the cause of
their coming, reading the Mandate, and in few words admonished her to prepare
her self unto death, for that she was to die the next day. She without
fear, and with a settled mind, answered, I did not think that Queen
ELIZABETH, my sister, would have consented unto my death, for I am not subject
unto your Law; but since it is otherwise, death shall be unto me most welcome,
neither is that soul worthy of the heavenly and everlasting joys, whose body
cannot endure one blow of the hangman. She requested that she might confer
with her Almoner, her Confessor, and with Meluin her Steward. They in plain
terms denied her confessor to come unto her; and the Earls commended the
Bishop or Deane of Peterburgh for to comfort her; whom when she had rejected,
the Earl of Kent being fiery hot in Religion, turned unto her, and amongst
other words, broke out into these, Thy life will be the destruction of our
Religion, as on the other side, Thy death will be the life of the same. Mention
being made of Babington, she constantly and utterly denied that she knew of
his plots; left the revenge unto God. And being demanded of that which was done
by Nauus and Curlus, she asked if ever it was heard, that the servants were
suborned and admitted as witnesses to the death of their Masters. When the
Earls were departed, she commanded them to make haste with her supper, that
she might set things better in order. She supped sparingly and soberly, as her
manner was. In supper time beholding her men and maidseruants mourning and
weeping, with an undaunted mind she bade them be of good cheer, and to
abstain from sorrow, but rather to rejoice, for that she was to depart
presently out of an abyss of evil. And turning unto Burgon her Physician,
asked him if he did not observe that the force of truth was great. They said I
must die, for that I was of counsel to kill the Queen; nevertheless, the
Earl of Kent insinuates that there is no other cause of my death, but that
they fear their Religion by reason of me. Neither is my offense against the
Queen, but their fear they have of me, has hastened and procured my death,
whilst many seek privately their own ends and purposes under the borrowed
cloak of Religion and the public good. Toward the end of supper she drinks
unto all her servants, who pledged her on their knees in their order, mingling
their tears with the wine, and asking pardon for the neglect of their duty,
as she also of them. After supper she read over her testament, reads over
the inuentory of her goods and mouables, and writ on them the names of them
unto whom she appointed them: unto some she gave money with her own haud.
She writes unto her Confessor, to pray unto God for her, and also she wrote
letters of commendation unto the French King, and unto the Duke of Guise, for
her servants. She went to bed at her ordinary hour, and slept certain
hours; being awaked, she spent the rest of the night in prayers.

The fatal day beginning to break (viz. the vi. Ides of February) she
apparelled her self neatlier and finer, as she used to be on Festival days,
and calling her servants together, read over her Will, and requested them to
take in good part the legacies she gave, since that her ability was not to
bestow any more. And then setting her mind all upon God, with all humility, in
her Chapel, besought him to give her his grace and favor, with sighs,
tears, and prayers, until the time that Thomas Andrews, Sheriff of the
Shire, told her, that she was to come forth. She came forth maiestically, in
stature, beauty and show, with a cheerful countenance, matron-like apparel,
and very modest, her head being covered with a linen vcile, and the same
hanging very low, her beads hanging down at her girdle, and carrying a Crucifix
of Iuory in her hands. In the gallery the Earls and other Gentlemen received
her, where Meluin her servant on his knees, and with tears in his eyes,
lamented his fortune, that he should carry this heavy and sad news of the
woeful death of his Lady into Scotland. She comforting him, said, Do not
lament, but rather be glad, thou shall straight-waies see MARY STVART delivered
and freed from all cares. You may tell them that I die constant in my Religion,
and firm in fidelity toward Scotland and France. God forgive them who have
thirsted for my blood, as the Heart does after the spring of water. Thou our God
who art truth it self, and perfectly and thoroughly do know the most secret
corners of my heart, do know how much I desire that the Realms of England
and Scotland might be united in one. Salute my son, and certify him, that I
have done nothing that may be prejudicial unto the Kingdom of Scotland: Will
him to keep friendship with the Queen of England; and see that thou serve him
faithfully.

And then tears falling from her eyes, she bade Meluin farewell again and
again. And turning to the Earls, she requested that her servants might be
courteously used, and that they might enjoy those things which she had
bequeathed them, that they might stand by at her death, and be sent into their
Country with a safe conduct. They promised the former things, but the Earl of
Kent showed himself strange, fearing some superstition. She said, Fear not,
these wretches desire to give me their last farewell. I know my sister
ELIZABETH would not deny me so small a favor, as to have my maids to be
present, if it be but for woman-hood sake. I am most near of kin unto her, I
come from King HENRY the seventh, I am Queen Dowager of France, and the
anointed Queen of Scotland.

When she had said thus, and turned away, she was permitted to have those of
her servants present whom she would name. She nominated Meluin, Burgoine her
Physician, the Apothecarie and Surgeon, and two maids, and others, of the
which Meluin bore up her train. So, the Gentlemen, two Earls, and the
Sheriff of the Shire going before her, she came to the ^caffold, which was set
up in the upper end of the Hall, in the which was a chair, a cushion, a
block, and all covered with black cloth. As soon as she sat down, silence
being made, Beale read the Commission, and she heard attentively, as if it had
been another matter. Then Fletcher, Deane of Peterburgh, began a tedious
speech unto her of the condition of her life formerly past, and the present,
and that to come. Once or twice she interrupted his speech, and desired him not
to trouble her, and protested that she was settled in the ancient Catholic
Religion, and was ready to end her life in the same. And when he persuaded her
earnestly to do true penance and with a firm faith to put her hope in Christ;
she answered, that she was borne and bred, and would now end her life in that
Religion. And unto the Earls, saying that they would pray for her, she said,
she would give them many thanks if they would pray with her, but I should
offend much, if I did communicate in prayer with you, who are of another
profession. Then they bade the Deane to pray, and when the whole company there
assembled prayed together, she falling on her knees, carrying the Crucifix
before him in her hands, together with her servants, prayed in Latin out of
the Office of our Lady.

After the Deane had ended his prayers, she in the English tongue commended
unto God the Church, her son, and Queen ELIZABETH, and besought him to auert
his indignation from this Isle, and professed that she reposed her hope in the
blood of Christ, (and lifted up the Crucifix) and desired all the company of
heaven to make intercession unto him for her; she forgave all her enemies, and
kissing the Crucifix, and signing her self with the Cross, she said, As thy
arms, O Christ, were spread abroad on the Cross, so with the stretched out
arms of thy mercy receive me, and forgive me my sins. Then she forgave the
Executioners, who asked pardon. And when her maids had taken off her upper
garments, she hastening them, they cried out amain, she kissing them, and
signing them with the Cross, and smiling bade them farewell. Her face being
covered with a linen cloth, lying on the block, she said the Psalm, In te
Domine confido, ne confundar in aeternum. Then as she stretched out her body,
and oftentimes repeated, In manus tuas Domine commendo spiritum meum, her head
was cut off at two blows. The Deane saying aloud, So let the enemies of Queen
ELIZABETH perish, the Earl of Kent saying the same, and the multititude
sighing and grieuing thereat. Her body was embawmed, and was after buried like
a Prince in the Cathedral Church of Peterburgh. And her funerals were kept
most magnificently at Paris, at the charges of the Guises, who performed all
the best offices of kindred for their Cousin, both alive and dead, to their
great commendation.

In this lamentable manner ended her life MARIE Queen of Scotland, the great
granddaughter of Henry the seventh, by his eldest daughter, in the XLVI. year
of her age, and the XVIII. year of her captivity. A woman most constant in
her Religion, adorned with a wonderful piety toward God, wisdom above her
sex, and was also very fair and beautiful: And is to be accounted one of
those Princes, whose felicity was changed into adversity. In her infancy
she was with strife desired for wife, by King Henry the eighth of England, for
his son Edward, and by Henry the second, King of France, for Francis the
Dolphin. At the age of five years she was carried into France, and at the age
of fifteen years married unto the Dolphin. She flourished, and was Queen of
France one year and four months. Her husband being dead, she returned into
Scotland, and was married again unto Henry Stuart Lord Darley, and had by him
JAMES, the first Monarch of Great Britain: Tossed and turmoiled by Murrey, her
bastard brother, and other her ungrate and ambitious subjects, deposed from her
Kingdom, and driven to fly into England, and circumuented and entrapped (as
men speaking indifferently think) by sundry Englishmen, careful of the
conservation of their Religion, and of the safety of Queen ELIZABETH, and
thrust forward by others, desiring much to restore the Roman Religion: and
oppressed by the testimonies of her Secretaries who were absent, and (as it
seemed) corrupted with rewards. Near to the grave, an Epitaph in the Latin
tongue was affixed, and forthwith taken away.

MARIA SCOTORVM REGINA, REGIS FILIA, REGIS GALLORVM VIDVA, REGINAE ANGLIAE
AGNATA, ET HAERES PROXIMA, VIRTVTIBVS REGIIS ET ANIMO REGIO ORNATA, IVRE REGIO,
FRVSTRA SAEPIVS IMPLORATO, BARBARA ET TYRANNICA CRVDELITATE, ORNAMENTVM NOSTRI
SECVLI, ET LVMEN VERE REGIVM EXTINGVITVR: EODEMQVE NEFARIO IVDICIO ET MARIA
SCOTORVM REGINA MORTE NATVRALI, ET OMNES SVPERSTITES REGES, PLEBEII FACTI,
MORTE GIVILI MVLCTANTVR. NOVVM ET INAVDITVM TVMVLI GENVS, IN QVO CVM VIVIS
MORTVI INCLVDVNTVR, HIC EXTAT: CVM SACRIS ENIM DIVAE MARIAE CINERIBVS OMNIVM
REGVM ATQVE PRINCIPVM VIOLATAM, ATQVE PROSTRATAM MAIESTATEM HIC IACERE SCITO;
ET QVIA TACITVM REGALE SATIS SVPERQVE REGES SVI OFFICII MONET, PLVRA NON ADDO
VIATOR.

Which may be Englished thus:
MARY Queen of Scotland, daughter of a King, widow of the King of France,
kinswoman and next heir to the Queen of England, adorned with Royal Virtues,
and a princely spirit, having often, but in vain, implored the right of a
Prince; the ornament of our age, and the true princely light is extinguished by
a barbarous and tyrannical cruelty. And by the same wicked judgment, both
MARY Queen of Scotland is punished with a natural death, and all Kings living
are made common persons, and punished and made liable unto a civil death. A
strange and unheard kind of grant is here extant, in which the living are
included with the dead, for with the ashes of this blessed MARY, know thou that
the Majesty of all Kings and Princes lie here depressed and violated; and
because the Regal secret does sufficiently admonish Kings of their duty, O
Traveler I say no more.

Out of this lamentable fortune of so great a Prince, the disposition of the
divine providence most evidently appeared (as some wise men have observed.) For
those things which the Queens, ELIZABETH and MARY, chiefly wished and studied
to procure, by this means came to pass. Queen MARY (which also she said at
her death) desired nothing more earnestly, than that the divided Kingdoms of
England and Scotland might be united in the person of her dear son. And the
other wished for nothing more, than that the Religion by her established in
England, might be kept and conserved, with the safety and security of the
people. And that almighty God did hear their prayers, England to her
unexpected felicity does now see, and with great joy acknowledge.

As soon as word was brought to Queen ELIZABETH, that the Queen of Scotland
was put to death, she not thinking thereof, she heard it with great
indignation, she looked heavily and could not speak a word, and ready to
swound for sorrow, in so much that she put on mourning apparel, and grieved
exceedingly, and lamented very much. She caused her Counselors (being
reproved and forbidden her presence) to be examined, and commanded Dauison to
be brought into the Star Chamber. And as soon as her dolor would permit her,
she in great haste wrote this letter following unto the King of Scotland with
her own hand, and sent it by Mr. Robert Carry, one of the Lord of Hunsdons
sons.

Dear brother, I would to God you did know, but not feel, with what
incomparable grief my mind is tormented and vexed, by reason of the
lamentable event which has befallen contrary to my mind and will, which you
shall understand fully by my Cousin; for as much as I cannot abide and endure
to set it down by writing. I beseech you, that as God and many others can
bear witness unto my innocence in this matter, so I desire you to believe,
that if I had commanded it, I would never have denied the same. I am not of
that base mind, that for any terror, I should fear to do that which is
just, or to deny it, being done. I do not so degenerate from my Ancestors, nor
am I of such an ignoble mind. But as it is not the part of a Prince to cover
and cloak the sense of his mind with words, so will I never dissemble nor
gloss mine actions; but I will perform that they shall come to light, and
appear to the world in their colors. I would have you be assuredly persuaded,
that as I know that this was done upon desert, so if I had imagined it, I would
not have put it over upon any other; neither yet will I impute that to my self,
which I did not so much as think. He who shall deliver you these Letters,
shall acquaint and impart other things unto you. As for me, I would have you to
believe, that there is none other who loves you better, and bears better
affection to you, or that will have a more friendly care of you and your
affairs. If any one suggesteth, or puts other things into your head, I
would have you to think that he bears more good will and affection to others,
than to you. God Almighty keep you in health, and preserve you always.

In the mean time that Mr. Carry was in his journey with these Letters, Dauison
was brought into the Star Chamber, before the Commissioners appointed, viz.
Christopher Wray, Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, made for that time
Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal, the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, the
Earls of Worcester, Cumberland, and Lincoln, the Lords Gray, and Lumley;
James Croft, Knight, Controller of the Queens House, Sir Walter Mildmay,
Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir Gilbert Gerrard, Master of the Rolls, Edmund
Anderson, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and Roger Manwood, Lord
Chief Baron of the Exchequer. Before these Commissioners, Popham, the Queens
Attorney, charged Dauison with contempt against her Majesty, violation of his
faith, and neglect of his duty; that whereas the Queen out of her inbred
clemency, would not have the Queen of Scotland, though condemned, to be put
unto death, for causes known to her self, and not to be searched and pried
into by others, could not be brought thereunto, neither by the Estates of the
Kingdom, nor by her Counselors earnestly urging her thereunto; nevertheless,
had commanded a Mandate to be made for her execution, to prevent dangers that
might ensue, and had committed it unto the fidelity and secrecy of Dauison;
He being her sworn Secretary, forgetting his trust and duty, and in contempt
of her Majesty, contrary unto which the Queen had commanded, had imparted it
unto the Counselors, and put it in execution, she being utterly ignorant
thereof.

Dauison with great modesty, and quietly, yet with a good courage answered,
That he was sorry, that in a most just cause of the Queen of Scotland, and
most weighty judgment against her, if ever there was any, that he should
trouble again the Commissioners, if not with the loss, yet at the least with
the impairing of his reputation, which he esteemed above all other things: but
he was most aggreeued that he was charged to have offended most contemptuously
against her Majesty, who the more she had been bountiful to him, and he
more bound for her bounty, his offense might seem more heinous. If he should
acknowledge himself guilty of the crimes objected, he should wrong his
credit, which was dearer unto him than his life. If he should contest in his
own defense with the Queen, he should do a thing unworthy of the obedience
of a subject, the duty of a servant, and the fidelity of a Secretary. He
protested before God and the Commissioners, That wittingly or willingly he had
done nothing in this thing, but that which he was persuaded in his conscience
the Queen willed: In the which, if he had carried himself to do any hurt,
either by unskillfulness, or by negligence, he could not choose but be
grievously sorry, and undergo willingly the censure of the Commissioners.

As concerning particulars: when the Queen reproved him that he had sealed the
Mandatum with the great Seal in such great haste; he affirmed, That she
insinuated, but did not expressly bid him to keep it to himself. Neither did
he think that he committed any fault against the trust of silence put on him,
since he never spoke word of this matter, but unto the Privy Counselors. Unto
that he did not call back the Mandatum, after that the Queen had signified
unto him, that she had changed her mind, he affirmed, That it was agreed that
it should be sent forthwith, and execution done, lest the Commonwealth or the
Queen might take some harm.

Hereupon Egerton, the Solicitor, began to press Dauison out of his own
confession, reading a piece thereof, but he requested him to read it all, and
not this piece and that piece; but yet he had rather it should not be read at
all, for that therein some seccrets not to be uttered were contained; and now
and then interrupting him, he said, That as he would not contest with the
Queen, so he could not endure that his modesty should be any detriment unto
the truth and his integrity. Gaudy and Puckering, Sergeants at Law, reproved
him sharply with many words, that craftily he abused the wisdom of the
Counselors, and that out of the confession of Burghley the Treasurer, unto
whom doubting whether the Queen had assuredly determined of the execution to
be done, he affirmed it very earnestly, as he did also unto the rest, who set
their hands unto the letters of the manner of the execution. Dauison with
tears in his eyes, required the Lawyers not to press him so vehemently: And
wished them to remember that he would not contest with the Queen, unto whose
conscience, and unto the censure of the Commissioners he committed himself
wholly.

To conclude, by the general censure of them, he was fined at ten thousand
pound, and imprisonment at the Queens pleasure.

Dauison besought the Commissioners to make intercession unto the Queen for
him, not for the honorable place of Secretary, which he had, or his liberty,
or for the diminishing of the fine imposed, but that he might be restored unto
her favor, which yet he never recovered, though she oftentimes relieved his
wants. So Dauison an honest man without policy, and not skillful in affairs
of State, was brought, as most men thought, upon the Stage amongst the
Statesmen, to play his part a while in this Tragedy, and straight had his
disguise pulled off, and as if he had failed in the last Act, thrust from off
the stage, and kept long in prison, but not without the commiseration of many.
Now I have told what was publicly done against Dauison; but how he excused
himself privately, take briefly out of his credit, and his Apologeticall
Narration unto Walsingham.

He says, after the departure of the French and Scottish Ambassadors, the
Queen of her own mind commanded me to show unto her the Mandate of the
execution of the sentence against the Queen of Scotland. And it being shown,
she willingly signed with her hand, and commanded it, being thus signed, to be
sealed with the Great Seal of England, and jesting, said, Signify this thing
unto Walsingham, who was sick, yet I fear much that he will die for sorrow
thereof. Moreover, she said that the causes of the delaying thereof, were, lest
she should seem to be thought to be drawn thereunto upon violence or malice,
when yet she knew that it was very necessary. Moreover, she blamed Powlet and
Drury that they had not freed her of this care, and wished that Walsingham
would try their minds in this matter. On the next day, when it was sealed
with the Great Seal, she commanded by Killegrew that it should not be done;
and when I had told her it was already done, she reprehended so much haste,
insinuating that some wise men thought another way might be taken. I answered
that the course which was most just, was always the best and most safe. But
fearing she would lay the fault upon me (as she laid the death of the Duke of
Norfolk upon Burghley) I communicated all the matter unto Hatton, protesting
that I would not thrust my self into so great a business; he presently
imparted it unto Burleigh, Burleigh unto the rest of the Counselors, who all
gave their consent to the quick dispatch of the execution, and every one vowed
to stand to it, and to stick one to another: and sent Beale with the Mandate
and Letters. The third day after, when I perceived that her mind wauered,
hearing her tell a dream of the death of the Queen of Scotland, I asked if she
had changed her mind; she said no, but, said she, another way might have
been invented: and withal asked if any answer were comefrom Powlet. And when
I had showed his letters, wherein, in plain terms, be refused to take upon
him that which was neither honorable nor just; she chasing, said, that he and
others, who had taken the oath of the Association, were perjured and forsworn
men, as they who had promised many things, but would perform nothing. But I
showed her how unjust and infamous this would be, and into what danger she
brought Powlet and Drury. For if she approved and allowed the fact, she
should draw to her self both danger and dishonor with the note of injustice;
but if she disauowed and disallowed the fact, she overthrew utterly those
well deserving men and their posterity. And afterwardshee, on the same day the
Queen of Scotland was put to death, slightly checked me, that the execution
was not done.

What grief and anger soever Queen ELIZABETH conceived, or made show of, for
the death of the Queen of Scotland, I am sure the King of Scotland, her only
son, took it wonderful heavily, who with the most admirable piety that could
be in a son, reverenced his most dear mother, and mourned and lamented for
her exceedingly. For he did not think that Queen ELIZABETH, in regard of the
mutual love that was between them, and the league of stricter friendship
lately made between them, neglecting the so many intercessions of Princes,
would have delivered his mother, a Prince of equal estate, and her nearest
cousin of the Royal blood, into the hands of a base hangman. He suffered not
Mr. Robert Carry, son to the Lord Hunsdon (who was sent from England to excuse
the Queen, by laying the fault upon her Counselors and Dauison) to come into
Scotland, and hardly would hear him by another man, and with much suit
received the letters he brought: Called his Ambassador out of England, and
threatened revenge. And some there were that persuaded him that other Princes of
Christendom would not let such an injury done unto the Majesty and Royal
name of a King, go unpunished.

The Estates of Scotland who were assembled in great number, professed that
they were most ready to revenge the death of his mother, and to defend his
right to the Crown of England, yea and to spend their lives and goods in the
quarrel, and that they could not digest the injury done, not only unto the
King, but also unto the whole Nation of the Scots.

Some there were who persuaded the King to require aid of ships, and of a Navy
of the King of Denmark, unto whose daughter he began then to sue for marriage.

Some who were addicted to the Roman Religion, suggested unto him, that he
should rather join with the Kings of Spain and France, and with the Pope, and
so he might with case get the possession of England. And above all things to
give no credit unto the Protestants of England, who now ruled all, and closely
plotted to destroy him also: whispering this in his ears, He that has killed
the mother, will also kill the children if he can.

Some there were who secretly advised him to keep himself as Newter openly,
and to hold both the Protestants and Romanists in suspense. For if that he
showed himself openly for the Protestants, the Romanists of Europe will lay
all their plots against him, and would set up another prop and stay in England
to his great danger.

Some also there were who advised him to keep a firm peace with England, and
not to put his certain hope upon the uncertain fortune of war. And to be
constant in his Religion, in the which if he once wauered, he should neither
get nor purchase friends, nor lessen, nor diminish his enemies. Thus every man
as their fancy gave, or their profit lead them, spoke. But the King being more
provident, and more witty than his age gave him, used no haste, which is
always blind, but weighed their counsels in his mind considerately and
maturely a long time, both with himself and a very few others.

But Queen ELIZABETH by laying all the fault on Dauison, and the rash
credulity of her Counselors, so to mitigate his grief and sorrow by little
and little, lest the comfort given out of season, might more exasperate him,
and so stayed until his sorrow lessened by length of time, would suffer it
self to be handled. But when she saw the French egg on the King to revenge,
she fearing lest he by their policies, and upon a burning heat of revenge,
should be drawn away from the Religion of the Protestants, and the friendship
of the English, she labored with all her power to pacify his mind,
exulcerated, and in a manner alienated from her, by all means not unworthy of
a Prince.

Therefore by her Messengers and Agents, and after by the Lord Hunsdon,
Governor of Berwicke, she proposes these weighty and important Reasons most
diligently. First, what a dangerous thing it may be for him to break into open
war against England for this cause, which seemed unto the Estates of England
to be as well necessary for the safety of the whole Island, as also most
just. Then let him consider if he be of ability to take such a war in hand,
for as much as England was never better furnished with Military men and
Leaders, with forces and riches; and Scotland exhausted with intestine wars,
never more weak. If he depended upon foreign aid, with what great
difficulty, and how long it would be ere he can get it; and if he do obtain
it, what success can he hope for, since that England having the Fleets of
Holland and Zealand joined thereunto, has no cause to fear the most mighty
and potent Kings of Europe? What hope can he place in the French King, or the
King of Spain? For as much as his power much increased and augmented by the
accession and addition of England, may cross or empeach their designs and
purposes, for that his Religion may be so opposed unto their profession, that
they cannot help and aid him, but with their own loss and detriment. Neither
can the French King see with a contented mind, the King of Scotland to be
augmented with the Kingdom of England, for fear lest he should with war
prosecute the ancient right of the Englishmen in France, or else give help or
succor unto the Guises, his Cousins, who at this time gape after the Realm of
France. But the King of Spain without all doubt will do all things to serve
his ambitious humor, for as much as he vaunteth himself to be the first
Catholic Prince of the blood Royal of England, and the stock of Lancaster,
though untruly. In respect of which, some Jesuits and others also endeavored
to advance him, whilst the Queen of Scotland was yet living, unto the Crown
of England, as a man most fit to restore the Roman authority in England (the
mother and the son being not respected nor regarded.) Moreover, they
persuaded him, that she determined in her last Will and Testament, to bequeath
the Kingdom of England unto this King of Spain, if her son continued in the
Religion of the Protestants.

What may be the meaning of these things, and whereunto they may tend, and what
aid and help can be hoped for from the King of Spain, the King may thereby
see and perceive: And withal, if he shall revolt and fall from his Religion,
in the which he has been brought up, with what great ignominy he may
precipitate and cast headlong his soul into eternal damnation, and the whole
Island of Britain into danger and destruction. Moreover, he is to consider and
be advised, lest the Estates of England, who have given sentence against his
mother, do not exclude him altogether from the right of Succession, by a new
sentence, whose love, by yielding and giving place unto necessity, and
restraining the passionate motions of his mind, he may easily win and
purchase unto him, for as much as that which is done, cannot be undone. And at
his time he may possess and enjoy quietly the most flourishing Kingdom of
England. In the mean time, he may enjoy security, and may seem with all men,
indifferent men, that have understanding and consideration of things, to have
received no blemish in his honor, for as much as when time was, he omitted no
part of a most pious and virtuous son toward his mother. And let him
assuredly persuade himself, that the Queen of England would account and use
him most lovingly and affectionately, as if she were his own mother.

These things she caused to be beaten into the head of the King of Scotland,
and that he should not doubt, but that his mother was put to death without her
knowledge; and to confirm him in that opinion, she determined to send unto
him the sentence given against Dauison in the Star Chamber, under the hands
of all the Commissioners, and also under the Great Seal of England: And also
another instrument (to please him the more) signed with the hands of all the
Judges of England, wherein they confirmed that the sentence given against his
mother, was no hurt unto his right in Succession, nor could be any prejudice
unto the same.

And thus an end of this History.
FINIS.

