A SILVER Watch-bell.

The sound whereof is able (by the grace of God) to win the most profane
worldling, and careless liver, if there be but the least spark of grace
remaining in him, to become a true Christian indeed, that in the end he may
obtain everlasting salvation.

Whereunto is annexed, a Treatise of the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

1. Cor. 11. Be ye followers of me, even as I am of Christ

1. Cor. 13. Though I speak with the tongues of men and Angels, and have not
love, I am as sounding bra^^e or a tinckling Cimball.

Imprinted at London by T.C. for William Cotton, and are to be sold at his shop
adjoining to Ludgate. 1605.

TO ALL WEAK Christians that have a desire to be saved.
IT is a necessary rule in policy (dearly beloved in our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ) that those cities should be guarded round, which are besieged
round, and it was Cambices counsel too, that Citizens which would keep their
Cities in safety, and flourishing esta^^, should ever be watchful, as if the
enemies were approaching. As this is good policy for Cities or Garrison
towns, so also Christ Jesus in the Gospel, knowing that his Church should
have many enemies, and foreseeing the danger that might come unto it by
security, commends, and commands watchfulnes to his Disciples and
servants: for security has ever greatly enda^maged Gods church. Security made
Bethel, Bethauen: the sweet valley, a valley of salt: Syon, a den for Foxes:
and Jerusalem, Hieruschica: that is, a most homely and unpleasant place. And
who sees not, that the greater number of men at this day, are so lulled a
sleep in the chair of security, by the love of the world, by the sinful
delights of the flesh, and by the subtle suggestions of Satan, (which they
suspect not) that they can as hardly be awaked, as Endymion from his endless
sleep? In the one ear, Security sounding, It is not yet time: In the other
ear, presumption singing, It will be time still. And thus with the Dolphin
they swim in delights, when destruction is nearest: till at the last,
Desperation, the handmaide of Security, plaieth her part, shows them the
houreglasse, and woefully tells them the time is past.

The consideration hereof moved me (Christian reader) according to my simple
art and skill, to frame this book, as a Watch-bell, to sound in the ears of
all men, not one stroke alone, but twelve, in twelve several Chapters: which
may serve as the wheels of a Watch-bell, to enforce it to yield forth the more
shrill sound, thereby to awake the most drowsy hearted sinners, from their
security and careless living, to enter into a consideration how their case
stands with God, and finding themselves, by their forepassed wicked life, not
worthy of the least of Gods mercies, they may reform their lives, and seek
speedily to be reconciled unto Christ.

And I do heartily wish that this labor of mine, may be unto all those, (which
desire to be heirs of the everlasting kingdom of Christ,) so sweet a creation
in soul, as were the 12. fountains of water in Elim, to the people of Israel:
Number. 3.3. and that it may yield a healing plaster to every wounded soul, no
less effectual, then the leaves of the tree of life, which bare 12. several
fruits, to heal the nations. Apoc. 22. Read it therefote diligently, and
with a single heart, and I doubt not but in the end thou will praise God both
for the book and the Author, as some well disposed have done, who have
confessed, that it was the first means under God, that wrought their
conversion, and have been importunate suitors for reprinting of the same:
wherein I have done my endeavor, and commend the success unto God, and to him
I will evermore pray, that it may work the like effect in many, that the
number of his Church may be daily increased, Amen.

Errata.
Page 9. lin. 8. For neither are governed with a certain violent motion, read
neither are governed with reason and counsel, but are carried with etc. page.
44. lin. 11. for embraced, read numbered, page. 63. lin. 3, for fron, read from.
pa. 62. lin. 11. for if, read, it. pa. 106. lin. 24. for the, read he, page.
100. lin. 6. for hour, read Chapter. page, 173. lin. 12. for likewise, read,
like wise men.

A SILVER Watch-bell.
CHAP. I. Of the shortness, frailty, and miseries of man's life.
THis present transitory life in the Scriptures is called a Pilgrimage, Genesis
47. Sirac. 40. Psalm. 1.
a Travail, and a Way, because it continually plieth to an end. For as they
which are carried in Coaches, or sail in ships, do finish their voyage,
though they sit still and sleep: even so every one of us albeit we be busied
about other matters, and perceive not how the course of our life passes away,
being sometime at rest, sometime idle, and sometime in sport and dalliance, yet
our life always wastes, and we in poasting speed hasten toward our end.

2 The wayfaring man trauelleth apace, and leaves many things behind him. In
his way he sees stately Bowers and buildings, he beholds them awhile, he
admireth them, and so passes from them: Afterward he seeeth fields, medowe,
flourishing pastures, and goodly vineyards: Upon these also he looks a while,
he wondreth at the sight, and so passes by. Then he meets with fruitful
Orchards, green Forests, sweet Rivers with silver streams, and behaueth
himself as before. At the length he meets with deserts, hard ways, rough
and unpleasant, foul, and ouergrowne with briers and thorns: here also he is
enforced for a time to stay. He labors, sweateth, and is grieved: but when
he has gone a while, he overcomes these difficulties, and remembers no more
the former griefs.

3 Even so it fares with us: One while we meet with pleasant and delightful
things, another while with sorrowful and grievous crosses. But they all in a
moment pass away.

4 In like manner, some one is cast into prison, the same is tormented, vexed
and afflicted: he is now in the brambles, and troublesome place, but he shall
quickly come forth again, and then he will forget all his misery.

5 Furthermore, in highwaies and footepaths this commonly we see, that where
one has set his foot, there soon after another takes his step, a third
defaceth the print of his predecessors foot, and then another does the like:
neither is there any which long time holds his place. And is not man's life
such? Ask (says Basil) thy fields and possessions, how many names they have
now changed. In former age they were said to be such a man's, then his,
afterward another. Now they are said to be this man's, and in short time to
come, they shall be called I cannot tell whose possessions. And why so? Because
man's life is a certain way, wherein one succeeds and expels another.

6 Behold the seats of States and Potentates, of Emperors and Kings, how many
in every age have aspired to these dignities? and when they have attained them,
after long labors and travails, in short time they are compelled to give place
to their successors, before they had well warmed their seat. Yesterday one
reigned to day he is dead, and an other possesses his throne: To morrow this
man shall die, and another shall sit in his seat, none as yet, could therein sit
fast. They all play this part as on a stage: they ascend, they sit, they
salute, they descend, and suddenly they are gone.

7 Therefore deerly beloved, man's life is a way, and a seducing way to them
which forget themselves that they are Pilgrims, and travelers, and do stand
too much upon those things which are oceurrent in their journey with long
delay. For the night will come, and it will come quickly, wherein no man can
walk, and these men shall not come unto that heavenly Jerusalem, but shall be
a pray for the wild beasts which walk in the night, and for the infernal
wolves. For the which cause our Savior Christ cries in the Gospel, John, 12.
Walk, walk while ye have the light, lest the darkness come upon you.

8 There is nothing that does so evidently set before men's eyes the deceits of
the world, and the vanity of things present, as does the due and diligent
consideration of the incertaintie, shortness, frailty, and of other
greeuances, and calamities of man's life. For all humane pride, and the whole
glory and abundance of the world, (having man's life for a stay and
foundation) can certainly no longer endure then the same life abides. Witness
the death of many thousands of late amongst us, and let our merciful
deliverance never, O never be forgotten.
So that riches, dignities, honors, Offices, and such like, which men here in
earth have in great regard, do many times forsake a man, he being yet alive,
and do never continue longer with him then unto the grave: For then when the
foundation fails, the whole building must needs fall.

9. These claie Tabernacles (as Job calls them) do fail daily. The Prophet
David therefore compares our life to the fat of Lambs, which wastes away in
the rosting: and to a new coat, which soon waxes old, and is eaten with
mothes. Isai, to grass, and the flower of the field, which to day florisheth,
and to morrow is cut down and withered. Job, to the burning of a candle, which
in the end anoyeth, and then every man cries, Put it out. What thing else is
man's life but a bubble, up with the water, and down with wind? What then is
to be thought of humane pomp and glory, the which is more transitory and
frail then life it self?

10 This consideration verelie, Humbling themselves before the Lord in prayer.
has opened the eyes of many; and has brought to pass in them, that they
begin to wonder at the common blindness of men: the which effect, that it may
work in us, let us call to mind a few things concerning the brevity and
miseries of man's life. And to the end our meditation may have an order, and
that we may keep the parts thereof in memory, it shall principally consist
upon the words of holy Job, written in the beginning of the fourteen Chapter
of his Book, where he says thus: Man that is borne of a woman is of short
continuance and full of miseries. He shoots forth as a flower, and is cut
down: he vanishes also as a shadow, and continues not.

11 To the end we might want nothing in this description of humane calamities,
it seems that his purpose was to begin with the very matter it self, of the
which man was made. For he says not Vir, but Homo, that he might express the
baseness of the matter, of the which this most proud creature was made. For he
is called Homo, ab humo, because he was procreated and made of the earth.
Neither was he made of the best of the earth, but of the slime of the earth,
(as the scripture testifies) being the most filthy and abject part of the
earth. Among all bodies the most vile element: among all the elements the earth
is the basest: among all the parts of the earth, none is more filthy and abject
then the slime. Wherefore, man was made of that matter, then the which there is
nothing more vile and base.

12 And whereas he says, that he was born of a woman, he has in few words
comprehended many miseries of humane condition. For first of all, our very
fashioning and original is so impure and unclean, that it is not for chaste
ears to hear, but to be passed over in silence, as a thing most filthy and
horrible to be told. This one thing I say, man's conception is so foul, that
our most merciful Lord, taking upon him all our sorrows and calamities, for
our redemption, would in no wise bear this: and although he vouchsafed to take
upon him our humane nature, and to suffer many reproaches of his enemies; as, to
be mocked, blasphemed, spit upon, bound, whipped, and in the end most
shamefully crucified: yet he thought it unseeming his Majesty, to be conceived
in the womb of the blessed Virgin Marie, after the same sinful manner that
other men be.

13 Furthermore, after that man is once conceived, does he not endure great
calamities in his mothers womb, as it were in a filthy and unclean prison,
where every moment he is in peril of his life? At the last, he is borne
naked, weak, ignorant, destitute of all help and counsel, not able to go, to
speak, nor to help himself, all that he can do, is to cry, and that is to set
forth his miseries: for he is born to labor, a banished man from his Country,
the enemy of God, in possibility to live a few days, and the same few days
full of misery, deuoide of all quietness and rest.

14 Behold then the very beginnings, from whence man has his first original,
who notwithstanding thinks himself to be born to pride, who mingleth and
co^foundeth all things, who ouerturneth, troubles, and subdueth kingdoms, he
turmoyleth the seas, and thinks not the whole world sufficient for him.

15 Job says further, that man is of short continuance. Behold another
calamity of man's body. The building is scarce finished, but it is ready to
totter, and to fall, and sure it is ere long to fall. Man is scarce entered into
the world, when as he is admonished to remember his departure out of the same
again. The days of man (says the Prophet David) are threescore years and
ten, Psalm. 90.
and though some be so strong that they come to fourscore years, yet is their
strength the^ but labor and sorrow, etc. Therefore the sum of our years,
whereunto all do not attain, is theeescore years and ten; the stronger bodies
sometimes continue till fourscore. From which years, first of all we do deduct
those years which Infancy and childhood spends: for all that time we live
not like men, neither are governed with a certain violent motion like unto
brute beasts, which are deuoide of reason and understanding. If also we take
away that time which passes away when we fleep (for sleeping, we live not the
life of beasts when they wake, much less of men) and that time will rather
seem a living death, then a lively life. If, I say, we deduct all the time of
childhood and sleep, that which remains will scarcely amount to forty years:
And of these forty years, we have not one moment of time in such wise in our
power, that we can assuredly say, that we shall not die therein. For whether we
eat, drink, or sleep, whether we be in labor, or in rest, we are always in
perils. Wherefore not without cause our Savior cries so often in the Gospel:
Watch, Mar. 13.
because ye know not the day, nor the hour. The which is as much, as if he
had more plainly said, Because ye know not that hour, watch every hour: and
because ye know not that day, watch every day: and because ye know not the
month, and the year, watch therefore every month and year.

16 And to make this matter more plain by a similitude: If thou should be
requested to a feast, and being set at the table, see before thee many and
sundry sorts of meat, a friend of thine secretly admonishes thee, that
among so many dainty dishes, there is one poisoned, what in this case would
thou do? which of them dare thou touch, or taste of? would not thou suspect
them all? I think though thou were extremely hungry, thou would refrain
from all, for fear of that one where the poison is. It is made manifest unto
thee already, that in one of thy forty years, thy death lies hidden from
thee, and thou art utterly ignorant which that year shall be: how then can it
be but that thou must suspect them all, and fear them all? O that we
understood the shortness of our life, how great profit and commodity should
we then receive by the meditation thereof.

17 The Peacock, a glorious foul, when he beheld that comely fan and circle
which he makes of the beautiful feathers of his tail, he rejoices, he
ietteth, and beholds every part thereof: but when he looks on his feet,
which he perceives to be black, and foul, he by and by with great misliking
vaileth his top gallant, and seems to sorrow. In like manner, a great many
know by experience, that when they see themselves to abound in riches and
honors, they glory, and are deeply conceited of themselves, they praise their
fortune, and admire themselves, they make plots, and appoint much for them
selves to perform in many years to come: this year, say they, we will bear
this office, and the next year that: afterward we shall have the rule of such
a Province: then we will build a palace in such a City, whereunto we will
adioyn such gardens of pleasure, and such vineyardes: and thus they make a very
large reckoning aforehand, who if they did but once behold their feet, if
they did but think upon the shortness of their life, so transitory and
inconstant, how soon would they let fall their proud feathers, forsake their
arrogancy, and change their purposes, their minds, their lives, and their
manners.

18 And this brevity and inconstancy of life is appointed us before we be
borne. For man is scarce conceived, when as he is condemned to death: and when
he comes out of the womb, he comes out of a prison, not to be free, but to
undergo the cross. And we all do tend and hasten, as it were, to death:
some at one miles end, some at two, and some at three, and other some when
they have gone further. And thus it comes to pass, that some are taken out
of this life sooner, and some tarry longer. Since then the case stands thus,
who can sufficiently wonder at our madness? for we are going, as it were, to
the gibbet, and we dance, we laugh, and rejoice in the way, as if we were
secure from all manner of evils. But we are in this error, because we know not
the shortness of our life.

19 Here then we see two wonderful and monstrous things: one is, that man
being scarcely borne, dies, when as notwithstanstanding, he has a form and
show of immortality: other things how long they retain their form, so long
they remain: A house falls not all the time that his form and fashion
lasts: The brute beast dies not, except first he forgo his life, which is
his form. But man has a form which never is dissolved, namely, a mind endued
with reason, and yet he lives a very short time.

20 But yet there is another thing to be seen far more monstrous in this
creature, that whereas he is endued with reason and counsel, and knows that
his life is like unto a shadow, to a dream, to a tale that is told, to a
watch in the night, to smoke, to chafe which the wind scatters, to a water
bubble, and such like fading things: and that the life to come shall never have
end, and yet nevertheless sets his whole mind most carefully upon this
present life, which is to day, and to morrow is not: but of the life which is
everlasting, he does not so much as think. If this be not a monster, I know
not what may be called monstrous.

21 Thus having seen the shortness and mutabilitie of man's life, let us now
also see the misery thereof. Man (says holy Job) being borne of a woman, is
of short continuance, and full of miseries. Every word has a great emphasis:
He is full of misery, even from the sole of the foot to the crown of the
head; not only the body, but the mind also, so long as it is captiued in the
prison of the body. Thus no place is left empty and free from miseries.

22 Man's miseries are many and great, there is no member, no sense, no one
faculty in man, so long as he is here upon earth, which suffers not his
hell. Nay, all the elements, all living creatures, all the devils, yea, the
angels, and God himself also, bend themselves against man for sin. To
begin with the sense of seeing, with how many kind of feauers, impostumes,
ulcers, sores, and other diseases is it afflicted? The volumes of Physicians
are full of diseases, and remedies for the same: and yet for all this, there
are daily new diseases, and new remdeies found out for them: and among the
remedies themselves, it were to be wished that there were one to be found, yt
were not more vehement to vex the sick, then the disease it self. Long
fasting and extreme hunger, is a bitter medicin, the cutting of veins, the
incision of wounds and sores, the cutting off of members, the searing of flesh
and sinews, the pulling out of teeth, are remedies for griefs and diseases,
but yet such, that many had rather choose to die, then to use these and such
like remedies. Furthermore, immoderate heat, exceeding cold, one while too
much drougth, another while excess of moisture, does offend and hurt the
very sense of feeling.

23 The sense of tasting is most of all troubled with hunger and thirst: and
many times medicines and meats that are bitter, sharp, salt, and unsavory,
do distemper it.

24 The sense of smelling is compelled to endure and suffer many times al
manner of stinkes, all vapors and fogges, and things of bad sent.

25 As touching the sense of hearing, what il tidings, how many cursed
speakings, and injuries does it hear, which like sharp swords do pearce the
heart?

26 The sense of seeing, how many things does it behold which it would not,
and how many things does it not see, which it desires?

27 As for thought, how many horrible and fearful things does it imagine and
feign?

28 What shall we say of understanding? to what an innumerable sort of errors
is it subject? so as it seems to be like unto a little child, to whom a
tedious and very hard knot to be dissolved, is delivered, and he contendeth
what he can to undo it, and when the knot begins in one part to be opened,
he shows it and rejoices, and sees not that the knot in the other part is
more fast shut: So in like manner, God has made this generality of all
things, and has set the same before man's mind to be considered, and says,
seek and search out the reasons and the causes of all these things, if thou
can: when as indeed the truth of the thing is more secret and profound, then
man's understanding, being placed in the prison of the body, can reach unto.
This is the cause that the philosophers and worldly wise men, have fallen into
so many and sundry sects, and dissentio^s about all things, even of least
moment. And they do so contend among themselves, until falsehoode having put
on the habit and vizor of truth, deceives them all. Hereunto accords the
saying of the Preacher, chap. 3, God has set the world in their heart.
Eccles. c. 3. v. 11.
Or, God has given them the world to dispute of, yet cannot man find out the
work that God has wrought from the beginning, even to the end. Be not curious
therefore says Syrach, chap. 3. ver. 24. in superfluous things, for many things
are showed unto thee above the capacity of men. And yet we see, that the most
ignorant do many times soonest offend herein, rushing into those matters
whereof they have no knowledge, and nothing belonging unto them. They will
build Tabernacles with Peter, and lay platformes for the Church, whereof they
have no skill. Every common person will be an Agryppa over Paul, and every
woman a Bernice, and every mean person make a shop a Consistory to control
a State, forgetting the Proverb, Ne suitor vltra crepidam: The shoemaker is not
to exceed his pantofle.

29 But a greater misery as yet holds our active and practicing
understanding. For how many means, how many reasons and ways does it devise
to clime up higher, and to grow in the opinion and estimation of men. For the
which cause the Prophet David in his Psalms says, that our whole life is like
a copwebbe: For as the Spider is occupied all his life time in weauing of
copwebbes, and draws out of his own bowels those threeds, wherewith he
knitteth his nets to catch flies: and oftentimes it comes to pass, that when
the Spider suspecteth no ill, a servant that goes about to make clean the
house, sweepeth down both the copweb, and the Spider, and throws them
together into the fire: Even so, the greatest part of men consume their whole
time, spend all their wit and strength, and labor most painfully to have
their nets in a readiness, with the which they may catch the flies of honors
and of riches. And when they glory in the multitude of the flies which they
have taken, and promise unto themselves rest in time to com^ behold, death
(Gods handmaide) is present with the broom of diverse sicknesses and griefs,
and sweepeth these men away to hell fire, they being fast asleep in the chair
of security: and so the work, together with the workemaster, in a moment of
time do perish.

30 Neither is the man of meanest capacity, and of least understanding, free
from miseries. Who can number the suspicions, the hatreds, the iealousies, the
enuies, the fears, the desires, the vain hopes, the greefs and anguishes of
man's mind? If he do evil, he fears the Judges, banishment, whipping,
reproaches and torments: If he do well, he fears evil tongues. Who is able
to express with what miserable desire all men are inflamed, in so much that no
man living is contented with his estate: but we are all like unto sick men,
which turmoile and toss, first from one side of the bed, and then to the
other, and yet never find rest?

31 After these things, behold and consider all ages. How weak is infancy?
how ignorant is childehood? how light and inconstant is adolescencie? how rash
and confident be young men? how grievous and irksome (...) old age? What is a
young boy but as a brute beast, having the form and shape of a man? what is a
flourishing yonker, but as an untamed horse? what is an old man, but the
receptacle of all maladies and sicknesses? And in all these ages, with how
great a heap of miseries and necessities are we overwhelmed? We must daily
eat, drink, and sleep, we are daily compelled to serve many other
necessities: and (which is much more miserable and unhappy) we must of
necessity purchase unto our selves these occupations, with infinite labors and
sweatings.

32 Now who is not astonished, if he consider how all the creatures which
compass us round about, do bend their whole force, and fight against
mankind: as if the things which have been already repeated, were not
sufficient to fill the bosom of man's heart with miseries? That same most clear
brightness which we call the Sun, which is as a certain general father to
all living things, does sometimes so scorch with his beams, that all things
are parched and burnt up with the heat thereof: at another time he takes his
course so far from us, that all things die with cold.

32 The earth also, which is the mother of us all, how many men does she
swallowe up with her downfalles, gulphes, and quakings?

33 And what do the seas? how many do they devour? Verily they have so many
rocks, so many flats and sands, so many sirts, so many Charibdes, and so many
perilous places, that it is a most hard thing of all other, to escape the
danger of shipwreck: and they which are most safe in the ship, have but the
thickness of a planke between them and death.

34 What shall we say of our air? Is it not many times corrupted? and does it
not engender and gather clouds, thick mistes, pestilences and sicknesses?

35 As for the brute beasts, they yield no reverence to man their Prince, and
not only the Lions, Bears, Tigers, Dragons, and other greater wild beasts,
but the very flies also, gnats, fleas, and other of the most small sort of
living creatures, do wonderfully and very vehemently trouble, vex, afflict
and disquiet man.

36 It were to be wished that we had no worse enemies then the brute beasts,
and that we had no cause to stand in fear of men themselves: But these also
are full of frauds, deceits, injuries, evil practices, then ye which what can
be more intolerable? And what means so much armor, pikes, bows, bills,
swords and gunnes, with diverse other instruments of man's malice, do not these
destroy and consume more men, then do sicknesses, and diseases? Histories
report, that by one only, Julius Caesar, which is said to have bin a most
courteous and gentle Emperor, there were slain in several battles, eleven
hundred thousand men. And if a man of mildnes and meek spirit did this, what
shall we look for at the hands of most cruel men? Neither lands, nor seas,
nor desert places, nor private houses, nor open streets, are safe from
ambushments, conspiracies, hatreds, emulations, thieves and pirates. Are there
not vexations innumerable, persecutions infinite, spoiling of fields, sacking
of cities, praying upon men's goods, fiering of houses, imprisonments,
captiuities, gally-slaueries, renegations of Christianity by torments enforced,
beside death it self, which men daily suffer at the hands of men? And this is
that civil and sociable creature, which is called humane, which is borne
without claws and horns, in token of peace and love which he ought to
embrace. Moreover, not only enemies, but also friends, and the mainteiners of
peace and justice, are fierce and cruel against men. O man, the very storehouse
of calamities, and yet thou can not be humbled, but art proud still.

37 Neither have we only those foresaid corporal enemies which we may see and
shun: but which is more perilous, we have also ghostly enemies, which see us,
and we not them. For the devils, which are most crafty, cruel, and most mighty
in number, and strength, do nothing, practice nothing, and think upon nothing
else, then how they may tempt, deceive, hurt, and cast men down headlong into
hell fire.

38 The holy and blessed Angels also, do many times fight against sinful men.
For who burnt Sodom and Gomorrah, with the inhabitants thereof, with fire and
brimstone? The Angels. Who slew the fourscore and five thousand men in the
host of Senacharib? The Angels. Who afflicted the Egyptians with all those
plagues mentioned in Exodus? The Angels. Who assisted Joshua against the
Cananites and Iebusites? Gods Angels.

39 Not only the Angels, but God himself also, sometime showing himself
toward man as toward an enemy: which caused holy Job to say, Why do thou
hide away thy face, and take me for thy enemy? what means this O lord
God? Thou also which wast wont to be my father and keeper, have now bidden
battle against me.

40 Moreover and beside all these things, there is yet a civil and internal
war, which man has within his own bowels continually. For what man is he
which does not feel the striuings and contentious of his affection, will,
sense, and reason? Insomuch that man himself does afflict himself, and
understands it not, and is a greater enemy to himself then any other can
be. For who does greater harm to thee, then thou do to thy self? who more
then thy self lets thee, and turns thee away from thy felicity?

41 Who then sees not how truly it is said, Man that is borne of a woman is
of short continuance, and full of miseries? who sees not that man is set in
the very center of the sphere, that miseries may fall upon him from every
part; and as the white in a butte, that the arrows and darts of all miseries
may be directed unto him?

42 But let us see what follows, He shoots forth as a flower, and is cut
down. Whereby he teaches, that man's life is frail and transitory. A flower
v rily is a comely and beautiful thing: and yet for all that, it is nothing,
because there is nothing found more fading and vanishing: Even so man, during
the time of his childehoode and flourishing youth, he seems to be of a
wonderful comeliness: but this beauty is of small price, because it is more
brittle then the glass: for that man carries always the cause of death in
his veins and bowels.

43 Man's fading away is such and so sudden oftentimes, that there can be no
reason given of his death: for many have gone to bed well in the evening, that
in the morning are found dead in their beds: and many very suddenly have
dropped down in the highwaies and streets, as they have walked about their
affairs. And this is no wonder, if we consider the substance of man's body,
which being a building compact of green clay, is easily overthrown with a
small puff of wind.

44 And how, I pray you, comes it to pass, that clocks are so easily stopped
from their course? is it not because they are made by art and skill, with so
many wheels, that if one be staide, all the rest are let? If this befall
clockes that have wheels of Iron and steel, how much more easily may it come
to pass in the humane clock of life: the wheels and engines whereof, are not
of Iron, but of clay. Therefore let us not wonder at the frailty of man's
body, but at the foolishnes of man's mind, which upon so frail a foundation is
wont to erect and build such lofty Towers.

45 Furthermore, there is another misery which is signified unto us by the
comparison of a flower, namely, the deceitfulnes of man's life, the which indeed
is the greatest misery: For as fained virtue is double iniquity, so
counterfeyt felicity is a twofolde misery and calamity. If this present life
would show it self to be such as it is indeed, the misery thereof should not
greatly hurt us: But it does now greatly damnifie us, because it it is false
and deceitful: and being foul, it makes a very fair and glorious show: being
ever mutable, it will seem to be stable and constant: being most short, it
bears us in hand that it is continual, that men being deceived, they may
believe that they shall have time to fulfill all their lusts, and yet time and
space enough to repent them.

46 Holy Job concludes his sentence thus: He vanishes also as a shadow, and
never continues in one stay. To make this more plain, behold and consider
the ages of man, and thou shall evidently perceive the alterations of humane
life. Childehoode is weak, as well in mind as in body: Flourishing youth is
weak in mind but strong in body: Ripe and manly age, is strong both in mind
and in body: Old age strong in mind and weak in body: Crooked old age, is in
this twice a child, weak both in mind and body: Therefore he flees as it
were a shadow, and never continues in one stay.

47 Beside this, he is now wise, now foolish: now merry, now sad: now in
health, now sick: now strong, now weak: now rich, now poor: now he loves,
anon he hates: now he hops, by and by he fears: one while he laugheth,
another while he weepeth: now he will, anon he will not. To conclude, the Moon,
nor any other thing that is mutable, shows not so many cha^ges unto us, as do
the daily and almost sudden alterations of men. And yet for all this, they
live as men in a frenzy, which know not their miseries. And although they
cannot repose their hope and assurance in the present things of this life, yet
they do not transfer and remove the thoughts of their mind, their
counselles, their works and endeudurs, unto the happiness to come. And if it
were possible, they would make the place of their exile and banishment, their
Country and inheritance. But in vain they desire this, for death comes and
plays the last Pageant, shutting and finishing the life of all calamities.

CHAP. II. Concerning Death, and the meditation thereof.
THe errors of al men, for the most part, take their original from hence, that
they forget the end of their life, which they ought to have always before their
eyes. For here-hence comes Pride, Ambition, too much carfulness for the
body: hereof also come these Towers, which we build upon the sand. For if we
did consider what we should be after a few days, our manner of living would
be, parrduenture, more humble and temperate. For who would have a high look
and proud stomach, if he would with the eyes of his mind behold what manner
of one shortly after he shall be in his grave? Who would then worship his
belly for a God, when he wayeth with himself that the same must in a short
time be worms meat? Who would be so in love with money, that he would run like
a mad man by sea and land, and as it were through water and fire, if he
understood that he must leave all behind him saving his winding sheet? If
this were thought upon, all our errors would soon be corrected.

2 The word of God tells us in many places of this vanity, to the end we
might the more earnestly seek a better course and more happy life. The Prophet
desires of God, Psalm. 90.
that he may learn to number his ^aies, to the end he may apply his heart unto
wisdom. For unless we think upon death, we cannot apply and fashion our
selves to a godly life. Yea we find daily in our selves, by experience, that
the forgetfulness of death, makes us apply our hearts to folly, and all kind
of vanity. The holy men of old time, were wont in such wise to keep an
account of their days, that above all things they might apply their hearts to
wisdom. Of all Arithmeticall Rules this is the hardest, to number our days.
Men can number their heardes, and droues of oxen, and of sheep: they can
account the revenues of their manners and farms: they can with a little pains
number and tell their coin: and yet they are persuaded that their days are
infinite and innumerable, and therefore do never begin to number them. Who
says not upon the view of another, surely yonder man looks by his
countenance as if he would not live long? or, yonder woman is old, her days
cannot be many. Thus we can number other men's days and years, and utterly
forget our own. Therefore this is the true wisdom of mortal men, to number
their own days: and like skillful Geometricians, to measure all their
actions, all their studies, all their cares, all their thoughts, all their
desires, and all their counsels, by their departure out of this life, as by
the end whereto they are referred, as it were by a certain rule, and thereunto
to direct all things: and so to finish the course of our life which God has
given unto us, that at the last we may come to the happy haven of rest.

3 The case standing thus: we cannot, nor ought not to doubt, but that the
devil a most cruel enemy of mankind, laboreth all that he can, to take away
from us, the most wholesome remembrance of death, which by most evident
demonstrations sets before our eyes, the breuity of our life, the misery of
our flesh, the deceits of the world, the vanity of things present, and
whereunto all humane beauty, and the universal glory of the world, shall come
at the last. For otherwise, how could it be, that we should at any time forget
a thing so fearful, and which by no manner of means we can shun and avoid.

4 If a light suspicion of some loss, either of our goods, or of honor, does
prevail so greatly with us, that many times it takes from us our sleep, what
might the meditation of most assured death do, which is more terrible then all
other terrors beside?

5 Wherefore, as they which in open games of actiuitie, as of shooting, and
wrestling, and such like, do long before the day come, think upon the same,
and do exercise their hand and bow, spending and consuming many arrows at the
mark, that in the day of trial ^or the best game, they may shoot nearest the
mark: and as Fencers which are to play their prizes of trial, do daily try
their strength, and exercise their weapons, bending their whole mind how they
may best foil their enemies, that when the day comes they may have honor
and triumph: Even so ought we to do, for whom a greater reward without all
comparison is set, if we die well: and if otherwise it come to pass, we shall
be punished with unspeakable shame and reproach.

6 And this our meditation of death, shall be handled in no other order, then
the same which our death and departure from this life brings with it. For as
they which are to run a race, do oftentimes lead their horses up and down
the running place, that they may see and be acquainted with all the stones,
uneven places, and other impedimentes in the same: that when the day comes,
they may finish the race without stay or stop: Even so we, which whether we
will or no, must measure and pace the race of death, shall do very well, if now
in our mind and memory we frame this race, and do diligently consider all
those things which are in the same: especially, seeing the way is most obscure,
and full of sundry impediments, and is so perilous, that there are very few
which finish the same happily. They which slip and stumble in it, shall never
more find any hope of salvation.

7 Therefore, that we may begin there where this most bloody battle has his
original, we ought diligently to consider the same: namely, that then death
does especially come, when men do least think of it. Hereupon the Apostle
Paul salth, The day of the Lord shall come as a thief in the night. And in
the Apocalips, Behold I come as a thief. And thieves have this property,
that they break up houses to steal, when men are most fast asleep, and when
they least suspect any such thing.

8 Hereupon also the Prophet Amos has these words, In that day will I cause
the sun to go down at noone, Amos. 8.
and I will darken the earth in the clear day. That is to say, when men think
it to be the high noone of their age; when they think that they have yet many
years to live; when their mind is occupied about their gain, about their
affairs, about their honors, buildings, marriages and pleasures: when they say
unto their soul, Soul, thou have much goods laid up in store for thee for
many years, eat, drink, rest, and be merry: then it shall suddenly be said
unto them, Behold death is at the door, thou fool, this night shall thy life
be taken away from thee; Eccl. 41.
and whose are then those things which thou have gotten?

9 Then death unlooked for, frustrateth all our counsels, cutting off the webs
of our devises, and with on stroke she casts down and lays flat on the
ground, al those Towers builded in the air: and then what a wound does the
heart of the sinner receive, which loves this present life, when the Physician
says unto him, Thou must from he^ceforth think no more of life, but of death?

10 Here first of all, all those things which he loved in time past, offer
themselves unto him, from the which he shall be pulled away, and separated by
death, whether he will or no. The body shall dye once, but the heart shall dye so
often as the things be in number which he loved. Then in very deed shall the
most clear light be turned into darkness, because those things which were
aforetime occasions of great joy, shall be now horrible vexations and torments.
It is a most sweet and pleasant thing to them which live, to see their loving
and faithful friends, to remember their honors, to think upon the pleasures
past and to come: But all these things in the time of death, shall be as swords,
as torments, and most bitter potions.

11 But if it be so hard a matter to be pulled away from those things which
do not so nearly touch man, how bitter, I pray you, will the separation be of
the body from the life and soul? For such two loving familiars, which have
always lived sweetly together, even from the mothers womb, cannot be
separated without great greef. If the Ox do commonly low and mourn, when his
yokefellow which was wont to draw with him is taken away, how will every one of
us mourn when the mind shall be separated from the body? Then will the body and
the mind with tears repeat again and again, do thou thus separate bitter
death? O death, do thou thus separate?

12 And when the cogitation of so sharp a separation is deeply settled in our
mind, then greefes follow greefes, and sorrow comes upon sorrow: for then it
comes presently into the mind, what a miserable condition the body and soul
shall be in after the separation. And first of all, when a man begins to
recount with himself, that his body after a few hours, shall be buried in a
grave, or dark tomb, he cannot cease from wondering at so abject and miserable
a condition. What? the body that now lives, which sees, which hears, whith
speaks, shall it be made (after one hour, in a moment) blind, deaffe, dumb,
without sense, without spirit, without life? Shall I have then in stead of a
large palace, a base sepulcher? in stead of a soft bed, the hard ground? for
delights, rottenness? for sweet smelles, stinkes? and in stead of servants
and familiar friends, worms? And thus this cogitation of the grave will very
sore trouble and terrifle a man in these extremities.

13 But yet notwithstanding, every man fears much more when he begins to
consider what condition remains for the soul. For when he beholds that
eternity, and that new Region, unknown to all men living, which he then alone
and naked is to enter: and again, when he understands, that there is to be
found in the same, both everlasting glory, and perpetual pain and misery,
and knows not of which he shall take his part: it cannot be told, with how
great fear, with what carefulnes, and with what exceeding sorrow he shall be
tormented. When he perceives plainly that after two hours he shaibe either
in eternal joys, or in everlasting pains: Is not this a cross far
surpassing all other crosses?

14 This incertainty therefore of bliss, or of a cursed estate, which after
two hours the sinner expects that remembers his sins, and fears the
just judgment of God, without hope of remission or faith in Christ) brings a
hell in mind not to be expressed. For by how much the kingdom which he
desires is of largenes, and by how much the fiery furnace which he fears is
terrible, by so much greater shall this perturbation be. For from the one,
Angels shall come, to carry the faithful up into heaven: and from the other,
devils shall come, to carry the wicked and infidels into hell fire.

15 But there is yet a far greater perturbation then this: namely, that he
shall call to mind the account which he is to make to God, of all his words,
deeds, and thoughts. For of it self it is a horrible thing to enter into
judgment with God: the which horror will wonderfully vex and disquiet the
devils themselves. For as, so long as we live they set forth unto us the mercy
of God, and do also commend the same, and do strive all that they can, to
keep us from meditating of his justice and judgments: Even so now on the
contrary part, they extenuate and make his mercy insufficient, and do set
before our eyes the greatness and severity of the Lords Justice.

16 Then the sinner will begin to tremble, and to fall into desperation, and will
begin to reason thus with himself: If God for the sins of others spared not
his only son, will he spare me which am guilty of so many sins? If this be
done in the green tree, what shall befall that which is fear and dry? If the
Prophets, if the Apostles, if the Martyrs, after they lived godly so many
years, entered not into the kingdom of heaven without tribulations, what other
place can be left for me, but that of hell fire, which know no good that I have
done?

17 If the Scripture be true which says, He will render to every man according
to his works, I which have done so great wickednesses, what should I look for
but eternal torments? If the Apostle lie not (as indeed he does not) when he
says, That which a man sows, that shall he reap, Gal. 6.
what shall he reap but eternal death, which has made so cursed sowing? If
no polluted thing shall enter into the kingdom of God, how shall I which am
altogether filthy and unclean, have hope to make so happy and blessed an
entrance?

18 Then therefore all his sins, which he committed with so great facility
when he lived, shall violently invade the sinful man like an host of his
enemies. Then the fear of punishment will open the eyes, which sleeping
security in sin, before had shut. Then ambition, pride, thefts, murders,
adulteries, fornications, gluttonies, drunkenness, lying, perjury, idle
words, unclean thoughts, and negligent slacknesse in all good works, will come
to remembrance. O how heavy and grievous will they then seem to be, which now
seem so light, and are done with so much sweetness and pleasure? And how
greatly will they then torment the mind of the Sinner?

19 For who is able to express that last agony, wherein the soul fights
with sore and paineful sickness, with the temptations of devils, with fear of
the judgment to come, and all this at one instant? Then comes that same last
perturbation, the failing of all the senses, as the forerunner of death
approaching, which vehemently terrifieth: at what time the breast swells, the
speech grows hoarse, faint, and hollow, the eyes sink, the nose begins
to be sharp, the countenance waxes pale, the feet die, and the Arteries send
forth a cold sweat.

20 These things which appear outwardly are grievous and full of horror: but
they are without al comparison, more grievous and horrible which are felt
inwardly. For if they (as Saint Hierome writes of blessed Hilarion) which have
many years served God, do fear at the time of their departure, what shall
they do which many years have served the devil, and their execrable
wickednesses, and which have provoked God unto wrath? Whither shall they go?
whose help shall they crave? what counsel shall they take? If they look upward,
they shall see the drawn sword of Gods Justice? if downward, they shall see a
great gulf gaping, and hell fire: if the time past, they shall see al things
vanished away like a shadow: if the time to come, they shall behold the
eternity of worlds, which shall last without end.

21 But how I pray you shall they be able to resist and abide the assaults of
the Devils, who will then bestir them with all their might and maine? What shall
sinful men do which are left in this state? Return they cannot, and longer to
abide in this state, will not be permitted them.

22 O that we might understand and know what manner of battle this is, and
what manner of burden is to be borne in this hour: we would then verily be
other manner of persons then heretofore we have been. Al these things Faith
teaches, Nature proclaims, Experience testifies, and it is evident to every
one of us, that we shall come unto that state, wherein we will desire with all
our heart, that we had brideled our selves from al wickedness, that we had
exercised all the works of virtue, that we had lived in all holiness, and not
spent our time in vain. Let us not imitate foolish men, which look upon
present things only: let us wisely provide for things to come, and so by the
grace of God we shall bring to pass, that the same hour which to others is the
beginning of sorrows, to us shall be the beginning of joy and felicity.

23 Thus far we have showed what may befall a man at the point of death,
until the moment of his departure: now let us see how the body is bestowed
after the horrible seperatio^ of the life from the same. The soul therefore
being dissolved, there lies upon the ground, not a humane body, but a dead
carcass, without life, without sense, without strength, and so fearful to
look upon, that the sight thereof may hardly be endured. To be short, it is
little better (as touching the substance) then the body of a horse, or a dog,
which lies dead in the fields, and all that pass by stop their noses, and
make have away, that they be not annoyed with the sight and stink thereof.
Such is man's body now become, yea though it be ye body of a monarch, emperor,
or king. Where is now that Majesty, that Excellency, that authority which it
had aforetime, when men trembled to behold it, and might not come in presence
thereof without al reverence and obeisance? where are al those things become?
were they a dream, or a shadow?

24 After these things the funeral is prepared, the which is all that men can
carry with them, of al their riches and kingdoms: and this also they should
not have, if in their life time they did not appoint it for their dignity and
honor. Psalm 49.
For the Prophet David says truly, Be not thou afraid though one be made
rich, or if the glory of his house be increased: for he shall carry nothing
away with him when he dies, neither shall his pomp follow him.

25 Here now a pit is dug, seven or eight foot long, as if it should
serve for Alexander the great, whom the world could not contain: and therein
the dead carcass is contented to dwell alone continually, the which so soon
as it is come, the worms do welcome, and the bones of other dead men are
constrained to give place.

26 In this house of perpetual oblivion and silence, the carcass being wound
in a sheet, and bound hand and foot, is shut up, though it need not to have
so great labor bestowed upon it: for it would not run away out of that
prison, though the hands and feet were loose.

27 And now, if we do but consider a little of the Tombs and Sepulchers of
Princes, and Noblemen, whose glory and majesty we have seen when they lived
here in earth, and do behold the horrible forms and shapes which they now
have, shall we not cry out as men amazed, Is this that glory? is this that
highness and excellency? whither now are the degrees of their waiting servants
gone? where are their ornaments and ieweis? where is their pomp, their
delicacie and nicenes? Al these things are vanished away like the smoke, and
there is now nothing left but dust, horror and stink.

28 But now leaving the body in the grave, let us consider how the soul
enters into the new world. Therefore so soon as the soul of the sinner is
dissolved from the flesh, it begins to pass through a Region unknown,
where there are new Inhabitants, and a new manner of living. What then shall the
miserable and sinful Pilgrim do, when he shall see him self alone in such an
unknown Region full of horror? How and by what means shall he defend
himself from those most fierce thieves, and horrible monsters, which in those
vast deserts do assail passengers? This verily is a fearefuli journey.

29 And yet the judgment is much more fearful, which in that place is
exercised. Who is able to express the uprightness of the Judge, the severity
of the judgment, the diligence of inquisition, and the multitude of witnesses?

30 In this judgment tears will not prevail; prayers will not be heard;
promises will not be admitted; repentance will be too late; and as for riches,
honorable titles, scepters, and diadems, these will profit much less. And the
Inquisition shall be so curious and diligent, that not one light thought, nor
one idle word (not repented of in the life past) shall be forgotten. For truth
it self has said, not in jest, but in earnest, Of every idle word which men
have spoken, they shall give an account in the day of judgment.

31 O how many which now sin with great delight, yea even with greedines, as
if we served a God of wood, or of stone, which sees nothing, or can do
nothing, will be then astonished, ashamed, and silent. Then shall the days of
thy mirth be ended, and thou shall be overwhelmed with everlasting darkness, and
in stead of thy pleasures, thou shall have everlasting torments.

When Jeremy had embraced all the calamities and sins of the Jews, at the
last he imputed al to this; She remembered not her end: Lam. 1.9. So if I may
judge why natural men care for nothing but their pomp, why great men care for
nothing but their honor and dignity, why covetous persons care for nothing but
their golden gain, why voluptuous Epicures care for nothing but their
pleasure, why the pastor cares not for his flock, nor the people for their
pastor: I may say with Jeremy, they remembered not their end. When Solomon had
spoken of all the vanities of men, at last he opposes this memorandome as a
counterpoyse against them al; Remember that for all these things thou shall
come to judgment: as if he should have said, men would never speak as they
speak, think as they think, nor do as they do, if they were persuaded, that
these thoughts, words, and deeds, should come to judgment. What if we had
dyed in the days if our ignorance, like Judas that hanged himself before he
could see the passion, resurection, or ascension of Christ Jesus? we should
have numbered our days and our sins too: but alas how many days have we spent,
and yet never thought why any day was given us? but as the old year went, and
a new come, so we thought that a new would follow that: and so we think that
an other will follow this: and God knows how soon we shall be deceived, for
so they thought too, that are now in their graves. O dear brethren, this is
not to number our days, but to provoke God to shorten our days; I that writ
this, thou that read this, and all you that hear this, which of us have not
lived twenty years, yea and some thirty or forty, and happily some many more;
and yet we have never applied our hearts aright unto wisdom. O if we had
learned but every year one virtue since we were borne, we might by this time
have bin like saints among men; whereas if God at this present time should call
us to judgment, it would appear that we had applied our hearts, our minds,
our hands, and feet, or tongues: yea and our whole bodies to riches and
pleasures, to lying and deceiving, to swearing, and forswearing, yea and to all
kind of sin and wickedness, but to true virtue and wisdom, we have not
applied our hearts. God of his merry give us grace to see our former sins,
truly to repent us of them, and to amend our lives hereafter, that we may live
with him for ever. Surely if man could persuade himself that this were his
last day, as it may be if God so please, he would not defer his repentance
until to morrow. If he could think that this is his last meat that ever he
shall eat, he would not surfeit: if he could believe that the words which he
does speak to day, should be the last words that ever he should speak, he
would not offend with his tongue in lying, swearing, and blaspheming: if he
could be persuaded that this were the last lesson, the last admonition, or the
last sermon that ever God would afford him to call him to repentance, he would
read it, or hear it, with more diligence then ever he has done before. O I
beseech you remember your selves while it is to day, lest you repent your
selves when it is too late: of all we that be here, which of us can assure our
selves of life til to morrow? or what if we should live three, four, or five
years, or what if twenty years, who would not live like a christian twenty
years, to live in heaven with Christ eternally? we can be content to serve
seven years prentise, with great labor and toil, to be instructed in some
trade that we may live the more easily the rest of our days, and we must
labor notwithstanding afterward: and can we not be content to labor in the
things of God a little while, that we may rest from our labors ever after.
Christ said to his disciples when he found them sleeping, could ye not watch
one hour? so I say unto you, and to my self, can we not pray, can we not
fast? can we not suffer a little while? he which is tired, can travail a
little further, one step more to save his life: and therefore God would not
have men know when they shall dye, because they should make ready at all
times, having no more certainty of one hour then an other.

32 Seeing therefore the case stands thus, let us look to our selves, and
let us take counsel of him, which would be an Advocate before he be a Judge:
For no man knows so well what is necessary for us against that day, as he that
shall be the Judge of our cause. He therefore cries thus unto us. John. 12.
Mar. 13. Luke. 12.
Walk while ye have the light, least the darkness come upon you. Take
heed, watch and pray, for ye know not when the time is. Be ye like men
waiting the coming of their Lord; etc.

33 They that thus watch and wait, are sure to make a most joyful departure
from this life, and to be received into the Lords joy, of the which happy
dissolution the scriptures thus record: I am now ready to be offered, and the
time of my departure, or dissoluing, is at hand. I have fought a good fight,
and have finished my course: I have kept the faith: Henceforth there is laid
up for me the Crown of righteousness, etc. 2. Tim. 4.6.

As the Heart brayeth for the Rivers of water, so pants my soul after thee, O
God. My soul thirsts for God, even for the living God* when shall I come and
appear before the presence of God? Psalm 41.1.

The righteous shall live for ever: their reward also is with the Lord, and the
most high has care of them. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom,
and a beautiful crown of the Lords hand: For with his right hand shall he
cover them, and with his arm shall he defend them. Wisdom, Chap. 5.15.

Bring my soul out of prison, that I may praise thy name, Psalm. 142.7.

I desire to be losed, and to be with Christ, which is best of all, Philip
1.23.

Read also the fifth Chapter of the second Epistle to the Corinthians, the
first and second verses.

And let these things be oftentimes thy meditation and standing, that so
despising the things of this transitory life, and pacing thy steps in the
pathway to felicity, thou may at the last, obtain the reward which our
Savior Christ has promised, Come ye blessed of my Father, etc. Which Lord for
thy mercy sake grant us, Amen.

CHAP. III. Concerning the general day of Doom.
For So Much as the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and al for
the most part are restrained from sin and wickedness, by the fear of
punishment and pains, and are brought to a good mind and purpose, they which
exclude this fear out of their hearts, do shut up against themselves the true
and wholesome repentance. For as the Scripture testifies, the fear of the
Lord expels sin, and he which is without fear cannot he justified.
August. in Joan. Tract. 9.
The which St. Augustine by a very proper similitude sets forth: If there
be no fear, there is no entrance for love: eue^ as we see when a man sows,
the thread is brought in with a needle, the needle first enters, but except
the needle go out also, the thread follows not: Even so, fear first
possesses the mind, but fear remains not there alone, because it therefore
entered to bring in love. Wherefore to awake us sleeping in sins, and to
engender fear in our minds, the Lord does oftentimes in the Gospel threaten
utter darkness, gnashing of teeth, everlasting fire, and other torments of hell,
that at the leastwise for fear of pains and torments, we might bridle our
minds, our eyes, and our hands, from sin and wickedness.

2 This fear is not only probable, but also very necessary. For if now after
so many threatenings of our Creator, so fearful and so grievous, we scarcely
forsake our sins, what would we do if God did not threaten at all? Therefore I
hold this, that the fear of the Lord is, as it were, the parent and keeper of
righteousness, temperance, love, and of all virtues.

3 But there is nothing that does more work this fear in us, then the
remembrance of that great day, wherein all the causes of al men are to be
pleaded, and their matters determined. Insomuch that Saint Augustine affirms,
if Christian men should hear no other Gospel then that wherein the general
judgment is set forth, that one might suffice both to revoke sinful men
from their wickednesses, and also being revoked, to co^teine them in their
duty.

4 Wherefore, in this Chapter we will handle two notable points concerning the
judgment to come. The first shall be concerning the greatness and horror of that
day, and of the fearful signs that shall go before the same. The second
shall be concerning the raising up of the dead bodies, and the coming of the
Judge.

5 The greatness and horror of that last day may be known hereby, that it is
called in holy Scripture, a great day, and the day of the Lord. And shall it
not indeed be a very great day, which shall comprehend all the days of all
ages, as well those that are past, as those that are to come? For in that day
men shall render an account of all the days that are past. In that day God
will pour out that infinite treasure of his wrath and indignation, which he
has heaped up in the space of all the worlds that are past. In that day the
motions of the heavens shall cease, the course of the stars, the revolution
of years, the vicissitude or return of months and days, the decay of mortal
things, all the cogitations of men, al their studies, al their Arts, al their
disciplines, all their affairs, shall rest in eternal silence.

6 Also in that day it shall be decreed by the sentence and irreuocable
constitution of the most high and eternal Judge, what state and condition every
one of us shall have and retain in all eternity of worlds.

7 And not without cause the holy scriptures have called it the day of the
Lord. For as all the days of men going before, are called their days, because
men watch in them, and do whatsoever they will: and God bears, suffers,
endures, expects, and after a sort, sleeps and rests in them: Even so
then, the day of the Lord shall shine, wherein he shall be continually waking
and shall do whatsoever he will, and we (whether we will or no) must suffer and
endure.

8 Thou now do add sin unto sins, and ceasest not to offend God daily:
and God is silent at al these things. And why so? Because this day is thy day:
But the day shall come, believe me, the day of the Lord shall come, which shall
bring an end to so long silence, and wherein he will take vengeance of all the
injuries that have been done unto him.

9 Thus we see that al Eternity comprehends two days only: The one of man,
the other of God. In the one, men shall watch, and God shall sleep; In the
other, men shall sleep, and God shall watch.

10 How horrible this day shall be, we cannot plainly understand, and yet we
may guess at it by the present calamities: For then the host of al
punishments, which their confederate battle of al offenses, shall assail us
with maine force.

11 But as in the wars of men, before the last and general battle, there are
many excursions, and short skirmishes: even so, before that great and most
fearful conflict, which shall be in the day of the Lord, God is wont with his
several bands to make certain excursions, and one while to send upon us
famine, another while pestilence, another while war, another while
earthquakes, another while floods of waters, and another while drougth, as it
were his horsemen to invade us, who when they have damnified us, retire and
abide in their tents. If therefore, we so greatly fear pestilence, war,
famine, earthquakes, and such like, when as they are but the beginning of
sorrows and short excursions, what I pray you, will we do, when the last and
general conflict shall come? at what time al tribulations, extremities,
calamities, and miseries, shall also fight against us?

12 And if we do yet more fully desire to know the greatness and horror of
that last day, let us consider those signs which shall a little while come
before that day. Therefore before the coming of that great day, heaven and
earth, and all the Elements, shall give signs: For there shall be signs in the
Sun, in the Moon, and in the stars, Luke 21.
and upon the earth, trouble among the nations, with perplexity: the Sea and
waters shall roar, and men's hearts shall fail them for fear, and for looking
after those things which shall come upon the world.

13 For as man (which is a little world) when he draws near to his end, ye
humors in him, as certain Elements are troubled, and his eyes, which are as
the Sun and Moon, are obscured and lose their light, and the rest of the
senses, as the lesser Stars, do by little and little fall and fail, and yet
his mind and reason, as the power of heaven is moved from his seat,
wandereth and erreth: Even so in the dissolution and fall of this whole frame,
which is called the great world, the Sun shall be turned into darkness, and
the Moon into blood, and the Stars shall fall from heaven, the Air shall be
full of whirlewindes, storms, corruscations, slashing meteors, and thunders,
the earth with fearful tremblings, and swallowing gulphes: the floods of the
sea shall swel so high, as if they would over flow the whole world: and the
roaring and raging noise of the fretting billows and tossing waves, shall
greatly terrify. Men therefore shall wither, and wax pale with fear; and
horror and trembling shall vex them more and more, expecting what these new
monsters will bring forth at the last, and what will be the end of such horrible
beginnings.

14 When a tempest arises at the Sea, and the boisterous waves begin to toss
and beat the ship, and the men which are in the same do behold the horrible
lightnings and fiery flashings in the air, and the furious winds also, making
the sea to swel and rage, in such wise, that now they see themselves tossed
aloft, and then anon carried down into the deep: they begin presently to cry,
to fear, to tremble, to call for mercy, to multiply their prayers, to crave
time of repentance, to commend their salvation to almighty God: and to be
short, they begin to think of the amendment of their manners, and to have
better purposes. Then think with thy self what manner of mind men will have,
when they shall see heaven and earth, and all the elements, to have their
peculiar and proper tempests; when the Sun shall strike a horror into men's
hearts with his fearful darkness, and the Moon being turned into blood, shall
terrify them that behold it, and the stars with their falls shall threaten,
for they shall fall so thick, that the Firmament shall seem to be quite without
light, and the air with continual fiery meteors shall seem to burn, the sea
shall swel exceedingly, and the most high mountains being shaken with
earthquakes, shall fall with exceeding great noise.

15 Who then will take pleasure to eat? who will take delight in drink? who will
then have any desire to sleep? Nay, who dare once then slumber, or take the
least rest, amidst so many tempests and storms? O miserable and unhappy
sinners, over whose heads al these signs do hang, and do foreshew unto them
extreme calamity. O happy men, yea thrice, four times, ten times, yea a
thousand times happy and blessed, whose conscience in that time will make them
merry and glad.

16 Thus far we have considered the greatness of the last day, and the
signs going before the same: now let us call to mind certain things
concerning the resurrection of the dead, and the coming of the Judge.

17 Therefore after those signs and wonders, which shall go before the day of
the Lord, an Archangel shall come down from heaven, and with the fearful
sound of a Trumpette shall give a sign to all that are dead, to rise again,
and to come to Gods judgment. This is that Trumpet which Saint Hierome thought
that he ever heard sounding in his ears, whatsoever he were doing: and not
without cause. For who can appeal from this citation? who can refuse this
judgment? who can pretend sickness, business, or any other excuse?

18 Then shall death be compelled to make surrender of all the spoils in a
moment, which he had taken away from the world: and she shall be sent away into
everlasting banishment, beyond al lands and seas, and beyond the world, and
the borders of al living things. For as Saint John shows in his Revelation,
then shall the sea yield up her dead which it has swallowed, and death and hell
shall do the like.

19 What a sight shall there be then, when sea and land shall bring forth in all
places so many bodies, so unlike one to the other, so different, and so
unequal? And when as at one and the self same place, so many armies shall come
together from all parts of the world? In that place, Adam the father of all the
Nations of the earth, shall see al his posterity come together, and shall
marvel. There we shall see Xerxes, Darius, Alexander, Caesar, and other
Monarchs of the world, but yet having another form, other manners, and other
minds, then they had when they lived here. For at the sound of the Trumpet
kings and Nations, and all the world shall tremble, they shall strike their
breasts, and mourn.

20 Moreover, although all men shall be restored unto life, yet nevertheless,
there shall be great difference between those bodies which shall be restored to
holy men, and those which the wicked and ungodly shall receive. For they shall be
more shining then the sun, and shall be beautified with unspeakable brightness:
but the others most foul and ugly, and more terrible then death it self.

21 What pleasure I pray you, shall the blessed souls have, when they shall be
joined again to their bodies, as to their most sweet brethren, after so long
banishment, never to fear any more a separation? What I beseech you, shall
flesh feel, when it shall be raised from dust, and shall see an unwonted light,
and when the soul shall come unto it, and say, God save thee my sister, and
most sweet Spouse, the winter is now gone, the storm is past away, arise my
beloved and come, the Lord has fulfilled our desire, thou have been the
companion of my travels and labors, thou have for the Lords sake suffered
with me persecutions and injuries, thou have been with me in watchings, in
fastings, and under the cross of repentance, thou have lived with a temperate
and spare diet, to feed the poor, thou have not exceeded in apparel, that
thou might cloth the naked: Equity therefore, and reason requires, that
the things which thou have sown with me in tears, thou should also reap
with me in joy: and that seeing thou have been a companion with me in my
labors, thou should also be partaker with me of my pleasures, riches, and
glory. Then shall the soul sweetly embrace the body, and the body joyfully
kiss the soul, and they shall be joined together with most happy and
indissoluble knots: And then with how great joy and gladness shall they dwell
together in one: for from thencefoorth appetite shall not contend with will; nor
sense with reason: but being joined together in one with the league of amity,
peace and concord, they shall enjoy the delights and joys of heaven
everlastingly.

22 And contrariwise, with what anguish shall the soul of the sinner be
tormented, when that foul, il favored, deformed and fearful body is offered
unto him? With what words think thou will they salute one another? O unhappy
body will the soul say; O the beginning and end of my calamities; thou have
brought me to these torments with thy entisements: and now I am come, not as it
were into a house to rest, but as it were into a prison to be tormented. I am
compelled to enter into thee again against my will. Is this that flesh for the
which I have committed so many fornications, so many wickednesses? For the
which I have so many times given my self to gluttony and carnal pleasures? Is
this that face, which with so great care I have kept from sunburning? O unhappy
palace, for thy sake I have wearied my self by land and by seas. O
unfortunate belly, how became I such a fool, that I would worship thee for
God? Have I lost the kingdom of heaven for this most abject body, for this
most foul stink of al filthiness, and have purchased to my self everlasting
torments? O ye furies, O ye spirits of hell, why do ye stay, why tear ye me
not in pieces? why do ye not bring me to nothing? These and such like words
shall the soul utter against the flesh with exceeding rage and hatred, the
which notwithstanding, it lived so well when it was here upon earth, that it
worshipped the same for a Lady and God: and to fulfill the lusts thereof, if
feared not to violate and break the law and commandments of God.

23 And when all are risen again, and are gathered together into the place
which God has appointed for this judgment: then shall he appear in the
clouds of heaven, with power and great majesty, whom God has appointed to be
the judge of the quick and dead. And he shall not come alone, but accompanied
with an innumerable multitude of heavenly Princes.

24 The fear which shall come by reason of that majesty, shall be so great,
that the prophet Isaias says, Isay. 2.
They shall go into the holes of rocks, and into the caves of the earth, from
before the face of the Lord, and from the glory of his majesty, when he shall
arise to destroy the earth. Apoc. 20.
And the Apostle Saint John adds, I saw a great white throne, and one that
sat on it, fron whose face fled away both the earth and heaven: For as when
the flood of the Ocean swells, they are wont to tremble which dwell upon the
shore, and yet can take no harm: even so when the Lord begins to pour
forth his wrath and indignation upon wicked men, the Saints also and the
Angels, and men which are in no peril, shall after a sort tremble and fear. If
therefore the just shall fear, and the pillars of heaven shall shake, what shall
the wicked and ungodly do?

25 And in very deed, so soon as the Lord shall appear, there shall be heard
immediately a great cry and howling among the Nations: Mat. 24. Apoc. 1. Zach.
12.
for then (as the Lord himself says) shall all the kinreds of the earth mourn;
and they shall see him whom they pierced, and they shall lament for him, as one
mourns for his only son, and he sorry for him, as one is sorry for his first
borne. O how many causes of weeping and howling, shall miserable and unhappy men
then have? They shall weep, because they shall see that their evils and miseries
are past all remedy. They shall weep, because they shall see that their
repentance is too late, and unprofitable. They shall weep, because they cannot
appeal from Gods sentence, neither can flee the judgment at hand, and it shall
seem a thing intolerable to be at the judgment, and to hear the sentence
of everlasting condemnation. They shall weep, because when they lived here on
earth, they despised those which forewarned them. They shall weep, because the
pleasures which are gone as a shadow, have brought upon them endless sorrows
and torments. To be brief, as men beset on every side, and brought into
inevitable straights, destitute of al counsel and hope, they shall weep,
because they shall see that they cannot prevail any thing at all, neither with
weeping, nor yet with scratching and tearing of themselves.

26 Neither will the Judge be moved by any means with these cries and
sorrows, but will rather separate the weepers from those that rejoice, that is
to say, the wicked from the godly, even as a Shepherd divides the Sheep from
the Goats, and shall set the godly on his right hand, and the wicked on his
left.

27 And then he will begin to discuss the cause of every one, and he will
not forget any one offense. For we shall see all things registered in perfect
books; by which books all men shall be judged. I saw (says Saint John) the
dead both great and small stand before God: and the books were opened, and
another book was opened, which is the book of life, and the dead were judged
of those things which were written in the books, according to their works. So
that al our works are written in those everlasting books. Thou have scarcely
committed an adulterous thought, but the same wickedness is written in Gods
book.

28 And not only Church-robbings and sacrileges, parricides, periuries and
such like faults, but also impure thoughts and idle words, the neglecting of
good works, or the same done to no good end, shall be brought into judgment.
For so great is the excellency and estimation of Christian integrity and
purity, that no one, or the very least vice that may be, is not permitted to
Christian men.

29 The cafe standing thus, whereof I beseech you comes it, that there is in
us so great looseness, so great carelessness so great sloothfulnesse, and such
security? Do we not flatter our selves, when so great judgment hangs over
our heads. Holy was the prophet David, a man after Gods own heart, and yet he
so feared this judgment, that he said, Enter not into judgment with thy
servant, O Lord, for no man living shall be justified in thy sight. Holy was
the Apostle Paul, and yet he says, I know naught by my self, and yet hereby
I am not justified, it is the Lord that judges me: as if he should say,
therefore I dare not pronounce my self just, because he that judges me is the
Lord. For such are the eyes of the Lord, that the stars are not clean in his
sight: and many times his eyes do behold wickedness, where we see nothing
but holiness. Holy also was the friend of God, Job. 31.
Job, and yet he said, What shall I do when God arises to judgment? and when
he makes inquisition, what answer shall I give him? Why does this man of God,
so commended of Gods own mouth, who was so just and simple, that he could say
without lying, I was an eye to the blind, and a foot to the lame: Job. 29.27
and again. My heart does not reprove me in all my life: why (I say) is a
man of such singular innocence, so afearde of Gods judgment? namely, because
he knows that God has no eyes of flesh and that he judges far otherwhise
then men do.

30 Moreover, when all men's causes are diligently discussed and examined, the
Judge will pronounce against the wicked, the irreuocable sentence of eternal
damnation, Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, which is prepared
for the devil and his Angels. O bitter word, which will make the ears of them
that hear it, to tingle. O sentence intolerable, which depriueth sinners of
all good things, and brings them to all woe. The Lord sometime accursed the
Fig Tree, and immediately, not only the leaves, but also the body and roots
were wholly withered: Even so, that fearful curse of the last day, shall be no
less effectual. For on whomsoever it falls, it shall so scortch them, and
shall so make them destitute of Gods grace, that they shall never more be able to
do, to speak, to think, or to hope for any good thing.

31 Then therefore the wicked being stricken with this thundering sentence,
will lift up their mouths toward heaven; will spue forth their shameful
blasphemies against God the Judge; they will curse this day? and the hour
wherein they were borne and their Parents which begat them, and the wombs which
bare them; the aier which gave them breath; and the Earth which has borne
them: but they shall not be suffered any long time to speak these things
against the Judge.

32 For suddenly the Spirit of the Lord shall ouerwhelm them, and shall with
great violence cast them down headlong into the deep, Apoc. 18.
as in Saint John's Revelation appears in these words, Then a mighty, angel
took up a stone, like a great Millstone, and cast it into the Sea, saying, With
such violence shall the City of Babylon be cast, Apoc. 20.
and be found no more. And again, Whosoever was not found written in the book
of life, was cast into the Lake of fire. And this deep shall be shut up with
gates of brass, and with iron bars, which cannot be broken with any force,
nor cut in sunder by any art: and there they shall drink of the cup of the
Lords wrath, and the smoke of their torments shall ascend world without end: and
they shall not rest day nor night.

33 On the contrary part, the just being in the fruition of full blessedness,
and of everlasting glory, shall have in their mouths the praises of the
Lord, and giving of thanks: and shall with singing and with mirth extol the
name of their Lord and God, with whom they shall reign without end.

34 But although we hear of those things often, yet nevertheless, we are
not awaked from the sleep of sin, before we be overwhelmed with the night
of death, and of darkness: Why do we which have this time now, look for
another time, which peradventure we shall never have? Now is the accepted time,
now is the day of salvation, There is nothing more profitable for a man, then
to know his time, and therefore in our worldly business, we observe times
and seasons: as a convenient time to ear, a fit time to sow, to plant, and
such like. Yea, the brute beast, by the instinct of nature, can make choice of
his time for benefit. The Swallowe, when winter approaches, prepares
himself to take his flight into a warmer Country. The Be, and the Ant, in
the time of summer prepare their food against winter. And the Prophet Jeremy
says, that the Storke knows his appointed time. If brute beasts, deuoide of
reason, have this foresight to make choice of time for their good: and if man
him self, in a worldly regard, can make choice of a fit and due time to
get earthly and transitory things, how much more provident ought he to be
for heavenly things, that to attain these, he lose not his fittest time to
attain salvation?

35 The old world that lived in the days of Noah, knew not their time, and
that was the cause they then perished with the flood. The Cities of Sodom and
Gomer, knew not their time, and that brought fire and brimstone from heaven
upon their heads to their destruction. The foolish Virgins knew not their
time, and therefore when their Lord came, they (being altogether unready) were
shut out of the Lords joy.

Let us then know the season, how it is time now that we should awake out of
sleep. Romans 13.36 1. These. 5.
Let us watch and be sober for they that sleep* sleep in the night, and they
that are drunken, are drunken in the night: But let us which are of the day, be
sober, least the darkness come upon us, wherein we can neither walk nor
work.

Let us always have before our eyes that day and time, wherein we shall
appear before God, and his Angels, and before the whole world, to answer our
cause: and either to receive a Crown of glory, or else perpetual shame and
confusion.

Let us know that we have here a very short time limited unto us. wherein we
must so endeavor our selves, that for short and transitory things, we lose not
that which is eternal.

If we have this consideration of that great day of the Lord, we shall not
only be the more secure in death, but also be the better prepared to meet with
our Lord and Savior, when he shall come to judgment.

CHAP. IIII. Concerning Hell and the torments thereof.
THere is nothing that the Devil labors more, then to persuade men that
there is no hell, that so the more easily he may lead them thither, as it were
blindfolde; by the way of sins, while they have no fear of any punishment?
even as sheeues are wont to be led with a veil before their faces, when
they are going to the gallows: and as Ezechias was served, whose eyes
Nabuchadnezer commanded to be put out, when he was carried away captive into
Babilo^.

2 But it may be showed by many reasons and authorities that there is a hell.
For as a Princely magnificence requires that a King have a beautiful Palace,
for to entertain the best sort of men, and a prison for the worst: Even so the
king of kings, and Lord of all glory and principalities, has a Palace,
wherein there are many mansions (as our Savior Christ in the Gospel testifies
which is the kingdom of heaven: and he has also a dark prison or dungeon
which is hell.

3 The law of nations requires that malefactors for their offenses be driven
into exile for ever: even so God does banish from his presence, Luke. 16.
the impenitent sinners into hell. For so it is said of Dives that he dyed, and
was carried into hell. Esaias. 5
And ye prophet says, Hell has enlarged it self, and has opened his mouth
with out measure, and their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp, and
he that rejoices among them shall descend into it. Also S. John says that the
fearful, and unbelieving, and murderers, Apoc. 21.
the whormongers, sorcerers, and Idolaters and all liars, shall have their part
in the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death,
And Christ Jesus says, Fear him, which has power to cast body and soul into
hell.

4 But for so much as God has not made Death, nor the kingdom of Hell upon
earth. Wisd. 1.
We must understand that the principal procurer of this Hell, is Satan the
Prince of darkness, who being in his first Creation a bright shining
Lucifer, beautified as a precious stone, and more excellent than all the Angels
of Heaven in resplendant brightness, through his pride against God, lost his
light, glory and beauty, and as he was worthy became a foul feend, dejected
from heaven into this Elementall world, lower than all the Spheres into the
Fire, Air, Earth and Water.

5 I saw (says S. John) a star fall from Heaven to the earth, Apoc. 1.
and to him was given the key of the bottomless pit.

Further he says: There was a battle in heaven, Michael and his Angels fought
against the Dragon, Chap. 12.
and the Dragon fought and his angels. But they prevailed not neither was their
place found any more in Heaven. And the great dragon, that old Serpent, called
the Devil and Satan, was cast out which deceives all the world: He was cast
even into the earth, and his Angels were cast out with him. And being thus
dejected he now never cease compassing the whole earth, Job. 1.
but in his circuit seeks like a roaring Lion whom he may devour. 1. Pet.
5. Luke 22. Apoc. 12.
For the which cause S. John pronounces this woo saying: Woe to the inhabitants
of the earth and of the Sea, for the devil is come down unto you which has
great wrath, knowing that he has but a short time.

6 For albeit the world seems to be the parent, the bringer forth and
nourisher of bodies: yet is it the prison of Spirits, the exiling of souls,
and a place of all wretchedness and pains, For as the world is a place of
sin and transgression a Station of Pilgrimage and of woe, a habitation of
wailing and of tears, of travail and of wearines, of fearfulness and of
shame, of moving and of changing, of passing and of corruption, of insolence
and of perturbation, of violence and opprssion, of deceit and of guile, and
finally the laystall of all wickedness and abomination: so also by GODS
Justice it is appointed the place and pit of punishment and everlasting
torment, wherein the evil Angels that rebelled with Lucifer, and the damned
spirits of wicked men departed this life, have endless pain without rest.

7 And albeit the Apostle calls Satan a Prince that rules in the Air:
Ephe. 2.
yet is that Rule so slane-like, and his power so weakened by the Almighty,
that when the Lord intending to punish the sons of Adam, and to strike the
earth with tempests of lightning and thunder. He thereby also beats Satan
and the whole rabble of his hellish feendes, that in their fury and rage
therewith they terrify men by ougly shapes and aparitions, and (by GODS
permission) to murder man and beast, sometimes, do ouer-throwe buildings, Job.
1.
and do fire, and consumne houses, leaving a most noisome and horrible stink
behind them of the hellish place from whence they come. For it is not the
devil, but the glorious God that makes the thunder: and as testifies Syrach:
Psalm. 29. Eccle. 43.
It is the sound of the Lords thunder that beats the earth.

8 Thus by Gods just judgment he raungeth like a runagate in the sphere of
his Hell until the day of doom, for which season he is let loose: and yet
with such prohibition and restraint, that in his malice he can proceed no
further, than shall seem fit to the mighty Jehovah his Creator: and then he
shall receive that punishment whereof S. Jude speaks in these words: The
Angels which kept not their first estate, 2. Pet. 3. Apoc. 21.
but left their own habitation, he has reserved in everlasting chains under
darkness unto the Judgment of the great day: at which time there shall be a
new heaven and a new earth wherein shall dwell nothing but righteousness, when
the are refined with the fire of Gods justice: and then all the creatures of
those new heavens, and new earth shall be made perfect: for which perfection and
restoration, every creature waits being now subject to vanity, Romans 8.
for the which they groan, that they may be delivered from the bondage of
corruption, into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. For albeit the
fashion and form of this world goes away (as says the Apostle) yet they
subtance shall reamine, 1. Cor. 7.
whether of the heavens themselves, or of the Elements, or of men, al which
shall abide for ever.

9 At this time of restoration, when al things shall become new, and when the
dead are raised up again to life in their corporal bodies, then shall be
prepared an out-set habitation, which shall be a Chaos full of confusion, deuoyd
of the first most excellent thing that God made, Light: and in steed thereof
replenished with darkness, a thousand times worse the^ the palpable darkness of
Aegypts plague, Exodus 10.
wherein the burning and intolerable tormenting fire gives no light, and
where the freezing cold which causes gnashing of teeth, Job. 10.
mittigateth nothing at all the burning heat.

10 The holy Scripture, to enable the weak capacity of man, to comprehend and
understand the exceeding horror, and most fearful torment of this place calls
it a Bottomless pit: ^ophet: a Dunge on deep and large, Apoc. 1. Esai. 30.
Apoc. 21
the burning whereof is fire and brimstone the lake of ye second death which
burns with fire and brimstone. And in regard of the weeping, howling,
roaring, and secreetching in that place, it is compared to the valley of Hynnom
near Jerusalem, where the idolatrous people at the sacrificing of their
children so the Idol Moloch, Iere. 32.
made a confused noise of crying, and howling, together with singing and
sounding of Instrumments that the pitiful screetching of the children
tormented in that diuellesh sacrifice, might not be heard. And for this cause
Christ calls Hell, Gehennon, which the Prophet David calls the neithermost
Hell.

11 And albeit to men that measure all things by Philosophy and humane reason,
it may seem absurd that Fire should aflict the souls of the reprobate
departed, and the damned spirits in Hell, for so much as the Agent is ever
reputed more noble than the patient: but no corporal body is more noble than
the Spirit: and according to the mind of the Philosopher in his book of
Generation, Those things are only agent and patient in themselves which
communicate in the same matter: yet in this point as also in many other things
which lean only on Faith, and not on humane reason, we must believe it
because the word of God so delivers it. For the soul of Dives in Hell,
cries and shall cry for ever, Luke 16.
I am tormented in this flame. Which is no Parable, but really acted.

This then is no immaginarie fire, but a true corporal fire working really upon
body and soul, on the soul before the day of Judgment, and on both together
in a higher degree of torment after the day of doom: not by a proper virtue
and natural action which the fire has, but as the instrument of Gods justice,
not consuming, but afflicting after a certain manner of perpetual detaining
in the torment of real punishment.

12 But is this place of Hell, so to be vpholden only by Faith, that humane
reason cannot conceive it to be such, or as it is delivered to be in the word
of God? yes verily, and for this cause the conceit of Poets was not altogether
idle and deuoyde of reason, in saying that Saturnus dividing his Kingdom among
his sons, gave the West part toward the lower Sea, to Pluto his youngest
son: the East part to Jupiter: and the Ile-landes to Neptune of the Sea. And
heeuppon they feigned that Jupiter was King and God of Heaven: Pluto of Hell:
and Neptune of the Sea.

And to describe Hell, they could not bethink them of a more fit place in the
earth to make a resemblance thereof, than a certain territory in Italy,
between Baiae and Cuniae where the Cimerii inhabit: a place in very deed so
environed with high hills, that the Sun from the first rising to the setting
thereof, never shines there, by reason of which continual darkness this
Proverb is used.

Cimmeriis tenebris atrior. More black then the darkness of Cimmeria. And
here they place Acherusia, a dark Dungeon or way to Hell. Out of which
Hercules drew Cerberus the dog of Hell Thus these Poetical fictions grounded
upon earthly darkness represent and set before us, that invisible darkness,
which no man ever living on earth has seen, nor tongue is able sufficiently
to express,

13 Geographers tell us of the mountain Aetna in Cicile, Pliny.
at this day called Gibello Monte, on the top whereof is a barren ground mixed
with ashes, in the winter time covered with snow: the circuit of which
mountain is twenty furlongs, and is environed with a bank of ashes on the
height of a wall. In the middle of this mount, is also a round hill of the same
cooller and matter wherein be two great holes called Crateres, out of which do
rise sometimes sundry great flames of fire, sometime horrible smoke, sometime
are blown out burning stones in infinite numbers: before the visible fight of
which fire there is also heard within the ground terrible noise and roaring.

14 What else can these fearful fiery flames, horrible smoke, burning
stones, in such hydeous manner blown up, and the terrible roaring within that
Mountain Aetna import, but a certain subterraneall part of Hell? As also it
may be in like manner thought of the marine Rock of Barry in Glamorgan-shire
in Wales, Giraldus.
by a certain cleft or rift whereof, (if a man lay his ear thereon) is heard
the work as it were of a Smythes Forge, one while the blowing of bellows,
another while the sound of hammers beating on a stithie or Anuile, the noise of
knyues made sharp on a Whet-stone and the cracking of fire in a Furnace and
such like, very strange and admirable to hear.

15 Nauigators report, that there is a sea in the Voiages to the West Indyes,
called the Burmudas, which is a most hellish Sea for thunder, lightning and
storms. Also they assure us of an Ile-lande, which they call the Ile-lande of
Devils, for that to such as approach near the same there does not only appear
fearful sights of Devils and evil spirits, but also mighty tempests with
most terrible and continual thunder and lightning, and the noise of horrible
cries with screeching which does in such wise afright and amaze those that come
nere that place, that they are glad with all might and main to ply and speed
them thence wi^h all possible haste they can.

16 Cosmographers also inform us of a certain wonderful Whirle-poole in the
frozen sea not far from Ise-land toward the Ile-la^ds of the Hebreedes,
whereunto all the waves of the sea from far have their course and recourse
without stop: with their conueying themselves into the secret receptacles of
nature, are swallowed up as it were into a bottomless pit and if chance any ship
to pass this way, it is pulled and drawn with such violence of the waves that
eftesoones without remedy, the force of the Whirle-poole deuoureth the same.

17 I doubt not, but there are some which ascribe all these things to natural
causes and workings, or else will account them no better than fables, as they do
all things else which concern Religion. But yet let such men now know (as one
day with woeful experience they shall feel) that these and many mo wonderful
works of God in earth, and his wonders in the deep, beside his counsels and
judgments revealed in his word, does assure those which fear God, that there
is a Hell.

18 Who is so ignorant that he does not see and know, how in all things both
natural and supernatural there is an opposition and a contrariety, and
therefore also a God, and a Devil, a Heaven and a Hell. This Hell in the day of
doom, as touching the pains and torments to be laid on the devil and his
adherents shall be therein so enlarged and redoubled, that the darkness of
Cimeria, and all the darkness of the earth beside the fire in the Region that
compasses the earth, the fiery flames, lightnings, thunder and tempests; the
smoke, terrible noyce and roaring in the mountain Aetna: the fearful
visions, near the Ile-land of Devils: the chilling cold, and frozen Ise in
Frygida Zona: the indraughts and swallowing Gulphes of Waters: the whole
barrenness of the earth with all bitterness, stench, and whatsoever else may
offend the senses of damned men (the punishments of sin) shall be gathered
together into one Chaos of confusion, whereinto Satan with his Legions of
damned Spirits which are now for a time let loose to remain and converse in
the fiery Region in the Air, in the hollow Caves and Dungeons of the earth,
and in the waters, and where it has pleased God to appoint them, shall be
plunged for ever and ever.

19 Therefore let Hell be where it has pleased God in his secret counsel to
place it, to men unknown, whether in the North, or in the South, under the
frozen zoane, or under the burning zoane, Or in a pit or gulf, that shall
exceedingly participate of both, it makes to us no matter of exception. For
most true it is that Saint Gregory says, Gregor. super illud, Mat. Ei^cientur
in tenebras
The wicked shall be cast into utter darkness, that they may there gnash
their teeth, which delighted here in nothing but gluttony: For heat and
burning commonly makes men to weep, and cold causes men to beat and gnashe
their teeth. In Hell (says he) there shall be cold intolerable, fire
unquenchable, the worm immortal, stink that cannot be endured, darkness
palpable, the horrible scourges of devils, and the fearful sight of devils.

20 Thus much then we learn hereby concerning Hell, that it is a most fearful
and horrible place, into the which the souls of all that live ungodly in this
present world, Esaias. 5.14.
and in unbelief, are carried after death by the devil and his angels, even as
contrariwise, the souls of Gods children, which live in his fear and in
Christian obedience in this world, are carried up into Abraham's bosom, as was
Lazarus, and are in the hands of God, Luke 16. Wisd 3. Greg. lib. 9. moraliu^.
where no torment can come near them. For as S. Gregory says, Inasmuch as the
wicked have in this life forsaken their Creator, both in body and in mind,
they shall in hell fire be tormented both in body and in mind together.

And now that we have hitherto spoken at large concerning Hell, it rests that
somewhat be declared, as touching the pains and torments that are now, and
shall be for ever in the same. In the which, albeit there is but one fire, yet
says S. Gregory it does not torment sinners after one manner. For every one
shall be punished according to the quality, and quantity of his sins.

22 As in sin there are to be seen 2. turnings, namely, a turning away from
the chief and increate good or felicity, called Summum bonu^, and a
conversion or turning to the lesser and created good, which be ye things of
this world: Even so in the punishment, which is answerable to that sin, there
shall be found two sorrows: The one, which shall arise of ye loss of
everlasting blessedness, and the other, which shall arise of the pain and
torments which shall be brought upon the body and soul. Both which sorrows and
torments, the Schoolmen call, the pain of loss, and the pain of sense.

23 But first of all we will speak of the loss of felicity, which is the
greater punishment. There cannot be immagined or devised any pain or
punishment so greiuous, which is comparable to the loss of felicity. For if
to live in exile and banishment in a close prison from our dear friends in
this world, it may seem a punishment how greatly will that seperatio^ from God,
vex and torment us, whose only sight is so great happiness, that suddenly it
makes a man blessed and happy?

24 It was to the Citizens of Rome, a great punishment, and almost the
greatest of all other when for some great offenses they were compelled to
forsake the City, and the company of Citizens, and to dwell in certain desert
Islands, among the Barbarians.

Wherefore Marcus Tullius, when he was brought again from banishment, as if he
had entered into a new world, and had gotten heaven for earth, said, as a man
amazed, how beautiful is Italy? how fair are the regions thereof? what
goodly fields? what pleasant fruits? what famous cities? how great humanity
of Citizens? what an excellent common wealth? and so forth. How great grief
and sorrow then shall they feel, which are absent from the Palaces of heaven,
from the commonwealth of Saints, from those most happy Regions; where peace,
charity, tranquillity, and joy reigns, where the voice of praise and
rejoicing, and a continual Alleluia is sung? And finally to be absent from that
most pure light, which makes the beholders joyful and happy: and when they
shall be compelled to dwell for ever in most filthy prisons, and as it were in
a sink of al filthiness: where there shall be no order, but continual
horror: where there shall be no voice, but of such as mourn, and blaspheme:
where there shall be heard no sound, but of beating maules, and of whips: and
with a rabble of all sorts of devils, both barbarous and cruel, and also in the
company and fellowship of most wicked men,

25 Then shall their eyes be opened: then shall the veil be taken away from
before their face: then shall they see with exceeding sorrow, that between the
everlasting felicity, and these frail and transitory things there is
incomperable difference: when they shall behold most evidently that they have
lost the joys not to be told, and permanent for ever, for certain shadows
and dreams.

26 Here shall be so great sorrow, that although the damned do know that al
access unto everlasting blessedness is shut up from them, O Lord open our
hearts, and give us grace to seek thee while thou art to be found,
and that there is a most great Chaos, and universal confusion set between
them, and the place of the elect and blessed, yet being compelled with a
certain natural desire, they shall not refrain themselves from these cries,
Lord, Lord, open to us, Lord, Lord, open to us.

27 Hell, therefore, is an intolerable thing, and the pain thereof most
horrible: and yet if it were a thousand times bigger, yet is it not comparable
to the separation from the honor of that blessed glory in the kingdom of
heaven, and to the hatred of Christ, Math. 25. O remember the poor members of
Christ Jesus, and the Lord will remember you.
when he shall say, I know you not, and to this reproach and check, When I
was hungry and thirsty, ye gave me no meat nor drink etc. For we shall more
easily endure a thousand thunderclaps, then to have his most meek and loving
countenance turned away from us.

28 Moreover the loss of this felicity brings with it self the loss of
all good things. For the eyes of the damned shall see no comely shape or form:
their ears shall hear no manner of harmony: their taste shall have no sweet or
sauerie thing to delight it: their feeling shall have no safte thing to serve
it: and their smelling shall have no fragrant savors to refresh and comfort it.
For they which shall be once shut out from the company of God, are at one
instant drowned in the Ocean of all calamities and miseries, without hope of
deliverance. Let us then deeply weigh and consider, how great a matter it is to
lose felicity.

29 Now let us come to entreat of that torment, which is therefore called the
pain of sense by the schoolmen, because it is as well laid upon the outward
senses of the body, as upon the inward faculties of the mind. And that we
may first deal with the torment of the inward sense, ye shall observe, that
there are four faculties of ye soul, which shall be vexed in hell with
wonderful torments. The first is that which the Grecians call Phantasia, and we
Cogitation. The second is memory. The third understanding. And the last will.

30 Cogitation therefore, shall be most vehemently vexed with the feeling of
those torments, into the which both the body and the mind shall be cast. For
if now some great grief do so possess our Cogitation, that a man cannot,
would he never so feign, but think of that grief; what will the torments of
hell do in the minds of the damned, which shall be greater without al
comparison? Therefore cogitation shall increase the griefs and sorrows: and
those sorrows shall whette and stir up cogitation: and they both shall so
feed one another, that they shall leave no place of rest, neither in ye mind,
nor in the body of the damned. These therefore, Holy mediditation.
shall be the contemplations of those men, who when they might in this life
fruitfully have thought upon these things, would not: and they which disdained
here to use these most profitable meditations, as a bridle of their lusts,
shall in that time suffer them, as most cruel torments.

13 Furthermore, the memory shall be no small cross to the minds of the
damned, when they shall begin to call to mind their former delights, and the
pleasures past, for the which, they are now come unto these torments. For then
too late they shall perceive, with what bitter sauce they were seasoned. which
in times past seemed so sweet unto them. But they shall much more vehemently
be tormented, when they shall compare the brevity of the pleasures past, with
the eternity of the present sorrows. For what Mathematician so skilful can be
found out, which can declare unto us how much greter that everlasting time
shall be then the time of those transitory pleasures? How shall they then groan
and mourn, and what great deep sighs shall they fetch, when they shall find
by experience that their pleasures were most momentanie, and that they are gone
as a dream and shadow, and that their sorrows shall have no end?

14 But the understanding, as it is a faculty more excellent and perspicuous,
Understanding.
so shall it be tormented with a more intolerable cross. In this faculty
shall that worm be, which the Scriptures so oftentimes threaten to sinners,
where it is said, that their worm dies not, and the fire shall not be
quenched. For as the worm has his original from the wood, and yet does
continually eat and consume the wood, whereof it comes: Even so this worm
springs from sin, and holds a perpetual war with sin, and is nothing
else but a continual repentance, and sorrow, full of rage and desperation, which
they have by reason of their sins, when they see and feel, that for them
they have lost the kingdom of heaven, and have incurred those unspeakable
torments. This worm of the damned rests, neither day nor night, but biteth
and gnaweth continually, and feeds upon the bowels of those miserable men,
always bringing to their remembrance, the notable opportunity which they had
here in earth, not only with very small labor to have escaped those
punishments, but also without money, or money worth, to have gotten the kingdom
of heaven. Therefore they shall evermore contend with themselves, and say, O
miserable men that we be, to whom the kingdom of heaven was sometimes offered
freely to receive and possess: the which, the Preachers of Gods word did
humbly and lovingly beseech us, to embrace, and we refused, If we had truly
repented us of our sins, all had been forgiven. How small a thing had it been
to have repented? If we had craved mercy, we had easily obtained it: If we had
called for help and grace faithfully, it had been at hand: If we had given
but a cup of cold water for the Lords sake, we had not been unrewarded But
now we fast continually, and shall be tormented, we shall be afflicted, and
shall reap no fruit thereof. O that golden time misspent, how is it now gone
and never shall return again? Who bereaved us of our wits? Who shut our eyes?
Who stopped our ears? Whosoever bewitched us, that we never thought upon these
punishments, that we never had regard to these times, that we never foresaw
this misery, and that we harkened not unto them which forewarned us?

30 And if the understanding shall feel these things, what shall we then say
of the will, which is the chief and principal cause of sins? The will
therefore, shall be evermore tormented with a certain outrageous envy, which
it shall conceive of the honor and glory of Almighty God, and of all the Saints
in heaven, according as it is set down in the Psalm: The ungodly shall see it,
and it shall grieve him, he shall gnash with his teeth, and consume away: the
desire of the ungodly shall perish. Psalm. 112.10. ver.
Also in the wills of these sinners, there shall be joined with envy, an extreme
hatred against God, from whence shall arise horrible curses and blasphemies,
Hear and tremble oh wicked and profane.
which shall never cease in their mouths. For when they shall perceive that
there is no hope any more to recover their salvation, and shall also be assured
that they shall at no time come into the favor of God, and that their torments
shall never have end. And further, when they shall see that it is God himself
which keeps them, as it were fast bound with chains, in those perpetual
torments: and that it is he which does from an high cast down upon them
thundering tempests: and with his omnipote^t breath does kindle those furnaces
of hell fire: then they will rage, and some like mad dogs, and will never cease
from barking, from blasphemies, and cursed speakings. They will curse him,
because he created them, and adjudged them to death, and yet dying, are never
dead They will curse his punishments, because he tormenteth them so
vehemently. from wicked blasphemies good Lord deliver us.
They will curse his benignity, because it is now turned into severity. They
will curse his cross, and his blood shed upon the same, because it has been
profitable to so many, and nothing available unto them.

31 To conclude, they will curse all the saints and Angels of heaven, because
they shall see them in joy and felicity, and themselves in everlasting
misery. This shall be there perpetual simphonie and melody: these shall be
their evening and morning songs: these their Psalms and Himnes, which they
shall sing in those doleful Temples of devils, where they shall have fire and
brimstone, in steed of frankencense, and the noise of stripes, with whips and
maules which shall enforce weeping, howling, and gnashing of teeth, in stead of
Organes, Trumpettes, Cornettes, and Harpes.

32 Thus far concerning the sorrow, which arises of the loss of the chief
felicity, and which the inward faculties of the mind do suffer, which has
been showed to be the greatest, and unspeakable: Now also we will show that
to be an exceeding sorrow, which the very torments shall work in the
external senses of men.

33 Therefore, as the reward of the blessed is not some certain particular
goodness, severed and divided from other good things, but a certain common
and general good, or felicity, wherein al good things, al delights and
pleasures are contained: So the pain and torment of the damned is not one
kind of sorrow, as of the head, of the eyes, of the teeth, of the raines, and
so forth: But it is a certain general punishment, which comprehends all the
sorrows, of all the members and senses together.

34 If the sorrow and pain of a woman travailing in childbirth, be so great,
and so general, that it inuadeth every part: what shall become of them, upon
whom all manner of sorrows shall come? If a man cannot endure a little fire in
one part of his body, as on his little finger, but one hour: how intolerable
shall the pain of the damned be, when they shall wholly burn within and
without? Which of you (says the Prophet Isaias) can dwell with burning fire?
And yet our fire here is but a picture and shadow of that unquenchable fire
there in hell: where one drop of cold water will be more worth, then all the
iewelles of the world, though only to cool the tongue.

35 All the senses of the body shall be here tormented, and that not with heat
only, but also with extreme, and most freezing cold, as Gregory affirms
in these words, In hell is intolerable cold, unquenchable heat, an immortal
worm, a stinch not to be endured, a scourge ever striking, darkness
palpable, a fearful vision of devils, confusion of sins, and a desperation
of all good things.

36 This endless misery shall enforce them to houle and cry, cursed be the day
wherein I was borne, and let not the day wherein my mother bare me be blessed.
Cursed be the man that showed my father saying. A man child is borne unto thee,
and comforted him. Cursed be he that he slew me not: Ier. 20.
even from the womb, or that my mother might have been my grave, or her womb
a perpetual conception. How is it that I came forth of the womb to see labor,
pain, and sorrow, that my days should be consumed with shame.

37 Three things, among many other torments shall enforce the wicked to
blasphemy and curse: first, that before the day of doom, they daily see the
downefal of those into Hell, of whose damnation, they themselves have been the
authors. And for this cause Dives in Hell prayed Abraham to send Lazarus to his
fathers house to forewarne his brethren that they might not come into that
place of torment.

38 Secondly because in Hell, the waters which they could wish might serve for
their refreshing shall be like to burning pitch which shall never be quenched, the
smoke whereof shall ascend for ever.

39 Thirdly because they shall be gathers, together as the prisoners in the
pit and fagoted up in a band like a bundel of sticks, for the fire.

For as heaven is (as touching the many ma^sions whereof christ speaks) is in
it self infinite, answering the essence, majesty, and power of God, being placed
above all orbs and spheres, and far beyond all circle and compass of man's
capacity: even so Hell is limited in a small orb, capeable of no more than the
damned, and the instruments of their torments: which cannot be very spacious,
in regard the whole earth is much less then the circumference of the Sun. The
straitenesse of which place shall bring to the huge heaps of the damned packt
up therein, increase of torment, with palpable darkness.

40 Now, if this Hell were but a temporal pain (as Origin thought) then hope
would cheer the tormented sinner: but the torments are eternal, and the
tormented quite destitute of hope. The worm of conscience is there for ever
without solace, and gnashing of teeth shall be continually without gladness. Thus
the torments of the damned shall continue so many worlds, as there be stars in
the firmament, as there be grains of sand by the sea shore, and as there be
drops of water found in the sea. And when these worlds are ended, the pains
and torments shall not cease but begin afresh: and thus this wheel shall turn
round without end.

41 For when the motion of the Primum Mobile, and of the Heavens shall cease,
then shall time also cease. Now in this world, there is a time past: now there
is a time present, and a time to come: but then there shall be no time past,
nor any time to come, no week, no month, no year, nor any variation of time.
Apoc. 10.
It shall be as the day whereof the Prophet speaks, which shall be neither day
nor night. This shall be a very long day: Zach. 14.
For it shall be for ever and ever. For one day is with the Lord as a thousand
years, Pet. 3.
and a thousand of years, but as one day of darkness, and of blackness.

42 What ^an considering these things, will endure these hellish torments,
everlastingly, to enjoy for a little while the vain pleasures of the flesh?
Although a man by living in sin, might procure unto himself the wisdom of
Solomon, the strength of Sampson, the beauty of Absalom and Susanna, the riches
of Cressus, the power of Augustus, and the years of Mathusalah: what would all
these profit at the last, if after a while being in death, thou can neither
deliver thy body from worms, nor thy soul from hell fire? and as our Savior
Christ says; What does it profit a man to win all the world, and to loose his
own soul? If thou often meditate these things, thou shall both lead a good
and holy life, and after a while make a blessed and happy end of thy
pilgrimage.

The fifth hour. Concerning the small number of them that shall be saved.
Strive to enter in at the narrow gate: for many, I say unto you will seek to
enter in, and shall not be able. Luk 13.24. With what purpose* and meaning ha^
(...) Lord uttered this sentence? Verily to no other end as it may be gathered
by the words going before) then to show, that they are few in number, which
are saved, and many which perish.

2 For there are some which had propounded this question to the Lord, saying*
Lord are there few that be saved? To the which question the Lord answered so
wisely that by his answer, he taught that they were but few which would be
saved, and also renders a reason why they were but few, Strive (says he) to
enter in at the straight gate, for many, I say unto you, will strive to enter,
and shall not be able: the which is all one as it he had more plainly said,
they are but few which shall be saved, and that for no other cause, but for that
the gate of life and salvation is straight and narrow.

3 This thing the Lord goes about to print in our minds, when as he so often
times repeateth, Many are called, but few are chosen: And when he cried
again, Wide and broad is the way which leads to perdition, and many there
be which enter thereat: but narrow and straight is the way which leads unto
life, Mat. 7.1.3
and few there be which find it.

4 This thing Isaias sets before our eyes by a very plain, and yet fearful
similitude: For thus he speaks, Surely thus shall it be in the midst of the
earth among the people, as the shaking of an Olive tree, and as the grapes when
the vintage is ended. Isaias, Chap. 24.13. These shall lift up their voice, and
shall sing praises, when the Lord is glorious and magnificent: that is to say,
how seldom do Olives hang upon the tree after they are shaken: and how seldom
are grapes found upon the vines after the vintage, even so few shall be saved
out of the nubmer of men. Who will not tremble? who will not forget his sport and
mirth, and delights, if he begin to think upon this thing?

5 Again in Esdras it is said; The most high made this world for many: 2.
Esd. 8.1
but the world to come for few: The earth yields great store of clay to make
pots, but little gold: So it is with the work of this world: There be many
created, but few shall be saved. We see hereby that even in natural things,
those that be most excellent, are most rare: much clay, but little gold: great
plenty of common stones, but of precious stones very few: unprofitable herbs
spring every where, but wholesome and m^dicinable herbs are more geason.

6 How many millions of Infidels, Barbarians, Turks, Jews, which remain in
the darkness of their own ignorance, are damned? and among Christians so many as
hold not their profession truly, or otherwise are evil livers therein? Also
before the coming of Christ, all the world went the broad way to damnation,
for many thousand years together, excepting a few Jews, which were a peculiar
people unto God: and yet amongst them also it seems, the greater part were
not saved:

7 If this be so, that God damneth so many thousands for one that he saves,
Psalm. 144. James. 2.
how is it true, that his mercy is above al his works, and do surmount his
judgments? For if the number of the damned, do so much exceed the number that
are saved, it may seem that the work of justice does exceed the work of
mercy.

8 To this objection it may thus be answered: First, that mercy may be said
to exceed his justice, 2. Esdr. 7.69.
for that our whole salvation is of his mercy, and our damnation of our selves,
as from the first and principal cause thereof. Ose. 13.
Thy only perdition is from thy self (O Israel) and thine assistance to do
good, is only from me.

9 Secondly, in that he desires that all men might be saved. Whereby it
appears, that he offers his mercy to all willingly and freely, and is
constrained to execute his justice by our obstinate behavior only. Mat. 23.37.

10 Thirdly, in that he uses many means to save the damned in this life. 1.
Tim. 2.9 Iere. 3.
First by calling them and assisting them sometimes with his grace to do good,
by moving them inwardly with infinite good inspirations: secondly, by alluring
them outwardly with exhortations, promises and examples of others: thirdly, by
adversities: forthly by prosperities: fifthly, by giving speace to repent:
lastly, by threatenings, This must needs make the very damned confess in hell,
that his judgments are nothing comparable with the greatness of his mercies.

11 But to return to our purpose: Seeing they are so few that shall be saved
if they be compared with those which shall perish, Isaias says full truly,
Isaias. 24.
These shall lift up their voice: they shall shout for the magnificence of the
Lord. That is to say, when (the kingdom of Antichrist being finished) Christ
shall come in the clouds of Heaven with power and majesty: when he has cast
innumerable multitudes of the wicked into hell fire: when he has judged all
blasphemers, all fornicators, all drunkards, and al unclean persons to eternal
torments: and when he has tumbled down headlong all proud persons: then those
few which are left shall lift up their voices, and shall break forth into the
praises of the Lord.

12 Now let men which are lovers of themselves, eat, drink, play, laugh, live
in security, and give themselves to delights, and they shall see what will come
upon them soon after. Verily if there be but a few that be saved, these are
not like to be in that number, but are rather to to be reckoned among those
which play upon the Simphony and Harp, living in prosperity and pleasure all
their days, and at last descend into their graves.

13 Thus have we the meaning and purpose of our Savior Christ in the former
sentence, now we will begin briefly to expound the same.

Strive (says he) to enter by the straight gate: one moved the question, but
the Lord makes answer not to one only, but to many. Strive ye to enter in at
the straight gate. For although one had propounded the question, yet there were
many which desired to hear the solution of the question.

15 But what is that straight gate, by which we are commanded to enter? Surely
no other thing then Christ himself. For in another place he says plainly, I
am the door, John 10.9
by me if any man enter, he shall be safe: And again, I am the way, John 14.6
the truth and the life

16 After what manner then do men enter by Christ? Two things are required for
this entrance by Christ into Heaven: The one is, on the behalf of Christ, the
other is on our behalf. That which is required on Christ's part is, Apoc. 3.7.
that he open the gate, for he has the key of David, and opens, and no man
can shut: and he shuts and no man opens: and this is done long since. For
Christ then opened unto us the gate of everlasting life, when living here upon
earth he was obedient to his Father, humbling himself to the death, the most
shameful death of the Cross. For as the disobedience and pride of the first
Adam did shut up the gate of the kingdom of Heaven: so the obedience of the
second Adam and his humility, opened the same again. Therefore that which is
required on the part of Christ is already done. For the gate stands wide
open, and shall so stand unto the end of the world.

17 But on our part this is required, that we strive and labor by Gods
assistance to enter in at this gate, which (as is said) stands open. And we
enter, when we use and receive those means to obtain salvation which Christ
has appointed: Faith comes by hearing the word of God preached. Gael. 5.22.
namely, Faith and Repentance. For this was the first sermon the preached,
Repent and believe the Gospel. These two do work hope, charity, humility,
chastity, patience, etc. But because these things are hard to the carnal man
and unregenerate, therefore the gate of salvation is called the straight gate.

18 But some man peradventure will say, if the Law of the Lord be a straight
way or gate, why does the same Lord in another place affirm, that his yoke is
sweet, and his burden light? How do these things agree, Strive ye to enter by
the strait gate: Math. 11.30.
and my yoke is sweet, and my burden light? This knot may be undone many
ways. S. Chrysostom expounding the seventh Chapter of S. Mathewes Gospel,
affirms that the law of the Lord in it self is grievous and hard: but yet
also that it is light and sweet, if the rewards to come, and the torments to
come, be considered. Romans 8.18
For the sufferings of this life, are nothing in comparison of the glory that
shall be showed upon us.

19 If the sick man for the love of his health, is very willing to drink most
bitter potions: If the husbandman in hope of the harvest to come, sets
light by the scorching heat of Summer, and the pinching cold of Winter: If
the Merchant fears not the danger of ship-wracke, nor the lying in wait of
Pirates when he aduentureth for gold: If the soldier for vain glory and a
shadow of honor, thinks the burden of his armor light, and is contented
to undergo hunger, thirst, watchings, labors, wounds, perils, and death it
self: how can it be but that those things which God commands, must be easy
and light to a Christian man, especially if he consider that great and
sempiternal glory which God promises to his soldiers?

20 The holy Apostle writing* to the Ephesians does not without cause say that
he prays with so great carfulness, Ephesians. 1.18.
that the God of glory would vouchsafe to give them, the spirit of wisdom, and
illumined eyes of the heart, that they might know what is the hope of his
calling, and what is the riches of his glory, and of his inheritance in the
Saints. For he knew that the greatness of the heavenly reward was such that the
only consideration thereof was able to make all grievous and bitter things
sweet and light. These cogitations (says S. Cyprian) what persecution,
Cyprian. de exhor. Martirij.
what torments can overcome? The mind which is settled upon religious
Meditations stands firm and stable: and the same mind stands immovable
against all the terrors of the devil, and the threatenings of the world, being
confirmed by a steadfast faith of the things to come.

21 The punishments also and torments which are to come, are so continual and
greiuous, that to escape them, all the labors that we suffer here in earth,
are not to be accounted labors.

22 But yet let us see another answer to the former question. The way of the
Lord in the beginning is very straight, but by little and little it is
enlarged. In the beginning it seems hard and bitter: but by use it grows
easy, by little and little; and by custom it is made light and sweet.

23 Hereupon Saint Bernard says, The commandments of God, at the first seem
importable, afterward, not so heavy: Then not heavy at at all: And in the end
they delight. To this agrees the saying of Saint Hierom. Virtues are hard to
him that first takes them in hand, easy to him that profits in them, and
sweet to him that exercises them. And Saint Augustine says, The paths of
equity, when a man first enters to them, are straight and narrow, but when
he has gone foreward in them a time, they seem spacious and broad. Pro.
4.11.
Also Solomon in his Proverbs says: I have taught thee in the way of
Wisdom, and lead thee in the paths of righteousness: wherein when thou
go, thy gate shall not be straight, and when thou runnest thou shall not
fall. That is to say, before thou entrest, thou shall be discouraged, but when
thou art entered, thou shall feel little difficulty or none at all.

24 Homer the Prince of Greek Poets, a Heathen man, but yet wise, writteth,
that when Ulysses should pass by those places, where Circe a famous woman in
inchauntments, (whereby she turned men into beasts) dwelt, carried with him a
certain herb, by the force whereof, he fortified himself against her power:
the roots of the which are most foul and stinking, but the flowers most fair
and white as milk. The purpose of Homer is, hereby to show, that wise men
(whom he describes in the person of Ulysses) are wont to guard and fortify
themselves with virtue, which is stronger then any armor of proof, least
being vanquished with diverse desires and lusts, they be transformed and made
like unto brute beasts: and that virtue is like to the said herb which has
black roots, and white flowers, for that the beginnings of virtue are hard
and unpleasant, but the fruit thereof most sweet and good.

25 Moreover, experience and daily use, proves this. For there are many to
whom if we should say thus. This must be your life hereafter: ye shall abstain
from pastimes and pleasures: ye shall seldom walk abroad out of your houses:
ye shall not hunt after feasts and banquets: ye shall not use wanton daliaunce
with women: but ye shall follow your vocation at home, wherein ye shall be
conversant: and hereunto ye shall join prayer, reading, and godly Meditation.
To this they would answer, we can in no wise perform this, without God should
work a great miracle in us: this is no humane life, but a life for Angels.

26 But if these men would begin to enter the kingdom of heaven, as it were
with strong hand, to resist their evil customs, to exercise themselves in
good works, and willingly to use those remedies which help to root out sin
and wickedness, as often prayer, and fasting, the receiving of the blessed
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, the diligent reading of the
Scriptures and other good books, the company and fellowship of good men: who
doubts but yt upon these religious exercises, there will follow such good
success, that the way of the Lord shall be opened unto them more and more: and
that in a short time they shall see themselves in that place with exceeding joy
of mind, whereunto before they thought they should never come? And thus they
shall not only without labor and pain but also with delight and pleasure
abstain from sin and wickedness, and live a holy and blessed life.

27 For the Philosopher, though an Ethnicke, saw this plainly and so taught,
that it is a pleasure to a virtuous man to live virtuously: and Solomon
expresses the same thing in others words: The righteous man rejoices, to
deal righteously.

28 Moreover this question may be answered another way, If we say with
Theophilact that Christ is a straight gate, and narrow way, so called, not so
much because he is so, but because he seems so, to the lovers of the world,
to wealthy and rich men. For in very deed if men were humble, if they would
lay aside many unprofitable burdens, and put off the garment of the flesh,
they should (peradventure) find no straites in the way and gate of the Lord:
Whereas now they think upon nothing, but how they may rise continually, how
they may wax fat in body, swell in mind, how they may extend and enlarge
their possessions, how they may abound and flow in wealth: neither do they
cease at any time to lade themselves with the heavy burdens of the cares of
this life. And what marvel then if to such men, the gate of the heavenly
kingdom seem to be strait and narrow?

29 It seemed not a hard and strait way to the Apostles of our Lord: It seemed
not so to them which succeeded them in profession, who forsook all that they
possessed, and would needs follow poor Christ in poverty. For it cannot be
expressed in words how ample and large the way of the Lord shall be made unto
all them, which can set their heart upon Heaven, contemn earthly vanities,
with great feruencie of mind to cleave wholly unto God, and which can cut off
the desires of unprofitable things.

30 Last of all this may be added also for the explication of our question,
that the law and commandementes of God are a strait way and gate, if they be
considered by themselves, and alone. But if the grace and help of God be
joined unto them, they ought not to be called a strait gate, but a sweet yoke
and a light burden.

31 For this is the difference between the law and the Gospel. The law
commanded that we should be holy, but it gave no grace by which men are
sanctified: It commanded us to fight against the devil, but it gave not unto
us necessary armor and weapons to fight: It commanded us of carnal to become
spiritual, but it gave not the holy Ghost by which we might be made spiritual:
It commanded us to go forward toward Heaven, but it gives not unto us
Ladders and steps by which we may ascend into Heaven.

32 Therefore the Law was a yoke, but not a sweet yoke: It was a burden, but
not a light one. But the Gospel commanding the selfsame things, gives help
and strength, that they may not only be done, but also that they may be
easily done.

33 Wherefore the Gospel is a yoke, but sweet: It is a burden, but light. It
is also a strait and a broad way: it is a sharp, and pleasant way. Let us
hear the words of the Prophet saying, Because of the words of thy mouth, Psalm.
119.
I have kept hard ways. Behold a yoke and a burden, a strait and a narrow
way. Let us hear the same Prophet again: In the way of thy Commandments I
have had as great delight, as in in all manner of riches. Again, I have run
the way of thy commandments, when thou have set my heart at liberty. Behold a
help of grace.

4 For then the way is enlarged, and the course easily finished, when the heart
is made spacious and void with the fire of love: What is the cause that all the
saints did so great and wonderful works, and we so small, and the same not
without the compulsion of law many times? Surely there is no other cause but
this: they were fervent, and we are cold. Finally they which complain of the
straitnes of the Lords ways, seem to me not to have known as yet what the
Gospel signifies. For what does the gospel signify? what grace? what the Law
of love? what the holy Ghost? what Christ? what Jesus? and what a deliver? but
a deliverance, but liberty, and charity, but sweetness, and facility?

35 What this gate is, whereof the Lord speaks, why it is called strait, we
have hitherto showed: now these words are to be considered, Because many I say
unto you, shall seek to enter in, and cannot.

36 There are three sorts of men, which shall seek to enter in, and yet
notwithstanding cannot: and there is also a fourth kind, which do not so much
as seek to enter in.

37 There are some therefore which seek to enter into the kingdom of heaven
but they do not therefore enter, because they do not seek to pass and enter
by the strait gate, but by the broad way. And of this sort are the Mahometans,
the Jews, Heretics, Papists, Sectaries, and all Infidels. The Mahometans
seek to ender and to be saved, but therefore they enter not, and cannot be
saved, because they enter not by the strait gate Christ, but by the broad gate
Mahomet. For when Mahomet saw the straitness of Christian Religion, he opened
a certain other gate, broad and wide, which leads the direct way unto hell.

38 Behold and see what a wide gate Mahomet has set open: he has taught
nothing to be believed which exceeds man's understanding; no Trinity, no
Incarnation, no death or resurrection of the Son of God. Also he has taught
to hope for nothing, which the eye sees not, and the ear hears not, but
floods of milk, honey and wine, fullness of venerie, and fulfilling of lusts,
multitude of servants, continual sportes and banquets: this he would have to
be the felicity of the blessed.

39 The Papists also set open a very wide gate, when they teach men to merit
heaven by works; to purchase unto themselves with money, pardon for their sins
past, and to come; to redeem their souls out of Purgatory fire, by purchasing
infinite Masses and Dirges with money to be sung after their death; to have
absolution of their sins, by confession to a Priest, with diverse other points
of like sort: which makes the way very broad and open for rich men, but
strait and narrow for the poor.

40 In like manner al Heretics and Scismatickes, which cannot endure and abide
the straits of this gate, do open every one to himself a proper gate: The
Family of Love has a peculiar gate: the Anabaptists and Libertines, a wide
gate: and the Brownists, and Barrowists at this time a fantastical gate, all
which seek an equality of states and persons, a common participation of other
men's portions, a sacrilegious spoil of the Lords treasury and sanctuary with
Athalia: whereby they open the broad way of disorder and confusion, and a
liberty to all sin and wickedness: and yet by these gates which stand so wide
open, a great multitude of men do daily enter.

41 All which the Lord calls back with these words, Strive ye to enter in at
the strait gate, for many, I say unto you, have sought to enter (namely into
life) and cannot: because they enter not in by the strait gate, which only
leads unto life.

42 Let not the largenes of the gate move you. What does it profit to enter
easily, and not by the straits, if ye enter into Hell? Nay rather, if ye be
wise, suspect and stand in fear of the broadnes of the gate, and of the
facility of faith. Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto
life. And that is true Christian faith, which for the deepnes and excellency
of her mysteries requires this, that understanding be captiued of will.

43 There are yet another sort, which desire to enter in by the strait gate,
but they come too late, and therefore seeking to enter in cannot. He that stepped
not in quickly, and at the first into the water of the poole Bethesda, after
the Angel had stirred the same, Io^^. ^.
lost the benefit of healing: and great were the liberties and privileges
which the Israelites had in that great year of Iubile, which was every fifty
year: and he that challenged not his freedom in this time, afterwares lost it.
Even so now is ye time of health, wherein the Archangell Christ Jesus makes
the water of life effectual to our salvation: now also is that great Iubile,
wherein we are to challenge the benefit of Christ's death and passion, and the
gate of Heaven is set open: but the said water of life must have his use in
time, or else it helps not: and when the year of Iubile is past, the gate of
Heaven will be fast shut up. Every man's life is his year of Iubile, so that
when his life is ended, the Iubile is past, and he is barred from the gate of
life.

44 And because many while they live here, are overwhelmed with the cares of
this world, and passing on in their way, do promise unto themselves a long
life, and a large year of Iubile: the Lord foreseeing their peril, does after
this mnaner carefully admonish them, Strive ye to enter in at the strait
gate: as if he should say, use no delays in the way, but make haste, run
apace while the year of Iubile lasts, while ye have time of repentance, and
while the gate of salvation is open. For many shall seek to enter in, but
because they come too late, they shall not enter. They shall knock in vain at
the gate, they shall cry in vain, Lord, Lord, Math. 25.
open to us, and in vain they shall wish to have one day of repentance.

45 And for whom, I beseech you, are these things so often spoken? Are they
spoken for those that are dead, and stand without knocking and saying, Lord
open to us? No verily, they are not spoken unto them, for they have no profit
thereby. But they are spoken to us, and for us, and to him (I say) this is
spoken: The gate of heaven is now opened unto you, now is the time of your
Iubile come, now the kingdom of Heaven is offered unto you, ye are now called
upon to enter by the strait gate, loose not this opportunity, for the gate
will be shut much sooner then you think of, even before you be aware, then shall
ye be most miserable and unhappy for ever: ye shall desire but one hour to be
given you of this most precious time, whereof now ye make so little account, and
it shall not be given unto you.

46 There is a third sort of men, which seek soon enough to enter in by the
strait gate, but yet being overcome with the straits in the way, do not at
last enter in. To these the Lord speaks, Strive ye to enter in by the strait
gate, because many, I say unto you, shall seek to enter: that is to say, they
shall make a proof whether they can enter or not, but they shall make it
dangerous: they shall assay whether they can enter by those straites, but
because they seek not with all their strength to enter, therefore in the end
they shall not enter.

47 There are of this sort an innumerable multitude of men, which when they
hear their sins and wickednesses by the word of God condemned, do for a
while purpose to forsake them, and to enter in at the strait gate of virtuous
life, and to forsake their drunkenness, fornication, contention, strifes, and
such like, from which the Apostle commands us to abstain: So that these
seek to enter, and begin to enter, but soon after they return with the dog
to his vomit, and with the sow to her mire again.

48 And some, many times, renew their desires: they oftentimes conceive the
spirit, and yet never bring forth. But the Lord is not fed with barren
desires, it is not enough to have a will to enter, but we must also labor and
strive to enter. For I say unto you, many shall seek to enter, many shall have
a will to enter, many shall have a desire to enter, many shall prove to enter:
but because they will not strive, and labor with all their strength, therefore
they shall not enter. For the kingdom of God suffers violence, and the
violent draw it unto them.

49 When there is a Comicall or Tragical play at the Theater or Curten, do
ye not see many times, how men do throng and shooue with great labor to enter
betimes, that they may hear and behold the same: for the which they think
their pains, their, time, their labor and their cost well bestowed? But in the
kingdom of heaven there shall be such glorious sights, and so far excelling
those worldly vanities, and profane delights, that the beholders of them shall
be made happy with the beholding thereof: And we must not tarry til our
servants go before us to prepare the way, but every man by himself, be he
rich, be he poor, be he noble, or unnoble, every one must seek to prepare
and make his own way, and must strive, labor and endeavor all that we can,
if we will be at those delightful and happy sights,

50 These things considered, which of us will not sustain the labor and
travel to enter in at the strait gate? Who will not willingly suffer himself
to be pained and aflicted for a time? I doubt not, but that there are many
which would enter but they cannot, and therefore they cannot, because they know
not how to enter. For without skill we must not look to enter by those strait
and low gates. If the gate belowly, and thou look to go in without stooping,
with a fight up body, not once bowing down thy head, is it not like that thou
shall hurt thy forehead, and yet be stopped from entrance? Even so the gate being
strait, except thou know how to conform thy self to the fashion of the
cross, and to enter as it were stooping, or side-waies, thou shall desire to
enter in vain. Therefore this is that which the Lord says here, Strive to
enter in at the strait gate, because many, I say unto you, shall seek to
enter in and cannot: and all because they cannot fashion themselves to the
cross, and know not the manner of entering in by the straites. Therefore thou
must conform thy self to the manner of the cross: that is to say, thou must
determine with thy self to endure with a valiant mind all manner of
afflictions and tribulations, and after this manner thou shall easily enter.

51 Thus the Lord himself entered. For thus it behooved Christ to suffer: that
is to say, it was requisite for Christ to be crucified, and so to enter into
his glory. Thus the Apostle Peter, Thus the Apostle Saint Andrew, and thus all
the elect have entered into the kingdom of heaven. For they all following the
figure of the cross, with many tribulations, and with great labor, have
entered into the straits of this gate.

5 But now to come to the last, and most unhappy sort of men, which do not
only not strive to come in, but also do not so much as think upon any
entrance. And how many think you are there to be found in this number? verily
there are very few, which are not to be reckned among this kind of men. What
man is he that forgets not the fear of God and his own salvation? To how
many do these words agree? Isaiah. 5.12
The harp and Viole, Timbrell, and Pipe, and Wine, are in their feasts: but
they regard not the work of the Lord. Job. 21.12.
And again, They take the Tabret and Harp, and rejoice in the sound of the
Organs: They spend their days in wealth, and suddenly they go down to the
grave. They say also unto God, depart from us: for we desire not the knowledge
of thy ways, etc. That is to say, we will not walk in that strait way which
thou command us to walk in, but we will go the broad way.

53 When the Phrigians, first became christian, the governor of the city
desired to be resolved by the Bishop (who was then about to baptize him) of
this question: namely whether those that shall be saved, or those that shall be
damned, shall be the greater number. The bishop answered, that the greater number
should be lost. And I quoth the Governor will do as the most do: and so
refused his Baptism. Many men at thsi day peradventure will be ashamed, openly
to say thus, as this Governor did, and yet in deeds proclaim it.

54 Wherefore the greater part of men shall be adjudged to everlasting pains.
Few are chosen. Many go the broad way: Few there be that enter the strait
gate: the which is not only proved unto us by words, but also by many tipes
and figures of the scripture.

55 God in that old world, wherein Noah lived, entered into judgment with
mankind, Genesis 7.
and destroyed the evil and the wicked with the flood, but saved the good and
godly. And how many were saved in that great multitude? A few (says Saint
Peter) that is to say, 2. Pet. 2.5
eight souls, etc.

56 Furthermore in the days of Abraham, by another figure, he sets before
our eyes, the small number of them that shall be saved: Genesis 19.
for when he destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah with fire and brimstone from heaven,
he among so many people saved only three.

57 Moreover in the time of Moses, 1. Cor. 10.
God brought the people of Israel out of Egypt, to plant them in the land of
promise, a land flowing with milk and honey: All which things happened to them
in a figure, and were done to admonish us upon whom the ends of the world are
come. How many were there think you of this people, which came out of Egypt? Six
hundred and three thousand, Number. 1.
five hundred and fifty, beside women and children, and old men. How many of
this exceeding multitude entered into the land of promise? Number. 26.
No more but Joshua and Caleb.

58 To conclude, what other thing was the transfiguration of the Lord in the
mount, but a most manifest figure of blessedness? but how many were admitted to
this blessedness? only five: Moses, Helias, Peter, James and John: to give us
to understand, not only that they are few that shall be saved (because there are
but few Christians, Mat. 17.1.
if they be compared with Ethnicks, Jews, Sarasins, Heretics, and such like,
which without al doubt perish) but also because among Christans few shall be
saved. Wherefore whosoever loves God truly, and his own soul, let him labor
and strive to enter in at the strait gate, during the time of this pilgrimage.

CHAP. VI. Concernining repentance without delay.
Jesus the son of Syrach, 2. Eccle. 5.
gives us a very profitable admonition, to turn unto God from sin and
wickedness, so speedily as possibly we can, in these words: Because thy sin is
forgiven, be not without fear, to heap sin upon sin: And say not the
mercy of God is great: he will forgive my manifold sins: for mercy and wrath
come from him, and his indignation comes down upon sinners. Make no tarrying
to turn unto the Lord, and put not off from day to day: for suddenly shall the
wrath of the Lord break forth, and in thy security thou shall be destroyed.
Also, Eccle. 12.
Solomon to the same effect gives us most excellent counsel: saying; Remember
now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor
the years approach, wherein thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them.
Heereunto agrees the saying of Saint Augustine;

Age poenitentiam dum sanus es: sic si ages, dico tibi quod securus es: quia
poenitentiam egisti eo tempore, quo peccare potuisti, that is, Repent thee
while thou art in health: so doing, I say unto thee thou art without danger,
because thou have repented, at what time thou might have sinned.

2 Although these divine testimonies might satisfy a christian man, that their
hope is vain and full of peril, which defer their conversion and
repentance, albeit but for one hour: yet it shall be showed by other reasons,
that it may the more plainly appear, how needful a thing it is, for man with
all speed to repent him.

3 There are four principal causes, why a man cannot without great labor and
difficulty, forsake sin and follow righteousness. The first cause is, a
custom of sinning, the which, being now made as it were another nature, can
very hardly be overcome. For as Mithridates used to eat poison so long, that
nature in the end could very well brook and digest it, and the people called
Gemerij, are so well acquainted with darkness wherein they live continually,
that they cannot well endure the light: Even so men that live continually in
sin and wickedness, (...) thus brought us to his allure, then his care is,
to hold us still in his bondage, and for fear that we should make conscience
of sin, and so turn unto the Lord by repentance, he puts a fair vizor
over the ougly face of sin, and so disguiseth her, that the proud person
which exceeds in apparel, says that his or her pride, is cleanliness and
decensie: The whoremonger and fornicator, takes his filthy life to be but the
course of youth: The drunkard and riotous person, persuades himself, that his
excess is but good fellowship: The covetous person, believes that his
covetousness is good husbandry: The idle person which spends his whole time
in dice, cards, and such like, neglecting his vocation, flattereth himself
that his time thus wickedly spent, is honest recreation. Whereas if the devil
had not blinded them, so as they might see sin in her colors, she would seem
such a deformed monster, as they would loathe her for ever. For her eyes are
full of Adultrie: her ears are very large and great, open to hear all vain
delights: her tongue swollen with lying and deceit: her throat is an open
sepulcher: her lips are boulstred up with the poison of Aspes: her hands are
large to receive bribes: her belly has a timpanie of surfeiting and gluttony:
her back is laden with idleness: and yet her feet are swift to shead blood:
with her heart she thinks upon nothing, but how to betray the innocent, and
oppress the widow and the fatherless: Yea, from the very top of the head unto
the sole of the foot, she is full of botches and sores, and has no whole part.
What man will be coupled with this monster, who has no other dowry and
portion of her father the devil but hell fire? Let him then that has been
enchanted with her adulterous eyes, divorce himself betimes from her company
without delay: for delay is perilous. Her handmaide Security will peradventure
flatter us and say, It is yet too soon to depart, and so to crave further
company: much like unto Swetonius Tranquillus crow, which in the Emperor
Domitians days, stood upon the Capitol, and said thus, All shall be well.
It is the devils voice, which says, Cras, Cras, to morrow, hereafter: but God
says, Hodie, Today if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. If we
harken to the devils voice, he will serve us as he served Adam and Eve, and will
lay open our nakedness and shame.

5 A third cause of our delaied repentance, is the absence of the holy Ghost
from us. For as the spirit of the Lord dwelling in our hearts, makes the
way of virtue easy and sweet, insomuch that the Prophet David says, Psalm.
119.
I have as great delight in the way of thy commandments, as in all manner of
riches: and again, I have run the way of thy commandementes, when thou have
set my heart at liberty: Even so contrariwise the absence of the holy Ghost,
makes the same way hard and unpleasant. And as the light of the Sun cheereth
up men's spirits to go to their labor: even so the son of righteousness
shining in our hearts, with the bright beams of his grace, makes us to have
a delight in the way of his commandementes. The first outward mean of Paul's
conversion, was the great light which he saw from heaven: then he was cast down
to the ground, and humbled: he hears a voice, and acknowledges it to be Gods
voice: Act. 9 3. Act. 26. and 22.
And then arises up and says, Quid faciam Domine? What shall I do? It is the
celestial illumination that works our conversion unto God, and which frames
our hearts to his obedience. And therefore the Lord says by the mouth of the
Prophet Ose thus to sinful men, Ose. 9.12.
Woe unto them when I shall depart away from them. And by the Prophet Jeremy:
Understand and know what a grievous thing it is, that the Lord thy God has
forsaken thee.

6 The last cause, is a certain sickness, and languishing of all the
faculties of our soul. For the apple is not so eaten of worms, nor the garment
with moathes, as the powers of the soul are corrupted with sins and
wickednesses, as the understanding is darkened, the judgment dulled, and the
will depraved. Whereof it comes, that now to live a holy and godly life, is a
very hard and painful matter. Who sees it not then, in what peril, and error
they are in, who putting off their repentunce and conversion, from day to day,
do think that the same which is now hard unto them, they shall find
afterward more easy, when all the causes of difficulty and hardness are
increased: when they have increased the causes of their labor and difficulty,
by adding sins unto sins: and when an evil custom has taken more deep
root: Shall not the Devil then more fortify his castle, which is thy soul?
Shall not GOD whirh is thy light, depart further off from thee? Shall not the
powers of thy soul then, having received many wounds, be made more weak and
insufficient to goodness? Beside this, thou must greatly hazard the loss of
heavenly treasures, by thy long delay. God has thought upon and loved us from
everlasting, and has prepared for us an eternal reward? with what face then
can thou hold from God a little momentarie service, which owe unto God all
that thou art able to do for ever?

7 God has given unto thee, the life of his only begotten son, the which is
of greater price then the life of all men, and of the Angels: and by what right
and prerogative dare thou deny unto him the flower of thy youth, and to
spend the same in other things then in the service of God, and to offer unto
him the dregs and rottennes of old age only? Mala. 1.
Consider what the Prophet Malachie says, If ye offer the blind for
sacrifice, is it not evil? and if ye offer the lame and sick, is it not
evil? Offer it now unto thy Prince, will he be content with thee, or accept
thy person, says the Lord of hosts? But cursed be the deceiuer, which has in
his flock a male, and voweth and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing.
All that we have, and our selves wholly, are not sufficient to serve the Lord.
Therefore let our youth be dedicated to his service as well as our age. Let us
serve him not only in sickness, but also in health; Let us turn unto him not
only when we are in affliction, and under the cross, but also in prosperity.
For forced holiness is of no great account. Pharaos repentance, Festus
trembling, and Judas sorrow, auailed them nothing. Saint Augustine in his
second book of true and false Repentance, speaking of that Repentance which
affliction wringeth from men, says, Vis dicam liberaliter, etc. Will thou have
me speak my mind freely? I do neither say, nor will say, that he shall be
damned. But says he, will ye put the matter out of doubt? Repent then whilst
thou art in health: otherwise whether a man do safely depart out of this life,
I my self am not sure. And the same Author in another place, says us: Will thou repent thee, when thou can sin no longer? Thy sins then have
forsaken thee, and not thou thy sins.

8 Sin is common to all times and ages of man's life; yea, to frail youth
more then to old age, which caused King David to say, Remember not O Lord the
sins of my youth: There is then at no time want of matter in us for
repentance: and yet our sins are much more then our sacrifices. Sin is
common to all: but timely and speedy repentance to few.

9 But let the exhortation of our Savior move us, which he so oftentimes
repeateth, Math. 24. Mar. 13.
Watch, watch, because ye know not the day nor the hour. For I demand of
thee whosoever thou be, which assurest thy self that after a few years be
past, thou will repent thee: who made thee an undoubted promise (I will not say
of years and months) but of the morrow, which is but one day? nay, who can
assure thee of one hour? And what greater folly and rashness can there be
devised, then for a worm of the earth, to determine any thing certain,
concerning the times and seasons which the Father has set in his own power?
Art thou ignorant how many this vain confidence has deceived, even to this
day?

10 But thou will say, the Lord is full of compassion and mercy, who has made
large promises to those that trust in him; who sent his Son into the world
for me, and therefore he will not suffer me to perish. O man, thou greatly
deceiuest thy self. Truth it is, the promises of God are great, and greater
then thou can well consider. And yet they appertain not to thee, if thou
can make no better use of them. Think upon that Proverb of Solomon, Mel
inuenisti? Haste thou found honny? eat not too much. Haste thou the sweet and
most comfortable promises of God in the Gospel? use them to thy comfort, yet
presume not thereby to live securely in sin. For Jacob must change his garments
before he can obtain a blessing. Genesis 27. Hester. 2.
And Hester must deck her self when she comes into the presence of the
King. That is to say, we must put off the garment of sin, by speedy
repentance, and we must be clothed with virtue and godliness, as pilgrims, with
Scrip and staff for celestial glory.

CHAP. VII. Of the Remission of our sins by Christ, and of our love to our
brethren.
AMong manifold things which do set forth the wonderful power and exceeding
mercy of God, there is nothing that does so much express the same, as does the
great mystery of the Incarnation and Passion of Jesus Christ, whereby we have
free pardon and remission of all our sins, and that Benediction whereof the
Prophet speaks, saying; Blessed are they whose sins are covered, Psalm. 32.
and whose iniquities are forgiven.

2 Wonderful was the wisdom of God in the redemption of mankind, from the
thraldom of sin, death and hell, in that he has made Mercy and Truth,
Righteousness and Peace, to be conjoined in one.

3 The first Adam sinned so damnation, from the which, neither he, nor his
posterity could deliver themselves. God nevertheless will not have Adam and
his posterity utterly to perish, and therefore in unspeakable mercy, he
deuiseth the mean, that his Justice and righteousness might be satisfied, and
yet man saved. No Saint, nor Patriarch, nor any other were he never so holy,
which came out of the loins of Adam, were able to make satisfaction to God,
for that first tra^sgression. No Angel nor Archangel in heaven, was fit to take
this great task in hand. Because man had sinned, Justice required that man
likewise should make satisfaction.

4 Behold here then the infinite love and mercy of God, who for man's
redemption sent his son from heaven, Phil. 2. Luke 2.
so far to be abased, as to take upon him our flesh, conceived in the womb
of the holy virgin Marie by the holy Ghost, Luke. 2.
that so of God and man, he might be Emanuel, that is, one Christ, in whom
Mercy and Truth are met together, Righteousness and Peace have kissed each
other.

5 Of this great work of wonder, wherein God has thus conjoined his mercy and
his Justice, the Prophet long before prophesied thus: Unto us a Child is
borne, and unto us a Son is given, and the government is upon his shoulder:
and he shall call his name Wonderful, Isai. 9.
Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace.

6 This child our Emanuel, and Jesus the Lords Christ, approved himself
wonderful in person, and in all his works. Three things (says S Bernard) are
singularly wonderful, and wonderfully singular: that the Godheade, and the
Manhood should be united in one person: that one should be both a Virgin and a
Mother: that faith should dwell in the heart of man, things in nature and
reason so contrary.

7 This wonderful Christ, is not to be comprehended with corporal eyes alone,
and with a carnal heart, but also with the eyes of a lively faith, whereby we
have remission of sins. John. 3.
For God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that all
that believe in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

8 He then that will be saved must come to him. Whosoever will come to the
father, must come by him, who not only is the way to life, but is both the way
and life. For as there was no come to be had in Aegipt, but only by the hands
of Joseph, who after long affliction was so highly exalted: so there is no
grace, nor life, no remission, no holy Ghost now to be looked for, but at the
hands of our Crucified Joseph. He is the Brazen Serpent, which only heals
the infernal serpents wounds. He is that holy Temple, where only God is to be
worshipped, and no where else: without him there is no hearing God, no helping
God, no God for us at all.

9 Only the Faith which is effectual and available to Justify us before
God, is that, whose object is the body and passion of Christ Jesus crucified,
Romans 4. Act, 16.
and whose fruits are the works of charity. Therefore (says the Apostle) by
faith comes the inheritance, as after grace, because ye promise might be firm
and sure to all the seed.

10 The means to have this faith, is the word of God preached, that hearing
it, we may believe it to be the word of life. For so it is also manifest in
the Acts of the Apostle, Act. 10.44 Act. 4.4.
where it is said, While Peter yet spoke, the Holy Ghost fell down upon
them which heard him. Romans 10.17.
And Paul to the Romans says, Faith comes by hearing. So as the Church
preaching continually the word of God by her ministers, and offering
reconciliation by Christ, gives remission of sins: in that by the outward
ministry it pronounces the same out of the word of the Scripture, by the
which, through attentive ears (as through a Conduit) both the grace and
spirit of Christ do flow in, even into our heart.

11 As the word sounds and is heard in the voice: so in a visible and evident
sign, the sacraments do speak, unto the which we giving credit, obtain in
very deed, that which they promise and signify. So that how often soever we
hear the word, or receive the sacraments in faith, remission of sins is
assured unto us: whereby no small faith is inwardly wrought in us.

12 Thus then we see, that remission of sins, is openly published by
proclamation, ratified by promise: confirmed by will and testament: stablished
in blood: and sealed with Sacraments. And thus much concerning the first mean
to get remission of sins.

13 The second mean, is Charity in us, in pardoning and forgiving the
offenses and

16 But they which have the greatest injuries done unto them, ought to be
always prepared and ready to forgive, according as we are taught in the
Scriptures: Eccle. 29
Have the patience with him that humbles himself, and keep not mercy from
him. Our Savior Christ commands us to forgive our brother that offends
seventy times seven times: and which is more, to love our very enemies. Also
the Apostle Paul does not only exhort us to love our enemies, but also if they
be hungry to feed them, and if they thirst to give them drink. Romans 12.

17 Yet such is the corruption of our nature, that there is nothing that we can
more hardly digest, then the forgiving of injuries. For the which cause, let us
understand and know, that by how much this forgiveness which God requires is
hard unto us, by so much it is a greater argument unto men, that they are the
sons of God, which do easily forgive and forget injuries, and with their
heart love their enemies. For herein they do show forth a certain likeness
unto God their Father, who loved us, as the Apostle says, when we were his
enemies, and reconciled unto himself, being redeemed by the death of his only
Son, from eternal damnation. Pray (says our Savior Christ) for them that
persecute you, Mat 5.
and say all manner of evil sayings against you, that ye may be the children of
your Father in heaven, who suffers his sun to shine upon the just and upon
the unjust.

18 The example also of our Savior Christ makes this matter yet more
manifest, the which we ought always to have before our eyes. For he having not
so much as any suspicion of sin, yet being buffeted, spit upon, whipped,
blasphemed, crowned with thorns, and nailed to the Cross, prayed thus for his
enemies: Luke 23.
Father forgive them, for they wot not what they do.

19 There are many other most weighty reasons, which the Fathers have used, to
suppress their frowardness, which are most obstinate and wilfully bent to
revenge. One is, to give him to understand that has the injury done unto
him, that the same is not the principal cause of the injury, which he
desires to revenge. For all those things whatsoever, which we suffer in this
life, do come from the Lord, who is the author and fountain of all
righteousness and mercy. For God does correct and chastise us as his sons,
wherein he uses his creatures as his ministers, which can hurt us in nothing,
but in those things which befall outwardly. But every man may most wickedly
hurt himself, and defile his own mind, with hatred and envy. These things,
that most rare man Job understood, who being vexed of the Sebeans, Caldeans,
and the devil himself, used these words, The Lord gave, Job. 1.21. Gen 45. 2.
Sam. 19
and the Lord has taken. Thus Joseph forgave the injuries which his brethren
did unto him. Thus David bare patiently the injuries which Shemei did unto him.
It is great magnanimity in a man, when he has received a wound, not to feel
or regard the harm.

20 A second reason is, that they which do not forgive, shall not be forgiven
of the Lord. For, 1. John 3. Eccle. 28.
he that hates his brother (as S. John says) abides in death. And Sirach
says, He that seeks vengeance, shall find vengeance of the Lord.

21 The third reason comprehends those incommodities, into the which we then
fall, when we will not forgive the injuries that are done unto us. For it is
most certain that hatred is not only a grievous sin in it self, but also by
continuance it strikes more fast into our minds, and is made greater. In so
much that the man which fostereth hatred in mind, and desires revenge, with
hope to prevail against his enemy at the last, is so continually troubled day
and night, that he never can put that wicked cogitation out of his mind:
whereby often times it comes to pass, that the malicious man, will sooner go
down into hell, then be brought to forgive, and with his whole heart to remit
the injury. Wherefore hatred is rightly compared to a wound, wherein the head
of the dart or arrow remains fast still.

22 There are many other inconveniences and sins, which are fast linked to
this sin of hatred. Therefore Saint John says, He which hates his brother
is in darkness, and walks in darkness, and knows not whither he goes,
because the darkness has blinded his eyes. Therefore of necessity he cannot
but stumble and fall. For how is it possible, that a man should allow or like
either of his words or deeds, whom he hates? Hereof therefore come rash
judgments, wrath, envy, slaunderings, reproachful raylings, and many such
like, every one of the which bring men in danger of hel-fire: whereof he is
guilty (as appears by the testimony of Christ) which says but so much, as
Thou fool. Math. 5.
What then does continual hatred, and backbiting raylers, and slaunderers
deserve?

23 Let us therefore follow the counsel and admonition of Jesus Christ, as we
tender the remission of our sins, Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven. For as
Tertullian says most comfortably, Si apud Deum deposueris iniuriam, ipse vlt^r
est: Si damnum, restitutor est: Si dolore^, medicus est: Si morte^,
resuscitator est. That is to say, If thou lay down the injury that is done
unto thee before Gods tribunal seat, he is thy revenger: If thy loss, he is
thy restorer: If thy grief, he is thy Physician: If thy death, he is thy
resurrection, and thy life.

Now therefore as Gods elect, put on the bowels of mercy, kindness,
humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering, Coloss. 3.
forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any have a quarrel to
another: as Christ forgave, even so do ye: So shall thou peaceably proceed
in thy pilgrimage.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning Blessedness and Felicity.
IT is written in the ninety one Psalm, There shall no evil happen unto thee,
neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling. These words of the Prophet
David, may bear a two fold interpretation. First, that they which are here
in this life under the protection of the Almighty, are free from all evil.
Secondly, they contain a prophetical promise concerning the life to come. And
when we be in that heavenly Tabernacle, of the which it is said in another
place, Psalm. 84.
O Lord of Hosts, how amiable are thy tabernacles? My soul longs, yea and
faints for the Courts of the Lord. And the Lord in the Gospel says, Lu.
9.16.
I say unto you, make you friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that when ye
want, they may receive you into their everlasting habitations. And the Author
of the Epistle to the Hebrews says, Heb. 9.
Christ being a High Priest of good things to come, by a greater and a more
perfect Tabernacle, not made with hands, that is, not of this building,
neither by the blood of Goats and calves: but by his own blood entered he in
once into the Holy place, and obtained eternal redemption for us. Also Saint
John in his Apocalips, Behold, Apoc. 21.
the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall
be his people, and God himself shall be their God with them. And God shall
wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death,
neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for
the first things are passed. When, I say, we be in this heavenly Tabernacle,
then shall no evil happen unto us, neither shall any plague come nigh our
dwelling. O most blessed Tabernacle! O most safe refuge! O region most
resplendant and glorious! All thy inhabitants wear crowns of glory, sit in
thrones of Majesty, live in life eternal, and possess a paradise of infinite
pleasures: which as S. Bernard says, are so many that they cannot be numbered:
of such eternity that they are without all end: so precious, as they cannot
be estimated: and so great, as they cannot be measured. For the which cause,
the Apostle says, neither the eye has seen, nor ear heaerd: 1. Cor. 2.
Apoc, 2.
nor the heart of man conceived, what things God has prepared for those that
love him. And Christ says, No man knows it, but he that enjoys it.

2 Yet notwithstanding, as it is reported of a skillful Geometrician, that
finding the length of Hercules foot upon the hill Olympus, made a portraiture
of his whole body by that one part: Even so by those demonstrations which in
Gods word are found, we may make a conjecture of this Tabernacle, and the
felicity in the same, although we can not express the full perfection thereof.

3 We have therefore a most comfortable description of this Tabernacle, in the
21. and 22. chapters of Saint John's revelation, comparing it unto a city which
is made of pure gold, with a great and high wall of the precious stone called
Iaspis. The wall whereof had also twelve foundations, made of twelve distinct
precious stones, which he there names: also 12. gates made of 12. rich stones
called Margarites, and every gate was an entire Margarite. The streets of the
city were paued with gold, enterlayed also with pearls, and precious stones.
The light of the City was the clearenesse and shining of Christ himself,
sitting in the midst thereof: from whose seat proceeded a river of water as
clear as Crystal to refresh the City: and on both sides of the banks,
there grew the tree of life, giving out perpetual and continual fruit: there
was no night in that City, nor any defiled thing entered there: but they
(says he) which are within shall reign for ever and ever.

4 By this description, wherein Saint John uses such words as he could, and
not as he would, he gives us to understand, that the greatness of the
felicity prepared for us in heaven, is such, that as I noted before, we may
very well think with S, Paul that no tongue of man is able to declare it, nor
heart imagine it.

5 This city or tabernacle shall in amplenes and in beauty, be far beyond the
reach of man's reason to comprehend. Yet the greatness and amplenes, may partly
be conceived by the view of the stars. For if the least of them be of such
greatness, as all the Princes of the world have not within their power so much
compass and space, and yet an innumerable multitude of stars have place in the
firmament, where there remains still room and space for many more: how great
then is the amplenes and capacity of heaven it self? The which gives just
cause to the Prophet Baruch to cry out and say; Bar. 3.24
O Israel, how great is the house of God, and how large is the place of his
possession?

5 And now what shall we say of beauty, delicacie, and glory of paradise? This
our earthly world, which is as it were in comparison of that other, but a
stable of beasts, a place of exile, and a vale of misery and tears: if this be
so decked and garnished by the great and most skilful worke-maister, that it
seems not to be a stable of beasts, but a garden of delight and pleasures:
the firmament adorned with so many stars like golden knops, the earth paued
with sweet smelling herbs, and glorious flowers: decked shith flourishing
trees and green woods: watered with seas, and rivers: replenished with great
majesty of cities and towns: garnished with all manner of fruits and spices:
and furnished with all living creatures, as beasts, fowls, and fishes,
scruing for man's necessary use and pleasure: If I say, this frame of the world
be made so glorious for man which is but a servant, and also for so small a
time, in respect of the eternity to come: what then shall we imagine that the
habitation prepared for the eternity, and the Kings palace it self shall be?
Surely, no less, then the power and wisdom of the maker (who is omnipotent,
and wisdom it self) could make and finish.

6 But the chief praise of a city consists in this, to have many Citizens
which are noble, peaceable, and quiet: the which are to be found in most
excellent manner in the celestial Jerusalem. For if we consider the holy
Angels, does not Job say, Job. 25.3.
Can his Soldiers be numbered? And the Prophet Daniel says, Dan. 7.10
A hundred thousand ministered unto him: and ten thousand thousands stood
before him. And if we consider the number of holy men that shall be there,
then harken to the words of Saint John in the Revelation, I beheld, Apoc. 7.9
and lo a great multitude, which no man could number, of all nations and
kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throane, and before the
Lamb, clothed with white long Robes, and Palms in their hands. And this
multitude shall not be confused, but passing well ordered

7 As touching the Nobility of these heavenly Citizens, what shall we say,
when as they shall be triumphant kings, princes, the sons of God, and after a
sort Gods themselves, and inhabitants of the kingdom (...) belongs to the
body, consists in the change and glorification of our flesh after the general
resurrection: that is to say, whereby this corrupted body of ours shall put on
incorruption, and of mortal, become immortal. All this flesh, I say of ours,
which now so burdeneth and grieueth the soul, which is now subject to so many
chaunges, vexed with so many sicknesses, infected with so many corruptions:
oppressed with so many crosses and vexations, shall be freed from all these,
and made perfect to endure for ever with the soul, without any alteration. For
it shall be delivered from all the infirmities, diseases, pains, troubles, and
incombrances of this life, and in steed thereof, it shall have a most perfect
and glorious estate, which shall never fade and decay any more. Mat. 15.
And then (says Christ) they shall shine as the Sun in the kingdom of their
Father. And if one Sun can lighten and fill the whole world with his
brightness: if the majesty and glory of his beams be such and so great, that
some Ethnickes, do worship him for God: and if he have been called of the
ancients, the Father of gladness, the eye of the world, and the fountain of
light: What shall so many glorified bodies of the blessed be? surely they shall
be so many suns, so many lamps, and so many shining lights to lighten the
heavenly Jerusalem.

11 Now to say somewhat concerning the soul as the principal part of man: We
must understand, that although there be many things which make us happy, yet
they all are no where else to be found but in God. For then at the last we shall
be happy and blessed, when we shall be like unto God, which by nature is blessed.
And we shall be like unto God, when we shall see him as he is. As the
Evangelist Saint John testifies, saying; Dearly beloved, John. 3.
we are now the sons of God, and it has not yet appeared what we shall be:
and we know that when we shall appear, we shall be like him: for we shall
see him as he is. Saint Paul also puts our felicity in seeing God face to
face. And therefore Saint Austine says, 1. Cor. 13.
This only sight of God is our happiness.

12 For as God is hereof blessed, because he sees and beholds himself being
the first and the chief truth: even so we also shall be blessed and like unto
God, according to our measure: namely, when we shall behold and see him as he
is, the first and most principal truth.

13 Furthermore, if the Moon and Stars do receive their light, and are made
like unto the Sun, when they are opposite unto him, and do after a sort
behold him: how much more shall the pure minds of the blessed receive the
divine light, and be made like unto God, when as they shall no more in a glass
or dark speech, but face to face, behold the uncreated sun and light of
righteousness?

14 O what a joy shall it be, when at one view we behold the most high and
hidden mystery of the inseparable Trinity, and of the love of God therein
toward us? and when we shall see all things whatsoever in God. For what shall
not he see who sees him that sees all things? Then shall man's mind have
perpetual rest and peace, neither shall it desire any further understanding,
when he has all before his eyes that may be understood. Then shall man's will be
quiet, when he enjoys that felicity, wherein al other good things, as in the
fountain and Ocean of all happiness, are contained. Then shall faith have her
perfect work: hope shall enjoy that which she long desired, but charity shall
abide for ever. Then shall be sung continual praises unto the Lamb: and the
song although it be always sung, yet it shall be ever new.

15 Therefore our true and only blessedness consists in the sight of God: as
our Lord Christ has testified. Mat. 5.
Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God. This is life
everlasting, John. 17.
that men know thee the true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

16 This blessedness, though it be but one simple thing, yet has it riches,
power and pleasure. In this world no man is rich, no man is satisfied: for the
heart of man is greater then all the world can content. But in that most
blessed life, the souls of the blessed shall be rich and satisfied with God
whom it shall possess. This abundance of all things the Lord promised saying.
Luke. 6.
Good measure and running over, and pressed down, shall men give into your
bosoms. And in another place, Mat. 24.
Verily, verily I say unto you, he shall make him ruler over all his substance.

17 The blessed souls also shall have their honor and power. For if they shall
be Princes, if Kings, if the sons of God, and petty Gods, and if they shall
sit in Gods throne: how can it be, but that they shall be most mighty and
glorious? For thus says God in the Revelation of Saint John; To him that
overcomes, Apoc. 3.
will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I overcame, and sit with
my father in his throne. O incredible glory, what labors and sorrows will not
they forget, which shall be invested into Gods throne, and have palms of
victory put into their hands, and crowns set upon their heads by Gods own
hands, before all the Princes of heaven? Therefore the Apostle Paul most truly
cries out saying: Romans 8.
The afflictions of this life are nothing in comparison of the glory that shall
be showed upon us. 2. Cor. 4.
And again: Our tribulation which is momentany and light, prepares an
exceeding joy and weight of glory unto us. etc.

18 The joy and pleasure that the souls of the blessed shall have cannot be
expressed, especially when soul and body shall be united again in the
resurrection. O joy above all joys, surmounting all joys, and without the
which there is no joy, when shall I enter into thee (says Saint Augustine)
when shall I enjoy thee to see my God that dwells in thee? 35 solilo quiorum.
O everlasting kingdom: O kingdom of all eternities: O light without end: O
peace of God that passes all understanding, in which the souls of saints do
rest with thee, and everlasting joy is upon their heads: they possess joy and
gladness, and all pain and sorrow is fled from them: O how glorious a kingdom
is thine O Lord, wherein all saints do reign with thee, adorned with light as
with apparel: and having crowns of precious stones upon their heads? O
kingdom of everlasting bliss, where thou, O Lord, the hope of all saints art,
and the ^adem of their perpetual glory, rejoicing them on every side, with thy
blessed sight. In this kingdom of thine there is infinite joy and mirth,
without sadness: health without sorrow: life without labor: light without
darkness: felicity without ceasing: all goodness without any evil. Where
youth florisheth that never waxes old: life that knows no end: beauty that
never fades: love that never vanishes: health that never diminishes joy that
never ends. Where sorrow is never felt: complaint never heard: matter of
sadness is never seen: nor evil success is ever feared: Because they
possess thee, O Lord, which art the perfection of their felicity.

19 Let us enter into these godly meditations with this holy man: let us not
neglect so great felicity, for the love of transitory things which are mere
vanity: why do we so earnestly labor for things of no moment, and have that
most happy and blessed life offered unto us, wherein all felicity consists?
Thebrotus when he had read the book of Plato of the immortality of the soul,
was so moved therewith, that immediately he cast down himself headlong from
a high wall. Shall Platos heathen Philosophy so much prevail with an Ethnicke,
which had no feeling of this felicity, that in hope of immortality he bereft
himself of life, and shall not the sweet and most comfortable promises of the
Gospel much more persuade us, which have the true knowledge of Christ and his
heavenly kingdom, to forsake these vanities, and delights and pleasures of the
world? Remember often that worthy sentence: Hoc momentum, vnde pendet
aeternitas: that is, This life is a moment of time, whereof al eternity of
death or life to come depends. If it be a moment, the joys thereof must
needs be momentany: and miserable is that joy which has an end. But the joys
of heaven are so perfect, that nothing can be added to them, nor taken away
from them, and therefore perpetual. This therefore is the most happy and
blessed place to build and set up a Tabernacle, where no manner of evil shall
happen unto us, nor any plague come near us. Therefore stand fast in this
station against all temptation, so shall thou the more chearefully shake off
all carnal burdens, and recreate thy self in this paineful pilgrimage.

CHAP. IX. Concerning the liberty of Gods children.
Liberty is a thing very pleasant and delectable, and more wished for then any
thing in the world: in so much that we by experience see, that not only men,
but also beasts, do greatly desire liberty, and do prefer it before all other
things. The little birds, whether it be that of Canary, or the Nightingale,
with whose sweet tunes men are delighted, being shut in cages are served most
daintily, without their wonted labor to seek their food: and yet for all
this, so great is the love of liberty, that many times they will neither sing
nor eat being sullen and full of sorrow, and if they can they will gladly
escape out of their cage, more desiring to get their living with labor and in
the cold air, then to be kept captive in Palaces, with the delights of
Kings. It this desire be in beasts, and birds which are deuoide of reason,
what great account ought man to make of liberty, who alone should be freed, and
yet nevertheless, is often times compelled to serve most cruel masters.

2 There are two sorts of liberty: The one is a true liberty: the other is
false. The true liberty is that which we have by regeneration, by which we have
the participation of the spirit of Christ, through the which we are freed
from the tyranny and invasion of sin, and our minds prepared unto good
works: by the power whereof the Apostle Paul says thus: I can do all things
through him that strengthens me. And again: It is God that works in you
both the will, Philip. 4. Philip. 2. John. 8.
and also the deed. Wherefore our savior Christ says, If the Son make you
free, then are you free in deed.

3 And although all corruption of the affections of man's mind, be not taken
away, yet it is so maimed and weakened, by the power of the holy ghost, that it
is not able, as before, to hinder the making of a right choice: and this is the
true freedom and liberty which we have by our regeneration. Of this liberty
Saint Augustine speaks thus. August. in sententiis suis sententia 53.
A good man is never servant, but is always Lord of all things, howsoever he
seems to be in servitude and bondage. And contrariwise a wicked man,
although he seem to be free, yet he is a servant, and that not of one man
alone, but he serves so many masters as he has sins.

4 Then, that is a false liberty, which makes the body only free, and leaves
the mind subject to sin and wickedness, most miserably to serve them. For I
am persuaded, that neither Alexander nor Caesar were free, although they
commanded the whole world, so long as they most filthily served their sins.
Neither can I say that Peter and Paul were servants being imprisoned, and kept
in chains and bonds, when as notwithstanding in mind, they went freely
throughout the world, and by their letters, as by a kings letters pattents,
delivered, and set at liberty daily an infinite sort of men. For as man
differs from brute beasts, not so much in the members of his body, as in the
virtues of the mind, even so not the liberty of the body, but the liberty of
the mind is the true liberty, and alone is to be called man's liberty. Of the
which freedom and bondage Christ speaks thus. Every one that does sin,
John. 8.
is the servant of sin: and if the Son shall make you free, then are you
free indeed. And the Apostle Paul in like manner says; Romans 6.
Know ye not that to whom so ever ye give your selves, as servants to obey:
his servants ye are, to whom ye obey: whether it be of sin unto death, or of
obedience unto righteousness: when ye were the servants of sin, ye were free
from righteousness.

5 To restore us unto this freedom and liberty, from the intolerable
bondage, and most cruel tyranny of sin, from the horrible wages, and reward
thereof, which is death, our Savior Christ has taken upon him, and undergone
that which is unspeakable.

6 What Orator is able sufficiently to unfold and declare the tyranny of sin
and concupiscence? First of all do but consider what a cruel tyranny the
sin of whordom exercises upon those that are in bondage thereunto. And see
what an adulterous woman will do to satisfy and fulfill the command of this
tyrant. She knows very well, that if her husband happily take her in her
wickedness she shall without all doubt he utterly undone: she shall beside the
loss of her good name, riches, friends, and credit with her parents,
children, and and kindred, loose, which is more, her soul, and whatsoever is
both good in this world, and in the world to come, and shall leave behind her
perpetual matter of sorrow and grief: And yet for all this, so great is the
force of her affection, and the tyranny of this wickedness so insatiable, that
this miserable woman is constrained to incur all these perils though very
fearful and evident, and to devour al troubles, so that she may serve her
unclean lust. What tyrant has been ever heard of, so cruel, that would have
his captives to obey and serve him with so great peril and detriment?

7 Yea, this and the like wickednesses at this day, do swallow men up, and so
devour their whole time, that they suffer them to do, to say, to think, and
to dream upon nothing else. Wine and Women (says Syrach) make wise men
runnagates: Because men being made drunken with the love of carnal pleasures,
are no less witless to do all other things, and so far from reason and
judgment, as if they had quaffed up an exceeding quantity of most strong
wine. For reason, (which the fathers call Noct^^am cerebri, the brains
Gloweworme) being once extinguished, what are we better then beasts? Therefore
such men, neither the fear of God, neither the prick of conscience, neither
death, neither judgment, neither paradise, neither hell, nor any other thing,
will call back to a better life. And the more secure they are, the more busily
they endeavor, and apply themselves to all manner of wickedness. And they do
constrain not only the members of their body, but also their mind and
understanding, which by nature is the Lady and most noble part of man, to watch
day and night, and to labor, to find out the means and the ways how to
satisfy the lusts of the flesh, how to endite songs and Sonnets of love full
of wantonness and deceit, how to deck and set out themselves with fine
apparel, with sweet smelles, with daunces, and other like allurements. The
which to do is no better, then to wrest the heavenly light of the mind, which
was made to behold God, to the obedience of a most wicked bond-slaue: and to
make the mind, being withdrawn from heavenly exercises, to be subject unto
the appetites of a most abject hand-maide.

8 Therefore whoredom is a great and intolerable tyranny over the mind of
man: And no less is that tyranny of Ambition. For behold and see what a heavy
yoke ambition lays upon his bondmen, commanding them that al their words and
works be wholly employed as nets and snares, to get the common praise and
fame of men: and it compels them also to creep as it were upon the ground:
and to fly through the air. For man at the commandment of Ambition, seeks
to climb higher then all men, to be subject to none, to rule al men: and yet
sometime when occasion serves, he prostrateth himself, and humbles himself
to al men. Thus the miserable man being contrary to himself, and divided in
himself, outwardly prefers humility, and in heart, pride.

9 Furthermore, the laws of this most cruel tyrant are such, that if a man do
receive a little reproache or detriment either by right or by wrong, he thinks
that he is utterly disgraced, if he do not presently revenge it, and if by no
other means, then to provoke his enemy to some singular combat, and so rather
to loose his soul and body, then to hazard the least part of his dignity.

10 I omit the tyranny of covetousness, and of other vices which are
innumerable: affirming with the Prophet David, that all the servants of sin,
do sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, fast bound in misery and iron.
For what greater blindness can be imagined, then that man should not know
himself, that he should not know God, that he should not know wherefore he
lives, and sees not his bonds, his miseries, his perils, and his harms?

11 And what greater misery can there be, then that miserable man should have
an infinite sort of desires, as it were an infinite sort of mouths and
stomachs, which always bark, always crave, always hunger, and is not able
to satisfy and fill so much as one of them?

12 But now let us see, what reward sin gives unto her servants, for so great
labors? Let us harken to the Apostle, and he will tell us, The wages of sin
(says he) is death: that is to say, both the first and the second death. For
what gall is to the lips: a Cockatrice to the eyes: a dead carcass to the
nose: and Alowes to the taste: the same, and more, is sin to the soul of man.

23 Therefore let the bond-slaues of sin and wickedness go, and serve their
masters: let them run into all dangers: let them not spare for cost nor labors:
let them watch day and night, least peradventure they be beguiled of so great a
stipend. O fools, which for the wages of eternal death, will willingly bear
so heavy a yoke, when as with much less labor ye might serve righteousness,
who rewards her servants with eternal li^e in the kingdom of heaven. Wicked
men labor, and good men labor also: both suffer, both sweat, both delue and
dig: but good and godly men, till that ground, (likewise husbandmen) which is
firm, sound, and fruitful, that is to say, they exercise themselves in good
works and in sound virtues, whereby they rearpe in the end everlasting life:
but wicked and ungodly men, plow in the sand, and sow in the flesh, and of the
same, shall receive the wages of sin, eternal death.

14 Therefore, whether ye consider the wickednesses by themselves or the wages
of the same: the service of sin must needs be horrible and woeful. But yet
there is nothing which does so much set forth the misery of servitude and the
excellency of liberty, as the manner of our setting at liberty, and the
passion of the Deliverer. For God which made the world without labor, and as
it were with a beck only at his will: that he might deliver us from bondage
and slavery, thought it good to be borne in a stable, and was content to die in
sorrows and pains. But what manner of sorrows? Verily such, that the only
cogitation and expectation of them, might have bin able to have brought him
into a bitter agony, to sweat water and blood plentifully. The suffering of
them, made the most hard stones to rent, the earth to tremble, and heaven it
self to be abashed.

15 If God made so great a reckoning of thy liberty, that he vouchsafed to
take upon him the form of a servant, and to live three and thirty years, in
hunger and thirst, in cold, in nakedness, in fastings, in watchings, in
journeys, in persecutions, and in the end to shead forth his most precious heart
blood upon the Cross, rather then he would suffer this precious gemme to be
taken from out of his hands: let us then acknowledge that exceeding glory of
the sons of God, whereunto we are called, which is the mother of all good
things, which alone is able to give true peace, perfect joy, blessed rest, and
tranquillity.

If the heathen Romans of old time, for a false and fading liberty, suffered
great perils, and death it self; as Quintus Mutius Scaeuola thrust into the
fire his right hand: the Decii vowed themselves to the death, that their
legions of soldiers might be preserved and get the victory: Curtius being
armed at all points, and mounted upon a horse, threw himself willingly into a
gulphe of the earth, that the City of Rome might be delivered from the
pestilence: for so had the Oracle given answer, that the wrath of the gods
would cease, if that which the Romans esteemed best, were thrown into that
gulf. Brutus also for the preservation of the liberty of his Country, did
not stick to slay his own children: If the heathen I say esteemed thus of
their liberty, (which is in no point comparable to ours) how much ought we to
esteem of that most true liberty, whereby we are delivered from sin, from
satan, from death, and from the wrath of GOD. They sought human praise, a
thing doubtless unconstant, and of small force, as appears by the saying of
the Poet Virgill concerning Brutus, His Countries love him drives, and greedy
lust of endless same. But our end is to approve our selves unto God, whose
judgment cannot be deceived: and to get the prize of the kingdom of heaven,
and the fellowship of Angels, which is set before us as the end of our
liberty, which we seek to attain by this Pilgrimage.

CHAP. X. Concerning the Imitation of Christ.
THe true and sound perfection of a Christian man consists in this, to
imitate Christ so near as possibly he can: for he is the head, we are his
members: he is the captain, we his soldiers: he is ye Doctor, we are his
disciples. It is said of Platoes Scholars, that both their diet, and their
apparel, was always like unto that of their Masters. And the Heathen could
say, that the perfection of a man is to be like Jupiter. So in like manner,
Christians must do all things after the example of Christ: because the
perfection of Christianity is to be like Christ.

2 But let no man be afraid or troubled: Let no man say with despair, how can
it be that men which are made of dust, should imitate GOD? that we which are a
mass or lump of sin, should be like the unspotted lamb of God? For we
are not commanded to immitate and follow Christ in that glory and majesty,
wherein he sits in heaven at the right hand of his Father: nor yet in that
power and virtue, by which he governs the whole world, and works signs and
woonders: but only in that pattern of holiness which he set before us in our
flesh, when he was here on earth.

3 For thou shall never find these precepts in Scripture: he which walks
not upon the sea, is not worthy of me: he that does not daily raise up dead men
unto life, cannot be my disciple: and blessed is he which foresheweth things
to come, and is mighty in signs and woonders, because to such belongs the
kingdom of heaven. These are not the things that we are commanded to follow in
Christ: but these rather, Learn of me for I am meek and humble in heart, Mat.
11.
Christi exemplum (says Saint Augustine) est medicament^m vn^rum. etc. The
example of Christ is a remedy to amend wickedness in us: but especially it is
(says he) a medicine for pride, and a pattern of humility. For both his
doctrine, and his whole life was nothing else but an example of meekenes and
humility: what man bearing the name of a Christian, is not ashamed to see
Christ so humble and meek, and himself so proud? Math. 10.
(Again he says) He that takes not up his Cross and follows me, is
not worthy of me: Also blessed are the meek, Math. 5.
blessed are the poor in spirit: blessed are they which mourn: blessed are
the merciful: blessed are they which suffer persecution for righteousness
sake, for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven.

4 This thing our Captains and guides the Apostles, very well understood, who
albeit they spoke the languages of all nations, and were most famous in
working of miracles, knowing themselves to be the teachers of the whole world:
yet herein alone they rejoiced, that they were counted worthy to suffer
contumely for the name of Jesus. And the blessed Apostle Paul, beside those
things which he had in common with the other Apostles, being rapt up into the
third heavens heard certain things which are secret, and yet for all that,
he judged not himself any whit the more like or near unto Christ: but for
those things only which he rehearses in the latter Epistle to the
Corinthians: 2. Cor. 12.
they (says he) are minsters of Christ, (I speak as a fool) I am more: In
labors more abundant: In stripes above measure: in prison more plentiously: In
death often.

5 These are the things which we are to imitate in our great Commander and
captain: namely, in adversity, patience: In hard matters, fortitude: In all
peril and labor, constancy. What heart is so cold and cowardly, which
considering the inestimable greatness of the gift that God has bestowed upon
us, in giving unto us his own so well beloved Son with all his perfection,
is not enflamed with an exceeding earnest desire, to become like unto him in
good works? especially seeing the Father has given him unto us for an example,
whereon we must continually look, framing our life after such a sort, as it
may be a true counterpaine of the life of Jesus Christ (as says saint Peter)
For as much as Christ has suffered for us, 1. Tet. 2.
leaving us an example, to the end that we should follow his foote-steps. Out
of this consideration follows the whole frame and fashioning of our selves
like unto him in all his deeds, words, and thoughts, leaving our former wicked
life, and decking our selves with the new life, that is to wit, with the life
of Christ. By reason whereof Saint Paul says: Let us cast away the works of
darkness, and put on the armor of life, not in feasting nor in drunkenness,
nor in chambering and wantonness, nor in strife: but put you on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and make no preparation for the flesh, nor for the lusts thereof.

6 Hereuppon the true Christian being in love with Jesus Christ, says in
himself: Since that Jesus Christ, not having any need of me, has redeemed me
with his own blood, and is become poor to enrich me: I will likewise give my
goods, yea and my very life, for the love and welfare of my neighbor. He that
has not this affection, is no true Christian: For he cannot say that he
loves Jesus Christ, if he love not his members: and if we love not our
neighbor, for whose sake Christ has shed his blood, we cannot truly say that
we love Jesus Christ: who being equal with God, was obedient to his Father,
even to the death of the cross, and has loved and redeemed us, giving
himself unto us, with all that ever he has. After the same manner, we being
rich, and having abundance of good things at Christ's hand, must also be
obedient unto God, to offer and give our works, and all that we have, yea and
even our selves to our neighbors and brethren in Jesus Christ, serving them,
and helping them at their need, and being unto them as another Christ.

7 And as Jesus Christ has endured all the persecutions and spites of the
world for the glory of God: so must we with all patientnes, cheerfully bear
the persecutions, and reproaches that are done by false Christians, to all such
as will live faithfully in Jesus Christ, who gave his life for his enemies, and
prayed for them upon the Cross. And this is to follow Christ's steps
according to Saint Peter's saying.

8 But now turn thy eyes a while unto thy self, and diligently behold and
see what thou do imitate and follow in the life of Christ. Thou delightest
in sumptuous wardroabes, and in many suites of costly apparel: But Christ in
the most cold time of Winter, was laid naked in a Manger. Thou spendest
hours and days in feasting and banqueting, amidst thy dainty dishes,
talking, and serving thy belly: and the Son of God afflicted his most
innocent body with hunger and thirst. Thou live in peace and pleasure, in
recreations, in plays, in pastimes, and art delighted in idleness, passing thy
time in singing, laughing and sporting: And the Son of God came down from
heaven for our salvation, that we might not perish eternally, and for this
cause was a pilgrim, preached, labored, took no rest, and spent whole nights
in prayer for us. Thou earth and ashes, can not digest the least injury of
words without displeasure: but God sent his son for us to suffer most
meekely of wicked men evil sayings, reproaches, spitting upon, buffetings,
whipping, crowning with thorns, wounding, and at last death it self. Thou
contemnest great things, and magnifiest small trifles, if thou sinnest, thou
say it is nothing: if thy head do ache but a little, thou think it to be
a great matter: To loose thy soul thou make no great reckoning: but if thou
be in peril to loose but a finger, thou will call together all the Physicians
and Chirurgians in the City. But Christ with his true example of life, taught
that there is no evil so much to be feared, as sin and hell: that nothing was
so much to be desired as God, the glory of God, salvation, and virtue: and
that he is rich, noble, wise, and beautiful indeed, which is endued with
patience, humility, charity, chastity, and with other virtues: and that he is
a poor man, vile, deformed, and witless, which is a fornicator, a drunkard, a
covetous and proud person, and which is polluted with other vices, as with a
leprie and scabbe. For Christ being God, and having all thing in his power, to
choose what manner of life he would, during the time that he lived on earth,
chose the most vile and abject state of life: and therefore for his house, had a
stable: for his bed, a manger: for clothes of Tapistry, hay, and the same none
of his own: a poor mother: thin and a spare diet, apparel suitable: to be
short, he sought no manner of pomp, riches, or pleasure of this world. And
contrariwise, he refused no labors, no afflictions, no miseries, nor any
evils, saving only sin, only which evil he would have his Disciples and
professors utterly to abhor.

9 And thou can not say, that he neither could, nor knew how to choose a
better state. For he which was God most mighty, was also most wise. And what
other thing does Isaias commend in him more, Isaia. 7.
then that he should be called Emanuel, and he should know how to shun the
evil, and choose the good? Has not Christ then plainly and euidenly by his
example of life taught, that there is no evil so much to be eschewed, (...)
thee, as with a shield, who has said, I am the way, the truih, and the life:
him therefore follow in this pilgrimage here on earth, so shall thou never err.

CHAP. XI. Concerning the cross and tribulations of this life.
IF in all other things, it behooves a wise man to have skill to behave and
govern himself, how much more in adversity, the which is of such force to
shake and discomfort the mind of man, that thereof come heresies, desperation,
thefts, homicides, and all manner of wickedness, with the which all men do so
abound, that whether we be small or great, rich or poor, noble or base, or
whatsoever else, we have more calamity, then felicity.

2 The efficient cause of these calamities, is God himself, as he testifies
by the mouth of Isay the Prophet saying: Isay 45.7.
I am the Lord, and there is no other: I form the light, and create
darkness: I make peace, and create evil: I the Lord do all these things.
And holy Job, whenin one day he had lost all his riches, all his children, and
the health of his body, and understanding that he was thus afflicted, partly
by the Sabeians, and partly by the Chaldeans, partly by the wind, and partly
by fire, which the devil in his malice raised, and therewithal consumed and
spoiled his goods: did he say, the Lord has given, and the devil has taken?
No verily, but he said; The Lord has given, Job. 1.
and the Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the Lord. And in another
place, Shall we receive good from the hands of the Lord, and not evil also?

3 Wherefore whatsoever befall us, whether storm or tempest: thieves or
murderers: losses at the sea or on the land: famine or pestilence: sicknesses or
imprisonment: or whether we be afflicted with heretics, or scismatiques: with
Angels or devils: with heaven or earth: or from whence soever any tribulation
does come, God alone is to be feared, to be prayed unto, and to be pacified, to
his will and commandment all things obey. For fire, water, hail, snow,
frost, rain, wind, storm and tempest, these when they seem to be grievous
unto men, what do they else but fulfill his word?

4 There are two gates then to be considered, by which tribulations do enter
into the world: the one is Gods providence, the other is sin. Concerning his
providence, Solomon says: Wisdo. 6. Chap. 14.
He has made the small and great, and cares for all alike. And again; Thy
providence, O Father, governs it. And our Savior Christ himself says: Are
not two sparrowes sold for a farthing? and one of them falls not to the
ground without your heavenly father. Math. 6.
The very hairs of your head are numbered.

5 Not only the scriptures, but that most excellent and comely order, by which
we see so many several things governed, being so different, so diverse, and so
disagreeing in natures, and in places, does prove unto us, that all things in
the world, are governed and ruled, not by fortune and chance, but by the
providence of God. Even as, if thou hear a harp sound pleasantly, or if thou
see a wagon or a ship to go forward by art, reason, and order, although thou
see not the harper, wagoner, or master of the ship, yet thou art out of doubt,
that there is a harper which causes the hary to sound in good tune, a wagoner,
and a shipmaister, which makes both the wagon and ship, to move and go.

6 We are two manner of ways afflicted by God. For sometimes we are troubled by
those things, which without any fault of their own, do hurt us: and sometime
by those things, which hurt us not without their fault and sin. The first
follow the laws of nature, by which it is ordained that among mortal
creatures, the weaker shall always give place unto the stronger. The other do
break the law of God. As when we suffer and sustain any thing at the hands
of wicked men, God has a work therein, so farreforth as it may be to our
good, and therefore suffers the evil to be done, drawing out of the evil a
greater good.

7 For God is said to work in that which is good: for there is nothing so
evil, which has not some good joined with it. And there is no good so small,
whereof God cannot make a bottomless fountain, and as it were an Ocean of all
good things. As for example, behold a lame man. What is it to halt? To halt, is
to walk: but yet, not without a malady. To walk is good, but the malady is
evil: Whereof or from whence has the man that walking which is good? From ye
power of his will and moving instrument of the mind. From whence comes the
malady? comes it from his will? No verily: but either of the shortness, or
crookedness of his leg, or from such like cause. After the same manner, a
thief stretches forth his hand, he shakes his sword, and it is of God, and
is good. But to kill him whom he should not, is evil, and comes from the
wicked will of man, which God neither co^pelleth, nor moves, nor helps to
evil: and yet nevertheless suffers that to be done, which he desires. Thus
then we see how far God has his work in the sins of men, in suffering
them to be done. And although it is in him not to suffer evil, the which
without his sufferance could not be, yet notwithstanding (that I may use
Saint Augustines words) he thinks it better to draw that which is good from
evil, then not to suffer any evil at all. For God would not suffer any sin
to be, if he were not so mighty, so prudent, and so good, that both he
knows how, and also can and will out of sin, work greater good.

8 What greater evil could there be, then so many Prophets, so many Apostles,
so many Martirs, and Christ himself to be slain? Could not God have hindered
this? No doubt most easily: but he would not. By which we see how great glary
and felicity he has brought to them that suffered: how great honor and praise
they have yielded to God, for whom they suffered, and how great profit and
commodity their deaths and sufferings has brought to the whole world.
Neither did the Church at any time suffer the persecutions of the heathen, but
it was thereby made the better, the more vigilant, the more glorious, and like
gold, which coming out of the furnace, is more fine and pure.

9 The other cause of all our calamities, miseries, and afflictions of this
life is sin. By reason whereof, so soon as we are borne, we bring with us
the sentence of death. Much like unto those sick men, of whose life the
physicians having no hope, do only for a time maintain life with
preservatives, that so a little while he may linger to make his testament, and
then depart. Even so it fares with us all, who do not therefore, eat, drink
and sleep, that we may never dye (for that cannot be) but that we may prolong
our life for a few days, and so prepare our selves to (...)? And as Pirates,
which are taken at the sea by the royal ships, and are brought to the shore
there to be hanged, and have no longer hope of life, then there is space
between the ship and the land: even so every one of us which like Roauers
sail here in the sea of this world, being once taken and holden captive by
the ministers of Gods justice, when we are come to a certain place and point
of our age, shall without all doubt, or mercy, abide there, and suffer death.

10 Sin therefore has opened the passage unto death: and the whole host of
tribulations do follow death as their captain and guide, and do enter in upon
us by the same breach of sin. And as we do read of sin, The wages of sin
is death: even so also we read of tribulations, Miseros fucit populos
peccatum* That is: Sin is the cause of many tribulations.

11 Neither is it for one sin of Adams that so many tribulations come upon
us: but also for an innumerable sort of sins, which we have added, and do
add daily, as the holy ghost by the mouth of the Prophet David has
pronounced: If their children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments:
if they break my statutes and keep not my commandments, Psalm. 89.
I will visit their iniquities (...) the rod, and their sins with scourges.

12 God afflicted the Jewish nation, one while by the Philistines, another
while by the Madianits: another while by the Assyrians: and also by the
Romans: but always first they sinned and provoked God to anger: as the book
of Judges, the books of Kings, and of the Prophets do declare. God also
afflicted the Church of Christians by tyrants, as Neroes, Dioclesians, and such
like, which most cruelly persecuted the Church: the cause of all which
persecutions, was the sins and wickednesses of the Christians, as appears
by Cyprian and Eusebius.

13 Thus far concerning the causes of tribulations: now we will speak of the
effects. Concerning the effect and fruit of tribulation, Chap. 12.
the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews writes thus: Now, no chastising for
the present time seems to be joyful, but grievous: but afterward it
brings the quiet fruit of righteousness, unto them which are thereby
exercised. Although therefore we cannot plainly know the fruits of
tribulation, before such time as we come to that blessed and heavenly life,
which is free from all misery and trouble: yet notwithstanding it will be very
profitable for us, to speak and think upon the same diligently (...) to
desperation. But as the physician of things venomous and hurtful, makes most
healthful medicines: even so Almighty God by his wisdom, out of afflictions
(although they be evil things) brings forth in his elect most excellent
virtues, among which patience is one.

17 This patience works experience also, the which is a certain trial both
of our selves, and of our own strength: and especially of the might and goodness
of God. For in suffering of adversities, we learn how great the corruption of
our nature is, which being touched with any adversity, straight way (except the
holy Ghost help) breaks forth into murmurings, grudgings, and into
blasphemies, and complaints against the providence of God. Whereof we have a
lively example set forth in Job, who being delivered by God unto the devil, to
be tried: how great blasphemies powered he out in his afflictions? how much
complains he of the providence and justice of God? But the light of the holy
Ghost had no sooner illumined him, but how did he pluck up his spirits again?
How godly and rightly does he judge of God? The crookednes of our nature is
hidden from us: for the heart of man is unsearchable. But look how soon the
fire is stricken out of the flint stone, so soon breaks out our perverse
nature, when tribulation oppresses us. This trial (as Peter says) is even as
a furnace unto gold. And therefore God answered Abraham, when he was now ready
to sacrifice his Son; Now I know that thou fear God, No doubt, that was
known unto God before. But by that fact he brought to pass, that this
obedience was the better known unto others. For we are like unto certain
spices, whose sweet savor is not felt, unless a man bruise them well. We are
also like to stones called Piridites, which show not forth that force which
they have to burn, except, when they be pressed hard with the fingers.

18 The trial also (before spoken of) brings hope. Whereby we see that God
has so disposed those instruments of his, as that they should one help
another, and the one bring in the other. By reason of the hope of the glory of
God, afflictions are not troublesome unto us: but God giving us strength we
bare them with a valiant mind. And in the very suffering, we have a greater
trial and proof of the goodness of God toward us: whereupon we conceive the
greater hope. So hope breeds and brings in patience: and patience hope. For
when we consider that God was present with us, in suffering our afflictions
patiently, we hope also that he will hereafter be present with us, and at the
length make us blessed. The sick man because he has confidence in the
Physician, suffers his impostume to be cut. Afterward as he feels himself
relieved, he puts confidence more and more in the Physician: so as if need
were, that his foot should be cut off also, he would nothing doubt to commit
himself to his fidelity. The devil so much as in him lies drives us to
desperation: and by afflictions goes about to persuade us, that God is our
enemy. But contrariwise the holy Ghost says: Because thou have quietly and
patiently borne affliction, it may be a sure token unto thee, that God therein
declares his favor toward thee. Wherefore have thou a good trust, for he
undoubtedly will deliver thee.

19 This confidence will make us to resolve with the Apostle Paul, Romans 8.
that no manner of tribulation shall be able to remove us from the love of God
which is in Christ: Neither the loss of goods, of wife, childien, friends,
lands, and possessions, nor any thing in the world: because we are verily
persuaded that his love and bounty toward us is such, that often times he most
abundantly restores those things which are lost for his sake: and that
sometimes in the midst of tribulation, and even in the very cross and death,
he gives to his children so much strength and consolation, that in very
deed, it is more then a hundred fold. The loss of the said worldly things is
to many a great grief: but is not the winning of a hundred fold so much, and
the obtaining of an everlasting kingdom a good salve for this sore? If we gain
with the loss of transitore things, heavenly treasures: with the forsaking of
worldly friends, Christ to be our dear and sure friend: and with the refusing
father, mother, brother, sister, wife, children, purchase God to be our
heavenly father, Christ our most loving brother, and to be loved of the Son
of God, as his dear dearlings, and only beloved spouse, what have we lost?
what greater gain can we have? or what more profitable exchange can be made?
This bargain and profit, has our heavenly Father promised unto us, by a bill
of his own hand, sealed with the blood of his only Son, testified by the
witness of his Apostles, and left with us in our own custody to be paid at the
sight, whenever we shall require it. Whereof this is the content: Who so
has forsaken house, brother, sister, father, mother, wife, children, or land,
for my names sake, he shall receive an hundred foulde, and the inheritance of
everlasting life. Who will deny, but that hunger, cold, nakedness, cxtreame
poverty, and want of things partly necessary, are a heavy burden for a man to
bear? But the weight hereof is lightened and made easy to them that with a
right eye, and unfeignedly do believe Gods promise, and cast their care on him.
Cast thy care upon the Lord, for he cares for thee. Your heavenly father
knows that ye have need of al these things, meat, drink, and clothes. He
ministers these things in due time to the beasts of the earth, the fowls of
the air, the fishes of the Sea, and will he not keep his promise unto us, for
whose sakes he has made these creatures, and has made us Lords over the^?
What cause have we to mistrust his promise, rather then the byrd that flies
forth in the morning upon this natural persuasion, that he shall find
food, not doubting but that he who made him, will not suffer him to starve
with hunger: Have we seen such as put their trust in him starve with hunger,
dye with cold, or perish through nakedness? It has not been heard of, that
the righteous has been forsaken, or his seed beg, wanting bread? For they
that know the name of the Lord will trust therein: for he forsakes not them,
that seek after him. And he has willed us in the day of our troubles, to call
upon him, adding this promise that he will deliver us. Whereunto the Prophet
David did so trust, feeling the comfortable truth thereof at sundry times, in
many and dangerous perils, that he persuaded himself al fear set apart, to
undergo one painful danger or other whatsoever: yea, if it were to wake in the
valley of the shadow of death, that he should not have cause to fear,
comforting himself with this saying, (which was Gods promise made unto all) For
thou art with me: thy rod and thy staff, even they shall comfort me. Psalm.
23.
Is Gods staff waxen so weak, that we dare not now lean too much thereon,
least it should break? Or is he now such a changeling, that he will not be with
us in our troubles, according to thy promise? Will he not give us his staff to
stay us by, and reach us his hand to hold us up as he has been wont to do?
No doubt but that he will be most ready in all extremity to help according to
his promise: The Lord that made thee (O Jacob) and he that fashioned thee (O
Israel) says thus, Esaias. 43.
fear not, for I will defend thee, etc.

20 He is that mighty Captain, who having under his government many
soldiers and servants, Math. 8.
has them so at his commandment, that when he bids them go, they go: when
he says abide, they abide: and when he wills them to do this or that, they
obey his word. For pain, pleasure, grief, ease, sickness, health, life and
death, are at the beck and call of God, and do come and go at his appointment,
as the faithful Centurion confesses in the Gospel; Math. 8.
Yea, he works so forceably in his children that lean wholly unto his
promise, that he makes to them, of pain, a pleasure: of grief, ease: of
sickness, health: and of death, life: As contrariwise to the unbelieving,
pleasure, ease, health, and life, is a weary, irksome, and painful death.

21 But reason and our flesh are hardly persuaded, that we are beloved of GOD,
when we be exercised with afflictions, and yet the author of the epistle to the
Hebrews says, That if we be not under chastisement, Heb. 12.
(whereof all are partakers) we are bastards and not sons. Romans 8.
And S. Paul to the Romans brings in the complaints of the Saints which
were tormented and afflicted before Christ's time: Psalm. 44.
For thy sake are we delivered to the death all the day long: we are accounted
as sheep to the slaughter. They which made this complaint were (as cannot be
denied) most dear unto God: and yet they make this sorrowful complaint, we
are accounted as sheep to the slaughter. As if they had said, We are
otherwise dealt with, then the Fathers in the old time were dealt withal, unto
whom God seemed to bear great favor, when as he enriched them, fought for
the^, gave them the victory, and with excellent names and titles, made them
famous and honorable: we say they are now otherwise dealt with, for we are
delivered unto the enemies as sheep to be slain: as unto whom they may do
what pleases them: death hangs all the day long over our heads, and we are
never in security: but yet herein we are comforted, that we are not in this
peril as men that suffer for evil doing, but, For thy sake, that is for
Religion and godliness.

22 Whereby also we are admonished, that pains, punishments, and death, make
not Martirs, but the cause: For otherwise many suffer many grievous things, and
yet are not martyrs, nor confessors. If punishments mke martyrs, then the
Papists at this day, might truly boast of Martyrdom, when for their traitrous
deserts to their Prince and Country, they are rightly executed. And some
Sectaries and Scismatickes, which would feign be reputed Confessors, might then
have some just color to complain of persecution, when they are by
Ecclesiastical censures justly punished. But these are such Martirs and
Confessors, of whom S. Augustine writing to Boniface, de correctione
Donatistatum, and in many other places, complains, saying that in his time
there were Circumcellions, a furious kind of men, which if they could find none
that would kill them, would often times break their own necks headlong, and
would slay themselves. These men (says he) must not be counted martirs. These
are not sheep, but Goats: these are not led against their wills: but run
headlong through ambition, and proud conceit. These Rams follow not the
example of Christ, of whom it is written, that when he was led like a sheep
unto death, yet did he not open his mouth: for these open their mouths too too
wide, uttering blasphemies against Magistrates. These have forgotten the
sentence of the Apostle, If I shall deliver my body to be burnt, 1. Cor. 13.
and have no charity, it profits me nothing. Therefore Martyrs and
confessors, beside the goodness of the cause, must be meek, patient, and
charitable.

23 Wherefore we having a good cause, ought with patience and meekness be
ready prepared, when trial shall be to suffer persecution and tribulation, after
the example of the holy Martirs of old time, because the cross always
follows them which will live godly in Christ Jesus: Then he, who has
promised us, that neither in fire, water, no nor yet in the shadow of death
he will be from us, but will be our buckler, defender, and shield: faithfully
will perform the same, in such wise, that no temptation shall so assail us, but
that he will give us a joyful end and deliverance.

24 The holy Ghost has caused many histories to be kept in writing for us,
that live now in the latter age of the world, to this end, that we should not
only behold in them, the fiery raging of the world, from the beginning,
against the people of God, and how stoutly they withstood and overcame by
faithful patience the malice thereof, but also by reading of them, we should
in our like troubles, learn like patience, receive the same comfort, and
being thoroughly tried, conceive a sure hope of the same victory, which they
after many and sundry trials, did win, whereof we shall not be disappointed, if
we to the end, strive lawfully. If it be too hard and above your capacity, to
behold all the hystories and examples propounded in the scriptures, and the
chronicles of Christ's Church, with such consideration that you may espy and
behold in them the order of Gods working with his Church in all ages: and if you
do not understand in diligent perusing the^, that the end and issue was ever
joyful, and glorious victory and deliverance, wherewith to comfort your selves
in the midst of miseries, take into your hands the comfortable history of
king David: mark his whole life from that time he was taken from his Fathers
sheep, until his death: behold in him your selves, whenever you shall be
afflicted with any kind of Cross.

25 After that the Lord had found out David, a man after his own mind, and
appointed him king over his people, who labored worthily to deliver and defend
Gods people from their enemies the Idolaters, that dwelt near about him he did
not grant unto him such quietness, neither to his people, but that he was in
continual troubles, and no small dangers, during the life of Saul, and also
after Saules death, the Idolators, and also Saules friends, seeking all the
ways that might be, to depose him from his kingdom.

26 And not only was he thus vexed with his foreign enemies, but also most
grievously of all other by those of his household, who should have been his
most dear friends, his own natural son Absalom, his most privy
Counsailers, 2. Sam. 15
the nobility of his realm, and the most part of his subjects. Absalom
pretending to his father David a great holiness (as the manner of hipocrites
is) desired to have leave to go into Hebron, there to sacrifice for the
performance of a vow, which he had made in the time of his being in Siria: but
his meaning was to obtain the kingdom from his Father, and to stir all
Israel against him, which he brought to pass. David was banished, and pursued
unto the death by his own son: who wrought so much villainy against his own
Father, that he did not forbear in the despite of him to misuse his Fathers
wives in the sight of all the people. How grievous and dangerous this sudden
change was to David, and to the godly people, which were but a few in respect
of the great number of the malicious Hipocrites which followed Absalom, it
appears plainly in the story, and you may easily consider.

27 The best that was like to come of the matter was, that while the kingdom
of Israel was thus divided, Gods enemies the Pbilistines, which had lien long
in wait therefore, should snatch up from both the parties the kingdom of
Israel, and not only utterly banish Gods true Religion from among the
Israelites: but also bring them, their country, and their posterity, into most
miserable bondage and thraldom, and that to Gods enemies the most vile people,
and hated of all the world.

28 David in all these perlious dangers of his own life, loss of his
kingdom, and utter destruction of Gods people, did not discourage himself,
but understanding all this to be the work of Gods own hand, acknowledging the
true cause unfeignedly, did persuade himself that the Lord after a time, when
his good will should be, would give a comfortable end to all these storms and
bitter pangues. His whole behavior he himself describes in a Psalm, which
is left in writing for us, to learn thereafter how to behave our selves in the
like persecutions.

29 When he was fled from Jerusalem, and the priests were departed from him
with the Arc of the Lords covenant, he went upon Mount Cliuet barefoote, wept
as he went, and had his head covered: and so did all the people that were with
him. And he made his moan unto the Lord, saying: O Iehoua how are they
increased that trouble me? How many are they that rise against me? How many
are they that say of my soul, there is no help for him in his God?

30 Wonder not though this good King with a heavy heart, and sorrowful cheer,
does lament and bewail his dolourous estate. Would it not grieve a King when
he thinks of no such matter, suddenly to be cast out of his royal seat,
and brought in danger of his life, and that by his own natural son? Can the
displeasure of any enemy so much pearce the heart of a kind Father, as the
unnatural cruelty of the son, to seek his death, of whom he himself had his
life? It grieved him no small deal to perceive such as had bin his wise
counsailers, whom he much trusted, (whose duty it had been, with the spending
of their own lives, to have defended the common weal, brought to good and
quiet order, both in matter of policy, and of Gods true Religion) to be the
supporters and maintainers of an Hipocrite, who had neither respect to Gods
true honor, nor yet consideration of duty to his most honorable Father,
neither yet regard to the prosperous weal of his native country. But nothing
of all these grieved him so much as this one thing: the remembrance and true
acknowledging in himself, that he himielfe was the only cause of all these
evils. He called to remembrance that these plagues fell upon him sent from
God, whose work it was, and that for his sins, which were the cause thereof,
and this made him weep and mourn. For so soon as the Prophet Nathan had
warned him of his offense, he cried peccaui, I have sinned: and afterward when
he saw this grievous and sudden change follow, he perceived it came partly for
his sin, by the work of God, and therefore submitted himself wholly to Gods
will, saying: If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me
again, and show me both his Arc and the Tabernacle thereof. 2. Sam. 15
But and the Lord thus say, I have no lust unto thee: behold here I am, let him
do with me, what seems him good in his eyes.

31 Thus the worthy man of God acknowledges his trobles to be of Gods hand,
his sins to be the cause, and therefore humbly and faithfully submits
himself to Gods ^ordering, well content to receive whatsoever should be laid
upon him. He assured him self, that when he himself were most weakest, then
God would declare his strength for his own glories sake, and after he were
reduced to faithful repentance by the correction of his merciful father, then
the rod should be cast into the fire.

32 This consideration of plagues and tribulations, both to private men
particularly, and also of Realms and whole common wealths is diligently to be
weyed, that as they come from God, so have they this end, that they tend
partly to his own glory, partly to our profit and amendment. For although sin
be the general cause wherefore all mankind was, is, and shall be molested with
many and sundry kinds of troubles and calamities, yet the calamities and
afflictions, are not all kind of men alike, nor yet for one end and purpose.
For the wicked and reprobate are punished, and whipped of God, to a far other
end and meaning, then the godly and chosen children, who are the true Church of
God, the lively members of Christ, and such as shall be never separated from
God, and his loving favor in Christ Jesus.

33 These although they be never without trouble in this world, but always
exercised under the cross, yet the cause and consideration, why God will have
them thus exercised, is either for the honor and glory of his own name, or the
profit, commodity, and exceeding benefit of them, whom he thus afflicts,
either else for both these considerations together: for that there is no
trouble that comes to Christ's Church, or any member thereof, which appears
not plainly to redound to Gods glory, and the profit of the afflicted, if it be
well and justly considered.

34 Thus may you plainly see, how God has wrought with his Church in old
time, and therefore should not discourage your selves, for any sudden
change: but with David acknowledge your sins to God, declare unto him how
many they be that vex you, and rise against you, naming you Hugonotes,
Lutherians, Heretics, and the children of Belial, as they named David. Let
the wicked Idolaters boast and brag, that they will prevail against you and
overcome you, and that God has given you over, and will be no more your God:
let them put their trust in Absalom with his large golden locks, and in the
wisdom of Achitophel, the wise counsailer, yet say you with David, Thou O
Lord art my defender, and the lifter up of my head. Persuade your selves with
David, that the Lord is your defender, who has compassed you round about and
is as it were a shield, that does cover you on every side: it is he only
that may and will compass you about with glory and honor: It is he that will
thrust down those proud hypocrites from their seat, and exalt his lowly and
meek: It is he which will smite your enemies on the cheeke-boane, and burst
all their feeth in sunder: he will hang up Absalom, by his own long hair:
and Achitophel through desperation, shall hang himself: the bands shall be
broken, and you delivered: for this belongs unto the Lord, to save his from
their enemies, and to bless his people, that they may safely proceed in their
pilgrimage to heaven without fear.

CHAP. XII. Concerning the alterations of true Religion in all ages.
ALbeit David and his kingdom, after he was anointed king over Gods people,
were exercised with many troubles, during his time: yet he observed the
ordinances of the Lord, and kept the true Religion, among his people, according
to the commandment of God. After him Solomon had governance of Gods people,
who in the beginning of his reign walked after his father David, did build
Gods temple, and observed the true Religion: but that lasted but a while: for
in his latter years, he fell to Idolatry and the service of false Gods, so
that the true service of God began then to be corrupted.

2 After him, his son Roboam reigned, at whose beginning that realm had such
a miserable change, that it could never after recover it self again: sor the
kingdom was divided, and ten tribes which were called afterward Israel, fell
from Roboam, and from the true Religion, unto Idolatry, and false serving of
God, and so continued in false superstitious Religion, always hating the true
religion of God, killing the Prophets, that did teach the truth, and the godly
people, that confessed the same many years, and yet all that time persuaded
themselves, that they had the true service of God, and that their doings did
much please God: yea, the face of Gods Church was so blemished, and brought to
such a small number of true professors, that the Prophet Elyas complayneth,
that there was not one left, but he himself alone, whose life also they sought
after. Consider will this history and the working of God with his Church and
true Religion. The Prophet Samuel, had taught the people the true service of
God: the worthy king David maintained the same all his time, but with great
difficulty. Solomon his son, a Prince of most singular wisdom and
knowledge, perfectly instructed in the ways of the Lord fell from God, and
corrupted Gods Religion, with the false services invented by man, so yt the
Lord was so offended therewith, that he cut off from the rule of his
posterity, the most part of the kingdom: For the ten Tribes were never after
him under ye governance of his succession, neither did they afterward walk in
the fear of God, but in Idolatry and false Religion, till at the last God
sent the Assyrians to invade them in that wise, that they overcame them,
carried them forth of their own country, dispersed them in many countries
among the heathen, sent strangers to inhabit their land, and so utterly
destroyed that kingdom.

3 This was a fearful judgment of God, where he had but one small kingdom
in the whole world, that bare the face of his Church, where his true honor was
maintained, and that so dodainly of twelve tribes, ten should fall from God, to
Idolatry, and false Religion: yea, and the other also, during all the time of
Roboam, and his son Abia after him: so that during all this time, there was
not in the world any Church, or people, where the sincere Religion, and pure
word of God, was received by public authority and common order: although God
reserved always some that privately served him, and feared his name faithfully,
who were always so hated and punished by the Idolaters, that their lives were
bitter unto them.

4 In those days did the Idolaters make the self same reasons and arguments
against the Prophets and their doctrine, which Idolaters do make now against
Gods people, and his true Religion concerning generality. The faithful the^
lived among those Idoters with no less peril and danger, then the Christians
have done in Spain, and in other Countries, where the Gospel has not free
passage. The Prophets were then imprisoned, and driven out of their country
like seditious heritiques, the causers of all evil, as the true preachers in
some places of Christendom now are.

5 After the death of the wicked Kings of Iehuda, God visited his people with
some light of the truth by the means of Asa: and King Iosaphat after him: who
restored (although not perfectly) the true Religion, banished the false, and
destroyed the Altars of the Idolaters. The which reformation was done not
without great difficulty and trouble, and continued but a small time in that
same order. For Ioram the son of King Iosaphat, overthrew the true service of
God, condemned it, and brought in the place thereof, the superstitions and
Idolatries of the Kings of Israel: and so the Church continued never perfectly
reformed, but always afflicted, till the time of Ezekias. For although Aza,
Iosaphat, Ioaz, Amazias, Vzzias, and Ioatham, attempted a reformation, and were
indifferently good Kings, yet was not the Church cleansed of all the
Idolatries, and false counterfeit Religion, as it appears by the Prophets,
E^ia, Amos, Isai, Osea, Micha. But the worthy King Ezechia in the first year
of his rain, began to reform Religion, brake down and banished all Idols and
Images, hill Altars, and what so ever was against Gods commandment, restoring
Gods true Religion after the rule of Gods word. The which thing as he brought
to pass, not without great troubles and difficulties, so it continued in
purity but a little time. For his son, wicked Manasses, who reigned after
him, put away, and did forsake the true way, and brought in again al manner of
Idolatry and false Religion: and did grievously punish and persecute, the
faithful people and true Prophets. He shed (says the Scripture) innocent
blood exceeding abundantly. In like manner did his son Ammon also, who
reigned after him.

6 This grievous change remained thus, until the good king Josias made a new
and godly reformation, which ought to be a glass to all Princes to behold
themselves in. But this godly reformation of this good king did not continue,
for his son and all the kings of Judah after him forsook the ways of God,
and restored again the idolatry, and false religion of their forefathers,
and so continued, till God sent the king of Babylon to destroy their City,
Temple, and country: who also led them captive into Babylon, where they
continued many years in great affliction: as it appears by the Prophets
Jeremy and Daniel: so that in five hundred years and above, in the days of
all the kings of Iehuda, Gods religion was set forth, and received in public
order sincerely and perfectly, and the contrary utterly banished and abolished.
But in the times of David, Ezechias, and Josias, (as Jesus the son of Syrach
witnesses,) All Kings except David, Ezechias, and Josias, committed
wickedness: For even the Kings of Iehuda also forsake the laws of God.

7 With what difficulty and troubles, Gods religion and true service was
restored after the return of Gods people from Babylon, and how short a time it
continued in purity, what trobles and grievous persecutions the true servants
of the Lord suffered, it is partly set forth in Esdras and Nehemiah: after in
Hester, and then in Machabes: And although unto the coming of Christ, there
was an outward face and beautiful show of Gods religion among the Jews, yet
was it so defaced, and utterly falsified with traditions of the Pharisees, who
were at that time in estimation, that Christ himself does testify, that their
service was but vain traditions of men, Mat. 15.
and the commandemnet of God was not observed. All that time there were no
Prophets, to instruct them in the right way: for immediately after the
captivity, al prophesying ceased in Israel. Now peruse the History of our
Savior Christ in the four Evangelists, and you shall perceive in what state
Christ found his true religion: what pains and travail he took to restore
the true and sincere honoring of God: with how great difficulty he brought it
to pass: and at the last, how it cost him his life. After whose death the
cruelty of the^, who would seem to have and maintain the true honoring of
God ceased not, but stirred most vehement persecution against the true Church
of Christ, and dispersed it thoughout all the world: With what pains,
troubles, and difficulty true Christianity was planted, and false Religion
put away, Saint Lucas partly mentions in the Acts of the Apostles, who spent
their lives in the building of Christ's Church.

8 After Christ's death, the cruel tyrant Nero the Emperor, did persecute the
Church most cruelly, after whose time, the Church was in some quiet, but not
long. For Domitian the Emperor, did persecute Christ's Church to destroy his
true religion most hainously. Nerua his successor was friendly to the
Christians. Traian after him, a cruel persecuter and enemy: And then Hadrian
after whose time the Church had rest for a while. For shortly after, the
Christians that were in Asia, and also in the West parts, were cruelly
disquieted. Shortly after this time* did England receive the Christian Faith,
and was the first Country of all the world, that received the Faith of Christ
by public authority. Lucius being the first Christian King. But the purity
of Christ's truth did not long here continue, not much above one hundredth
years.

9 Seuerus the Emperor, wrought all the means that might be to destroy
Christ's Church, and to subvert the true Religion with most sharp persecution:
after whose time, there was some quiet. But shortly after the cruel tyrant
Maximinus did sore molest the faithful, and likewise after him Decius, Gallus,
Hostilianus, Lucius, Valerianus. Galienus granted the Christians peace:
Aurelianus did persecute them. And Dioclesianus, more like an infernal
Serpent, then an earthly man, did as it were devour the Church most cruelly.
In this time, was the greatest persecution that has been before: the
tormentors were much more weary in shedding the Christian blood, and cruelly
tormenting the faithful, the^ the holy Martyrs were in suffering the pains.
There were in this persecution within thirty days, above seventeen thousand
Christians killed most spitefully.

Eusebius Eccle. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 9.
10 But Constantine the good Emperor became a Christian, set the Church in
peace, and was the first Emperor that did by public authority put down
Gentilitie, and truly maintained Christianity. But that lasted not long. For
within short time after, Iulianus the Apostata, being Emperor, went about to
undo all that Constantine had done: used wonderful policies to destroy the
Christian Religion, and did afflict the faithful very grievously. After this
time the Church was grievously molested by the Arrians, after with Humes,
Vandales and Goths, and so continued many years, till all good learning began
wonderfully to be decayed. And at the length, albeit the Church seemed to be
at rest, yet has it been even unto this day miserably afflicted and
wonderfully defaced, by two Vicars of the Devil, put in commission at one
time, about eight hundred years since: The one, Mahomet for the Eest: the
other, Antichrist of Rome, for the West. The one foreign, the other a more
near and domestical enemy to Christians. For during these four hundred
years Rome has been Topheth, and the valley of Hynnom, and the very Altar,
whereon has been sacrificed the body of Gods children. Whose tyranny and
outrage is such, that the Kings and Potentates of the world, have been and are
greatly damnified and injured by her, as appears by many notable pageantes,
which she has played before our time: among which, this one shall serve for
many.

11 Pope Innocent being displeased with George Pogiebracius, king of Bohemia,
for favoring of John Hus, and his religion: that is to say, for playing the
part of a godly Prince, did excommunicate and depose him, appointed his
kingdom to Mathias. But Frederick the Emperor would not thereto consent: and
especially after the death of the aforesaid George, when the Emperor and the
Bohemians leaving out Mathias, did nominate Vladislaus, son of Casimirus King
of Polonie, to be king of Boheme, for the which, great war and trouble
kindled between him, and Frederick the Emperor: wherein the Emperor, had
been utterly ouerthrown, had not Albertus Duke of Saxony, rescued the
Emperor, and expressed the vehemency of Mathias. This fire of dissension
being kindled by the terrible thunderbolt of the Popes Excommunication, did yet
a greater mischief. For it hindered the said Mathias in his expeditio^ against
the Turks, wherein he should have been set forward and aided, by Christian
Princes and Bishops.

The like curse and excommunication has been denounced by the Antichristian
Bishop Pius Quintus, for the like cause, as we all know, against Q. Elizabeth,
but the same has been altogether turned to her and her peoples good, by him
that can and will bless, where Baalam curses. What should I need to set
before you the bloody broiles of France, and of the Low Countries thereto
adjoining, wrought and brought to pass, by this domestical enemy, under the
color and name of a holy league, thereby to maintain Idolatry and
superstition, and to root out the religion and service of almighty God? It is
too too manifest, they have felt it, and all the world cannot but condemn it.
But what better can be expected? Can any good come from Rome? No verily. For as
Babylon is full of Ostriches: as Africa yearly breeds some monster, and as
Sodom and Gomer sends forth yearly noisome stinches: So the Church of Rome,
is the nource and fountain, which sends forth error, treason, rebellion, and
utter desolation (if it were possible) of all christian kingdoms.

12 Now weigh and consider with your selves this same brief rehearsal of the
seat of Gods church, how the church of the Israelites was afflicted in the
time of the kings: then carried into a strange country captives: after their
return and redeifiyng of the temple, what great perils and troubles it
sustained, till after the days of the Machabees: next, consider the history
of Christ, and the Acts of the Apostles. After this the ten not able
persecutions, which the Church suffered under most cruel tyrants, from the
eight year of Nero, by the space of three hundred and twenty years, unto the
time of Constantine: and from his time three hundred years after by the
Arrians and barbarous Hunnes, Vandals and Goths, by whose means good learning
was decayed, and ignorance brought in: and then mark with aduisement, how that
from that time hitherto, Mahomet has usurped and afflicted the East Church,
and the Pope the West: (for he began to exercise his proud power over the
Church, about the same time, that Mahomet brought in his religion.) Consider I
say with aduisement, in all these times, how little while Gods Religion was
maintained in the church: what perilous changes were in the kingdom: what
exceeding cruelty was always used against the people of God, as though they
had bin heretics, his word condemned as heresy, and the cause of all evils:
and you shall easily perceive that neither Gugall, Silo, nor Mispah, can assure
the Lords tabernacle any rest: and that Religion keeps not her place and
standing any long time.

13 The use and profit which is to be made hereof unto our selves is this:
that for so much as God has given unto us his word, and the ministry thereof,
in such wise that we have amongst us (blessed be his name therefore) his true
religion and service: let us not grow secure, forgetting our duties unto him,
in regard of so unspeakable a blessing, least he come shortly and remove our
candlestick from us. Apoc. 2.
For he has no less cause to execute this judgment against us now, then he
had of old time against the obstinate, and unthankful Jews, of whom he
complayneth thus: What shall I do unto thee, 2. Esdr. 1.
O Jacob, thou Judah would not obey? I will turn me to other nations, and to
those will I give my name. For he entreats us continually as a father does
his sons: as a mother her daughters: and as her nourse her young babes, that
we would be his people: and lo by our disobedience we refuse. It is therefore
to be feared, that the kingdom of God shall be taken from us, and given to a
nation, Math. 21.
which will bring forth fruits of the same. For I am verily persuaded, there
is nothing that will more speedily deprive us of Gods favor, and that will
sooner bring upon us his heavy judgments, then our unthankfulness, in abusing
his word and ministry.

14 It fares with us, as it did with the Israelites, after their mighty
deliverance out of Egypt, in the wilderness: who at the first when Manna was
strange unto them, liked it wonderfully, so that they would run out even on
the sabbath, although they were forbidden to gather it, but soon after waxed
weary of it. Even so in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth, most happy reign,
we al as me^ almost hunger-starued for lack of ye spiritual food of Gods word,
the Manna of our soul, were right glad by what occasion, or from what manner of
person soever we might hear that Angelical tidings as it were from heaven, of
our salvation in Christ, and of our justification through faith in him: yea,
how joyful were we then to hear God served in our vulgar tongue, with that
same form of prayer now used in the Church, which some nice wantons at this
day condemn, saying: Nauseat anima nostra, we loath this, we will have a
better form: we will set up a Temple in Gerezin, in stead of that in
Jerusalem.

15 Through this fulness, some are grown so lasie and unlusty toward the
spiritual Manna, that they will no more go seek it abroad, as in former time
of need, but they will have it brought home to their houses, and so make the
public minister, a parlor preacher, as if it were now a time of persecution:
whereas Ely has his open place by one of the pillars of the Temple, where any
man may find him, which is desirous of knowledge. For they which desired to be
instructed by Christ, asked him: Rabbi, vbi habitas? Master where dwell
thou? He answered, Come and see. And they came to him: not he to them: he
himself commanding it should be so: If any man thirst let him come to me.

16 And as touching Religion, many be of Gallios mind, yt it is nothing but a
question of names: or of Pharaos mind, that it is but a vain thing: or at
most of king Agrippas mind, to be half Christians. But Nazianzene to the
Arrians says, Aut totum honora, aut totum abijce: Either honor Christ wholely,
or cast Christ wholly away.

17 There be also many which deal with Gods word and his religion, as does the
Butter-flye with the sweet flowers: and that is, even to dye their wings with
them, that they may seem to be of a fair painted cullor. These think that
holiness consists in often, and much hearing, how little soever they practice.
They can endure the sowing of a Gomer, although thy reap but an Epha. To these
it may be said, as Phocion said sometime to the Athenian hands, O quam multos
duces, quam pauces milites: more teachers then followers.

18 And as for the ministry, it serves for nothing now adays but even for a
whetstone to set the peoples tongs on edge withal: Come (say they) let us smite
Jeremy with the to^ng, and give no heed unto his words, Gods Ministers have
cause to complain as Ezech. in his time, that they be judged and condemned at
the doors of men's houses: or as christ, and his apostles, by the fire side: and
as John Baptist* yt they receive their judgment at the tablecloth or carpet,
not from any judicial seat.

19 Do we think yt God will suffer still this contempt of his word and ministry
unpunished: he has already looked a long time for our amending, and has long
borne with our evil doing. And although it is truly said of God, in respect of
his long suffera^ce, that he has lea^^^ feet: so as truly it may be said in
respect of his any judgments following the same, that he has iron hands. He
comes against us slowly, but when he comes, he pays home surely.

20 For these forty and six years past, who has led the life of delights
but we? What nation under heaven has been happy, but our English nation? Our
God has long loved us: Our God has long suffered us, and with his cheerful
countenance has most lovingly looked upon us: But even as the Trojans, when
their city was beaten down flat to the ground, said thus; Troia fuit, there
was a Troy, or we had a Troy: so the time may come, wherein we may say, God was
in this place, and we wist it not: we had once Gods favor, and we acknowledged
it not.

21 Lt us then in time recall our selves to a better consideration, and let us
constantly and thankfully embrace the word of God, and persevere in the way of
godliness. It was king Hezechias singular commendation, that he did cleave
unto the Lord, and departed not from him. And it was a Christian resolution of
Policarpe to the Leefetenant of Anthony, who incited him to deliver himself
from imprisonment and bonds by blaspheming Christ: to whom he made this answer;
These eighty six years have I served him, and yet did he never hurt me: and
sure, Gal. 3.
I will not forsake him now. Even so let us resolve, that for so much as we
have begun our pilgrimage in the spirit, never to end it in the flesh: And
that if all the world would fall away from God and his word, yet we, and
ours, will serve the Lord. Joshua. 24.
(...) would admonish thee to enter into the Court of Conscience, and examine
thy self, especially in these four points following.

THE COURT OF CONSCIENCE: Wherein every Sinner may examine and try himself,
whether he be fitly prepared to receive the blessed Sacrament of the Lords
Supper.
Dearly beloved in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, If we will be worthy
receivers of the holy Supper of our most blessed Savior and Redeemer, it is
necessary that we hearken unto the holy Apostle S. Paul, in his first Epistle
to the Corinthians, Chapter 11. verse 27. Where he says thus: Whosoever shall
eat this bread, and drink the Cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty
of the body and blood of the Lord, 28. Let a man therefore examine himself,
and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this Cup. 29. For he that
eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation because
he discerns not the Lords body. etc. Here the Apostle shows us the danger
of the unworthy receiving the Lords body and blood, and also the means how we
may be worthy receivers of the same: namely, by examining our selves: which
examination consists chiefly in four points: That is to say, in Faith,
Kepentance, Giving of thanks to God, and love toward our neighbors. First, we
must have Faith, that is to say, a certain and infallible assurance, and firm
persuasion that God is a merciful Father unto us, in the name of his Son
Jesus Christ our Lord, whom he delivered to death for us. Yea, every sinner
must apply Christ his merits particularly unto himself. This Faith comes
not of us, neither is it grounded upon us, or upon any thing that is in us, but
it comes from God, and is grounded upon God the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost, and upon the promises of the Gospel confirmed inwardly within us,
by the working of the holy Ghost, which cries in our hearts Abba, Romans 8, 15
Gal. 4.6.
that is to say, Father. Furthermore, this faith is nourished, confirmed, and
increased in us by the holy Sacraments. For in the Supper, God as a good father
(after that he had once brought us into his Church by Baptism) nourishes us
spiritually with the proper substance of his Son Jesus Christ, applying and
making proper unto every one of us, the merit of his death and passion. To this
end and purpose is it, that Jesus Christ himself, gives us the Bread and
Wine: that he commands us, Mat. 26.26. Mar. 14.21. Luke 22.19. 1. Cor 11.14.
to eat and drink it: that he says, that the Bread is his body which is
given for us, and that the Wine is his blood which is shed for the remission of
our sins: by which words he gives himself wholly unto us, he will be out
nourishment and spiritual life: he will dwell in us by his holy Spirit, and
will that we abide in him by faith, that through belief we may not perish, but
have eternal life, John 3 36.18. Psalm. 8.7. Mat. 11. Heb. 1.2. John 17.12.27.
and 28.
whereof he is the only heir and giver. In like sort the breaking of the
Bread of the Supper, serves to the confirmation of our Faith, and sure
warranting of our salvation: insomuch as it assures us, and causes us to see
with spiritual eyes, that Jesus Christ was once broken with the pains of
death in Jerusalem, to deliver us from the same, and to get us eternal life.
Also, in that, that by the Commandment of Christ Jesus, we take the Bread in
our hands, and then the Cup: moreover in that, that we eat the Bread, and
drink the Wine, which turn into the nourishment of our bodies: we are
certified, that by the hands of Faith, we take and embrace Jesus Christ our
Lord, for our only Savior and Redeemer, and that by the same Faith we eat
his body spiritually, and drink his blood, to the hope of eternal life.

Now, every one of us must live by his own faith, according as we may make
our Confession in the Belief, which is called the Apostles, in that every man
says by himself, I believe in God, and says not, We believe. We must not
here cast our brains, or think upon the believing or unbelieving, upon the
worthynesse or unworthiness of an other man, but upon our own. For S. Paul
does not teach us to examine other men, or that other men should examine us,
but he says, namely, Let a man examine himself. Therefore let every one of us
for his own part be assured in his heart, that Jesus Christ the true Messiah,
is come into the world to save sinners, amongst whom he ought to account and
esteem himself (by the example of S. Paul) the chiefest. Let him believe that
Jesus Christ came down from Heaven into earth, to lift him up from earth to
heaven, that he was made the Son of man, to make him the child of God: that
he was conceived by the holy Ghost, and that he was borne of the Virgin Marie:
to purify and cleanse his wicked conception and birth.. Let him persuade
himself that the Son of God has ourcome the Devil, to deliver him from the
tyranny and slavish subjection of the Devil: that he has fulfilled all the
Law, (loving God his Father with all his heart, strength and might, and his
neighbor as himself) to get him justice: that he appeared before Pilate an
earthly Judge, and received as an evil doer, sentence of condemnation for this
life: to exempt him from appearing before the terrible judgment seat of Gods
justice, to receive sentence of death and everlasting damnation, for that he
had offended one eternal and everlasting God. Let him assure himself, Psalm.
22.1
that the same Jesus Christ went down to Hell for him, that is to say, that
he suffered the sorrows and terrors of the second death, and of the sincere
wrath of God to deliver him, that he died a death accursed of God, in that he
was hanged on the Cross, to purchase him life and blessing before God: that
he rose again, for a gage and assurance of his resurrection: that he ascended
into Heaven, for a certain token, that he also shall ascend thither, that he
sits on the right hand of God his Father: to be for him an everlasting
Priest, Teacher, King, defender, reconciler, and advocate: to be short, that he
shall come at his last coming, for his comfort and full redemption. We must
also every one of us for his own part make proper unto our selves: yea, and
make ours all the goodness and all the riches that is in Jesus Christ: because
that in giving himself to us, he gives us also his benefits. So then in that,
that Jesus Christ is God, it is to make us partakers of his Divinity: in that,
that he is heir and Lord of the world, it is to make us partakers of his
Lordship and inheritance, and that we recover in him the government of all
things, which we lost in Adam: in that, that he is well beloved of his Father:
it is that we may be acceptable unto him: in that, that he is rich it is to
make us partakers of his riches: in that, that he has all power against the
Devil, Sin, Hell, Antichrist, the World, and all our enemies, it is to
defend and shield us: in that, that he is just and good, it is to justify us,
and make us good: in that, that he is happy and immortal, it is to make us
partakers of his blessedness and immortality.

When we shall thus particularly apply all the actions and benefits of Jesus
Christ our Lord, and also all his essential qualities unto our selves, putting
our whole trust in him, and in his promises, and distrusting our selves, then
may we boldly come to the Lords Table, whereat we shall enjoy Jesus Christ, God
and man, by the benefit of faith, and shall feel moreover a great increase and
augmentation of the same.

But we must note, that it is impossible for us to be unite and made one with
Christ, and to be made partakers of the treasures and riches which are in him,
unless we first renounce Antichrist and his kingdom, and unless we detest
all Idolatry, superstition and traditions of men, directly contrary to the
pure service of God, bounded and limited out in his word. For seeing that God
is our only Creator: and he gives himself wholly unto us in the person of
his Son JESUS CHRIST, the true Isaac, Gene. 17.18.
in whom all the nations of the earth are blessed, it is great reason, that
likewise by Faith we give up our selves, Genesis 12.18.
and yield us wholly unto God. And thence is it that God in his Law does
rightfully require of his people, that they have no other Gods but him: Eccle.
20.2.
And that they love him with all their heart, with all their soul, with all
their strength, and understanding, that is to say, with all their parts, as well
inward as outward. And thence is it also, that God does not only rebuke and
reprove al them that halt on both sides: but commands also, 1. Reg. 18.20.
Deuteronomy. 13.1. and 17.5.
that they which sacrifice unto strange Gods, should be put to death. And to
this purpose S. Paul (minding to warn the Corinthians to flee from Idolatry,
uses an argument taken from the knittting together and union that we have with
Jesus Christ our Lord in the Supper, 1. Cor. 10.16.
speaking after this sort. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the
Communion of the blood of Christ? And the bread which we break, is it not the
Commmunion of the body of Christ? As if he would say, that seeing the
Corinthians came not to the Supper to be partakers simply of earthly Elements,
but to be partakers really and in deed of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to be made one with him by faith, and to be made flesh of his flesh,
and bones of his bones, that therefore it were too great wickedness and
abomination, to be present in the assemblies of Infidels, or to be partakers
of their idolatry. And therefore the Apostle adds afterward, 1. Cor. 10.21.
that the Corinthians cannot drink of the cup of the Lord, and of the cup of
devils: and that they cannot be partakers of the Lords Table, and of the table
of Devils. Whereby he signifies, that it is impossible to serve God, and the
devil together, and that whosoever does communicate with Idolatry, does
manifestly renounce our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore, seeing that darkness
is no more contrary to light, vice to virtue, death to life, Paradise to Hell,
then the Pope and his doctrine is contrary to our Lord Jesus Christ and to his
holy Gospel: it behooves all true faithful people to withdraw themselves
wholly from Popery, and cast off without delay the yoke of that Romish
Antichrist, that they may give themselves wholly to the service of this Savior
and Redeemer Jesus Christ. But if so be that the Communion that we have with
the son of God, and the promises of the heavenly Father, cannot entice and
persuade us to yield our selves wholly to God, to put our trust in him only, to
serve and worship him only, according to his will, but that we will yet cleave
unto Antichrist and his servants and Ministers: yet at the least, let the
threatenings and judgments of God hinder us, and fear us so to do: as when it
is said, Go out of her my people, that ye be not partakers in her sins,
and that ye receive not of her plagues.

And again, Apoc. 14.9.^0.11.
If any man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his
foreheade, or in his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God,
yea of the pure wine, which is powered into the cup of his wrath, and he shall
be tormented in fire and brimstone before the holy Angels, and before the
Lamb. And that stink of their torment shall ascend-euermore: and they shall
have no rest, day nor night, which worship the beast and his image, and
whosoever receives the print of his name. And again, The fearful and
unbelieving, the abominable murderers, Apo. 21.8.
whoremongers, sorcerers, idolatrors, and all liars, shall have their part in
the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. Let
this therefore be well printed in our hearts, that we be not seduced and
destroyed with the vain seruers of this world, which think it is a thing not
impossible to serve God and the Devil. Jesus Christ and Antichrist, to follow
the commandments of God, and of men, and to satisfy the affections of the
spirit, and of the flesh, all at once.

2. We must have repentance.
THe preparation whereof we spoke before touching faith, which applied unto
every one of us particularly, Jesus Christ with all his riches and blessings,
can have no place in us, unless it bring forth also in us a true repentance:
that is to say, a true misliking of evil, and a burning love and affection of
goodness: as we see the example in David, Peter, Paul, and other holy men. We
must have a sorrow and unfeigned grief, for that we have offended God, for that
we have before times wickedly abused our creation, redemption, and Baptism,
for that we have provoked God with all our members, for that we have abused
our understanding, heart, tongue, feet, and hands: for that we have given and
set forth our souls and bodies (which are the Temples wherein God would
dwell) to infidelity, idolatry, superstition, filthiness, blasphemy,
whoredom, extortion, usury, robbery, gluttony, drunkenness, ambition,
excess, riot, and other worldly vanities, which is as much as if we would have
lodged God the father, the son, and the Ghost, in a most stinking and filthy
privy. We must therefore be sorry for our wicked life passed, using a true
and severe examining of our selves, which may bring forth in us a
displeasantnesse and horror of our forepassed renting and breaking by all
manner of means of the Law of God, to follow the will of the Devil, of the
world, and of the flesh. Now the breaking of the bread of the Supper (which
is omitted in the Passover of the Papists) should cause us to acknowledge and
detest our wickedness, that is to say, whatsoever is found in us, contrary
and repugnant to the pure and holy Law of GOD. For, in that, that the bread is
broken for us, or rather in that, that we break the bread of the Supper of
our Lord Jesus Christ: it signifies unto us, that in deed it is we, that it
is our sins and iniquities, which have crucified and put to death the Lord
of life, who is the very same Jesus Christ our Lord, So that we must not do,
as in times passed the Infidels did, which made great lamentations and
inuectiues against the Jews, Pontius Pilate, Herod, Judas, and them that had
executed and put Christ to death, and in the mean season flattered themselves:
vaunting of their own merits and deserts, and did not narrowly consider,
that Judas, Pontius Pilate, Herod, were but executers and ministers of their
impieties and sins.

Let us therefore consider in the breaking of the bread, that our sins, yea,
the sins of every one of us severally, crucified the son of God, and brake
him with the sorrows of the first and second death, as namely the words of
the Supper do show, that the body of Jesus Christ was broken for us, and his
blood was shed for the remission of our sins. And our heavenly Father
witnesses the same, speaking of the death of his Son, Esa. 53.3.
For the sins of my people, have I smitten him. Then if it be so, that our
sins being weighed in the ballaunce of the justice of GOD, were found to be
so weighty, and of so great importance, that his wrath could never have
been appeased toward us, but by the death of his only Son, which makes
full satisfaction, I say, by the cruel ignominious death of the Cross: how
should not we hence forward detest and abhor our sin, as that which is the
cruel and bloody murderer of the only Son of God? Mat. 27 451.
Behold the Sun and the Moon, behold the Element, behold the veil of the
Temple, behold the stones and rocks, which were moved at the death of Jesus
Christ, which showed forth tokens of sorrow, and we which bear within our
selves the cause of his death, shall not we have in horror and detestation
this cursed enemy sin, that is lodged within us?

Shall we suffer him to rule and dwell in us, as before, that il may bring
home death unto us? Not so: but we must detest it, as that, that before time
separated us from God our chiefest happiness: as that, that caused us to loose
the image and similitude of God, according to which we were created at the
beginning by GOD. It is that, that has wholly destroyed us, that has deprived
us of holiness and righteousness, that has banished us out of Paradise, that
has made us slaves to the tyranny of the Devil, that has made us subject to
so many miseries and diseases: and to be short, both to the first and second
death. It is that, which after it had set a bar and division between God and
us, caused us to see our own filthiness, purchased unto us shameful and
vilainous infamy, made us to tremble at the voice of our God, which was before
most pleasant and loving unto us. It is that, whereby the wrath of God is heaped
upon men: that makes the earth to become barren, and to bring forth thorns
and thistles: that causes women to bring forth in sorrow, and that men eat
their bread in the sweat and labor of their bodies. Seeing then that sin
brings forth, and procures unto us daily so many miseries: it follows that
we ought to withdraw our selves from it, if we will not be wilful enemies of
our own happiness and salvation. Now then, I cite here all disordered and
slanderous persons, which notwithstnading are so impudent to present themselves
to the Lords holy Table. I ask them what it is that they promised to God and
his Church in Baptism? They will answer me, that they promised God to renounce
the Devil and all his works. But one of the chief and principal works of
the Devil, is sin. Why do they not then abstain from it? Why are they
traitors, and disobedient to God and his Church? Why have they conspired with
the Devil, the world, and the flesh, against their own salvation? How dare they
peesent themselves before God, to ask him pardon and remission of their sins:
seeing that more and more they heap sin upon sin, and crucify and kill again
(as much as in them lies) the son of God, or at the least make a scorn and a
scoff of the purging of this blood, which was appli-vnto them in Baptism. Put
the case that a wicked man, poor, and destitute of all help, wete fallen into
a mire, whence out he could by no means raise up himself, and that some young
Prince passing that way, took the pains to draw him out of the ditch, to make
him clean, to cloth him with gorgious and precious apparel: if this wicked
man, and poor miserable caytife, fall again into this mire wilfully by his
own folly, and beray both himself and his apparel, being moreover in great
danger of his life: would not one think that this man were maruellously
unkind, and a contemner of that princely bounty and goodness, and on the other
side, a wilful and sworn enemy of his own health, worthy to be lost and cast
away without any help or assistance? Even so stands our cause with Jesus
Christ. We fell al into the puddle of sin, in the person of Adam, Genesis 3.6
Psalm. 39.15
we are all wicked doers, and worthy of an hundred thousand gibbets before
God, we can by no means get out of our selves, and out of the ditche of
destruction, whereinto we are all fallen by our own fault.

Behold the son of God, the king of kings, the Lord of Lords, which comes to
draw us out of this puddle, which comes to wash us with his precious blood,
which vouchsafes to cloth us with the proper cloak of his righteousness and
innocence. If we come again to wallowe our selves in the puddle of sin, if
we please our selves in it, if we defile and bedurt the robe of innocence which
he has given us in Baptism, are we not manifest contemners of the inestimable
love and gift of Jesus Christ, and are moreover worthy to rot a thousand times
in our filthiness, or rather to gnash our teeth everlastingly with the devils
in hell? It is evident.

Seeing then that it is so, that the end of our redemption, baptism, and
justification, requires of us to abstain from sin, (so farforth as possibly
we may, and our fleshly infirmity will suffer) we must take all pains and
diligence by the virtue of the spirit of God, to cast out from us all
foulness and filthiness: Idolatry, blasphemy, rebellion, hatred, murder,
whordome, theft, and usury, and all other things contrary to the holy Law, if
we will not be more than ungrateful toward Jesus Christ, and open enemies of
his Church, and our own salvation. But because it is not sufficient for the
inducing of a true and he althful repentance, to acknowledge our misery, to
abhor it, to confess it, and to abstain from it, but we must also know,
desire, and do that good which God commands in his word: we must consider the
argument which ought earnestly to stir us up to the sanctifying of the name
of God. First, in that we are joined and made one with Christ Jesus in the
supper, in that we are made flesh of his flesh, and bones of his bones, in that
we live by his holy spirit. ought not this upon good cause to exhort us to
conform our selves to the Image and likeness of the holiness of our Lord Jesus
Christ? Can he dwell in us, nourish us with his own substance, quicken us with
his holy spirit: join us unto himself by the bond of Faith, yet so, that he,
his holy spirit, and faith, bring not forth in us good and holy works?
Moreover, for so much as he does not give himself unto us halfemeale, and
destitute of his qualities and riches, and accompanied with all spiritual
gifts and blessings, adorned with righteousness and perfection, accompanied
with innocence and sanctification: how can we receive Jesus Christ enriched
with all his graces, that the righteousness of our head, may not shine in us
which are members: yea, shine in all our parts as well inward as outward: Must
it needs be, that the two parts of our soul, that is to say, our mind and
heart, which ought to apprehende and take hold of the promises of God, which
ought to receive by faith the body and blood of our lord Jesus Christ, that is
to say, whole Jesus Christ true God, equal in every respect to God his father,
and true man made of humane body and soul: that this mind and heart (I say)
must be applied to the meditation and love of worldly and wicked things, being
destitute of the knowledge and love of God, and of the love of our neighbor:
Does it behoue our body, which is the temple of God, to be profaned? That our
ears, which were created of God to hear his voice, should be stopped against
it, and be opened to vanities, wanton talk, and unchaste worldly songs. Does
it behooue our tongue, which is bound by the right of creation, to sing the
praises of God, and by the right of redemption, to show forth the Lords death
till he come: h That this tongue, which is so proper an instrument of the glory
of God, should be mute to goodness, incessantly occupied in backbiting,
slaundering, blaspheming, or at the least in speaking idle words, whereof one
day we shall yield an account before the throne of the Majesty of God? Mat.
12.36
Does it behoue our mouth, which ought to receive the blessed sign of the
body and blood of our Lord Jesus, to suppress the benefit of our redemption,
and to have adders poison in it? Does it behooue our hands, which ought to
take (at the supper) the assured gage of the love of God, the infallible
pledges of his league with us, the earnest penny of our salvation, to be void
of goodness? and beside that, be given to extortion, theft, murder,
oppression, and violence? Does it behooue our feet, which ought to run and
make have to goodness, to be ready and light to run to mischief: No surely,
but as he which calls us, is holy, so likewise must we also be wholly holy: as
he has brought us by holy Baptism into his holy house, which is his Church,
the Communion of Saints: Even so likewise must we lead therein a good and holy
conversation: as he has washed us from our sins, by the precious blood of
his son Jesus Christ, so must we dye to them, and live in righteousness: as
he has called us to the the incorruptible hope of the blessed resurrection and
eternal life: so must we lift up our hearts on high, and not be buried like
Moles in this frail and transitory earth. To be short, seeing that the grace
of God is set before us every day, and his holy word sounds in our ears,
Tit. 2.11 12.13.14.
to this only end, that it may be salvation unto us, and that (renouncing all
ungodliness, and worldly desires) we should live soberly, justly, and godly in
this present world, looking for the blessed hope and appearing of the glory of
the mighty God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ. We must pray unto this good
God, that he would give us grace, so to behave our selves toward him in
living godly, so toward our neighbors in living justly, so toward the poor
in releeuing them charitably, and so toward our selves in living soberly, that
we may be found at the day irreprehensible, by the means of that his well
beloved Son our Lord Jesus Christ.

3 Thirdly, Of thanks giving.
we must give thanks to this good God, for the benefit of our redemption: and
for this cause it is, that the Ancients called the holy supper, Eucharistia,
that is to say, gratefulness, good grace, giving of thanks. For if so be that
our ordinary food, and daily bread, which GOD gives us for the nourishment of
our bodies, ought to be sanctified by the word, and received with
thanksgiving: ought we not much more to thank God for the heavenly bread, and
for the nourishment of our souls, which is offered unto us, and really given
us in the holy Supper of Jesus Christ?

And we see also, how Jesus Christ himself shows us an example hereof. For
when he took the bread of the Supper, S Matthewe, and S. Mark say, that Jesus
Christ blessed. And S. Luke expounds this word to bless, when he says, that
he gave thanks.

Now then, seeing that we see, that Jesus Christ, when he took the bread of
the supper, gave thanks to God his father, as he did also when he took the
cup, and that for the redemption of mankind: it is our duty to do the like. And
that we may be the better moved to give thanks to God, we have to consider, the
greatness of the benefit of our redemption, and the excellency of the gift
which God gives us at his holy table, which cannot be done, unless we
consider our miserable condition, which was before figured by the temporal
captivity of Egypt.

We see there, how Pharaoh was strong and mighty, how he knew not the general,
how he went about to kill all the seed of the Israelites, Exe, 1.3.
by the suppression and death of their men children: we see also how
excessiuely he caused the Israelites to work without any hope of wages, how he
would not suffer them by any means to sacrifice to the Lord, nor to go forth
of the land of Egypt.

Which thing continued not for one year or two: but for the space of four
hundred and thirty Exo. 12.30.
years. Here may we lively behold a draught of our misery. We were all lost
and destroyed in Adam. We were holden captives in the helly Egypt, under the
Tyranny of a spiritual Pharaoh, which is the Devil. This Tyrant was strong
and mighty: he suffered us not to serve our GOD. He made us to labor
incessantly in slavish and unfruitful works of sin, to the establishment of
his own kingdom. He slew not only our men children, but he led us all
indifferently, to utter ruin and destruction. And this Tyranny had not only
continued for a certain time, but had been eternal and for ever permanent,
if the mercy and power of our God had not plucked us out of it by the ministry
of the true Moses, which is our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the true Lamb which
the heavenly father has delivered to death, to deliver us from it, and
purchase us eternal life. As it is said, that God so loved the world, Ioh.
3.16
that he has given his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him
should not perish, but have everlasting life. Now then seeing this good God
has done in us so great a pleasure, as to free us from the tyranny of the
Devil, of sin, of death, of hell: seeing that his love was so great, that he
delivered his only Son to the cruel and ignominious death of the Cross, for
us, which were the servants and bondslaues of Satan: his well-beloved, for us,
which were his enemies: the just, and the Lamb without spotte, for us, which
were sinners and corrupt: the only heir of Paradise, for us, which were
worthily heirs of hell: ought we not to be ravished with admiration of this
great and unspeakable love of God toward us: and our tongues to be for ever
displayed to publish with a loud voice the praise of the benefit of our
redemption? It is very reasonable, and therefore we see, that Jesus Christ
admonishes us of our duty in this behalf, Luke 22.19 1. Cor. 11.24.
speaking of the celebration of the holy Supper. Do this in remembrance of me.
And S. Paul expresses what remembrance this is, when he aduertiseth us, 1.
Cor. 11.
that as often as we shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, we show
the Lords death till he come. Seeing the^ that God requires of us a true
acknowledging of his benefits, which we receive at his hands and
bountifulness, by the means of our Lord Jesus Christ: let us take heed, that
we be not spotted with the fault of ingratitude, especially, if we will not
incur the wrathful displeasure of God, and acknowledge him for Judge, whom we
would not acknowledge for a gentle and merciful father: as Saint Paul also to
this purpose threatens the ingrate and forgetful, when he says, Whosoever
shall eat this bread, and drink the cup of the Lord unworthily, eats and
drinks his own damnation. And rightfully is the vengeance of God displayed
against them, which wickedly suppress the glory of God, in that, that
concerns their own salvation. For if so be that a murderer ready to be
hanged for his wicked deeds, casting away and rejecting his princes gracious
pardon (and not vouchsafing to thank him for it) deserves worthily the
gallows: or if a child deserve the rod, for not giving once I thank you to
his father, when he has received at his hands great and singular benefits:
much more we, which for our sinful and wicked deeds deserve to be hanged in
hell, if we contemn the grace of God our sovereign Prince, and make no count
of this everlasting benefit, which our heavenly father presents us withal in
Jesus Christ, who is offered to us in the supper, by good right and reason we
are worthy to perish for our unkindness and unthankfulness. But here must we
diligently mark the points that follow.

First, this acknowledging must be made to one only God, by his only son
Jesus Christ. For even as God by his only son has created us, and redeemd
us from everlasting death: so will he that to him alone, and by him alone, in
whom he is well pleased, we render thanks for all his benefits. As we see how
S. Paul sets this forth unto us in many places, and precisely in the Epistle
to the Ephesians, where he says, Blessed be God, even the father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which has blessed us with all his spiritual blessing in
Heavenly things in Christ, as he has chosen us in him before the foundation
of the world: but they which call upon Saints, and put their trust in them, or
in their merits, they also which make them patrons and advocates to GOD ward,
and likewise they which trust in their own strength, in their own free will
or good works, rob God of his glory, and cannot give him true thanks for
the benefit of redemption. For we cannot give to any creature, the least joy
that may be in the matter of our salvation: but we commit sacrilege against
God the Creator.

And therefore renouncing our selves and every living creature, let us say with
the Apostle, Unto the king everlasting, immortal, 1. Tim. 1.17
invisible, unto God only wise, be honor and glory for ever and ever.

Secondly, thanks must be given, not with the mouth only: but with the heart
also. For, seeing that God is a spirit, he requires a service of us, that is
agreeable to his nature: that is to say, he will be served of us in spirit and
truth. And therefore, when that praising of God for the benefit of redemption,
comes in question, we must have our hearts lift up on high, and there must be
a consent and mutual agreement between our inward affections and our tongues,
as we see how David exhorts himself to the same, when he says, My soul
praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me praise his holy name. My soul
(I say) praise thou the Lord, Psa. 103.1
and forget not all his benefits. And the blessed Virgin sings the self same
in her song, Luke. 1.46
saying: My soul magnifieth the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my
Savior. Now all hypocrites, and wicked persons, also they that sing and praise
in an unknown tongue, are here reproved. For where there is no understanding,
there is no affection nor will, and consequently no faith, without which,
whatsoever we do, be it never so fair and glorious before men, it is but
sin and abomination before God. Let us take heed therefore that in this
behalf we wander not, and go astray, least we be condemned with the Jewish
people, which honored and served God in vain, insomuch as they came near
unto him only with their mouths, Esa. 29.13 Mat. 15.8
and honored him with their lips, but not with their hearts.

Thirdly, it must be done at all times and seasons, Psalm. 34.1
that is to say as well in affliction, as in prosperity: and to this purpose
David protests, That he will always give thanks unto his Lord, 1. These. 5.18.
and that his praise shall be in his month continually. And Saint Paul
admonishes the Thessalonians. To give thanks in all things: adding, For this
is the will of God in Christ Jesus. But this is clean contrary to time
seruers, and to all them which in time of prosperity lawn upon the Gospel, and
are well content for that time to praise God, whom afterward in time of
affliction they defy and set at naught.

The cause of this mischief is, for that they have not yielded themselves to
the Church of GOD, for a good end and purpose, as to extol the glory of God,
to seek their own salvation, and the salvation of their brethren, but rather
to make themselves greater in their goods and honors, and to satisfy their
own affections. And therefore it comes to pass, that as soon as the devil
lifts up his horns against the Church of God, and persecutions be at hand,
they melt away by and by in afflictions, as does wax before the fire: they are
offended, and parched with the Sun of the cross, they are sorry for the good
they have done, they repent themselves that they were so hasty to confess the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ in the assembly of the faithful, they wish they
had never known GOD, nor his word, nor his Church, nor his Ministers, because
they make greater account (as Esau did) of one mess of pottage, Ge. 25.38
than of the birthright and blessing of the heavenly father. But let such
manner of persons know, that it shall no more profit them, that they made a
fair beginning and jolly holding up of their buckler: then it did Cain, Esau,
Saul, Judas. For seeing that sentence is general, that whosoever continues
unto the end, he shall be saved: it follows by the contrary, that all they
which do not continue constantly in the confession of the son of God, and
are hindered by their goods and honors, love of the world, ease of their
flesh, to set forth and declare with a continual train, the benefit of our
redemption: it follows (I say) that such persons shall go to ruin and
everlasting destruction.

Last of all, this acknowledging must not only be private, but public, in the
face and presence of the whole Church: and therefore as David says, Psa. 116
12.13.14.
What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? I will
take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my
vows unto the Lord, even now in the presence of all his people, Psalm. 40.9.10.
And again, (I have declared thy righteousness in the great congregation:
Lo, I have not refrained my lips, O Lord, thou know, I have not hid thy
righteousness within my heart, but I have declared thy truth and thy
salvation. I have not concealed thy mercy and thy truth from the great
congregation. So then this ought to be well printed in the heart of the weak,
and those that are ashamed to confess and praise openly our Lord Jesus Christ.
For seeing that God does avouch us openly for his people, and gives himself
freely unto us, and to our children, in the person of his well-beloved Son our
Lord Jesus Christ, we can do no less, then auouche him publicly for our
God and Savior, in the person of that same his well-beloved son Jesus Christ
our Lord.

4. Of Love.
FAith, Repentance, and Acknowledging of GODS benefits, cannot have place in
us, and in vain are we called Christians, or that we brag of our selves for
the practice of the Commandments of the first Table, which concern the
service of God before mentioned: unless we show the effects by the keeping of
the Commandments of the second Table, which concern the love of our neighbor,
without which we cannot worthily present our selves to the holy Table of Jesus
Christ our Lord. And therefore it is, that Jesus Christ himself in the Sermon
of the Supper, which he made to his Apostles the same night that he was
betrayed and deliueuered to death for us, did diligently beat this point into
their heads, saying, By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples,
John, 13 35.
if ye have love one to another. Iho. 15.12.13.14.
And again, This is my commandment, that ye love one another, as I have
loved you. Greater love than this has no man, when any man bestows his life
for his friends. Ye are my friends: if ye do whatsoever I command you.
To this same end tends also that, that the same night JESUS CHRIST washed
the feet of the Apostles: Ihon. 13.12.13.14 15.
after which washing, he said unto them, Know ye what I have done to you?
ye call me Master and Lord, and ye say well, for so I am. If I then your
Lord and Master have washed your feet: ye also ought to wash one another
feet. For I have given you an example, that ye should do even as I have done
to you.

We must therefore (according to the commandment and example of the Son of
GOD) be furnished with true and hot love, that we may worthily present our
selves to the Lords Table. If we will have a true description of this love,
we must take it of Saint Paul, which painteth it out in lively colors,
writing to the Corinthians in this sort. 1. Co 13 4.
Love (says he) suffers long, and is bountiful, Love enuyeth not, love
does not boast it self, it is not puffed up, it disdaineth not, it seeks
not her own things, it is not provoked to Anger, it thinks not evil, it
rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth. It suffers all
things, it believes all things, it hops all things, it endures all things.
See what manner of love ours ought to be, every one of us must endeavor, that
all the parts of this description may rightly agree unto us. We are many
ways and in sundry sorts exhorted to this love, and brotherly concord in
the holy Supper of our Lord Jesus Christ.

First in that, that we must wait one for another, 1. Cor. 1.35.
and that it is not lawful for every one of us to celebrate the Supper
particularly and aparte: but when the whole congregation is assembled
together, all the faithful together must take, eat, and drink, the Bread and
Wine of the Supper, according to the commandment of Jesus Christ. Mat. 26.26.
Mark. 14.21. Luke 22.19. 1. Cor. 11 14.
Take ye, eat ye, and drink ye all of thit. It is a true figure anst
testimony of the vanity that ought to be among us.

Moreover, in that, that we being all gathered together in one house of God,
which is his Church, we do there all call upon one self same father, which is
in Heaven, we have all one self same head, Advocate, and intercessour, Mat.
12. John. 11.17. 1. Tim. 2. 1. John. 2.
which is Jesus Christ: We are all quickened with his holy Spirit which
dwells in us; in that, that we all have one self same Word of God, in that,
that we all eat of one self same Spiritual meat, and drink all of the
selfsame spiritual drink, in that also that we all pretend as brethren to
one selfsame inheritance, which is the kingdom of heaven: ought not this to
inflame us with true and hot love?

Finally, the making of the bread and Wine of the Supper, does teach us also
what unity and concord we ought to have one with another: for as we see, that
the bread is made of many corns, and yet notwithstanding afterward is but
one self same lump of bread: as we see also that the Wine is made of many
clusters of grapes, and yet after it is made, is but one only wine: in like
sort must the Christians, which are many in themselves, be joined together
throught love into one body, which is the Church, whereof Jesus Christ ought to
be the only head and leader. But we must note, that this love, whereunto we
are exhorted by so many reasons of the Supper, cannot be where there is envy,
brawling, contentions, rancour, debate, and division: and therefore, before we
come to the Supper, (which is a witness of our agreement as well with Christ, as
with his congregation) if we have had any strife and contention with our
brethren: we must lovingly reconcile our selves unto them. If any man have
offended us, we must franckely and freely forgive our brethren, Mat. 5.23.44.
yea our enemies, as we would that our good GOD should pardon us, and as we
see how JESUS CHRIST our Lord has left us an example of his love, when he
prayed to GOD his Father for his enemies which put him to death: Luke. 23.34.
as we read also that Saint Stephen did the same. Acts. 7.60.
Again, we must also mark, that this love ought to be practiced in all
estates. Kings must love their subjects, they must be Nurces Esai. 49.23.
of the Church of GOD, lovers of common peace, they must use their people with
all moderation and clemency. So likewise must the people honor the King, 1.
Pet. 2.13 14.15. To. 13.2.3.
they must pay him their tribute faithfully, they must be obedient to all his
Lieftenants and Officers. The Pastor must love his flock, Acts. 20.28.31. 1.
Pet. 5.2.3.
he must watch, take pains, and pray incessantly for it. Sa. 12.13.
So likewise must the sheep love their Pastor, the fathers their children,
the children their fathers and mothers, the wife the husband, and the husband
the wife, the masters their servants, and the servants their masters: and
every one in his calling must endeavor to exercise love in that vocation
whereunto God has called him. For otherwise it will be impossible for us to do
our duties faithfully, as well toward God, as toward men, if the rule of love
do not guide and govern us in all our doings.

Other necessary observations for them that will come to the Lords Table.
IN the four Articles aforesaid, consists the true examining of our selves:
notwithstanding, we must take good heed to these points and notes which follow.

First we have to note, that we must not cast our heads, and bend our
brains to examine curiously another ma^s life: as many do which stretch out
and scanne so narrowly the blemishes of their brethren, that they forget their
own. It is to be wished, and we must procure it as much as lies in us, that
the Church of God may be maintained in purity, without show of offense. But
for so much as in this world corn shall always be mixed with chafe, weeds
with wheat, Mat. 3.12 Mat. 13 24 Mat. 13.47. Mat, 10. Mat. 25.
good fish with bad, Judas with true Apostles, foolish Virgins with wise, yet
none of us must be affended therefore. And moreover, let every man endeavor to
find that perfection in himself, which he desires to bring into an other.

Secondly, we must not think that faith, repentance, giving of thanks, and
love, and other virtues which GOD requires of us, can be perfect here in this
world: for there will be always in us, what regenerate and new borne soever
we be) some remnantes of sin, of incredulity, of lack of repentance, of
unthankfulness, and self love, which is directly contrary and opposite to the
true love of our neighbor. As long as we live, the flesh will fight against
the Spirit, Romans 7.23.8.6.7. Galat. 5.1. 1. Pet. 5.8.
the Devil and the world will make war against us: as the life of the
Patriarchs, Prophettes, and Apostles, do sufficiently witness unto us: so
that, even to the last breath of our life we shall have need to crave of our
God, that he would forgive us our sins, through his son Jesus Christ.

Notwithstanding, so far it is that the imperfections which are in us, should
cause us to draw back from God, and from this holy banquet, that rather (so
that we are displeased with our selves for them) they ought to cause us to come
the sooner, to the intent, that as poor famished creatures, we might more
greedily, and with greater desire, receive Jesus Christ, which is the true
shepherd of our souls.

Thirdly, although it be not required of the worthy coming to the Supper, to
have a perfect faith, perfect repentance, perfect giving of thanks, perfect
Love: yet must they be (notwithstanding) true, and proceed from the heart, and
from the spirit. Our faith must not be feigned, our repentance must not be
counterfeit and painted, as that of hipocrites: the thanks which we give to
GOD, must not come only from the mouth, neither must we love our brethren in
word only, and not in deed: but let the whole profession of our faith, and
Christian life, above all things, be far from ostentation and hypocrisy, so
that we take more pains to be good Christians in deed, and before God, then
to be so counted and taken before men.

Of those that refuse wilfully.
But as there are many which do amiss in presenting themselves unworthily to
the Communion: so there are many which do amiss on the contrary side, in
that they will by no means come, nor present themselves to this holy banquet,
for fear of communicating (as they say) unworthily: and so consequently to be
culpable of the body and blood of Jesus Christ. But let them that abstain of
set purpose from the Lords holy table, know, that it is no less fault, upon
an unthankfulness and contempt, to abstain from the holy and sacred meats
which God presents to us at the Supper, then to receive it unworthily: as we
see that a Patient, which being very sick, makes no account of the receyte
and diet which the Physician has prescribed: is no less faulty then he
which abuses, or uses it not competently, as the Physician has appointed.

Therefore, let not this sort of people flatter themselees, as though by this
means they could be excused does before God and men, seeing that it is a most
certain truth* that so heinous an ingratitude is in no wise to be admitted,
or worthy excuse. For first of all, such men do willingly contemn the
commandment of Jesus Christ, which says to all his, Do this, take ye, eat
ye.

Secondly, they contemn the blessed remembrance of the death and Passion of
the Son of GOD, who commands all the faithful to celebrate the Supper in
remembrance of him.

Thirdly, they contemn the price of their redemption: that is to say, the
precious body and blood of Jesus Christ, which are given and distributed to all
faithful Christians in the Supper: according as it is said, This is my body,
which is given for you: This is my blood, which is shed for the remission of
your sins. Finally they despise the church, and the unity thereof, and
willingly excommunicate themselves from the communion which the faithful have
in the Supper, as well with Jesus Christ, as one with another. We see
therefore, how fondely these contemners of the Lords holy Supper do fall, and
are utterly inexcusable. And therefore let us take good heed, that we follow
them not, if we will not be punished with them, which for their Oxen, Mat.
12.7. Luke. 14.22.
Farms, Wives, and Trafficque of Marchaundize, refused is come to the marriage
in the Gospel.

Contrariwise, of them which come unworthily to the holy Supper of the Lord,
or ought not to be thereunto admitted.
AL Atheistes, that is, such as are without GOD, These have not faith.
misbeleeuers ignorant of God and his word, all heretics and false
Prophets, all Magicians, Idolaters, and superstitious, which are partakers of
the table of Devils: likewise all they which have but an hystorical faith, all
the adherents and ministers of the Romish Antichrist, and they that establishe
by any manner (whatsoever) his kingdom, or depend thereon: also all they
which have not yielded themselves to the Church of God, and have not made
profession of their faith. Finally, all they that customably swear either by
the name of God, or by their faith, and apply it to vain matters, and causes
of no value: all these ought to abstain from the Lords table: for so much as
they have not a true trust in God, without the which we cannot be members of
Jesus Christ, nor consequently be apt and meet to receive life of him, which
is the only head of the true fatthfull.

These have not repentance.
AL they which live slanderously, all impenitentes, and unthrifts, al
contemners of God, of his word, and of his holy assemblies, al blasphemers,
and denyers of the name of God, al despisers of correction, and Ecclesiastical
Discipline: they also that haunt and frequent ordinarily evil company, which
walk in the counsel of the wicked, Psalm. 1.1.
which stand in the way of sinners, which sit in the seat of the scorneful. To
be short, they in whom appears no amendment of life, no regeneration, and
they that commit heinous and infamous vices, and such as are to be punished
by the Magistrate: all these, after that they are known to be such, ought not
to be admitted to the Supper: and if they present themselves unto it, they
ought not to be received, least that, that is holy, be given to dogs and
Swyne, Mat. 7.6
to the great dishonor of GOD, and slander of his Church.

Of them which sin against the third Article, which consists in giving of
thanks.
Without true faith and repentance, These are not thankful to God.
we can not be meet to set forth the praises of GOD, who will not be praised
by the mouth of the wicked, Psalm. 50.16.
and therefore al Infidels, Ignorants, and Impenitents, sin also against this
Article, and ought not to be received to the Lords Supper. Also, they that are
mad, or fools, either by nature, or some other accident. They also, which by
reason that they be under age, (as little children) cannot show forth neither
the Lords death fit he come, nor are capable of the Supper of the Lord.

Finally, they which by fragilitie, unkindness, and contempt, in time of
persecution did forsake Gods cause, and renounce the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, ought not also to be admitted thither: unless that they do first
make open confession of their fault, and be reconciled to the Church of God.

Of them which sin against the fourth Article, which consists in love
toward our Neighbor.
THe disobedience to father and mother, These are void of love.
to the Magistrate, and to al superiors, the seditious conspiratours,
fighters, murderers, and such as bear malice and hatred against their
neighbors, they that are carried away with the fire of reuengement,
whoremongers, adulterers, incontinent buggerers, Drunkards and Gluttons,
Deceivers, Thieves and Usurers, Backebyters, Mockers, False witnesses, Liars
and common perjured Persons: and in sum, all they which make an Art of the
breach of Love toward their Neighbors, contained in the second Table of the
Law of GOD, ought not to be received to the Supper. For, seeing that the
Scripture pronounces thus, that such sort of men have none acquaintance of
God, are shut out of the kingdom of Heaven, Ephesians. 5.5. Psalm. 15.
and shall not dwell in the Lords holy Mountain: they ought of right to be
shut out from the sacred signs, whereby the faithful are joined to JESUS
CHRIST, and made possessors of eternal life.

FINIS.

