SEMPER EADEM


A DISCOVRSE concerning the Spanishe fleet inuadinge England in the year
1588 and overthrown by her Maties: Navy under the conduction of the
Right-honorable the Lord Charles Howarde high Admiral of England: written
in Italian by Petruccio Vbaldino citizen of Florence, and translated for A
Ryther: unto the which discourse are annexed certain tables expressinge the
several exploites, and conflictes had with the said fleet.

THESE books with the tables belonginge to them are to be sold at the shop
of A. Ryther being a little from Leaden hall next to the sign of the Tower.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, CHARLES, LORD HOWARD, BARON OF EFFINGHAM, KNIGHT OF
THE MOST NOBLE ORDER OF THE GARTER, LORD high Admiral of England, and one of
her Majesty's most Honorable privy Council: A. R. wishes long life in
perfect health, with great increase of honor.
I AM BOLD, RIGHT Honorable, to present this book unto you and to crave your
favorable patronage therein, because there are many reasons which move me so
to do. First, the subject matter of the book, which is your self especially,
and the rest of the leaders, under whose happy conduction her Majesty's navy
prevailed against the Spanish fleet. Secondly, the time, which I have spent in
the grauing of the several Tables belonging to the book, whereby the reader
shall have not only the report, but the sight as it were of what notable thing
soever was performed by your Honor in that high and honorable service. Thirdly,
the book it self, which as it has been kept back these two years almost
from our men in an unknown tongue, so (as I guess) it had lien hid for ever,
had not the good foreseen given just occasion of the publishing thereof. Last
of all, the time it self does move to that which I have done, which being the
beginning of the new year, calls for by custom a NEW YEARS GIFT, that is,
as I construe it, a sign as ability permits, of that dutiful thankfulness,
which I acknowledge my self to owe unto your Honor. The which my thankfulness,
because I had none other more convenient sign, I was enforced to show in
presenting you this book. For So Much therefore as it is now come abroad to the
view of the world, translated and printed at my cost, I was moved by the
reasons aforesaid, to crave your Honors patronage, that thereby I might the
better withstand, both the malicious toongs of such as carpe, and the manifest
injury of such as are ready unadvisedly to counterfeit another man's work: The
which your Lordships favor obtained (as my hope is) shall bind me forever to
pray for your Honors daily increase in all good things.

Your HONORS most humble, A. RYTHER.

To the Reader.
Who list to hear and see what God has done
For us, our realm, and Queen against our foe,
Our foe the Spaniard proud, let him o'rerun
This little book, and he the truth shall know:
The place, the time, the means expressed be
In book to read, in graven maps to see.
Which when you read, and see, retain this thought,
That howsoever the mean deserved well,
It Was chiefly God against our foe that fought,
And sent them quick through midst of sea to hell.
Whether both quick, and thick let them go down,
That seek to alienate the title of our crown.
T. H

To the Reader.
I could have wished courteous reader, that this book with the tables belonging
thereto, might have come to thine hands immediately after the repulse of the
Spanish fleet, but seeing it could not be so, I must count it better late then
never. Though it come somewhat late, I doubt not but it will breed some
pleasure, because the remembrance of pleasures passed are always delightsome.
If in the graven tables there be any thing which does not please thee in regard
of the work, I crave pardon for it, because I count my self as yet but a
young beginner, do but yet strive to attain to that excellency, which I wish
for. In the book it self the truth of every thing is set down so near as
might be, and therefore it is so much the more to be regarded, being also by my
friend translated faithfully, only the Italian flourishes were here and there
omitted, because in our English tongue they could not sound well without
suspicion of flattery. Farewell.

Thine A. Ryther.

A DISCOVRSE CONCERNING THE SPANISH FLEET, INVADING ENGLAND IN THE YEAR 1588.
overthrown by her Majesty's navy, under the conduction of the Right honorable
the L. CHARLES HOWARD being high Admiral of England, written in Italian by
Petruccio Vbaldino citizen of Florence.
THE Queens Majesty having diverse ways understood the great and diligent
preparation of the king of Spain, in diverse parts both by land and sea, not
only of the strongest ships of all places within his dominions: but also of all
sorts of provision and munition necessary for a mighty fleet, which was to
come from Spain and Portugal (for the furnishing and better direction whereof
he had drawn together into the places aforesaid, the most principal and
ancient captains and soldiers, as well of the kingdoms of Naples and Sicilie,
as of Lombardie and other parts of Italy, and the more remote parts of India,
as by every one was long before very evidently perceived, by reason that the
preparation of these things together with the number of the ships, mariners and
soldiors, the diverse sorts and quantities of victual, the great number and
diverse kinds of artillery, with the sum of every several kind, were
sufficiently specified unto all countries by certain Pamphlets, laieng forth
at large his whole intent: the which Pamphlets were printed and published in
Spain and Portugal, and other provinces of Christendom, with this title; The
most puissant and most happy fleet of the king of Spain, against the Realm
of England:) Her majesty, I say, having in this manner received so open and
manifest information hereof, as also certain intelligence of horsemen and
footmen sent in so great number, that they were sufficient for the furnishing
of diverse camps in the low Countries, under the government of the duke of
Parma his lieutenant general for those provinces, and withal knowing the
multitude of the ships of war, and the possibility that the said king had to
transport his soldiers out off Flaunders, and land them in England, not sparing
to give out thereupon open and free report, that all that provision was for the
invasion and conquest of England: And for so much also as at the same time the
king himself by means of his aforesaid General the duke of Parma, pretended a
certain treaty of peace to be made with her Majesty (albeit this offer was
in truth known in England, not to have been made but only to take advantage
of the time, and to make her Majesty negligent in preparing for her defense,
although she notwithstanding desirous openly to declare her good inclination
unto that, which is a just and christian commendation in a prudent Princess)
refused not in any point this treaty and offer of peace, greatly desired of
all christian people: and therefore for that purpose gave commandment to
certain noble men of her privy Counsel and others, with certain Governors of
her forces in Flaunders, to deal in this matter with the commissioners that
should be there appointed in the name and behalf of the said king: And our
commissioners after their departure and manifest declaration that they began to
parle to some purpose concerning this treaty, being driven off a long time to
small effect, and without any manifest hope of agreement likely to ensue,
until such time as the Spanish fleet was not only discovered in the English
channel, but also withheld and brideled from their purpose in joining with the
forces of the duke of Parma, and transporting an army into England: and
finally until such time as it was enforced to withdraw it self and seek
some better fortune in the northren seas, being every where else unable to make
any forceable resistance: Therefore her Majesty as well to declare her
propense readiness, if on their part any sincere intent of peace had been, as
her vigilant providence not to be deluded by so subtle and malicious an
enemy, furnished her self by sea with a mighty fleet, and by land with no
less diligence to resist so great forces as by all nations were reported to
come against her: For it was never known in the memory of man, that so great
preparation was ever heretofore at one time made out, either by king Phillip
himself, or yet by the emperor Charles the 5. his father, although his power
were much more and his occasions of war far greater.

The diligence therefore of the Englishmen, answerable unto the care of the
Prince, was such and so great, that her Majesty was provided of a mighty
fleet to defend her by sea from the enemy, between the first of November
1587. and the 20. of December next ensuing, a time in truth very short for such
a provision, in regard of so many years spent by the said king in preparing of
his fleet, which notwithstanding did show of what force it was by experience
afterward made thereof against the English navy, gathered together within 50.
days, and provided and most excellently furnished of all things necessary
for such a purpose. The care and charge of this navy was commended unto the
right honorable Charles L. Howard, Baron of Effingham, L. High Admiral of
England, who for his place and office, noble courage, experience in martial
affairs, and nobility of blood and descent, was thought most fit and worthy
to be employed in that service. He had in his company a sufficient number of
honorable, worshipful, and valiant personages, famous both in respect of their
birth and the gifts of mind, desirous to serve their Prince and Country in
such a cause as this, being judged of the whole English nation both just and
necessary: likewise of seafaring men and private soldiors so competent a
number, as might be answerable unto the power of so great a Prince in so
weighty a cause. The L. High Admiral therefore with these forces keeping for
a season the narrow seas and channel between England and Flaunders, sir
Francis Drake knight, mentioned here also in honor of his good deserts, was by
the advice of the Lords of the counsel and his honor so commanding it, sent
toward the west parts with certain of the Queens ships and others from
certain ports of England thereabout, being in all not above the number of 50.
sail of all sorts, there to attend the L. high Admiral his coming with
greater forces, if occasion should so require. In the mean season the L.
Admiral with his Vice admiral the L. Henry Seymer, kept the narrow seas,
accompanied with 20. ships more, very well furnished at the charges of the
citizens of London, besides many other from diverse parts on that side of the
Realm, that lies from the town of Dover up to the northward, which met all
together in good order, and well appointed for the wars.

And here the Lord Admiral understanding for a certainty, that the fleet of
the enemy was already lanched and at the sea, he weighed ancre, and leaving
the L. Seymer with sufficient forces of the Queens ships and other vessels to
watch what the duke of Parma would do, or was able to undertake by sea, and
parting from thence the 21. of May 1588. to the westward with her Majesty's
navy, and 20. ships of London, with some others, he arrived at Plymouth the
23. of the same Month: where sir Francis Drake with 50. sail which he had
under his charge, met with the L. Admiral in very good order. And then the two
nauies being joined together into one, the L. Admiral made sir Francis Drake
his Viceadmirall.

Arriving then at Plymouth, his Lordship presently gave order for provision of
victual for the whole navy, that it might want nothing, that should tend to
the necessary service ensuing. The whole navy was at this present about 90.
sail of all sorts.

This provision being complet, he resolved with himself to put forth to the
sea again about the 30. of May aforesaid. But the wind not serving his
turn, he kept himself abroad, sailing up and down within the Sleeue between
Vshant and Silly, attending some sight or report of the enemies fleet. Where
having waited a certain time, somwhiles drawing near to the coast of France,
and sometimes to the coast of England, he returned, being thereto enforced by a
great tempest, with his whole navy into the Port of Plymouth the 6. of June to
refresh his company there.

In the mean season there were discovered between Vshant and Silly certain
ships of the Spanish fleet, not above the number of 14. which were known to
be severed from the whole fleet by violence of the aforesaid tempest. But
before they could be encountered withal by any of the English navy, the wind
came about, whereby they had opportunity to return back again, saving
themselves from all perils in their haven called the Groine, into the which
also the rest of the Spanish fleet was put to provide themselves anew of other
things which they wanted, and specially of fresh water. Of this thing the L.
Admiral had intelligence and advertisement from sundry parts, as also that the
Spanish fleet was by great fortune dispersed and severed into diverse places,
through penury of many and those necessary things, through diseases and
mortality of men, although the report hereof could not afterward be verified,
whereof the certain truth was, that being troubled with tempest, they were
commanded to come a shore at the Groyne.

The L. Admiral therefore seeing the coast of England and France clear and
free from all danger, as by diligent search it was understood, resolved by the advice and opinion of his counsel, to take the advantage of the next wind that
should blow from the North, that passing to the coast of Spain he might find
the enemies fleet so dispersed in the Groine, and in other parts of Galitia
where they had driven by the storm.

This was put in execution between the 8. and 10. of the same month, the wind
being then at the North, which within a while changing unto the South, after
that he was come within 40. leagues or there about of the coast of Spain, made
him to cast a doubt of that which afterward happened indeed. For laying this
before him as his principal care, according to the charge laid upon him by her
Majesty, to be diligent and careful for the defense of the coast of England,
and considering that with the wind which was now changed and very good to make
for England, the enemy might set out and pass for England without discovery of
his fleet, he returned back with the whole navy, and the 12. of the same
month he arrived at Plymouth, there accordingly to provide himself of all
that was necessary.

The 19. of June his honor had intelligence by a bark or pinnis, whose
captain was Thomas Fleming, amongst other behind him in the Sleeue for
discovery, that the Spanish fleet was discovered near unto the Lyzarde, As
appears in the 1. table.
the wind being then South and by West. And therefore albeit that by reason of
the great number of English ships which were in Plymouth, it was with that
wind very hard to bring them forth from thence (as the military art of the
Sea and the condition of their affairs required) yet was there such diligence
used by the L. Admiral and the rest by his example, as they endeavored therein
with such advise and earnestnes, that many of the ships at the length warped
out of the haven, As appears in the 2. table.
as if the wind had been wholly favorable unto them: which thing could not
have fallen out but through the long and certain skill which the English
Masters generally have in marine discipline. To the which reason this may be
added, that they were all of one nation, of one tongue, and touched with a
greiuous and equal hatred toward their enemies, being mightily persuaded of
their forces. Whereupon we may in such cases assure our selves of what
importance it is in seafaring matters, for a fleet of any prince whatsoever,
inuading any foreign state or kingdom, to encounter with a fleet ready for
defense in such manner as the English navy was, for so much as the fleet
inuading being provided diversely of Masters and Officers differing one from
another in custom, language, and conceit, cannot in any measure give any
assured hope of certain victory, how honorable soever the commander be. Many
of the ships therefore came forth, by reason that the men were moved in the
foresaid respects to labor diligently, and so much the rather, by how much the
captains and chief officers both by counsel and hand, showed themselves more
diligent and industrious.

By these means the 20. day of June the L. Admiral accompanied with 54.
ships, came forth with the same wind that the enemy had from the southwest:
Which thing certainly was not esteemed a small thing to be done, in regard
as well of the wind as of the narrownes of the place it self.

The Spanish fleet being manifestly discovered about 140. miles from Edestone,
and clearly seen of every one toward the west, and so far off from Foye as
the English fleet was, that is 25. ordinary English miles: the next morning
being the 21. of June, all the ships which were now come out of the haven, had
gotten the wind of the Spaniards, and approaching somewhat nearer, found that
their fleet was placed in battle araie, after the manner of a Moon cressant,
being ready with her horns and her inward circumference to receive either all,
or so many of the English navy, as should give her the assault, her horns
being extended in widenes about the distance of 8. miles, if the information
given have not deceived my pen. The reason of their arraunging in this order,
arose upon the foresight of the duke of Medina Sidonia general of the Spanish
fleet, who approaching the coast, sent out a small ship to espy somewhat
concerning the English fleet, and hearing by certain fishermen taken
prisoners, that our fleet was in Plymouth, he prepared himself as aforesaid,
for the avoiding of all such chances as might after befall. Whereupon about 9.
of the clock before noone the L. Admiral commanded his Pinnesse called the
Disdain, to give the defiance unto the duke of Medina: after which he himself
in the Queens ship called the Arcke went foremost, As appears in the 2.
table.
as was convenient, and began hotly to fight with a great ship which was
admiral of the Spanish fleet, in which ship he thought by reason of certain
likely conjectures the duke of Medina to be, considering also the said ship was
so well accompanied by others. The fight with her continued so long and so hot,
that diverse other ships, yea the most part of the Spanish fleet came to her
succor.

As appears in the 3. table.
In the mean season the Viceadmirall sir Francis Drake, with master John
Hawkins, and master Martin Frobisher fought with a Galeon of Portugal, wherein
they thought Don Martin de Ricaldes the Viceadmirall to be.

This fight was so well maintained for the time it continued, that the enemy
was enforced to leave his place, and to give way gathering toward the East. In
the which point of removing, As appears in the 3. table.
a great Galeon wherein Don Pedro de Valdes went as captain, falling foul
with another ship of their fleet was deprived of her foremast, so that she
could not follow the body of the fleet that forsook her, to the great marvel
of the English men themselves, whereby Don Pedro became prisoner, as afterward
shall be declared.

As appears in the 4. table.
Furthermore also there was at this time a great ship of Biscaie about 800.
tun in burden, that was spoiled by fire upon this occasion: The captain of
the soldiors that went in her having small regard (as is reported) of an
orderly and civil life, did insolently beat a certain Flemish gunner: what
cause he had I know not, whether upon occasion of words touching his charge, or
by means of the gunners wife, whom he had abused according to the custom of
that nation. Whereupon the perplexed man seeing himself among such a kind of
people, as not only made him serve their turns at their own pleasure, but
disgraced him in as vile manner as if he were a slave, despairing both of life,
wife, and his young daughter, and perchance rather moved with the dishonor of
them then by his own misfortunes, (which mind is many times in men even of
mean condition) he set himself on fire in a barrel of gunpowder, procuring
thereby through the loss of his own life, and the extreme hazard of those
that belonged unto him, and the loss of many men's lives besides, a cruel
revenge of his injuries received by one only man. This example may serve to
instruct such as command over others, how they ought to behave themselves with
less insolency: inasmuch as the mind of man is always ready to revenge,
after the custom of this our bloody age, if he be not borne utterly void of a
quick wit and lively spirit.

Through this mischance of theirs all the upper decks were blown up, all her
furniture marred, and much other spoil done, besides the death and maiming of
her men, so that being utterly unable all that night to help her self, she
was succored by the galliasses, and for the time saved in the body of their
fleet.

But to return unto our purpose. This first skirmish continued not above two
hours, because the L. Admiral considering that he wanted as yet 40. ships
which could not so readily come forth of the haven, thought he should do
better service if he stayed their coming before he proceeded any further,
beating behind upon the enemy, least he should bring the rest too much in
hazard, and therefore he thought it not profitable too much to embolden and
prick those forward that he had with him in a matter that was not greatly
convenient, either for the honor of the Realm, or his own person, neither did
the military discipline of the English nation purchased by long experience at
the sea give him leave to do it. And therefore he put forth his flagge to call
the other captains to counsel, who agreeing unto his determination, received
instructions concerning the order that they were to keep in following the
Spanish fleet. Then having given liberty to every man to return to their
charge, he gave order likewise to his Viceadmirall sir Francis Drake to appoint
the watch for that night, and to bear out the light.

The same night the Spanish fleet lay about 14. miles off from the Stert. The
next day following early in the morning it was under the wind not so far off
as Berie.

As appears in the 4. table.
In the mean time the English fleet wanting light, because the Viceadmiral sir
Francis Drake leaving his place to follow 5. Hulkes which were discovered in
the evening very late, it came to pass that all the other ships stayed
behind, not knowing that they were to follow, or whither to direct themselves:
so that there might have followed some great inconvenience had they had to do
with an enemy more practiced in our seas. But as it seemed by report, the said
Viceadmiral was moved to do this by means of a certain curious diligence and a
military suspicion, growing in his mind upon certain and very probable
conjectures, grounded on circumstances of matter considered in his mind: and
therefore he gave them the chase, thinking that they had been enemies.

But being overtaken and their officers examined, and being known to be
friends, or at the least wise not enemies, he permitted them to go their way,
returning him self unto the fleet the day following.

The L. Admiral notwithstanding accompanied with the Bear and the Marie Rose
coming a little behind his stern, As appears in the 4. table.
by reason of the cleerenes of the air (which at that time of the year is
ordinarily very great through out all England) followed the enemy all that
night within a Culuerin shot. By occasion whereof the rest of the fleet was
cast so far behind, that the morning after the nearest part thereof could
hardly descrie the tops of the other ships, As appears in the 5. table.
and many of them were clean out of sight, so that with all the force of their
sails they could hardly come all together the whole day following until the
evening.

The next day the Viceadmirall sir Francis Drake being in the Queens ship
called the Revenge, having also the Roebucke and a Pinnesse or two in his
company, took Don Pedro de Valdes, who as was said before, had lost the
foremast of his ship: and having received the said Valdes as his prisoner, and
certain other gentlemen of most account that were therein, he sent the ship
together with the prisoners unto Dartmouth, under the conduct of the Roebucke,
and he himself made toward the L. Admiral, under whose lee he came that night.

The same day being the 22. of the month, a little before the Viceadmirall
sir Francis Drake was returned unto the fleet, the Spaniards forsook the ship
which the day before was spoiled by fire. To the which ship the L. Admiral
sent the L. Thomas Howard, and with him M. John Hawkins, who being in the
cockboate of the Victory went a board her, and there found a lamentable sight.
For all the uppermost decks of her being torn and spoiled by the fire, there
were in her 50. men miserably burnt with the powder. The stink in her was so
great, and the ship it self so filthy, that the L. Howard departed presently
from her: and returning with M. John Hawkins to the L. Admiral, they informed
him of that they found and saw there. For which cause there was presently
commandment given, that the little pinnesse of captain Fleming should conduct
her unto some port of England, where they might most co^modiouslie help
themselves. Whereupon it was carried to Waymouth the next day following. For all
the mishap that befell this ship, they understood that the Spaniards had taken
out of her all the best things that they could, casting off the bulk of her
together with certain gross stuff therein, as for that time altogether
unprofitable.

About this time her Majesty seeing that all hope of peace was frustrate,
called home again her Commisioners from Flanders, who were by the duke of
Parma most courteously dismissed, very honorably accompanied, and themselves
and their cariages safe conducted to the marches of Calis, which way they took
their journey.

But to the matter: the night last before mentioned there befell a great calm,
and thereupon 4. Spanish Galliasses severed themselves from the rest of their
fleet. This thing made the Englishmen to doubt that that night they had
resolved to give the onset upon some of their lesser ships, imagining that they
might annoy them the rather for that they were the rereward of the fleet. But
afterward the Galliasses (whatsoever the occasion was) enterprised nothing,
either for that they saw they could not safely do it, or else because their
minds were not thoroughly settled upon that which before they thought to do: a
thing many times faling out in such persons as are but poor in counsel and
resolution, that they continue in their perplexed conceits without any effect
or commodity ensuing thereof.

As appears in the 5. table.
The morning following being Tuesday the 23. of the month, the wind was at
North East, whereupon the Spaniards came back upon the Englishmen with the
advantage of the wind, directing their course toward the land: the which course
was not profitable for the Englishmen. Therefore to take the advantage of the
Enemy, they cast about toward the west with a reasonable compass, their ships
being very good both of sail and stirrage, that they might bring about their
purpose. Now the Spaniards to hinder their intent, As appears in the 5. table.
after they perceived it, offered to come near aboard to fight with them,
trusting in the huge greatness and height of their ships. The which offer of
theirs the English men refused not, but began presently to bring themselves
into battle array, which the enemy perceiving he also did the like.

In this case the Arc, the Lion, the Bear, the Elizabeth Jonas, the Victory
and certain other ships were content to follow the ship called the Non
Pariglin.

In the mean season the Triumph with other 5. ships of London, namely the
Merchant Royal, the Centurion, the Margerie Joan, the Marie Rose, and the
Golden Lion were so far to the rereward, and so far severed from the rest of
the fleet, that the Galliasses undertook to give them an hard assault. But
they were well entertained by the ships for the space of an hour and an half,
until at the length some of the Queens ships, coming to succor the Triumph
and the Londoners, dealt so well in the matter, that the Galliasses were driven
to retire. The wind came about at this present to the South east, and
afterward to the South west and by south, at which time a certain number or
Squadron of the Queens together with other Merchants ships gave assault unto
the Spanish fleet, As appears in the 6. table.
and that so furiously to the westward of them, that the Spaniards were all
enforced to give them way: For which cause the Lord Admiral considering both
the discommoditie and danger, whereinto the Triumph and the other five ships
were come, he called other of the Queens ships that were not far off, and gave
them straight commandment to follow him, and to charge the enemies which were
to the west ward with all their force: giving further order to them all, not to
discharge any one piece of ordinance before they should come within a musket
shot of the enemy, in as much as that was the only way to succor the ships of
their friends with the greater damage of the enemy. This was well performed by
the Arc, the Elizabeth Jonas, As appears in the 6. table.
the Galeon Leicester, the Golden Lion, the Victory, the Marie Rose, the
Dread-nought, and the Swallow. Which thing the duke of Medina perceiving, he
also came forth with 16. of his best Galeons, to hinder and impeach the
Englishmen in the defense of the Triumph, seeming in this case to pretend, that
the reason of the fight did so require; whereas the regard of his honor did no
less enforce him unto it: because it seemed inconvenient that he should in
every thing be inferior to the Englishmen: and therefore he made large promises
unto those by whose means the victory should be gotten. Howbeit that fell out
in the end that was prefixed by the stars, that is, that the success of the
conflict falling out on his side as hardly as in such a case might be, the
Spaniards in the end were enforced to give place and to retire unto their
array of battle. In this conflict one William Cocks captain of a little
pinnesse called the Violet, belonging unto sir William Winter, behaved himself
very valiantly against the enemy in the greatest heat of this encounter: but
within a little while after, he lost his delight wherewith he was not very well
acquainted, and his life by a great piece of ordinance, fortune not being
correspondently favorable unto his courage, which therefore was not whit
profitable to the perfection of his purpose.

As appears in the 6. table.
Toward the evening 4. or 5. Spanish ships came out from the rest of the fleet
from the south eastward, against whom certain of the English ships came, and
namely the May flower of London, which discharged certain pieces upon the
enemy with a very honorable declaration of the Marine discipline, and being
accompanied by other ships that were there found they all behaved themselves no
less diligently (which thing was not at the first hoped for) showing their
desire tempered with a wish of other company. The conflict continued from the
morning unto the evening, the L. Admiral being at all times ready and vigilant
in all adventures that might fall out: And thereupon he was sometimes more, and
sometimes less eger in the conflict as necessity required, giving thereby
evident example how others should behave themselves. It might well be said that
for the time it was not possible to see before this battle in this sea so hard
a conflict, nor so terrible a spoil of ships, by reason of the pellets that
flew so thick every way: to conclude, there was never seen so vehement a
fight, either side indeuoring through an headstrong and deadly hatred the
others spoil and destruction. For albeit the musquettiers and harquebusiers
were in either fleet many in number, yet could they not be discerned or heard,
by reason of the more violent and roaring shot of the greater ordinance, that
followed so thick one upon another, and played so well that day on either
side, that they were thought to be equal in number to common harquebusiers in
an hot skirmish. The battle was not only long, but also near at hand within
half a musket shot, and that to the great advantage of the Englishmen, who
with their ships, being (as was aforesaid) excellent of sail and stirrage, yet
less a great deal then the Spanish ships, and therefore more light and nimble,
sought not at all, according to their manner otherwise, to board them, but
keeping themselves aloof at a reasonable distance, continually beat upon the
hull and tacklings of their enemies ships, which being a great deal higher
could not so conveniently beat the English ships with their ordinance. This
long conflict being finished and every one retiring unto his part, the next
day following (which was wednesday the 24. of the month) was passed without
any thing done, because by reason of the fight that day before there was spent
a great quantity of powder and shot: whereupon the L. Admiral sent diverse
barks and pinnesses to the shore for a new supply of such munition. For her
Majesty prudently foreseeing each thing necessary for her men, ordained that
there should be sufficient provision made, according as should be needful,
as well of victuals as of munition. It seemed moreover that day that the
Spanish fleet was nothing grieved with that dais respite, but were all of them
indifferently glad of that breathing, inasmuch as thereby they had good
opportunity to look to their leaks, whereof no doubt they had a great number,
for they had carried away many shrewd stripes from their enemies, their hurts
being of great likelihood so much the more in that the Spaniards were pend up
in a narrow room. As appears in the 6. table.
This day the L. Admiral for certain convenient reasons, divided the whole
body of the fleet into four squadrons, by means of which division the enemy
might be greatly and more continually troubled. The first squadron he kept for
himself: the second he assigned unto sir Francis Drake his Vice admerall: the
third to M. John Hawkins: the fourth to M. Martin Frobisher, and after noone he
gave order, that in the night fire of the merchants ships in each squadron (for
that as they were of sundry parts of the Realm, so they were equally divided
into each squadron) should charge the Spanish fleet in as many parts at one and
the same time, that at midnight the enemy might be kept occupied. This order
taken (as it was very likely) might have had as good effect as it was wisely
given: but by reason of a great calm which fell out, no part of this
aduisement could be accomplished, fortune interrupting good counsel.

The next day being the 25. of the month and Saint James his day, there was a
great Spanish Galleon left behind her company to the South ward near to the
squadron of Master John Hawkins: As appears in the 7. table.
so that the barks belonging unto the greater ships, were within Musket shot
of her. By reason hereof 3. of the Galliasses and another ship that was in
manner of a Galleon and well appointed, came from the Spanish fleet to succor
this Galleon. Against whom went out the L. Admiral in the Arc and the L.
Thomas Howard in the golden Lion, and drew so near being towed by their boats,
that they did them much harm, whereby one of them requiring the help of the
rest, being succored by them returned unto the fleet: And from another, by
means of a shot coming from the Arc, there was taken away her light and
thrown into the Sea; the third lost her beck. Whereby these 2. ships the Arc
and the golden Lion declared this day to each fleet, that they had most
diligent and faithful Gimners, desirous as well of the common good, as of the
private honor of their leaders the Lord Admiral and the L. Thomas Howard which
went in them: which commendation might rightly be imparted with them concerning
this happy event, because the calm was so great, that albeit the two fleets
were well able to behold the fortune of each of their friends, yet
notwithstanding they could not help them at all: at the length the wind
beginning somewhat to arise, the Spaniards took the opportunity thereof, and
put themselves foreward to help those of their side, and succored them
honorably. After this time the Galliasses in whose puissance the greatest hope
of the Spanish fleet was founded, were never seen to fight anymore, such was
their interteinment that day.

The two fleetes notwithstanding approaching nigh one unto another began a
conflict, but they continued it but a while, except one ship called the Non
Pariglia, and another called the Marie Rose, which having taken in their
topsailes stayed themselves there, to make as it were a certain experience of
their manhood upon the Spanish fleet, behauing themselves honorably for a
season. In which time, the Triumph being to the northward of the Spanish fleet,
was so far off, that doubting that certain of the Spanish ships would assault
her to the windeward, they succored her with diverse boats that got the wind
easily: for the Bear and the Elizabeth Jonas even at one instant having
knowledge of the danger wherein the other were, drew near unto them, As
appears in the 7. table.
desiring both in regard of the honor of their commonwealth, and also for the
preservation of their friends and countrymen, to be partakers of the like
danger and difficulty.

Whereupon each ship doing her duty they jointly saved the Triumph from all
harm, and recovered the wind. And thus this days work ended: whereof I may
say, that the conflict was no whit shorter then the day it self.

At this present the Englishmen considering the great wast of powder and shot
that had heretofore been made, the L. Admiral determined not to assault the
enemy any more, until he were come nigh unto Dover, in which place he knew he
should find the fleet under the charge of the L. Seymer, and sir William
Winter, who were ready to join with him, that thereby he might both fortify
himself with a greater number of ships, and in this manner provide them selves
of munition from that part of the Realm. Upon friday therefore being the 26.
of the month ceasing from fighting, the L. Admiral (as well for their good
deserts and honorable service, as also to encourage others to like valor) was
desirous to advance certain personages to the degree of knighthood, for that
behauing themselves manfully as well with their ships as their good advise, they
were worthy that degree of honor: and so much the more worthy in that being
far separated from all courtly favor, which many times imparteth the
cheifest honors unto the least deserving men, As appears in the 8. table.
they declared their valor in the eyes of either fleet.

Therefore the two Lords, viz. the L. Howard, and the L. Sheffeild: Roger
Townsend, John Hawkins and Martin Frobisher were called forth, and the order
of knighthoode given them by the L. Admiral as their general.

This day there came to the service of her Majesty in her fleet diverse
Gentlemen, honorable both by blood and place, but much more in respect of their
courage and virtue, for that in these public affairs and so necessary service
of the wars, they willingly offered their service in the defense of their
country and honor of her majesty.

This day also and the next being the 27. the Spaniards followed their course
quietly before the English fleet. In which time the E. of Sussex, the L.
Buckhurst, sir George Carry knight, and the captains of the fortes and castles
thereabout, sent their men with powder, shot and victuals, to the L. Admiral
to assist and help the army. The same Satturday toward the evening the
Spaniards drew nigh to Calis under the coast of Picardie, As appears in the
9. table.
and there suddenly cast anchor almost right against the left hand of the haven
to the westward, a little less then five miles from Calis cleeues. The English
fleet also cast anchor within a culuerin shot of the enemy to the westward.

In the mean season the L. Seymer and sir William Winter joined with the L.
Admiral, whereby the English fleet increased to the number of 140. ships of
all sorts. But the Spaniards with all speed sent tidings unto the duke of
Parma of their arrival, who at this present was at Bruges, who having retained
with him all his seafaring men many days before to this purpose, yet proceeded
no farther in the matter for that time, although for such time as the king had
limited him, he for his part took as much care as might be looked for at his
hands. For having already embarked a certain number of his soldiors, he was
careful in like manner to dispatch the rest as soon as they should be ready,
that they might take opportunity to come forth, furnishing them abundantly
with victual and munition. But in the mean time such a chance fell out as
made frustrate not only his, but the conceit also of the duke of Medina, and
wholly overthrew their enterprise, in that her Majesty was not a little
careful and troubled in mind concerning the success of these affairs,
albeit she herself had committed her whole fortune into the hands of almighty
God.

Moreover also the L. Admiral having by certain notice understood, that the
duke of Parma had prepared a great number of tons of water, and ten thousand
chosen footmen to be embarked for the joining with the fleet, which could not
be avoided if the duke of Medina were not compelled to avoid that place,
knowing also the evident peril that was to be feared, if the Spanish fleet
should be suffered to refresh it self, and to be furnished with so many
soldiors, he applied his wits so in the deliberation of these matters of weight
and importance, having the consent of others more practiced, that no time might
be lost for the furtherance of this service: and for so much as the forces of
the enemy were not yet united and joined together, therefore the 28. of this
month at midnight he provided eight small ships dressed with artificial fire,
to the intent to drive the same upon the Spanish fleet. As appears in the 9.
table.
This thing was diligently and effectually brought to pass under the charge of
captain Young and captain Prewse, two valiant and courageous men. By reason
hereof the enemy was not only enforced to break his sleep, but the fire
coming so suddenly upon him (not remembering himself at the very instant time
of any other remedy, either more safe for himself, or more excusable) to cut
his cables, to let slip his ankers, and to hoyse up sails as the only way to
save his fleet from so imminent and unexpected a mischief. Furthermore by
means of this tumult and confusion (which in truth was very great) the chief
Galliasse fell foul with another ship, upon the cable of whose anchor her
stern was set so fast, that they could not loose her all the night long, so
that the next day following she was enforced with her oars to make toward the
land, and to draw nigh to the havens mouth of Calis, to save hirselfe in that
place: but not knowing that water, and having no profitable and convenient
counsel for the time, she fell upon a shelfe. This thing being in good time
espied by the L. Admiral, As appears in the 10. table.
he sent thither his greatest boat under the charge of Amieus Preston his
lieutenant, and together with him Thomas Gerard and M. Haruie two of her
majesty's Gentlemen and servants, and others of the court, and of his own
servants, who fought with her, but unequally, for that the ship being graueled
could with her force prevail but little. In this conflict it chanced that a
musket shot stroke Hugo de Moncada chief captain of the Galliasse, a noble
and valiant man, in the head. The which mishap joined with the difficulty of
stirring themselves in their defense, bred such a despair in every man, that
the greater sort lept into the water to save themselves by swimming into the
haven, although many of them perished in the water. By this disorder of the
enemy, the Englishmen being more secure, took her and sacked her to their
great commodity, above an hundred men being entered into her, and their company
increasing more and more.

Whereupon Monsieur Gordon governor of Calis, a man of good estimation in
respect of his prerogative in that place, sent his nephew to give the
Englishmen to understand, that they should content themselves with the ordinary
spoil, and that they should leave behind them the great ordinance, as a thing
belonging unto him by virtue of his office. The which embassage sent the second
time unto men more intentive unto their pray then other men's reason, made the
Gentleman to be euilly entertained by our men, in such sort, that they would
have forceably taken from him some trifeling things about him, thinking him to
be a Spaniard. Whereat M. Gordon being offended, caused certain pieces of
ordinance to be discharged from the Town, and then the Englishmen departed,
leaving the Galliasse at his pleasure after the loss of some soldiors, having
notwithstanding sacked 22000. ducats of gold, appertaining unto the king, and
14. coffers of mooueables of the duke of Medina, with some other both money and
mooueables of other particular men, and some prisoners, among whom was Don
Roderigo of Mendoza, and Don John Gonzales de Solerzauo under captain of the
Galliasse.

During the time of surprising of which Galliasse, sir Francis Drake Vice
admiral being in the ship called the Revenge, As appears in the 10. table.
accompanied with Tho. Fenner captain of the Non Pariglia, with the rest of
that squadron, set upon the Spanish fleet, giving them an hot charge. Within a
while after sir John Hawkins in the Victory accompanied with Edward Fenton
captain of the Marie Rose, with George Beeston captain in the Dread-nought, and
Richard Hawkins in the Swallow, with the rest of that squadron, put themselves
foreward and brake through the midst of the Spanish fleet, where there began a
vehement conflict continuing all the morning, wherein every captain did very
honorable service: among the rest captain Beeston deserved special praise. Unto
this fight came the L. Admiral accompanied with the Earl of Cumberland, they
L. Thomas Howard, the L. Sheffeilde, and in that place where the fight was
made, and the victory was gotten, they were publicly commended, that of their
own accord had made show of the fruits answerable to the hope before
conceived of them. Not far from this place there was a great Spanish galeon
seen, which was set upon on the one side by the Earl of Cumberland and George
Ryman in the Bonaduenture, and on the otherside by the L. Seymer, in the ship
called the Raynbowe, and sir William Winter in the Vantgard, yet she saved her
self valiantly, gathering into the body of the fleet, As appears in the 10.
table.
although with ill success: for she was so beaten and so terribly rent and
torn with our great ordinance, that the night following in the sight of her
own fleet, she sunk, her men, as is thought, being saved. After this
captain Fenton in the Marie Rose, and a Spanish Galeon met together, being
east and west one of another, yet no nigher then that their shot might play
safely, and fly between them without any great hurt. Captain Fenton
notwithstanding and those that were with him, were woorthilie commended for
their service begun and accomplished with such prosperous boldness. The same day
the deeds of sir Robert Southwell were evidently seen: for being a man borne
to virtue and commendation, and desirous to purchase honor, to the end that he
might not make frustrate the judgment of his Sovereign, who before time had
made him knight, divining how much in time to come he would further the profit
of the common wealth of England, he enforced himself not only to satisfy
either in counsel or pains the public intent, but also the private commodity
of the L. Admiral his Father in law, in that he had dutifully promised him
sure and faithful service, whereupon for the same he received condign praise
of every man. There was also particularly praised Robert Cross captain, who in
the ship called the Hope, gave a sign of fruit to be looked for in him, not
inferior unto that which the ship wherein he went did by the name it carried,
cause us to hope for.

It fell out also the same day, that the L. Henry Seimer and sir William
Winter did so thoroughly beat two Spanish Galeons, although they were of the
cheifest of them and the best provided, that they were enforced to withdraw
themselves to the coast of Flanders, where for so much as they were in a very
evil taking, as well in respect of the murder of their men, as the manifold
leakes of their ships, they were surprised, and without fight rifeled by the
Zelanders, and with all the men in them carried as prisoners unto Flushing.
Among these, the cheifest was Don Diego Pimentello, a man very famous among his
country people.

It seems heerby that we may with reason gather, that in these conflicts many
of the Spanish ships perished, albeit that most men think that few of them
miscarried. After this battle which was made the 29. of the month, the L.
Admiral the 30. day ordained, that the L. Seimer and sir W. Winter should
return with their fleet unto their appointed office in the channel, which was
to keep the coast from the danger that the duke of Parma seemed to threaten.
The which duke had already lost the opportunity of being able to do any thing
for the acco^plishing of the common intention of the Spaniards, or according to
the instructions received from the Spanish king whatsoever they were: Because
the sudden and unlooked for departure of the duke of Medina with the whole
fleet from the coast of Calice, and his small aboade upon any other coast,
caused the whole care of the aforesaid duke that he took upon the maine land,
to become void, so that he did not imbarke the rest of his men to join with
the duke of Medina.

The Lord Admiral therefore determined to follow the As appears in the 11.
tabl.
Spanish fleet only so long until they might be shot up to the Northward,
whither the Spanish fleet directed her course, but to what end it was not
known. And that he with the same wind might come to the Fyrth, which is upon
the coast of Scotland, if so be that he saw the enemy pass those parts.
Whereupon he thought moreover, that it was good to stay his fleet from
attempting ought upon the Spaniard, until he should have good intelligence of
their purpose, thereby to work a mean utterly to disperse and otherthrow
them. But the Spaniards kept their course about the Islands of Orknay, declaring
thereby, that they minded to return that way into Spain along by the North
coast of Scotland, which as skillful men coniectured, would be to their evident
danger, as it fell out afterward. As appears in the 11. table.
Perceiving therefore the purpose of the enemy, when he was shot up 55. degrees.
13. min. to the Northward, and 30. leagues of from Newcastell, the L. Admiral
resolved with himself to let the Spanish fleet keep on her way: Albeit at
the first he was minded to give them a strong assault upon the second of
August: but persuaded otherwise by a more safe advise and counsel, he wisely
stayed himself from that action, leaving the event that should ensue unto
fortune, who might work some farther matter upon them: seeing the enemy had
taken that way to save himself. Moreover, he considered the scarcity of
munition, whereof at that present he had but little, and that upon this occasion,
for that the ships that lay on the coast appointed by order from her Majesty
to carry such provision, knew not where to find our fleet in time convenient.

The Spanish fleet therefore, as for her own welfare it was requisite, having
gone on so far before, the L. Admiral resolved to put into the Fyrth in
Scotland, as well to refresh himself with new victuals, as also to dispatch
certain other matters which he thought necessary. But the wind being much
westward and against him, the day following he changed his course, and returned
into England with his whole fleet the 7. of August, although by reason of a
tempest which befell them, part of the ships put into Dover, part to Harwich,
the rest into Yarmouth.

Hitherto I have described, according to the instructions and direction which I
received of those things that fell out between the Englishmen and the
Spaniards, adioining thereunto such particular discourses as I thought to be
necessary, and such ornaments of speech as the matter and the Italian tongue
did specially require: Now therefore it remains for the finishing of our
former discourse, briefly and evidently to set down the issue of all the
things before mentioned.

THe Spanish fleet passing (as aforesaid) into those seas, which for the most
part are quiet and calm enough, whether it were driven too and fro in them
with contrary winds, or by some other fatal accident that fell out, it
continued therein tossed up and down until the end of September, As
appears in the 11. table.
with fearful success and deadly shipwreck along the whole coast of
Ireland: so that the duke of Medina Sidonia was enforced to leave there behind
him about the number of 17. good ships, besides those 15. that were thought to
be lost in the months of Iulie and August, and so to return into Spain.

The persons lost in Ireland were esteemed to be about 5500. So that all being
accounted together, it is certainly avouched, that all the ships that were lost
amount unto the number of 32. and the men accounted one with another arise to
the number of 13500. or more. The prisoners also of all sorts in England,
Ireland, and the low Countries arise to the number of 2000. and more. As for
the loss of the ordinante, and the common or private treasure, or whether the
duke after he was preserved from the former fearful and mortal dangers lost
any more ships, or no, or last of all, how many he brought home with him again
into Spain, I mean not to occupy or trouble my pen with any such superfluous
curiosities, being willing to leave that matter unto such as have received
certain tidings thereof: because I study (so far forth as is possible) for
brevity without procuring unto any man either hatred or evil report.

And therefore to knit up this present treatise, this is reported, that after
her Majesty was thoroughly assured of the return of the duke into Spain, and
that her seas were clear and free from al her enemies, and having called home
the L. Seymer with his fleet, it seemed good unto her (as a convenient thing)
that her people should render unto almighty God as great thanks as might be,
for that it had pleased him thus to work and bring about the deliverance of
them all. And therefore the 19. of November, by public edict and order from
her Majesty, there was generally made throughout the whole Realm, a most
frequent assembly of all sorts of people publicly to give thanks unto God all
the day long, for so singular a benefit received, with this intention, that the
remembrance of the said benefit, should upon the same day of every year to
ensue, be renewed in the mind and eyes of all men throughout the whole nation,
with an evident and religious acknowledgment, that the common safety of them
all was accomplished by the special favor of God, the Father of all good
things.

Her Majesty also being afterward desirous to do the like in her own behalf
(as it was convenient) came into Paul's Church in London on Sunday being the
24. of the same month, with a most decent order and assemblies of all the
Magistrates and companies of the City standing in a rank in the street,
replenished most abundantly with people, through which her Majesty was to
pass, being accompanied with such a princely train of all those that had
been instruments of that notable victory, that it seemed her Majesty
together with the rest, having gotten the victory, was desirous in triumphing
manner to show her thankful mind unto the Londoners also, for the charges and
pains they had undertaken all the year before, in the service of the Crown
and the commonwealth, together with the increase of their own reputation,
being accounted the foundation and chief stay of all the other parts of the
Realm. Wherein her Majesty followed the example of diverse kings her
predecessors, who upon special favor, according as good occasions moved them
thereunto, have given many large privileges and liberties unto the said City,
which at this day is doubtless more populous, more wealthy, more mighty, and
more free, then ever it was heretofore.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London, by A. Hatfield, and are to be sold at the shop of A.
Rither, being a little from Leaden hall next to the Sign of the Tower. 1590.


