A FRVITFVLL SERMON PREACHED in Christs-Church the 13. of Iulie. Anno 1589. By
Anthony Tyrell sometime a Seminary Priest.

But by the great mercy of God made a true professor of the Gospel, and
Preacher of his holy word: containing an admonition unto virtue, and a
dehortation from vice.

Taken by Characterye.

2. Pet. 2.21. Better it had bin for a man not to have known the way of
righteousness, then after that he has known it, to turn from the holy
commandment that was given unto him. AT LONDON Printed by John Windet, and
are to be sold at the sign of the Sun in Paul's churchyard by Abraham Kitson.

TO THE MOST reverend Father in God John Archb. of Canterb. his humble
Suppliant Anthony Tyrell wishes abundance of al spiritual graces, and
blessings from God the Father, of our Lord Jesus Christ both in this world, and
in the world to come.
I Stood in doubt somwhile (Right Reverend and my especial good Lord) whether
I might presume to make dedication of so simple and slender a matter unto your
grave and learned Grace: but knowing how much I stood bound unto your great and
exceeding charity: and considering with what favor you do affect a simple and
well meaning mind, and how religiously you have prosecuted my irreligious
demeanor, in receiving me as a lost and straied sheep unto the fold of Christ
again, and waying therewithal, that notwithstanding my true and unfeigned
return, yet every slight action of mine may seriously be Censured of such
as are not given to speak the best, but inclined to judge the worst, I thought
it expedient for mine own comfort to fly unto your Lordships patronage, and I
hope for the causes before considered that I may boldly do it without
presumption, not doubting but that thereby I shall safely be defended from the
sinister opinion of all my adversaries.

May it please you therefore to vouchsafe to accept this simple Sermon, which
for the utility of many, and for the hurt of none I have caused to be
published in printe, a matter though small in substance, yet great in good
will, and the grateful acceptance thereof at your Lordships hands may be an
encouragement to greater endeavors. It was not my purpose and meaning at the
first to put this forth in print, but upon an occasion as your Lordship may
understand in the Preface, and since it has so fallen out that I did determine
it to come abroad, I thought I could not do better then to shroud it under the
covert of your wings.

And in an other respect I am glad that the occasion has bin offered me to set
this forth in public, that withal I might publish unto the world yet once
again the constancy of my faith, which by reason of my former inconstancy
has bin hardly Censured of many as well Protestants as Papists. The Papist
thinking that I was ashamed of my late public action at Paul's Cross, and
the Protestant thinking that I did it but dissemblinglie. To the first I
answer with the Apostle S. Paul. Non erubesco Euangelium: Ro^. 1.16.
Est enim virtus Dei in salutem omni credenti. I am not ashamed of the Gospel,
for it is the power of God unto salvation to all believers. And to the other I
do answer with our Savior. Nolite iudicare, Mat. 7.1.2
vt non iudicemini: in quo enim iudicio iudicaueritis, iudicabimini. Judge ye
not, that ye be not judged: For with what judgment you do judge, you shall be
judged. And therefore leaving the true discussion thereof unto the everlasting
Judge that knows the secrets of all men's hearts, and shall lay open to all
the world in the latter day the priuitie of a man's conscience, I will say no
more but this, that I may satisfy him that stands in doubt of me, if I can.
That I do profess my self to be no otherwise in heart, soul, and conscience,
then I do set down here by pen, namely a true servant of Jesus Christ, one
that has bin by his mercy called and reclaimed from the floods of errors,
Idolatry, and superstition, wherewith I have bin heretofore overwhelmed, and
that mine eyes are opened, and do behold my Lord and Savior Christ Jesus in
his Gospel, and do receive and embrace him in his word, and that I obey and
serve him in that true manner and form that he has prescribed in the same. And
that I do from my heart, as I have heretofore testified, relinquish and abandon
the Pope and the sea of Rome so far forth as it mainteineth Idolatry,
favors superstition, nourishes schism and division, teaches disobedience
both to God and Princes. And I do renounce him for Gods Vicar on earth, which
rebelleth against the Lord in Heaven, in overthrowing kingdoms, murdering of
anointed Princes, removing subjects from their due and natural obedience,
and all to maintain him self in pride and Antichristian government,
acknowledging no other Church but the universal Church of Christ dispersed
throughout the world, nor any other head of the same then Christ Jesus, by the
merits of whose passion I hope to be saved, and in whose faith I purpose to
live and die.

This being my public and outward testimony, yet once again by this
occasion uttered, I hope all good and Godly men will rest fully satisfied, and
as for the mouths of the ungodly in time the Lord shall stop them.

I needed not (my good Lord) unto your Paternity have used this protestation,
and yet I hope the renewal thereof with the continuance shall be no small comfort
unto you, who thirsts the health of my soul as your own.

The cause chiefly why I did it, was to stop the tongues of such as are
always itching to hurt and prejudice other men. I have said my mind, it
rests that I pray for them, to grant me patience to bear the rebuke, and
that I may have grace to remain irreprouable unto the end: for the which I
doubt not but your Lordship of your Charity will vouchsafe to say Amen.

To trouble your Lordship farther by way of Preface I thought not need:
wherefore beseeching your Grace to pardon my bold attempt, to accept of my
poor endeavor, I conclude, praying God continually to bless you, to make you
a careful and vigilant Pastor over his flock, to endue you with all graces
necessary for the government of the same. And so kissing the hand of your
Paternity, with all humility I take my leave. From my chamber in London.
Nouemb. 1589.

Your Graces most humble and daily Orator. Anthony Tyrell

To the Christian Reader.
IT was not my meaning I must confess truly (Good Christian Reader) to have
this short and brief exortation which I made for my private exercise to come
forth thus in public, partly for that I knowing mine own ignorance and
imperfection might seem a great deal more bold then wise to set forth so
simple and slender an action unto the view of wise and learned men, and partly
least I might be condemned of many, either for want of discretion in not
judging of spiritual actions more maturely and soberly, or that I gaped after
vain glory, which would condemn me of greater folly among al Godly me^,
but chiefly for that I had no just or good occasion to induce me to the same.
The cause therefore why it is come forth, in brief was this. At the time I
made my exhortation publicly in Christ his Church in London, my words were
no sooner out of my mouth but a young youth had penned my Sermon verbatim by
Characterie, an art newly invented. It was this youths pleasure, for the
manifesting of his skill in that swift kind of writing, to publish my Sermon in
print, yet honestly he came unto me, to inform me first of the matter. He
was to me a mere stranger, of whom, after I had understood his intent and
purpose, I craved respite to pause of the matter before I would give my
consent. I considered first of my self what might be thought or spoken, and
rather I should be esteemed foolish and vainglorious tha^ to deserve
commendation of any man. Secondly that the youth did it but to show his skill
and cunning in the dexterity of his own handewriting, and that it was not
simply for the health of souls or spiritual profit of any man, and after I
had debated thus to and fro with my self, I was determined to have stayed his
copy, and to have let all alone. Yet remembering my self, that the works of
the Lord are wonderful, and that he uses such means for bringing of things
to pass which are very strange and to me unknown, That the matter might
perhaps be profitable unto some, that whereas I being but newly converted, and
of many suspected for my synceritie in religion, it might be an occasion to
give some farther testimony then I have done, and that some things it may
please the Lord to work by this simple actio^ for the benefit of his Church,
which unto me was unknown, I altered my purpose and intent, so far forth as I
would not be judge of mine own doing, but commit it to some other. I did write
my letters therefore unto a grave and learned man, I told him what had
happened, and I set down mine own mislike, for fear that things might not
be well and orderly done, subiecting my self and my matter unto his virtuous,
wise, and learned censure. It pleased him to return me my copy again approved:
what should I do? should I conceal it? so I might perhaps contristate the holy
Spirit. For the coming of it forth might yield perhaps some devout and
penitent soul some comfort and profit. For thy sake therefore (good Christian
Reader) who so ever thou art, without all other respect I have permitted this
sle^der endeavor of mine to come to light, in hope that although I may be
subject unto blame of many, yet I may do some good thereby to few. To teach
them how they ought to detest and hate sin, to walk warelie before the face
of the Lord, that receiving the manifold graces and mercies at his hands, they
be not ungrateful, and having once thrown out the foul spirit of sin out of
their souls by true repentance, they permit him not to return again by their
great fault and negligence, for if they do, what will follow thereof they shall
understand by the future discourse. Thus having given thee a full satisfaction
of the cause of the publishing of this present discourse, I am to admonish but
one other thing, and so I end. He that penned my Sermon as I uttered it in
Pulpit, did it most exactly, writing it word for word: Yet when I perceived
that it should come to the print, I did only peruse it again, altering some
words, but nothing of the matter: and thus much I thought good to advertise,
least they that heard me when I pronounced it, should think it was not the
same, but some other. And this being all that I am to say at this time by way
of preface, if any spiritual comfort redound thereby unto thy soul, Gods name
be glorified, and it is all that I require: and so I commit thee unto the Lord,
and my self to thy good prayer. From my chamber in London. 1589. 1. Nouemb.

Thy faithful Brother, and fellow laborer in Christ, Anthony Tyrell.

A FRVITFVLL SERMON Containing the nature and vileness of sin, preached at
Christ his Church, by Anthony Tyrell.
Math. Chap. 12. verse. 43.44.45. When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man,
he walks throughout dry places, seeking rest, and finds none. Then he
says, I will return into my house, from whence I came out. And when he is
come, he finds it empty, swept, and garnished. Then goes he and takes 7.
spirits worse then himself, and they enter in and dwell there. And the last
state of that man is worse then the first. Even so shall it be also unto this
froward generation.
THE Occasion of these our Savior his words (Right Worshipful and deerly
beloved in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ) of diverse men is diversely
considered. Some think that they are generally meant of the whole multitude of
the Jews, who after they had received the law of Moses (being brought out of
Egypt when the Devils had possessed them with great blindness and superstition)
and were taught a peculiar and true manner of worshipping the Lord according to
his holy will and pleasure, Exodus 20.
that then the Devil departed from the Jews and traveled dry and desert
places, never resting until he came among the Gentiles, whom he corrupted in
such vile and gross manner, as loosing both common sense, humane reason and
understanding, they fell into all blindness, idolatry, and superstition, and
wallowed and continued in the same until such time as our Lord and Savior was
incarnate, and preached the truth of his holy Gospel among them, the which
glad tidinges the Gentlies embraced, believing in Christ Jesus and forsaking
the gross errors, whereas the Jews, unto who^ the promise most properly
belonged, and to who^ Messiah peculiarly was promised, remained most obstinate,
Genesis 12.3 18.18.
and would neither receive him or believe in him. Satan then with all the foul
troop of his filthy family being cast out of the Gentiles by the faith they
had in Jesus Christ, and having then no rest, said he would return unto the
place from whence he came, namely to the vncredulous Jews, and finding their
Synagogue empty, that is the Scribes, Pharisees, and principal teachers of the
Law to be void of faith, to contradict all that they might Jesus Christ who was
come into the world for their salvation and comfort, and that it was also
garnished, that is to say, stuffed and filled with a number of blind
ceremonies, and pharisaicall traditions contrary unto that that the Lord had
either taught or commanded the^, in so much as our Savior pronounced his
terrible woes, as you may read at large in S. Math. Gospel. Mat. 24.
The devil (I say) finding this opportunity and advantage, returns back unto
them again, and repossesseth them, taking seven spirits with him worse then
himself, in so much as the end is become much worse the^ the beginning, they
being now in farther bondage and captivity then ever they were under Pharao,
having no proper country, or place to remain or abide in, but are made
vagabonds throughout the world; as it appears plainly of them at this day:
and well may it be said that their end is worse then their beginning, for
better it had bin that Christ had never bin incarnat, then being incarnat, they
will not now receive him.

Other some apply these our Savior his words as spoken of heretics, who
being of Infidels and Pagans, by the mercy of Christ made Christians, and the
Devil expelled from them by faith in Jesus Christ, and falling again by
Apostacy into heresy or infidelity, the Devil returns to make his
reentrie again, bringing with him seven worse then himself, and repossesseth
them, and then it comes to pass that their end is worse then the beginning,
for of an infidel there remains some hope that he may be converted and
believe, but of an apostate, or an obstinate heretic there is scarce any hope
at all. Although this application be not amiss, yet here it agrees not with
the litterall sense.

Other some therefore (and they in my judgment come nearer to the letter)
think that these words of our Savior were directly spoken unto the Scribes
and Pharisees, who seeing and beholding the wonderful miracles that our Lord
and Savior had wrought, and namely that, notable miracle ye is mentioned in
this present Chapter, Math. ^^ 22.
of the man that was both blind and dumb, out of whom our Savior did cast out
a Devil, and by the power of his Godhead made him both to see and to speak,
whereupon the common multitude seeing and beholding it, forthwith glorified and
magnified God, but the Scribes and Pharisees, who ought to have had more
knowledge and understanding, became thereby more malicious and obstinate, and
these miracles that could not come but by the power of the Deuinitie, most
blasphemously they did attribute them to proceed from the power of Satan,
saying that through the power of Beelzebub the prince of devils he did cast out
other devils. Math. 1.24.
Whereupon after Christ had defended him self and proved inuincibly, the
power of his Godhead by an argument of of a kingdom divided against it self
that it cannot long stand, Math. 12.5.
and thereof concluding, that if Satan were divided against Satan, then his
kingdom could not stand, but should in short time be consumed and over
thrown. In the end he adds these words that I have recited for my text,
whereby he proves that those miracles that he had wrought amongst them should
serve for their farther condemnation, and proves by that example of an unclean
spirit going forth, how he returns with more strength back again, and
repossessing them from whom be departed makes their end to be worse then the
beginning, and therefore the conclusion was, that the state of those Scribes
and Pharisees was now much worse than if no miracles had bin wrought amongst
them, or grace offered unto them.

Finally it is thought, and not improbable, that these our Savior his words
were particularlye directed unto that man, Mat. 12. v. 22.
out of whom he had cast the devil, and to whom he had restored both his
speech and his sight, that having received these benefits and graces at the
Lords hands, he should not become either ungrateful or unthankful, or by
thinking himself secure, live any thing the more loosely, but to walk before
the Lord with all humility, fear and circumspection, least by overmuch,
negligence or misdemeanour the devil should return back again, and so
alleging that example should show, that if it chanced so to fall out, his end
would become much worse then his beginning. The like caveat or warning our
Savior gave unto the diseased man whom he cured at the poole of Betheisda,
Io. 5. v. 2.
whom he finding in the temple said unto him,

Having (as I think) said so much as may be for the understanding of ye meaning
of the letter, and of the end and scope whereunto our Savior uttered the
forementioned words. It rests now that for our particular utility and
profit that shall either hear or read them, we may understand what benefit
we are to take by them, and the benefit will be this, if we make it an example
unto our selves, for that it may serve very well, for so much as there is none
of us all but have received innumerable benefits and graces at the Lords
hands, more then mind can conceive, or tongue can utter, for all which if we
should show our selves ungrateful, as that man did, the Devil having bin once
already by Gods grace cast out of us, might return again, and returning
again bring other seaue^ worse then himself, and then woe unto each of us,
for our end should be much worse then our beginning.

Wherefore, for memory and methods sake I shall divide ye whole matter into 4.
parts. the second I will show the presumption of Satan in returning again to
see if he can make any reentrance into that man or woman from whom he went out
of;

As touching the first which is the devils departure and his demeanor after he
is departed, When an unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks dry and
desert places seeking rest, and finds none. In these words is contained both
his departure and demeanor. Now to come unto every thing in order you must
first consider what is meant by an unclean spirit. This word spirit is in
holy Scripture indifferently taken, sometime it signifies the holy spirit
which is the third person in Trinity, sometime it signifies the soul of man,
sometime the air, or ye life of any creature. When so ever you shall read or
find in holy scripture this word spirit, set down simply without any other
word to express the meaning thereof, it is commonly taken in the better part,
as when S. Paul in the 5. to the Gal. reckons up the fruits of the spirit,
naming them, Gal. 5.22.
Charity, Joy, Peace, and the like, it is meant there of the holy spirit. Romans
8.26
And in the 8. to the Romans where he says, the spirit helps our infirmity,
and the like; he means also of the holy spirit. But being set down with his
adjective, the nature and quality of ye adjective will show what thing ye
substa^tiue is, as when it is said, holy spirit, good spirit, or the like.
Likewise the Devil who is ye wicked spirit is always certainly set down by
his adjective, as in ye first of Sam. the 15. chap. it is said yt evil spirit
vexed or tormented Saul; 1 Samuel 15. v. 15. ^^t 12.
whereby is meant the Devil. And likewise here in this place our Savior naming
an unclean spirit, he means the devil.

Now that we understand what spirit is spoken of or meant in this place, it
follows that we understand why he is called unclean.

The Devil being a spirit, as he is the creature of God he was created in
great excellency, for there was nothing that the Lord had made which he
approved not to be very good, as may appear in the first of Genesis. Genesis 1.
v. 31.
And especially the Angels who were of all other creatures the most noble. But
Lucifer the chief of the Angels not being content with those excellent gifts
of nature which the Lord had bestowed on him, but aspiring unto the majesty of
God, and usurping (as it were) the glory of his deuinitie, was therefore
worthily dejected, and so many as consented unto him, and became of all
creatures the most vile and abominable, not vile in nature but in condition and
quality, for being cast down into eternal misery himself irreparable without
all redemption, he endeavors all that he may to make man in as bad estate as
him self, and that he can not do but in tempting him to sin: the which being
a vile and an abominable thing in the sight of the Lord, and a thing most
impure and unclean unbeseeming the nature and condition of Angel or man, and
for that he labors continually, tempting us to bring us into this impurity,
the devil is said to be an unclean spirit, unclean (I say) by operation, not
by creation.

This unclean spirit being departed from a man. It follows to know how and
in what manner he departs. Sure and certain it is that the unclean spirit
Satan never departs from man or woman by his good will, for such is the
envy and malice that he bears unto man, that he never cease laboring to
bring him unto eternal destruction, as witnesses S. Pet. in his first epist.
5. Chap. verse. 8. saying. 1 Fet. 5.8.
Be ye sober and vigilant, for your aduer sarie the Devil goes about like a
roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour, whom you must resist being strong in
faith: surely he goes about continually watching and prying where he may get
a pray, and such is the malice and hatred that he bears toward man, First
in respect that he is created unto the image and similitude of God, to possess
that place from whence he is dejected, and in respect of the curse that was
given him in Paradise, Genesis 3.
and that it was told him that the seed of the woman should bruise his head,
that he prosecuteth mankind with an implacable hatred, and seeks to destroy
us all that he can. By his good will therefore he never departs from us, and
he tarieth or abides with no man for any goodness, but to bring him to
mischief or destruction. Every man therefore that is in sin, he is accounted
to possess: for so many as are wilful and obstinate sinners, they are under
the devils subjection. If any man be called from his sin by the grace and
mercy of God and true repentance, then the devil is said to depart, which
departure, (as I said) it is not of the devils accord, but by the force of Gods
Spirit that expels him by true repentance out of a sinners heart, for other
wise he would never depart: And therefore Satan, of our Lord and Savior in
holy scripture is called Inimicus homo, that is, Mat. 13. v. 28
the enemy by a kind of singularity, for that there is no enemy comparable
unto him in hatred that seeks the destruction and loss of our body and
soul for evermore, Yet as envious as he is, and as malicious, he dwells no
longer or abides in us more then we remain in sin, and so soon as it
pleases the Lord to call us by his grace unto repentance, will he, nil he, he
must depart away from us, for sure and certain it is, according to the rules
in Logic, two contraries can not agree at one time together in one subject,
but as virtue comes in, vice must go out, and as grace appears, sin
flees, and where the holy spirit takes possession, the unclean spirit must
pack out. I follows, When an unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he
walks, etc.

Hitherto has bin discussed so much as I thought necessary for the time and
place, what the unclean spirit is, how he departs from a man, it comes
now in order to show, his demeanor is to walk throughout dry places.

The walking of Satan through dry places is but a metaphor taken from a dry
ground wherein is no moisture of water whereby it can yield or bring forth any
fruit, for as almighty God has his orchard and vineyard that brings forth
good fruit, so the devil has his orchard and vineyard to bring forth fruit
agreeable unto his appetite. The fruit that the devil gapeth after is noother
but the spoil and destruction of man, which he proves by his temptations, and
the corruptions of our flesh: and first he seeks to destroy the soul of
man, being sure yt if once he can come to the possession of the soul that the
body will come after, and if by Gods mercy he be prohibited that he can not
hurt us in souls, then he labors all that he can to plague and aflict us in
body, If he can not in body, then in our temporal goods, if not in our
goods, then in any thing that belongs to the health and comfort of man, as
birds of the air, fyshes in the sea, plants, herbs and trees, beasts or
any other cattle. And if by the permission of God he be not suffered to hurt us
in any of these, the^ he is said to to walk dry and desert places then, is in
places where he can make no fruit: for all those labors of his he acounteth
fruitles wherein he may do no manner of mischief either to man him self, or to
the things that belong to man. And thus you know now what it is to walk in
dry and desert places. It follows, Seeking rest, and finds none.

What rest think you is that that the Devil seeks? Is it possible that
Satan the enemy of God, and mortal enemy of man should have any rest? does he
seek to be reconciled unto God, or to leave tempting of man? can he ever be
at any rest that carries always his hell about him? no such matter. The rest
ye Satan seeks is no more then how he may accomplish his malicious mind,
and put his deuilish practices in execution: Even as a man that is given to
wrath and envy, who never is at quiet until he have revenged himself, or
shown his malice upon him that he persecuted with hatred, and then he seems
in that degree to be at rest, so is the Devil is accounted to be at rest when
he has brought his malicious mind unto any deuilish accomplishme^t or
execution: so many souls as the Devil can bring by any wicked suggestion or
synister means unto destruction, so much myschiefe as he may utter against any
man or woman, so much rest he takes in the accomplishment of his will,
although otherwise he sustain grievous torments and punishment at the Lords
hands for the same, wherefore every man or woman is here to take heed that
they make not themselves like unto the Devil in this point, as all they
undoubtedly do that do bear with themselves revenging minds, and never are
at quiet until they trouble or vex their neighbor, or have taken reuengement
on their enemy, who so ever does so, doubtless he shows himself to be
the child of Satan, and if he seek, after Satan for such rest, he shall
have that rest that Satan has that is, to be tormented with the intolerable
pains of hell fire for evermore, and never shall he come to any other rest, much
less unto that rest that is prepared for the children of God to live and
remain in eternal bliss for evermore. And thus much of Satan's departure and
his demeanor in seeking rest and finding none. It follows.

Then he says, Pars 2.
I will return into my house from whence I came out, and when he is come, he
finds it empty, swept and garnished.

This is the second part wherein I purposed to note unto you the presumption of
the Devils return, saying I will return into my house from whence I came: and
when he is come what causes he finds to force him make a reentrie, and they
are three, namely, that the house is empty, that it is swept, and garnished.
I will entreat briefly of every point in order.

First the Devil having departed and walked dry and desert places, seeking
rest and finding none, he says that he will return unto ye house from whence
he came. Here is to be noted the boldness and the malice of Satan, let him be
expelled and repulsed never so much, yet he will return again: whereby we
are taught never to be too secure or void of fear, but always to stand upon
our guard, for as fast as one temptation goes, an other comes, so sone as one
misery is passed, forthwith comes an other, a man never remains (as Job
says) long in one estate, Job. 14. v. 2.
but now are we merry, and by and by sad, now rich, then poor, now free, by
and by oppressed with temptation again. I will return (says he) unto my house
from whence I came. The soul of that man or woman that the Devil possessed for
sin, and by grace was expelled out, the devil calls his house, not his
properly by creation, for so every man or woman is properly the Lords, for he
has made us, Psalm. 95.
and not we our selves: but the Devil calls the soul of a sinner his house
by possession, for so long as we remain in the estate of grace, we are the
children of God, and our bodies are the temples of the holy Ghost, but so soon
as we give our selves over unto sin, forthwith we become the slaves of Satan,
and our bodies are made an habitatio^ and a receptacle for Devils. Here would
be noted the dignity of man or woman the fears ye Lord and yt walks in his
ways how he is the temple of the holy Ghost. and the indignity of every
sinner that makes him self the bondslaue of Satan, and a receptacle of foul
and vnclane spirits. I will go into my house from whence I came out. The
Devil desires rather to go unto his own house that he possessed before,
then to a strange house which before was none of his: every wicked spirit has
his proper house, the spirit of pride he harbors in the proud man, the
spirit of Envy in the envious man, the spirit of Glotony and dronkennes in
the Gloton or dronkard, the spirit of uncleanness in the unchaste and fleshly
man, the spirit of covetousness in the covetous man and usurer, and so
consequently every sin has his proper and peculiar spirit.

Now when he says: I will go into my house from whence I came. Every spirit
seeks to go into his own house, into that house whereof in former time he
had possession, out of the which houses, that is, out of the souls of sinners,
these foul and unclean spirits by the mercy of God have bin cast out, some
of Glottons and Dronkardes, being made sober and temperate, some of envious men
being made meek and charitable, some of proud men being made humble, some of
fornicatours and adulterers being now made chaste, some of covetous persons
being made liberal and charitable, and so of the like.

Thus have you heard the Devils boldness and presumption, to put you in a
warines and good caution, now let us come to the causes that he finds for his
reentrance.

After that the unclean spirit was returned, he found his house empty,
swept and garnished. Three causes sufficient to make him make reentrance, he
watched his time and opportunity, and so soon as any occasion was given, he
plieth him, he loses it not, but takes it for his most advantage. It stands
therefore dearly beloved us upon to have a vigilant and watchful eye unto all
the parts of our soul, to rule and govern well all the senses of our body,
all the motions and desires of the mind, and especially to preserve our heart
pure and clean from the consenting unto any corruption or sin. Omni custodia
custodi cor tuum (says Solomon) quia ex ipso vita procedit: Prou. 4.23.
With all dilige^ece keep well thy heart, for out of it proceeds life. Three
causes or occasions the unclean spirit found out in this wretched person which
gave him means to reenter again. The first whereof was, for that he found his
house empty. The soul of that man from whom Satan was expelled remained
empty: what is it to be empty? To be empty is to be void of faith, and he
that is empty and void of faith, it can not be but he must be empty also of al
good works. For I do not here distinguish faith from good works, as the
Papists commonly do, for when I speak of faith I mean a justifying faith
which can not be without good works, no more then life can remain in a man's
body without a soul. I mean not a dead faith, or a deuilish faith, Iac. 2.
such a faith as S. James does mention in his Epist. This justifying faith (I
say) who so ever has not, he is empty no doubt of all goodness, and without
that faith as S. Paul says 11. to the Hebr. verse. 6. It is impossible to
please God. This emptiness of faith, Heb. 11.6.
and consequently of all good works, proceeds of a kind of idleness which is
the mother and nurse of all kind of mischief, and him I account to be idle,
that is not well occupied, for all such as occupye themselves in vain and
tristinge business, as in carding, dicing, unlawful gamings or exercises,
(unless it be for an honest and moderat recreation) I say) those labors are
no better the^ idleness, for that they be childish, there is no profit in them.
And such actions or labors which contain in the^ manifest and apparent evil,
I say those are deuillish, and worse then if a man were childishly occupied or
idle altogether. That man or woman that wants a true and perfect faith, yt is
fruitful by good works, can never be well occupied. It is not enough for a man
by faith to apprehend Christ Jesus our Savior, as he is merciful, as he has
redeemed us, and paid for us ye price of our redemption, but we must apprehend
him also as he is just, as he hates sin, crutifiing it in his own flesh, and
conte^ning it in us, and us for sin: we must apprehend him as he is risen
again from death to life, with whom we must also arise again from death to
life, Colos. 3.
by dying to the world, and living unto him by crucifying old Adam with all his
concupiscences, and putting on ye new, in justice and righteousness, for he that
is not partaker of the first resurrection, which is to rise from sin to
grace, shall never be partaker of the second, to rise from death to everlasting
life. Let us not therefore deceive our selves with the bare name and title of
faith, 2. Pet. c. 1. v. 10.
but let us rather as Peter says, by good works endeavor to make our vocation
and election certain. Let us always be working and laboring like good and
painful servants in the vineyard of the Lord, every man in his vocation. That
we should so do, we are admonished by that weekly labor that the children of
Israel had in the desert, where every day by the commandment of the Lord they
were commanded to gather Manna, Exodus 16.
only the Sabbath they should rest. Surely so with us, we ought all the week
days of this our pilgrimage, and short and transitory life to be gathering of
Manna, of spiritual food for our souls: so long as we remain in this world we
must not be Idle, nor seelt for any rest, until our Sabbath comes, which is
the day of our joyful resurrection, when as with body and soul we shall
remain in the Kingdom of our Father for evermore, there we shall rest, and
then we shall rest, and not before.

The second cause that moved Satan to make reentrance was, for that he found
his house swept, and as our Text has it, it was swept with a Besom.

A house that has bin long unswept and contracted great corruption, it is
impossible with a Besom sweeping it to make it clean, for the dyrt and filth
being baked on the ground, and hardened, is not so easily taken away, in such a
case it is necessary and requisite, that a man use the help of a
paring-knife, or a scraping-iron, for if a man do but superficicially sweep it
with a broom, assuredly it will be little the better. Even so it fares with
the soul of a sinner: how many sins by long continuance have we contracted
in our house? how many ways have we defiled our selves with vile and filthy
thoughts? how many foul and unsavory words have we breathed out of our
mouths, to argue the uncleanness of our Souls within? how many lewd and
abominable acts have we daily committed, and do commit from time to time? and
do we think with a slight and small repentance to be pardoned and forgiven? do
we think by knocking once or twice upon our breast, and saying, Lord forgive
me, Lord have mercy upon me, our sins shall be remitted and taken clean
away? What should then that noble king Ezechias mean when he lay sick of an
infirmity, Esai. 38. v. 10.15.
so to cry out, and say, in the moitie of my years, I will descend into the
grave, and to say that he would call to remembrance all his years in the
bitterness of his soul? What meant the Prophet David, Psalm. 51. v 1.
after he had committed adultery, to cry out, and say, Have mercy on me O
God according to thy great mercy? And in another place to say, I have labored
in sighing, Psalm. 6. v. 7
I shall wash my bed every night, and water my Couch with tears. Such and the
like signs of repentance used this noble King and Prophet. What manner of
repentance was that of Magdalen, when she entered into Simon the Pharyses
house, bathed our Savior his feet with tears, Luc. 7.
and washed them with the hairs of her head? O Lord how far are we in these
days from this sorrow for our sins? We think it enough if we cry once unto
the Lord for mercy, we never study to take revenge of sin in our own
flesh, we are not minded with the Ninevites to repent in Sackcloth and Ashes,
Jonas 3.6.
when as our sins are no less grievous then theirs, and as many in number,
if not more.

We think perhaps that Christ mocked, when he said: contend ye to enter in
at the narrow gate, Luc. 13.24.
for many (I say unto you) shall seek to enter in and cannot: or that he spoke
not in earnest when he said: The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and
they that get it, must get it by violence. I know not surely how we practice
now a days to get heaven by violence, unless eating and drinking, banqueting,
and sporting, daunsing, and vising, swearing, and staring, be violence. If
this violence, or the like kind would get heaven, perhaps a number should come
to Heaven, who for using the same shall be assured never to come there, but
violently to be thrust into hell where they shall remain and abide for evermore.

There be many now a days when they are reprehended of sin, and persuaded to
holiness of life, can be content to say it is a good thing, it is meet it
should be so, but to study as they should amendment of their lives, to pluck
sin by the roots out of their heart, there are few that will do so. Let a man
cut his hair never so short, yet in short time it will grow long again, and
why? surely there is no other reason, but for that the roots be left in the
skull still, so let us clip our sins never so short, and sweep our houses
never so much, unless we pluck up the roots, and pare away the dirt with a
sharp paring iron, it will be never the better, in short time all things will
return unto their former lothsomnes again. And this is the second cause or
occasion of the devils reentrance when he finds our houses but swept. It
follows, And he finds his house garnished.

This is the third and last cause that moves Satan to make reentrance either
into man or woman, namely when he finds his house garnished. This garnishing
of the house is no more but the corrupt affections and desire of sin, which
remain still in the heart of man or woman, although the sin be done away,
which is an occasion of returning or falling again unto sin so soon as any
cause of sinning shall be offered, 1 Thef. 5.23.
And therefore Saint Paul, to prevent this mischief, exhorts us not only
to abstain from evil, but from all occasion or show of evil. For it is not
enough for a man to abstain from the out ward act of sin, unless he
mortify in himself the inward desire and affection: for if he entertain and
nourish that, no doubt at one time or other he will come to the accomplishment,
and that is a sufficient garnishing for to inuit the Devil to make a
reentrance. A notable example of this matter I may produce out of Exodus, Exodus
10.
of Pharao King of Egypt, who having kept the children of Israel a long time in
his subjection, at what time that Moses was sent by the Lord to move Pharao for
their departure out of his Country, unto the desert, Pharao being loath to
forgo so great a multitude, whom he used as slaves in all servile lahours,
resisted a long time, until at ye last being terrified by sundry plagues that
the Lord sent upon him, he called Moses and Aaron unto him in the end, saying.
Ite and sacrificate Domino Deo vestro, oues tantum vestrae, and armenta
remaneant, paruuli vestri eant vobiscum, Go ye (says he) and sacrifice ye
unto the Lord your God, and take your little Children with you. Let only your
sheep and cattle remain behind. What was Pharaos meaning in this, think you?
Had he such a desire of the sheep and cattle that he esteemed them more then
the Israelites themselves? no verily, he was a Prince and a King, and of the
Israelites goods he stood in no need, but he had a farther meaning and that was
this, he thought the Israelites had covetous minds, and that when they should
come into the desert, and find the want of necessary provision, and be
pinched with penury, they should remember their Cattle that they left
behind them in Egypt, and thereby be moved to come back again, the which
Pharao thought he might easily bring to pass, if he might reserve still in
his hands, but such a pawn.

This was the drift and purpose of Pharao: even so it fares with Satan and a
sinner, the sinner whom Satan a long time has had in subjection, if by Moses
and Aaron he be commanded to depart out of Egypt, that is, if by ye preachers
of Gods word be moved to forsake his sin, and to travel into the desert of
repentance, Satan is loath he should go, and hardly he will let him depart,
unless the Lord do plague Satan, that is by giving such grace and strength
unto the sinner, that maugre Satan's spite, he will desist from sin, he will
frame himself unto an exchange of life, he will frequent the Church, he are
Gods word, read Gods word, converse among good and godly persons of whom he
may be instructed, learned, and taught: all which things although Satan be
loath he should do, as by experience each of us may find in our selves how loath
Satan is that we should serve ye Lord, or be at any time well and virtuously
occupied, and lays all the impedimentes and blocks in our way that he can to
make us desist and leave of our good purpose and intent, yet (I say) when he
sees there is no other remedy, but that the grace of the Lord is so strong in
us that we break the Devils bonds a sunder, and that we release our selves out
of his bondage whether he will or not, he can be content then with Pharao to
say. Ite, and sacrificate Domino Deo vestro. etc.

Go ye, and Sacrifice ye unto the Lord your God, he can be content we
should come to the Church, hear the word preached, read it at home in our
houses, talk of it at our tables, and the like: only he craves at our hands
but a pawn, that is, that we leave our sheep and cattle behind us with him in
keeping, that is, that we retain still but the affection and desire of sin,
that we would retain but in our memory the pleasures that we had in the
world, that when we are in the desert, the remembrance of ye turpitudes of our
flesh, may bring us back again as S. Peter says like dogs unto our vomits.
2 Pet. 2.22


But (derely beloved) in this case we must answer Satan as Moses answered
Pharao, Cuncti greges pergent nobiscum: non remanebit ex eis vngula. All our
cattle shall go with us, we will not leave behind us so much as an hoof. So must
we answer the Devil in the act of our repentance, that we will return unto
the Lord with all our hearts, with all our minds, with all our souls, we will
serve him with our bodies, lives and goods, all our cattle, that is, all our
desires and affections shall go with us, we will not leave so much as a hoof
in the world, so much as a desire to return back again unto sin, which we
purpose to forsake, unless it happen to us as it happened vuto Lots wife, Ge.
19.26
to be transformed into a salt stone. Who soever shall do this, he shall keep
his soul ungarnished, and the Devil by that occasion shall never find means
to make reentra^ce, the which the Lord for his mercy grant us grace that we may
perform. And thus much of the second part which was the return of Satan to
make a repossession, and the causes ye moved him unto the same.

Now it follows to show that when Satan being returned, Pars. 3.
and finding his house, as I said, empty, swept, and garnished, how he takes
possession and enters in more strongly then ever he did before, and therefore
thus it follows in the text.

Then goes he and takes seven spirits worse then himself, and they enter
in and dwell there.

Now are we come to the repossession of the enemy, whereby we have to
understand, that that man or woman that has received Gods grace, and afterward
falls unto his former accustomed wicked life, that man or woman does give the
Devil an occasion to make a reentrie, and coming again he comes with an
army of other seven spirits worse then himself, and they al enter in and dwell
there. 2 Pet. 2.21.
Oh better had it bin (as Peter says) never to have known the way of
righteousness, then after a man has known it, to turn from the holy
commandment that was given unto him. Hebr. 10.26.
And as the Apostle Paul witnesses, if we sin willingly, after that we have
received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for
sins but a fearful looking for of judgment, and violent fire, which shall
devour the adversaries. Let us take heed therefore derely beloved, how we
behave our selves after that we have received the grace of God, least for our
ingratitude and negligence, our Candlestick be removed, Apoc. 2.7.
and our grace taken from us and given to an other that shall bring forth
better fruit. To come to my Text, that it is said, that he takes seven
spirits worse then him self, they are counted worse, in that they come
furnished with greater malice to seek the destruction of the soul of man. In
that he names a number of 7. I suppose the Evangelist means a number of
perfection, that is to to wit, the Devil returns with an absolute power, for
under this number 7. all power that the Devil can use is contained. So we read
that Marie Magdalene was possessed with 7. spirits, and that our Savior cast
out of her seven Devils, Luc, 8.2.3
which signifies al kind of sin. So that the number of 7. imports that
Satan if he come back and repossesse either man or woman again, he will
omit no occasion to hinder them that they shall never return unto God
again, and therefore the matter is most dangerous and diligently to be
looked unto. And where it is said in our text that all these spirits do enter
in and dwell there. You must understand how and in what manner the deuild welleth
in a body, he does not dwell as the Philosophers say, tanquam corpus locatu^
in loco, as a body placed in a place for the Devils are spirits, and not
contained in any place. Nor yet tanquam forma in materia, as the soul of a man
does dwell in a body. For the Devil is a simple substance of himself, and not
composed or joined to any matter, but the Devils dwelling is only by his power
or operation: where he has power, there he exercyseth his strength, and there
he is said to dwell. The Lord defend us from his power, and that he dwell not so
among us.

I have bin too long I fear me in my former parts, I will now hasten to the
fourth and last part, and so make an end. It follows in the text.

And the last state of that man is worse then the first. Pars 4.


This is the fourth part of my division wherein I am to show, how that after a
man has received the grace of God and that the foul and unclean spirit yt led
and tempted him to al wickedness by the great mercy of God was cast out of
him, if after he look not well unto himself, avoiding as nere as he can all
occasions and causes of sin, but leaving his house empty, that is, his soul
void of a true faith, and good works, and that for all his abominable sins
that he has committed, he has but swept his house, that is, made a
superficial sorrow or repentance for his sins, and that which is worse,
leaves his house garnished, that is, retains still the remembrance, desire,
and affection of his former concupiscence: unto such a man Satan does sone
return again, and in returning he brings seven worse spirits then
himself, and they enter in and dwell there, then it can not be, according unto
our Savior his testimony, but that the end of that man must be worse then
his beginning.

Wherefore that you may understand how much worse the state of that man shall
be in the end, it shall not be amiss if you know how bad the estate of a
sinner is in the beginning. And that you may the better judge of the vileness
and deformity of the first sin I know not which way I may make you to
comprehe^d it better then to lay before your eyes the excellency of virtue.
For every thing (as ye Philosopher says) is best known being compared by his
contrary. What man is he that can tell the commodity of health so well as he
that has bin afflicted we sickness? or who knows so well the sweetness of
liberty as he that has had experience of captivity? To know therefore the
vileness of an evil thing, we must consider the nature and condition of a good
thing, for the deformity of a crooked line will appear best if it be measured
by a right rule or square. The Philosophers defyned that there was nothing that
could be good which had not all, or at least one of these three properties,
that is, if it were not honest, profitable, or delightful, and although the
wiser sort of them desined certainly, that nothing could be good that was not
honest, yet yt thing which in his own nature is not honest, if it be either
delightful or profitable, it carries at ye least a resemblance of goodness. And
thereof it comes, that no man would commit any sin, but ye it caryeth
some show of goodness: for although syn in the judgment of ye committer be no
honest thing, yet he judges it at the least to be either profitable or
delightful, or else he would never do it. The fornicatour or adulterer he
knows ye sins of the flesh, yt they are not honest, yet he thinks them
delitefull. The usurer or covetous man he knows, that briberie and extortion
is naught and not honest, yet he thinks it profitable. So that I say, every
sin that the sinner commiteth, he does it under the color of some good, or
else he would never do it. Goodness therefore in it self cannot be but an
excellent thing. And look how much the more it does participate of all the
three properties yt is to wit, honesty, profit, and delight, so much better it
must be. Virtue therefore is an excellent thing, for it is both honest,
profitable, and delightful. And that thing what soever it be that is most
honest, most profitable, and most delitefull, must needs be most excellent and
be that which is called Summum bonum, the chiefest good, which all men
naturally do desire. And who is most honest, most profitable, and most
delightful, but only God: God therefore is summum bonum, the end that every
man ought to seek, and such an end, that he that finds it shall be blessed
for evermore.

Now at the last we have found out our rule and square of goodness to measure
the crokednesse of vice, and to see the deformity thereof. As the thing that is
most honest, most profitable, and most delightful is most good. That thing that
is opposite and contrary unto the greatest good, must needs be the greatest
evil. That thing that depriueth a man or woman from the greatest good of all
other, which is God, must needs be the greatest of all evils, and that evil is
called sin: for sin depriueth a man of the chiefest good, which is God, and
therefore sin must be the greatest evil of all other. Will you see how sin is
opposite and contrary unto the three properties of good, (and so by
consequence unto God) namely unto honesty, profit, and delight, then give you
me leave a little to examine each property apart, and with patience and
attention harken what I shall say.

First of all, Sin, as the Philosophers define it, being no positive thing but
a privation or taking away, it is as much to say, it has in it nothing that is
good, but takes from a man all that is good. And the chiefest property wherein
goodness consists, and without the which there can indeed be no goodness, is
honesty, and that sin depriueth a man of, for sin in his own nature is
shameful and opposite unto honesty, in so much as it is written, Qui male agit,
odit lucem. He that does evil, he hates the light. Sin is a work of
darkness, it fears to be seen, it is loath to come to the light, it seeks
dark places, and secret corners. Examples of this matter we have great store;
every man can witness it in his own conscience. Adam so seen as he had sinned
in Paradise, Genesis 3.
and that he saw himself to be naked, was he not ashamed? did he not hide
himself from the presence of the Lord? What shall we say of David, that after
he had committed adultery with Bethsabe, in sending for Vrias home, in
procuring him to go home to fleepe with his wife, in giving him meat and
drink apt for that purpose, was it for any other thing but that he was ashamed
of his fact, he would feign have had the matter covered, but it would not be,
the Lord did bolt it out, sending Nathan the Prophet to him, who reprehe^ded
him of his falt, 2 Samuel 11.
then he could cry, Peccatum meum coram me est se mper, My sin is always
in my sight, Psalm. 51.
I am ashamed O Lord of that which I have done. This may you see how opposite a
thing sin is unto honesty, that it brings with it nothing else but
confusion and shame.

Let us now see how it contrarieth the second property of goodness, which is
profit. How unprofitable a thing sin is.

To speak of the disprofite that sin brings, if I should say so much as
might be said I should never make an end, what greater disprofite can it be to
a man or woman, the^ to loose their soul eternally. In so much as our Savior
him self says: Mat. 16.26.
What shall it profit a man to have gained the whole world and after shall
sustain the loss of his soul? or what exchange or commutation can a man
make for his soul? Shall I breefly discurre unto you, what loss sin did bring?
Note first in the Angels them selves, Genesis 1.
who for sin were deprived for ever from the vision of God, and are now
damned for evermore.

For sin Adam and Eve were exyled Paradise, Genesis 3.
and al their posterity made subject to death and misery. For sin the whole
world was drowned, Genesis 7.
8. persons excepted. For sin Sodom and Gomorrha with other Cities there
adjacent were consumed and burnt by fire, Genesis 19.
and all the people perished. For sin the Children of Israel were carried
twice captive, 2 Reg. 17.
once under Salmanasar king of the Assirians, and an other time under
Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, besides a number other plagues and losses ye
came to them through sin. 2 Reg. 25.
Finally sin brought such a loss unto mankind, as the ransom thereof was
never able to be paid, but by the death and passion of Jesus Christ, the only
son of the living God.

Let this at this time suffice for the loss or disprofit that comes unto man
or woman by sin. Perhaps this matter or loss may be requited with the delight
that sin brings with it, and so great may be the delight ye a man cares
neither for honesty nor profit. If it be so, then let us consider the delight
that sin brings a part, and see what is the pleasure that a man receives in
the committing of sin. And that is the third property of goodness that I have
to speak of, namely delight. And now shall you see how opposite a thing sin is
unto delight also.

Sin (as I said) is a thing opposite unto that part of good which is called
delight, for it is a most sad and sorrowful evil full of grief and
pensiuenes. Sin is so sad and pensive a thing, that it does not only bring a
man unto eternal death, but it leaves a man full of trouble and grief also
in this life.

The justice of God can not suffer the guilt of sin to be unpunished. And
therefore the Prophet Jeremy gave us to understand ye evil of sin in this
point, Ier. 8.
when he said. Know thou, and see how evil and bitter a thing it is to have
forsaken the Lord thy God. For besides ye eternal and everlasting punishment
which exceeds al other punishments, and I have no leisure to stand to
discourse upon at this time, I will reckon up four great evils that it brings
unto a man or woman in this life, which no man what soever he be, can by any
means avoid.

The first is the sting of a man's conscience which he has pricking within
after he has committed the sin. Of al other things how sweet soever sin
seems in the beginning, it has the vilest end, yea such an end, that it
brings many a man or woman unto desperation after they have committed a
wicked fact. When a man has satisfied his filthy lust, what lothsomnes does he
find remaining in his soul and conscience? a fitter example I cannot give
you, then Amon David's son, who falling in love with his Sister Thamar in such
wise, 2 Samuel 13
as he almost perished for love and lust, yet when he had accomplished his will
and purpose, there remained such a lothsomnes behind of sin that he could
never abide to look upon Thamar afterward. And this I dare be bold to say,
that there is no sinner alive, let him be never so shameless and impudent in
his sin, let him face and brave it out with never so desperate a mind, yet
he can not so extinguish that touch of conscience, but his soul at one time or
other shall find the torment of the same.

The second evil that sin brings to a man or woman to contrary delight, is
shame: of the which, for that I have touched it already, I will spare to speak
any more of it, but come unto the Text.

The third evil that sin brings in this life to contrary delight, is fear
of punishment, for the sinful man after he has committed a naughty fact, he
is by and by afraid. He knows there is a God above that will revenge all
sin, and he is afeard of Gods judgments, and of sodeine death. This fear
remains of inferior Magistrates that are administers of Gods justice. For if
a Thief after he have committed a roberie be brought before a Justice to be
examined forthwith he fears, and faultereth in his speech and answers, and a
guilty conscience bewrays it self, so that he that sins is always
fearful, and as Solomon says, Prou. 28.1.
the wicked man he flees when no man persecuteth him.

In so much as sin is a continual hangman that tormenteth a man's conscience
where so ever he goes.

The fourth and last evil that sin brings contrary to delight, is a
continual combat and conflicte between reason and sensuality. In so much as
when sensuality entiseth us to a thing that is naught, reason says, do it
not, sensuality says, do it. And such a contrariety a man shall find in him
self, that often times he is forced to cry out, and say with Job. Factus sum
mihimetipsi grauis, Job. 7.20.
I am become troublesome unto my self.

Thus have I made a brief description of the vileness and crookednes of sin,
which if it be laid to the right rule of goodness that is honesty, profit, and
delight: You may see how vile a thing it is, and far from all goodness, that has
in it neither honesty, profit, nor delight. And depriving a man of all
honesty, profit, and delight, which is the greatest good yt may be, and
contained in God himself, from who^ sin excludes us. Also it cannot be but
we must necessarily conclude, that sin is the greatest evil that may be, and
that there is no evil to be compared or matched with sin.

Thus having found out the vileness of the first evil, it rests that we know
how the second evil may be worse then this, for that it is said in our text.
The last state of that man is worse then the first. A man would think that the
first is so bad, as lightly there could be no worse: but how the last becomes
worse then the first, in few words I shall show. If we respect sin in his own
nature, it is always evil and so evil, as it can not be worse. But if we
respect it as it is renewed in action, the more an ill thing is renewed, the
worse still it is, by reason of the ingratitude that remains in the offender.
As for example. A man committing a trespass once, he is pardoned of his
Prince, and after commits the same offense again in the same nature, both
the offenses in their own nature are bad, and neither worse then the other, but
in respect of the ingratitude of the offender, who being pardoned once, would
not take heed the second time. And so forth of all other sins that so shall
be renewed, the more they are renewed the more hainons they are by reason of
the ingratitude.

Now where our Text says, that the last state of such a one shall be worse
then the first, I will show you briefly also how yt may be meant, and ye is for
three respects. First in respect of the Devil that tempts a man to sin.
Secondly in respect of the offender that commits the sin. Thirdly in
respect of God that punishes sin. All these I shall make plain by a familiar
example. And first in respect of the Devil that tempts unto sin. I will
show you how the last evil is worse then the first. Take the example of a
Iaylour that takes a man to prison, the man being committed but for debt, or
some such other trespass, is indifferently well used, and entreated in Prison,
he has as much liberty as the Prison can yield him, and as much favor as the
Iailour can show him: But if this Prisoner watching his opportunity, do happen
to break forth, and to make an escape, how does the Iaylour then rage and
fume, and how does he threaten and lay about him, saying that if ever he catch
that Prisoner again, he will use him, and so forth. So as you see, it
stands the Prisoner upon that is so broken away, to look unto himself, for
otherwise it had bin better for him that he had remained in Prison still, and
made no escape. It comes to pass that he is taken again, how is this poor
wretch then used, he is laid in Boltes, he is kept under lock and key, he
goes not out of his chamber, he is continually watched, you see how his last
imprisonment is worse then the first, by reason of the cruel usage of the
Iaylour. Even so it fares with a sinner, who as long as he is in sin, is in
the Devils keeping, and so long as he continues in sin, the Devil lets
him alone, does not trouble him much, but lets him enjoy the liberty of the
Prison, that is the pleasures of this world, and suffers him to go from one
to an other without contradiction. But if this sinner chance at any time to be
moved by grace to forsake sin, and the pleasures of this world, and to break
prison, that is to give the Devil the slip, and means to return to ye
service of Almighty God; it stands this man upon to look well unto
himself, and to think that the Devil has a continual eye upon him, and if
ever he can catch him again, and bring him within the compass of his Prison,
let him be assured he will keep him more warely the second time, and remove
from him all the occasions that brought him to goodness, and lock him up fast in
a close dungeon, where he shall see nothing, and feel nothing but continual
temptations and allurements unto sin, and shall be so watched and guarded
that he shall hardly make any escape again. And thus you see how the second
estate of a sinner is worse then the first, in respect of the Devil by
comparison of a Iailour.

The last estate of a Sinner is worse then the first also in respect of the
sinner himself; for experience and natural reason teaches, that many actions
do at the last come to be an habit, and long custom in any thing does alter
nature, wherefore that man or woman that frequenteth much synning, in time can
come to do nothing else.

We see by daily experience that a Child that has bin virtuously or well
brought up when he comes to years, and begins to see the corruptions of
the world, how at first not being experienced with the filthiness of sin, he
accounts it an abominable thing, but if after he fall into ill company,
among whom sin is boldly used, by little and little he may be drawn to commit
it once: If he have committed sin one time, he will be the more easyly
drawn to the second, and so to the third, and at last he will be as bold in
sin as the best, and as shameless as the rest.

And thus you se how the last state of a sinner is worse then the first, by
reason of the Sinner himself.

Finally the last state of a sinner is worse then the first in respect of God
who punishes sin. For the order of justice requires that the more graces
and benefits that a man receives at the Lords hands, and the more he
conte^neth and abuses them, that the more severe and grievous shall be his
punishment. And therefore it stands every man and woman upon to take heed
that he receive not the grace of God in vain. That we abuse not Gods mercy by
adding now sins to our old. For as the Apostle says, Romans 2.4.
because the Lord is merciful, patient and long suffering: shall we therefore
make this an occasion of sin, God forbid. I deny not but in what hour
soever a sinner shall repent and turn from his wicked ways, that the Lord
will receive and take him to mercy, if he repent indeed from his heart and
have a full purpose by the help and assistance of Gods grace to sin no more:
the which purpose and intention if the sinner have not, and when he has it,
unless he put in practice, and execute it, his repentance is no repentance,
he does but dallye and mock with God Almighty, he fears not his
judgments, and therefore he shall never be partaker of his mercy.

And thus ye see how the last estate of a sinner is worse then the first in
respect of God himself. The conclusion of the whole is this.

So shall it be with this wicked generation.

By these words we may perceive that our Savior Christ meant that, ye has bin
spoken, of the Scribes and Pharisees, who contemned and maligned him for all his
miracles and wonders that he wrought among them.

Let us (deerly beloved) for our profit and benefit apply them to our selves,
and think that they are spoken unto every one of us here in particular: let us
not abuse the graces and mercies that the Lord has bestowed among us, as the
Scribes and Pharisees did, least according to the example of the repossessed
man, we be accounted among that wicked and perverse generation.

If I should reckon unto you the benefits and graces wherewith ye Lord has
blessed our Country, and ye above other nations, I should hold you over long.
Of an infinite number take a few, and besides the common benefits note the
particular, and so I make and end. We were al possessed with the Spirit of
blindness as all other nations who tempted us to al uncleanness, to Idolatry
and superstition, in as vile and as wicked manner as ever the Gentiles or Pagans
were.

It pleased the Lord to expel this spirit of darkness from us, and to send us
the light of his Gospel by the which he has illumined us, that there is no
nation at this day under heaven that has it more bright. He has sent us
besides a most gracious Queen and Prince, under whose most happy government
we have lived these 30, years in great peace and tranquillity more then any
Nation round about us: he has mightily and miraculously defended both her and
us from the invasion of our enemies that thought to have swallowed and devoured
us up quick. What shall I say, what mercy has he not showed us, what wonders
has he not wrought amongst us. And yet behold, are we not become almost
unmindful of these benefits? do we not abuse these mercies of almighty god in
promising unto our selves peace and security, and thereby remain in our former
sins and wickedness? Be our lives any thing amended, our manners and
behauiours bettered, whereby the Lord may be the more glorified, and our
selves comforted? I fear me no; How does sin abound yet amongst us? how does
every one walk after his own wicked concupiscence? How does sin show
herself almost with uncovered face? If I should enter into the particulars, I
should amaze you. Pride abounds, lechery ouerfloweth, covetousness rages,
and not in any small portion, but in summo gradu, in the highest degree. Is it
not to be feared, if it so continue, but ye the unclean spirit will return
again: and yt if he come, do you not think that he will bring seven worse
then himself, and that God for our unworthiness will permit him to make
ree^tra^ce? So should our end be worse than the beginning. So should we have ye
maledictio^ of yt wicked generation. That ye wrath of the Lord may be auerted
from us, in this I can say no more, but repent and amend, for the day of the
Lord is at hand. For the which ye Lord grant us all grace to prepare our selves
to be in a redines.

But for as much as no man is able to make this preparation of himself without
the especial grace of God, let us with humble and penitent hearts crave of our
heavenly Father for his Son our Savior Jesus Christ his sake, that he would
vouchsafe of his infinite goodness and mercy to take from us our stony hearts,
and put into us fleshy hearts, that may be pliable unto his holy will, and so
to be governed by his holy Spirit, that in all the assaults of our enemy, he
may have no power over us, but that by his power and might we may vanquish and
overcome him, and that we may be so fortifyed, that no adversity put us down,
no prosperity puff us up, and that on every side we being fenced by the Lords
most heavenly protection, Satan that goes about like a roaring Lion seeking
whom he may devour, may make no reentry. Grant this O heavenly Father for thy
dear son Jesus Christ his sake, together with the holy spirit. To whom
being three Persons in Trinity and one in unity be all glory, praise, power
and dominion both now and evermore.

Amen.
Imprinted at London by John Windet, dwelling at the Sign of the Cros-keies,
by Paul's wharfe.


