THE VOICE OF THE CRIER.

Containing 1. A Denunciation of Gods Judgments. 2. An Inuitation to
Repentance to prevent the same.


Delivered in two Sermons

By Alexander Vdny B. in Divinity, and Chaplain to his Majesty in Ordinary,
and Minister of the Gospel at Hanking in Kent.

1. Pet. 4.17. For the time yet is come that judgment must begin at the house
of God. Aug. de ciuit. Dei. Tunc manifestus veniet inter iustos iudicaturus
just, qui occulte venerat iudicandus. LONDON, Printed by T. C. for James
Bowler dwelling at the sign of the Marigold in Paul's Churchyard. 1628.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM EARL OF PEMBROKE, LORD HERBERT of Cardiffe
Marmion S. Quintin, Lord Steward of his Majesty's Household, Lord Warden of the
Stanneries of Devon. and Cornwall, Governor of Portsmouth, Chancellor of the
University of Oxford, Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, and one of
his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
RJght Honorable, there be two causes which should move and force all hearts
to mourn and lament (the fear of evils and loss of good) these two may come
in one day, says the Prophet, Isa. 47.9.
there are two sorts of men, the one good, the other evil; good men do ever
sorrow, for this world is their hell; and evil men should ever sorrow and
lament, for God is their enemy? the one for the afflictions which they feel,
the other for the judgments which they may and do fear: Verba iusti dolor
sunt plena. Gregor. Mag. 5. moral.
To the wicked Stimulus conscientiae est scelerum paena. The times are such as
should bedew, the words of good men with lamentation. Quocunque adspiceres
luctus gemitusque sonabant, Formaque non taciti funeris intus erat. Hier. in
vlt. c. Esae.
The godly do and must take to heart grief for sin: for thereby God is moved
to wrath against us, the times of grief beseems not the seasons of joy. Heu
quam difficile est imitari gaudia falsa? Ovid. 1. trist. and 3. Claudian
Difficile est tristi, fingere, mente, iocum. My speech must be short, because
J speak of grief, which our times do require to be performed of all, albeit
a few of all do supply the same: yet they to whom the Lord has bestowed many
and rare blessings, may and should fill up the gap. Of the which number your L.
is a special member under God and his Majesty in this kingdom for the
advancement of Gods glory, and all good works; which godly and noble, and
worthy disposition, is known to be in you, the effect is at all occasions
proouing the same, to the great comfort of all well disposed people of this
land. Luke 2.52.
And as the Scripture says, That as the Lord Jesus, our righteousness, did
increase in years, stature and wisdom, so he did in the favor of God and
man; and from Christ as the fountain, these blessings are distilled upon the
children of men, according to the measure of Gods dispensation: which Solomon
praying for obtained, whose example no question your Lordship has followed,
who not only have Gods holy Spirit, moving you to be zealous of good works,
whereby Gods great favor is manifested; and in so great estimation with so
mighty a Monarch: but also honored, respected, loved, by Church and policy,
and so by consequent most deserving, that all should have their eyes and hands
directed unto you, as to praise God for so good an instrument, as also to
encourage you to go on in so godly and righteous course of life to the end of
this mortal life, and then to enjoy your crown of life eternal. Jn
consideration of these great gifts bestowed on you, J have made choice of your
honor, and that with great cause, Sivc enim illustrem generis prosapiam
scrutor, sive devotam in Deum pietatem ruminor, sive summam in literas and
studia humaniora, propensionem reputo, sive siugularem in Doctos and literatos
quosvis clementian pensito: sive illustres dotes alias, vere dignas considero,
optime, inter optimos in venio. Seneca lib. 1. cap. 8. de ben.
And seeing these gifts are extended to many out of your Lordships good
inclination, and unto me also, J cannot but say with Aeschines, who when
Zocrates scholars did bring gifts unto him in token of their thankfulness,
yet Aeschines his affection was comparable with any, albeit worthy of Zocrates,
but one thing J freely give which is my self. And seeing J have received
favor at your Lordships hands, J wished J could express my thankfulness in
greater measure, then my ability will permit: yet J offer my service and this
myte of my weak labors to your honorable protection, albeit not fit for the
press in so great light, had I not been urged by the well affected that heard
it. It merits with the security and iniquity of the time, my desire is, that it
may rouse up, all those that are asleep in sin, a double respect makes it
due unto your Lordship, Nimis enim ingratus scytha vel geta fuerim, if J should
not acknowledge my particular obligation, and secondly your Lordships
propensitie, and ardent study to advance Gods glory, the safety of his roy all
Majesty and welfare of your country, for these causes and many more, Libellum
mole quidem, sed non pondere exiguum, reuerenter offero, atque inscribo, and
hoc qualicumque monumento, singularem obseruantiam, gratitudinem and charitatem
meam declaratam, ac testatam volo, alacriori animo obtaturus multo nobiliora,
si facultas voluntati respondere posset. And thus ceasing further to trouble
your Lordship, but never ceasing to honor and serve you, praying the God and
father of our Lord Jesus Christ the father of glory and mercy, who in these
last days of the world has drawn us out of darkness unto his marvelous
light, through the Lord Jesus by the spirit in the word, increase, preserve,
and bless your honor, with all sort of heavenly and earthly blessings, and
when ye foughten the fight of faith and finished your course with joy, that
ye may at the last day, be crowned with immortal and eternal glory.

Your Lordships most humble and dutiful to be commanded, Alexander Vdny.

THE VOICE OF THE CRIER: Containing A FEAREFVLL DENVNCIATION OF GODS IVDGEMENTS.
The Text MATTHEW. 3.10. Now is the axe laid to the root of the trees, therefore
every tree which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into
the fire.
AMongst the many means which the Lord uses for the conversion of sinners, to
draw them unto repentance, two are most ordinary, effectual and common, his
Mercies and his Judgments; both joined together in one verse, by the sweet
singer of Israel; Psalm. 101.1.
Of Mercy and of Judgment O Lord God unto thee will I sing: both comprised in
this Verse by John Baptist the forerunner of Christ. Mercy, that God had also
amongst others, raised up to preach unto them the doctrine of Repentance, that
as yet they had time, wherein they might repent, that God would accept of their
repentance, if it were in sincerity; that if they did bring forth good fruit,
they should not be hewn down: Judgment, that unless they did bring forth
good fruit, they should be hewne down and cast into the fire: unless they did
repent and become new men they should be condemned, and tormented with the
Devil and his Angels world without end.

Before I come to handle the words in particular, diverse things are to be
observed in general: viz. 1. Concerning the Occasion. 2. The Substance. 3. The
Method. 4. The end of this Commination.

Touching the Occasion: thus it was with many of the Pharisees and of the
Saduces, although with others they went out to be partakers of John's Ministry,
yet because they accustomed themselves to and outward show of Religion, without
sincerity, presuming upon the external privilege which they had of being
Abraham's seed, Circumcised as the children of Abraham; and therefore that God
was bound unto them, and that being the seed of Abraham by generation of the
flesh, they were within the Covenant of Grace, and should be saved.

Therefore Saint John does in the words of my Text endeavor to overthrow this
their presumption, exhorts them unto repentance, whereby they might both
persuade themselves, and testify the same unto others, that they were not
bastards but true sons; not the children of the Devil, but the children of
Abraham, 3. Things to be observed.
by faith in Christ Jesus. Hence three things may be observed.

First, Mar. 6.20.
The Pharisees and the Saduces went out as others did, submitted themselves
outwardly to the Ministry of Gods Word preached by John, and yet in
hypocrisy: thus did Herod, of whom it is recorded that he reverenced John, and
when he heard him, he did many things, and heard him gladly, and yet in
hypocrisy: Act. 8.13.
thus did Simon Magus, of whom it is written, that he believed also and was
Baptized, and continued with Philip, and wondered when he saw the signs, and
great miracles which were done: thus I fear many of us do; we come but in
hypocrisy, we hear but in hypocrisy, this comes to pass either when we
hear to be seen of men, and respected by them, or when we hear for novelties
sake, or when we hear for fear of punishment sake, or when we hear that we
may carpe and cauel at that which we hear, or when we hear for any other
respect then for the glory of God and our own salvation. And as in the hearing
of Gods Word, so likewise in the receiving of the Sacrament, in Prayer, in
giving Alms, in Fasting, and they may be done in hypocrisy.

This may teach us to be diligent and careful, that when either we hear Gods
Word, or perform any other part of his service, we may do it in sincerity,
as true Nathaniels, without guise.

Secondly, John saw many of the Pharisees and Saduces, and knew (no doubt by the
revelation of Gods spirit) that they were come in hypocrisy, he rouseth them
up with this alarm, Now also is the axe laid to the root of the tree: thus did
our Savior Christ at diverse times, some come to him in hypocrisy, some in
sincerity, accordingly he behaved himself toward either. This will be
profitable toward Preachers, this will be profitable for hearers, hereby Gods
glory shall be advanced, the kingdom of the devil and sin destroyed: shall
it not be profitable for Preachers when they can distinguish betwixt chafe and
corn, when they out of a good conscience can approve themselves to be right
disposers of the mysteries of Gods kingdom; to be such, as without respect of
persons endeavor to beat down sin, and overthrow the kingdom of Satan?
Shall it not be profitable for hearers, when by the lantern of Gods word, they
shall see even the secrets of their heart discovered, their most near and
dear sins rebuked? Will it not be for the advancement of Gods glory, when
both Preachers and Hearers, in speaking and hearing, conform the mselues unto
Gods will, Preachers by a conscionable rebuking of sin; Hearers, by a
conscionable practice of Gods word, for repressing sin; and when sins are
thus particularly rebuked by the ministry of Gods word, they must needs go to
wrack, and so the kingdom of the devil overthrown.

This serves for exhortation both unto Preachers and people; Preachers, that
they may with the eye of discretion, distinguish betwixt their hearers, taking
particular notice of their chiefest vices, that with an holy and bold
resolution to rebuke them for the same, without respect of persons; let them
with Nathan tell David, thou art the man; with John the Baptift, tell Herod, it
is not lawful for him to have his brother Philips wife; and here unto the
Pharisees, Now also is the axe, etc. People, that they may wlllingly submit
themselves unto the reproof of Gods word: Art thou wounded? suffer thy wound to
be lanced. Art thou ficke? be contented to take bitter pills, that thou may be
whole. Do thou come an hypocrite? let Gods word sharper then any two edged
sword meet with thee, that thou may go away a sincere Christian, esteem
them most, which do least sooth thee up in thy sins, and account them not
always thy best friends which sow pillowes under thy arme-holes, which
proclaim peace when there is war, which tell thee thou art reconciled unto
God, when thou know that thou do not fear nor serve him, which cast thee
asleep in the bed of security, which move thee rather to applaud them, then to
mourn for thy self, and for thine own sins, which both thou have and do
commit against God.

Thirdly, that no external benefit, blessing, or prerogative bestowed either
upon our selves, or our predecessors, can make us happy, unless we live an
holy and sanctified life aecording to Gods will revealed in his word, and the
holy conversation of those, Ioh. 8.39.44.
for whose sakes we esteem our selves blessed. The Pharisees and Saduces
descended of Abraham according to the flesh, did therefore account themselves
to be happy; whose error in judgment, as St. John does here reprehend, so our
Sauiout at another time, If ye were Abraham's childran, ye would do the works
of Abraham: and again, Ye are of your father the devil, and the lust of your
father ye will do: Behold therefore (says Paul, Romans 11.22.
confirming this doctrine) the bountifulness and severity of God, toward
them which have fallen severity, but toward thee bountifulness, if thou
continue in his bountifulness, Romans 2.25.
or else thou shall also be cut off. And again, for Circumcision verily is
profitable if thou do the Law, but if thou be a transgressor of the Law, thy
circumcision is made uncircumcision. What shall it avail thee to descend of
good parents, Quid prodest tibi pium saluatoris nomen lectitare in libris, nec
habers pietatem in mortbus? Rer. sup. cant. ser. 1.
if thou do not imitate them in holiness and sanctification; yea, this shall
tend more to thy condemnation, then to thy salvation or consolation: example we
have of this in Hophni, and Phinias, the two sons of Ely, who was the Priest
of the most high God, that for their wickedness were slain in battle, and
their posterity was rooted out for ever before the Lord. David was a man after
Gods own heart, 1 Samuel 4.17.
yet hereby neither was Absolon preserved from hanging, Amnon or Adonijah from
being killed, neither was it sufficient for Judas that he was a Disciple of
Christ, because he did not imitate the righteousness of Christ. The Israelites
did eat Manna from heaven, the food of Angels, and yet died because of
contempt. Quid profuit Came quod filius fust Noa, aut quid mocuit Abraham quod
patrem habuie Their luteoru^ deorum cultorem?
Not to multiply examples, as the Idolatry of Terah, did not hinder Abraham his
son from worshipping the true God; so it did not profit Cham, that his father
Noah was a holy and just man. Greater cause have parents to boast of their
religious children, then children of their religious parents.

The Reasons of this Doctrine are these: First, Hab. 2.4.
by him we are reconciled unto God, and therefore no external prerogative does
avail at all, the just man shall live by his faith in him.

Secondly, Abraham, which was, Genesis 17.9.
that God should be the God of Abraham, and his posterity also; whereunto
there was a condition annexed, Ezck. 3.20.
that Abraham and his seed after him in their generations for ever should keep
the covenant of God, wherein if they did fail, in making defection from God,
then the Lord was not bound to perform his part of the Covenant to wards them:
now they having broken their part of the Covenant, in making defection from
God; therefore this exteruall privilege in being the seed of Abraham, does not
free them from Gods judgments: when the righteous man falls from his
righteousness and commits iniquity, he shall dye in sin, and his
righteous deeds, which he has done, shall not be remembered.

Thirdly,

The uses of this doctrine are diverse; Si mandata domini custodires scriberis
cum electis, si autem praterea juis manda^ i^ domin^^s aliquid boni, adieceris
honori, hoc eris apnd deum quam futurus eras. Eus. b. lib. S. hist. eccles.
text. lib. de pudictrier impro Gal.
and first it reproves the Papist, who affirm, that by their works, de
congruo and condigno, (that it is by the good works of others) men may be
saved. The original of this error, was invented by one Hermes, to whom (as
they allege) an Angel did appear, praising him for his good works, who
said, if thou keep the Commandments of God, thou shak be written with the
elect, but if thou do more good works, then the Lord has commanded, that thou
shall be more honorable before God then thou was to be.

This testimony is worthy of small credit, seeing ever his whole works are
repudiated by those of greatest Antiquity, amongst the learned, Ensebius, and
Tertullian, S. Hierome. This is a most fearful consenage of Gods, as if men
could do more then they are bound to do, Beza in cap. 2. ad Colos. v. 22.
this is not the way to appear righteous before the Lord: The Patriarchs did
observe the Ceremonial Law, yet hereby they could not be justified, For by the
works of the Law, Romans 3.24.
shall no flesh be justified before God: we are justified steely by his grace,
through the Redemption that is in Christ lesus; when even such as are most holy
have done all what they can, Luke 17.10.
they may say they are but vnprofit able servants: if those who have had the
greatest measure of sanctification, were not of sufficiency to deliver
themselves from the power of death, how much less are we able, which pull
iniquity with the cords of vanity, and draw sin unto us as with cart roapes;
this extent goes further: In that the Spirit says, There is none that sins
not, and does good, no not one: If then the Papist did but awake, and see a
sight of his own sins, he would go out of himself, and from all earthly
help, and cloth himself with the righteousness of Christ; Discute bona
merita tua and videbis quia dona sunt mea. August. de 6. Apost. ser. 2.
yea even many of them being summoned by death, the Law accusing them, their
conscience tormenting, the judge condemning them, reason conuincing them, and
Satan ready to execute the sentence of indgement upon them, are forced to
foregoe their errors, and consent to the truth of this Doctrine, that there is
no salvation but in the blood of Christ crucified: if they would take notice of
good works, they may find that they are the proper gist of God, not inherent
in them, or an acquired habit by them, but only by imputation of Christ's
righteousness.

The second use of this Doctrine, is to distinguish betwixt the godly and the
wicked; the godly are never at rest,

The third use of this Doctrine is for exhortation; Job became quickly poor,
the honor of Herod consumed with vermiue, Sampson lost his strength, Dives
with his riches perished: Rejoice not even in the Gospel it self, without
profit thereby, for if thou do abuse it, Romans 11.21.
or contemn it, God will remove it; if God spared not the natural branches,
take heed lest he also spare not thee: thou art but a wild Olive, get thee
unto Christ as a branch ingrafted into this stock; and being incorporated, and
as it were become one with him, keep with all diligence that prerogative, that
nothing divert thee from him. If the Heathen could say unto his Countrymen the
Athenians, when they committed any offense, Hoc nonfacerent Lacedemony.
certainly our enemies the Lacedaemonians would not have done thus, thereby to
dissuade them from their Iewde behavior; much more we which are created
according to Gods own image, which wear the badge and cognizance of
Christians, learn both in respect of that nobility which we have in Christ,
and that glorious eternity which we hope for when mortality shall be
swallowed up of life; to abstain from relying upon any external prerogative,
but only as we are in Christ, of whom we are denominated Christians: thus of
the occasion.

Touching the substance, it contains matter both of mercy and of Judgment,
Mat. 4.6.
which were the two parts wherein the ministry of John consisted, Isaih 5.4.
as it was foretold of him: so likewise here he does faithfully execute and
perform both. The whole speech is figurative and allegorical, which may be
thus resolved: God is compared to an husbandman, who had planted a vineyard in
Judea, namely his Church, which from time to time he had manured and dressed,
What could I have done more to my vineyard that I have not done unto it? The
people are compared unto trees, of which the Lord says, I looked that it
should have brought forth grapes: Ibid. 4.
The ministry of John to an axe, that will cut quickly; either to hasten to
damnation, or to salvation: By the roots of the trees, are meant the souls
and consciences of men, to which the word is well applied: The he wing down and
casting into the fire, signifies the final sentence which at the great day
shall be executed upon such, as at the hearing of the Gospel preached, remain
unfruitful: so yt it is thus much in effect, as if John had said unto them; as
trees when they neither blossom in the summer, nor render increase the time of
reaping, notwithstanding of their planting and pruning, are fit for nothing but
to be cut down and cast into the fire: cuen so likewise ye for all your
glorious shows, unless ye take heed unto your selves, and bring forth fruit
worthy amendment of life, shall by the power of my ministry, be hewn down and
cast into the fire, even prepared and fitted for eternal destruction.

Hence two things may be noted from this Allegory: First, touching the
husbandman, he is God; Isai 5.2. Ier. 2.21. John 15.1.
thus he writes of himself, thus our Savior testifies of him: an
husbandman, inrespect he is the first planter of his Church; as also because he
is the continual dresser and manurer of the same: an husbandman in whom we may
behold both skilsulnesse, and ^^inefulnesse, in hedging it, gathering out the
stones of it, building a tower therein, purging it, pruning it; and
carfulness to plant it with the best plants, to hedge it, to watch over it,
to defend it from wild Boares, and Foxes: and patience in looking and waiting
from time to time, from year to year, that it may bring forth good fruit.

Touching his husbandry it is the Church so named in many places of Scripture,
and that in diverse respects; as a vineyard has need of planting, watering,
pruning, purging, digging, Psalm. 80.9. Cant. 2.12.
and dunging; so the Church has need of planting, watering, pruning and
purging; as vineyards are not every where, but there where they are planted;
Isai. 3.14.
so the Church is not every where, but there where the Lord has planted the
same: Ezekiel. 17.6.
as in a vineyard there are Vines; so in the Church is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.6.
the true Vine-tree of life, whose branches are all such as by faith cleave
unto him, which abound in fruit, and bring forth pleasant grapes, even the
gifts and graces of Gods Spirit: as the grapes are gathered and pressed out; so
are the members of Gods Church, their faith, patience, experience, and hope,
are manifested; are not tears pressed out? yea oftentimes their blood for the
testimony of a good conscience: finally, as in a vineyard all the trees are not
fruitful, but some proving barren, are cut down and cast into the fire; so in
the Church, all are not living branches of this true Vinc, many prove fruit
esse, and therefore shall be taken away and perish: Wherefore seeing God is the
husbandman, and the Church is his Vineyard, let us pray unto him, that such as
are not yet planted, may by him be transplanted from their old stock Adam, and
may be ingrafted upon the root of Iesse Jesus Christ, and that such as are
already ingrafted, may bring forth good fruit. God has been painful about
us, he has been careful over us, he has been patient, waiting for our
fruitfulness; he might have dug us down long ago, has he spared us yet,
O then let us not prove barren, but fruitful in good works! Thus of the
substance.

Touching the Method, St. John denounces judgment, to rouse them from their
security, and a waken their sleepie consciences, calling them a generation of
Vipers, bidding them amend their lives, and repent them of their sins,
telling them now also The Axe is laid to the root of the trees, and that
unless that they did bring forth good fruit, they should be bewen down and
cast into the fire; and yet under this, be does also offer them mercy, that if
they did bring forth fruit worthy of amendment of life, they should not be
hewn down, but perpetually saved.

Hence two things may be observed; First, that the Law must precede the
Gospel. Secondly, that the Gospel is to be conjoined unto the Law, and to
accompany the same.

For the first, the Law must precede the Gospel, the Ministers of Gods word
must first denounce judgment out of the Law against sin, Genesis 2.27.
before they proclaim mercies out of the Gospel unto sinners; thus dealt God
with Adam before his fall, In that day that thou eatest thou shall die the
death: so also before the giving of the Law, there were thunders, lightnings,
yea Mount Siuai was all in fire and smoke, Isai. 1.4. Joel 1.8, 12. Matt.
4.17. Act. 2.36. Romans 3.18.
the trumpet sounding exceeding loud, and the Mountains trembled, and all the
people were afraid of death. Thus Isaiah begun his prophecy; thus did Joel
begin his; thus our Savior Christ; thus Peter; thus the Apostle Paul; and thus
S. John in the words of my Text.

The Reasons hereof are these: As in a glass we behold and attain a knowledge
of our own infirmities, as the Apostle Paul says, Romans 7.7.
I knew not sin but by the Law, for I had not known last, except the Law had
said, thou shall not Just. Secondly, Iowes were when they came unto the
Apostles, said, Men and brethren what shall we do? Thirdly, Act. 3.37.
because hereby impenitent sinners should have no cloak,

The use of this Doctrine, is both for reprehension, That unless they did
repent, they should all likewise perish. Some again cannot abide to hear the
Law preached, they are all for mercy, the Gospel, salvation; and yet they live
contemners of mercy, enemies of the Gospel, dispisers of grace and salvation;
they defire to sin securely, to have pillowes sowed under their arm pits,
they neglect their duty toward God, by their A the sine, prophannsse,
ingratitude, idolatry, blasphemy, profanation of the Sabbath, and yet would
hear of nothing but mercy; they neglect their duty toward their neighbor, by
their disobedience and maliciousness, uncleanness, thest, falsehood,
covetousness, drunkenness, and yet would hear of nothing but mercy; they
would have plasters before they be wounded, physic before they be sick,
cordials before they have corrasiues, which is absurd.

For exhortation, profitable shall it be for you.

For the second, the Gospel must be conjoined unto the Law: 2 Samuel 12.13.
John although he does denounce judgment, yet if they would bring forth good
fruit, he does also offer them mercy; Isai 1.19. Luke 13.5.
thus did Nathan unto David, Isaias unto the Jews, and Christ unto his
Hearers. The Reasons hereof are these; first, because the preaching of the Law,
does properly belong to such as are impenitent and not converted, unto such as
continue in their sin, unto hypocrites and secure Christians, according to
that of the Apostle, The Law is not given unto a righteous man, 1 Timothy 1.9.
Isai 61.1.
but unto the lawless and disobedient: whereas the Gospel does belong unto
the penitent, to such as are poor in spirit, and contrite in heart. Secondly,
because as wicked men are more terrified from sin by Comminations from the
Law, so the godly by Gods mercies proclaimed in the Gospel. Thirdly, Gal. 3.2.
because the Law only teaches us what we should be, the Gospel how we may be
such. Fourthly, because the Law without the Gospel is ineffectuall; By the
works of the Law shall no flesh be instified; Romans 3.20. 2 Cor. 3.6. Ibid. 9.
the letter kills, but the spirit gives life; The Law is the Ministration of
condemnation; the Gospel, the ministration of righteousness, covering our
sins, healing our diseases, offering free remission of sins by Jesus
Christ, unto all which as believe in him.

This serves both for Exhortation and Reproof: Exhortation to us, to
distinguish betwixt the Law and the Gospel, betwixt the threatenings against
impenitent sinners, and the promises unto the penitent, that they preach the
Law unto such as have most need, and the Gospel unto such as have most need
of it; as also because they cannot exactly distinguish of their hearers,
therefore let both be conjoined together, that neither the penitent despair by
the preaching of the Law, nor the impenitent presume by preaching of the
Gospel, unto the people to prepare themselves, either for threatenings or
comforts, according unto their present estate: threatenings if they are
impenitent, comfort if they are cast down through the consideration of their
sins: as also to be careful in the application of Gods word, that they do
not apply the Gospel unto themselves, continuing in sin; neither the Law, if
they truly repent them of the same.

This should teach us, when either preaching nothing but judgment, or nothing
but mercy; by the former terrifying Gods children, by the latter imboldning the
wicked: this reproves the people, which either look still for mercy, or still
for judgment, and which either out of a conceit of the sincerity of their own
hearts, apply mercies unto themselves, and judgment belongs unto them; or
out of a needless or wrong suspicion of their own hypocrisy, apply Gods
judgments unto themselves, when as mercies are propounded unto them, and they
are the children of God. Thus of Method.

Touching the End why Saint John does thus threaten them: It was that they
might take notice of their present and miserable estate, and whilst they had
time might repent, and so escape the danger. Hence this observation does arise:

That before God does inflict any judgment, he gives advertisement and
warning thereof, that it may be prevented: thus he did unto the first World,
unto the sinful Cities, unto the Ninevites; thus did our Savior unto
Jerusalem, he gave warning of that lamentable destruction, yea before it came
to pass, diverse signs did appear, aduertisements for desolation, as Josephus
does relate: and did not God give us sufficient warning, and advertisement of
those judgments which of late have fallen upon this Land; thus does John at
this time to the Pha^isees.

And John does this, first that those his aduertisements and warnings might
move us to repentance; this effect they wrought both in wicked Ahab, and
likewise in the Ninevites: the hunter does not disquiet his prey, but rather
waits till it rest, that he may thrust it through; but God does rouse us up,
least we be thrust through. Secondly, that the wicked may be the more
inexcusable, yea and forced to approve of Gods judgments when they fall upon
them.

This serves for Instruction, Exhortation, and Reprehension: Instruction, to
show us the truth of that excellent comfort, that God does not delight in the
death of a sinner, if he were desirous to destroy he needs not to give us
warning, but because he is unwilling we should perish, he does give us
admonition of our danger that we may repent.

Exhortation, seeing it has pleased God to give us warning, O let us in time
take warning, let us humble our selves under the mighty hand of God; Joel 2.14.
let us rent our hearts and not our garments, and return unto the Lord; we
shall find him merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and of great kindness.

Reprehension, Iet. 29.29.
we have not taken to heart Gods aduertisements and warnings: the Lord may
complain of us as he did of his own people, that we would not hear: great
judgments have seized upon us already, greater may, as they are daily
threatened, because we do not hear. Both the Israelites and the Jews were led
into captivity, the one unto Syria, the other unto Babylon, because they would
not hear, they despised those warnings which were offered: did not the
Spaniard in 88. seek the destruction of this Land, as he does now: did not the
Papists, Anno 1605. in that horrible Gunpowder treason, plot the death both of
Church and Commonwealth? Do not innumerable Locusts of the bottomless pit
of hell, sent by the devil and that Romish Antichrist, swarm in this Land?
Has not there been such a Pestilence of late, that the like was never amongst
us? How many have died by famine at home, by the Seas and Sword of the enemy
abroad? yet for all those aduertisements we neglect Piette, profane Gods
Sabbath, blaspheme his name, omit the duties both of the first and second
Table: where is our amendment and conversion unto the Lord, we rather increase
then decrease in wickedness? and is not this one evident token that the Lord
will yet pour an heavier judgment upon us, a rebellious Nation, contemning
the day of our visitation, therefore as Hosea said to Judah, Hosea 4.1.2.3.4.
lo I say to Britain, Hear the word of the Lord ye children of Britain,
for the Lord has a controversy with the Inhabitants of the Land, because that
there is no mercy nor truth, nor knowledge of God in the Land: by swearing, and
lying, and killing, and slaying, and wheredome, they break one, and blood
touches blood; therefore shall the Land mourus, and every one that dwells
therein, shall be cut off, etc. We fear the sword it may seize upon us, let us
then repent in time of all our sinnea. In taking to heart the judgments
threatened, let us make use of our time of peace, in being zealous of Gods glory
and our own salvation; let us turn to our first love, from whence we are
fallen, ere the Lord make a full end of us: let us imitate such as feared the
word of the Lord among the servants of Pharaoh, Exodus 9.20.
who being warned by Moses, made their servants and their cattle to fly into
the houses: let us, I say, take warning in time; least judgments seize, as
upon the Sodomites in the like kind, take us at unawares, whilst we expect no
such thing. These of the end.

Thus in General, both touching the Occasion, Substance, Method, and end of
this Commination: I come now to speak of the words in particular.

Now also is the axe laid to the root of the trees, therefore every tree which
brings not forth good fruit, is hewue down and cast into the fire.
THese words contain a denunciation of judgment, consist of these three
parts, which all concern the same. 1. A public Proclamation of Judgment, Now
also is the axe laid to the root of the trees. 2. The extension, or generality
of this Judgment, every tree that brings not. 3. The Execution, accompanying
the contempt of the former Proclamation, is hewne down and cast into the fire.
Of these in order.

Touching the Proclamation, The first part.
Now also is the axe laid to the root of the trees, these four things are to
be considered. 1. The Time (Now also.) 2. The Instrument (the axe.) 3. The use
of this Instrument (is laid.) 4. The Subject (unto the root of the trees.)

Concerning the first, the Time, Now also: the present tense is put for the
future, as is usual in the Scriptures; noting unto us not only the certainty
of Gods judgments, but also that when mercies are despised, judgments shall
come.

For the second, all the threatening, punishments and judgments, which the Lord
has pronounced in his word, either in general or particular, shall as
certainly come to pass, as if already they were past; although uncertain unto
us, either in respect of the time when, or the manner how they shall be
executed: hence is is that God is called by Daniel Palm^ni, that is, a secret
numberer, Dan.
as knowing the time when to perform his promise, either of mercy or of
judgment: hence the Psalmist says, Psalm. 75.3.
when I shall take a convenient time, I will judge righteously; that is, when I
see my time (says God) to help your miseries I will come and set all things
in order. Thus did the first world find them, thus the Sodomites, thus the
Egyptians, thus the Israelites when they were in captivity; thus
Nebuchadnezzar, thus Pharaoh, thus Saul. And as his Judgments, so also his
Promises shall as certainly come to pass, as if already they were past, all
which are in Christ Jesus yea and Amen; God himself being yesterday and to
day, ever the same for ever,

The Reasons hereof are these. 1. The unchangeableness of his will, Reasons.
Act. 17.30.
with whom is no shadow of changing or alteration: he has appointed a day in
which he will judge the world in righteousness; in which he will both execute
both general and particular judgment. 2. His ability and power to perform
what he has decreed; many may lay down a purpose and resolution, which they
are not able to bring to pass, but God has decreed that he has power to
accomplish. 3. For the comfort of Gods children, least they should despair.

But it may be demanded, 1. whether all those judgments which are threatened
shall certainly be accomplished. 2. Why the Lord does conceal the particular
time of his coming, either to judgment or mercy. 3. Why God does defer to
deliver his own children from wicked men, and does not execute judgment upon
them when they do sin against him.

To the first I answer, that Gods judgments are threatened against us
conditionally, if we do not repent, if we do continue in sin; otherwise, if
we do not repent, and forsake our sins, they shall either not sease upon us
at all, or otherwise in mercy, not in justice: hence commonly they have this
conditional conjunction, as annexed unto them, if ye do not amend; as when we
intend any journey, we understand, if it shall please the Lord; so when the
Lord says he will destroy us, we are to take it as appertaining unto us, if we
do continue in our sins.

To the second I answer, that the Lord does conceal the particular time of his
coming, either unto Judgment or unto Mercy, both for the trial and
humiliation of his own children, and for the furtherance of wicked men unto
repentance, because the more uncertain judgments, when they shall come, the
more should these hasten their repentance, that they may prevent the same; the
more, I say, they should prepare themselves by repentance to avoid judgments,
that they may be partakers of mercies.

To the third I answer, that God does delay to execute his judgments upon
wicked men (most commonly) to draw them unto repentance; and does defer to
deliver his own children from them, but that they may be truly humbled, and
that they may call upon him, acknowledging by whom they are delivered, yea that
hereby greater evils may be prevented; after which manner, the Lord for a long
time did exercise his servant David, whom his faithful God did not suffer to be
tempted above that which he was able to bear, but at length delivered him from
them all, all things working together for the best to such as love God.

The Uses of this Doctrine are both for Reprehension and Exhortation:
Reprehension to wicked men, which through the lusts of their own flesh promise
unto themselves liberty, saying, where is the promise of his coming? 2 Pet.
3.3.
even as if God were mutable, his word false, and his delay in executing
judgments, were a certain argument either he could not, or would not execute
them all. Notwithstanding of their contempt of this kind, there were some in
the Primitive Church, such as Basilides, T^monius, Simon Magus: and after them
the Heretics called Gnostici, as the Ecclesiastical Histories make mention,
their sin died not with them; the devil in this last and worst age, has
consented the same to spring up again, and that in four sorts of people,
Atheists, Anabaptists, Papists, and formal carnal Protestants. Atheists,
which live neither fearing the torments of hell, nor desiring the joys of
heaven, believing neither; who say with Pharaoh, Who is the Lord, that we
should serve him? Anabaptists, which condemn all obedience unto Magistrates,
teaching that civil jurisdiction is unlawful. Papists, which give liberty to
profaneness, injustice, covetousness, etc Profaneness in setting up a new
Priesthood, offering (as they say) a Sacrifice for the quick and the dead,
whereby they abolish the Mediation and Sacrifice of Christ: Injustice in
deposing Kings, and making Subjects to rebel against them: Covetousness, for
selling Pardons for sins for 1000. years to come, yea making men to despair
of their own salvation, teaching that we cannot be assured of the king dome of
heaven, without a special revelation. Formal Protestants, which turn the
Counsels of Gods Election into wantonness; reasoning thus, If I be elected
unto salvation I shall be saved, how badly so ever I live, or if I be appointed
unto damnation, so it shall come to pass, because Gods counsel is
unchangeable. By those horrible Blasphemies Gods judgments are abused, the
grace of God by them turned into the liberty of sin.

Exhortation unto us all, timely to repent us of our sins; Gods judgments
may seize upon us, whilst we are most secure, when we are least aware: we are
as grass which withers, and as the flower which fades, the breath of the
Lord may soon blow upon us for our destruction. In Paradise men might have
lived or died, Mortes potet defer, non a^ferre, veniet and sinelis, veniet
quands neseis. August.
now we live and must dye: we are changed from grace and glory into sorrow and
misery; before sin nothing could change us, now every thing does change us;
as one says of Death, so it may be said of other Judgments. They may be
deferred, not removed, they shall come when thou would not, they shall come
when thou know not: when winter comes we wax old, when age comes then we
become withered; when sickness comes, then we become weak; death will come,
and then we shall dye: the clothes we wear upon our backs, the Sun setting
over our heads, the graves under our feet; yea, the meat which goes into our
bellies, tells us we must decay: one creature does summon another unto
judgment; the fish in the sea, the fowls in the air, the beasts on the
ground, the one day living in their elements, the other day dressed for our
meat, give us warning: our fathers summond us, and we our children. To the
grave we carry others, others shall carry us to this bed wherein all must
sleep. Genesis 47.9. Psalm. 22.6.
Hence Jacob called his life a pilgrimage, Paul his life a race, David himself
a worm and not a man. A Pilgrimage has an end, a race has a stop, a worm is
trodden down vnder-feet: and all this is to teach, that we must dye. Wherefore
I say, seeing both the particular judgment of death, and other threatened are
certain, have we not all cause speedily to repent us of our sins, that both
others may be preuened, and when we dye, our death may be the beginning of
endless joy of life everlasting?

For the second, when the time of grace and salvation is offered (not embraced,
then judgments shall come; the people of the Jews had a time of repentance,
the ministry of the Law and the Prophets, now also have they a time of
judgment, unless they did repent) for the contempt of so great a mercy
offered: the destruction of the old World by the inundation of waters, for
their contempt of the ministry of Noah; the herrible confusion of Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram in the days of Moses; the wickedness of Saul in the days
of Samuel; the contempt of the Israelites after their deliverance from Babylon
and Assyria, being like the Blackamoore which does not chang his color, or the
Leopard his spots: and the judgments which seized upon them, clearly confirm
this point. The Jews had many both painful and faithful Teachers, yet they
would not embrace the mercy offered: Christ the light of the world, him they
did crucify, Paul famous throughout all the world, who had preached even from
Illyricum unto Spain, for him they laid wait, that they might kill him, many
others they had but all in vain, they would not hear: What followed upon
this? most fearful judgments: within two and forty years after the
ascension of Christ, Tripart. hist.
Jerusalem was destroyed by Titus the son of Vespasian, and the whole land of
Palestina, at this day all groaneth under the Turkish thraldom. The Primitive
Church for the contempt, did also undergo most fearful judgments. The
Romans for their contempt, were overthrown by the Goths and Vandales, and
forced to forsake the ancient Septicolles, and make their residence in Campus
Martius, where Rome stands at this day. The Citizens of Ephesus, Colosse, and
Corinth for their contempt, were by fire from heaven, by the earth quake and
pestilence destroyed: to come nigher home, England had her days of peace,
which being abused, followed the scourge of Queen Mary, whereby many thousands
lost their lives; yea, even of late God has in diverse things visited us, by
Famine, Pestilence, and even for our contempt of mercies offered, which yet if
we do refuse and reject, greater judgments shall cease upon us.

The Reasons hereof are these. 1. In respect of the Justice of God, which must
needs take place, where Mercy is rejected. 2. The Glory of God, which is even
purchased by inflicting judgments upon contemners.

The Use of this point is for exhortation unto us all, that seeing we have this
day of mercy wherein we may repent, even to embrace this occasion of the same,
left our impenitency open a door to Gods Judgments.

O Britain thou have a day wherein God offered mercy unto thee, by the
Preaching of the Word, saying unto thee, as our Savior unto Jerusalem, O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem feign would I have gathered thee, as the hen gathers her
chickens, but what may be complained of? but thou would not. If time be
neglected, shall there still be more for repentance? no assuredly, therefore
the Apostle says, Heb. 4.
To day if ye will hear his, voice, harden not your hearts. Let us draw nie
unto the Lord while he calls, for then he will be found of us in the day of
salvation. To all things there is an appointed time, Eccles. 3.1.2.4
and a time to every purpose under the heanen; a time to be borne, and a time
to dye; a time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mournt, and a time to
dance. Son of man write the time of the day, even of the same day the King of
Babylon set himself against Jerusalem upon the same day. The time of the King
of Judah his profanation, Hos. 7.5.
and as some think, is noted in this ironicall phrase; This is the day of our
King. By the contrary, such as mourn and are gricued at the afflictions of
Joseph, are marked in the forehead with the letter Tan: they shall have their
day of gladness, glad tidings of greatioy: let us watch and be sober, lest the
Master find us sleeping, and so instead of joy, we get sorrow; let us make use
of our time whilst we have it; let us embrace mercy whilst it is offered, for
death may soon take hold of us, Serapanitentia, raro est vera. Hiero. in Mat.
25. and in Epist.
delay not the least hour, for late repentance is seldom true: let us daily
call to mind Hieromes continual Meditation; Whether I sleep or wake, or
whatsoever I do, I hear the sound of that terrible trumpet knelling in mine
ears, O ye dead arise and come unto judgment. Thus of the Time.

Concerning the second point, the Instrument, an Axe: 3. Point. Deuteronomy. 19.5.
Isai. 10.15. Ier. 46.23.
In the holy tongue (...). Deuteronomy. Chap. 20. verse 19. (...). Psalm. 71.6. (...).
Isar. 44.12. (...). 1 Samuel 13. verse 20.

Secuirs a secando, from cutting: in the Scriptures it is taken diuirsly,
sometimes for an instrument wherewith men are accustomed to cut down trees;
sometime for the pride and presumption of the devil and wicked men, Shall the
Axe boast it self against him that heweth therewith? sometimes for the wrath
of God, by which wicked men are cut down; sometimes for the word of God, which
as a spiritual axe, cutteth down spiritually, wicked men and hypocrites, like
barren and rotten trees: and thus it is chiefly to be taken in this place,
according to the judgment both of Ancient and Moderene writers. Thus Hilarious.
and Gregory, He appointed the Jews to be cut off by infidelity; thus
Chrysostom, The axe is the sharpest. Designabat abscindendes esse Iudaos per
infidelitatem. Greg hom. in Euang. Securis est acutissima.


Touching this instrument, three things may be noted: 1. the weight of it, it
is heavy: 2. the sharpness of it, it cutteth: 3. it frames and fashioneth
several pieces of wood for their several uses, whether for building or burning
or the like; hence also three things may be noted touching the ministry of
Gods word.

First, that the judgments denounced against wicked men out of the word of
God, are heavy, of great weight and burden. Secondly, that the ministry of
Gods word, is of a sharp cutting nature. Thirdly, that the ministry of Gods
word, does fit and prepare such as obey, unto salvation; such as are
disobedient, unto condemnation.

For the first, that the judgments pronounced out of the word of God are
heavy, may be proved by that bloody speech of Cain, Genesis 4.13.
My penishment is greater then I can bear: And no wonder, for is it not just
with God, that such as weary God with their sins, as lade him with their
abominations, should themselves be pressed down with judgments; wherefore
let us be careful, that we do not contemn the warnings of Gods word, lest
heavy judgments do sease upon us, least we receive a terrible and forcible
blow.

For the second, the ministry of Gods word, is of a sharp and cutting nature;
hence it is called a two edged sword; a sharp sword with two edges; R^^. 1.16.
Reu. 2.12.
the sword of the Spirit; mighty in operation, sharper then any two edged
sword; The Lord will sharpen his wrath, (says the Wiseman) for a sword, and
the world shall fight with him against the unwise. Ephe. 6.17. Heb. 4.12. Wisd.
5.20.
Wicked men find this by daily experience: the adulterer, the blasphemer, the
drunkard, as formerly Herod, and the Scribes and Pharisees at diverse times.
Whence we may learn both to try the spirits whether they be of God or not, as
also to fit and prepare for the right hearing of God. Isai. 30.10.


To try the spirits, those that cast men a sleep in the bed of security, and
preach things pleasant to the corrupt nature, which speak smooth things, which
rouse not sinners from their sins; such I say handle the word deceitfully,
yea they preach not Gods word, but with their own inventions. By the contrary,
such as tell thee of thy sins, as gall thy spirit, as cut thy conscience, as
convince it, as plainly rebuke thee for thine iniquities, such preach Gods word
unto thee; believe them. To prepare our selves for the right hearing of Gods
word, even by a full purpose and resolution, to have our sins rebuked, and
our wickedness pointed out unto us.

For the third, that the ministry of Gods word does fit and prepare us either
for salvation or damnation, may be proved by that speech of the Apostle Paul
unto the Romans, Romans 1.16.
For it is the power of God unto salvation, unto every one that believes: and
to the Corinthians, We are unto God the sweet savor of Christ, 2 Cor. 2.15.16.
Ier. 5.14.
in them that are saved, and in them which perish; to one we are the savor of
death unto death, and to the other the savor of life unto life. Hence it is,
that the word of God is compared unto fire, either to purge, or to consume; to
a wind, which will either cleanse us, or blow us away; to water, which will
either wash, or drown us: Hence it comes to pass, that the word of God has
different operations, not in regard of it self, but in regard of those upon
whom it works.

This serves both for reprehension, and exhortation: For reprehension unto
such as contemn Gods word, deride and speak against the preaching of the
same, as if it were not the Axe by which we are framed and fashioned for the
Lords building.

Exhortation unto every one of us, to be frequent in hearing the word of the
Lord, that we may be made fit for the service of our God: Which of us will be
contented to have our houses built of rugged and vnhewen stones? and do we
think that we can be fit for Gods building, unless our superfluities by Gods
word be pared and weared away. Thus of the instrument. 3. Point.


Concerning the third point, the use of the instrument laid or put to the root
of the trees; noting unto us two things: First, the propinquitie of Gods
judgments: Secondly, the delay which he uses in executing his judgments.

For the understanding of both these points: two things are to be obscrued:
First, if the Axe, be put to the root of the trees, why are they not cut
down? Secondly, if they be not cut down, why then is axe laid unto them; or
if Gods judgments be threatened, why are they not executed; and if they are not
to be executed, why then are they threatened?

For answer unto both: First, The axe is laid to the root of the trees: Gods
judgments threatened, and yet not executed, because the trees are reasonable
trees, men endued with reason; the roots of these trees, the hearts of men,
which in time may change, turn and bring forth good fruit; namely, when God by
his Spirit shall renew their wills, and bestow upon them willing minds to
perform the actions of holiness: In the performance of good, our wills are not
active, but merely passive, we have no free will unto that which is good, we
are not only prisoners, Ephesians. 2.1.
bound with the cords of sin, but stark dead, without any ability in our
flesh to perform any good work, but by the operation of Gods Spirit; we are
not only destitute of that original righteousness wherein we were created,
but also our hearts are altogether inclined unto evil, The inventions of our
hearts are evil continually: wherefore I conclude against the Papists, that
seeing by nature we want original righteousness, and also are prone unto all
evil, therefore we want free will unto that which is good: This the Apostle
Paul confirms, The natural man perceives not the things that are of the
Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.14.
for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. Our righteousness is in Christ Jesus only; both in
respect of his active and passive obedience, Through whom God does account us
righteous, 2 Cor. 5.4.
imputing his sons righteousness unto us, whom he has made to be sin for
us, which knew not sin, that we should be made the righteousness of God in
him.

Secondly, although the trees are not presently cut down, yet is the Axe laid
unto them, though Gods judgments are not presently executed, yet are they
denounced and threatened, even that hereby we may fear our cutting down, and
in time bring forth good fruit, that so we may not be cut down at all, for (as
Chrysostom says) although wicked men do not amend by fear, Quam vis ^^tus
nec timore corrigitur, tamen bonus, nssi timuerit, perivit. Chrysostom.
yet unless the godly fear they shall perish. Thus for the information of the
understanding.

The observations which then arise from the applycation of the instrument, laid
or put to the root of the trees are these. First, that when Gods word is urged
and applied to men's consciences, and by preachers laid and pressed to the
hearts of the hearers, they then behold the propinquitie of Gods judgments
whereby they belong unto God, they are moved to repent; which made David to
say, I have sinned; and again, Psalm. 143.2.
enter not into judgment with thy servants; Genesis 41.32.
Joseph told Pharaoh that his dream was doubled unto him twice, because the
thing was established by God, and God would shortly bring it to pass, or
hasten to perform it: so I tell thee, thou have need to fear when thy
conscience is informed by the word, of those judgments prepared for the wicked.

Let my counsel be acceptable unto you, Break off your sins by
righteousness, and your iniquities by showing mercy unto the poor. In time
forsake your wickedness, Dan. 4.27.
seeing the Judge is ready to knock at the door, and now the Axe is laid to
the root fo the tree.

Secondly, that howsoever our sins deserve that God should execute his
judgments against us so soon as they are threatened, yet out of his abounding
love and mercy, he does prolong his judgments, and not presently execute the
same, Ezekiel. 18.32.
As I live (says the Lord) I desire not the death of a sinner, but that he
should convert and live. The Lord does stretch out his arms all the day long,
to a froward and rebellious generation: Matt. 11.28.
For this cause our Savior does most willingly inuit us, Come unto me all ye
that are weary and laedued with your sins, and I will case you. Gods mercies
are above all his works, Psalm. 145.9.
more willing by prolonging his judgments to convert us, then by executing
them to destroy us. The truth of this doctrine appears in that Parable of the
Fig tree; which although it was unfruitful for the space of three years,
yet the dresser of the Vineyard did say, Lord let it alone this year also,
till I dig round about it, Luke 13.6, 7.
and dung it.

The Reasons hereof are these: First, that such as are appointed unto life, may
have convenient time to use those means by which they may be furthered
thereunto. Secondly, to convince such as are disobedient contemners of the time
of their visitation, who shall be forced to approve the just judgments of God
upon them for their contempt; as Achan, who being taken, confessed he had
sinned, of which Daniel speaks, We and our fathers have sinned, in
transgressing the Law; therefore justly is thy wrath kindled against us, Josh.
7.
for shame and confusion belongs unto us: other Reasons I have touched before.

The uses hereof are both for exhortation, and reprehension: For exhortation,
first to be truly thankful unto God for this his abundant mercy toward us,
saying with David in general, What shall I render unto the Lord for all his
mercies: in particular, For sparing us so long, and giving us so large a time
of repentance: We must take the cup of salvation in our hand, and sing his
everlasting praise, who sits upon his throne, and in greatest misery shows
mercy: We receive great blessings from God; eyes to see, hands to work, feet
to walk, a time to repent; and yet alas all other creatures, the Sun, the
Moon, the Stars are thankful, we unthankful. Secondly, to make right use
of our time, redeeming the time which we have spent amiss, if God does
bestow upon us a time, let us not run the more unto sin, but the more be
with drawn from the same.

Reprehension, unto such as turn the mercies of God into wantonness, as abuse
his gracious time, wherein God does spare them, and do daily increase in finne,
and run on in wickedness. The first world was spared for a 120. years, so
Pharaoh, the Isratlits, the primative Church under Constantiue, Germany,
France, England, but did not make the right use, did not turn unto the Lord,
therefore judgments came upon them: and I pray you has not God spared us this
long time, he might have taken us away by the sword by the famine by the
pestilence, as many amongst us have been; but it has pleased him yet to spare
us: judgments are threatened against us, and yet where is our amendment? what
use do we make of this time? sin does now more abound amongst us, from the
highest to the lowest, then formerly it has done; and is not this an evident
token, that the sweetness of mercy shall be turned into the bitterness of
judgment; and then we shall repent, that in time, we did not use time
aright; judgments shall find us out, howsoever we may think to escape them:
Pharaoh bad Moses go out of his fight; but judgments shall not depart from us
when we would. It is Satan that does incite us to neglect the opportunity of
time, because he gains by our forgetfulness, therefore with David we might
pray, Teach us O Lord that we may number our days, Psalm. 90.12.
that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom: The wicked whilst mercy is
offered, neglect this numbering, are more busy to multiply sin; in short time
become perfect swearers, expert drunkards, cunning deceivers, and so make not
right use of their time. In life to live well is joyful, to dye well is
comfortable; but after an evil life to dye in impenitencie, this is most
fearful. To conclude this point, whilst it is to day, let us hear and obey;
whilst Gods judgments do not lie upon us, but hang over our heads, let us in
the fear of God, by repentance prevent them, that they may be removed. Thus of
the application and use of the instrument.

Concerning the fourth point, 4. Point.
the subjects whereunto the Axe is laid, unto the root of the trees, that is,
the word applied unto the hearts and consciences of men; men are not all of one
sort, some are ungodly, some are godly; yet both may fitly be compared unto the
root of the trees, and the word of God is to be applied unto both.

In a tree two points are to be noted: First, that which is above the ground,
which remains after the branches are cut off, commonly called a stock
Truncus. Secondly, that which is under the earth, hid and covered by the earth,
firmly fastened to the earth, both which Job conjoyneth together, Though the
root of it wax old in the earth, and the stock thereof be dried in the
ground, yet by the sent of water it will bud. The godly and the wicked may be
compared unto both these parts of the tree, though in a different respect.

First, I say the godly may be compared unto that part of the tree, which is
super terram, above the ground; for as it may bud, and tender twigs may spring
from it, although the branches be cut off, even so although Gods children for a
time may be terrified, and as it were cut down by Gods judgments, yet at the
length they spring again; or although Gods children for a time may seem to
have the graces of Gods Spirit, decaying or dead, yet at the length they
appear as young branches out of the stock, though they seem cut down, it is
but only for a time, God can again make them to fructify, he purges them
that they may bring forth more fruit. John 15.2.


Secondly, the godly may be compared unto that part of the tree which is sub
terra, Iam. 1.17.
under the earth, for as the roots are firmly settled and fastened to the earth,
whereby the tree is more firm and steadfast; even so are Gods children, by
faith firmly settled and fast grounded to the Lord Jesus Christ, with whom is
no variableness, Prou. 12.3.
nor shadow of changing. Thus Solomon proves a man cannot be established by
wickedness, but the root of the righteous shall not be moved: Romans 8.39.
and Paul also persuades himself, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels,
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any creature, should be able to separate us from the
love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Matt. 7.24.
Gods children fastened unto Christ, are like the house built upon the rock,
able to endure the storms and winds of temptation: the foundation of our
faith remains sure; strong is Mount Sion, which cannot be moved: and
afflictions are unto Gods children, as that still and soft voice which passed
by Elias, whilst he was upon the Mount: God does by his grace and presence
support them in the midst of their troubles, that neither sin, nor Satan,
nor afflictions shall be able to hinder their Progress in the ways of
salvation. The truth hereof appears by these two Reasons. Hos. 14.6.
2. In respect of the certainty of our Adoption through Christ, by virtue
whereof our roots are fastened as the trees of Lebanon, from whence there
comforts do arise to remove our fear and doubting. 1. Through him we shall
receive everlasting life. 2. We shall never perish. 3. None is able to take us
out of his hand Secondly, in respect of our obedience to this conjunction with
Christ; of which wisdom says, John 10.28.
Let thine heart hold fast my words, and thou shall live: Prou. 4.4.
our love is so great unto Jesus Christ, that death cannot dissolve the same;
we must say with Job, Though thou killest me, yet will I trust in thee; the
Mediation of this Union is more sweet then the honey and the honey comb; for
whose cause we must contemn all the pleasures of this world, and account them
bitterness.

The Use of this point is for our Instruction. First, constantly to persevere
in the Doctrine of salvation, fast settled and firmly grounded upon Jesus
Christ; Such as endure unto the end shall be saned: Tit. 1.9. Ephe. 4.14. Lu^^.
17.
If we do this we shall obtain the crown of glory, which the Lord has
promised to such as love him: Let us be no longer children carried about with
every wind of Doctrine, by the deceit of men, and with craftiness, whereby
they lie in wait to deceive us.

Secondly, to be thankful for this our incorporation into Christ; not
suffering this so excellent a benefit to slip out of our mind, imitating
herein not those nine unthankful Lepers, but the tenth returned back again
to express his thankfulness. And as we are to be thankful, so we must be
careful, lest we dissolve and break this our conjunction by falling away from
that faith wherein we have been baptized to the beggarly rudiments of this
world: for then the devil departs from us, will return unto us, and our
latter end shall be worse then our beginning.

As the godly, fo the wicked may be compared both unto that part of the tree
which is above the ground, and that part of the tree which is under the ground.

2. I say the wicked may be compared unto that part of the tree which is above
the ground; in respect that part of the tree which is above the ground, is more
subject unto danger then that part which is under the ground: so the wicked are
subject unto the wrath and judgments of God, Exodus 9.31.32.
when as his own children are free; the wicked are as the Barley and Flax in
Egypt, whieh by the Hayle were smitten: whereas Gods children are as the Wheat
and the Rye, they were not smitten, Isai. 5.24.
because they were hid in the ground. Secondly, as that stock is most commonly
the most rotten piece of the tree, joined to the dust of the earth, and the one
dissolved into the other; so likewise the wicked which are not in Christ Jesus
are but dirt and dung, the offscouring of the world in the presence of God, in
a most unhappy and miserable condition; as the flame of fire deuoureth the
stubble (says Isaias) and as the chafe is consumed of the flame, so the root
shall be as rottenness, Isai. 4.1.2.
and their bud shall rise up to dust, because they cast off the Law of the Lord
of hoasts, August. Epist. 10.
and contemned the holy one of Israel. And again he says against those
profane Nations whom he would destroy before his people Israel, so that be
gave them as dust to the sword, and as scattered stubble to his bow. The wicked
are called by Saint Augustine, Paluis mortis, the dust of death, because they
are appointed to death, whom the wind drives away as dust: Job in his
miseries says, My sleep is clothed with worms, and the filthiness of dust.
So that I say as the stock rotteth in the dust, so the wicked, who are but
dust, shall dye in their sins, and rot in their iniquities without hope of
life, either in this life or in the life to come. As from the dust of Egypt
there came a swarm of Lice, whereby the Land was plagued of God, so from the
wicked a rotten, dusty and unfruitful stock, proceed innumerable sins,
wherewith they themselves shall be plagued.

And as the wicked may be compared unto the stock, so fitly may their sins
be compared to the dust or rottenness; Propter ariditatem.
therefore, first, as a rotten stock is destitute and void of sap and
humidity whereby it may wax green, bud forth and fructify; so the wicked
have not a lively sap, nor the water of the spirit of Christ Jesus, whereby
they may bud and spring up from dead works to newness of life; the want
thereof the Prophet found in Ephraim; Hos. 9.6.
Ephraim is smitten, their root is dried up, they can bring no fruit. And Job
says of this wicked man, Job 15.39.
that he shall never depart out of darkness, the flame of Gods Angels shall
dry up his branches, and he shall go away with the breath of his mouth.
Propter leuitatem.


Secondly, as rottenness or dust is not Solidum quid, a solid matter, but is
tossed with the wind; so are the wicked lighter then vanity it self; Psalm.
1.4. Prou. 10.25.
they are as the chafe which the wind drives away: Dan. 5.27.
as the whirlewinde passes, so is the wicked: no more Belshazzar King of
Bab^ll being weighed in Gods balance is found to be but light as a feather.

Hence we may perceive a clear difference betwixt a wicked man and a godly
man; the wicked is wavering, the godly is stable. Prou. 10.15.
Theresore Solomon says, the righteous is an ever lasting foundation; but the
wicked are even subject to alteration and that at all occasion: for every
little cross unto the wicked is a mighty tempest, breaking the anchor of their
faith, and rock of their salvation, which makes them go a whoring after
unlawful means, and not to have recourse unto the Lord. The wicked says
Esaias, are like the raging Sea, that cannot rest, Isai. 10.15.
whose water casts up mire and dirt: Iam. 1.18.
wavering minded and unstable in all their ways. This our own daily
experience confirms unto us in these our days: the Apostles words prove true,
for the most part of men are foming out their own shame, rotten trees without
fruit, wavering Stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever
of this fort, Iud. 13.
there are not only among the common people, a great many, but even among the
Rabbis, great ones; not a few changing from one Religion to another, as reeds
shaken with every wind of doctrine, thus manifesting their own rottenness.

Secondly, the wicked may be compared unto that part of the tree which is under
the ground; for as it does fast cleave unto the earth, and can hardly be
removed from the same, but with great pains and labor; so the wicked do fast
cleave unto sin, and are so steadfastly glewed unto the world, and the
pleasures thereof, that not without great difficulty, they cannot be drawn from
the same: whence it comes to pass, that howsoever for a time they may
dissemble, and play the hypocrite with Demas, Judas, Saul, Achitophel, yet at
the length they bewray themselves, and for the love of the world, they will
forsake God himself and his kingdom; that they love the praise of men, more
then the praise of God, that their affections are set upon things below. It is
not an easy matter to remove the roots of a tree which has continued a long
time, it requires Spades and Mattocks to dig about it and stubbe, it must
have an Axe to cut it, and all little enough. The conversion of a sinner, of a
worl^ly minded man, of a rich man, whose heart is by covetousness in league
and covenant with the things of this world; I say the conversion of such a one
is an hard and difficult piece of work, with men impossible, which is the
only work of Gods spirit. Oh suffer not your selves to take so deep root, be
not so desirous of the things of this world, set not your hearts upon them, for
if ye belong unto God, it will cost you dear many sigh, groans, tear, prayer
before you shall again get it rooted out; persuade your seiues of this, that
the nigher and stricter ye cleave unto the world, and sin, the further you
are from God and your own salvation.

Thus having showed you how fitly both the godly and the wicked are compared
unto trees, it remains that I should prove, that as the axe is laid to
thereote of the trees, so the word is to be applied to the hearts and
consciences of men, as the Apostle says in the declaration of the truth, 2
Cor. 4.2.
We approve our selves unto every man's conscience in the sight of God. It is
lively and mighty in operation, Heb. 4.12.
and sharper then any two edged sword, and enters through even unto the
dividing a sunder of the soul and the spirit, and of the joints and of the
marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, 1 Cor.
14.25.
by which the secrets of man's heart are made manifest: Hence it is, that the
word of God is compared unto a hammer, Ier. 23.29.
to beat upon the hard Adamantine hearts of men, Ezekiel. 9.19.
by which God does take away their stony heart, and give them an heart of
flesh: unto fire, by which the Lord does purge their hearts from dress and
corruption: Ier. 5.14. Isai. 55.10.
unto rain by which the heart is watered that it may fructify; and for this
cause the Preachers of Gods word are called Stewards of the mysteries of God, 1
Cor. 4.1.
such as may rightly divide Gods word, and apply it to the consciences of men,
either for their further humiliation, or for their comfort. Thus have the
Prophets done, thus the Apostles, thus out Saniour Christ; they did not respect
persons, but told men their sins by the word of God, as Iohu Baptist did to
Hered, and here to the Pharisees, as Nathan to David, and the Apostle Paul to
Ananias, and Peter to Simon Magus.

The Reasons hereof are these: 1. because the heart is the sountaine of life,
thence murders, adulteries, thefts, slanders do proceed, Prou. 4.23. Math.
13.19. Genesis 6. Ier. 13.9.
the imaginations whereof are evil continually, which is deceitful and wicked
above all things, who can know it? yea no man can perceive the sinfulness of
his own heart, without the power of regeneration, though we have example both
from Christ and his servants to direct us toward the kingdom of heaven, yet
we forsake them through the sinfulness of our heart, either through our
natural corruption, or the instigation of the devil, who from our natural
corruption takes occasion to tempt us unto sin. He put it in the heart of
Judas to betray his Master, whereby we run even headlong unto our own
destruction, and our hearts cannot he rectified, but by the word of God.
Secondly, if the heart were not rouzed up by the word of God, but did continue
in sin, it would become hardened, and then past all feeling of godliness,
Romans 1.28.
and so be burnt as with an hot iron, with a cauterized conscience given up to
a reprobate sense, an estate most dangerous, a condition most miserable, a
forerunner of everlasting condemnation. By this no judgment, no affliction,
plague or punishment can become effectual. Pharaoh and his Land were
wonderfully plagued with variety of judgments, but they did not draw him unto
repentance because his heart was hardened. This the Lord does prevent out of his
unspeakable mercy in his own children, by the application of his word unto
their hearts, whereby they may repent them of their sins, become mollified
and tender hearted, and so escape the wrath to come.

The Uses of this Doctrine are for Exhortation and Reprehension: Exhortation
unto us all in general, and unto both Preachers and people in particular.

Unto us all in general, even to take notice of the sinfulness and corruption
of our hearts, that we endeavor and labor for a speedy remedy out of the
word of God: let us I say take notice of our omission of good duties, of our
commission of evil, of the negligence of our duties toward God and our
neighbor, and the ground whence those proceed, which is our hearts, that
hereby we may have our hearts reformed by the word of God, that God may create
within us a clean heart, Psalm. 51.10.
and renew within us a right spirit. So long as our heart remains asleep,
and is not wakened by the word of God, so long we cannot rightly setue God;
yea, though with Saint Basil we did go into a Wilderness to avoid wicked
company. Unto Preachers, to approve themselves before God and man in a good
conscience, by their lively and particular application of Gods word. God does
inioyne it unto them, God does require it of them, God does expect it from
them: hereby thou may persuade thy self of thy calling from God, and that
thou do perform it according to his will; true it is thou may undergo
much hatred, be in great danger and trouble for the same; 1 Cor. 4.9.13 Isai
17.13. Zach. 3.8. 1 Timothy 5.21.
thou may be forced to fly for thy life, with Elias imprisoned with
Jeremiah, hated with Micaiah, forbid to come any more unto their presence with
Moses, forbid to preach in the name of Christ with Peter, and the Apostles;
they may wait for thy life, as for Paul's; thou may be brought before the
Judgment Seat, as the Apostles; thou may lose thy head with John Baptist, be
killed with the sword as James was; thou may for thy pains be made a
spectacle to the world, as the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all
things: thou may be wearied with men, thou may be wondered at, yet
notwithstanding of all this, or any thing else which can be done unto thee by
men, thou must perform this duty, doing nothing partially, not respecting
persons, but laying the axe to the root of the trees.

Unto people to prepare themselves before they come unto the heating of the
word preached, by an expectation to have their sins told them, and resolution
to apply those things which they hear unto their hearts: art thou an
adulterer, a murderer, a swearer, a sabbath breaker, a thief, an envious
person, secure, negligent, backward in performing religious duties; And make
account before thou come, that thou shall hear thy sins disclosed, rebuked,
and do thou also apply those judgments, which are denounced in the word, in
genetall unto thy self, in particular, I am the man.

This should teach us in our calling not only to inform the judgment, but
also to reform the will by application of the word, which being omitted, it is
a token of weakness or ignorance, for we must be as a candle in a
candlestike; yet for all this faint not.

People which will not have their finnes rebuked, which will not have their
wounds searched, which cannot abide that any Preacher, nay that God himself
out of his word should reprove them: Who is the Lord, say they with Pharaoh,
that we should know him? we will fill our selves in taking our pleasure, and in
giving way to the corruption of our nature, according to the several
inclinations, that we are most given unto, whether they be sins of ignorance
or of malice, or of infirmity, or if it be the common sins of the world, as
pride, covetousness, drunkenness, whoring, and swearing; I tell thee man,
except thy heart and affections be seasoned with grace, and especially in
heating of the word, when Satan is then most busy to tempt, the word which is
the savor of life, shall turn to the savor of death and unto thy
destruction. Whatsoever the Preacher does say we will not believe him, And to
morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundance; to such says Solomon,
Eccles. 11.9.
Rejoice O young man in the days of thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee
in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine own heart, and in
the sight of thine eyes; but know thou that for all these things God will bring
thee into judgment. Gods word shall be applied unto thee, either for thy
confusion or consolation.

Thus for the fourth Point, The 2. Part.
and so much for the first part of my Text, the Proclamation of Judgment (Now
also is the axe laid to the root of the trees.) The second follows, the
extention or generality of this Judgment; every tree which brings not forth
good fruit.

Touching the Extention and Generality of this Judgment, it belongs unto
every tree which brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewne down and cast
into the fire.

All trees do not alike prosper, some prove fruitful, ethers wither and dye;
of fruitful trees there is also great difference, some bring forth good fruit,
others bad fruit. So likewise amongst men and women, the most part are barren
touching goodness as the Fig Tree, destitute of fruit, but most fruitful in
eulll, bringing forth bad fruit; they are but a few (in comparison of the
other) which are good trees bringing forth good fruit. Now touching those
trees, every one that brings not forth good fruit shall be hewne down and
cast into the fire.

Hence these observations may be gathered.

First, that it is not enough, not to do evil, unless also we do good; not
enough, not to bring forth bad fruits, unless also we bring forth good fruits.

Secondly that as trees are known by their fruits, so men and women, by their
obedience unto Gods Commandments.

Thirdly, that God without partiality or respect of persons, will proceed
against all such as live not an holy and sanctified life, through obedience
unto Gods Commandments.

For the first, it is not enough, not to bring forth bad fruit, unless also we
bring forth good fruit: therefore the Prophet David says, Depart from evil,
and do good: and the Prophet Isaiah, Cease to do evil, learn to do well.
The fig tree was cursed by our Savior, not because it brought evil fruit,
but because it brought not forth good fruit, whereby his hunger might have bin
satisfied. This may teach us to try and examine our selves, whether we have
brought forth good fruits; I doubt not but many will say, Psalm. 34.14. Isai
1.17.
we have wronged no man, we have lived of our own; and let be so, but what
good have thou done? have thou sought the glory of God, to edify thy
neighbor, have thou labored for his good, as for thine own? have thou
clothed the naked, relieved the needy, fed the hungry, visited the sick,
comforted the sick, comforted the distressed, prayed for the welfare of
others? Thou will answer me (if truly) that thou have not done those things;
then I reply, thou art not a good tree, thou do not bring forth good fruit,
and therefore shall be hewne down: if then thou do no good, Mat. 12.30.
thou do evil, this does necessarily follow; He that is not with me is
against me, says our Sauiout; if I say thou do not that good which thou
may, and in some measure as thou should, it is fit thou should be hewne
down. But alas, what should I speak of bringing forth good fruit, when as men
and women in these days, are so fruitful in evil. And if even those trees
which bring not forth good fruit, shall be hewne down, how much more those
which altogether bring forth evil? whose throat is an open sepulcher, whose
heart is a den of thieves, whose words and actions tend altogether to the
dishonor of God, as (alas) it is too too common in this woeful age.

For the second, as trees are known by their fruit, so men and women by their
obedience unto Gods Commandments; for to yield obedience unto the whole Law of
God, is to bring forth good fruit, such as God requires. For the illustration
of this point, these two things are to be considered. First, by what means we
may bring forth good fruit. Secondly, by what signs we may discern, if we do
bring forth good fruit.

Concerning the first, that we may bring forth good fruit, that is, that we
may walk conscionably, in the practice and obedience of Gods Laws, both
touching our general and particular calling, these seven things are required
of us. First, that we take particular notice of these which God does require of
us, of that fruit which God does expect from us, an abridgement whereof we have
in the ten Commandments. 2. We must resolve particularly to yield obedience
unto every one of those Commandments, unto the whole Law of God, and every
part thereof. 3. We must consider the necessity of the performing the same,
both in respect they are commanded by God, and in respect that the neglect of
them depriueth us of heaven. 4. We must endeavor to be cut off our old stock
Adam, and be engrafted into Jesus Christ. 5. We must have life and juice in us
derived from our root Christ Jesus, whereby we may be made like unto Christ,
both in his death by dying unto sin, and in his resurrection, by rising to
newness of life; whereby we may say with the Apostle Paul, Now I live, Gal
2.20.
yet not I now but Christ lives in me, and in that I live now in the flesh, I
line by faith in the son of God, who has loved me, and given himself for
me. As a tree receives moislure from the root, or otherwise cannot fructify,
so we cannot bring forth good fruit, unless we receive spiritual moisture
from Christ, of whose fullness we receive grace for grace. Ioh. 1.16.
And as trees cannot bring forth fruit, unless they be well and surely rooted;
so we, unless by says rooted unto Jesus Christ 6. Let us call to mind what
great pains God does take, (as a careful husband, that we may bring forth
fruit) planting, pruning digging, and dunging and should all this be in vain,
should not we fructify? 7. Let us daily pray unto God, the giver of all good
gifts, that he would be pleased to make us fructify.

Concerning the second, what signs we may discern if we do bring forth good
fruit: I answer, that good fruit may be discerned, Col. 2.7.
either by the sight, or by the taste, but chiefly by both conjoined together,
because that some fruit (such as the Apples of Sodom) do appear pleasant and
beautiful to the eye, which yet are unsavory, bitter and unpleasant to the
taste; so by viewing and trying our works, we may discern of their quality
and nature, viewing of them, let us compare them with the good fruit of others,
mentioned in Gods word, as our faith with Abraham's, our patience with Jobs, our
wickedness with Moses; and finding that in the quality, they agree in the
quantity and measure they differ, thou may persuade thy self, that thy fruit
is good, in trying and tasting it if thou find it sweet, pleasant, delectable,
whereby thou art desirous to do more, and thou would not for any thing, but
that thou had done it, and do resolve daily, to make a further progress,
and to bring forth more and better fruit, thou may rejoice and be glad, thou
art a good tree bringing forth good fruit, to the glory of God and comfort of
others.

Thus then ye see that men and women are to be discerned to be good trees, by
their obedience unto the Commandments of God. Which may serve for exhortation
unto us all, even conscionably to walk in the ways of God, caresully to
perform the Law of God, dutifully to become unto the Commandments of God both
in general and particular, and then we may be assured, that howsoever we may
in some measure fail, and in great weakness and imperfection perform those
duties, we are good trees and bring forth good fruit.

In vain do such boast that they are good trees, when as their fruit is bad;
a good tree cannot bring forth bad fruit, as a corrupt tree cannot bring forth
good fruit; if thou continuest in the course of ungodliness, if thou be now as
much set upon these ends, as thou wast formerly, rather more, if thou abidest
in any one particular sin, without repentance, if thou do speak against
the Commandments of God, and will not conform thy will unto his, in the
obedience of the same, assure thy self, thou art a bad tree, and have bad
fruit.

Concerning the third, God without partiality or respect of persons, will
proceed against all such, as live not an holy and sanctified life in Christ
Jesus through obedience unto his Commandments; he will not proceed against
the poor and spare the rich, against inferiors and spare superiors; no, no,
every tree which brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewne down: no man of
degree, estate or condition, whether high or low, superior or inferior, shall
be exempted from the same; Luke 13.4.
Unless ye repent, says our Savior, ye shall all likewise perish. If God did
punish Moses for his Infidelity, David for his Adultery, which brought forth at
that time bad fruit, what shall become of those that bring forth no good fruit
at all? the want thereof transformed Nebuchadnezzar into a beast, caused Hered
to be eat up with vermin, Judas an Apostle to be hanged, and everlastingly to
be tormented in hell.

The Reasons hereof are two. First, in respect of the nature of God,
impartial, no accepter of persons. Secondly, Act. 10.34.
the justice of God, in judging impenitent sinners, disposers of grace and
salvation offered unto them through Jesus Christ.

The Uses of this Doctrine are threefold. For Instruction to teach us that the
Lord is the searcher of hearts, Heb. 4.13. Gregan 29. Job. cap. 9.
that all things are perfectly known unto him, neither is there any creature
which is not manifest in his sight, but all things are naked and open unto his
eyes with whom we have to do; our external works are seen of men, much more
our inward thoughts of the Lord. Whence it appears that it is vain for us to
dissemble and be bypocrites in matters of Religion before God, or not to be
upright in our dealings toward men, seeing that the Lord both sees all, and
unless we repent judges all.

For consolation unto Gods children, which bring forth good fruit, when as
others shall be hewne down, and cast into the fire, thou shall escape: here
wicked men mock and revile you, account you sottish and foolish in spending
your time in the service of God, but resolve thou shall not perish, as they
shall: If every tree which brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewne
down; then every tree which brings forth good fruit shall stand, not be cut
down, and cast into the fire.

For Exhortation, seeing all which lead not an holy and sanctified life, shall
be brought unto judgment; seeing every tree which brings not forth good
fruit, shall be hewne down and cast into the fire, then let us endeavor to
lead an holy and sanctified life, that so we may escape the wrath to come.

Let us redress now whatsoever may condemn us, then no Proctor shall have
place to plead for us, no bribe shall buy us out. In se discat, se inspictat,
se discat; fiat se quarat, and se inueuiar, and quod destlicee nacet, quod
placet ^^tet, and planter. August. de verb. dom. ser. 12.
Let us I say, get the knowledge of our selves, look into our selves, search
our selves, seek our selves, find our selves, kill whatsoever does displease
us, desire and plant whatsoever does please us: we stand upon life and death,
let us therefore in time pray and beg for pardon, that we escape that
fearful day to come; for he that confesses and forsakes his sins, shall
find mercy: let us by a conscionable carriage of our selves, stop the mouths
of our Consciences, that they may stand for us, and not against us, before the
Tribunal of God.

Thus of the second Part, the Extension and Generality of this Judgment; Prou.
28.13.
every tree which brings not forth good fruit. The third follows, the
Execution of Judgment, following upon the contempt of the former Proclamation
of Judgment, be hewne down and cast into the fire.

Touching this Execution of Judgment, The 3. Part.
two things are to be considered. First, the manner how the Lord will proceed
in Judgment against such as bring not forth good fruit. Secondly, the time
when this Execution shall be accomplished.

Concerning the first, the manner how the Lord will proceed in Judgment
against fruitless Christians, is twofold. First, he will hew them down.
Secondly, he will cast them into the fire.

For the first, he will hew or cut them down. Men may be said to be cut down
(in general) from the original righteousness of Christ, by the transgression
of Adam, from their profession of the truth, by apostacy, wounding the
conscience unto death. In particular, from their outward pomp, glory and
worldly prosperity by affliction and trouble, from their pleasures in this life
by death: hew down the tree, Dan. 4.14.
and break the branches, shake off his leanes, and scatter his fruit, that the
beast may fly from under it; there is an hewing from worldly profperity. The
wicked his root shall be dried up beneath, and above shall his branches be cut
down; Job 18.16.
there is a cutting (as I take it) by death. Thus both the wicked and the godly
may be hewne down, although in a different manner, for both afflictions and
death unto Gods children are profitable; even to the wicked terrible, even
types of their last cutting down at the day of Judgment. By hewing or cutting
down, three things may be understood. First, that division aad separation
which the ministry of Gods word would work amongst them. Secondly, the
hardness of heart, wherein (justly) they should be given up, if they continued
fruitless. Thirdly, that external separation from God, his Angels, Saints,
and all happiness, at the general, fearful and terrible day of Judgment.

Hence three things may be gathered:

First, that the Preaching of Gods word, is the cause of separation and
division amongst men: a thing wonderful, and yet most true; it separateth
betwixt the gold and the gross, betwixt the Sheep and the Goats, betwixt the
Wheat and the Chafe; it makes the father against the son, and the son
against the father; Mat. 10.34.
and think not (says our Savior) that I come to send peace on earth, I come
not to send peace, but a sword. Paul was a persecuter, he was in great credit
and estimation, but when he became a Preacher, he was persecuted from place to
place: the word brings to light, and discovers some to be hypocrites, which
both had deceived themselves and others; what division and separation did this
make in the primitive Church, in this Land in the days of Queen Mary, in
France at this day, take one example for all; the Apostle Paul having preached
unto the Jews at Rome, some were persuaded with the things which were spoken,
some believed not. Acts 24.24.
I might instance diverse other examples, touching this operation of the Word in
making division, betwixt neighbors, brothers, parents and children, husband
and wife, yea betwixt a man and himself. So that the Word preached, as it does
confirm Gods children, it he weth down hypocrites, and discovers what they
are.

The Causes hereof are not in the Preaching of the Word; for the Sun is all
one, that shines upon pleasant Gardens, and upon stinking Dunghils; the fire
all one, which hardneth the Clay, and softneth the Wax; the Word all one, that
is preached to the godly and ungodly; but in respect of the difference which is
betwixt the hearers. The godly hear it, and bring forth good fruit, the wicked
hear it, and remain fruitless, so it heweth them down. The wicked not
perceiving the benefit which may bereaped by the word, but hating it, pleasing
their sinful desires, and so coutemning it, remain ignorant of the use of it,
and so are justly cut down. Whence I infer, first, that notwithstanding of
this hewing down, of this separation, and division which the Gospel works,
yet it is most needful to be preached; for it is better that hypocrites be
discovered and hewne down, then remain in close, they should both deprive
themselves and others, yea and there be a separation betwixt such, as are by
the most strict bonds of nature coupled together, that some of them might be
saved, then that continuing in worldly friendship all should perish. Secondly,
that not the Gospel or Ministry of Gods word is the cause of our hewing do
we, but our contempt thereof disobeying the same, which I speak for this end,
because many blame the Gospel for all these hurts which befall them, as Master
Latimer notes in one of his Sermons, Upon a time (says he) the people of
Sandwicke met together to consult about the season, why their town was more
over blown with Sand in few years, then it was of a long time before; an old
man answered, that he did remember that there was no steeple nigh, but since
there were the same might come upon that occasion, whereby he meant that
preaching of Gods word might be the cause, as assuredly many wrongfully imagine
touching other things.

The Uses of this point are three fold.

For consolation unto the children of God, howsoever that by the preaching of
the word hypocrites shall be hewne down, yet they shall be safe. The Gospel
is the power of God unto salvation to all them that believe; it is to them the
savor of life unto life. If we belong unto God, the word of God shall be
profitable unto us; if we receive it with meekness, it is able to save our
souls.

Gods children by the word bring forth good fruit, some thirty, sixty, and a
hundred fold; Gods word does work in them sorrow for finne, humiliation, an
avoiding of the occasions of sin, a labor to perform the works of piety
and godliness, and may we not much rejoice when we perform those things.

For Instruction: the clear shining of the Gospel does gall and torment
wicked men; which is a sign they did never feel the power of Gods spirit
within them, working for their conversion. Of those men there are two sorts,
the one more public, the other more private. Some publicly fight against God
with a stretched out Arm, and a stiff neck, as Pharaoh, Who is the Lord,
says he, that I should know him? Others go more subtly to work, are more
politic then the former; They are favorites of the Gospel, whilst there is
prosperity and peace. The Galathians esteemed of Paul as an Angel of light;
the town of Millan was so affected to Ambrose, that rather they would loose
their lives, then their Bishop: David had friends; yet the case is altered; the
Galathians fall away, Ambrose not so much respected; David, by such as bare him
fare formerly, persecuted. Moses was not at all times esteemed alike; when
Christ turned the water into Wine, and fed the people by hundreds and
thousands, all was well, then he was called Rabbi and Rabboni, then they would
make him a King, etc. but when he said, they are of their father the Devil,
then away with him, crucify him: Paul now called Mercurius, by and by a
murderer; these our days are full of such, whilst there is peace, then they
feeme religious, when trouble comes, they not only revolt, but persecute
such as are truly religious.

It is true that the children of God, being asleep, left unto themselves for a
time, may be offended at the word preached (who therefore are by the preachers
of Gods word to be roused from their security, that they may perceive their
error, rouzed I say by the terror threatened out of the Law of God; if they
have a long time continued in the course of godliness, or otherwise if they be
but nouices in the school of Christ, by a more milder course) but they do not
so continue, they repent, they are sorry, they are grieved for the same, where
as the wicked remain still so yea daily grow worse and worse, and therefore
shall be hewne down.

Secondly, that such as remain fruitless, and will not be reformed, shall be
given over unto the hardness of their own heart, and left unto their own
deserved condemnation: This is a terrible punishment, a fearful hewing down,
which proceeds from the contempt of Gods word, when the wicked have had the
outward Ministry of Gods word for a long time, and God has by it called them
to repentance, offering grace and salvation unto them, if they do not embrace
it, but continue in their back wardnesse and rebellion, then the Lord by
hardness of heart, hewing them down, he makes their hearts fat, so that
hearing they do not hear, seeing they dee not see.

O let us be careful to prevent this fearful judgment, rather let us be
hewne down, by crosses, affliction, and death, then by hardness of heart; let
us pray unto the Lord daily to mollify and soften our heart.

Thirdly, that the wicked at the day of judgment, shall by a perpetual
separation, be hewne down from the fellowship of the holy Trinity, blessed
Angels, and glorified Saints, which our Savior himself confirms, Mat. 24.
Go ye cursed of my father unto everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels; their hewing down by the word in this world, precedes their hewing
down at the day of judgment; that proceeds from this; for such as are here
hewed down, by the ministry of the word, given over to a reprobate mind, and
an hard heart, shall then by final separation be hewed down, from the
presence of God.

This lets us see the miscrable estate of wicked men, both in this life and
in the life to come: here they are hewed down by the ministry of Gods word,
then they shall be perpetually hewed down by the sentence of the just Judge,
Go ye cursed of my father, etc. This final hewing down shall not befall unto
all sinners, but only to such as are impenitent; many may in this world be
hewed down, by temporal judgments, which repenting shall not be hewed down
in this last iudgemknt. To this purpose the Apostle speaks of the Jews, And
they also, if they abide not still in unbelief, shall be grafted in, Romans
11.23.
for God is able to graffe them in again. Such as belong unto God may for a
time fall away (as all such do totally, which are outwardly planted and not
inwardly) and so by assliction hewed down, but they do rise again, and by
repentance blot out their fall, and therefore shall escape this final hewing
down.

For the second, he will cast them into the fire: by fire in this place we may
understand, the judgment which at the great day shall be executed upon wicked
men, the extreme and most sharp pain appointed for them in hell; concerning
which, these six things are to be considered. First, that it is fearful.
Secondly, that it is painful. Thirdly, that it is unspeakably painful.
Fourthly, that it is continual. Fifthly, that is universal. Sixthly, that it is
eternal: other questions as being more curious then profitable, I willingly
pass by; such, as whether it be a material fire, how it is maintained, etc.

First, I say it is fearful, and that if either we consider the place where
it is, Hell; for what it is to torment wicked men, how unpleasant it is, not
for light, heat, or comfort, as other fire is, but to torment and terrify,
accompanied with diverse other torments, utter darkness, the worm that never
dies, weeping and gnashing of teeth, which shall never be quenched; fearful
was that destruction of Sodom, but more fearful this, that did end, this
shall never.

Secondly, it is painful, and therefore called the Lake burning with fire and
brimstone: the extremity whereof both in body and soul, the heart of man is
not able to conceive; a taste where of we may have in the rich Glutton.

Thirdly, it is unspeakable: as Paul was not able to express the joys of
heaven, no more can we the extremity of this fire.

Fourthly, Mat. 3.12.
it is continual, always without any intermission, which does so much the
more agrauate the misery of the wicked, this fire cannot be put out.

Fifthly, it is universal, both upon soul and body, and conscience, both
outwardly and inwardly.

Sixthly, Mat. 25.41.
it is eternal: if it would once cease, though after many thousand years,
there were some hope, but it shall continue world without end, for evermore,
from whence there is no redemption.

Hence we may learn, that seeing this fire is so fearful, so painful, so
unspeakable, so continual, so universal, so perpetual, and the wicked not
repenting them of their sins, shall be (without doubt) cast thereinto, even
in time to forsake our sins, and to turn unto the Lord, by true and unfeigned
repentance, bring forth good fruit, where by we may escape so terrible a
torment, the fire of hell. O let us fear and tremble when we hear or read
hereof, yea let us always have it before our eyes, that we may be withdrawn
from sin, least sinning and not repenting, we become partakers thereof.

O wicked man why do thou run on in sin, why art thou so careless of
thine own welfare? would thou burn willingly? think thou, that thou
can abide the fire? no certainly thou can not: if thou can not abide that
the least member of thy body should abide in the fire, but for a little time,
how shall thou be able to abide the fire of hell, both in body and soul
eternally?

Concerning the second: when this Execution shall be accomplished: although
that chiefly it shall be executed in the great and general day of judgment,
yet notwithstanding it does begin even in this life; as then they shall be
finally hewne down and cast into the fire of bell; so also here they shall be
hewne down by the ministry of Gods word, and feel this fire begun in them,
their Conscience accusing them, torments affrighting them, they themselves
driven unto desperation. Hence we may perceive the miserable estate of wicked
men, both here and hereafter, in this life and in that which is to come.

Whereby we may learn in time to become obedient unto the Preaching of Gods
Word, not despising the gracious offers of mercy; for certainly, to conclude
with the words of my Text, Every tree which brings not forth good fruit,
shall be hewne down and cast rute the fire.

FINIS.
THE VOICE OF THE CRIER.

Containing A forcible Inuitation to REPENTANCE.

By Alexander Vdny B.in Divinity, and Chaplain to his Majesty in Ordinary,
and Minister of the Gospel at Hauking in Kent.

Lament. 1.20. Abroad the sword bereaueth, at home there is as death. Chrysostom
in Sermon. Nemo ad Deum aliquando flens accessit, qui non quod postulauit
acceperit. LONDON, Printed by T. C. for James Bowler dwelling at the sign of
the Marigold in Paul's Churchyard. 1628.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sr. THOMAS Couentrey Knight, Lord Keeper of the great
seal of England, and one of his Majesty's most Houourable Privy Council.
WE read in holy Scripture, Right Honorable, that godliness with contentment
is great gain, 2. Tim. 6.6.
for it has not only promise of this life but of the life and glory to come:
for proof whereof we have in the person of Obed-Edom, That when the Ark of the Lord, was well entertained in his house, 2. Sam. 6.11.
both he and all that did belong to him were blessed of God, for the Arc was
not only a token of Gods presence, but also a type of our ministry; To which
God has conjoined himself to be present with us unto the end of the world. By
the Arc many miracles were done, by it the waters of Jordan were divided, the
walls of Jericho fell down to the ground, the Jdoll Dagon was dismembered. But
the Arc of the new Covenant does much more, it passes all Gods children
through the mighty floods of affliction, breaks down the walls of
temptation, casts Popish Jdolatry to Gebena from whence it came, as not able
to look the truth in the face, this does present Christ the way, the truth,
and the life, and does exhibit Christ unto us, God and man to be our
righteousness, sanctification and redemption. Now the way to meet with all these
blessings, with Obed-Edom, is to entertain the Arc of the Gospel, but yet
these blessings are not obtained in respect of the presence of the Gospel, but
in respect of believing, obeying, and reverent estimation and entertainment of
the same, for as we must love God, embrace his laws, advance the Gospel, so
must we imitate the example of Obed-Edom, who did not break the tables of
stone, Aarons rod, or misused Manna, which would have bred his overthrow, but
as he did carry a reverent respect and estimation to the Arc, so he did to the
supporters thereof, he brake not off the rings, nor the bars in the rings, by
which it was carried from one place to another. It is a difficult matter for a
man in our days to profit himself by the Gospel, that does for any earthly
respect, despise a powerful Ministry, who as the Bars in the Arc do
preach the truth, and carry the Arc of the Gospel unto the world; neither was
the Ring or Bar changed, but keept as it was ordained by God and his servant
Moses; and wheresoever this hasty disposition is, we may assure our selves it
leaves some bountiful remembrance: to your Lordsh. is recommended a care of
the reverent estimation of the Arc and affairs thereof. You are as a tower
upon the top of an hill, and so much the more reason have you to walk wisely,
and that in respect of your great privileges, that the laws of God and the
kingdom may be conioynd with an upright and godly course of life, because Plus
effecit apud populum, which laudable course your L. does follow, which has the
more emboldened and encouraged me to present this small token of my good wills
unto your Lordship, albeit J have not used the common Method of many in the
like case, which were rather to write of you, then to you, yet neither to be
neglected, for in publishing (though sparingly) my knowledge of your worth to
the world, some might tax me with flattery which J condemn in others, but
only on the other part, some may censure me to have written of you according to
the poverty of my ability rather then to the fulness of your merit, but
howsoever peradventure it will seem strange when this comes to your
Lordships hands, what assurance of your good acceptance, should have moved me
to dedicate the same unto you, J have not done it mercinarie, further then my
pains may advance the Gospel, for then I would have presented it to your
hands; nor vain gloriously in craving your approbation, but freely and
honestly out of that respect which J owe to that innate goodness, which J hope
is and shall express it self in you. And herein I think my self happy that
J live to know one of so great quality as your self, whose breast goodness
makes her habitation which J may the more boldly say, in that J heard from your
mouth, that your desire was to advance and prefer, those that were worthy to
the work of God, for the which, and for mine own part also, as J endeavor my
self to run after the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, so I desire to
imitate the fertile lands, Qui multo plus reddunt quam acceperint, quia si non
dubita -- mus bona confer his qnos speramus nobis profuturos, quales debemus
esse in eos qui iam profuerunt? But yet J say, Non redderevero, bono viro, it
cannot absqua iniuria id facere possit, Receive then a signification of my
love, a testification of duty. Accipe ergo hanc obseruantiae meae humilem
tesseram, and quidem sereno vultu ac animo clementi accipe: Inde pium meum in
te affectum elice, meque clementia solita porro prosesequere. Illud vbi
impetravero magnum me quid impetrasse existimabo, pro quo tamen nil praeter
preces pias, officia and obsequia humilia reponere queo. And thus humbly taking
my leave, wishing to your Lordship all health and happiness, with the increase
of all spiritual and temporal blessings. And that this small gift may have as
good acceptance in your Lordships favor, as it is well intended by me: to this
effect I pray the very God of peace sanctify you throughout, and I pray God
your whole spirit, and soul and body, be preserved blameless unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: in him, Farewell.

Your Lordships in all respective duty to be commanded, Alexander Vdny.

THE Voice of the Crier: Containing A FORCIBLE INVItation unto Repentance.
JOEL 2.12. Therefore also now, says the Lord, turn ye even to me, with all
your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning.
IN the former part of this Chapter, the Prophet threatens unto the Jews
heavy judgments, and a fearful desolation from the Assyrians, whom God at
the length would send unto them: beholding them secure and careless, obstinate
and impenitent, he rouseth them up by a Proclamation of doleful tidings. The
day of the Lord is come, for it is at hand; a day of darkness, and of
blacknes, Verse. 1.2.11.
a day of clouds and obscurity, etc. The day of the Lord is great and very
terrible, and who can abide it?

In these words, as a most loving Pastor unto his flock, he declares the
remedy, whereby this fearful desolation might be prevented; namely, by true
and unfeigned Repentance: concerning which two things are to be considered.
First, the duty enjoined. Secondly, the reasons where by it is enforced.

The Duty enjoined is true and unfeigned Repentance, consisting of these two
parts. First, internal in the affection, required both of Priests and people,
turn ye even to me with all your heart. Secondly, external, and in action
consisting of three points. 1. Fasting. 2. Weeping 3. With mourning.

The Reasons whereby it is enforced are three. 1. From the occasion, therefore.
2. From the time, now also. 3. From the author, says the Lord. Therefore now
also, says the Lord.

I shall first speak of the Reasons, then of the Duty it self, at the
pleasure of God.

The first Reason then whereby our Prophet does exhort the Jews unto
Repentance, The occasion, Therefore.
is from the occasion of the same, laid down in this increasing particle,
therefore: which having relation unto the former verses, points out unto us
the great danger wherein the Jews stood at this time; judgments being
denounced against them; judgments being prepared for them; judgments even
hanging over their heads, which could not otherwise be removed, but only by
their repentance. The Reason may be framed thus: If those judgments which are
denounced against you, cannot otherwise be removed, but by true and unfeigned
Repentance, then it is needful that you should repent: but those judgments
which are denounced against you, cannot otherwise be removed, therefore it is
needful that you should repent.

Hence this observation may be gathered: that,

When either Gods hand is heavy upon us, Jews at this time, as may be
gathered out of the former chapter, greater judgments were denounced against
them, in the beginning of this, and therefore now they are exhorted unto
Repentance. Thus did Iehosaphat, 2 Chro. 20.
hearing that the Aramites were come against him, He set himself to seek the
Lord, and proclaimed a fast throughout all the Land. Thus did the Israelites,
when two several times they were discomfited by the Beniamites, They went up
unto the house of God and wept, Judge. 20.26.
and sat there before the Lord, and fasted that day until the evening. Thus
did the Ninevites after the denunciation of Gods judgments by Jonah. Jonah 3.5.
Hence it is that the Prophets, after they had denounced. Gods judgments, did
always from thence exhort them unto Repentance. Thus Isaiah, Why should ye be
stricken any more, Isa. 1.5.16.
etc. wash you, and make you clean. Thus Jeremiah, Ier. 4.6.8.
I will bring evil from the North, and a great destruction; for this, gird you
with sackcloath, lament and houle. Thus Daniel having expounded Nebuchadnezzars
dream, and warned him of his approaching fall, exhorts him to break off his
sins by righteousness, Dan. 4.27.
and his iniquities by showing mercy to the poor. Thus Hosea, for this shall
the Land mourn: come and let us return unto the Lord. Thus Amos, Hos. 4.3.
and 6.1. Amos 4.2. and 5.4.
The Lord God has sworn by his holiness, that lo the days shall come upon
you, that he will take you away with hooks, and your prosperity with
fish-hookes, etc. seek ye me and ye shall live. Thus Zephaniah, Zeph. 1.2.
and. 2.1.
I will utterly consume all things from of the Land, etc. gather your selves
together before the decree come forth. Thus our Savior Christ, Luke 13.5.
Unless ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Thus our Prophet, he does
both advertise the Jews of their imminent danger, and also how they might be
delivered.

The Reasons of this Doctrine are these two. First, The Reas. 2.
Because Gods hand is heavy upon us, and his Judgments are denounced against
us; for this end, that we may repent and return unto him: according to that of
the Prophet, Isa. 26.16.
Lord in trouble have they visited thee, they powered out a prayer when thy
chastning was upon them. For this cause the Lord complains, that although he
had afflicted his people, yet they did not return unto him.

Secondly, because upon Repentance, God does withdraw his Judgments either
inflicted or denounced: inflicted, Israelites, He regarded their affliction,
when he heard their cry: threatened, from the Ninevites; And God saw their
works, Psa. 106.44. Jonah 3.10.
that they turned from their evil way, and God repented of the evil that he
had said he would do unto them, and he did it not.

The Uses of this point are twofold.

1. For Reprehension unto all of us in this Land, upon which Gods hand lies
heavy, against which so many Judgments are denounced, and yet (alas) we
continue in our evil courses, and do not repent us of our sins; yet which
is worse, we daily grow worse and worse, adding sin unto finue, and
multiplying our abominations in Gods sight. What could have been done more
unto us, then the Lord has done? yea at this same time, all those causes
whereby God has provoked others to humiliation, concur together to move us
to Repentance. Public, open, powerful and malicious enemies hunt after our
destruction, that they may deface Gods glory, root out Religion, possess our
Inheritance, and make our streets run over with blood. God blows upon those
actions which we undertake, either by Sea or Land, as daily experience
teaches: Gods Judgments both in general and particular are denounced against
us, as they were against the Ninevites; we have been visited with the Plague,
the famine, strange diseases, etc. The sword of our enemies hangs over our
heads, few are sorry for the afflictions of Joseph, the love of most both
toward God and their distressed brethren is waxed cold: we fall away from our
former love and zeal which we have had to Gods glory and our own salvation;
and yet who takes those things to heart? who does repent him of his sins?

For Exhortation both unto Preachers and People.

Preachers to be careful both in foreseeing and fore-warning Gods Judgments;
Jeremiah; Speak unto them all that I command thee, Ier. 1.17.
be not dismayed at their faces, least I confound thee before them. And unto
Ezechiel, When I say unto the wicked thou shall surely die, Ezekiel. 3, 18.19
and thou give him not warning, nor speak to warn the wicked from his
wicked way to save his life; the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity,
but his blood will I require at thine hand. Let us remember I say that God has
made us Watchmen, and that therefore we ought to give warning. O let us cry
aloud, and spare not, Isa. 58.1.
let us lift up our voice like a trumpet, and show our people their
transgression, and what judgments are prepared for them, that so they may
repent, at least we may save our own souls.

People, even truly to repent them of their sins, in respect of Gods
Judgments both lying upon us, and greater hanging over our heads. Has God
been pleased to spare you so long, and not quite destroyed you, repent in
time, become obedient unto the word of God calling upon you. Repent I say, that
God may be glorified in his mercy, our enemies may be subdued, our present
calamities removed, and further judgments prevented: to conclude this point,
seeing God has dealt with us in this Land, as he did with the Jews, seeing he
exhorts us unto Repentance by a Proclamation of Judgments as he did them,
and we have as much need to repent as they had, I conclude with that
exhortation of Zephaniah, Gather your selves together, Zeph. 2.1.
yea gather together a Nation not desired before the decree bring forth, before
the day pass as the chafe, before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you:
otherwise the Lord may justly in the day of his wrath make us subject unto the
cruelty and slavery of our enemies. Thus of the 1. Reason.

The second Reason whereby our Prophet exhorts the Jews unto Repentance, The
time, Now also.
is taken from the time wherein he did exhort them, laid down in these words,
Now also, wherein diverse things may be noted. 1. That as at this time, so also
at other times the Lord has exhorted them unto Repentance, as might be
confirmed by the Prophesies of Jonah, Amos, Hosea, Isaias, Micah, Nahum, and
Jeremiah, all which did precede this our Prophet Joel. Secondly, that as yet
there remained hope for them of obtaining pardon, and preventing those
Judgments threatened, if they would truly return unto the Lord. Thirdly, that
God did not promise again to call upon them, or any longer to spare them, if
they did not delay, and put off their Repentance, as formerly. The Reason may
be framed thus; If God have spared you so long, and not utterly destroyed you
notwithstanding of your deserts, and does now also inuit you to Repentance;
not like to spare you any longer, if you do not now amend, then you ought to
return unto him: but so it is, that God has yet spared now, does now also
inuit you to Repentance, and is not like any longer to bear with you;
therefore you ought now to Repent, now to turn unto the Lord. Hence this
observation does arise:

The bounteousnesse, patience, and long suffering of God ought to move us unto
a present and speedy Repentance. God has been bountiful unto the Jews, in
exhorting them so often, in sending so many Prophets unto them; he had long
born with their frowardness and backwardness, he had wearied himself by
waiting upon them; yet again he offers unto them mercy, by the same, to
provoke them unto a speedy and present Repentance. Romans 2.4.
This the Apostle Paul confirms; Despisest thou the riches of his goodness,
and forbearance, and long suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God
leads thee unto Repentance. 2 Cor. 6.2.
And again, Behold, now is the acceptable time, Heb. 3.13.15.
behold now is the day of salvation. And again, Exhort one another daily,
while it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin: to day if ye will hear his voice harden not your
hearts.

The Reasons hereof are these. First, because for this end the Lord does
forbear us, spare us, call upon us, even that we may repent. Ezekiel. 18.23.
God is not bound thus to deal with us, but out of his exceeding great love;
he does spare us, not desiring the death of a sinner.

Secondly, because if we do not Repent, and return unto the Lord, then we
shall be left inexcusable, we shall be forced to confess Gods just judgment
in our confusion, following upon the contempt of his mercy offered unto us; yea
after our hardness and impenitent hearts, Romans 2.5.
we treasure up unto our selves wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation
of the righteous judgment of God.

The Uses hereof are threefold.

For Reprehension unto all such as abuse the goodness,

For Exhortation unto every one of us.

1. To be thankful unto God,

2. To embrace those gracious offers of mercy and salvation now presently
offered unto us, not putting off from time to time, saying with Salomons
sluggard, Yet a little while, Prove. 6.10.
yet a little folding of the hands. Why would thou buy Repentance at such a
dear rate; the longer thou delayest, the more hardly can thou repent, the
more painful shall thy Repentance be unto thee?

For Consolation unto such as are cast down through the sense and
consideration of their sins, Now also, the Lord does inuit thee unto
Repentance; do thou Repent, and thou shall be saved, Gods Judgments shall be
withdrawn from thee, thou shall not be destroyed; thy Repentances cannot be
too late, if it be true. Neither do I speak this to encourage any to go on
in sin, and so by presuming upon Gods mercies, to continue in sin, for such
are in a dangerous and lamentable estate, but only for the comfort of such as
are in danger of desperation, through their long continuance in sin; to them
I propound the example of Manasses, Marie Magdalen, Zacheus, Paul, the Thief
at the right hand, that they should not despair. To the others, I might
instance thousands of examples, of such as by delaying did perish, that they
should not presume. Thus of the 2. Reason.

The third Reason whereby he exhorts them unto Repentance, The Author. Thus
says the Lord.
is taken from the Person of him that speaks, or from the Author by whom, and
in whose name our Prophet was directed thus to speak unto them, laid down in
these words, Thus says the Lord. The Reason may be framed thus. That which the
Lord himself does command you, enjoin unto you, and require of you, that you
ought to do: but so it is, the Lord does by me exhort you all unto Repentance,
to return unto him; therefore you ought to Repent and return unto him. Hence
these three things may be observed.

1. That God by the preaching of his word does reveal his will unto us. 2.
That before the Lord inflict his Judgments, he does give warning and
advertisement thereof. 3. That unless it please God to work Repentance in our
hearts by his Word and Spirit, we can never truly Repent.
For the first, Ier. 15.19. 1 Cor. 3.9. 2 Cor. 5.20.
and abstinence from that which is evil. Hence they are called Gods mouth,
Laborers with God, The Ambassadors of God. By them he did for the most
reveal his will in former ages, by them he does reveal his will in these our
days: as he sent his Prophets unto the Jews, with Thus says the Lord, in
their mouth, so he does now send Preachers to reveal his will unto you.

The Uses hereof are threefold.

For Instruction,

1. Reverently to esteem of the Word preached, and of the Messengers thereof.
Of the word preached, as the word of God, as the Wisdom of God, as Oracles of
God, which is to be preferred before thousands of Gold and Silver, Psalm. 19.10.
and is sweeter then the honey and the honey comb. Of the Preachers, as
disposers of the secrets of Christ's kingdom; 1 Pet. 4.11.
such as despise them, despise God himself: as the Lord said unto Samuel, They
have not rejected thee, 1 Samuel 8.7.
buty the have rejected me, that I should not reign over them. And our Savior
Christ, He that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you, despises
me, and him that sent me. Luke 10.16.


2 To know Gods will revealed in his word. God does not now reveal himself
unto us, by Prophecy, Revelation, Vrim and Thummim, and the like, as formerly
unto the Jews he was wont, but by his word preached, which does instruct us in
the same.

3. To obey the will of God, revealed to us in the preaching of his word;
resolving to hear what God shall speak unto us out of his word, and to
perform such things as we hear.

For Reprehension, both unto Preachers and People.

Unto Preachers, Eze. 13.7.10.
and that they are his Messengers to declare his will: or which preach not Gods
word but man's traditions, and their own inventions, confirming their Doctrine
rather with humane testimonies, then the written word of God.

Unto People, which either absent themselves from the hearing of Gods word
preached, or if they come, give not that reverence as is fit; yea, there are
many amongst us, which either could be content that there were no preaching, or
that it were very seldom. There are also many, which prefer the Popes
holiness before the Scriptures, yea allow those things which are contrary unto
the same: as one speaking of Confirmation, says, Guido. editus anno 1595.
mamp. Curat. in Tract. 3. Itart. 2. Ier 20.8.
Though it be not found in the Canonical Epistles of Saint Peter, yet our Lord
and Pope has it in the decrees of the Church of Rome. Thus they preseire
falsehood before the truth, and humane traditions laboue the word. Besides, how
many are there, which both mock the prezchers, and preaching of Gods word, to
whom Gods word is a reproach and derision?

For Exhortation both unto Preachers and People.

Unto Preachers to stir up their People unto attention, Thus says the Lord:
whereby they shall become more cheerful, Luke 4.20.
whilst the eyes of the people are set upon them; and people more attentive,
knowing that it is God which speaks unto them.

2. To propound unto their people the Oracles of God; If any man speak (says
Saint Peter) let him speak as the Oracles of God. 1 Pet. 4.11.


3. To deline^ Gods will unto their hearers both faithfully and diligently,
according as they have received from him.

Unto People, diligently to attend upon this ordinance of Preaching; loathe not
this Manna, despise not this Seed reject not this Milk, refuse not this
Treasure, though in earthen Vessels, look not unto the meandness of the
Preachers thereof, For God has chosen the foolish things of this world to
confound the wise: 1 Cor 1.27.
whilst this blessing is continued make use of it, and reverence the Preachers
thereof, for if we contemn it, there may come a famine thereof, Amos 8.12.
that we shall seek it, and not find it.

For the second, Thus says the Lord: which our own particular experience may
sufficiently confirm. Gods hand is now heavy upon us (as of late it has
been) Judgments are daily by the Preachers of Gods word denounced, and are
like to fall upon us: have we not sufficient warning? We had warning of our
former visitation, we have warning of another, yea the former (without
Repentance) is but a forerunner of a greater.

The Uses of this Point are.

First, Jews and unto us: he gave them warning and advertisement, so also he
gives us.

Secondly,

Thirdly, themselves, neither yet are desirous, that others should advertise
them: much like unto the Sodomites. whom Lot advertised of their imminent
danger, Genesis 20.14.
He seemed unto them as one that mocked: and like the Jews, who being warned
by Jeremiah concerning the will of God, whereof at their own desire he had
enquired, said, Thou speak falsely, Ier. 43.2.
the Lord our God has not sent thee, to say, Go not into Egypt to soiourne
there.

For the third, Acts 11.18.
This point is needful to be urged in these days, wherein men are so
careless in living, and wretched in sinning, as if Repentance were in their
pocket, whereas there is no true Repentance unless God enter into the mind,
then follow the sobs of a contrite heart. As the sap and juice runs fast
from a green piece of wood, whilst it burns, till it be consumed; so when
the Lord comes into the heart, there is weeping till the power of sin be
consumed. Repentance is not the wringing out of a tear, or the breathing out
of a sigh, Note.
or the lifting up of the eyes, or a bare saying, I have sinned: but it must be
with weeping, sighing, praying, confession, and true amendment of life, the
special gift of God.

The Reasons of this observation are two. First, God has ordained a Saniour,
for to give Repentance unto Israel, Act. 5.31.
add forgiveness of sins: wherefore it follows, that as a man cannot
pardon his own sins, so he cannot Repent when he list: sin may quickly be
committed, but hardly rubd off again. Some may say, we have sinned grievously,

Secondly, heart, so it is the word of God which softneth the same. Hence it
may be demanded,

The Uses of this point are twofold.

For Exhortation: Lam. 5.21.
Turn us unto thee O Lord. Do thou find heaviness in thy heart, dullness
in thy soul, in performing of good, and readiness unto evil, then pray unto
the Lord for thy conversion, for thine estate of life is worse then death? Do
thou live without Repentance? there is but a little space betwixt thee and
death, betwixt thee and hell; yet notwithstanding I dare say, that of all suits
preferred before God, this especially was never denied. Do thou live a
profane life, and yet hearing some Sermons of death and Judgment, defirest to
do better? stay not here, but confer with thine own conscience, and pray
unto the Lord, that thou may do his will, and that he would be pleased to
strengthen thee that thou may perform that which he commands: Pray both
in public and private, pray continually, then I assure thee, drunkenness
shall not drown thee, covetousness shall not overrule thee, pride shall not
deface thee, whoredom shall not undo thee, stealing shall not shame thee, the
world shall not deceive thee, nor thy self condemn thee.

For Instruction: If Repentance be the special gift of God,

And so much for the Reasons whereby our Prophet exhorts the Jews unto
Repentance, laid down in these words, Therefore now also, thus says the Lord.

I come now to speak of the Duty whereunto he does exhort them, and that is
unto true and unfeigned Repentance: for the understanding of which, two things
are to be observed in General.

First, That God does not respect our miseries, unless we do repent.
Secondly, that without the preaching of Gods word, judgments cannot amend us.
Concerning the first: God does not respect our crosses and calamities, except
true Repentance be joined therewith. Isa. 58.
This the Prophet Isaiah confirms, testifying that the Lord did not regard
the outward fasting of the Jews, because they did not truly repent. We may
have sickness, endure poverty, yea we may dye, and yet never the nearer God,
except we have repentance the ornament of a Christian.

The Reasons hereof are these two.

Secondly, Ezechiel witnesses, Thou shall be broken in the midst of the
uncircumcised, Ezekiel. 32.38.
and shall lie with them which are slain with the sword: though God corrects
every one whom he loves, yet he loves not every one whom he corrects. Note.
Christ was crucified, the Apostles martyred, yet beloved of God; Herod was
eaten of worms, and yet out of the favor of God, his misery in this life,
does not better his estate in hell: Josiah a good King, and Ahab a wicked King,
died both in wars, yet the estate of the one was not the better because he
died as a good man did, neither the estate of the other worse, because he died
as an evil man died. In one and the same fire Gold glistereth and dross
smoaketh; so by Tribulation good men become purged, whereas evil men become
worse.

The Uses of this Doctrine are these two.

First, seeing our affliction cannot move God to pity us, Turn unto the Lord
your God. Thy blood cannot pacify the wrath of God, whereas tears of
Repentance can: bodily plagues do not move God to pity us, when as spiritual
sorrows do. To apply this in particular unto our selves; Have not we had
great judgments lying upon us? how many Soldiers have we lost, crying and
dying in their own blood? how many have perished by famine? have not many
houses been swept clean by the Pestilence, not only in London, but even in
remote places, and do they not yet continue: Does not the Lord see them? he
does: does he see them, why then does he not pity our desolation? does he
pity it, why then does he not stay it; for no question but the cries of the
afflicted do pearce the heaven? and yet they do continue. O England, it is no
wonder; so long as thou continuest rebellious in so great a light, thou may
look for the increase and continuance of Gods judgments upon thee; for the
Lord will never remove his judgments, until we forsake our sins: because we
do not turn unto the Lord, therefore our health is turned into sickness, our
life into death, our peace into war, our mirth into mourning, our plenty into
want: let us turn before all be ouer-turned, let us fill our chambers with
mourning, lest the whole Land be filled with lamentation.

Secondly,

Concerning the second: Without the preaching of Gods word judgments cannot
amend us. At this time the Jews were wonderfully afflicted, fearful
judgments were denounced against them, yet this does not the turn, God by his
Prophet does exhort them to Repentance. Though the Lord should shake the earth
terribly, thunder omnipotently, darken the light searefully, multiply
punishments abundantly, yet this alone cannot convert the soul. The Lord at
another time complains, that He had given them cleanness of teeth in all
their Cities: Amos 4.6.7.9.10 11.
that he had withheld the rain from them: that he had smitten them with
blasting and mildew: that the Palmerworme had devoured their Vines and Olives:
that he had sent amongst them the Pestilence; that their young men were slain
with the sword, etc. yet they did not return unto the Lord. So that I say, no
outward cross works repentance: this our own experience witnesses: Is not
this Land greatly afflicted, do not Gods judgments hang over our heads (if we
had eyes to behold them, and hearts to consider them) and yet who are
converted? who do truly return unto the Lord?

The Reasons hereof are these two. Deuteronomy. 32.41.42.
does send his Judgments to revenge, that even his arrows may be drunk with
blood; the special end of Gods judgments is to take vengeance on a sinful
Land. But it may be objected,

Secondly, The word of the Lord is like unto fire, Ier. 23.29.
like unto an hammer, mighty in operation, sharper then any two edged sword.
Heb. 4.12.
Every word in the holy Scriptures is as a thunderbolt; this pulls up sin
by the roots.

The Uses hereof are these two.

First, to teach us. that we should have the word of God in great estimation:
when we neither see nor feel it. The cross afflicts us, but the word
instructs us; afflictions punish, and bring us the heavy news of
condemnation, but the word brings glad tidings of life everlasting; by
judgments we are blinded, by the Gospel we are enlightened; by Judgments we
are endangered, by the Gospel we are defended; Judgments threaten the life,
Gods word does threaten our soul with everlasting death, unless we repent:
make much of the word in thy health, for I assure thee, Ephe. 4.18.
sickness cannot so prepare thee for the Lord, the word will then be sweet to
hear, when all others fail; miracles would make us wonder, and worldly
pleasures make us proud, but Gods word makes us to Repent, and to live the
life of God in Christ Jesus our Lord.

It may be objected: this seems a strange doctrine; David was afraid of
judgment, so must we; let us tremble as the earth does, let us weep and
mourn, we know not how soene the wrath of God may se^aze upon us, with what
calamity we may be troubled, by what death we may be taken away. Let us, I say,
fear the word and works of God, and then we shall not need to feel them.

Secondly, to teach us, that when we are visited by Judgments,

I come now to speak of the Duty in particular, both internal in the
affections, in these words; Turn ye even to me with all your heart: and
external in the action; with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning. Of
these two in order.

Concerning the first. The inwsrd form of Repentance is described in these
words, Turn ye even to me with all your heart: wherein these points are to
be handled. 1. The action, Turn. 2. The persons exhorted to turn, ye, every
one of them. 3. To whom they must turn, to me, the Lord. 4. How they must
turn, even with all their heart, speedily, readily, and willingly.

For the first. 1. Point. Turn.
The Duty whereunto our Prophet exhorts them, is to turn, or to come unto
themselves again: whereby two things are intimated. First, that such as sin
against God, in so doing depart from him. Secondly, that such as do truly
repent them of their sins, they do turn from their wickedness and evil
ways; So that true Repentance is a turning from sin and wickedness; yea
only such as truly repent are in their right minds, all others are out of
their wits, mad and frantic.

For the understanding of this Point, these four things are to be considered.
First, the nature of it. Secondly, the reasons to move us unto it. Thirdly, the
means whereby to attain it. Fourthly, the signs whereby it may be discerned.

The nature of it may be the better conceived, The nature of our turning.
by comparing it to the conversion of earthly bodies in the Scriptures: as the
Sun is turned into darkness, so men shining in this world must be ashamed
and confounded because of their sins: as the Moon sometimes increases, at
other times decreaseth, always changing; so must a sinner be always
decreasing in sin, increasing in grace; as a rock is turned into water, so
must our hard hearts into plenty of tears; as a stone is turned into copper,
and gives a sound, so when we are touched by the spirit of God, then must the
voice of our confession sound: as the Sea is dried up, so must our bitterness
of sin be turned into the drouth of repentance: as the sparkles of fire
ascend, when the body being mixed with earth cannot, so although our bodies as
yet cannot ascend, yet we send our sparkles and tears unto the Lord: as fire
does mollify the hardest Iron, so must our hard hearts by Gods spirit. This
fire is kept under the ashes of humility, and the remembrance of the day of
death, whose fear does conserve the fire of Gods grace in the heart of a
penitent sinner. Briefly, this conversion is a turning from sin, yea from
every sin; Heb 12.1.
Let us lay aside enery weight and sin (says the Apostle) which does so
easily beset us. Let eue^y one turn from his evil way, Jonah 3.8.
and from the wickedness that is in their hands. It is a ready and speedy
turning, for by delay we endanger our own salvation.

The Reasons which may move us to turn are these. 1. The Reasons why we should
turn.
The Necessity. 2 The Equity. 3. The Vtility.

The Necessity, if either we consider God, our selves,

The Equity:

The Vtility:

The means whereby we may attain unto this conversion, and it may be effected
in us, are these:

First, The means whereby we may be moved to turn.
we must have the knowledge of the Law of God in our understanding. Secondly,
we must know what our sins and transgressions are, which we do commit
against the Law. Thirdly, we must know the guilt of sin, cleaving unto the
action it self. Fourthly, we must know the judgments and wrath of God, which
do sease upon such as break this Law. Those points being thoroughly marked; in
the next place the sinner is to apply the same unto the conscience after this
manner, which may be called the practical Syllogism of the conscience.

Every one which breaks the Law of God, is guilty of eternal death, says
the mind.
But I am a breaker of the Law of God, says the Conscience, as an accuser.
Therefore I am guilty of eternal death, says the Conscience, as an upright
and just Judge condemning.
The meditation hereof turns the mind from sin to godliness.

The signs by which our conversion may be discerned are these: The signs by
which our conversion may be discerned.
though thy flesh be not altogether subdued, though thou do not always
mourn, and shed tears for thy sins committed, though thou can not wholly
forsake sin, yet if thou do earnestly desire unfeigned Repentance, if thou
do by all means abandon and forsake sin, if thou do endeavor to serve
God, thine endeavor is accepted of God. Do thou find the power of sin
weakened within thee? do thy relapses in sin beget in thee fear and
humiliation? do thou continue in prayer, that the spirit be not overcome?
assure thy self, that sense and feeling within thee, is an evident token that
thou art not subdued by sin, but in the end shall become victorious over the
same; for our Repentance is not only to put out sin, but to assure us of the
life of grace, and that Gods power is made perfect in our weakness, so that we
may even be comforted in our fallings, and moved to labor for perfection, that
we may live the life of grace, whereby we dye daily, and may overcome Satan,
and have peace both with God and man, for being Justified by Faith, Romans 5.1.
we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Uses of this point are these.

For Reprehension unto all such as brag and boast of their Repentance, rather
go further on in wickedness, and with more eagerness then formerly.

For Exhortation unto every one of us to turn, to be converted:

For the 2. The Persons which are exhorted to turn, 2. Point. Ye.
are all and every one of us, Turn ye. This duty is required both of rich
and poor, of Pastors and people, of superiors and inferiors, of every one of
us, all of us must turn, and no wonder; because all are out of the way, there
is none righteous, Romans 3.10.
we were all conceived and borne in sin, and therefore have need to return.

This serves for Exhortation unto every one of us,

For the 3. To whom we must turn, 3. Point. To me.
and that is unto the Lord; Turn even unto me, says the Lord: as if he would
say, You haueby your sins, gone from me, return now again by Repentance unto
me. I am that Summum bonum, which ye should seek: I am the fountain and
author of all goodness: from me you have life and being, and every thing which
is good: It is I which have chastened you, which have wounded you for your
going from me; it is I which will heal you again, if ye return unto me. This
is confirmed by the Prophet Jeremy, Lam. 3.40.
Let us search end try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord.

The Uses of this point are twofold.

For Reprehension, unto such as turn not unto God,

For Exhortation, to turn unto the Lord: astray from him, let us now turn
unto him; we have by our backsliding displeased him, let us endeavor by our
returning to please him let us imitate the Prodigal, Luke 15.20.
who having gone from his father, returned unto him. Thus of the 3. Point.

For the fourth. 4. Point. With all your heart.
How we must turn; even with all our heart: the word (even) in the original
signifies not only until, but also greatly, and very swiftly, as it may be
taken, 2 King. 9.20. The word (heart) in the original signifies also the
mind and the understanding; whence the meaning appears to be this: that,

God does require of us, They shall return unto me with their whole heart:
Ier. 24.7.
the want of this the Lord bewailed in his own people; This people draw near
me with their mouth, and with the lips do honor me, but have removed their
heart far from me. Isa. 29.13.


The Reasons hereof are these. without faith it is impossible to please God:
Heb. 11.6.
such as do not live well, cannot believe well. Prou. 23.25.
he craves the heart, he principally delights in the heart; he requires
every part of his service to be performed with our whole heart. We must seek
him, serve him, obey him, Deuteronomy. 4.29.
love him, know him, fear him, etc. and here return unto him with our whole
heart. Solomon says, Pro. 4.23.
above all things keep thine heart: for as a full vessel cannot receive any
other liquor, so no more can the heart be fit to receive grace, till sin be
out: Vinum semper est in motu donec separetur purum ab impuro.
as wine is ever in motion till that which is pure be separated from that which
is impure, so those whose hearts are turned, are still in fear, till they be
separated from the contagion of sin.

For the illustration of this point, these things are to be considered. 1. By
what means the heart may be turned. 2 How the heart may be tried. 3. How the
heart may be established in Gods service. 4. How the heart may entertain the
motions of Gods Spirit. 5. How we may discern the security and drousines of
our hearts. 6. How our hearts may be roused up from their security. 7. How we
may know the greatest and chiefest sin of our heart. Of these briefly.

For the 1. The means whereby the heart is turned
The means whereby our hearts may be turned are these. 1. The consideration of
our miserable estate by nature. 2. The meditation of our present estate by
grace. 3. An acknowledgement and confession of our great corruptions. 4. A
reformation of the causes of our backwardnes. 5. An examination of our self by
the glass of the law and of conscience, always judging our self and renewing
our spirit by repentance. 6. Contrition, a breaking of our hard hearts with the
hammer of Gods word.

For the second, the heart must be examined and tried. How the heart may be
tried.
1. Not by it self, but by the law of God. 2. Not by the world, or by opinion,
but by the spirit. 3. Not by the law of men, but by the rule of faith. 4. Not
by the outward condition, but by our inward experience. 5. Not by the examples
of the most, but of the best. 6. After a true and holy manner, and that daily
in particular, concerning both good and evil, and the strength of both. 7. We
must have a right end in our resolution, not vainglory, nor self-love;
neither for love of the world, for fear of death, but to be prepared for it,
not to prefer our self before others, or to be angry at the good of others,
but that we may still hunger and thirst more and more after grace.

For the third, How the heart may be established in Gods service.
our heart may be settled and established in the service of God. 1. By resigning
it into the hands of God, which we perform by yielding the heart to be daily
tried of God. 2. Doing all things as in the presence of God, comforting our
self in Christ, relying upon his promises by faith above all sense and feeling
whatsoever. 3. By paying our vows unto the Lord, fearing our self in our best
actions, and Satan's readiness to set upon us, approouing our self by striving
against corruption, living in spiritual duties, loving one another, waiting
for our end. 4. We must watch over the outward man. 5. We must moderate our
liberty in respect of time, place, and person; our guide must be in this, love
and wisdom.

For the fourth, we may entertain the motions of Gods Spirit in our hearts.
How we may entertain the motions of Gods Spirit.
1. By discerning and esteeming of them. 2. By rejoicing in them as in our
chiefest treasure. 3. By putting them in practice, and praising God for the
same.

For the fifth, we may discern of the security and drousines of our hearts by
these rules. How we may find out the drousines of our hearts.
1. If there be within us a loathing of holy duties. 2. If our consciences are
continually turmoiled with great tetrors. 3. If we find but little or no
comfort when we have performed holy duties. 4. If we find much contentment in
our willingness to sin, and unwillingness to die, then our hearts are cast
into a drousines and security.

For the sixth, How our hearts may be roused up.
our hearts may be awakened and roused up from this security. 1. By the
powerful ministry of the word. 2. By strong cries unto God. 3. By craving the
prayers of the faithful. 4. By a resolution to become more careful. 5. By
endeavoring more constantly for the conversion of others. 6. By exercising a
daily course of Repentance in respect of daily sin. 7. By private and public
humiliation and fasting before God.

For the seventh, we are to take notice of the chiefest sins of our heart,
whereby we may chiefly conquer them, How we may find out the chiefest sins of
our heart.
which being vanquished, in time we shall overcome the rest, for from the
purity or impurity of the fountain, the streams flow accordingly: this we may
do. 1. By diligent hearing of Gods word, which will meet even with our most
secret corruptions. 2. By a diligent and careful observation of our thoughts,
words, and actions, by which the usurer shall find that covetousness, the
adulterer, that uncleanness, etc. are their dearest darlings, the chiefest
sins of their heart, out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. 3.
By a general and universal reformation and mortification of our lusts, in the
performance whereof, we shall meet with the greatest resistance from those our
chiefest sins. 4. By an examination of our self, if we might retain some
sins which we would chiefly retain, those are our chief sins.

The uses of the former doctrine are threefold.

For instruction: there can be no true Repentance, unless the whole heart be
changed: it is not only outward in words or in practice, but inward in the
affection of the mind, and therefore our Savior says, First cleanse that
which is within. Our memory must be changed by remembering God: our
understanding by knowing God: our will by believing God: our affections by
loving, desiring, meditating, and rejoicing in things heavenly. All must
concur together, else it is not with the whole heart. Some have knowledge,
but want true faith, some have will, but want memory, all which must be
amended, we must confer often to get memory, read much to get knowledge,
hear much to obtain faith pray always, whereby we shall get good effections.
Seeing God does require the whole heart, and our imperfections are exceeding
great, we must even pray with S. Augustine, Da, quod iubes, and iube quod ^is.
Aug.
Lord give us power to do what thou command, and command what thou willest.

For reprehension unto such as either delay to return unto the Lord, Herod,
who although he did many things well, yet would not forsake Herodias his
brother Philips wife. Mar. 6.20. Hos. 6.4.
This is as a morning cloud, as the dew of the morning.

For exhortation unto us all to draw nigh unto God with a pure heart, Heb.
10.22.
As the sacrifice of Cain was rejected, so are the prayers of the wicked, as
having their hearts corrupted. The heart rules the life, purge the heart of
ignorance, pride, and dissimulation, and all things which may disquiet the
conscience when thou come before the Lord, and the oftener thou do come,
the more thou shall be changed. Pray that the Lord may cast thee in a new
mould, or thou shall be for thy negligence cast into hell fire. Let us watch
over our hearts, over that part which is unsound: for there is no man but has
some wound in the soul. We must do with sin, as the Apostle counsels to
do with anger, Ephesians. 4.25.
Let not the sun go down thereon. Do thou delay to return, thou abusest
the mercy of God? if thou love any thing above God, thou denyest him: the more
thou delayest truly to repent, the further art thou separated from God, and
the nigher and faster thou hastest unto thine own destruction. Thus of the
fourth point, And so much for the inward form of Repentance laid down in
these words, Turn ye even unto me with all your heart.

Now I come to speak of the outward form of repentance which concerns
action, consisting of three parts. 1. Fasting. 2. Weeping. 3. Mourning. The
former was to be internal in the affection, this external, and in action,
whence this general observation does arise: that.

Both outward and inward repentance must be joined together.

Thus Peter to express his repentance wept bitterly: where the body is
wounded, there issues out blood, Mat. 26.75.
so where there is true repentance in the heart, it does outwardly express it
self, in fasting, weeping, and mourning.

The reasons here of are these two. 1.

The uses hereof are twofold.

For instruction: Repentance must be in the heart;

For exhortation. As we are not afraid or ashamed to sin, to confess. Let us
rather glory in repenting for our sins, then in acting of them: we have many
sins, let us shed many tears, we have great sins, let us shed forth
great sorrow for sin: We have watched in sin, let us watch in prayer, we
have loved sin, now let us love to sorrow for sin, look on thy soul
weeping, as thou wast wont to behold thy sins rejoicing. Have thou been a
drunkard, be sober; if a thief, fear God: if a blasphemer, use Gods name
reverently, and as Paul of thest, Ephesians. 4.28.
so I say of all sin, Let him that has sinned, sin no more. Thus let us by
our outward humiliation and repentance give a testimony, both unto our self
and others, of our inward, that as outwardly, so also we are humbled inwardly.
Thus in general.

The parts required in our outward humiliation are three. 1. Fasting. 2.
Weeping. 3. Mourning. Of these in order.

And with fasting. This word according to the custom of the Hebrews, 2 Cor.
7.10.
does signify the humiliation of the whole body. 1. Maymon in his Treat. of
the rest sixth day cap. ^. ser. 4.5.
Inward by sorrow for sin, which works repentance, whose effects are these,
carfulness, indignation, fear, vehement desire, zeal, revenge, judging our
self with detestation of our sin. 2. Outward, by abstinence from all filthy
pleasures, which according to the Hebrew canons were meat and drink, washing
and anointing themselves, putting on shoes and all fine apparel, abstinence
from their wives; which the Scriptures confirm. Psalm. 35.13. Dan. 3.12. Exodus
33.4. 2. Sam. 15.30. and 12.20.
David afflicted his soul with fasting: Daniel did not wash and anoint
himself, the Israelites put off their ornaments, David went barefooted, weared
sackecloth, did not wash and anoint himself in the time of his humiliation,
Vriah abstained from lying with his wife. They were to begin their fast the
ninth day of the month at even, (from which only the sick and such as were
under nine years of age were exempted) that walking thereby in newness of
life, the body of sin might be destroyed: which ought also to be the end of
our fasting when we do perform the same.

Before I come unto the particular discourse of fasting we are to take notice
of the profit and utility arising therefrom, The vtility of fasting pro^^d by
ex^mples in nature.
which may be manifested unto us in the creatures by diverse and sundry
examples, all which being simple bodies, consist of two natures, the one
celestial, the other elementary.

1. The fruit of fasting may be learned from the quality of the Moon, which
although it be of a celestial nature, yet is the more darkened by reason of
her gross and corpulent nature, whereby some black spots do appear, yea the
more nigh the earth she is, she is, as I may say, rather of a terrestrial then
a celestial nature, for the which she does not so fully partake of the light
of the Sun as the rest of the Stars. So although the nature of man be light
in respect of his understanding, yet the more he feeds, and the more full he
is, he is the less disposed to the light of wisdom. Therefore David says,
Si quis astimat se abundantia cib^rum p^rionum que persrui and posse ^acar^
sapientia, (...) in delicijs versare, H^^r.
They that are darkened are full. This is the darkness of the Moon, when we
are filled with the things of this life; if any think that by the abundance of
meats and drinks he may enjoy and give his mind unto wisdom, he does occupy
himself in pleasant fantasies.

2. From the element of the earth, which is dry and hard, therefore God sends
rain to make it fruitful; so are we by abstinence, but when the water of life
is powered into our soul, we are made fruitful in good works, our hearts
become well disposed: when we wither by abstinence, and are moystned by
heavenly grace, we become fruitful by good works.

3. From the element of water, wherein the Crocodile is pro^blinded, which on
the dry land sees clearly; so by the abundance of nourishment, the eyes of
our understanding are darkened; therefore Solomon says, Eccles. 2.3.
I thought to have drawn my self from Wine to bring my mind to wisdom.

4. From the Air: the less vapors, the more clear it is, the more vapors
the darker. Hence upon Mount Olympus it is most clear, which the learned did
ascend to behold the course of the Stars, for there Olympus outreached the
clouds: Nube^e^^essit Olympus-Luca^. P^nguis ventor non g^g^^t (...).
so it is with the mind of Man, by abstinence the understanding becomes more
quick and clear, whereas a fat belly does not beget a fine wit.

5. From the element of fire, in respect of the several properties of the
same. 1. As fire gives light in darkness, so abstinence enlightneth the
mind, and that by extinguishing the heat of lust. 2. As fire serves to
prepare our nourishment, so abstinence makes it to turn to our good, whereas
the stomach being cloyed with meat, it turns to putrefaction. 3. As fire
serves for a defense, as a wall (to which use it served Alexandor the Great
being in the Deserts of India beset with Lions) so is fasting as a wall and
targe to defend us from sin. 4. As fire serves to purge things corrupted, so
(as Austin says) fasting purges the mind. Ieiunium crationi deuotionem and
fidneiam do^at. or ati^ wr^utem imp^trat ieiunand^. and ieiunium gratian
pro^eretur oraendi: ieiuniu^ oratime^ roborat, oration sanctificat i^^uni^^ and
domino representat. Ber. ser. 4. de quadrag.
5. As fire was used both before and in the Law for to burn up the acceptable
sacrifice; so fasting does prepare our body for Prayer, that we may be heard of
the Lord: therefore this same Prophet conioyneth both together in this Chapter,
Verse 14.15. it gives (as Bernard says) devotion and courage unto Prayer;
Prayer begets fasting, and fasting furthereth prayer; fasting strengthens
prayer, prayer sanctifies fasting, and represents it unto the Lord. 6. As fire
did not hurt the three children in the furnace, but Gods power was the more
manifested in their deliverance, so this duty of fasting being rightly
performed, does not hurt, but rather the power of God is more manifested in
delivering from those troubles for which they fast. 7. As the fire is increased
by Oil, even so by abstinence the oil of piety abounds. Therefore our
Savior says, Mat. 6.17.
When thou do fast, anoint thy face with Oil, which is by doing the alms
of godliness. So wood does nourish the fire, this wood or those trees are good
works; and therefore our Prophet says, Sanctify a Fast, that is, offer unto
God an holy abstinence of the flesh accompanied with good works: yea, daily
experience does teach us, that those which eat but little, and are hardly
brought up, live longer, and are less subject unto sickness, then others.

So then the creatures are Schoolemasters unto us, instructing us in the
performance of this duty: if we learn by them to abstain from iniquities,
and the unlawful pleasures of this world, Iciunium purgat mentem, subl^unt
sensum etc. Aug ser. de ^eiun.
this is a perfect Fast. This purges the mind, helps the judgment, makes
the flesh subject to the spirit, makes a broken and humble heart, disperseth
the clouds of concupiscence, extinguisheth the heat of lust, and kindles the
light of chastity.

Now I come in particular to speak of this outie, concerning which these
things are to be handled. 1. What it is. 2. The kinds thereof. 3. By whom it
is ordained. 4. The time wherein it must be observed. 5. Wherein it does
consist. 6. How it is to be performed. 7. The several ends thereof. 8. The
benefits proceeding from thence.

For the first, the Fast required in this place, What fasting is. Genesis 12.10.
Act. 27.21. Act. 9.9. Mat. 4.2. Exodus 34.28. ^ King. 19.18 Mat. 3.4.
is not such a fast as does proceed from the shatting of the heavens, ^or
hardening of the earth, which is properly called famine: neither that which does
proceed from want of meat; neither that extraordinary abstinence occasioned by
visions; neither such a miraculous fast as of Moses. Elias, and our Savior:
neither such as the daily sobriety and temperance that was in John Baptist;
neither such as that supersticious fasting of the Papists in abstaining from
flesh, and eating more delicious meats, the observation whereof is by them not
only accounted a thing religious, but also meritorious: such sorts of Fasts, I
say, our Prophet does not require, but a true religious fast, which is an
abstinence from meat and drink for a religious use lawfully commanded, that
is, seasonably to abstain from refreshing of our bodies, to make them fitter
for religious duties (although Adam was commanded to fast from the forbidden
tree) Moses was the first (of whom we read) that did perform, Est. 4.16. Jonah
3.7. Luke 3.33. Mar. 2.18. Mat. 9.14. Dan. 10.3. Judge. 20.
and that willingly in craving God pardon for the sins of the people.

This deiection, together with the several parts thereof are agreeable to the
holy Scriptures, which these marginall quotations confirm.

It may be demanded, Ninevites did; or only from pleasant meat, as David did?
To this I answer, that Fasting may be considered. Israelites did. 1 Samuel 31.
2. Of distinct times following one upon another, as the men of Iabesh Gilead
who fasted seven days, which is not so to be understood, that they fasted so
long by one continued act of abstinence, but that they fasted every one of
these seven days, eating nothing all the day long, and at evening making a
course meal. This both Osiander a Protestant on 1 Chronicles. 10. and Tostatus a
Papist on 1 King. 31. do confirm. Wherefore I say, that a single act of
fasting (if nature can so long endure) is to be kept without meat or drink,
but if the fast consist of many acts it is lawful to eat, by the example of
Daniel, who fasted every day of the three weeks space, Als^ed. Theol. Polem.
tart. 4. de Ve cont. p. 50.6.
and at night broke his fast, according to the custom of the Jews. Therefore
Christ is said to have fasted as well the night as the day, to put a difference
betwixt his fasting and the fasting of the Jews. It is then an imperfect
fasting, when either there is not abstinence from all food from morning to
night, or when there is an abstinence only from one sort of meat and drink,
as flesh, and wine, and not from others.

For the second. The kinds and sorts of Fasting August. super Psalmum. 43.
The kinds and sorts of Fasting are especially two; the one worldly, the other
religious: a wordly Fast, is 1. For a worldly cause, as S Paul made the people
fast to be avenged of their enemies. 2. For healths sake. 3. To spare means.
4. To keep the stomach for better fare: an holy Fast, is for an holy an
religious end, the abuse whereof the Lord reproved by his prophet; Zech. 7.5.6.
saying, Ye fasted unto your selves, but not unto me.

Here a question may be propounded: Aug. super Psa.
whereunto S. Augustine does exhort in these words; Let that which is withdrawn
from our dainty fare, be given to the needy: let hungry Christ receive that
which a fasting Christian does abate. A Religious Fast, is either private or
public, both which are either ordinary or extraordinary. An example of public
we have in the Ninevites; and for private Fasting (though many mock it, and
speak against it, yet) it is also warranted from Gods word both in the Old and
New Testament, as we may read, Leuit. 26.29. which Statute was not Ceremonial,
but Moral, because we sin daily against God, and we cannot say, that
extraordinary actions did fall upon that day unto that people. So also Mat.
9.14. Luk 2.37. Whence may be gathered that fasting was kept in the days of
Christ, for a religious use; Christ reproved the abuse, but not the lawful
use: which duty was performed by Anna, Who served God, Luke 2.37.
with fasting and prayer night and day. So that this sort of fasting is
lawful, and helpefull to further our humiliation: both it self and the
several kinds thereof are commanded in the word of God.

For the 3. The Author and ordainer of Fasting, The Author of Fasting. Exodus
19.3. Luke 23. Mat 6.17.
was God himself in Paradise: as God did command it both before and under the
Law, so does Christ also in the Gospel. By eating, the Serpent overthrew the
first Adam, by abstinence the second Adam overcame the Serpent and restored us
to life again. It is not a late invention of men, but has for its warrant
both the precept and practice of Christ.

For the 4. The time wherein this duty is required of us, The Time.
is either when our enemies conspire against us, as Iehosaphat did; 2 Chronicles. 20.
or when we behold the face of the Lord against us, and his hand punishing us,
as the Israelites: Judge. 20.26.
or when Gods Judgments are threatened against us, as the Ninevites; or when
wickedness is not taken to heart, as it was in the days of Ezra: Iona. 3.5.
Ezra. 8.23.
or out of a love to Gods glory, and preservation of his people, as Queen
Hester and Mordicai: Hest. 4.15.
when our outward state and condition does decay: when Gods Judgments do not
provoke us unto Repentance: when we have committed some gross sins, which we
would have pardoned: when we would prevent future sins: when we find a want
of spiritual blessings, and the like.

For the 5. The parts of a Religious Fast are two, external, The part of a
religious fast.
and internal; external, in abstaining from labor and all worldly businesses
(wherein the Jews were so precise, that they held it as unlawful to do any
work upon that day, as upon the Sabbath, Maymon. Treat rest of the 10. day.
cap. 1. ser. 1.2.
yea and ordained the breakers of both to be punished alike.) Internal,
consisting of two parts, Repentance and Prayer. Repentance consisting of two
parts, sorrowing for sins past, leading of a new life. In the sorrowing for
sins past, there must be first a sense and feeling of our misery: secondly,
lamentation for it. Thirdly, an unfolding of the same before God. 1. I say,
there must be a sense and feeling of sin: to enforce which we are to
remember, the time, place, and manner of our sins; we are to take notice that
our sins offend God; and that we deserve punishment both in this life and the
life to come: for which we must mourn and fast, which is true humiliation. 2.
We must lament our misery, which is the groaning of the heart, and is sometime
expressed by our voice and tears; and if God hear the groans of other
creatures, how much more the groans of his own children, 3. We must confess
this our miserable estate to God, not in general, but in particular, that
hereby we may acknowledge Gods goodness, and our own wickedness; which,
until we have some grace, we are still ashamed to confess, although to such
as do acknowledge their sins, God is faithful and just to forgive them.
Prayer, 1. That the Lord would remove his judgments from us. 2. That he would
bestow all sorts of blessings upon us. 3. That God would give us grace; first,
to abstain from evil, of which Saint Ierom said, It is a pleasant fact to the
body, when the mind fasteth from vice; for if we would have God to turn from
the evil of punishment, we must first turn from the evil of sin: for what
profit is it to astaine from the eating of flesh, if in the mean time both the
mouth and our other members be given over unto impieties, to abstain from meat
and to do evil, is the Devils fast, who does evil, and yet eats nothing.
2. To do that which is good: first, in performing our duty toward God:
secondly, in loving one another, forgiving wrongs done unto us, and debts owen
by the poor, if they be not able to pay: which three are by our Savior joined
together, Fasting, Prayer, and Almesdeeds; Mat 6.
which actions of Christianity ought to be performed by every Christian; we
must be like Cornelius, who says, Four days ago, I was fasting, until this
hour, and at the ninth hour, Acts 10.32.
I prayed in my house, and behold a man stood before me in bright cleathing,
and said, Cornelius, thy prayer is heard, and thine alms are had in
remembrance in the sight of God.

For the 6. This duty is thus to be performed. First, How we ought to fast.
there must be an abstinence from meat and drink, that the body may be
afflicted: yet so, that nature be not destroyed, neither we made more unfit for
spiritual duties. 2. We must abstain from morning until night, as by the
Scriptures, the custom of the Jews, and the custom of the Church thereafter
is evident and plain. 3. We must abstain from all pleasures which may provoke
us to sin. 4. All persons (excepting such as want strength and discretion) are
bound to keep this humiliation. 5. We ought to put on our meanest apparel. 6.
We must make a more solemn confession of our sins, both in general and in
particular with more strong cries and groans to obtain pardon for our sins,
with plenty of tears, which were accompanied with putting on sackcloth,
bowing of the body, renting of the garments, lying in the dust, of which the
Prophet Micah speaks, Therefore will I wait and houle, Mic. 1.8.
I will go stripped and naked, I will make a wailing like a Dragon, and mourning
as the Owls. 7. All the members must fast, the eye, Ber. ser. 3. de quad.
the ear, the tongue, the hand, much more the soul it self.

For the 7. The ends of Fasting are 1. To subdue the flesh, The ends of Fasting.
and mortify our bodily lusts, that they may become subject to the will of
God. 2. To stir up devotion and attention unto holy duties; for by it the
heart and affections become lighter, purer, more fit, and in better order for
the service of God. 3. To testify by our humiliation that we deserve to be cut
off from God; that we deny our selves the use of Gods creatures; and that we
rather deserve death, as being by reason of sin, unworthy to enjoy the smallest
of Gods creatures.

For the 8. The benefit. of casting.
The benefits of Fasting (besides those formerly mentioned) are diverse. 1.
Hereby both blessings have been obtained, and fearful judgments have been
removed, yea turned into blessings. 2. By it Gods children have not only been
confirmed, but assuredly persuaded of their salvation. 3. By it Satan is
defeated, cast out and overthrown, and the Saints are more enabled to the
performance of all Christian duties; and the like favor may the Church of God
expect in the conscionable performance hereof, unto the worlds end. 4. By this
we testify our duty to God, before we dare meddle with the creatures for our
comfort. 5. Hereby we learn mortification, whereas the fullness of bread
begets uncleanness; thus did the Apostle Paul bring his body into
subjection to the Law of God; 1 Cor. 9.
so also Hilarion a devout man, having after much fasting (for he eat but a
little bread, and drunk water) felt the power of the flesh within him, knocked
upon his breast with his hand: Thou heast (says he) I Will make thee leave
kicking, neither will I feed thee with barlie, Hieron de Vita Hilar.
but with chafe, I will pull thee down with hunger and thirst, and lade thee
with heavy weights, and hunt thee through heat and cold, that thou may
rather think on meat then of wantonness. And the Reason hereof is, because
plenty makes the stings of lust to branch out; as vermin, weeds, and unbroken
clods, hinder a plentiful harvest. 6. Hereby the mind is elevated toward
heaven, both by conforming our bodies to our minds (according to that of the
Prophet, Isa. 26.
In their affliction they will seek me early:) as also by cutting us away,
from our worldly delights, from which we ought to abstain (though they are
lawful) to give our selves to Fasting and Prayer. Ne quidem tempora idonea,
qui super sunt. Bafilde Ir. hom. 1. page 327.
Hence Quintlian says, that when there is much time spent in feeding, even
that which remains is unprofitable, as indeed it is, in respect of the
exercise of Religion; and therefore both Saint Basil and Saint Augustine
compare Fasting to Feathers, which the air makes to fly upward, and the
things of this life to Birdlime which pull us downward. 7. It does further our
Repentance, both in following after, and going before the same: In following
after, as in the Ninevites, and David. The Ninevites sinned, and would not eat,
sinned and would not be clothed, sinned and would not give their beasts food;
we sin, and yet we eat, yea we sin in eating: we sin, and yet we drink, yea we
sin in drinking; we sin and cloth our selves, and sin by clothing. In going
before, because it is a chastisement which a sinner inflicteth upon himself
for his offense; therefore says S. Basil, Simil.
As worms which breed in childrens bellies must be expelled by bitter
medicines, so sin by fasting: and S. Ambrose says, that delicate fare is
pleasant (though hurtful) to the body; as honey makes the liver to swell,
which better things bring in temper: so fasting, although it seem unpleasant,
yet is most profitable. The truth here of by experience we may find in our
selves.

The Use of this point is for Exhortation unto us all:

And with weeping. This is the second thing which our Prophet requires in
their Repentance. The word in the Original signifies to send forth many
tears, as we may read Genesis 45.14. and Ier. 9.10. This second has great
affinity with the third, and therefore that you may the better understand both,
both are to be handled together.

And with mourning. This is the third thing required. The word in the original
signifies, not only a weeping, whereby tears appear but also mourning,
which is in affliction, in the inward parts, which chiefly belongs unto a
funeral pomp, as 1 King. 12.13. So that the Prophet does not require them
only to fast, but likewise to weep, to mourn, to groan in the spirit with
sighs and sobs unto the Lord, to be wounded in spirit.

For the better understanding of this godly sorrow and mourning, we are to
understand that weeping and mourning is a most excellent medicine for a
troubled conscience, yea for the most part, they do accompany the same,
therefore David says, Psalm. 42.3. Cibus animaru^ corroboratio sensuum,
absolutio peccatorum, refectio mentium, lauacrum culparum. Cassiod.
That tears were his bread night and day, whereupon Cassiodor says, that
mourning is the food of the soul, the strengthening of the senses, the
absolution of sin, the refreshing of the mind, and the washing of faults.
Hence they may be compared to many things in nature, of which I shall instance
only one, of water: for as water serves 1. to wash away filthiness
outwardly, so the tears of unfeigned repentance to wash away sin, Psalm. 51.7.
Wash me (says David) and I shall be whiter then snow. The swans after they
have coupled together, do not eat till they wash themselves, neither yet the
Storke and Elephant return to their fellows till they have washed themselves,
much more need have we to be washed with the unfeigned tears of repentance 2.
Waters are viuificatiue and quickening, and therefore we see trees which in the
winter seem dead, when spring comes, and the water ascends, do blossom;
so the mind benumbed with sin, is by the tears of true repentance renewed,
which otherwise would die, as the fish being out of the water. 3. As water is
fruitful wherewith the earth being watered produces every thing in its kind,
so our hearts hardened in sin become mollified by the tears of Repentance.
This effect of water is certain, by that ouerflowing of Nilus in Egypt. 4. As
water does comfort such as are weary, both man and beast; so do the tears of
Repentance the wearied and troubled conscience. 5. As water softneth that which
is hard, so the tears of repentance take away the security of Gods children,
when the waters are moved, we shall be whole. 6 As water is a strong
fortification, as at Babylon, whose strength (though her walls were very great)
consisted in this, that it was compassed about with waters, so the tears of
repentance do preserve us against the strength of temptation and persecution;
as by the falling of the water, the air becomes purified and clear, so by
the tears the conscience is clarified, for after temptation comes a calm.

So then this weeping and mourning (required in my text by the Prophet,
requisite to be in us at this time) does purify, strengthen, and purge the
heart of man to the performing of good works, in arising from the works of
darkness to a marvelous light.

Thus having showed you the necessity and excellency of those tears, of this
weeping and mourning; these things are also to be considered.

1. The diverse kinds of tears, and what tears are required of us. 2. The
reasons which may induce us, to weeping, mourning, and shedding of tears.
For the first, there are two kinds of tears. 1. The kinds of tears.
Wicked tears. 2. Godly tears.

Wicked tears are false and counterfeit, devilish and hellish 1. I say the
wickeds tears are false and hypocritical. Ier. 41.6
Such as Ioabs when he killed Amasa; Ismaels, when he killed the people that
came to Gedaliah: Ahabs, when he was reproved by the Prophet for Naboths death:
Judas his after he betrayed Chrrist. These are Crocadile tears which weepeth
when she has killed a man, and by and by will do the like. These are theeuish
and whorish tears, who weep before the Judge, but being at liberty walk in
their former course. 2. The wickeds tears are devilish and infernal, even
such as of the damned in hell, where there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth, which tears and mournings (says Saint Gregory) are more to be feared,
then expressed.

Godly tears are of four sorts. 1. 4. Kinds of godly tears.
Such as proceed from Gods children to clear and declare their innocence, as
were the tears of Joseph, Susanna, and the holy Martyrs of God in the time of
persecution, whose tears are put in the bottle of God. 2. Such as proceed from
a strong and lively says in the time of affliction whereby even Gods children
are comforted and refreshed, of which David says, Psalm. 42.3.
My tears have been my meat day and night, while they have said, where is my
God. Therefore says Saint Augustine, the Saints shed tears to see God
dishonored: grief troubles the soul: mourning does enlarge it: enlargement
gives it case. For in grief we sigh, sob, and mourn lest the heart should
burst with grief, and in another place he says, that nothing was pleasnt unto
him, but mourning and tears. 3. The tears of brotherly love and compassion:
the tears which Christ weeped over Lazarus were loue-teares, whereunto even
the beasts do inuit us, as the horses and dogs of Julius Caesar did
compassionate and lament their dead master. Beda.
4. The tears of true Repentance, such as were in Peter, whose offense was
washed away by his tears running down, when his shame was too great to be
known, which ought to be in every one of us, the tongue may dissemble, but
those lay open the inward affections of the heart. Those are especially
required in this place.

Thus then, What kind of tears are commendable.
all sorts of tears are not commendable and acceptable t^ but 1. such as are
shed when we hear that God is dishonored. 2. When the word of God is
oppressed, and the liberty thereof. 3. When the Church and servants of God are
persecured, Gods word is contemned, the righteous are taken away from the
earth, the people are destroyed in their finnes: such should our be at this
time.

For the second, Reasons to move us to weep and
diverse reasons may provoke us to the performance of this duty. 1. The
remembrance of our grievous sins and transgressions both original and
actual. That our eyes may run down with tears, and our eyelids gush out
with water: Ier. 9.17.18.
Jerusalem wept sore in the night, and her tears run down her cheeks. 6.
They wash us from sin, comfort the cold conscience, and mollify the hardness
of heart; and therefore tears in the holy tongue are taken for wine and oil;
for as wine does gladen the heart, and oil makes the face to shine, so tears
comfort and make the conscience joyful. 7. The love which we owe unto our
country, Israel could not be glad in Babel, and (although we are not in
captivity, as they were, praised be God) what cause have we not to mourn?
Psalm. 137.4.
seeing our fowls are by sin vanished from God; and our bodies and hearts
divided asunder, whereat even our enemies rejoice: is not Gods hand both
outwardly upon our bodies, and inwardly heavy upon our souls, even hardness
of heart, which of all others is most fearful; yea, of all things man's heart
is most hard, ungentle, and intractable. Hereby both our selves are deceived
and others, we deceive our selves in the judgment of things, using blind and
false spectacles, mistaking Gods will, esteeming evil good, and good evil,
excusing our selves by the example of others, travailing with false guides,
custom, example, multitude, civil honesty, laws of men, etc. and so an
error in judgment, breeds deceit in practice: we deceive others, in leading
them by our example, from the ways of holiness into the ways of
unrighteousness: and have not we cause to weep for this. 8. John 11.35.
and holy men and women in former times, to refresh their troubled souls, yea
the very stones provoke us to this duty, which before change of weather drop
tears.

The Uses hereof are threefold.

For Exhortation: Bernard says: Ber. de spec. penit.
O wretched and unhappy generation, whose father is hard carfulness, whose
mother is shameful filthiness, whose sister is base uncleanness, whose nurse
is falsehood, whose reward is everlasting bitterness: O sinful generation,
borne in care, swadled in shame, attended by vice, nourished with folly, wedded
to sin, has issue eternal misery. Let us lament the abundance of our finne,
lest we lament for the loss of Sion; either we must weep here, or weep in
hell. Let us weep with Mary Magdalen, if we would be comforted with her. It is
not enough to weep with the eyes, unless also we weep with our hearts,
otherwise we are but time-weepers. Oh let the eyes of our understanding and
memory call to mind those sins which we have done, and mourn for them; and
let the eyes of our bodies shed tears abundantly, send them down the cheeks,
as through spouts, yea making furrows therein by their continual plowing. Let
us truly weep, unfeignedly repent, and so continue unto the end, Gen 32 26. 1 Samuel 1.12.
as Jacob would not let God go, till he had obtained a blessing, as Hanna
ceased not from weeping till she had obtained her desire; so let us still weep
and mourn, till God accomplish our desires t as sweet drops do make a fertile
spring, so hearty mourning makes a virtuous soul; and that this may be
performed, the Apostle Paul requires six things: Romans 12.1.
1. We must give our body and soul to God. 2. We must give that which is our
own. 3. It must be willingly, not constrained. 4. Our gift must be holy and
undefiled. 5. That it may be acceptable to God. 6. That it may be reasonable.
Oh that we would look into our own estate, and narrowly mark the same; we
might find many things which might move us to weep: Eccles. 3.4.
Solomon says, that there is a time to weep: we may say, now is that time in
this Land. Gods judgments upon us, greater hanging over our heads: the
distressed estate of Gods Church abroad, the multitude and malice of our
enemies, divisions and contentions amongst our selves; the great abominations
of the Land: all these (I say) and many others should move us to weep and
mourn. Oh let us wash our beds, and water our couch with our tears: and thus
soweing in tears, we shall reap in joy. Let these be the causes of our
tears; Psalm. 126.5.
these are the times of mourning wash your faces with water, and cover the
Lords altar therewith, take heed unto thy self, for they which now laugh
shall one day weep. Oh, blessed is the shedding of such tears, producing the
fruits of celestial comfort. One weepeth in sickness, another for oppression,
and wordlings for worldly causes; but it is thou O righteous soul, which shall
receive profit by the tears, in the purifying of thy mind.

For Reprehension, unto such as either mourn not at all,

For Consolation, unto all such as exercise this holy duty: Tau, and
preserved, Ezekiel. 9.4.
when others shall be destroyed: thy tears shall not be shed in vain, the
Lord does behold them, the Lord does regard them; the Lord will bestow upon
thee thine hearts desire.

Thus ye have heard the God did require of his people (as he does now of us) to
testify their unfeigned Repentance, with fasting, with weeping, and with
mourning: that as formerly they had multiplied their sins, they might now
multiply their sorrow for them; and as formerly they had rejoiced in their
sins, so now they might weep and mourn for the same; that as formerly they
had pined their souls by sinning, they might now abstain from all their
former delights, punishing their bodies with fasting, with weeping, and with
mourning. Hence two other points may be observed.

1. That great sins require great sorrow and lamentation. 2. That a
sorrowful spirit ought to accompany a penitent heart.

For the first: Great and general offenses require a great and general sorrow
and lamentation. The Israelites being overcome by the Beniamites, Judge 20.26.
fasted and prayed all the day until the evening, and the day following they
obtained the victory: our private and public sins, require private and public
humiliation, that we may vanquish our sins as they did their enemies.

The Reasons hereof are these two. Mat. 17.21.
this kind goes not out, but by prayer and fasting; if our sorrows are
sensible, our prayers earnest, our groans strong, then thine heart is
acceptable unto the Lord.

The Uses hereof are twofold.

For Instruction:

For Exhortation: Vriah would not rest in his bed, 2 Samuel 11.11.
till Ioab and the Lords host were at rest, then I exhort you now in the fear
of God, fast, weep, and mourn now in this time of misery, and rest not in
this time of trouble, in these dangerous days. I do not say that the
Bridegroom is taken from us (although we deserve it) but it is to be feared
that our Candlestick shall be removed; for there is now more time spent in
feasting then in fasting, in laughing then in weeping, in rejoicing then in
mourning: our sins cannot otherwise be put away, God judgments otherwise be
removed, but by fasting, weeping and mourning.

But alas our Tauernes and Alchouses, our Stews and Stages are often suller,
yea at all times more frequented, then our Churches: our peace makes our lives
licencious, our manners monstrous, and our names odious. The Lord amend it.

For the second. Paul says, 2 Cor. 9.10.
Godly sorrow works Repentance, never to be repented of. This seeking is not
in many in these days; and therefore it may be accounted a wonder; but it may
be more admired, that we have so much preaching, and so little practice. The
Medicine that works most forcible, causes greatest pain, and speediest
cure; even so the blood of Christ, does most sweetly wipe away oursins, when we
are most pricked inconscience; mark this, you which have never wept one tear
for your sins; without Repentance there is no salvation; without godly sorrow
there is no repentance; without prayer there is no godly sorrow: this follows
upon a sense of Gods anger for our sins.

The Reason hereof is this;

The Uses hereof are twofold.

For Instruction: then we are in greatest danger, for if we do truly mourn,
Gods anger shall be turned away, he will pardon us; our faith (though weak)
makes us victorious: as there may be life in the body, though not perceived;
so there may be in the soul, though not discerned; as it was (...) David, who
said, This is my death, yet recovered both his health, and joy in the holy
Ghost.

For Exhortation: let us by true sorrow for sin, testify our true
Repentance: by this purgation we shall recover health, though the pains of
true Repentance exceed the pains of the body: and for this cause good men are
said to suffer hell in this life, yet assure thy self of heaven in the life to
come; mourn and weep, though God for a time delay, yet he hears thee, and
will grant thy requests. Our Savior says, Father I thank thee, that thou
have heard me: and yet at this time Lazarus was not raised. Mark this well,
that we must also be ready to believe that God will grant that which we ask
as we are ready to demand and pray for the same.

To draw to an end: As the Lord by his Prophet required of the Jews to turn
unto him with all their heart, with fasting, weeping and mourning, that they
might prevent those judgments which were threatued against them: so also at
this time, he requires this duty at our hands, he requires our turning; even
an holy reformation of our corruption, whereby we must be sorry for evil
doing, and more careful to admonish others by our falls, and to prevent sin
in our selves, and more wise to avoid the occasions thereof. If we find more
cheerfulness in troubles, more patience in waiting upon God, more care to
make our enemies Gods friends, taking to heart sins of the time; more sorrow
for sin, then crosses; if we feel an increase and growth of grace, with a
longing desire for our perfection in glory: these are certain and undoubted
tokens of our true conversion unto the Lord; which is the only means to
remove those judgments which lie upon us, and prevent those which hang oueour
heads.

For this cause let us try and examine our selves, what we find within us
which may condemn us. To this effect, let the heart which is the seat of the
affections speak to every one or us, or more plainly let conscience now
speak boldly to all sorts of people (for the heart is still put for the
conscience amongst the Hebrews, they having no particular word for it, so that
a pure heart, and a pure conscience are equivalent terms, as diverse places of
scripture confirm) telling them both whererein they do amiss, and likewise
what God does require of them.

And thou, oh Conscience, What conscience ought to tell.
that thou may execute thy office aright; speak in the language of Canaan,
spare no man's person, tell every one of their sins.

Go unto all Christian Princes, will them to tread in the scope of Josiah, by
weakening the power of Autichrist, Princes.
pulling down the high places, spreading Levites throughout their land to
preach the word of God, that godliness may be maintained and sin punished.

Go unto the Nobility, and tell them, The Nobles.
that there is no true Nobility without a good conscience.

Go to the Counselors, and Judges, and say unto them, Judges.
that Magistrates must be men of courage: fearing God, lovers of the truth, and
haters of covetousness, that they ought to abandon Balaams wages, and shake
all bribes out of their laps.

Get thee to the tribe of Leui, Say, The Ministry
lay hand suddenly on no man, bid them that they deliver the whole counsel of
God, though some with Demas embrace the world, and others with Judas betray
their master; let them cry in the ears of all men, and shoot the arrows of
Gods vengeance against the brazen faces of impenitent sinners.

Go to the Gentry, tell them that Gentility consists not in cutting of a
card, casting of a die, marching of a cock, The Gentry.
or in hollowing after a dismal cry of hounds, or in buying and selling
spiritual livings, but in living upon their own in the fear of God.

Go and tell Tradesmen, Tradsemen.
that they must make an equal measure and just balance, and that they keep a
good conscience abroad and at home: Let laborers take this to heart, for if
the Lord did not often cross men in their tillage, they would even worship
their Ploughes.

Go, Papists.
and tell the Romanists, that there is no true and upright conscience kept by
blowing up Parliament houses, murdering of Kings, or causing their subjects to
rebel against them.

Tell the Jews that the Messiah is come, Jews.
in whom, if they do not not believe, they cannot be saved.

Go, All wicked persons.
terrify all wicked persons; tell the Swearer, that the flying Book full of
curses shall light upon him: the Sabbaoth-breaker, that there is no rest for
him in heaven: Whoremongers, that the Lord shall judge them: Murderers, that
murder cries to the heavens for vengeance: Liars, Drunkards, Gluttons,
Epicures Deceivers, etc. meet with them all (for thou can have access unto
them at all times) strike, wound, and terrify the whole crew of them: hunt
them from lurking places, that they may be turned from their evil ways, ere
they be turned to eternal torments.

Oh, let us in time return unto the Lord, before destruction come upon us: let
us not in this time of peace, abuse Gods mercies, resisting the law of
righteousness. This was the loss of those famous Churches in Graecia, and
Asia, this may be our lot; it may come to pass (and we may justly fear it)
that others may say of this Land, as we now of theirs, there were Churches, but
are not now; there was the Gospel preached, but is not now. The Lord give us
eyes that we may be wise in time, and repent, in that we have fallen from our
former love.

Be not unthankful for your Peace, lest it be turned into War; be not proud
of your benefits, lest you be stripped of your ornaments be not secure in your
glory, lest you be put to sorrow. Let us all pray for true conversion unto the
Lord, and that our Peace may continue: Let God be our Governor, let the Saints
dwell amongst us; let the Churches be our Courts; let the Preachers be our
Council; let Religion be our exercise; let Prayers be our weapons, and Faith
our shield, and holiness our armor: Let us root sin out of our hearts; let
us wash all the spots of evil from our lives: let us cast down all the
Castles of the Devil in our Land; let us drive away whatsoever works
unrighteousness. Those are the tears which the Lord desires, even such as
proceed from the conversion of the heart.

Let Prince and people, Clergy and Laity, mourn with speed, for the Lord is
gone out against us: weep old men and women; weep young men and maids; let
us all mourn, for the day of the Lord is at hand, and is come already.
Therefore now turn with fasting, weeping, and mourning; let it be in greater
measure at this time, then has been formerly, because Gods anger is in
wonderful measure kindled against us. Let sorrow be our songs; and if we do
truly mourn, then I say with Chrysostom, as after a great rain, the air
becomes clear and pure; Sicut post vehementesimbres mundus aer ac purus
efficitur, ita and post lachrymaru^ pluvias serenitas mentis sequitur, atque
tranquillitas. Chrysostom. super Matt. Psalm. 34.19.
so after a shower of tears follows the purity and tranquillity of the
mind. So shall the Prophecy of David be fulfilled in us, that although the
troubles of the righteous are many, yet the Lord delivers them out of them
all. Such as weep sow precious seed, and shall (doubtless) rejoice in
bringing home their Sheaues: if we sow in tears, we shall reap in joy; for
Christ shall wipe all tears from our eyes, and shall bring us at length to a
City, not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens, where there shall be
no night, neither candle, Revel. 22.5.
neither light of the Sun, for the Lord God shall be our light, and we with
the Saints shall reign for ever and ever.

FINIS.

