OBEDIENCE TO the Gospel.

TWO SERMONS, CONTAINING FRVTEFVL MATTER, both of doctrine, and exhortation:
very needful to be known, and practiced in these our days: upon the words
of the holy ghost, written by the Evangelist S. Luke, chapter 2. verses 15. 16.
17. 18. 19. 20, containing the effect of the birth of Christ, (revealed by the
Angel of God) in the sheepeherds, and others that heard of it.

GATHERED OVT OF THE SERmons of JOHN VDALL, Preacher of the word of God, at
Kingston upon Thames, and published, at the request of some of them that heard
them preached.

ROMANS 10. 16. But they have not all obeyed the Gospel: for Esa^ says: Lord,
who has believed our report? AT LONDON Imprinted for T. Man, W. B. and N.L.
1584.

TO THE CONGREGATION OF CHRIST'S PEOPLE, EMBRACING THE TRVTH OF THE GOspel, by
a lively faith, and obedience to the same, the ordinary hearers of the word
of God, at Kingston upon Thames, JOHN VDALL wishes increase of knowledge,
faith, reformation of life, Zeal, and all other virtues of true godliness, and
holiness in this world, and the reward of the same, (thorough the mercy of God
in Jesus Christ) in the world to come.
SEEING it has pleased the Lord, of his great mercy, and goodness, to
vouchsafe unto us that inestimable treasure of his holy word: the preciousnes
whereof, surmounteth all things under the sun: wherein he does offer, even
his own self unto us, and teaches us the way whereby we may come unto him:
it behooves us with all reverence, and fear, to embrace the same, preferring
it before any thing that we can desire upon the earth. And forasmuch as it has
pleased him, to put that precious treasure in these earthly vessels, subject
unto corruption, and mortality: which by the natural disposition that they are
of, will strive to infect all the fruit of that precious treasure, with the
stenche of sinful and ungodly desires: we are diligently to watch, and
contend, that we see, that these fleshly and inordinate motions (that seek so
greatly to extinguish every good thing) may be daily more and more kept under:
that the word of God may (by the working of his holy spirit) get the victory
in our hearts, and sit there as a Prince, to rule the cogitations thereof,
captiuing them daily unto the kingdom of Jesus Christ, thorough obedience to
his most blessed will. The which, for so much as it is done, especially, by the
ministry of the word, wherein the Lord has printed such force, that it
throws down all munitions reared against it: and unto the work of the same,
has appointed me among you (of many other most unable) to do that, which he
commands, and my duty requires at my hands: it stands both me, and you,
in hand, to be most heedefull, that we be not careless in these great and
weighty matters, which do concern the glory of Almighty God, and the
eternal salvation, both of our souls and bodies: and so much the rather,
because Satan fearing the continuance of the world to be short: and therefore,
that which he does for the advancement of his own kingdom, he must do it
quickly: labors by his instruments, with tooth and nail, to extinguish the
light of the glorious Gospel, that it should not shine with open face, unto
Gods people: for we see daily, what mischievous practices he broacheth, what
errors he spreads, what slanders he inuenteth, what lies he disperseth, and
all to discredit the course of religion: the truth whereof we do feel, and
see in our own experience: for you know, what enimitie the establishment of
the Gospel amongst you had, by your envious foes, that would have kept you
still in palpable ignorance, with themselves: how many pullbacks and
hindrances were devised, and be daily invented, to stay the course thereof,
all which, for so much, as (thorough the mercy of God, to usward) they have
not had that success, which the authors hoped for: they labor now, and have
done continually, to imagine slau^derous lies, and most wicked forgeries, which
they do daily spread abroad, to the end, to defame the religion, which we
profess: so that there is not (almost) any sin, that can be committed, but
it is fathered upon some of us: which deuillish dealing, albeit we know that it
shall turn to their eternal destruction, unless the Lord in mercy, give
them grace to repent: yet notwithstanding we may learn a very good lesson out
of the same, and make a profitable use of it unto our selves: let me therefore
entreat you, to mark with diligence this which I shall write unto you, as you
are wont to do, when I do speak. The greatest accusation (you know) in
general, that your foes, the adversaries of the Gospel, do charge you with,
is, that you profess one thing, and practice another: that you say well, and
do naughtily: that you reprehe^d others, you your selves being worse: which
(in deed) is a most heinous accusation, and such a thing, as, your own selves
can witness, I never have winked at, but most carefully reproved, and such a
thing as our religion neither teaches, nor permits* for it is of that
force, where it enters* that it will reform all these things (in measure) in
those that have it within them. This slander goes yet further: for our
profession is accused, to be seditious, contentious, and troublesome unto the
state, and enemy to good order, and government: and we our selves accounted
malicious, proud, finding rather fault with others, than amending our selves,
seeking rather for singularity, than love and charity. You are not ignorant
of the sleights of Satan: and therefore knowing, that he was from the beginning,
an accuser, and liar, may the better, by the mercy of God, have use of your
knowledge, to comfort you in these temptations. But mark, how the Lord makes
Satan, and his imps, to be as spurs and pricks, to drive the godly forward,
though they be very gross, and dull in the beholding of their own faults:
(for Satan casts a myste over their eyes, when they should see them) yet they
be very quick eyed, to prye into the doings of others, especially, the godly,
and are able, if our foot do but slip, to find it out, and have it as a
reason to discredit our profession, which above all things, we labor to keep
unspotted. Therefore it behooves you, to look diligently unto your selves, to
watch your own souls, to attend and look unto every word that you speak,
every thought that you think, and every action that you commit: to examine it
diligently, by the line of Gods word, which is the touchstone, that will either
approve it, or disprove it: and if you find, by the undoubted warrant thereof,
that it is lawful, and that you ought to do it, then let neither slander,
speech of people, devil, nor hell, stay you from the practice thereof: but
if, (thorough the remnants of old Adam) you be at any time allured to do, or
speak any thing, that either is forbidden, or has no warrant from the word of
God, then reason thus with your selves: this is not agreeable to my profession:
this is contrary to that I have learned: this will procure the name of God to
be dishonored, my religion to be defamed, and my self to be discredited:
therefore, though it might be gainefull, delightful, or any other way pleasure
me, I may not do it: this you had need to mark very well: for (I tell you)
you have many lookers on, that would laugh to see your fall: you dwell in a
country, where the Gospel is very little preached: insomuch, that your ignorant
neighbors make them selves sport, to mock at you, that will be so foolish, as
to suffer your selves to be seduced by the Scriptures: you have godless and
profane men, that do deride you: Libertines, and freewill men, that do
despise you: worldlings and bellygods, that do carpe at you: insomuch, that
you have very great need to walk warily: that it stands you upon, to behave
your selves circumspectly: therefore do thus: be diligent in public hearing,
and, (as it may stand with your calling) private reading of the word of God,
(for that is the only schoolemaister, to teach you all truth) using daily and
hearty prayer unto God, for the presence of his holy spirit, to teach you the
true meaning thereof: look what you find therein required of every Christian,
be careful to do it: in your dealing with others, deal faithfully, without
facing out of ill matters: without swearing, or lying: reprove others with the
spirit of mildnes, that do amiss, in your presence: show your selves
obedient unto all authority, that is appointed of God: and that for conscience
sake. Bring up your children, and servants, in the fear of God, instructing
them in the principles of religion: detract no man secretly, but tell them
plainly of their faults: to conclude, show your selves approved unto the
Lord, in the testimony of a good conscience, being always careful to seek
the glory of God, and benefit of your brethren: be always in word and deed,
that, which (according to the Scriptures) ye profess: and then, let Satan
broach his lies: let the wicked carry them abroad: let godless persons hate
you, as long as they may, it shall turn to their shame at the length, as (to
our great comfort) we see it does daily, and (being a trial of your patience)
to your greater glory in the kingdom of heaven: and let not the glory of this
world bewitch you, for ye are not of this world: let not the success of
godless persons dismay you, for the world loves his own, and is liberal
unto them: let not the slanders of the wicked discourage you: for because you
run not on into the same excess of riot with them, therefore they speak
evil of you: let not the multitude of your adversaries fear you, for God is
stronger then all men: let not the threatenings of great ones daunt you, for
their hearts are in the hands of the Lord, to be guided at his pleasure: let
not the pronenesse of your own nature seduce you, for he that lives after the
flesh, shall die: let not the crosses that accompanye the Gospel weary you,
for they bring the joyful fruit of righteousness, to all that are exercised
thereby: so shall the name of God be glorified by you: so shall your foes be
put to flight, and your profession known to be the truth of the eternal God,
that lives for ever. Now, to come to speak of these present sermons, which I
have dedicated chiefly unto you: partly for that, by that calling which the
Lord has laid upon me, I am at this instant, bound, by all lawful means, to
do you good: partly, because it is the earnest suit of some of you, to have
them penned: and partly, for that they contain in them sundry points of
religion, which you do profess, and for which, you are of the world
condemned: that every man may see thereby, the impudency of Satan, that dare
note Gods own word with the mark of infamy: only let me crave this at your
hands, as a recompense for my travail, that you would express the doctrine
in your lives, that I have expressed, (though simply, yet truly) therein: that
I may once see in you all that zeal, which the example of these sheepeherds
may teach you: then shall I think my labor well bestowed, when the beams of
righteousness do break forth, as the sun at noone day: which, the Lord, for
his mercy, grant, in his Son, our Savior Jesus Christ: to whom with the
father, and the holy ghost, be all honor and glory, both now, and for ever.

Amen.
Your servant, for Jesus Christ's sake, his unworthy messenger. JOHN VDALL.

The table.
The birth of Christ, revealed by the Angels, did work effectually, in the
sheepeherds, in whom are to be considered these things: their conference, the
time when it was. 1. the manner of it. 2.
their journey in going with haste unto the place where the child was. 3. the
fruit of the conference and journey 1. found the child. 4. 2. published it
abroad. 5. returned, praising God. 6.

the people, who wondered at the things which they had heard. 7. Marye, who
kept all these things 8. pondred them in her heart. 9.


Two sermons, of obedience to the Gospel.
Luke 2. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. Verse. 15. AND it came to pass, when the
Angels were gone away from them, into heaven, that the sheepeherds said one to
another: let us go then unto Beth-leem, and see this thing that is come to
pass, which the Lord has showed unto us. 16 So they came with haste, and
found both Marie and Joseph, and the babe laid in the cratch. 17 And when they
had seen it, they published abroad the thing, which was told them of that
child. 18 And all that heard it, wondered at the things, which were told them
of the sheepeherds. 19 But Marie kept all those things, and pondered them in
her heart. 20 And the sheepeherds returned, glorifieng, and praising God, for
all that they had heard and seen, as it was spoken unto them.
WHEN the birth of our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ, was made manifest unto
the sheepeherds, that were keeping their sheep by night, it wrought
effectually (as you have heard): first, in the Angels of God, that they were
moved to praise and glorify God, saying: glory to God in the high heavens,
and peace in earth, and toward men good will. Whereby, they both declared,
that all praise, honor, and glory was due to God, for the work of Christ's
incarnation: and also made known the blessing of god, ye was showed upon
mankind thereby: to wit, that here on earth they should feel themselves at
peace in conscience, because of the full persuasion of the remission of their
sins: and also should be tied together one to another, in a true league of
spiritual unity: all which, flows neither from man's will, nor desert, but
only from the free favor, and good will of God, our heavenly father.
Secondly, it wrought most effectually in mankind, generally so many as were
made partakers of the knowledge thereof. Which parties remain now (together
with the doctrine contained in the history of them) to be considered of: that
we may learn out of the same, such doctrine as may serve for our edification
and comfort: the place of Scripture, therefore (that we may proceed according
to our ordinary manner) offers the doings of three sorts of people to our
consideration. 1. The sheepeherds. 2. The people that heard of it. 3. Marie. In
the doings of the sheepeherds, the holy ghost sets down their conference,
their journey to the place, where it was told, that Jesus was: and the fruit or
event of their journey: In the conference, there is set down the time when it
was, and the thing it self. The manner of their journey is set down to be in
haste: the fruit or event that came of it, is threefold: first, that they
found Marie, and Joseph, and the child: secondly, published those things that
they had heard: thirdly, (which is in the last verse of all) they returned,
glorifieng, and praising God. The second sort is the multitude, that wondered
at the thing. The third is Marie, y^ kept al these things, and pondered them in
her heart. These be the branches of the matter, contained in this text.

And it came to pass, that when, etc.] The first branch, that is to be
considered of, is the time when these sheepeherds conferred: to wit, presently
upon the departure of the Angels: that is, as soon as ever the Angels had
made an end of speaking, and were gone from them, they began to consider with
themselves, that the matter was of great importance, and therefore not to be
deferred: that it was a thing most necessary, and therefore not to be
neglected, but further to be enquired after. Out of which we have to learn,
for our instruction, two profitable doctrines. First, that we may not linger or
prolong the time, in the performance of those things, that God enioyneth unto
us: we may not defer the matter until hereafter, but presently upon the
hearing We may not put of from day to day.
of his word by his ministers, we must obey it: the reason whereof is most
apparent: for when God speaks, then does he offer the thing, whereof he
speaks. If he threaten his judgments for sin, his word speaking the same,
his hand is ready to power down the thing: if he teach us any point of
doctrine, for the confirmation of our faith, then is he ready with his spirit,
to seal the same in our hearts: if he exhort us unto amendment of life, with
promise of reward, then does he mercifully bind him self to the performance of
the same, so that we may surely settle our faith upon an undoubted expectation
of it: the which doctrine is notably urged, in the epistle to the Hebrews, out
of the saying Heb. 3. 7, etc. Psalm. 95. 8.
of David: to day, if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. Where
the holy ghost does tell us, that whenever the word of God is preached unto
us, even at that instant does Almighty God offer his mercy, and makes this
use of it, that then we should not harden our hearts with contempt, or careless
harkening thereunto, and (to imprint it the deeper in our hearts) the Lord, by
the mouth of Solomon, has uttered this Prou. 1. 24.
fearful threatening: because I have called (says he) and ye refused, I have
stretched out mine hand, and none would regard: but ye have despised all my
counsel, and would none of my correction, I will also laugh at your
destruction, etc. then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer: they
shall seek me early, but they shall not find me, because they hated
knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord: whereunto that of the
Prophet, accords: behold, the days Amos. 8. 1^.
come (says the Lord God) that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine
of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the word of the Lord, and they
shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north, even unto the east, shall they
run to and fro, to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it. We
have a most terrible example of Gods justice herein, in that profane person
Esau, who despising Heb. 12. 6.
the blessing of god, in the birth right, sold it away for a portion of meat:
of whom it is said, that he found no place to repentance, though he sought the
blessing with tears. We see then, both the necessity of present embracing
Gods word with faith and amendment of life, and also the terrible threatenings
that God denou^ceth to power upon the heads of the contemners: the which we
ought to apply most diligently unto our selves: for if God esteem so greatly
of his word, and punishes so sharply the neglect thereof, we have great cause
to search our own consciences, how faithful obedience we have yielded
thereunto: for we have heard his word long, we have professed the same, and
do profess it, to the sight of the world. Now, if by trial we can find,
thorough the testimony of gods spirit in our hearts, and examination of our
lives, that we have not heard in vain, but have increased both in knowledge of
the gospel, and also reformation of life, according to the same, our own
consciences may minister unto us matter of unfeigned consolation: but
contrariwise, if we have long time been hearers of the word, and have neither
profited in knowledge of god, nor obedience to his laws, surely our estate is
most lamentable, howsoever we flatter our selves in our own imagination: and
therefore let us search our own consciences, whether we find that ready mind
in our selves, that we see to be in these sheepeherds, to make present profit
of gods word, when we have heard it.

The second thing, that we have to mark out of this point, is, that we see the
word of god was effectual in them, and made them careful to seek further, to
be informed in the matter of the birth of Christ: that they having the whole
knowledge of the thing in every point, might not lack the use of it any way,
because they did know, that the thing both being straung, and also coming from
God, must needs be most necessary for them to know. The lesson that is to be
gathered out of the same, for our instruction, is this: that those who be
truly called unto the faith in Jesus Christ, and have the unfeigned earnest of
Gods spirit within them, do persuade themselves, that Gods word in every
point, Every point of gods word, is to be known of every man.
is to be known of them, and also every way to be practiced: which is a
doctrine most needful to be learned: for Satan has so inueigled the hearts
of a number, yea even of them that take themselves to be gospellers, that they
think the most part of Gods word not to appertain unto them: that the
knowledge thereof is needelesse, the comfort of it fruitless, and the
particular obedience thereunto, more precise, than necessary: insomuch that
they settle themselves in these, and such persuasions. I believe in Jesus
Christ, and hope to be saved by his bloudshedding: I know that Christ died for
my sins, and that I ought to live well: as for those points of doctrine, that
be so many, they belong to preachers, and men that profess learning, and so
forth. In which kind of people you may most lively behold the subtlety of
Satan, that under pretense of belief in Christ, would overthrow the knowledge
of God, and persuade them, that he can bring them a nearer way to heaven, than
by that ordinary way, which God has ordained: but we are to know: that God,
whose wisdom shines in the least of his creatures, has not set down his
word to be an idle thing, or belonging unto a few, but unto al, yea even to
give unto the simple wisdom, and sharpenes of wit, and to Psalm. 19. 7. Prou.
1. 4.
the child knowledge, and discretion. And therefore, howsoever they arm
themselves against knowledge, and hide their hearts in the dungeon of
ignorance, we must make this use of it: that Ephesians. 4. 12. Acts. 20. 27.
as God has appointed his ministers to teach all the council of God unto his
people: so it is his will, that his servants should learn it all, to the end
that they may have use and consolation of it, in the government of their lives,
and strengthening of their faith. If this were truly learned, it would
overthrow that settled persuasion which Satan has grounded in the hearts of
many, whereby they think themselves (if they have heard the word for some small
time) that they have learned enough: that they have sufficiently profited in
religion: and therefore they become cold, and careless, not regarding whether
they frequent the holy exercises of religion, or no. Which is the cause (at
this day) that so heinous enormities reign in men's lives, to the great
dishonor of God, and slander of the Gospel. But let us persuade our selves,
that every point of Gods word is of most weighty importance, needful for us
to be known: and that (do what we can) we shall never 1. Cor. 13. 12. Then we
can not be too for ward, as some say.
know, but in part, never go far enough, neither in knowledge, nor strict
obedience, for still we be unprofitable servants: and therefore, that we with
all humility, and reverence, be most diligent in frequenting those places
where we may learn to know more and more of Gods will, and pray unto him,
that we may become every day more godly than other, so long as we live.

They said one to another.] The second branch of the first part, which
conteyneth the manner of the conference, the meaning whereof is this: that when
they did see, both the weightines of the matter, and also the necessity of the
knowledge thereof in themselves, they began one to exhort and stir up
another, to the earnest and hastye seeking out of the thing. Out of which,
there may be gathered diverse doctrines, for our instruction. First, in that
they say one to another, let us go up then unto Bethleem: we may behold the
beginning of the performance of that propheste: where it was foretold, that in
Esaias 2. 3.
the time of Christ they should say: come, let us go up to the mountain of y^
Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we
will walk in his paths. Whereby the holy Ghost teaches us, that in the time
of the We ought to stir up one another to religion.
Gospel, there should be such zeal, that every one should excite, and stir
up his neighbor unto religion: which prophecy being verified in these
sheepeherds, does teach us our duty: to wit, that if we acknowledge our selves
to be of that number, whom Christ in his Gospel rules, then must we practice
this point of obedience to him, and love to our brethren: that we be means to
stir them up, to exhort, and further them in the duties of christianity:
whereunto, in the doctrine of the Gospel, (which is the statute law that
Christ governs his kingdom by) we are oftentimes exhorted. The holy Apostle
S Paul* says: wherefore exhort one another, and edify one another, even as ye
do. And in another place: exhort one another daily, while it is called to day.
And again: let us consider one another, and provoke unto love, 1 These. 5. 11.
Heb. 3. 13. 19.
and to good works. The reason whereof is this: that seeing by the merciful
calling of God, we are members of one body, whereof Jesus Christ is the head,
and linked together by one spirit, the fellow feeling of the grief of others,
(if we be feeling members in deed) constrains us to do good one to another:
and therefore especially to inform those that need, in the way of
righteousness. Thus we see what is our duty, required of us by the Lord
himself, which we are diligently to consider of: for we may not think, that
the gifts of God bestowed upon us, are for our selves alone, but for the
benefit also of others. Which, if it were rightly weyed, religion would not be
so geason amongst us as it is: for men think now adays, that if they see
others wallow in ignorance, and bring forth the fruits of the same, (most
enormious sins) in their conversation, it is not their duty to instruct
them, because (forsooth) it is the office of the preacher: nay, they think the
minister ought not to do it neither, unless he be in the pulpit: and
therefore his documents are unsavory, unless he himself be hedged in with a
piece of wood on each side: but howsoever they would shut out knowledge, by
these and such like speeches: we are to learn, that it is the duty, not only
of ministers publicly, but also of all men privately, to instruct those that
be ignorant, and to bring them from error: and the party informed, is not to
cauil at the man that does it, nor the place where it is done: but in reverence
to receive it, as from the Lord, and to lay it up in his heart, for the
amendment of his life

Secondly: in that these sheepehers do (after they have heard the message of
God, by the Angel) thus confer of it, how they may be further edified: we
learn that they were careful, that they shouldnot forget the things that they
had heard: and therefore they are earnest to go to y^ place* which the angels
had named, for their further satisfaction. An example of fruitful hearers of
the word of God, by whom we may learn a very profitable lesson, which is, that
when we come to y^ hearing of the word of God. (for so much as we are unfit, and
(in truth) unable to carry al things away that we hear, partly thorough y^
corruption of our nature (the remnants whereof we shall always carry about with
us) and partly thorough the subtlety of Satan, whereby he suggesteth other
cogitations into our minds, to the end that he may bereave us of the benefit
of Gods heavenly word and steal our minds from attending to it. After that the
sermon is done, we ought at our coming home, to meet together, and say one to
another: come, we have al been where We must co^ferre of the word of God,
after that we have heard it.
we have heard Gods word taught, let us confer about it, that we may not only
call to remembrance those things that every one of us have carried away, but
also that one may have y^ benefit of the labors of others: and surely it must
needs prove a very profitable way: for if one have missed y^ observation of
this or that point, an other has marked it, so that among them they may bring
away the whole, and so be edified one by another. And as all are to be careful
herein, soespecialy it is to be practiced by masters, and fathers of families,
that for so much as children and servants be often careless, in attending unto
the word of God, the very fear of rebuke or correction, at their faithers or
masters hands, will make them learn somewhat. If the benefit of this course
were perceived, and the practice of it used (besides the commodity redou^ding to
the parties) it would be ye means to stay many horrible offenses, that are
committed: For what is ye cause of such idle talk that me^ have delight in?
Even the lack of better matter wherein they might be occupied. What is the
cause y^ Lords saboths be so ill spent: yea so horribly profaned? Even this,
that so soon as they come from Church, (if yet they come there at all) they
think their duty to God fully performed, and so go in all haste; to dice,
cards, bowling, tippling, and every other wicked pastime (as they call them)
wherein want neither cursing, swearing, nor blaspheming, to the great dishonor
of God, and procuring of his heavy wrath to be powered upon this land, and the
decay of all religion: but mark in this point the height of all iniquity, in
these out days, whereas Magistrates should redress these things, and others
that take upon them the correction of vice in the Church, do make a show of
defending religion: if there be any small number (which is rare) y^ would
gladly (following the example of these sheepheardes) confer privately of those
things that they have heard, and be careful to grow in the knowledge of
religion, by and by it shall be charged to be within the compass of a
conuenticle: and their good and godly course shall be checked and blamed by
pretense and color of law: but if twenty meet together in an Alenouse (though
they most profanely abuse the creatures of God, lewdly mispend their time,
blasphemously dishonor the Lord, and uncharitably revile, even the very
profession of Jesus Christ: all this is no harm: it is but good neighborhood,
it is no conuenticle, they have (or will have) no law to punish it: from hence
do spring all the abominable sins that reign in this land: even that
religious exercises (by the secret papists and profane atheistes The wicked
ause man's law, to deprave the word of God.
that be in authority and abuse the law and meaning thereof) are
discou^tenanced, and godless and irreligious dealinges boalstered, whose
reckoning, for their parts, in the day of account, will be most intolerable,
which they least think of: but let us pray unto God y^ he would grant us
reformation of these and such things when his good will and pleasure is: and
in the mean while to grant us the spirit of wisdom, and discretion, that we
may walk warily in these dangerous days. Moreover in the consideration of
the parties, what kind of people they were, we may note that which concerns
our instruction. They were (as you see) sheepheardes, men of no great calling,
and most like of small learning: yet behold, both how the Lord does reveal
the birth of his Son, first, unto them, and also how careful they are, to
search out every circumstance of ye same. There is no doubt, but if they had
lived in these our days, they should have been charged with great presumption
(that being men of mean understanding) durst meddle with such high matters,
whereof the very Rabbines could not agree. But we learn by their example: 1.
to admire the wonderful wisdom, and love of God: wisdom that does thus
reveal his Son to these simple ones and not to the great clerks of the
Jews y^ Why God reuealeth (oftener) his word to the simple. 1. Cor. 1. 29.
Scribes and Pharisees, his love, that so mercifully makes him self known
unto these, that in their own eyes (no doubt) and also in truth, were by reason
less capable of so high mysteries: ye use whereof we must acknowledge to be
this, which (also) S. Paul teaches us, that the Lord thereby stops the way
for any man to rejoice or boast in himself: but that he may learn to ascribe
all glory only unto God: Secondly, we learn, that it is the duty even of
the simplest, to seek the knowledge of Jesus Christ out of his word, and to
exercise himself continually in the same: and not to say, (as commonly is
said) I am a Lay man, I have No excuse must keep the simplest from the
knowledge of Gods word.
no learning: let them that are preachers, and have been brought up in
Schools meddle with Scriptures: I must attend upon my worldly business: by
which, (and such like speeches) they think they have gotten invincible
shields, to defend them from knowledge, and shroud them in their ignorance: but
they will prove no better than broken reeds, and figgeleaues in the day of
judgment: for God has not placed any man in this earth, to the end, that he
(sleeping in ignorance) should fat up himself, with the use of Gods
blessings here, and seek no further: but that he should above al things, be
careful to search out of Gods word, how to know his will, that knowing it, he
may obey him, and so earnestly set forth the glory of his holy name.

Again, we see the manner of their proceedings to be this: that they say, let
us go then unto Bethlehem, and see this thing that is come to pass, which the
Lord has showed unto us, as if they should have said: as we are careful to be
further certified in this matter, so must we both be wary that we go to the
place, and also search the things that have been told us, least we (doing
otherwise) reap no benefit by our journey: wherein we may behold (for our
example) a pattern of right obedience unto God: they are very forward, and
yet notwithstanding ty themselves unto that which they had heard. Al men by the
very instinct of nature, are desirous to know the truth, Where and how the
truth is to be sought
but yet in the manner all naturally do err, for they seek it after the
course that their own fancies do imagine: but they that will seek the truth
truly, and in truth: they that ever shall come to ye knowledge of the same, do
follow the stricte rule of Gods word, neither swaruing to the right hand, nor
declining to the left: and they be most earnest and diligent in the same.
Whereby we may make notable trial of our selves: both whether we be in the way
of truth or no, and also how careful we be to find it. Which trial if it
were duly applied unto our hearts, ye greatest number of us no doubt should
find themselves careless and so have just matter with in themselves either to
convince themselves, and so be excuseles, or else to find their own
wickednsse, and so become more diligent and attentive to ye word of the Lord.
Lastly this does notably declare unto us the cause that so few do show forth
that care in obeying the Lord as they should, even because they make so small
reckoning of Gods The cause that so few find Christ
word persuading themselves that either the knowledge thereof is not needful
at al, or if any whit, yet they go about it as though they had no stomach to
it: but silly souls, if they did either know the necessity, or comfort of
it, they would not esteem it so base: the necessity: that it should be our
continual counsel, for the direction of our affairs: that it should Psalm.
119. 24. 2 Pet. 1. 19.
be as a lantern to our feet and light unto our paths: that we are naturaly in
darkness, and it must be the candle to direct us, or else we cannot choose
but fall into spiritual dangers: y^ comfort, that among the diverse troubles of
this miserable world (the waywardness of our own nature, and the manifold
temptations of Satan) it is not possible that we should stand or have any hope
of consolation but only in the promises of God, which be there set down,
whereon the souls of al holy men have ever sed, and been stayed: and therefore
David who was a king Psalm. 119. 50. 92.
endued with wisdom, strength, and riches, yet says he plainelye that that
it was his comfort in his trouble: and, except the law of God had been his
delight, he had perished in his afflictions: and therefore let us not flatter
our selves, who are many and infinite ways inferior, and more unable to
stand, than he was: but let us continually crave at Gods hands, that we may
be daily more and more ravished with the love of his word, and may have the
right use of it, and then we shall see, that of al things in this world it is
the thing that we should most desire.

So they came in haste]. The second general branch of the effect is this, that
when they had one stirred up another, and being earnest in enquiring out the
matter, and also knowing by the direction of the Angel, both the place where
unto they should go, and also the thing where* of they would be certified, do
now, in all haste, without any further delay, go to the place to see the
thing, wherein we may behold the true work of Gods word, that it not only
instructs them to confer and talk of the thing, but also to do it indeed.
The majesty of Gods word (as we shall see hereafter) gets an assent' unto
it (almost) of all men: insomuch, that all nowadaies are contented to profess
well, and to make a show: they are willing to cry, Lord, Lord, and carry the
countenance of Gospellers, but to bring forth the fruit of it in their
conversation, this is the thing that they strain courtesy at: but we are to
learn (by the example of these sheepherds,) that if we will be indeed, that
which we would We must not only profess Gods word, but do italso
be accounted to be, then must we be as careful to practice Gods
commandments in our life, as to speak of them in our months: for religion
stands not in profession only: the service of God stands not in words
alone: he is not straightway a Christian, that carries the countenance of one:
but he only who is careful both of profession, and also true obedience. For
as it is most true, that without professing of the Gospel we can not be the
members of Christ's Church here upon earth: so is it as true, that without the
fruit of that which we make show of, we cannot persuade our selves Romans 8. 9.
10. Galat. 5. 22.
to be (neither in deed are we) the servants of God. For whom God teaches by
his word, he indoweth with his spirit where the spirit of God is, there be the
fruits of the spirit: and the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is
life for righteousness sake. Let every one of us (therefore) lay this unto our
own consciences, and labor to make profit of it unto our selves.

Again we see in these sheepheardes, that as they make the motion one to
another, that they may go, so they leave not there, and so let it rest, but
they go forward also, a notable example for our instruction. When men that
have more It should be so is not sufficient
civil honesty and moderation of themselves then the common sort have, do
meet together often, they have up whole common wealths in their talk: ever
saying, this is not well, and that might be amended: and it were well if such a
thing were so: but you shall never hear more: They content themselves with (it
should be) and never put to their hands to further it: even like to them, that
being reproved for swearing, say: indeed I am to blame, and I confess it is
a fault: or being exhorted to this or that godly course, answer: indeed it
should be so: hearing a minister teach any point of religion, say: he said
very well, he is a very good man: I would we could follow him: but never
strive to amend: never labor, nor endeavor to do so: but cover all under this
cloak, flesh is frail, we are all sinners, and so think that to be excuse
sufficient to keep themselves still in the state they be, or else wax worse
and worse: Even so deal these men: they move or approve any good motion, and
never strive to stir up others, that it may be practiced, and these people be
com monly such, as either bear offices, or are some way assistantes, in
corporations, where they be governed by the co^sultation of man: and therefore
you here present may have good use of this doctrine when you have any public
matters in hand: especially when you do meet together, for the election of
your Magistrates, I am sure you will all say and wish in general terms, that
a sufficient man may have this and that office: but surely it falls out, that
every man almost is led by his private affection, in the particular wishing
either the preferment and benefit of him self, or his friend, never regarding
how able he is to discharge it. And hence it is that (as Solomon says) we may
see a great evil under the sun, as an error that proceeds from the face of
him that rules: Ecclesiast. 10. 5
folly is set in great excellency, and the rich (in all manner of wisdom) set
in the law place. I have seen servants on horses, and Princes walking as
servants on the ground: whereupon follows all disorder, because the governors
either can not, or dare not, or will not execute their office aright.

We may moreover see in these sheepherds a note of great zeal, that their
minds being ravished with desire of the thing, they went in haste: striving
(as it were) to go one before an other: and they had great reason for it: for
being taught that the son of God, the savior of mankind, their redeemer,
was to be seen in Bethlehem: who can blame them, if they ran one over an other
for have? Which teaches us what we are to do in matters of religion. For So Much
as in the word of God, we seek the same Christ, yea, far more glorious than
he was, when they sought him: we are to contend with all possible endeavor, that
we may eue^ go before our teachers, that (as David did) we may excel them, in
wisdom, zeal, understanding, and godliness: But do we so? Alas, no, we are
marvelous manerly herein: we give place to every one to go before us, and
Psalm. 119. 98. We strain courtesy, who should first be religious, but who
should first gain riches.
we would be so fine (after the fleshly manner) that we look at men, and follow
them: and though we see many go forward before us, if any in whom we have
any confidence, proceed not, we tarry also: and this is our excuse, lo
(say we) is not such a man wise, and learuedder? is not he of great accoumpt
with the best? trow you if it were the right way to heaven that he would so
little regard it? I know him to have more skill then I, and therefore look how
he does so will I do: for he is an honest substantial man. And thus we
build upon men, forgetting the rock Jesus Christ, upon whom we should settle
our ground, and of whom we must learn both knowledge, and example of life:
but in our worldly matters (which Math 7. 2. 4. 11. 29. 16. 24.
should be means to induce us to the consideration of heavenly things) we do
not so, for if we hear of a benefit, or preferment, or any other thing
whereby we may gain: we say not, he is a man more worthy to have it then I, he
has more need of it then I: but we strive by all means to prevent our
neighbor: then happy is he (think we) that can rise eareliest, and can spur
his horse to run the fastest: then is our mannerlinesse that we use in Gods
matters clean forgotten: the gredy desire of gain has so ravished our
hearts, that we clean forget, nay that we are careless, whom it is that we
go before, father or mother, friend or foe. Whereby we do even condemn our
selves to be mere worldlinges, wholly addicted to the mucke of this world,
not caring what become of all our dearest friends, yea of our own souls
after this life, so that we may have present gain. O that we were thus minded
toward heavenly things: that we had such a care to get unto us true wisdom,
virtue and holiness. O that we were as vigilant to increase in knowledge,
faith and righteousness: as we be in dignity, wealth, and worldly pleasure. O
that we could consider the excellency of the soul above the body: and thereby
compare the ornaments of the one with the other, and the necessity of the one
beyond the other: then (doubtless) would our righteousness burst forth as the
stars, and our holiness as the sun at mid-daie: then should not we poor
preachers of Gods word, cry out so much as we do, for religion and
reformation, with so small profit: then should not Christ be turned behind ^s,
and our own denises be preferred: then should not the counsel of God give
place to the decrees of men, nor folly bear the sway, and wisdom be
despised as it is every where, to the great dishonor of our most loving and
bountiful God, and grief of the consciences of all that fear his holy name.

And found) Now follows the fruit of this travail of the sheepherds, in three
points (as you heard in the beginning) first, they found that they sought for:
secondly, published it abroad: and thirdly, glorified God for it.

And found both Marie, and Joseph, and the babe laid in the cratch) The first
fruit, which is this: that according to their expectation and earnest desire,
they using the means, and taking the course that was enjoined unto them,
obtain their desire, and find Christ, as it was told them: The truth of Gods
word.
wherein we may behold generally the truth of the word of God that ever comes
to pass according as it is foretold: to teach us to repose unfeigned confidence
in it. And perticularly we may see that veryfied in this place, that our
Savior Christ promised, saying: ask, and it ^halbe given you: seek, and ye
shall find: Mat. 7. ^
^nocke, and it shall be opened unto you: ^r whosoever asks receives, and he
that seeks finds, and to him that ^nocketh it shall be opened: God is not ^ke
unto worldly men, that are very li^rall in promises, and sparing in per^rma^ce,
but what soever he promises, we use those means that he prescri^eth, for the
obtaining of it, he perfor^eth it, yea and that not niggardly: so at, if at any
time thou be not parta^r of those things in particular: which God has
generally promised unto his, ^ure thy self, that the cause is only in ^ee, and
no part in him: for the most ^dlesse that ever were, could never ^ccuse God of
this, to be short in ^e performance of his word. And therefore let us make
this use of it, unto ^ur selves: y^ seeing he is so free in word, ^d so
bountiful in deed, let us cast all ^ur care upon him, let us cleave, with^t
doubting, unto his mercy, and take ^at course of life that he inioyneth, using
all the lawful means that he has sanctified in his word, and then shall we
prove Romans 12. 2.
what is the good will of God, acceptable and perfect: then shall we to the
great comfort of our souls, seele that it is no vain thing to serve God:
that we have not washed our hands in innocence for naught. But here we are to
be very wary, that we tempt not God, and so accuse him of breach of promise.
For in truth^ Why men do seek, and find not.
there be many that seek and find not: that ask and have not: that beg and
obtain not: that would enter in, and cannot. Whereof S. James gives the
reason: James 4. 3.
for that (says he) they ask amiss, that they might consume it upon their own
lusts: which we do see most evident in our own experience: for every man
wishes, that he were persuaded of the love of God toward him, that he could
serve God, as he commands, and might come to the kingdom of heaven, and yet
the most part never the nearer. For either they despise and contemn y^ To
despise the means in trusting of God, is to tempte him
means that should bring them to the thing that they desire, (as he that does
wish he were religious, condemns word preached: he that would be holy,
refuses to strive against the lusts of his ^wne flesh: he that would be rich,
refuses ^he pains to travail for the same or else ^edoth it so
distrustingly, that he reposeth ^ot y^ confidence in God, which he should. The
world is full of both these sorts of people: the former are espied folishe,
even by natural reason, the latter seem to have greater color: for (think
they) I could be very well contented to be religious, and so inioye the
reward of y^ same. But what is now in this world? I see yet what is there, I
cannot tell, I will not therefore be so foolish, as utterly to renounce these
present pleasures so far, as to deny my self wholly: but this I will do, I
will take upon me the profession of Jesus Christ, and give him some
intertainement in my heart, but not wholly: I will not trust him too far, but
take him in the one hand, and the world in the other, that if at any time, I be
troubled for the one, I may cleave with honesty to the other, and say I never
meant any less. Thus do a number in these days (as their deeds do most
evidently declare) but what get they by it? Surely, the Lord in his just
judgment, does so bridle them because they would not trust him wholly to be
their governor, that they do never feel the sweetness of Religion, in so
much that in time of persecution they vanish away, and in the days of trouble
they know not which way to turn, because they would gladly retain Christ,
and yet feeling no comfort by his word dare not cleave wholly unto him. But
let us beware of parting stakes between God and the world: let us not come
limping unto the Lord, but with our whole wills, hearts and minds, have affiance
in him: that by his mercy we may reap the benefit of Jesus Christ's obedience,
for our full contentment in this world, and glorification in the world to come.

And when they had seen it, they published abroad that which was told them of
the Child.) Now follows the second fruit of their travail: to wit, that
they seeing the truth of God in his promise, and perceiving that God had some
greater work to do in him, they dispersed it abroad, and told it to others,
as they could get convenient occasion: so that this being the meaning of the
words, let us observe those things that are to be learned out of the same, for
our instruction: and first let us consider the time when they published it,
even when they did see and perceive plainly, that it was so indeed, as they
were told of the Angel, so that there could be no denial of it any way. Which
teaches us this lesson: that religion must first be known before it be
uttered: for how can a man reveal a thing unto an other, whereof he is still
ignorant Knowledge is the first point of gods service
himself? How can a blind man see to direct an other in the way? and therefore
the first thing that is required at our hands, in the service of God, is that
we seek thoroughly to know his will, to the end that we may have a most
certain ground, both how to direct our own ways, and also to make our
lights shine to others, which al men do desire to do, or at least to be so
accounted: but because they have not that care to be directed by certain
knowledge, both their own ways that seem good in their own eyes (yea though
they be works in themselves good) are odious in the sight Hipocrites nether be
loved of God or man
of God, as being fruits that proceed not from faith, and also their
profession or outward show, is espied faulty even in the world, and they
accounted hypocrites: so that if we enter duly into the consideration of the
estate of such persons, we shall see it to be of all others most desperate: for
in the sight of God, their doings are abominable, insomuch as they have not
learned by the knowledge of his word to do them in faith, and in the judgment
of men, they are also rejected: for both the godly (to whom the Lord has given
the spirit of discretion to discern those things that differ) do see their
course to be only in outward appearance, and therefore join not with them: and
also the wicked who cannot discern otherwise then by the fruits, do see that
they make a show of one thing, and practice an other: and therefore do even
of all other detest them most, so that they being neither beloved of God, nor
man, must needs (of all other) be in the worst case. Therefore they that
intend to take a right cause, where with they may both please God, ^ bring
comfort unto their own souls, and also stop the mouths of their
adversaries, as they be desirous to do those things that may be approved
before men, so let them first begin with this that they may learn of the
word how they may have warrant from him, and be sure that they do his will,
and not to take upon them for any private occasion (either of gain, credit, or
pleasing others) to make show of that, which neither they know, nor yet have
any feeling of: so shall they in any extremity have the testimony of a good
conscience, the comfort whereof ouercom, meth all those evils that the godly
are continually (thorough the malice of Satan) haunted withal.

Moreover, as we see that these sheepheards begun with knowledge, and were
first instructed thoroughly in the thing themselves: so we see* that as soon
as they had sure intelligence of the matter, they published it, and made it
known to others: wherein they make known, both their thankful hearts to
God, and also their loving affections to their brethren: their thankful
hearts, that having reciued such a benefit from the hand of God, think it
their duetye to make known unto others, what a bountiful God he is: Their
loving affections to their brethren, that are desirous to have them partakers
of those notable benefits of God, in the birth of his Son Jesus Christ:
whereby we may learn a most notable point of our duty, that our
thankfulness to God, and love Profession of religion stands in reproving
and instruction.
to our brethren must move us, by all lawful means, to make that known unto
others which we our selves do learn out of Gods word, the sum whereof
stands in these two points: to reprove our brethren offending, and to
instruct them when we see them ignorant. The carnal man that would not be
reproved, because he will not amend, nor be instructed, for that he despises
knowledge, will say, that a minister must do so, but private persons are not
to meddle in any such matter: against whom if I should aleadge no more but
only the doings of these sheepheardes, he were thoroughly answered: but to make
it more clear by the Scriptures, for reproving sin, Leuit 1^. 17.
which is the first point: The Lord says thou shall not hate thy brother in
thy heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and suffer him not to
sin. Whereby we do most evidently see, both that we ought to reprove one
another offending, and also that if we do it not we hate him: and for
instructing, the second point, David says, restore to me Psalm. 51. 12, 13.
(O Lord) the joy of thy salvation, and sta blish me with thy free spirit, then
shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked, and sinners shall be converted unto
thee. So that it appears plainly hereby what is the duty of every
Christian, which (indeed) causes them that have a care to keep Gods
commandementes, to take this course where with all the godless are most of
all offended, and are ready The world cannot away with private rebuking and
instruction.
to offer them any violent injury, charging them to do it not of care over
Gods glory, nor love to them, but either to show themselves buste, in carping
with others, or else of an arrogant bravery, for praise to be accounted
religious persons, whose accusation though it may fall out to be true in some,
(for we have examples of both in the Scriptures: Judas was a buste body,
carping at the deed of John. 12. 5.
Marie, for spending the precious ointme^t upon Christ, that might have been
sold, and given to the poor: and Simon Magus Acts. ^. 18.
was an arrogant person, who desired the gifts of the holy ghost, for vain
glory sake, rather then to do good with them: Yet it is no excuse for them:
for though a man reprove me of malice, mistrust me of vain glory, yet that is
only to him and not to me. I must respect the thing which is for my own
benefit, and not the intent of the party which he shall answer for Therefore
seeing the world cannot abide this, and yet thou see it enjoined unto thee
from the Lord: be With what mind we must reprove others
careful that in thy own conscience thou be not guilty of any sinister mind
in doing it, and then let them storm never so much, thou stand upon a sure
foundation, and discha^ ^st thy duty, so that his blood shall be upon his own
head.

It is said here of them, that they published abroad the thing which was told
them of that child: that is, all that they had heard, and no more showing their
faithfulness for our instruction: that as God has given his word, so would he
have it al published and made known, as he has perfected it himself, so is it
his will, that we should neither add to it, nor detract from it, but leave it
as we find it: a lesson that is very needful to be learned: For the world
does commit high treason The ungodly either detract^ from, or ad to the word
of God.
against God in this point, on both sides: some do esteem certain points of
doctrine, too high misteryes, and therefore would not have them meddled withal,
but buried in silence: as namely the doctrine of Gods eternal predestination:
the very staff and undoubted stay of our hope in Jesus Christ: which is most
largely handeled in many places of the Scripturs at large, and even (as it
were) discoursed upon of purpose. Especially Romans 9. 11. to 24.
by the holy apostle S. Paul in two several places: the which, whosoever
would have unknown, does accuse God, either Ephe. 1. 45.
of lack of discretion, to set y^ down in his revealed word that is not to be
taught, or of folly to trouble himself in revealing it, and man in seeking to
know a needelesse thing. Others (not having the right use of Gods word) do in
some things think it insufficient, and therefore they must add (forsooth)
some devise of their own brain, whereby the Scriptures might be made perfect,
and these do accuse the Lord of great They that do not know the use of Gods
word think it imperfect
carelessness over his Church, that would give them such an vnper fect law,
whereby all and every cause and person in his Church cannot be directed: and
therefore letting them both go, let us embrace all Gods word, and nothing
else: let us publish that all, and nothing but it, by the example of these
sheepheardes.

We may yet further behold in them the victory of the spirit against the
flesh, there were diverse reasons to induce the^ not to believe it: as the
baseness of his The bataile of the flesh and the spirit^ in the entrance to
religion.
birth, the simplicity of his mother, and contemptiblenesse of his kindred
(for the stock of David in those days was most hated by the heathen kings,
and gouenours): There were also reasons to move them (though they did believe
it, yet not to publish it, as, that Herod would be his enemy, because he
should be king of the Jews, and so they clapte in prison for spreading it
abroad: that the Phareseis and Scribes would be grieved wih it, because they
looked for a Messiah coming in worldly pomp: and so would excomunicate these
poor sheepheardes, if they confessed this child to be Christ: so that they
might fear both the governors of the church, and also of the common wealth to
be against them: which must needs bring unto them great trouble: and as for
Christ, he was but a child, and his kindred being poor, and therefore his
party weak, they could have no rescue at his hands from their violence: but
none of these considerations troubled them so, as to fear them from publishing
it: why? because they were fully persuaded, that the salvation The spirit ever
gets victory in the faithful at length.
both of their souls and bodies, rested only in that child, and therefore it
was their duty to use al means, that the glory of God might be advanced for
it, by whose example we may learn a most necessary lesson. Many thereby, that
take upon them the profession of Christ, who, notwithstanding by the
consideration either of his base estate, or for fear of wordly loss or
tribulation for his sake, or by one temptation or other, are driven back from
that sincere course that once they did practice: whose doings are clean
contrary to the doings of these sheepeheardes: this then is the lesson for us,
where the fear of God takes root, and religion is once truly sealed in the
heart, by Gods holy spirit: the seal of y^ glory of God does so possess that
man* that al worldly considerations cease, that agree not with it: al
alurements are loathsome, that draw him from it: and all afflictions are sweet,
that come to him with it: this is a most necessary meditation in these our
days, wherein men are so generally carried away with the pleasures, delights,
and riches of this present world, that there seems to be eue^ such a revolt,
as was in the time of our savior Christ, John. 6. 66.
when many of his disciples went backward, insomuch that Christ may say to a
very small number, that serve him truly, now will you go too? whose stay and
comfort is that beauenly answer of Peter, to whom should we go? Seeing Christ
has the words of eternal life, whom we believe and know to come from God,
and to have all the treasures of knowledge and wisdom hidden Col. 2. 3.
in him. The Lord open our eyes that we may see his ways, and truly walk in
the same.

Let us pray.
THE SECOND SERMON OF OBEDIENCE TO THE Gospel.
Luke. 2. verse. 18. And all that heard it, wondered at the things that were
told them of the sheepheardes.
NOW follows the second sort of people where in this thing was effectual
(for the third thing y^ is to be considered in the sheepheardes because the
holy ghost has set it last in the text, I will also refer it unto the latter
end) for it is said when they heard of the sheep heardes both the thing that
was come to pass and also the mean parties by who^: they wondered, for every
point of religion is strange to natural men, wherein we may see y^ wonderful
force of gods word which carries with it such a majesty, that it being
sincerely delivered, shakes the hearts even of all estates of men. Which we
may also learn of the Lord himself, by the mouth of the holy Prophet saying.
Surely as the rain comes down and the snow from heaven, and returns not
thither, but watreth Esaias. 55. 10.
the earth and makes it to bring forth and to bud, that it may give seed to the
sower and bread unto him that eats: so shall my word be that goes out of my
mouth: it shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I
will and it shall prosper in ye thing whereto I send it. Now to what end and for
what purpose the word of God is sent that we may know how it works S. Paul
does notably set down. God says he makes 2 Cor. 14. 15. 16
manifest the Savor of his knowledge by us, in euey place. For we are unto God
the sweet savor of Christ in the^ that are saved, and in them which perish* to
the one we are the savor of death unto death: and to the other the savor of
life unto life. So that we may see here Gods word works in all that hear it
preached.
that the word of God is ever more effectual but not to all in any manner: for
some it hardens through their own perverseness, others it molifieth and makes
them more obedient unto God and surely this is a doctrine wherewithal we have
great need to examine our selves. We have heard the word along time and it is
plain that it all ways works one way or other: so that every How a man shall
know when there the gospel do him any good or no.
one of us may thus reason with our selves: Has the Gospel been profitable
unto me? then have I increased in knowledge, grown stronger in faith, and
holier in life, by the hearing of the same, if I can find these fruits of the
word in me, truly, then have I (to the comfort of my own soul) a testimony
within me, that Gods word is unto me, the savor of life unto life: but
contrariwise, The marks of fruitless hearers.
am I as ignorant as I was? as faithless as I was* and sinful as I was?
Surely I am in a woeful taking, for (though I feel it not) my heart is
hardened every day, and I (the longer I live) am still further from GOD. This
is a fearful thing (if it were rightly weyed) not only to them that be
professed foes to the word that they hear (whom all men account to be in
desperate estate) but also, to them that otherwise are taken and do take them
selves for civil honest men, that for orders sake will present them selves
Hearers for fashions sake.
in the place where the word of God is preached, and think thereby that the
Preacher is beholden unto them, that they will vouchsafe to give countenance to
him with their presence: but never care nor regard what is spoken, neither
reap any benefit by it: such may assure them selves (for most sure it is)
that they do depart worse than they came, because the word that they have
heard must needs have his work, and returns not to God in vain.

These people that thus wondered at Hearers that are moved for the time
present only.
the thing, are yet further to be considred, to wit, that for all their
wondering, we read not, that ever they set the one foot before the other, to
go to the place where Christ was, that they might see him: which argues, that
they did not marvel in respect of the benefit that redounded to mankind by
Christ, but only. because of the strangeness of the thing, and that for the
time present. The world now adays is full of people that be right of the same
disposition, for let them come to the Church where they hear Gods word
preached, you shall see them presently so attentive as though they would catch
the doctrine before it be uttered: seeming so to depend upon the mouth of the
minister, that they thirst for the doctrine before it come, and also departing
from thence, you shall hear them with one consent and general applause admire
ye knowledge, zeal, boldness and gifts of the man: commending it highly to be
as good a sermon as ever they heard: but ask them what it was, they cannot tell,
it is but as the flash of a lightning unto them, quickly vanished from their
understanding: yea look into their lives how they profit by that doctrine for
their amendment: they be even as they were before* never benefited by it,
whereby they do notably Willing hearing without fruit, argues a guilty
conscience.
condemn themselves: For, in hearkening to it so diligently, they consent that
it should be heard: in commending it so highly, they confess it should be
obeyed, and yet in that they neither are instructed nor reformed by it, they
show themselves to walk contrary to that which their consciences do
approve: and so they need no other Judge but their own hearts, nor witness
against them, but their own consciences, therefore, (if we desire not to be
of this number) let us grow in knowledge and reformation by the word, and then
do we hear and profess the Gospel aright, let us not say, he said well,
and never care to remember his sayings: let us not say, we should do thus, or
(as the manner is) he touched such and such persons notably to day: but let us
apply it unto our selves, and reap fruit from it for our own amendment,
which all must do that will be right hearers of Gods word.

But Marie kept all those things and pondered them in her heart] This is the
third part, wherein the birth of Christ revealed by the Angel is effectual,
she was the mother of the child, and did know that he was wonderfully
conceived, and therefore was persuaded, that God had a marvelous work to do
by him: And seeing first the Angel coming to her, and then the sheepeheards,
was further induced to muze of the matter, and therefore she did as is here
expressed: First, she kept them, secondly, she pondred them in her heart.

Kept all those things) The first: the original word is, that she kept them
all together as it were in one bundle, both the Angels speech and the
sheepeheards coming to her, and every other circumstance in the manner of her
sons incarnation and birth, wherein she shows her self obedient every way
unto the word of God, so often as she heard it: for the Angel Gabriel had told
her this matter before hand, and now she hearing the same from the
sheepeherds, lays it then also up in her heart. If she had been of the mind
that many be in these our days, The sayings of the wicked when they hear one
doctrine twice.
and yet take them selves to be good Christians, she would have said unto
the sheepeheards: Why do I hear this from you? I have been told it before by
an Angel from heaven. Why then should I give ear unto it again especially
being spoken by you, that be but inferior persons, of no reputation? So say
many among us, if they hear one doctrine twice, they think it not worthy
the hearing again, because they think they learned enough at the first: but
if it be the second time by a meaner Minister than at the first, they abhor
it so much the more, saying: I heard this handled by a learneder man than he
is, by Master Doctor, by Master Archdeacon, etc. I am sure he can say no
more in it (nor so much) as he did, therefore I will be gone. But Marie was
not of this mind: for she considered, that the sheepeheards could not come to
the knowledge of the thing, without the will of God: and that the Lord who
guides all things, had directed them to come thither, and therefore it was
meet forher to harken diligently, and mark every word very attentively.
Which use also we must make of the like: for if a Sparrowe fall not Matthew. 12.
29.
upon the ground without our fathers What the godly think when they hear
that which they did hear before.
will: then can not we, neither shall we hear any part of his heavenly
word* without his appointment. Therefore I must make this use (rather) of it,
reasoning with my self thus: I think that I know this point that is now in
handling well enough: but yet I am deceived, for God would not then have it
spoken to me again, therefore I am now to hear it as diligently and mark it
as carefully, as though I had never known ^rst what it meant: and on the other
side, the party, who has heretofore refused to obey such or such a doctrine,
and hears it sounding in his ears again, may reason thus with himself, why
does God offer it unto me, knowing, that heretofore I have despised it? Surely
because he has a love unto me, and would have me repent, and What the wicked
should think when they hear that doctrine which they have despised before.
not be condemned: Behold the great love and mercy of God unto me vile, and
wretched sinner: therefore now will I go unto him, and say, Father I have
sinned against heaven and in thy sight, and am not worthy to be called thy
servant: I have done wickedly, in contemning so often thy holy word, in
casting it behind me despitefully: and now Lord, for thy mercies sake be
favorable unto me, and receive me unto thy mercy. Happy is that man that can
make this use of Gods word: but if they do not, they may take it thus (for it
is undoubtedly so) that the oftener they be invited to amend, and convert not,
the more horrible shall their condemnation be.

And pondered them in her heart) The second thing that Marie did, they being
kept in the chest of her heart, it is said moreover, that she pondered them,
that is, called them often to her remembrance, and was always muzing of them.
Wherein we may behold an example of most Christian modesty, that having so
great matters revealed unto her, she makes no brag of it, as We may not
boast of know ledge or any other virtue.
though she were to be honored of all men and admired for it, but is rather
careful to make use of it unto her self. By whose example is corrected that
proud spirit of worldlings, who, albeit they neither know one point of
religion aright, nor yet can tell how to begin the practice of a godly life:
yet notwithstanding They brag most that know least.
they will oppose them selves, both in knowledge against the learnedest, and in
godliness against the most holy, whose help (in deed) Satan uses to out
face the true servants of the Lord with their bragges: and to the uttermost of
their power, to bring them into hatred and contempt. But Marie was not of that
mind, she was inspired with that spirit which teaches true humility, which
instructs the godly to be lowly in their own conceit, and The godlier that
a man is, the humbler he will be.
humble in their own imaginations, because it does bring them to the sight of
their manifold sins, and the desert of the same: whereby they are brought low
and taught to depend upon the mere mercy of God, to boast in nothing, but
their own infirmities: to desire to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and 2.
Cor. 11. 30.
him crucified.

Again we are to observe, that she therefore pondered them in her heart,
because she did not yet behold what would be the event of these things: and
yet she would not neglect them. By whose example we may learn a profi-table
lesson, to teach us how to use the doctrine that we learn from the Lords
messengers. It may be, that at that The right use of knowledge.
present time when we hear it, we cannot tell how to have the present use of
it, as they that be certainly persuaded of Gods favor to them, have not
present or so great need of the comforts against distrustfulnesse, they that
be sufficiently humbled, need not greatly the severe reprehensions of the Law:
yet notwithstanding, when they hear the doctrine, they are not straightway to
think they need not harken unto it, but rather they ponder it in their heart,
and lay it up there as in a store house. We may learn this lesson by the
example of a good householder, We must bestoore us in knowledge.
who finding any implement in his house, which he presently knows not how to
bestow, will say, I will keep it seven years, and once in that time I shall
have use of it: even so it fares with Christians, they are to provide for
war in the time of peace: to arm them selves as well where Satan strikes
not, as where he does strike, and to be furnished with the complete armor of
God, to be instructed with doctrine every way, that wheresoever, or
whenever he shall assail us, his blows may be warded, and kept back with
the sword of the spirit which is the word of God, for we are not worthy to be
so much of Gods counsel, as to know with what trial he will search us next, and
therefore we are to be every way provided, persecution, sickness, poverty,
and all other Crosses that we are subject unto, come very suddenly, when it will
be too late, than to seek armor of proof for our comfort, if we lack it
then, we had as good lack it still, and therefore let us Math 25. 10.
provide for it aforehand, that we never be found as the foolish Uirgins
without oil in our lamps.

And the sheepherds returned glorifying and praising God, for all that they had
heard and seen, as it was spoken unto them) This is the third and last effect
that is set down unto us to be wrought in the sheepeheards, by the knowledge
of the birth of Christ: which contains in it three things: first, their
returning: second, their glorifying, and praising of God: third, the cause
wherefore, for all that they had heard and seen as it was showed unto them.

The sheepeheards returned) The first thing (as you see) is, that when they had
seen, and were fully instructed in the birth of Jesus Christ they returned
back again from Bethlem unto the place of their former abode, to exercise the
duties of their ordinary vocation: wherein we may behold in what place they
set the works of their calling, even in the last place of al: for we see, that
they first went in haste to the place where Christ was to be seen, then
published it abroad tothe world, and lastly, when they had done, they
returned: we are to learn then (if we mean to profit by their The world ought
to give place to religion.
example) to prefer the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and the spreading abroad
of his will, whereby he may be glorified before our own matters of this Prou.
16. 4.
world. For the first end of our creation is Gods glory, and the second, our
own salvation, whereunto in their several places the businesses of this world
must attend and give place, that is, that no things that be in, or upon this
earth, should be any hinderaunces unto us for the setting forth of Gods
glory, and the seeking of our own salvation* a lesson that is sooner taught
than it is learned, and sooner spoken than practiced: for how few are there
to be found in this* world that do keep their worldly desires so far
under, that they be wholly eaten up with the glory of the Lord? And how
many are there every where that do place this world in equal degree with
religion, yea and suffer it (being of it self an underling, the things whereof
God has put under man's feet) to be so saucie as to be check-mate with
religion, yea and to check (often times) and to control the very motions of
the spirit of God? But of all other, how easy a thing is it to find every
where those persons that do entertain this present world as a Queen, giving
unto him the whole rule and government of their hearts and minds, and turning
religion clean out at the doors, do bid her farewell, and set her to begging.
Whereupon, she having so long offered herself unto this land, and finding so
base intertainement, she is at this present almost banished out of it, so that
a man may seek whole houses, and not find her, towns and countries, and yet
her face is found scarce to appear. But howesoeuer the world despises her
(being that wisdom of God spoken of by Solomon, that cries in the streets)
we are to prefer her before gold and silver, before delights and pleasures,
we are to Prou. 1. 20.
make it the final end of all our devises, and counsels, to procure him unto
us, who only teaches the service of God, and opens the way to eternal
life. And not to do, as is the manner of many, who, when they be exhorted to
make religion their chiefest care, and not to wed them selves thus to the
world, will answer (their own consciences telling them that it should be so)
indeed I confess The excuses of worldlings why they be not religious.
I am too blame to be so negligent, but to say the truth, I could not as yet do
as I would, for I have had so many matters in hand as I could possibly turn my
self unto, which are indifferent well ouergone now: so that if I had once done
with one or two businesses more, or, if I had such and such a commodity that I
am about, then you shall see me be at an other stay. Thus do these persons
think that they do answer wislly, and yet even in such speeches they declare,
that when they have served the world, then will they serve God: (for they shall
never want such excuses so long as they live) when they have nothing else to
do, they will be religious: in effect, when sin for saketh them, then will
they forsake it: But God looks for the first fruits for the prime of all our
labors, he will be served before and above al other things: and therefore let
us not think to deal with him so: let us not deceive (or flatter our selves)
thus: but let us follow the example of David, dedicate al Psalm. 10 3. 1
that is within us, to the praise of his holy name, and that from our youth
upward, so shall we be sure of the blessing of God in this life, and in the
world to come.

Let us yet observe further the doings of these sheepeherds, who (though they
were very zealous and forward) yet you see, that in his due place they had
also a dutiful care of their calling, not being so far carried away from
their sheep, that they utterly forgotte them: but it is reported of them
here, (and allowed by the spirit of God) that they returned, to wit, to their
charge again: by whose example we do learn this lesson, that religion (even
in the perfection thereof) does not abolish the ordinary calling of this
world, nor exempt any man from taking some lawful way or other for the
maintenance of him self and his family. For God having placed man in this
world, and adourned it with the wonderful riches of his creatures, and made
them all for the use of man, permits unto him (receiving them as from him
with thankfulness, and using them for his necessity, and comfort) the free
use and benefit of this world, and all the things contained in the same: yea
rather religion is so far from hindering or exempting a man from his calling,
that it is the only direction for man, both to choose unto himself such a
calling as is lawful: and also (having admitted himself thereunto) to employ
him self in the same aright, and to use it lawfully: the scripture is
plentiful for* the proof of this point. Let us consider of certain places
for the warrant of this doctrine. But we beseech you (brethren) that ye
increase 1 These. 4. 10. 11
more and more, and that ye study to be quiet, and to meddle with your own
business, and to work with your own hands as we commanded you, and in 2.
These. 3. 10. 11 12, etc.
an other place: This we warned you of, that if there were any that would not
work, that he should not eat, for we hear that there are some which walk
among you inordinately, and work not at al, but are busy bodies: therefore
them that are such, we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that they
work with quietness, and eat Luke 3. 10, etc.
their own bread. John the Baptist teaching the people the right fruits of
1. Cor. 7. 31.
repentance, councelled no man to leave his calling, but rather taught him the
right use of the same. Saint Paul likewise tells us, that we may use this
world, yet it must be as though we used it not, that is, not to fix our mind
upon it, but esteem of it as a necessary thing in this present pilgrimage, so*
that the doctrine Four sorts of people that abuse this world. The first sort
of people.
being most evident, it teaches us to condemn the doings of four several
sorts of people: first of them that under the pretense and show of religion,
will live an idle life, being careless both for them selves and their
families, alleging this: God will provide, and in the mean while they despise
the means whereby he provides, living a careless and idle life, yea are
burthenous (often) to their brethren, and think, that because they profess
religion, others ought to support the^, but they are to know, y^ (if they be
not within the number of lame and impotent persons, who can not provide for
themselves) The Apostle enioineth to them, to eat their own bread with
quietness. And if they do provide for themselves, and are able (through their
small charge) to do it in small time, and so loiter over the rest, they are yet
further Ephesians. 4. 28.
o learn, that they must also labor that they may give to him that needs, to
have such a care over their poor brethren, that all the help that they can
possibly affoorde, is to be employed to the benefit of the saints that are on
the earth, and this is not only to be looked to generally in the^ that Psalm.
16. 1.
have ye government of themselves in these things, but also to be diligently
considered of by servants that profess religion: for it is a common complaint
(the truth whereof I refer unto every man's conscience) that if once they
become religions, they wax more careless in their Masters business, which
if they do, it is a grievous sin in them, for religion teaches them no such
matter, neither gives them any such leave, but rather clean contrary, for
Saint Paul enioineth unto servants, that they Coll. 3. 22.
should be obedient unto them that are their Masters according to the flesh in
all things, not with eye service as men pleasers, but in singleness of heart
fearing God: and brings a reason (in an other place) to persuade them
thereunto: to wit, that whatsoever good thing Ephesians. 68.
any man does, that same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or
free, and says further in an other place, that else they make the name of God
and his 1. Tim. 6. 1.
doctrine evil spoken of, and therefore, if any shall by color of religion,
wax careless in his Masters affairs, let both himself and others know,
that he is not religious indeed, but abuses the name of religion, to cover
his own sins. For this is most true, that religion is the only thing that
makes servants have a conscience to look to their Masters gains, and
therefore they Genesis 18. 19.
that would have profitable servants let them not only be careful to retain
such as they know to fear God, but also Psalm. 101. 6.
that they instruct them daily in the fear of the Lord, teaching them to do
every thing by knowledge out of the word and conscience of obedience unto God.
The second sort of people that by this doctrine The second sort of people.
are justly reproved, be the Anabaptiste, and their Cousingermanes the family
of Love, (of Lust I may term them better) who (mistaking that place of
Scripture in the Acts of the Apostles where Acts 2. 44.
it is said, that they that were converted unto Christ, had all things common)
do hold, that no man has any property in any thing that he possesses, but
that every brother has as lawful interest in it, and may use it when he
will, as the party him self, and though the words of the text at the first
blush seem to import so much: yet being duly considered they contain no such
matter, for the verse following does show the meaning of the former where it
is said, that they sold their possessions, and parted to every one as they
had need, that is, they had such a zeal and love unto the brethren, that they
did relieve and help them. But if it should be so taken, it were manifest
contrary to other places of the Scriptures (which were great blasphemy to
think that any part of Gods word should be contrary to an other) for truth
is one, and always like it self*, and nothing comes from God, but it is all
truth, and nothing but truth. Now in the Scriptures we read, that God has
set down laws to govern men buying and selling, that every one should deal
justly therein, and that none should defraud an other by false waights, or
measure, or counterfaite wares, which were a needelesse doctrine, if men had no
property in things, for then why should they sell? Or what needed the other to
buy? Besides that, the Scripture is plentiful in this, to exhort rich men unto
liberality and pity in releeuing their needy brethren, and never enioineth
unto any, to account nothing his own. Again we read of many godly men
that were rich, and had great possession, as Abraham, Job, Solomon, Zacheus,
Joseph of Aremathia, yea, and after the time of those converted by pity as
Cornelius, Simon the Tanner, and Romans 6. 23.
Gaius, who is said to be the host of the whole Church. Lastly, (which is the
most invincible place of all) God has commanded that we should not steal,
which commandment is never broken, if no man possesses of his own, or if
one man's goods were common to an other man, therefore let us embrace this as
an undoubted truth, that God has given unto every man a property in that
which he lawfully possesses: only let him know this, that he is to have care
that he be liberal to his power, unto those that need, or else he is no
feeling member of Jesus Christ. The third sort of people.


The third sort is that rout of Friars and Monks, who pretending the more
opportunity to serve God, abandoned themselves from all callings both of the
Church and common wealth to the end that they might live an idle and loytering
life, who through their hypocrisy robbed the people to enrich themselves, and
their celles, and being careless of every good exercise, whereas by the
Apostles rule (before alleged) they should not have eaten yet notwithstanding
they were (for the most) so stallfed, and were so fat Abbey lubbers, (that
though they had been willing) they were unfit, and not able to perform any
good thing: these be they that would devour (not only widows houses, but
even whole Lordships, yea, and the fat of whole countries, under the pretense
of devotion, and long superstitious prayers, and yet notwithstanding the
veriest Caterpillars that ever were, whereby we may behold (discerning the tree
by the fruit) what greedy vermin Popery does hatch and bring forth, to the
great impouerishing of whole common welths, and kingdoms. We are not (Gods
name be praised for it) much troubled with such people in these our days, yet
we are maruelously pestred with a kind of men that be much like them in
qualities, and those be they that when they could not thrive in their trades,
or could not live idly in them (being good for nothing, though they can neither
teach others, nor yet have learned what religion is themselves) have (and do
daily) thrust them selves into the Ministry, being of qualities much like
unto Ieroboams Priests, where upon aryseth this enormity, of all other, most to
be lamented, that poor people (notwithstanding this long liberty of the
Gospel) remain still as ignorant as they were in the time of Popery, and are
now more profane in life, and godless in conversation than ever they were,
because they see these people that should lead them, who have only changed
their coats, live so wickedly, that they neither care for religion nor yet
civil honesty, who in truth (I speak that I know by experience) are the
greatest foes that the true Ministers of Gods word have, perverting privately
that which they teach publicly: the Lord put it in the hearts of
governors to see it redressed.

The fourth, and the last sort of people, The fourth sort of people.
is, the greedy covetous worldlings, who (respecting only their own gain)
have no regard what course they take, be it lawful or unlawful, so that they
may have great advantage by it, which people generally be such, as seek either
to feed the veins and itching desires of fantastical heads with gay gorgeous
and new devises, whose gain (through the folly and fickle headed alteration
of us Englishmen) is great: but if they had truly learned this doctrine, that
religion enioineth unto every man a laweful calling, and such a one, whereby
he may be a profitable member among men, Acts 19. 19.
they would with those godly Ephesians, not only leave those curious Arts,
but even burn the books whereby such folly is learned. Contrariwise, where
religion is taught, and the fruit not showed, such persons prove the sorest
enemies, and most professed foes unto religion. For, what a stir did
Demetrius Acts 19. 24.
make in Ephesus at the preaching of Paul? and al to defend his own trade of
ungodly gain, by making still temples or shrines for Diana, much like unto
the boxes wherein the Papists are wont to put their little God almighty (as
they term him) so that it behooneth every one that is careful to please God,
and benefit by religion, to labor to be certified out of the word of God, of
the lawefulnesse of his calling, to the end, that he may embrace the Gospel
with a good conscience. But particularly those be especially by this doctrine
severely to be reprehended, that either respecting the greatest gain, or
idlest life, do convert all that they have into money, and put it out unto
Usurie, of all other sins the very Canker of the common wealth at this day,
and a thing so generally used, even of them that would be counted religious, as
if it were as lawful, as to reap the fruits of the earth: against which
offense I mean not to make any See Doctor Wilson upon Usury, Bishop Jewel
upon the 1 Thessalonians. etc.
great inuectiue at this present, because the common place is long, and handled
most learnedly of others, only thus much will I say of it, that it is flatly
forbidden by all law, both Statute law, Civil law, and Canon law, and as for the
law of God (whose only authority I fight withal against it) it is as plain to
be proved, that it is a horrible sin to take any gain, in any commodity
for the love of money, as that Jesus Christ our savior died upon the Cross
for the guilt of our sins, and therefore let no man flatter himself with this
or that qualification, as why may I not? etc. For no excuse may serve against
Gods own word, no exceptions may be made Ezech. 18. 13. Psalm. 15 5.
against it, for God says flatly, Thou may not give out thy money upon
usury, nor take any interest: for if thou do, there is no place for thee in
the Tabernacle of God, neither shall thou rest upon his holy hill, and
therefore never excuse the matter for lucres sake. Damn not thine own soul
for money: sell not thy birthright for a mess of pottage: for well may thou
by pretenses shift out the matter from the punishment of man, but al is no
better than fig-leaues to cover thy nakedness when God shall call thee to
account.

Again, though these Sheepeheards showed themselves marvelous forward, yet you
see, that after they had found that they did desire, they had their flocks to
return to again, wherein we may behold the great love of God unto them, that
in those dangerous times their flocks were preserved unto them, whereby we may
learn this general lesson, that religion rightly used is no enemy to Religion
no enemy to lawful gain.
lawful gain: neither of it self does it bring unto man any hindraunce: a
doctrine that will hardly sincke into the heads of a number, for they persuade
themselves, that nothing is more enemy to worldly gain than religion, whom I
do briefly answer thus, that if they mean every kind of gain which way
soever it be come by, without regard whether it be had by right or wrong, they
say truly, that religion is the only foe (next under God) that it has: and as
for such, it is but lost labor to tell them of any religion, for the fear of
God is not before their eyes: but if they mean that gain which may lawfully
be gotten with the warrant of Gods word, no point of religion can be against
it, for the Lord (as you have heard) enioineth such a course to gain unto
every one of his children: whereby it is proved lawful, and for the fruit of
their labor the Lord has promised that he shall reap it. First seek the
kingdom of God and his Matthew. 6. 33.
righteousness, and al these things shall be ministered unto you. Where you see,
that God has promised his blessing even in this life to them that be truly
religious. But you will say to me, how is that true? For we see in experience the
godly man comes unto many extremities. I answer, that religion was never
the cause of any of them: for you must understand, that God never punishes,
but either to correct, to try, or else to give example: one whereof is the
cause of every affliction, and therefore let no man say, if I had not been a
Gospeller, this had not befallen unto me, or religion is the cause of this
misery. For if he will truly enter into the consideration of the thing by the
word of God, he shall find, that God never afflicts any man because he is
religious, contrariwise, we read and see daily by our own experience, that
God severely plagueth the lack or contempt of religion even in worldly
matters, for you shall see some that are so vigilant and careful about their
earthly commodities, that they can not afford themselves any time to refresh
their weary bodies with sleep and food, nor the Lord any part of his Sabaoths
to be duly honored in, that a man would think they can not choose but prove
marvelous rich, and yet notwithstanding they are never the nearer: and why?
surely, because they not having that care of gods service that they should, nor
that regard to depend upon his blessing that God requires, but think to bring
great matters to pass by their own industry, and (as it were) in despite of
the Lord: he of his just judgment lays such a curse upon their labors,
that they profit nothing at all: whereby such persons may have just occasion
to learn, that man lives not Matthew. 4. 4.
by bread only: For the Lord can break the staff of bread, that is, the
strength Leuit. 26. 26.
thereof, that it shall not nourish: and can frustrate the hope of the
labourer, that he shall not reap the fruit of his own works. And therefore we
are first to seek his glory, and then in all our travails to acknowledge them
to be unfit to yield us any comfort without his gracious blessing be upon the
same.

Glorifying and praising God] The second point of this last branch, is, that
they did in and after their return glorify and praise the Lord. Wherein they
showed them selves not to be forgetful or unthankful of Gods mercy toward
them, by whose example we may learn what duty we owe unto the Lord our God
in respect of his manifold blessings, that we must glorify his holy name
continually for them: which lesson we had very much need to observe and
follow: for it is the course of the world now adays to be thankful unto
God, as they are to men, with a word and away, never remembering him any more:
But we are to know, that God will not be so served: he requires continual and
hearty thanks at our hands: which, if we would rightly consider, we should
not generally be so secure as we be. For time (which should teach us experience
of the love of God toward us* and so make us more zealous) does clean wear
out of our minds the remembrance of former benefits received, so that you
shall see them that by special favor that they have found at Gods hands, are
(for a season) exceeding hot and forward in religion: But it is with them
according to the common Proverb, soon hot, soon cold, for they become
afterward so faint and cold in their course begun, that it may be truly said
of them, as it was of the Church Ephesus, that have fallen from their first
love. I would to God, that I had not just cause to make this complaint in this
place, for surely (to speak generally) I have seen more zeal, more love and
care unto religion than now I can behold: the world does so carry men away,
and they be so crammed with the word, that now they be ready to surfeit of it:
they be cloied with it, and seem to loath it, as the Israelites did that
heavenly Manna: but assure Revel. 3. 4.
your selves, that if the plenty thereof do make you esteem it less
precious, God will send you that darth and famine that he threatens by the
Prophet, that ye shall seek it from sea to sea, and not find it.

Moreover, in that these are said to have this wroght in them by the
understanding of the thing, that they glorified Amos 8. 11.
and praised God, we learn, that where religion is truly embraced* where the
word of God takes root and true hold, it will bring forth the fruit
convenient and agreeable to the same: for of it self it is a most lively
seed, and is mighty in operation: so when it meets with a heart that is
pliant thereunto, it is very forcible, and therefore let no man flatter and
deceive himself by persuading his own heart, that he is truly religious, when in
the mean while he is cold and careless in the fruits of it: for Gods spirit
accompanies religion, which is a spirit of heat and zeal making man's heart
(as it were) to melt at those things y^ are for the glory of God, and increase
of true religion in the hearts of Gods people, which ought to be far more
glittering in us, than it was in the sheepeheards, for we have greater cause:
the whole passion, death, and glorificatio^ of Christ is manifested unto us, so
that we lack nothing to perfect our knowledge (if we will receive it) and
therefore there must be no lingering in us, to show forth al y^ praises of god
in most perfection, which we do little regard.

For all that they had heard and seen, as it was spoken unto them) The third
and last point of all, which is the cause that moved them to rejoice and
praise the Lord even the things that they had heard and seen, by whom we must
learn the last (but not the least duty) that we owe unto God, even
continually to recount, ponder, and consider the manifold blessings that the
Lord does multiply upon us daily by the just consideration whereof we cannot
choose, but burst out into admiration of his wonderful love and mercy
toward us miserable and wretched sinners, and so to devise with our selves
how we may show our selves effectually thankful: so did the Prophet David.
What shall I Psalm, 12. 12.
render unto the Lord (says he) for all his benefits toward me? I will receive
the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord, I will pay my vows
unto the Lord, even now, in the presence of all his Saints. Whose good and
godly example if we will reap benefit by, we must do as he did, worship him
truly according to his word, and perform that duty in obedience to his
commandments, that he requires at our hands As for the manner of his praise
we may also learn it by these sheepeheards, that they did it as it was told
them, that is, according as God had commanded: so must we do, praise his holy
name, (as he requires at our hands) and do it as himself has commanded in
his word, and so shall it be acceptable in his sight: Let us therefore (to
conclude) seeing we be hedged in on every side with y^ great blessings of God,
seeing that by him we live and move, and have our being, seeing he shows
himself most kind and liberal, both in things that concern the soul and
the body: let us (I say) study and endeavor by all possible means, that so
long as we abide in this transitory world, we may show forth the glory of
his name according to his will: then shall we be sure of his favor unto us in
this life, and of eternal ioies in the world to come, by the merits and
bloodsheding of Jesus Christ our savior: to whom with the father and the
holy ghost, be all glory and honor, now and for ever.

Amen.
Let us pray,
O Eternal God in Jesus Christ our most loving and merciful Father, we
render unto thy Majesty most humble and hearty thanks for all thy blessings
and manifold benefits bestovved upon us, namely, for those inestimable graces
of our election, creation, vocation, justification, sanctification, and
redemption: and for this great treasure of thy holy word, wherein we
acknovvledge thy great love toward us vile vvretches and miserable sinners.
And for as much (O Lord) as thou have taught us at this present, how forcible
and effectual thy word was unto the Sheepeherdes, vvorking in them such an
ardent and burning love to see thy son Jesus Christ, when he was manifested
in the flesh, such forvvardnesse and haste to satisfy that godly desire
which thy holy spirit had wrought in them, and finding that which they
soght for, were careful to publish it abroad, that others might be partakers
of that comfort, and after returned unto their vocation again, glorifying thy
holy name, with all obedience unto thy blessed word. And moreover, because
we have learned from thee, that the multitude that heard of it, yet shevved not
any zeal or care to see the truth of it themselves, but suffered the
cogitation thereof to vanish out of their minds, without any profit unto
themselves: but contrariwise, thy servant Marie kept every thing in
remembrance, being careful by continual pondering thereof in her heart, to
make use of it for her comfort and further instruction. We confess (good
father) that the example of these parties does teach us both the duty that
we owe unto thee, the obedience that thy word requires at our hands, and
the zeal which we should express in our lives, to set forth thy glory,
and also how to shun that careless course which the greatest number does
follow: but (O Lord) we acknovvlege against our selves, that we are not
able to think a good thought, much less to yield that obedience to thy
word that thou requirest, nor to make any fruit of it unto the comfort of
our souls, unless thou of thy mercy work it in us: we therefore most
humbly beseech thee merciful father, to grant us thy grace, that every one
of us may be so truly persuaded of the truth of this doctrine, now
delivered unto us, that thy holy spirit may imprint it in our hearts, and we
may feel the comfort of it in our souls and consciences, and labor
diligently to bring forth the fruit of it in our lives and conuersations: most
gracious Father, we pray thee subdue our affections and rule our desire by the
government of thy grace and holy spirit that the enticements of sin do not
pull us away from that service that we owe unto thee, that we never faint
or wax vvearie in the course of godliness, that our zeal be never quenched
by any allurements of Satan, but that we may daily grovve and increase in
all the Virtues of Christianity to the glory of thy blessed name and
consolations of our own conscienences, through Jesus Christ our Lord: to
whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all praise* now and ever,

Amen.
FINIS.

