The Poor Man's Pater noster, with a preparatiue to prayer: Whereto are annexed
diverse godly Psalms and Meditations: Collected out of the sacred Scriptures,
by Thomas Timme Minister.

Newly Imprinted the second time by Peter Short, dwelling on Bredstreet hill,
at the sign of the Star, 1598.

The life of a Christian man.
1 Remember thy maker. 2 Be thankful always to God for his benefits. 3 Love
the Lord thy God with all thy soul, and all thy strength. 4 Believe that he is
thy heavenly father, for his son Jesus Christ's sake. 5 Serve him with fear,
worship him, and call upon his holy name. 6 As thou love God; so love thy
brother also. 7 Let the love of God in thee, restrain the concupiscence of the
flesh, and provoke thee to good works. Let the love of thy brother, hold thee
back from doing injury, and prick thee forward to do good. And remember
always that thou art borne to die.
A Preparatiue to prayer.
Prayer is a talking (not of the tongue, but of a faithful mind) with God; by
when we ask of him some good thing, either for our selves, or for some
others: or else do give him thanks for his benefits.

2 When thou come to pray, first prepare thy mind, that it may be free
from all worldly cares, and that the affections of thy mind may be quiet:
for the place of the Lord is not in commotions, but in quiet and rest.

Reverence
3 Remember the majesty of him before whom thou stand: who as he is the
maker of heaven and earth, so also is he the mighty sovereign over the whole
world.

4 Remember that his eye sees all things, yea even the actions, and the secret
thoughts of thy heart.

Devotion.
5 If thou pray with thy mouth and not with thy mind, thy prayer shall be but
a tempting of the Lord, and a sacrifice of fools.

Humility.
6 Pray in humility of mind, shaking off all confidence of thine own
worthynes, and say thus: O Lord righteousness belongs unto thee, and to us
open shame. We do not present our supplications before thee, for our own
righteousness, but for thy great tender mercies. I have begun to speak unto my
Lord, and I am but dust and ashes. Father I have sinned against heaven, and
before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son. O God be merciful
unto me a sinner.

7 Pray not hypocriticallie, to seem devout in the eyes of men: but secretly,
and thy father which sees in secret will reward thee openly.

Contrition.
8 Pray with a contrite heart and sorrowful mind, when thou crauest of God
remission of sins.

Fasting.
9 When thou praiest, fast and abstain from carnal delights; for thereby
thou shall be made more apt and fervent in prayer.

Faith.
10 Pray in faith, and with a sure trust and confidence in God, without the
which thou shall not obtain.

For every one that comes unto God, must believe that God is, and that he
is a rewarder of them that seek him.

11 Let him that asks ask in faith and waver not, for he that wauereth is
like a wave of the Sea, tossed with the wind: and let not that man think that
he shall receive any thing from the Lord.

12 Faith is the gift of God, Therefore pray daily with the disciples of
Christ, which said, Lord increase our faith, and Lord help my unbelief.

13 The true knowledge of God learned out of his word, will greatly confirm
thy faith. As when thou shalt know that he is loving, kind, merciful,
gracious, long suffering, just etc. Also that he is most ready to hear us
and to grant our petitions.

14 God is omnipotent, therefore he is able to give whatsoever thou ask.
God is merciful: and therefore he will give that which is profitable for thee.

15 God gives liberally to those that ask of him. For Solomon craved but
wisdom, and had both it, and riches, and honor, in wonderful measure. And
Iehosaphat which desired only water in his extreme thirst for him and his
host, had both the same granted, and victory also over the Moabites.

16 God sees and knows thy need before thou ask: yet to show thy
obedience by this service which he has commanded, and also to exercise thy
faith, thou must receive those things whereof thou have need, by inuocating
and calling upon his name.

New obedience.
17 As thou do profess thy self to be the son of God by praying unto him,
and by calling him thy Father: so show thy self an obedient son in deed, by
walking in his commandments.

18 Let thy whole conversation be agreeing with thy prayers: for thy continual
walking in sin will make thy prayers abominable.

19 Pray for nothing contrary to the will of God revealed in his holy word.
For if thou pray to this end, to have the desires of thy flesh fulfilled,
thou shalt not receive.

20 That thy principal mark may be the glorifieng of God, Seek first the
kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and all other things shall be
given unto thee.

Perseverance in prayer.
21 Persevere in prayer and be not discouraged, though at the first thy
petition be not granted. For the Lord does sometimes defer and delaie us,
not that he is unmindful of his promises, but to try our faith: either else
the more to stir up our godly affections, or to make his gifts more sweet and
precious unto us, as appears by the woman of Canaan, and by Paul himself.

22 When our Savior Christ forbids much babbling, he means not long
prayers, but long babbling without faith and the spirit. For length of words
joined with length of earnest affection, does not displease God.

23 Christ himself prayed all the night upon the mountain, and before his
death he made long prayers: and he commands us to pray continually.

The force of true prayer.
24 Great is the force of faithful prayer; for thereby Abraham obtained life
for Ismael: Lot that Zoar might not be burnt in the destruction of Sodom:
Moses victory against the Amalachites: Eliah both drouth and rain: Ezechias
the prolonging of his life fifteen years; and such like

25 Let prayer be thy refuge in all trouble and distress; Call upon me in
the time of trouble (says the Lord) so will I deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me.

26 Hannah being contumeliously handled by Penninnah, betaketh her self to
prayer: Sara the daughter of Raguel being reproched, enters into her
Chamber, and there makes her prayer. David being persecuted, says thus; For
my friendship they were mine adversaries, but I gave my self to prayer.

27 Prayer, thus prepared and practiced, will be a guard for children, an
ornament for young men, a solace and consolation for old men, and a surpassing
beauty for women. It will drive away devils, It will procure Angels of
defense from heaven: and it will be a sacrifice of a good savor unto God,
pearcing the heavens, and will not return again empty.

The prayer of a penitent sinner.
O Father of heaven: O son of God Redeemer of the world: O holy ghost the
sweet comforter, O the divine essence three persons and one God, have mercy
upon me, most vile caitife and miserable sinner. I have offended both against
heaven and earth, more than my tongue can express. Whither then may I go, or
whither should I fly? To heaven I may be ashamed to lift up mine eyes and in
earth I find no place of refuge or succor. To thee therefore O Lord, do I
come, to thee do I humble my self saying: O Lord my God my sins be great,
but yet have mercy upon me for thy great mercy. The great mystery that God
became man, was not wrought for little, or few offenses. Thou did not give
thy son (O heavenly Father) unto death for small sins only, but for all
the greatest sins of the world, so that the sinner return to thee with his
whole heart, as by grace first received from thee I do here at this present
Wherefore have mercy upon me O God, whose property is always to have mercy
have mercy upon me, O Lord, for thy great mercy. I crave nothing, O Lord,
for my own merits, but for thy names sake, that it may be hallowed thereby:
and for thy dear son Jesus Christ's sake. And therefore I continue forth my cry
unto thee from the bottom of my heart saying; Our father which art in heaven
hallowed be thy name, etc.

Our Father.
TO none does this name (Father) more truly belong, then unto thee O God our
father. For both they which have begotten us, fostered us, and do bring us up,
and also our spiritual pastors which do instruct us, are called fathers. But
thou O Lord, art the father of all creatures which are upon the earth, whom
thou have made of somewhat (as thou made man) but of nothing, which none else
could do. These thou dooest feed and preserve, which else should return to
their nothing again. These thou dooest govern, teach, and stir up to do
their several and proper offices. Thou have made all things, therefore thou
art the father of all: but more specially man, whom thou have formed after
thine own similitude and image. Thou dooest rule and govern all things as
thy servants, but man, as thy son. To other living creatures thou have given
out of thy plentiful storehouse good gifts, but upon man thou have powered
them forth with full hand, and have adorned him with a living soul, of all
gifts one of greatest excellency.

Thou do drive forward al other creatuers, as it were with a certain secret
spur, but thou gently teach and instructest us. Other creatures thou
dooest violently draw, but us thou do fatherly teach and direct. In all
these fatherly properties, we wonder at thy power, and adore and worship thy
wisdom. But amongst al thy fatherly mercies, there is one which with great
delectation we consider as more profitable for us, namely our adoption, by
which thou have made us thy sons thorough Jesus Christ, the son of the
omnipotent essence and divine nature. Wonderful is this goodness of Christ, and
most sweet is his love toward us, who will not have us to be terrified with
servile fear, and therefore has not taught us to call thee his father, Our
lord which is a name of power; but Our father, which is a name of love. He
concealeth thy greatness, and sets forth thy goodness, the sooner to allure
us. What man considering rightly his vile nature and corrupt will, dare call
thee father except thou command him? What ungracious and inferior servant
will presume to call his king, father, except he be beside himself. But how
much greater difference is there between thee and us, then between a mortal
king and a servant, which do not differ in condition of nature, but only in
state of fortune. We, compared with thee in nature, are most far different.
Thou art the essence and the incompresensible fulness of all things, which art
all in all, and we are utterly nothing.

And in condition of worthiness and excellency we being with thee compared,
are unhappy and most miserable bondslaues of sin and the devil, which is the
most vile and execrable state: but thou art the most blessed lord of al. We are
ignorance and darkness, but thou art wisdom and light. Thy excellency is
infinite, and our shame and reproach more than can be expressed: man's mind is not
able to comprehend the difference between thee and us. But thy only son
has given us boldness to call thee, Our father, that we by adoption might be
made partakers of that excellent dignity to be called sons through his
favor and grace, which he alone in right of his divine nature possesses.
Now, how more neerelie and truly art thou the father of all those that are
baptized in thy name and that are purged and cleansed by the blood of thy son
Christ, to whom being reconciled with thee, and received into thy favor)
thou have given the earnest of Everlasting bliss, the love of thee, and an
assured faith and confidence in thee, and thereby perfect peace and rest of
conscience. Oh, how often do we feel to our great comfort thy fatherly
goodness? Thou dooest give us light in darkness: thou hold us up, when we
stumble, and are ready to fall: thou turnest from us many wicked evils which
hang over our heads* and changest them into good: and in all goodness thou
do establish and preserve us.

What do our fathers help us, which are only fathers in name, by whom we
have nothing but that which hirelings and servants have that is to say; the
necessaries of this present life? But this is the true fatherhood, whereof we
may rightly rejoice, by which we have an everlasting inheritance. Oh
wonderful clemency of thy son Christ, which vouchsafed on us the dignity of
his proper inheritance. What will thou not give, O father, unto thy sons now,
which thou shall think profitable for them. We have attained the greatest
gift, that thou should be called, and be indeed our father: how then can
we miss and be destitute of thy fatherly affection and liberality toward
us?

And forasmuch as we all, which truly are called Christians, are knit
together in one knot of love, and are therefore members of one body, and so one
thing: therefore that which we ask for our selves, we crave of thee, O
Father, for our brethren also. And for this cause, we call thee jointly
together, Our father. Beseeching thee that as thou vouchestsafe to be called of
us Our father, so thou will make us thy obedient children, that not with mouth
alone, but with heart and mind we may truly fear thee, serve thee, love
thee, and call thee our father, to the honor and glory of thy holy name,
Amen.

Which art in heaven.
THou art alone, O Lord, and we are not. That being which we have, is here in
Earth, that is to say, in the midst of many tempests and floudes of all
manner of calamities, wherewith we are continually turmoiled. But thou both
art, and also art in heaven; that is to say, in a place deuoyde of labor and
trouble. We do not call upon the dead saints, or upon such as are not able to
help themselves when they stand in need. We run not unto those which either
for their care and office in the common wealth, or for their age are called
fathers. We make not our petition to Jupiter, to Neptune, to Mars, or to other
vain gods, which Satan the enemy of thy divine majesty has set up in the
world; whom once almost to name is great wickedness, being false gods opposed
against the greatness of thy goodness and wisdom. Some think their riches in
their chest, or bestowed upon possessions to be their father, which are
subject to a thousand chances and perils. Some think their power and might
which stands on the love and favor of their subjects, to be their father:
then the which thing nothing is more instable. Other some think the grace and
favor of the prince being a man, and by nature mortal, in power weak, and in
will mutable, to be their father. Thus every one makes that vanity wherein
he foolishlie trusts, to be his father. But we upon whom through thy rich
liberality, thou have vouchedsafe the dignity of sons, lifting up our
eyes unto heaven do call thee our Father, and do beg and crave of thee which
art in heaven: whose presence notwithstanding does fulfill the whole world.
But the seat of thy kingdom, for the excellency of the place, is said to be
fixed and set in heaven.

This heaven for the form and beauty thereof, and also for the appointed
order, which keeps continually a certain course, does show forth the
highness of thine essence, the greatness of thy power, and the immortality of
thy nature. O miserable men which having gotten so great a Father, do run as
yet to other Fathers, of whom they may be ashamed: and from whom we receive
nothing but infirmity, evil and misery. But from thee the true father
comes power, goodness, and felicity. I am able (says thy Apostle) to do
all things, through the help of Christ which strengthens me. And in another
place complaning of his weakness, thou spakest to him from heaven saying, My
grace is sufficient for thee: for my power is made perfect through weakness.
Thou art in heaven for us, that we may know there to find thee our Father, and
that there a refuge is prepared for us, of the which we can not be
disappoynted, neither by deceit, nor by the force of enimyes. All things are
there secure and safe, because thou art there. Thou art a most mighty king,
and omnipotent God. And yet to many here on earth, thou art neither a king
nor a God. For every one makes a king and a god to himself after his own
fantasy. O Father which art in heaven, ye maker of all things, and most
mighty Lord, hear us we beseech thee which are here troubled and turmoiled
in earth, which are travelers and pilgrims therein, not only for a time,
but for the most part, for a small moment of time.

Our Father is in heaven: therefore our inheritance and happiness is there;
why then do we seek it on earth? where there is nothing to be found but the
natural fruits of the earth, as sickenesses, cares, troubles, sorrows,
greefes, and vexations.

Make us (O Lord) to seek thee in the heavens of sempiternall rest, where
thou have prepared for us all blessedfulnes. Lift up our hearts, O heavenly
Father, we beseech thee, unto those heavens and inflame our minds with the
love and desire of those good things, which thou have there prepared for us,
the greatness and excellency where of surmounteth the understanding and
capacity of man. For the which blessed be thy name for evermore, Amen.

1 Hallowed be thy Name.
THat is the true and proper name belonging to every thing, by which name the
virtue, and inclination of the same thing is declared: but who shall give unto
thee, O Lord, a convenient and proper name? the greatness of whose essence,
neither the minds of men nor of angels is able to comprehend. Yet we
understand that to be thy name, by which we may best comprehend thee. As
when in thy word thou art called Schaddai, that is to say; All sufficient:
Jehovah, that is to say, Of thy self everlasting. Thou art also called
immortal, the king, the Lord, and the maker of all things. Thou art called
most righteous, most wise, and the most merciful Savior: And therefore we
say with the Prophet in the Psalm, O God, according unto thy name, so is thy
praise unto the worlds end.

Hallowed be this thy name in us O Father, that we may think nothing more
sacred, more holy, and blessed than the same, that we may worship thee, and
submit our selves only to thy name.

Send down we beseech thee into our hearts thy heavenly light of true
knoledge that we may call upon thee alone: that we may look to be helped by
thy help and aid alone: and that we put not our trust in other momentanie,
temporal, transitory, and deceyueable helps, but that we may have our whole
confidence only in thee, which alone can, and wilt, and art wont to help.

Glorify thy name, O Father, in us, by the Gospel of thy son Christ, and by
the same also finishe the work which thou have begun in us, that we may
persevere in the way of godliness to the end of our life: that so abiding in
thy name, we may also be sanctified by thee.

Sanctify thy name so in us, O heavenly Father, that we may be able to teach
others, not only in word, but also in example of godly life, that thy holy
name be not evil spoken of among the gentiles who seeing our corrupt life,
may take occasion thereby to condemn thy holy gospel, because we which are
the professors thereof are not hallowed in our conversation. But make our light
so shine before men, that they seeing our good works, may glorify thee our
heavenly Father. And to the end thy name may be magnified thoroughout the
whole world, make O Lord, all those whom thou have chosen, partakers with us
of this felicity. Spread forth the bright beams of thy light upon mankind,
illumine their minds, inflame their affections, that all as it is meet, and
right, may sanctify thy name, not in profession only, but also in the true
love of godliness. For then shall thy name be hallowed when thy son Jesus
Christ our only Savior which is thy glory, is thus known. To whom with
thee and the holy ghost, be all honor and glory world without end Amen.

2 Thy kingdom come.
Reign thou O lord in us, rule and govern us, we beseech thee: for our
subjection to thee is a most happy freedom. By the fall of our first
parents, we are made thrall to sin, death, and the devil, the power of
whose kingdom we do too often feel in us. But thou have ordained and
appointed thy beloved Son to tread down the serpents head, that thou alone
in us might have the pre-eminence, and that we might be made partakers of
the blessed inheritance of thy heavenly kingdom. Of this kingdom thou haste
long since spoken by the mouths of thy holy Prophets. As, that thou have set
thy king upon Sion thy holy Mountain: and that thy throne O God, is for ever
and ever, and the Scepter of thy kingdom a Scepter of righteousness. To this
kingdom of thy well-beloved son, thou have translated us from the kingdom of
darkness, setting us free from the penalty of sin, and delivering us into
the glorious liberty of thy sons. Who then shall be able to lay any thing
to our charge. It is thou, O god, which do justify, who shall then
condemn? It is Christ thy son and our king and Savior that died for us, nay
rather, which is risen again, and sits at thy right hand making
intercession continually to thee for us, to bring us unto that heavenly
kingdom.

By this kingdom thou have given us, even in this life, peace of conscience,
righteousness, and reioicing in the holy ghost. Increase this joy in us, O
Lord, that our whole delight may be to serve thee in holiness and righteousness
all the days of our life. Keep us O Lord, from the poison of false doctrine,
idolatry, superstition, and incredulity, by which satan vpholdeth his
tyrannical kingdom. Mortify and subdue in us all carnal desires and lusts,
by thy holy spirit, and by the same abandon out of our minds unclean
thoughts, and break the snares of sin, that the whole kingdom of the devil
may be destroyed in us. Renew thy kingdom in us, O heavenly Father, we humbly
beseech thee, by giving unto us the true knowledge of thee, and thereby a
lively faith in thy son Christ, and regenerate us by his holy spirit and
word, that by the obedience of faith, we may wholelie be subject unto thee
alone.

Make us O Lord, to despise the glory, pomp and plesures of this worldly
kingdom, which satan promises to the worshippers of him, that we may still
desire from our hearts, even as the Heart desires the water Brooks, the
fruition of thy heavenly kingdom. The glory and pleasures whereof are
eternal and most delectable. But the pleasures of this life, momentanie and
vain, and yet mixed with manifold myseries. Here we are vexed with
tyrannies, of beasts, and of men. The earth, the water, and fire, as weary of
us, continually warreth against us. Those good creatures, which thou have
given us, many times through our sins, are hurtful and noisome unto us: yea
we are disquieted with our own bodies and with our own affections. As men
therefore weary of this wretched worldly kingdom, and desiring to be
dissolved from the burden of the flesh, we heartily pray thee, that thy
celestial kingdom may come for our deliverance: where, there is no hunger, no
nakedness, no labor, no infirmiite, no sickness, no infamy, no hatred, no
enemy, no dissimulation, no war, no sorrow, no moorning, no fear, no death.
All things are there joyful, and full of bliss: salvation and peace are
every where, and whatsoever happiness may be wished for, in such wise as
neither the eye has seen, nor the ear has heard, nor at any time has
entered into the heart of man. Let this thy kingdom come, O heavenly father, we
humbly pray thee. For all the afflictions of this life are not so grievous
unto us, as the joy of this kingdom delights us. Therefore with sighs and
groves we desire that this thy kingdom may come upon us, as the reward of our
conflict, as the garlande and crown of our course, and as the happy haven of
rest, after our tossing on the surging Seas of this world, which thou shall
give us for the merits of thy dear son Jesus Christ, to whom with thee and
the holy Ghost, be all honor, praise and glory world with out end. Amen.

3 Thy will be done.
OUr knowledge, our understanding, and our will, by natural corruption O Lord,
is blind, dull and rebellious against thy holy will: insomuch that the natural
man understands not heavenly things, nor desires the participation of thy
everlasting kingdom, but is an enemy unto the same. Therefore thy sentence
remains true, at what time thou saiedst, Man is but flesh, and all the
imaginations of man's heart are evil. For this cause we pray as thy beloved
son has taught us here, that not ours, but Thy will be done. Thy will is
just, holy, good, and full of saving health, even as thou art the bottomless
well of all goodness, and righteousness it self. And as thou art our loving
and most merciful Father, so there is no cause why we should doubt of thy
good will, which surmounteth the loving kindness of all earthly fathers. Thy
will O god is omnipotent, and everlasting, without shadow of change, thou will
do whatsoever seems good unto thee, and thy will shall stand for ever and
ever, and the thoughts of thy heart throughout alages. Give us grace loving
Father, we beseech thee, that as we are ignorant of this thy secret will, so
we may always humbly like obedient children submit our selves unto the same,
to be ordered thereby as shall seem best to thy divine wisdom.

But at this time, O Lord, especially, we pray for the execution of thy
revealed will which thy only begotten son our savior has manifested unto us
in his most holy gospel, and which at this day is revealed unto us by the
preaching of the same, that we might be saved through Jesus Christ, in whom
thou have chosen us from everlasting, that we might be heirs of his
kingdom. For this is thy will (says our savior christ) that every one which
believes in the son should have eternal life. Give us faith therefore (O
heavenly Father we beseech theee) that this thy will may be perfected and
accomplished in us, that we may tend unto that end, whereunto thou have
appointed us That we may believe in thee, fear thee, and love thee for thy so
great and fatherly mercyes in Jesus Christ our Savior, powered upon us. Let
this thy most holy, and wholesome will be fulfilled in us, that being justified
through the merits of thy beloved son, and thorough faith in him, we may be
joined with thee.

Furthermore thy will is, O god, that they which are redeemed by thy son, and
do steadfastly believe in him, should show themselves obedient, thankful,
and ready to walk in his commandments: and that we being wholly
consecrated unto him should give our selves to innocence and purity, and
should not any more defile our bodies with the filthiness of sins which he
has made the temples of the holy ghost. For this is thy will, O God, even our
holiness, that we should abstain from fornication, and that every one of us
should keep our vessel in sanctification and honor: and not to walk in the
lust of concupiscence, as do the heathen which know not thee. And as thou O
father, would have us to love thee above all things, so thou would that
we love our neighbors also, not in word and tongue, but in deed and verity.
Let this thy will good Father, be fulfilled in us.

And we heartily pray thee that as in prosperity, we can be well contented
with thy will, so also whenever it shall please thee, either for the
punishment of our sins, either for the trial and exercise of our faith, or
for any other cause, as shall seem best to thy fatherly wisdom to afflict us
with diseases, with languishing sicknesses, with injuries and reproaches, with
persecutions, or any other cross whatsoever, we may patiently and willingly,
even from our heart say, Thy will be done. For if we be not under
chastisement, whereof all thy children are partakers in this life, then might
we deem our selves bastards, and not sons. And seeing thy only son our
Savior, in whose mouth there was no guile, for us miserable and sinful men,
vouchedsafe to stand as a meek lamb dumb before the fleecer, and opened not
his mouth, but bearing the chastisement of our peace, in the most bitter
agony of death, when he sweat water and blood, most mildly submitted
himself to thy holy will: we heartily pray thee for the same our Christ's
sake that we may be appliable to thy will in all things, after the example of
thy deer son and may without murmuring or grudging unfeignedly say, Thy will
be done.

Jn earth as it is in heaven.
THe celestial creatures, O God, are pressed and ready to obaie thy divine
will, and whatsoever thou command them they do it speedily. Among which,
are thy angels, who always stood steadfast in thy truth since the first
beginning, and do still stand in thy presence to serve thee, as ministering
spirits, to defend and guard thine elect, These angels do reioise in heaven for
the fulfilling of thy will in the conversion and repentance of sinners, yea,
so prompt is their service and so willing is their obedience, that nothing is
more pleasant unto them then when thy will, O God, is performed and executed.

The blessed saints also departed this life in soul and spirit, have the
fullness of joy in thy presence, and the pleasures also which are at thy right
hand for evermore. This thy will has brought to pass. And therefore being free
from the cares and labors of this life, they do still execute thy holy will,
falling before thee which sit in the heavenly throne, and worshipping thee
which live for evermore and saying. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive
glory and honor, and power: for thou have created all things, and for thy
wills sake they are, and have been created.

As the angels and saints do thus rest on thy will, O God alone, even so other
celestial bodies also do obeie the same. The perpetual motion and true
course of the heavens: the sun, the moon, and the stars, do continually
keep their prescribed order whereunto thou have appointed them. The temperate
and flourishing springtide, the hot and dry summer, the fruit full harvest, and
the chilling cold winter, have their times and returns from year to year
according unto thy divine will. In the execution whereof they have thus
continued more than five thousand and six hundred years, and yet in that same
remains and endures still stable and firm.

Make in like manner, O Heavenly Father, we beseech thee, our stubborn,
disobedient and rebellious wills, pliant, tractable, and obedyent, to thy most
holy will. O that this flesh, putting off the old Adam which is made of
earth, might submit it self so willingly unto thy will as that inward
manne does which is regenerate and illuminated by thy holy spirit, and
therefore with groans and sighs desires to do thy will. O that it might
please thee, to break in sunder for ever the bands of sin, wherewith our
spirit is tied, that being free, we might serve thee continually as thou will. O Father, we heartily pray thee, and for Christ's sake humbly beseech
thee, disburthen us of this earth wherewith we are overwhelmed, and make us
heavenly, that thy name may be sanctified in earth as it is in heaven: that
we may desire thy kingdom to come in earth as it is in heaven: that we may
will thy will to be done in earth, as it is in heaven: that now here in earth
we may begin to be such, as one day through thy grace and mercy, we shall be
in heaven. Where we shall for ever praise thee and our lord Jesus Christ, to
whom with the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory world with out end, Amen.

4 Give us this day, our daily bread.
A prayer for all needful things, both for the soul and body.
WE are, O Father, in our selves miserable and needy beggars; but thou art
rich in mercy to all that call upon thee. Out of thy heavenly treasure
therefore, we beseech thee, plentifully power down thy gifts upon us: and
especially give us that bread, that heavenly Manna, the spiritual food of
our souls, thy omnipotent word Jesus Christ, by whose word and blessed spirit,
we are fed, comforted, and evermore preserved to come unto eternal life. For
thou have so loved the world, that thou have given thy only begotten son,
that every one which believes in him should have everlasting life. This food
thou dooest give of thy mere grace; make us by faith to take and digest it.

And to the end we may be the more able to go forward in that state of life,
where unto thou have called us, help O God our infirmities, and sustain our
earthly bodies, with that corporal food, which from sun to sun we can
not spare. We depend, O Lord, upon thy fatherly providence which openest thy
hands, and replenishest every living thing. Thou feedest the young Ravens,
that call upon thee. Thou dooest minister food to the hungry lions, when they
roar after their prey, and thou do cloth and apparel the lillies and
grass of the field. Therefore we humbly beseech thee, let thine eye attend
upon us, to feed, cherrish, and preserve us, in such wise that we may be
more apt to glorify thy holy name. Break this bread, O Father, to thy sons,
and give it unto them at such time, and in such measure, as is most meet and
convenient for them, so shall it be most sweet, and sauorie, and wholesome for
the children.

Thou only can give it; thou only know how to give it: and thou only
art wont to give it, and wilt give it still unto thy children in the best
measure. If thou give it not, we cannot have it. For who is he among the sons
of men that can make the smallest grain of wheat, or other seed to grow, or
the least herb to spring without thee? It is thou O Lord that do make the
grass to grow for cattle, and herb for the use of men. It is thou that
give bread and wine to strengthen, and make glad the heart of man, and Oil
also, to make him have a cheerful countenance. We that plant and water, are
nothing; Thou art all in all that give the increase. Therefore we stand like
poor beggars at thy door, craving thy daily alms and saying; Give us this
day our daily bread.

And also we pray thee, O Father, that as thou make these creatures of
thine, ours, by thy free gift; so also they may be ours by our labor and
study, in that vocation whereunto we are called. Give us thy grace we beseech
thee, that we eat not our bread with idleness: that we take not from our
brethren their bread, by rapine, theft, oppression, usury, briberie,
extortion, and by such other unlawful means: but that we may receive from
thy liberal and most merciful hands, our own bread, in the sweat of our own
brows, that we may be blessed in the labor of our own hands. And as thou
have from day to day, all the days of our life hither to fed us most
liberally, and preserved us: so we beseech thee good lord, that for so much as
this day, we do hunger and thirst, and shall daily (so long as we are in
this flesh) stand in need of thy goodness, thou will vouchsafe to give us this
day our daily bread.

And when thou have satisfied our mouth with good things, give us O Father,
contented minds, that we follow not the insatiable lusts of our flesh, which
being never contented with thy good gifts, abuse them intemperatly and devise
and desire new dainty dishes for lust, and cause us to say with the wanton
Israelites, Can God prepare a table in the wilderness? Can he give bread also,
and prepare flesh for his people Repress in us these carnal delights: give us
temperance that we may live not to eat, but eat to live. For thy kingdom, O
God, is not meat and drink, but a rejoicing in the holy ghost. And as for
the belly and the meat thou shall destroy them both. If therefore it shall
please thy goodness to give us our daily bread in abundance, give us also
abundance of thy grace, that we be not proud, intemperate, or luxurious: but
that we may use thy gifts to the relieuing of our faint and weak bodies, to
the comfort and help of our brethren, and also to the honor and praise of thy
holy name.

Make us mindful and thankful, O heavenly Father, for thy great goodness,
that we do not sit down at thy table as thy ghestes, to eat thy bread and
drink thy drink, and then to rise up to play, and so to forget thee, the
author and giver of all good gifts. Far be this gross unthankfulness from
us. For the ox knows his owner, and the ass his masters crib, and shall
we forget thee? The horse loves his keeper, and the dog will fight for his
master. The brute bear, and the fierce Lion are thankful to them that feed
them. And the earth yields fruit to him that tilleth it: and shall we so
far degenerate, that we shall be more unreasonable then brute beasts? Far
be this O Lord from thy children: Make us therefore O father, to receive our
daily bread with thanksgiving, that having thee always before our eyes,
which art the giver of all good things, and refreshest the hungry soul with
goodness: and considering also our own need and necessity, we may
continually for our daily bread ascribe unto thee, our father, with thy son
our savior, and the holy ghost our comforter, all honor, praise and glory
for ever and ever, Amen.

5 And forgive us our trespasses.
A prayer for remission of sins.
WHen we present our selves, O father before thy divine Majesty, satan our
adversary, our continual accuser, and sworn enemy does trouble us, and
strikes our consciences with the sting of our sins, which aforetime we have
committed against thee. How dare thou (says he) miserable man, presume to
come into the presence of God with thy prayers? with what face can thou call
him thy father, when as thou at no time have showed thy self an obedient son?
Art thou not ashamed to pray that he will sanctify and glorify his name, when
as thou dooest daily profane and dishonor the same? what reason have thou to
desire him to come unto thee with his kingdom, which hitherto have not
submitted thy self unto him, and have not suffered him to reign in thee? Also
why do thou pray that the will of God may be done in thee when as thou
hate his will, and willingly runnest into disobedience? Is it not impudent
temeritie that thou ask thy daily bread of God, when as thou have so led
thy life hitherto, that thou rather deseruest to be called a dog then a son?
have thou forgotten that the Lord has said, It is not meet to take the
childrens bread, and to give it unto dogs? These and such like heavy
cogitations, O Lord, our enemy does assail our minds to discourage us, and
to draw us away from calling upon thy name. But we being here taught by thy
son Christ our savior, to make our petitions to thee, and also he having given
us boldness to have access unto thee, and having also given us the earnest of
his holy spirit, whereby we cry Abba Father: do repel these grievous
temptations and fiery darts of the devil, crieng unto thee with true
repentance. Forgive O father our trespasses and sins: for we have sinned in
deed against heaven, and against thee, and are no more worthy to be called
thy sons, but have in our selves deserved the wages of sin, eternal death.
For we have all sinned, we have all gone out of the way, and are become
unprofitable; We are, Lord, conceived in sin, and borne in iniquity: all
the thoughts of our hearts are evil even from our nativity: we have not been
so thankful unto thee for the benefits bestowed on us, as becomes us: we
have many ways abused thy gifts: we have not received thy word with that
reverend regard that appertained to the same: neither have we obeyed thy will
therein revealed, yea, in many things we offend all. And although we be
renewed by the immortal seed of thy word, yet the corruption of our nature,
and the dregs of sin, remain still in us, and the law of sin in our
members, which holds us captive against the will of the spirit, and has
place in us, which is the cause that we break thy holy commandments. We are
therefore, O father, in respect of our guiltines enforced to cry unto thee,
Forgive us our sins: and thou in respect of the punishment which we, thereby
have deserved must forgive us for thy sons Christ's sake, or else we shall for
ever perish. For if thou Lord do in extremity and justice look upon our
sins, who shall abide it? If thou enter into judgment with thy servant,
what flesh shall be justified in thy sight.

Wherefore we appeal to the high throne of thy mercy, humbly beseeching
thee, O most loving God and merciful Father, according to thy great mercy,
and according to the multitude of thy compassions, Forgive us our sins. Wash
us thoroughly from our iniquities, and cleanse us from all our sins, in such wise
that they may no way prevail against us. Cast them into the bottom of the
sea, that they may never arise before thee in the day of judgment. Let thy
wrath, and anger, and heavy displeasure be turned from us, which we have
deserved, and take us into thy fatherly favor again, that we may be thy
sons. Show us thy mercy, O Lord, and grant us thy salvation, for thy
names sake.

It is thou, O god alone that can pardon and forgive us our sins; it is
thou alone that do make us happy and blessed, by covering our iniquities,
and not imputing our sins unto us. It is thou alone, that can put away our
transgressions like to a cloud, and our sins as a mist. None but thou, O God
alone, can remit so great a debt, as that ten thousand talents we owe unto
thee, Forgive us therefore we beseech thee O most liberal father which art
rich in mercies, al our sins, not for our merits, but for thy mercies sake,
and remove them so far from us as the east is from the west. Pardon us we
humbly beseech thee for our Savior Jesus Christ's sake, who has borne our
infirmities, and carried our sorrows, who was wounded and broken for our
iniquities, on whom thou have laid the chastisement of our peace, that we might
be healed with his stripes.

Purge us with his blood from all our sins, and cancel the hand writing which
is against us, which thy son fastened to his cross, for the full
satisfaction of thy justice.

Him, O Lord, we oppose with his innocence, with his holiness, with his
righteousness, and with all the merits of his sufferings in the flesh, against
thy justice, as our only sufficient mediator our peacemaker, and our
reconciler to thy heavenly favor, who by thy will was made sin for us, that
we might be thy righteousness through him, and also accursed for us that we
might be blessed for ever.

Wherefore upon sure trust and confidence of these thy great mercies offered to
us in thy son Jesus, being bold and joyful, and also sorrowful that ever we
offended thee so loving a Father, we do with deep sighs of heart cry unto
thee, Forgive us our sins? Remit our offenses, and cover our nakedness with
the holiness and righteousness of our eternal Savior thy son Jesus Christ:
and from hence forth keep us from presumptuous sins, and restore in us the
decayed image of thy heavenly light, that we may hereafter serve thee in
fear, in holiness and righteousness, all the days of our life, through our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

As we forgive them that trespass against us.
A prayer for brotherly charity.
AS thou art our heavenly Father, so O Lord, it is necessary that we should
be like thee in mercy, in kindness, and in love, showing mercy, kindness, and
love unto our enemies, as thou have loved us, when we were thine enemies. And
herein we shall show our selves to be led by thy spirit, as thy dear sons,
whom thou have adopted, and therefore assured of remission of sins. It has
pleased thy son our savior Christ, therefore to add this condition, (As we
forgive them that trespass against us) that we might be ascertained of
forgiveness to forgive our brethren, which trespass against us. What greater
thing, O Father, can we ask of thee, then forgiveness of our sins, whereupon
our everlasting salvation depends? For the which thou requirest, neither gold
nor silver, nor any laborious work of the body at our hands, but only
this; that as thou of thy mere grace and favor have pardoned us: so we in
like manner should forgive them which have offended us. Express in us good
Father, we humbly beseech thee this similitude of thy good will, and
transform us into thy likeness, that our souls by the illumination of thy
holy spirit, may be joined to thee, and that the image of thy fatherly
kindness, mercy and love, may shine in us. Stir up in us a desire of
brotherly good will, and Christian charity, that we may have care to help
one another as members of one body.

Grant us grace that our love may be perfect, not feigned, false, or
hypocritical, not in word and tongue, but in deed and truth. That we may be
patient, courteous, long suffering, gentle, meek, not suspicious, not
disdainefull, nor easily moved to anger, but forbearing and forgiving one
another through love. O heavenly Father take from us all bitterness, and
anger, and wrath, and crying, and evil speaking, with all maliciousnes and
inflame our minds, that after thy example we may vnfeynedlie love even our
very enemies, and bless them that curse us, do good to them that hate us,
and hurt us, leaving reuengement always unto thee. That thus retayning mercy
and love the bond of all perfection, and the fulfilling of the law, we may
declare our selves to dwell in thee, and thou in us, to the honor and glory
of thy holy name, Amen.

6 And lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil.
A prayer against temptation.
O Heavenly father, and everlasting God, we most humbly beseech thee,
protect and strengthen us weak and feeble men against all evil temptations of
satan, the sworn and mortal enemy of man's salvation: a liar and our
accuser, that great Dragon, the old Serpent, which is called the devil, a
wicked spirit, a deceyuer, which goes about like a roaring lion seeking whom
he may devour. But especially in this latter age of the world, he knowing
his time of raging to be but short and perceiving the day of judgment to be
very nie at hand, rangeth in a deadly hatred against thy children, and by all
means seeks the destruction of all mankind, and sundry ways by diverse
subtleties, he lays snares to entrap our souls, bending his whole power
against us, and prieng for any occasion to break thy commandments, and so at
length to plunge us horribly into desperation.

And because we of our selves are naturally prone to all wickedness, having
in us the seed of sin, which is concupiscence, he takes an advantage
hereof to tempt us, to wound us, or at the least to hurt us with one prick
or other: he prepares baits to take us and entrap us in wealth, in poverty,
in pleasure, and in the inticements of the flesh, in grief of mind, in
ambition and desire of glory: he makes us evil contented with our vocation,
to grudge in our inferior condition; he troubles us with exceeding cares of
this life, and makes us covetous, malicious, seeking revenge; he provoke to
pride, and presumption, and would feine bring us to doubt of thy divine will
and providence: he takes great pains to lull us asleep in the cradle of
security. Night and day, sleeping and waking, eating or drinking he is about
us, seeking with open mouth to devour us.

O Lord our God, who is able to stand against the manifold assaults and
temptations of Satan? unless thou, O most mighty protector defend us, alas
we perish. For thou know our weakness and how unable we be to resist so
subtle and strong an enemy. But thou have bruised in pieces that monstrous
Leuiathan, and have brought under foot the mighty and strong Goliath which
vpbraided thine host.

Thou have by thy son our Savior that blessed seed, broken the head of the
most subtle serpent, who came in the flesh to destroy the works of the
devil, with whom he encountered in temptations, and most victoriously overcame
him, and on his cross openly tryumphed over him, to purchase a crown for us.

By this thy victory so obtained, O heavenly father, we beseech thee hold
him fast bound, that he may not execute his tyranny upon us as he desires:
that although he seek to sift us like wheat, yet thorough thy grace we may
be able to stand. Let us not be tempted, O Lord, beyond our strength, but in
the midst of temptation make a way for us, whereby we may escape with
victory; for thou know how to deliver thy children out of temptation.

Prevent us, O Father, with thy heavenly grace that we take no truce or peace
with this our ghostly enemy, but that we may manfully fight under thy
standert against sin, our flesh, the world, and the devil, all the days of
our life, that there may be continual enmity between the woman's seed, and
the serpent for ever, that at the last the dreadful red dragon may be
overcome by the blood of the lamb.

Mortify this flesh of ours, O Lord, with thy holy spirit with all the lusts
and concupiscences thereof that we may the better serve thee. Subdue our carnal
reason and under standing to the obedience of faith, that we follow not our
own fantasies, but may depend wholly upon thy word. Give us a right judgment
to discern and judge of this world, that we may rather hate than love it,
and rather abhor it, than follow the example thereof. Turn away our eyes, O
Lord, that we look not after vanity: Stop our ears from all alluring
entisements and temptations to evil; and refrain our tongue from filthy
communication, that we may speak only such things as serve to the
edification and profitte of our brethren. Make us to love sobriety in our
apparel, and temperance in all our meats and drinks, that we being in all
our actions evermore directed and governed by thy good spirit, we may glorify
thy holy name.

Give unto us, O heavenly father, all thy armor, that like right soldiers we
may overcome in the evil day, and vanquish our enemy. Gird us therefore
with the truth, put upon us the brestplate of righteousness, and let us be
shod to the preparing of the gospel of light. Above all things, O God, give us
the shield of faith, which can extinguish all the fiery darts of wicked
spirits. Bestow upon us the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit,
which is thy word, that through thee we may encounter valiantly, and
gloriously attain the victory.

Deliver us O Lord our God, from all evil, that we may serve thee, and
consecrat our souls and bodies, yea all our members to be servants of
righteousness unto sanctification, that we may wholly and truly serve,
honor, and praise thee, our most loving father, here in the kingdom of
grace, and after this life in the kingdom of glory, Amen.

For thine is thy kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever and ever, Amen.
THou, O Father, art king of Heaven and of earth, and of all things in them
contained. For thou have prepared thy throne in heaven, and thy kingdom rules
over all: and as thou have made all things by thy word and breath of thy
mouth, so thou do still rule and govern all things. Thou sit upon the
circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers: thou
stretchest forth the heavens like a curtain, and spreadest them out like a
tent to dwell in. Thou make Pleiades and Orion, and turnest the shadow of
death into the morning, and make the day as dark as night: thou call the
waters of the sea, and powrest them out upon the open earth: the Lord is thy
name. Thou dooest lighten and thunder from heaven, and do moderate all the
influences of the heavens. Thou art the Lord of hosts, the strong and mighty
Lord of battle, and the king of glory. Thou deposest and set up kings
at thy pleasure.

And although thy seat be in heaven, yet thou humblest thy self to behold the
things that are done in earth. Insomuch that thy providence extends it self
to sparrowes, to ravens, to the lillies of the field, yea, to the hairs of our
head, so that they cannot fall but at thy pleasure. Thou art the father, whose
name ought to be sanctified in all things: Thou art the king which ought to
reign every where, and in all things: thy will alone ought to be done in
heaven, and in earth: Thou alone dooest feed all things with thy daily
bread: Thou alone dooest forgive us all our sins, and thou only turnest all
evil temptations whatsoever they be, from us. Thou alone dooest evermore arm
and defend us from all the trappes, assaults, and snares of that foul feend
and ghostly enemy the devil, as the only and mighty Lord of hosts, to
whom all Angels, whether they be good or bad do obey.

Thou art also omnipotent, O Lord, in this thy kingdom. For thou, O God, art in
heaven, and dooest whatsoever thou will: If thou determine a thing, who shall
disanull it? and if thy hand be stretched out, who shall turn it away? All
under the heuens is thine, and thou art present every where.

To thee therefore we fly for succor, and to thee we make our prayers,
ascrybing unto thee alone all glory and majesty. For thou Lord art a jealous
God, and wilt not give the glory of thy name unto another.

Make thy power, O God, known to the sons of men, and the glorious renown of
thy kingdom. For thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion
endures throughout all ages, even for ever and ever. We beseech thee therefore
O heavenly father to hear our supplications, and grant that as thy promises
in Christ to us ward are yea and Amen, that is most certain and assured, so
also our prayers, may with thee, be yea and Amen, that favorably allowed, and
firm lie ratified for thy son Christ's sake: to whom with thee and the holy
ghost, be all honor, and power, and glory, world without end, Amen.

A Meditation upon the Lords prayer.
O Almighty and eternal God, which dooest vouchsafe that we as it were
heavenly children, should every one of us call thee our heavenly father:
grant that amongst us by pureness and example of godly and innocent life, thy
most holy name may be sanctified, that all other nations beholding our
goodness, and virtuous living, may be stirred to hallow and glorify thee.

Grant, O Lord, that the kingdom of thy grace and mercy may reign
continually in our hearts, so that we may be worthy, to be partakers of thy
realm of glory and majesty.

Grant that unto the very death, we refuse not to follow thy divine will, and
that we (according unto the example of the celestial citizens, agreeing
together quietly) united in spirit) all controversy in opinions set apart,
the lusts of the flesh being subdued, and the flattering assaults of the world
and the devil ouercom, never wrestle against thy most holy will, but obeie it
in all things.

Grant O Lord, for our body needful sustenance, that we may the more freely
serve thee.

Give us we beseech thee (O merciful father) that heavenly bread, the body
of thy son Jesus Christ, the very food and health of our souls: give us the
bread of thy divine precepts, that we may truly walk and live after them.
Give us the bread of thy heavenly word, which is the strong castle and sure
defense of our fowls, that we being well fed and filled with this food, may
worthily come to the celestial feast, where is no hunger. Grant, O Lord, that
we patiently bear and suffer our enemies, and such as hurt us and willingly
to forgive the offenses committed against us: so that we may find thee Lord,
in forgiving us our trespasses, mild and merciful.

Grant, O Lord, that we be not utterly led into temptation, that thereby we
should be lost: but in all perilles of temptation, and in the midst of the
stormy tempests of tribulations, let us thy children receive and feel thy
fatherly succor ready to help us, least that we overcome with the crafty
deceiptes of the temptor, should be drawn into everlasting destruction: but
when we be well assailed, approved and purged with the fire of temptation,
then let us finish our course, and so well and valiantly fight, that we may
for evermore live with thee in that heavenly city, where against thee no
manner of temptation can prevail.

Finally, grant (most merciful father) that we through thy benign goodness,
may be delivered from all evils, present or to come, both of body and soul:
and that at the last the yoke of the foul feend being shaken of, we may
possess the heritage of thy heavenly kingdom, which thy son, with his
precious blood bought for us thy children: and therefore ever to have the
fruition of celestial delectation, accompanied with Angels and blessed Saints,
thorough the help, benignity, and grace of our Savior Jesus Christ: to
whom, and to thee our Father, and to the holy ghost, be glory and honor
now and for ever, Amen.

A prayer for the morning.
I Render unto thee (O almighty and most merciful father) most hearty
thanks, by thy dearly beloved son Jesus Christ, for that thou have
vouchsafed of thy fatherly goodness and free mercy, to give me this night
sweet sleep, quiet and most comfortable rest; and for so much as it has
pleased thee safely to preserve me this night from all perilles, hurts, and
dangers: I wretched sinner, most humbly beseech thee, that thou of thy
gracious goodness, wilt vouchsafe, to show the like kindness toward me
this day, in defending, cherishing, comforting and governing me, and all my
counsels, studies, and labors in such wise, that I may neither think, speak
or do any thing that may be displeasant to thy fatherly goodness, dangerous
to my self, or hurtful to my neighbor, but that I may evermore by thy
gracious governance so lead my life, that whenever it shall please thee to
call me from this vale of misery, and soil of sorrow, I may receive the
crown of everlasting joy and felicity, which thou have prepared for thy
faithful servants, and them that love thee: grant this merciful god for thy
deer sons sake Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Another prayer to be said in the morning.
O Almighty and most gentle God, I most heartily give thee thanks for the
sweet sleep and comfortable rest yt thou have given me this night. And
for so much as thou have commanded by thy lie word, that no man should be idle,
but always occupied in virtuous exercises, every man according to his
calling: I most humbly beseech thee, that thine eyes may attend upon me,
daily defend me, in sorrow succor me, cherish, comfort, and govern all my
counsels, studies and labors, in such wise, that I may spend this day
according to thy will, without hurt, that I may eschew al things that should
displease, set thee always before mine eyes, live in thy fear, and ever work
that, that may be found acceptable before thy divine majesty, unto the
praise of thy most holy name through Jesus Christ our lord, who lives and
reigns, both now and ever, Amen.

An Evening prayer.
Almighty God, who as thou have made the day for labor and travel, so have
thou created the night for rest and refreshing our wearied minds and bodies.
We most humbly beseech thee that as the night darkeneth and shadoweth all
things, so thou would for thy dear son Jesus Christ's sake, hide our
sins, remoouing them from thy sight, and putting away the memory of them by
eternal oblivion, that as our bodies shall have the rest of sleep, so also
our minds by hope of thy mercy, may enjoy the rest of a quiet conscience:
and so being wholly refreshed, we may awake, and rise unto thy service the
next day, and all the days of our life: as that when death shall come (from
the which it is as easy for thee to raise us as from bodily sleep) we may
rest in hope of the most joyful resurrection, wherein our bodies shall awake
unto the everlasting day, unto the which, and unto the kingdom of thy son,
we beseech thee bring us, for the same our Savior Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

An other prayer for the Evening.
THis our mortal body, which through sin daily decaieth and diminishes,
must at the last altogether perish, and become earth whereof it is come and
made; and then shall our vanity, which we through our own ignorance have
made unto our selves, take an end. But most merciful creator and maker of all
things, vouchsafe so to break, divide and dissolve me thy poor creature, who
am gathered, knit and made of thee, and grant that I may always have in mind
thy dissolution, and of whom I am knit together, having an eye to what place I
must go, to the intent that I not being prepared, be not brought without the
nuptial or bridal garment, before thy judgment seat. For like as when the
day is once past, we give our selves to rest, even so must we, this life
being ended rest in death. Nothing is more like life than the day, nor nothing
more like death than the night, and nothing so like the grave, then the couch
or bed. Thus good God keep and defend us from al evil, grant us now living in
impotencie and feebleness of our selves, that through thee we may be
preserved this night and ever Amen

The confession of our sins unto God the Father.
O Merciful and most loving Father, which have no desire in the death of a
sinner, but rather that he convert and live: I acknowledge unto thy highness
all mine offenses, by me committed, which I cannot hide, I consider the vile
state, whereto through sin I am brought: for thereby I have worthily lost thy
favor, and am fallen from thy grace, which while thou withdrawest from me I
can do no good thing, nor think one good thought. My sin causes thee to
put me out of thy remembrance, and to forget me, delaying to give me that
which is my strength and comfort.

But how long will thou forget me Lord, for ever? How long will thou hide
thy face from me? How long will thou withdraw thy grace from me? Thou know
my hearty contrition and sorrow, for that I have unkindly forsaken thee, and
thy service, and served thine enemies the devil and sin. But trusting surely
in thy promises made to all men, by the mouth of thy prophet Ezechiell; that
is, if the sinner will turn away from all his sins that he has committed,
and keep all thy commandments, doubtless he shall live and not die, as for
all his sins he did before, thou will not think upon them. I most humbly
beseech thee, that as my sins were the cause why thou did put me out of
thy remembrance: even so let my hearty penitence for them, cause thee to put
my sins out of thy remembrance.

Suffer me not long to remain in this perpletitie of mind, and to take sorrow
in my heart from day to day: continually fearing the punishment due to my
sin, and looking still for thy coming into my soul by grace to deliver me.
Hope has caused me long to look for thee, that art my life and my health. Thy
long delaie in coming has much increased my desire; My fervent desire at
length is now turned to a vehement pain: wherefore make have lord to help my
sick soul. Let not mine enemy the devil long triumph over me, whose
property is to tread under his feet, like a cruel prince, all those that
he vanquisheth. And that treading is dangerous and terrible: for he treads
them down to the pit of hell, and to eternal death. He did long hold in
captivity all mankind, until the coming and passion of Christ for our
redemption. And since through his crafty trains, has brought to utter
confusion, many of those that profess thy true religion. Wherefore behold
Lord and consider my miserable estate, and hear my humble petition, touching
my deliverance out of his danger.

Lighten the eye of my heart and understanding, with the light of thy grace and
comfort, thereby expelling the darkness of ignorance. Lighten also one other
eye of my soul, which is the light or eye of the affection. The sight of this
eye is so dim, that it has no perfect and true judgment; yea it is blinded
with the vanities of this world, that one thing in appearance, seems to be
twenty things, like the sight of deceytfull eyes of glass; yea sometime the
concupiscence thereof is so great, that the eye is clean put out, and the sight
lost. Mankind enters into such league of a mitie with the devil, that he is
contented to have one of his eyes put out to win his favor, as the
inhabitants of Iabes were agreed to have their right eyes put out, according
to the desire of Nahas king of the Ammorites, had not king Saul, and the
Prophet Samuel saved them there from, and overcome the said Nahas and his
host. Even so (most merciful Father) I beseech thee, save my said eye of
affection, that it be not put out by our enemy the Devil, that it sleep not
in sin, which is the cause of eternal death. Manne may fall by frailetie
and arise again: yea the custom of sin makes a man often to fall. But to
lie still sleeping and slumbring in sin, as does the swine in foul mire,
ingendreth obstinacy in amendment, and delaie of penitence till the latter
hour: at which hour, who can be sure to have thy grace at his pleasure? that
is only at thy will Lord, not at our commandment. Wherefore, I most humbly
pray thee to send me the light of thy grace while I have here time and space
of repentance; that at my latter end mine enemies say not (reioicing and
boasting) that they had the upper hand over me.

As the Philistines (the figure of the wicked spirits) after the death of king
Saul in the mount of Gelboe, cut off the head of Saul, and sent it with his
harness through their country for a show (they bare it also into the temple of
their gods, of a pride and joy that they had of his death in such fashion will
those cruel enemies that trouble me, rejoice if I be cast down, or if I do
once swerve from thee, and thy faith, and so die without repentance. They
assault mankind by pleasant suggestion to sin, they wrestle with us, causing
delectation therein. They strike us and wound us when we consent thereto.

They foil us, and bring us upon our knees when we do at any time commit
or go about the filthy action of sin.

And by the custom thereof they give a great fall, with such violence, that
we have much to do to rise again. But if we happen to die therein impenitent;
then they have the victory over us. Then rejoice and triumph they thereat,
even as the conqueror triumphs in his new gotten conquest. Then will they
cast us in a pit and lay a stone of abstinencie upon us, that we shall not
arise again.

And as there is much joy in heaven, when one sinner forsakes his sin, and
returns unto thee by penance: in like manner is there joyful triumphing,
among the wicked spirits in hell, when one soul forsaking thee dies in
deadly sin: but all my trust is in thy mercy O lord. For although thou hide
thy self in a cloud that my prayer should not go thorough it unto thine ears;
yet are not thy mercies clean gone, neither does thy loving kindness cease.
Thou art therefore Lord my portion, and in thy mercy still will I hope and in
none other creature, knowing for certain, that (as God) thou only may
help me, and as my loving father, thou will help me. Wherefore in thee my
heart shall be joyful and in thy saving health, which is thy son Jesus our
Savior and redeemer. The Philistines knowing the presence of thine ark to be in
the camp of the Israelites, the day of their battle, were sore afraid,
saying; who shall deliver us out of the hand of this mighty God? Much more
will I be glad and take sure trust in thee, O Lord, having the presence and
comfort of thy lively grace.

And in token of the victory which thou have given me over mine enemies, I
will not cease (as I have good cause) to sing the praise of the Lord, that so
lovingly has dealt with me, and praise the name of the most high all the
days of my life.

Another confession of sins.
I Thy poor creature unworthy to appear before thy mighty majesty, (O most
gracious Lord) do power down, even here before thee, my sack that is full
with sins, which I have committed even from my youth. They are great and
many without number. Nevertheless, trusting of thine accustomed and natural
property to be merciful to all sinners, that being sorry for the committing
of their offenses, with all their hearts call and turn to thee, and
acknowledging and knowing that thou did not send thy loving son to call
those that seem in their own conceits to be just; but to call those to
repentance, which confess themselves to be sinners. I therefore Lord willing
(by the help of thy grace) utterly to forsake sin, and to fulfill thy holy
will hereafter, desire thee humbly of forgiveness, and to admit me among the
number of those that are blessed, and their unrighteousness forgiven. I will
not hide from thee my sins, neither yet excuse them. But I pray thee
(gracious Lord and most loving Father) to hide them in ye bloody wounds of thy
Son Christ, where they shall be put in perpetual oblivion. For who so
covers his own iniquity, thou will discover it to all the world at the
day of judgment to his shame. Thou will then have him stripped as naked as
he was borne, that is, his shame shall not be hid, but manifest to all men in
that day. Wherefore I will not hide my wound my self to the intent, thou my
good Surgeon, may lay a plaster thereon to cover it betime that the devil
mine enemy never epsy where it was.

A prayer to be said before the receiving of the holy Communion.
O Lord, although I be not worthy to receive thee into the house of my soul,
for mine innumerable offenses and sins done against thy great goodness: yet
trusting good Lord, in thy great pity and infinite mercy, I come to receive
thy blessed body, as a sick creature to thee, that art the health of life,
unclean to thee that art the well of mercy, blind by ignorance to thee, that
art the light everlasting, needy of grace, and poor in virtue to thee, that
art the king of heaven and earth, naked of good works, to thee that art the
author of grace.

I come as a wretch to thee my Lord and maker, all desolate and comforties,
thou that art my help and succor, for besides thee there is no consolation. I
come as a sinner unto thee, that art the mediator, and mean between God and
man, I come as a caitife to thee my most merciful savior; I come all sinful
unto thee, the granter of remission and pardon, dead by sin, to thee the
restorer of life, evil to thee that art all goodness, hard hearted to be
relieved by the infusion of superabundant grace, beseeching and desiring thee
most meekelie, to heal mine infirmity, and sickness, to wash and cleanse
away all my sins and filthiness, and to lighten my blindness, and reduce
me into the right way, for I am out thereof, to comfort me being desolate,
and without any one point of goodness. Have mercy, on my wickedness, pardon
my sinfulness, give me the light of grace, buried and drowned in sin, yt I
may receive thee, the food of angels, the king of glory, the Lord of all
lords, with such chastity of body, with such pureness and cleanness of
soul, with such contrition of heart, and abundance of weeping tears, with
such spiritual joy and gladness, with such dread and reverence, with such
faith, hope and charity, with such obedience, and humility, with such love
and devotion, faithfulness and thankfulness, as it is beseeming for such a
Lord to be received and to my soul most expedient. And be not displeased good
lord, that I a sinner with an unclean heart, and polluted mind, come hither
this day to receive thy precious body in sacramental bread and wine, but
remember merciful Lord, thou that refusedst not the sinful Magdalen, being
penitent from the kissing of thy blessed feet. And in like wise despise me
not, nor put thou me away as unworthy from the receiving of thy body in the
blessed sacrament, for my sins and unkindness, but grant thou me compunction
of heart, plenty of weeping tears, to wash my sins and wickedness, so that
with a pure heart, and clean conscience, I may this day receive the
Sacrament to my souls health, that I may obtain and possess thereby ever
lasting life, with all holy saints in heavens glory, and in this present life
to be replenished with thy holy spirit, and never to admit other lover
besides thee. Grant me blessed Jesus, for to receive the sacrament of bread and
wine that I may be worthy to be counted for a member of thy mystical body
here in earth, and though as yet I be not any way worthy to be numbered
amongst the simplest and lowest of thy servants, but rather to be rejected and
cast out for my simplenes, yet good Lord, for thine infinite power thou make
me equal and like to the merits of thine elect and chosen servants. Come thou
Father of the fatherless, comfort of the comfortless, come and cleanse my
soul from all contagiousnes of sin, for it is not convenient and according,
there to be any uncleanness, where thou the spouse of virginal chastity,
should come in and dwell.

Come and apparel my soul with such ornaments of virtue and grace, that it
may delight thee therein to dwell and abide. And as thou disdainest not to touch
the sore leapers, with thy holy hand, so good Lord, vouchsafe to anoint my
simple soul with the ointment of remission and pardon, that in this life by
steadfast hope, firm faith, and perfect charity, I may so increse in virtue
from day to day, that I may attain to the glorious fruition of thy godhed in
the kingdom of heaven, where I may see thee face to face, world without end,
Amen.

A thanksgiving after the receiving of the Communion.
I Thank thee good Lord, of thine infinite goodness, that thou this day have
fed me with thy body and blood in the Sacrament, desiring thee meekelie
that this Sacrament, which I have received, may be to me a purgation and
cleansing of my sins, a fortitude and spiritual strength against my
frailty, and sure defense against worldly troubles, a purchasing of grace and
pardon, a medicine of life, and a continual remembrance of thy passion, so
that in the way it may conduct and guide me, and when I am out of the way it
may reduce me, when I stumble it may uphold me, and when I am fallen it may
raise me, so that by good continuance in thy will, to everlasting glory, it
may bring me, and so to order the tallage and taste of my heart, that I nere
feel other sweetness but thee, that I never seek other love but thee, nor none
other comforter besides thee, so that I care for none other honor but thine.
And give me such a perfect love toward thee, wherewith I may come to as great
merit in heaven, as though I had spent all my life in remembrance of thy
blessed passion; and graciously deliver me from all tribulation of body and
soul, captivity, anguish, and perils, and all Christian people, Amen.

A Psalm for remission of sins.
Have mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness, according to the
multitude of thy mercies do away mine offenses.

Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin.

For I acknowledge my faults, and my sin is ever before me.

Against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, that thou
might be justified in thy saying, and clear when thou art judged.

Behold I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin has my mother conceived me.

Who can understand his faults? cleanse me O Lord from secret sins.

For mine iniquities are gone over mine head, and are as a weighty burden too
heavy for me to bear.

My sins have taken such hold upon me, that I am not able to look up: yea
they are mo in number than the hairs of my head, therefore my heart has failed
me.

Therefore I say, Lord have mercy upon me, heal my soul, for I have sinned
against thee.

Return, O Lord, deliver my soul, save me for thy mercies sake.

Will thou Lord absent thy self for ever, and will thou be no more entreated?

Is thy mercy clean gone for ever, and is thy promise come utterly to an
end, for evermore?

Have thou God forgotten to be gracious, and will thou shut up thy loving
kindness in displeasure?

O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, nor chastise me in thy heavy displeasure.

I faint in my mourning, every night I wash my bed, and water my couch with my
tears

Have mercy upon me O Lord, for I am weak, O lord heal me, for my bones are
vexed.

Lord I power my whole desire before thee, and my sighing is not hid from thee.

Remember not the sins of my youth, but according to thy mercy think thou
upon me, O Lord, for thy goodness.

For thy names sake be merciful unto mine iniquity, for it is great.

Turn thy face from my sins, and put out all my misdeeds.

Look upon my affliction and trouble, and forgive me all my sins.

Though I have gone astray like a sheep that is lost, yet seek thy servant,
for I do not forget thy commandments.

Keep my soul and deliver me, let me not be confounded, for I do put my
trust in thee.

A Psalm, wherein thou desire god to hear thy prayer.
Hear me when I call, O God of my righteousness: have mercy upon me, and
hearken unto my prayer.

Hear my words O Lord, vnsterstande my meditation.

Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king and my God, for unto thee do I
pray.

My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, and art so far from my health, and
from the words of my complaint.

O my God, I cry by day, but thou hear not: and by night, but I have no
audience.

Our fathers trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them.

They called upon thee, and were not confounded.

But I am a worm and not a man, a shame of men, and the outcast of the people.

Be not far from me, because trouble is near, for there is none to help me.

Hide not thy face from me, nor cast away thy servant in displeasure, thou
have been my succor, leave me not, neither forsake me, O God, of my
salvation.

Let my prayer be directed in thy sight as the incense: and let the lifting up
of my hands be an evening sacrifice.

I stretch forth my hands unto thee, my foul desires after thee, as the
thirsty land.

Hear me O Lord, and that soon, for my spirit waxes faint: hide not thy
face from me, least I be like unto them that go down into the pit.

O let me hear thy loving kindness betimes in the morning, for in thee is my
trust: show thou me the way that I should walk in, for I lift up my soul unto
thee.

Comfort the soul of thy servant, for unto thee do I lift up my soul.

For my soul is full of trouble, and my life draws nigh unto hell.

My sight fails for very trouble: Lord I have called daily upon thee, I
have stretched out my hands unto thee.

I am weary of crying, my throat is dry whiles I wait for my God.

My heart trembles within me, and the terrors of death are fallen upon me.

Hear me, O Lord, for thy loving kindness is comfortable, turn thee unto me
according to the multitude of thy mercies.

And hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am in trouble: oh have thee, and
hear me.

Draw nigh unto my soul and save it, oh deliver me, because I trust in thee.

A Psalm for Gods grace.
Teach me thy way, O God, and I will walk in thy truth: O knit my heart
unto thee, that I may fear thy name.

Turn unto me, and have mercy upon me, give thy strength to thy servant,
and save the son of thy handemaid.

O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes.

Stay my steps in thy paths that my feet do not slide.

Be gracious unto thy servant, that I may live and keep thy word.

With my whole heart have I sought thee, let me not wander fro thy
commandments.

Take from me the way of lieng, and cause thou me to make much of thy law.

Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to covetousness.

O turn away mine eyes least they behold vanity: and quicken, thou me in thy
way.

Let my heart be upright in thy statutes, that I be not ashamed.

Direct my steps in thy word, and let no iniquity have dominion over me.

Keep thy servant from presumptuous sins, let them not reign over me: so
shall I be upright, and made clean from much wickedness.

Forsake me not, O Lord, be not thou far from me, O my God.

Create in me a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within me.

Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me:

Give me the comfort of thy help again, and stablish me with thy free spirit.

Send thy light and thy truth let them lead me, and bring me to thy holy
mountain and to thy tabernacle.

Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God: let thy good spirit lead me
into the land of righteousness.

Bow down thine care to me, make haste to help me: be unto me a strong
rock, and a house of defense to save me.

So shall I be glad and rejoice in thee: and I will sing praise unto thy name,
O most high.

A Psalm wherein we pray God to deliver us from our enemies.
Deliver me O Lord from the evil man: and preserve me from the wicked man.

Which imagines mischief in their hearts, and stir up strife all the day
long.

They have sharpened their toongs like a serpent, adders poison is under their
lips.

This thou have seen, O lord, hold not thy tongue then, go not far from me, O
Lord.

Awake and stand up to judge my quarrel, avenge thou my cause, my God and my
Lord.

Judge me O Lord my god, according to thy righteousness: and let them not
triumph over me.

Let them not say in their hearts, There, there, so would we have it, neither
let them say we have devoured him.

Deliver me from mine enemies, O god: defend me from them that rise up against
me.

O deliver me from the wicked dooers, and save me from the bloodthirstie men.

Which speak evil of me, saying; when shall he die, and his name perish?

Yea, my familiar friend whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, has
lifted up the heel against me.

But thou Lord art a buckler for me, my glory and the lifter up of my head.

O Lord in thee I put my trust, save me from all that persecute me, and
deliver me.

Thou will maintain my right and my cause, for thou art set in the throne that
iudgest right.

Up Lord let not man prevail: let the wicked be judged in thy sight.

Draw me out of the net, that they have laid privily for me: for thou art
my strength.

Let not them that are my enemies unjustly, rejoice over me, neither let them
wink with the eye that hate me without a cause.

Have mercy upon me, O Lord, consider my trouble, which I suffer for them
that hate me, thou that liftest me up from the gates of death.

The Lord redeemeth the souls of his servants: and none that trust in him
shall perish.

A Psalm of trust and confidence in God.
Have mercy upon me, O God, have mercy upon me: for my soul trusts in
thee, and in the shadow of thy wings will I trust, till these afflictions be
ouerpast.

Unto thee, O Lord, lift I up my soul, my God I trust in thee, let me not be
confounded.

I should have fainted if I had not believed to see the goodness of the Lord in
the land of the living.

But I trust in thy mercy, my heart shall rejoice in thy salvation, I will
sing to the Lord, because he has dealt lovingly with me.

I have set thee always before me, for thou art at my right hand therefore I
shall not slide.

Thou Lord art my fortress, my rock and my deliverer, my God, and my
strength, my shield, the horn also of my salvation.

Thou Lord art my light, and my saving health, whom then shall I fear? Thou
lord art the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid?

In God do I trust, I will not be afraid what man can do unto me.

Yea though I should walk through the valleie of the shadow of death, I will
fear no evil, for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff comfort me.

Thou will send from heaven and save me, from the reproof of him that would
swallow me up.

They that know thy name will trust in thee: for thou Lord have not failed them
that seek thee.

Thy Angel pitcheth round about them that fear thee and delivers them.

Therefore I will lay me down and sleep in peace, for thou Lord only
make me dwell in safety.

A Psalm wherein we pray for the afflicted Church of Christ.
O God, wherefore art thou absent from us so long: why is thy wrath so hot
against the sheep of thy pasture?

O think upon the congregation whom thou have purchased and redeemed of old.

Think upon the tribe of thine inheritance: and mount Sion, wherein thou have
dwelt.

Lift up thy feet, that thou may utterly destroy every enemy, which has
done evil in thy sanctuary.

Thy adversaries roar in the midst of thy congregations: and set up their
banners for tokens.

They have said in their hearts, let us make havoc of them altogether: and
they have defiled the dwelling place of thy name.

The dead bodies of thy servants, have they given to be meat unto the fowls
of the air, and the flesh of thy saints unto the beasts of the land.

Their blood have they shed like water on every side of Jerusalem, and there
was no man to bury them.

We are become an open shame to our enemies: a very scorn and derision to
them that are round about us.

For they have devoured Jacob, and laid waste his dwelling place.

The wild boar out of the wood does root up the vineyard and the wild
beasts of the field devour it.

O God, how long shall the adversary do this dishonor? how long shall the
enemy blaspheme thy name, for ever?

Why withdrawest thou thy hand? why pluckest not thou thy right hand out of
thy bosom to consume the enemy.

Lord how long will thou be angry? shall thy jealousy burn like fire for
evermore?

Power out thine indignation upon the heathen that have not known thee: and
upon the kingdoms that have not called upon thy name.

Do thou unto them, as thou did sometime to the Madianites: unto Sisera,
and unto Iabin, at the brook of Kison.

Which perished at Endor: and became as the doong of the earth.

Make them and their princes like Oreb and Zeb, yea, make all their princes
like as Zeba and Salmana.

O my god, make them like a wheel: and as the stubble before the wind.

Persecute them even so with thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm.

Make their faces ashamed O Lord, that they may seek thy name.

Let them be confounded and vexed ever more and more: let them be put to shame
and perish.

That they may know, that thou (whose name is Iohouah) art the only most high
over all the earth.

O deliver not the soul of the turtle dove into the hand of the enemies: and
forgette not the congregation of the poor for ever.

O let not the simple go away ashamed, but let the poor and needy give
praises unto thy name.

O let the vengeance of thy servants blood that is shed: be openly showed upon
the heathen in our sight.

O let the sorrowful sighing of the prisoners come before she: according to
the greatness of thy power preserve thou those that are appointed to die.

Help us O god of our salvation, for the glory of thy name: O deliver us, and
be merciful to our sins for thy names sake.

Save us O Lord our god, and gather us from among the heathen. So we that be
thy people, and sheep of thy pasture, shall give thee thanks for ever: and will
alwaie be showing forth thy praise fro generation to generation.

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel for ever and ever: and let all the people
say, So be it Praise ye the Lord.

A Prayer for the preservation of our most gracious Sovereign Queen Elizabeth.
O Almighty God, King of kings, and governor of all things, I most humbly
beseech thee, to continue thy woonted favor, and fatherly kindness, toward
thy handmaid, our most gracious Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, that as she has
hitherto advanced true religion and the glory of thy name through the
preaching of the gospel of thy Son Christ: so she may still perfect and go
forward in that good course like a loving nurse unto thy church. Give her
wisdom and understanding to do that thing which is acceptable unto thee,
profitable for us her subjects, and hurtful to none. Grant her, O Lord, a
perpetual time, long life, and continual felicity. Protect her as the apple
of thine eye, and deliver thou her not into the hands of her enemies. Give her
victory O God, we beseech thee, over all thine and her enemies, and bless all
her godly actions in such wise, that all the world may know, and the
posterity to come may say, that thy mighty arm has raised up in England a
Debora, a Judith, an Hester, and a nourcing Queen for thy Church. Make her to
rejoice in thy strength, and mightily to triumph in thy salvation. Grant her
the desires of her heart, and deny not the petitions of her lips. Let thy
heavy hand, O Lord, light upon her enemies, and thy right hand find out all
such as hate her, and envy her prosperity. Save our Queen, O loving father,
from all her enemies, which either secretly or openly go about to bring her
life to the grave, and her glory to the dust. Let her finish her course, O God,
in a good age, an old woman, and of great years, to the comfort of thy church,
and the glory of thy name, and to her everlasting salvation, thorough Jesus
Christ in thy heavenly kingdom, Amen.

A Psalm of praises and thanksgiving to God for his benefits.
PRaise the lord ye that fear him, magnify him all ye of the seed of Jacob.

For he has not abhorred nor despised the affliction of the poor: neither
has he hid his face from him, but when he called unto him he heard him.

Sing praises unto the lord all ye his saints, and give thanks to him, for a
remembrance of his holiness.

For who is God beside the Lord? and who is mighty save our God?

Praise ye the Lord with me and let us magnify his name together.

Thy mercy, O Lord, reaches unto the heavens, and thy faithfulness to the
clouds.

How excellent is thy mercy O God: therefore the children of men trust under
the shadow of thy wings.

Thou art the father of the fatherless, and a judge of the widows: even God
in his holy habitation.

Thou art the god, which helpest us, and powrest thy benefits upon us.

Thou art our god, of whom comes salvation: God is the Lord, by whom we
escape death.

Blessed is the people O lord that can rejoice in thee: they shall walk in the
light of thy countenance.

Thou Lord art slew to anger, and of great mercy.

Thou have not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our
iniquities.

O speak good of the Lord al ye works of his, in all places of his dominion,
praise thou the Lord, O my soul.

Another.
MY heart is fixed O God, my heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise.

Unto thee, O my strength will I sing, for God is my defense, and my merciful
God.

For thy loving kindness is better than life it self: my lips shall praise
thee.

As long as I live will I magnify thee on this manner, and lift up mine hands
in thy name.

My soul shall be satisfied as it were with marrow and fatness: when my mouth
praises thee with ioifull lips.

I will always give thanks unto the Lord, his praise shall be in my mouth
continually.

I sought the Lord, and he heard me, and delivered me out of all my fear.

Praised be God, which has not put back my prayer, nor his mercy from me.

Thou have delivered me fro my strong enemy, and from them that hate me: and
have drawn me out of many troubles.

Thou have given me the shield of thy salvation, and thy right hand has
stayed me, and thy loving kindness has caused me to increase.

What reward shall I give unto the Lord for all the been fits he has done unto
me.

I will thank thee O Lord my God, with all my heart: and will praise thy name
for evermore.

For great is thy mercy toward me: and thou have delivered my soul from the
nethermost hell.

Therefore my praise shall be of thee in the great congregation: my vows will I
perform in the sight of them that fear thee.

Thou art my god, and I will thank thee: thou art my God and I will praise thee.

Blessed be the Lord God, even the God of Israel: which only does
woonderous things.

And blessed be the name of his majesty for ever: and all the earth shall be
filled with his Majesty, Amen.

A Psalm of blessedfulnesse.
BLessed is he whom thou O Lord, dooest elect, and causest to come unto thee,
he shall dwell within thy courts.

Blessed is he, whose wickedness is forgiven, and whose sin is covered.

Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, and in whose
spirit there is no guile.

Blessed is the man that puts his trust in the Lord.

Blessed is the man that fears the Lord: and delights greatly in his
commandments.

Blessed are they that dwell in thine house, they will ever praise thee.

Blessed is the man that does not walk in the counsel of the wicked, nor
stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of the scornful.

Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee: and in whose heart are thy ways.

Blessed are they that are upright in their way, and walk in the law of the
Lord.

Blessed are they that keep judgment and do righteousness at all times.

Blessed is he that considers the poor and needy: the Lord shall deliver
him in the time of trouble.

Blessed is the man whom thou chastisest O Lord, and teach him thy law.

Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and seek him with their whole
heart.

Secret Meditations of the heart to stir us up unto godliness.
BY creation, I am a man, made of earth: therefore transitory and mortal.

Yet endued with a mind, that is to say; with understanding, reason, and
judgment: by which I may understand that most excellent goodness, which is
God, and may be joined with him in immortality and blessedness.

But my reason, understanding, and judgment, being by the malice of Satan
corrupted, I do neglect this happiness.

I rather seek to enjoy the delights and pleasures of my flesh. In the most
vile and transitory things, I occupy my whole mind.

I ouerwhelme my self wholly with earth, of heavenly I make my self
earthly: and change my self from a reasonable man into a brute beast.

But god who once loved me in his son Christ does not forsake me, but
calls me still outwardly by his word, and inwardly by his holy spirit,
and knocks at the door of my heart and mind, that I might love him, fear
him, and serve him.

Yet I am deaf, and blind, and being more stony hearted than flint, does
feel nothing.

O unthankful wretch that I am, which do neglect, and despise so great
benefits.

God gently offers to lead me by the hand, and I stubbornlie turn away my
face from him.

Awake my soul, lift up thy self, and let us not thus wallow in our
filthiness, stoutly strive thou against wicked custom: tread under thy foot
these contemptible and vile delights, and covet after the most excellent
things.

Now God calls; I will hearken to him, he leads me, and I will follow
him: he offers himself, and I will take the opportunity, he shows the
way to everlasting blessedness: I will not turn away my face, but will seek
to attain.

Print these things in thy mind, and let them not be in vain and ineffectuall
cogitations; but put them in practice, and thou shall receive the fruit.

FINIS.
To Jesus Christ.
I Jesus my joy, and comfort only good,
E Ever to stand and never to decay:
S Satan be fell, be fierce and furious wood,
V vorld do thy worst, and sin do thou not stay
S Speed you to spil, and plie to bear the sway.
C Cross be my share, and carking be my hire
H Hartbreak my comfort, and sadness my feast
R Railing my recompense, by toongs of fire
I Jesus be mine, and these things are he lest
S So art thou mine, full fixed in my thought,
T Trusty O Christ (O) world vile vain and naught
1598

SVBLIME DEDIT OS HOMINI


Printed at London Peter Short, dwellin Bredstreet hill at the sign of the
Star.


