A MATTER of moment: OR, A Case of Weight.

As great as ever was any, to be pleaded and examined in the Hall of the heart
and Conscience of every Christian at all times, before the receiving of the
Lords Supper.

Touching that weighty charge of the Apostle Paul, in the 1. Cor. 11.28. Let
every man examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread and drink of
this cup.

Set forth Dialogue wise.

AT LONDON, Printed by Robert Raworth, for Henry Bell, and are to be sold at
his shop on Holborne-hill, near the sign of the Crosse-keyes. 1608.

To the most high and mighty Prince, Henry, Prince of Great Britain, Son and
Heir Apparent to our Sovereign Lord the King.
MOst gracious and happy Prince: not long sithence a certain Religious
Gentleman asked me two questions touching those weighty words of the Apostle
Paul in the 1. Corin. 11. Let every man therefore examine himself, and so let
him eat of this bread, and drink of this cup. The first was: whether every
Christian be bound of necessity to examine themselves before they do receive
the Lords Supper or not.

The second was: wherein that examination of every ones self does consist, or
what the points be, which every Christian by this examination must find in
himself, before he can receive ahe Lords Supper.

Two questions, deserving a very careful answer, because they are as great and
as needful, as ever any can be in these days.

The former touches the careless Atheist, who is wont, to presume to the
Lords holy Supper, not caring what he does. The latter concerns the blind
ignorant sort, which are wont thither to flock (it is a wonder to see) not
knowing, what they do. By both which, this great Sacrament is every where
fearfully abused, and the breaches of Sion and the ruins of Jerusalem thereby
become most lamentable.

For this cause, at that time with my best endeavor, I answered the questions
in our private conference together, with all such doubts and objections, as did
arise from, and were occasioned by that our speech. Sithence, I handled the
same abroad by public preaching, as occasion was offered, which heard: I
understood, that many were delighted in the divine method. Many much rejoiced
at the plain and easy order, affirming, that they had red sundry godly
writings of the same argument, and heard diverse learnedly entreating of those
words of the Apostle: but that the way to the performance of this duty of
examination, was never tracted so plain, so ready, so easy. Lastly therefore,
not knowing what hurt the hiding up of this simple Talent may do: and again,
what gain and profit the occupying of the same abroad by Sea and land,
through Gods blessing might bring unto his Church, I thought best for that end
to put pen to paper, and humbly to dedicate the same to you (most noble Prince)
especially for two causes,

The first and chiefest is: after your most noble Father, our most gracious
Sovereign King James, whom God long preserve, you are our next gladsome hope,
to govern these Realms and Kingdoms with wholesome Laws, and chiefly with
sincere love unto Gods true Religion, whereof this little book contains a
part: wherein (I hope) your gracious clemency will not only take well in
worth my good will and meaning, but also will put thereto the signet of your
princely license and allowance, under which this little Talent, Quod sentio,
quam sit exiguum, may pass, be traded, and used, the rather because it is the
merchandise of heavens kingdom.

The other cause is: as my grandfather Doctor Tie was Tutor to Prince Edward,
afterward King Edward the sixth: so likewise, though I neither desire, nor
deserve the like place, yet am I glad (most noble Prince) to show any token of
mine unfeigned hearty duty and love unto your Grace, whereby (so far as I may
be bold) I might bid you hearty welcome into these your Fathers Dominions:
wherein in my daily prayers, I humbly crave of almighty God, in all happy
peace to establish his excellent Majesty, and his royal Progeny even to the
worlds end.

Your HIGHNESS, in all humbleness of duty to be commanded, William Tie.

A Dialogue, touching Examination before the receiving of the Lords Supper.
Lately had between, A christian Gentleman making objection, and A Minister
making answer.

Objection. SIr, I have had a purpose to confer with you in a matter of
weight, touching the Lords holy Supper, if I might find you at leisure.


Answer. And I (good Sir) in a matter so weighty would gladly hear you. I
pray you say on.


Object. That worthy Apostle Saint Paul, in his Epistle written to the
Corinthians, the eleventh chapter has these words.

Let every man examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread, and drink
of this cup. Touching that Examination of every ones self, I would crave
your resolution in two points.


Ans. My best endeavor is ready, what be those two points?


Object. First I would be resolved, whether every one be of necessity bound
to examine themselves before they do eat of the bread and drink of the cup
in the Lords Supper: And if it be so. Secondly, I would know wherein that
examination of ones self does consist, or for what every one must examine
themselves? For an infinite number through infidelity, doubting of the former,
do altogether neglect this examination of themselves: and many again, willing
to perform it, know not how to enter into the latter, namely, wherein, or for
what they should examine themselves.


An. Every one is bound of necessity to examine himself before he do
receive the Lords Supper.
To your first question I answer affirmatively, namely, that every one is bound
of necessity to examine himself, before he do eat of the bread and drink
of the cup in the Lords Supper. and I hope, none so wicked to deny it.


Object. For my part I do neither deny it, nor doubt of it: but yet I would
be better resolved by some reasons that it is so.


Ans. If reasons you would have in so plain a case, then mark them well. I
will prove it unto you by Reasons, and those of force. The first Reason.
The first may be drawn from the authority of the Apostle in this manner.
Paul speaking by the spirit of God, commanded every one to examine himself
before he do receive the Lords Supper. Therefore every one is bound of
necessity to do it. And if there were none other Reason, this only would be
of sufficient force to prove it. But hear a second, The second Reason.
thus: Every one is bound by necessity to know before hand, whether he shall
eat and drink the Lords Supper worthily, that is, as becomes such a supper
to be eaten and drunk, not perverting the right and pure use thereof.

But none can know that, except they examine themselves.

Therefore it is clear, that every one is bound of necessity to examine
himself, before he do eat and drink the Lords Supper.

The third Reason.
A third reason is set down by the Apostle himself in that 1. Cor. 11, and it
is drawn from the indignity or heynousnesse of offense in the unworthy eating
and drinking the Lords supper in this manner.

That party, that eats and drinks the Lords supper unworthily, that is,
otherwise then it becomes such a supper to be eaten and drunk, perverting the
right and pure use thereof, that party is guilty of the body and blood of the
Lord, even as if he should vilely contemn the same, and trample it under his
feet.

Therefore it behooves every one, and every one is bound of necessity to
examine himself before hand, how he is fitted to eat and drink the Lords
supper.

A fourth reason is drawn from the fearful punishment and woe, The fourth
Reason.
which most assuredly they do pull upon themselves, who do eat and drink
the Lords supper unworthily in this manner: whosoever eats and drinks the
Lords supper unworthily, that party eats and drinks his own damnation;
as our first parents in paradise did eat their own death by eating the
forbidden fruit.

Therefore, upon pain of damnation, every one is bound of necessity to
examine himself, how he is prepared to eat and drink the same. If you would
have a fifth reason, it holds very strongly from the lesser to the greater,
thus: The fifth Reason.
If in their earthly affairs and business, men do think themselves bound of
necessity before hand, to examine and make inquiry as well into the affairs
of themselves, what and of what condition they be, as into their own selves,
how they may find themselves able, fit, and meet to accomplish the same, lest
they should take them in hand unwisely, in vain, or with their loss and hurt:
then who will not much more think themselves bound of necessity to make the
same examination, and inquiry in spiritual affairs, but especially in this so
heavenly business, the eating and drinking of the Lords Supper: wherein we
cannot offend without the high displeasure and dishonor of our God. Wherein we
cannot offend without the deserved danger of eternal condemnation: and wherein
if we consider the meat and drink it self, with other common meats and
drinks, there may no comparison stand between the^ in any respect at all.
John. 6.55.
My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed (says our Savior
Christ.) For other meats and drinks are earthly and corporal, but this is
heavenly and spiritual. Other meat and drink, whether we eat and drink or
not, we shall surely die; but this meat and drink, he only does die, which
does not receive and he does live for ever which does receive it. Other meat
and drink does assuage hunger and thirst, but this meat and drink, I mean
still being spiritually and by Faith truly received, does more and more
sharpen the same, breeding in us an insatiable desire and longing after them.

Other meat and drink, are converted into the substance of the eatet and
drinker; but this, Not the elements of bread and wine.
abiding still the same without corruption, does convert the true religious
eaters and drinkers thereof into it self, making the^ of humane, divine, of
carnal, spiritual of ungodly minded, to lead a life beseeming God. John 6.56.
For he that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood (says our Savior) he
dwells in me, as a member incorporated into the body and branch, into the
vine. And I in him; namely, by my spirit, whereby he does live. Other meat and
drink, before they be received, are first to be examined, tried, and proved,
lest by any evil condition in them, they hurt us. But before we presume to
participate of this meat and drink in the Lords supper, we must first
examine, try, and prove our selves, lest we dishonor them, and become hurtful
to our selves, through our own fault.


Object. I would to God your reasons were known, not unto me alone here by
private conference, but unto the whole world also by public writing. For (I
think) they are of force not only to wrest from the most untoward and crooked
spirit, that is, a free confession that it is so, but also to force out of the
heart of flint a flood of tears, to bewail every former neglect thereof, and
further to drive it ever hereafter, diligently and carefully to put the same
in practice, and never in any case to omit this godly, wise, and careful
examination of ones self, before the receiving of the Lords Supper. But (good
Sir) from your present speech now, me thinks, do arise two doubts more,
wherein I pray you satisfy me in a word.


An. I pray you say on.


Object. Is then the examination of others by the Minister, before the
receiving of the Lords Supper forbidden, or needelesse?


Ans. It is more then plain by the holy scriptures, that examination by the
Minister of those committed to his charge, where need shall be: Genesis 18. Josh.
24. Ministers, fathers, and householders ought to examine their parishioners,
children and servants.
by the father of his children, by the Master of his servants, is not only not
forbidden, but straightly commanded, and highly commended, (howsoever alas) it
be too carelessly put in practice of such as one day will tremble and quake to
come to their answer for it.) And so much the more commended, if it be done
with that care and conscience that it ought: namely, not for auricular
confession, and then all is well, as the Papists dream, or for custom and
show: but for to prove, how they know their duty therein, to teach them, if
they know it not: yea, and not even then to thrust it into their mouths, when
they are to receive the Supper: but in such due season, as they may be sure to
be perfect in it. Unto the which examination, as every Minister, father, and
master is bound: so likewise is every parishioner, child, and servant,
reuerendly and willingly to submit themselves thereunto, before they come unto
the Lords Table. But yet notwithstanding, this examination by an other cannot
secure, neither is any safe warrant for any man: for one man may deceive an
other, and the examined may deceive the examiner in most points, but no man can
deceive the judgment of his own conscience. Though the former examination of
one man by another be needful, necessary, commanded, and commended, and though
one be examined by an other a thousand times, yet the examination of ones self,
is in no wise to be omitted, but carefully to be held fast, because it is most
certain, and cannot deceive: and therefore the Apostle says rather; Let a man
examine himself: and in an other place; 2. Cor. 13.
Examine your selves: know ye not your own selves?


Ob. You have fully satisfied me herein also. But this one question more: Is it
not required, that one do examine and inquire into those, with whom he is to
communicate, and that he do find them worthily prepared, before he can safely
communicate with them?


An. Hereto I answer you: Some are too busy examiners and searchers into
others.
that some with the Anabaptisticall sect, are too busy searchers into others,
in the mean while altogether neglecting themselves. And some again, with
these Anabaptists, imitating those proud spirits of the old Cathari, and after
them of the Donatists, do falsely flatter themselves with a persuasion of
absolute and perfect holiness in this life, and as I cannot tell, what spirits
made wholly of the air, do contemn the company and fellowship of all men, in
whom there does appear at any time any manner of humane want or imperfection
in this life. And further, if where the Gospel is preached, there appear not
forthwith fruits of life, answerable to the same, do by and by cry out that
there is no Church, and therefore they can have no community nor fellowship,
especially at the Lords Supper: whom the Apostle did seem also to respect,
when he said; Let every one therefore examine, not those with whom he is to
communicate; but himself, and themselves. In the mean while, it is not my
meaning to please any careless Athiests of these times, who so soon as they
shall hear, that none can here in this world live perfectly, and that GOD
does not impute unto his faithful children all their weak infirmities, do
straight way here upon imagine, that they may securely wallowe in all kind of
malice, mischief, and wickedness. Neither is it my meaning, to give liberty
of profaning the Lords Supper unto any, by their careless and sensual
presuming to the same. For it is to be wished, that every one, who is
manifestly known to be an impenitent Adulterer, or Adulteress, a forsworn
person, or a common swearer, a Drunkard, an uncharitable contender, a careless
hearer, or a scorner of the Word and ministry thereof, that such like, I say,
And so they are, if they be complained of.
what soever they be, should by the censure and discipline of the Church
appointed, be excommunitated, banished from the Church of Christ, and cast out
of the kingdom: and by that means, excluded from the Lords Supper, until
they should show again manifest tokers of repentance. Or if at any time,
perhapes through any let and occation, the same excommunication cannot readily
be had, And this also is freely permitted. Cannon. 26.
that then every Minister, to whom it may properly belong, having manifest
knowledge thereof, might be of Chrisostomes mind; who said, he would rather
spend his own body, then impart the Sacramental signs of Christ's body unto
such persons: knowing, that they, who do willingly, and wittinglie admit
them, have their hands as deep in profaning of Gods covenant, as the
impenitent parties themselves: because they do admit, and allow them for Gods
friends, who are Gods enemies, and would make God such a one, as has entered a
covenant, and is in league with Infidels and Hipocrites. But, to come nearer to
your demand, if any such impenitent sinners so manifestly known, be at any
time allowed and suffered at the Lords table, the blame then must and does rest
upon those, who have such authority to repel and keep them back. As for any
other private person of the congregation, it cannot hurt him to communicate
with such, neither ought their presence to let him, if by examination of
himself, he find himself fit, and worthylie prepared thereunto. For every
private person, in this case, shall render account unto his Lord and master,
not for others, but for himself. And the Apostle says not, Let every man
examine those, with whom they are to communicate: but, let every man examine
himself. Neither does he say, whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink
this cup of the Lord with others, that be unworthy, shall be guilty of the
body and blood of the Lord: But, whosoever shall eat and drink unworthily
himself, shall be guilty. etc. So that ye thing, which stands upon every ones
salvation, or condemnation in this business, is himself and themselves: every
one (I say) narrowly and with godly wisdom to examine and to lift into
himself. Wherein so many as have been careless heretofore, I counsel them
in the fear of God, to look unto it hereafter; or else to stand without
answer, and excuse at the day of judgment, when they would be full glad to
carry a clear conscience therein.


Object. Well then, seeing it cannot be shifted, but that every one is bound
of necessity to examine himself, before he presume to eat and drink the
Lords Supper: and seeing it is his own self that does so nearely touch and
concern every man: and seeing further, that you do so straightly advise every
man, ever hereafter to have a zealous care thereof, as of his own salvation. To
the end this may be, first diligently performed of every one, I pray you, next
now declare, wherein this examination of ones self does consist; and what it is
that every one must examine himself for. And secondly, to the end it may be
the better and more willingly performed of every one: I pray you secondly,
declare it with as easy order, and as briefly as may be. And the rather,
because I have heard some untoward and unwilling spirits (who think, that any
color will serve them for a just and blameless excuse) I have heard them give
out, I say, that they knew not where to begin any such examination of
themselves, how to go forwards in it, and that it is too tedious for their
brain, to whom by your good means, I hope, this private conference shall
publicly be made known.


Ans. I think your meaning is to have it set down in a few general heads,
under which all other particular duties may be comprehended.


Object. That is my meaning indeed. Examination of ones self consists in
three things in general.



Ans. The examination then of ones self, does consist briefly in three
things, that is to say, in knowledge, in faith, in a full purpose to live and
practice, according to that knowledge and faith: or if you will have it
plainer, thus; Before a man do eat and drink the Lords Supper, he must
examine himself: first, whether he have such knowledge, as he ought to have.
Secondly, whether he have faith, to believe that he knows. Thirdly, whether
he come with a resolute purpose, to live according unto that his knowledge and
faith. For whosoever shall find in himself these three, he may assure
himself, that he does worthily eat and drink the Lords Supper, because
they do comprehend all other particular duties required thereunto.


Object. The first thing, for which every one must examine himself before he
do eat and drink the Lords Supper (you say) is knowledge.


Ans. Knowledge is necessarily the first in this examination.
I put knowledge indeed in the first place, and (I think) very necessarily.
For how is it possible for any man to take any thing in hand, and do it
aright, except he do thoroughly know, what belongs unto the same. Now is it
possible, that he should eat and drink the Lords Supper worthily, who does
not know what is required to the worthy eating and drinking of the Lords
Supper? when our Savior said unto the Saduces, Matt. 22.
Ye do err not knowing the Scriptures. Did he not say plainly, that the
want of knowledge was the cause of their erring, being deceived and dealing
awry. When the Prophet David said; Psalm. 119.
Thy word is a Lantern unto my feet and a light unto my paths; did he not
clearly teach, that the knowledge of the word of God, must direct our actions
and proceedings, and that without the same knowledge we walk in darkness, we
know not what we do, nor whether we go? I think this is so plain, that it
needs no further disputing.


Ob. Why: must a plain simple man, that can never a letter upon the book,
come furnished with this knowledge, before he can eat and drink the Lords
Supper? what if such a one should come to you and say? The scriptures are too
busy for my head, I know how to earne my living with the sweat of my brows,
honestly and truly, I trust I know as the rest of my neighbors know: I hope
they mean well, they mean no hurt at their coming to the Lords Table, nor
no more do I: or such like speeches: would not this be sufficient for him?


Answ. I know no difference the scriptures make in this respect, between the
learned and unlearned, between the simplest and the wisest of all, neither yet
any dispensation the one has more then the other: but this I know, Ignorance
is no excuse
that ignorance is no excuse for any, by these our Saviors own words; Luke,
12.
But that servant that knew not his Masters will, and yet did commit things
worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes. This I know, that none
can plead ignorance: for the Lord God speaks generally unto all by his
servant Moses, Deuteronomy 3^.
The word which I command thee this day, is not hid from thee, neither is far
of: It is not in heaven, that thou need to say, Who shall ascend for us into
heaven to fetch it unto us, and to declare it unto us, that we may do it:
neither is it beyond the sea, that thou need to say, who shall go over the
sea to bring it, and to declare it unto us, that we may do it: but this word
is very near thee, even in thy mouth and in thine heart to do it. This I know,
Iosu. 1.
that all sorts of people ought to know the Scriptures. This I know, The
Scriptures are easy to the simplest, observing three things
that the Scriptures are easy unto the plain and most simple people that are,
observing but three conditions.

The first, if by zealous prayer they shall call for the illumination of Gods
spirit.

The second, if they shall bestow the like endeavor, care, and study, to know
them, that they do and can upon cunning fetches for their worldly profit:
whereof if a book should be framed twice as large as the Bible, it would soon
be known even of the simplest, yea, though he could never a letter on the
book (as you say) yet he would have it at one hand or other, and it would
busy his head never a whit. The third, if they shall desire and labor to know
the scriptures to the end to keep the will of the Lord revealed in them: they
are King David's words; The Law of the Lord gives wisdom unto the simple.
Psalm 19. Pro. 14.
Wise Solomon says; A scorner seeks wisdom, and finds it not: but
knowledge is easy to him, that will understand. And when David would persuade
the Lord, to teach him to know his will, he draws the Lord, as it were,
with this reason, because he will keep his will; when he knows it: Teach me
(O Lord) the way of thy statutes, and I will keep it unto the end. O give me
understanding, and I will keep thy law, yea I will keep it with my whole
heart.

And to conclud, this I know, that the simplest and plainest man that is,
would be ashamed to be found unskillful, and to be taken tardy, in the
profession that he has taken upon him. If his knowledge fail in the trade,
he was never bound apprentice unto; if his knowledge fail in the Art of
Logic, Rhetoric, or in the mystery of Astronomy, or such like: why in this
he is not to be blamed: but if his knowledge fail in ye points of
Christianity, whereunto he was bound apprentice in Baptism, which he took
upon him to profess at the time of his Baptism, and wherein he has served so
long appre^tiship: I think, in this he is worthy to be blamed: I trow, in
this ye simplest of us all would take great shame, to be found unlearned and
unskillful. If any, intending to receive the Lords Supper, should come to me
with such answer, as you say: I know how to earne my living with the sweat of
my brows, etc: (as indeed I think too to many hold it for the answer of a
sound Christian) surely I should be driven against my will, to reply upon him
again with these words: If this be all the knowledge that you have, and look
for, then a bruit beast is, for knowledge, as good a Christian as you: then a
bruit beast may for his knowledge (I speak it with reverence: be admitted to
the Communion as well as you: for a bruit beast knows how to get his living
with the sweat and labor of his body as well as you, and no more do you look
for. Further, I would reply again from the Apostle Paul: You would pretend a
zeal and devotion, Romans 10,
but the zeal and devotion of any whatsoever, either to God or godliness, is
nothing worth, if it be not according unto knowledge. Zeal without knowledge
is condemned
If any man intend to go to any place, he must keep the way, that leads
unto it: if any man have a zeal and devotion to God, and do seek God from
the heart, of necessity he must keep the way, that leads unto him, and
that way is his word. It is better (says Saint Augustine) to halt in the way,
then to run swiftly out of the way. If we will be devout and religious, let
us take it for truth which Lactantius says: That is true religion, zeal, and
devotion, which is joined with the word of God. And therefore so many as come
unto the Supper of the Lord without the knowledge of this word to instruct and
tell them, what is here to be done, and how they ought to deal therein:
undoubtedly they do fare as they do, who are blindfolded and have their eyes
closed up.

A man would wonder, A most fit similitude,
to meet in the highway, Ten, Twenty, Thirty, or Forty people blindfolded
grabling to some long iournies end: Surely he would think them stark mad,
ever to take such a journey in hand in that order: and he would judge, that
they would either never or very hardly at all, come to the place they desire.
Even so in like sort, when thou see people flock unto the Lords Supper
without the knowledge of Gods holy word, to direct them, and to show them, how
to do it: behold, thou see a company blindfolded, and thou may as well
think them besides themselves, ever to take such a matter in hand so blindely:
and as well thou may judge and say, that they will never come to heaven, and
to God, to whom they do travel, or rather do but seem to travel.


Ob. These things (I would think) are of force, to make every man rowse up
himself, and to look about him, before he do approach unto Gods Table, but
especially the plain unlearned man, who (silly soul) is wont to persuade
himself, if he come thither, with a good meaning and intent, proceeding from a
blind zeal and devotion, that then he has done his duty very well;
Therefore, for his better help and comfort, show, I pray you, what means he
has to get this knowledge, required of him, and to avoid this dangerous
ignorance, wherewith he is wont to come so blindfolded to the Lords Supper.


Answ. The means that every rude, Means to attain to the knowledge of Gods
word.
and ignorant person has to attain to the knowledge of, and in the word of
God, are these. First, and principally, they must, after the example of David,
Psalm. 119.
as was said before, The first means.
with singlenes of heart in prayer, beseech the Lord to remove from their
minds and understanding that palpable fogge and mist of their own natural
darkness and ignorance, and to illuminate the same with the light of his
spirit, observing always to pray, first, with an earnest zeal, and affection
to the knowledge of this word, secondly with an unfeigned purpose, knowing the
same, to lead their lives thereafter. The second means.
This done, then if they have a Prophet, which has that Vrim upon is
brestplate, that is, who is adorned with the light of knowledge, unto whose
public teaching they may resort: first, Hebr. 6.
for their catechizing, and instruction in the principles, grounds, and
foundation of religion: because in a building order requires, that first of
all the foundation be laid: afterward for more perfect and sound doctrine, 1
Cor. 2,
and stronger meat, as the building goes forward, and grows toward
perfection, yea, and unto whom they may have still recourse by private
conference, for to be resolved of every doubt: Because (as the Prophet
Malachie says) The Priests lips must preserve knowledge, Mala. 2.
and from him as from Gods storehouse, they are to have their wantes supplied.
If, I say, God has in his superabundant mercy blessed them with such a
Prophet and Pastor, then must they not wish him out of their coasts for
dealinge against their swine: that is against their uncleanness and
filthynesse, as the Gergesenes wished Christ: Neither must they neglect and
abuse this blessing, but with all true thankfulness use the same, and with
the Purple seller Lidia, Math. 8
lend him the hearing withal diligent and reverent attention, and with the
clean beasts in the law, chew the cudde, Act. 16 The third means Leu. 11
that is seriously meditate upon whatsoever they have heard and received from
him, least it go in at the one ear and out at the other.

But if there be no Prophet in Israel, if they have no such Pastor, unto whom
as unto a Nursse, they may so fly for their spiritual food, and sustenance:
Then their next remeadie and means are, first according to the commandment
of our Savior, The fourth means.
to pray unto the endless Fountain of all good gifts, that he would send
forth laborers into his harvest, Mat. 9.
to stay the spiritual famine of bread: that he would move the hearts, of
those which be in authority, to pity the silly sheep of Christ, and
likewise stir up the hearts of all those, who have in their hands the
planting and placing, yet now at the last, while the day does last, to make a
conscience, whom they set over Gods flock, and that they wuld become true
Patrons indeed: The patronage of Patrons ought to respect the flock of Christ.
that is, not so much of the man nor Benefit, as of the flock of Christ
Jesus. Secondly, and in the mean while, until by the merciful providence of
the Lord, the Harvest may be so furnished, these simple, rude, and ignorant
people, who cannot read themselves, must, for knowledge in Gods word, spend
that time in conference and reasoning with others, The fifth means.
either at home, or abroad, at one hand or other, if they have a will
thereunto, which they are wont idly, vainly, and upon unfruitful works
many ways to misspend.

And further, they must lend their ears to such, as can read good books,
English, and Englished writers, wherewith, if they will but step out of
Westminster road, into Paul's Church-yeard, the stalls stand so stored, yea,
and which are in such abundance brought home almost to their own doors,
wheresoever in any place within the Realm of England they have their dwelling,
that, who so does still remain ignorant of the way and will of the Lord,
revealed in his word, they must needs be willingly, wilfully, and obstinately
ignorant, and shall surely abide the punishment of wilful, stifnecked, and
obstinate persons without all excuse.


Object. Doubtless you have said very well, that the first thing which every
one must examine themselves, before they presume to come unto the Lords Table,
is knowledge. You have likewise proved, that this knowledge is required at the
hands of every one, learned and unlearned, wise and simple, and that no man
has any dispensation, or tolleration to come thither ignorantly, more then an
other. You have further showed the means, whereby every one may come by it,
if they will.

But now, I pray you, in the mean time, omit not to show in brief order,
wherein this knowledge does consist, or what be the particulars, which every
one must know, before they can be worthy partakers of the Lords Supper?


An. The matter it self, we have in hand, is good and godly, and through Gods
blessing may hereafter tend to his glory, and the increase of his Church.
Besides, it I should wax weary, yet your forward desire and willingness to
learn, would stir up and encourage me to go on. If all, that be ignorant,
would take your course, surely all might come to knowledge needful unto
salvation. I wish, your example might not be lightly passed over. You have had
mine endeavor hitherto, and you shall likewise have it in this if God permit.

You would learn further (you say) what knowledge every one by examination of
themselves must find in themselves, before they can be worthy partakers of
the Lords Supper. And herein, according to your own Christian motion, I would
rather seek to profit many by plain order, then to please a few by curious
art and cunning division. For your demand therefore: this knowledge
doubtless, I cannot see, where it can begin with that profit and order, that
it ought else, The degrees of knowledge before the receiving of the Lords
Supper.
then at man's creation, for the first degree thereof. And therefore before I
do presume to come unto the Lords supper: I must find my self to know
particularly and in order to this effect.

The first degree.
The first, that in my first Parents Adam and Eve, the Lord God created me and
all mankind, in soul according to his own image and likeness, Genesis 1
in righteousness and true holiness, in body without fault or blemish: in a
word, both in soul and body, a most glorious creature, furnished with all
heavenly and glorious prerogatives, able of my self to do the will of my God
without any kind of contradiction, Man's first estate glorious.
or check, which might come from any imperfection, either of soul or body:
which was my first estate.

The second degree of knowledge.
The second, That because good reason it was, I should acknowledge a Lord above
my self, even my almighty and merciful Creator, therefore the same my Lord
and God gave me an easy commandment, to keep and obey: Genesis 2
namely, that I should not eat of the fruit of one only Tree in Paradise, the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil, upon pain, if I did eat, to dye the
death.

The third, The third degree of knoledge.
that the consideration neither of the infinite goodness and mercy of my
maker, neither of my most perfect and free estate, neither of the easines of
the commandment, nor yet the punishment threatened for the breach of it, could
make me bold me fast by God, and to the obedience of his commandments. But
(wretch that I was) I must needs forsake my maker, and subject my self unto
the obedience of the Devil my destroyer: and so, according to his damnable will
and word, I must eat of the forbidden fruit, Genesis 3
of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil. Whereby indeed I came to ye knowledge
of the good lost, and the evil found (for so the Devil iug^ingly meant) which
I least thought ^f: whereby I lost al former good, glory, perfection, and
freedom both of ^ody and soul, and found all man^er of evil, ignominy,
imperfection, and ^hraldome, both of body and soul: whereby I made my self
unable, in every part ever afterward also to keep the commandment of my God,
or to step any righteous step at all, whereby in a word, I did cast my
self down headlong from the top of all happiness, into the depth of all misery
in this life, and into the infernal gulf of endless torment and damnation in
the world to come, Man's second estate wretched.
which was my second estate, and of al mankind.


Object. Before you go any further, I pray you suffer me one word. It seems to
me that this knowledge of man's first and second estate, makes little to the
worthy receiving of the Lords Supper, because it belongs not unto the same.


Ans. I do not say, that these my two former estates are any part of the Lords
Supper, or that they belong either to the benefit or use of the Supper it
self; but that the knowledge of them must bring me, by order unto the
knowledge of the benefit and use of the Lords Supper. For before I can truly
know and confess any benefit and restoring in Christ, I must first know and
confess, that I was in misery: before I do fly unto Christ for succor, I
will first know some reason why, and that I have need of succor, and what
drives me unto Christ.

Now, the Law, Romans 3.
which lays before me my misery, sin, unrighteousness, and eternal
damnation, because I cannot now, through my fall, and disobedience keep it; It
is (says the Apostle) a Schoolemaister or Usher, Gal. 3.
which sendes me unto Christ; for righteousness and salvation in him. And
therefore these two former estates, are as it were the Alphabet, A, B, C, or
first entrance, where I must first begin in the school of God, and which I
must first know out of his word, before I can come either orderly, or
profitably unto any riper knowledge of that good and benefit which is offered
me in Christ, and so consequently in his holy supper.


Object. I do now see your course, and order right well: it is right plain
and profitable, I pray you, go on unto the fourth point.


Auns. The fourth point of knowledge, which by examination of my self, I must
find my self to know, before I come unto the Lords Supper, The fourth degree
of knowledge.
is to this effect. Namely, that the Lord God on the one side, because he
would, and must have his justice satisfied for my sin, and the sin of all
mankind, which justice requires, that as true and very man, had sinned against
God: so of necessity, true, and very man, must satisfy his justice with
death, and torments both of body and soul for that sin, according to the
sentence of his just word. G^n. 2.
Man's third and last estate restored by Christ.
And of the other side, because he would in this his justice become merciful
unto man too, has in his rich wisdom, caused his only son being very God,
to take my nature upon him, and to become also very man: who in the same his
humane nature, might satisfy GODS justice for my sin, by death, and
torments due unto me for the same: and by virtue and power of his Godhead
might be able to sustain, and bear in his flesh the wrath and punishment,
might be able to deliver me also from the same, and might repair in me, and
restore unto me again that righteousness, life, and blessedness, which I
had lost by my fall, and disobedience: which his mercy the Lord first set a
broach in Paradise, after that he published the same by his Patriarchs, and
Prophets: Thirdly, he shadowed it out, by sacrifices, and ceremonies of the
Law: and lastly, fully accomplished it by the same his own only son.

The fifth point of knowledge, The fifth degree of knowledge.
which by examination of my self I must find in my self, before I come to
the Lords Supper is, that as GOD does thus offer, and reach out his hand of
mercy unto me, Ephe. 2
so likewise I must have another hand to take it: it is my part to apprehend,
As God has a hand to give, so we must have a hand to take.
to take and lay hold upon the same with the hand of faith, as the only
isntrumental cause of my salvation, least it be alleged against me, I
would, Math. 23
but you would not.

Sixthly, and to come nearer the matter: before I come unto the Lords Supper,
by examination of my self I must find my self to know, The sixth degree of
knowledge.
that the Lord God has ordained and instituted helps, and seals to
strengthen and confirm this my faith, in that his mercy promised and offered
in his son: namely his word, and two Sacraments, Baptism, and the Supper of
the Lord.

The seventh degree of knowledge.
In the seventh place, by examination I must find my self to know, before I
presume to come unto the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: that in a Sacrament
two things are to be considered.

The first is a visible and outward sign, the second an invisible and inward
grace signified thereby: And in the sacrament of baptism, the visible and
outward sign to be, water, sprinkled upon the body of the party baptized,
to the washing away of the filthiness of the body: The invisible or inward
grace signified thereby, to be the blood of Christ sprinkled upon the soul by
faith, wrought by the holy Ghost, whereby the spiritual filthiness of the soul
is washed away and forgiven, the righteousness of Christ imputed unto the
party, the old man of sin mortified and slain, the new man of righteousness
raised up and revived, answerable unto the death and resurrection of Christ: by
which Sacrament the Lord first of all does admit us into his Church and family.

Also in the Sacrament of ye Lords supper, the visible and outward signs
therein to be: First bread, broken and eaten, secondly wine distributed and
drunk the invisible and inward Grace signified thereby to be* First the Body
of Christ broken and crucified, Secondly the blood of Christ shed for to
pacify Gods wrath, and to satisfy his justice for my sins.

Again, that thereby is signified a full satisfaction of Gods justice, and a
perfect salvation purchased, without any thing wanting, because not only bread
is broken, signifying his body crucified, but also wine is distributed,
signifying his blood shed.

Thirdly: that thereby is signified the violence of Christ's death, his soul
being drawn and separated from his body, because there is seen breaking and
division of bread.

Fourthly: That thereby is signified our Union, uniting and growing into one
body and nature with Christ (receiving him by faith) even as surely and as
certainly, as the bread, and wine, which we eat, and drink in the Lords
Supper, are united, and grow into one body and nature with us. And that
therefore, seeing so by faith we become the true members of Christ, Bone of his
bone, and flesh of his flesh, and do grow into one body with him, even as
Eve, being formed, and taking of the substance of the body of Adam her
husband, became as it were part of him, nay one flesh with him. That
therefore (I say) it must needs follow of necessity, Christ his Members must
needs live by his spirit.
that we must take life from, and be governed by one and the self same
spirit of Christ, as all the members of one body take life from, John 6. John
15.
and are governed by one, and the same soul.

Whereupon if follows necessarily again ye so many as have not a godly care,
in their lives, and conuersatio^s to express the fruits, and graces of the
holy spirit, but do still delight, slauishly to serve Satan and sin, so many
do in vain flatter themselves, that they are the members of Christ, and that
they have received Christ in his holy supper, his death and passion, to the
forgiveness of their sins: Because Christ cannot be drawn from his spirit,
neither received without his spirit, but he, that eats his body, and drinks
his blood truly by faith, must needs eat and drink his spirit also, and so
consequently express the fruits of ye same spirit, in a regenerate life.

Secondly, because (I say) who so do eat the body, and drink the blood of
Christ crucified, and shed upon the cross truly, by faith, to the forgiveness
of their sins, they are members united unto Christ, they are grafted into
Christ, they dwell in Christ, and Christ in them. And they yt are grafted into
Christ, must needs take part of, and live by the spirit, and life, which is in
Christ, even as the branches which are grafted into the wine, do participate
and live of the sap and life of the vine.

In the fifth and last place, by examination of my self, I must find my self
to know, that, whereas we do feed not of sundry kinds of bread, and drink,
not of sundry cups, but al of us of one bread and one cup in regard of the
institution and Sacrament, hereby is taught and signified our unity and
community one with another also, that we ought to be of one body, that we
ought mutually to love one another, as members of one body, and as those,
which are fed and nourished by one body, by one meat, by one drink.

Here in this Sacrament all are one, and one is all. All come to one, and one
is made of all. For in an other respect, we see, of many grains of corn is
made one bread, of many grapes is made one wine: whereby is signified further,
that an especial end and drift of this Sacrament is, of the multitude of the
faithful, as of many members to make one body, and to knit them together in
one mutual relation and love.

It is reported by Salust a noble humane Historiographer, that they, which
conspired with Catiline against Rome, drank all of them aforehand man's blood,
whereby they would all make (as it were) a Consanguinity and affinity among
themselves, whereby they would all bind themselves, to will one thing, all to
mean and do one thing, and not any one to open the conspiracy, or to
disagree one from another in any sort, and therein they iumped and joined
together even unto the death.

Now, can the drinking of a mortal man's blood, so invented by man's malice, in
a wicked practice of a multitude of men, make one man: of many men, make one
body, one mind, one will, one consent one heart, and bring all to an unity? And
shall not the drinking of the blood of Christ, by faith, nay, the eating of his
flesh also, found out by the endless wisedo^e and goodness of God for man's
redemption, make all one, First with Christ, secondly, one with another: make
all one body, make one mind, one will, one consent, one heart, and bring all to
an unity in Christian love, mutual affection, and brotherly charity, one with
another? which is the su^me and whole scope of all christian Philosophy and
wisdom.

Surely light cannot agree with darkness, nor the spirit of God, with the
spirit of Belial, No more can division and discord agree with unity.

This Sacrament is a Sacrament of unity, therefore it cannot abide, neither
admit a cloven heart, divided from his brother. And thus as by the Sacrament of
Baptism, our God does admit us into his house and family, not as servants, but
as children: So likewise by this Sacrament of the Lords Supper, as a provident
Father, does he feed, and nourish us in the same, with the living bread of
his dear son unto a true and blessed immortality.

And this is the knowledge briefly, for which every one must examine
themselves, before they presume to the Lords supper.


Object. But you said in the beginning of our speech, that this examination
does consist in three things. In the first place, you have well and
necessarily placed knowledge, I pray you therefore proceed unto the second?


Ans. Faith is the second thing for which we must examine our selves before we
come to the Lords Supper.
I said, that the second thing, for which every one must examine themselves,
before they do eat and drink the Lords supper, is faith. And surely faith
comes as necessarily in the second place, as knowledge came in the first. For
as there can be no faith without knowledge, so again to bare knowledge can be
to no purpose without faith, that is, except one do believe that, he knows
in Gods word.


Object. Explain it, I pray you a little more plainly, what faith do you
mean?


Answ. I mean not an Historical faith which is but only a bare knowledge of
the history of those things which are contained in Gods book, Faith
Historical.
assenting also unto the truth of them, which faith the very devils have, and
would gladly have it utterly extinct and put out. James 2.


I mean not a Temporary faith, which steps a step higher, that is, which does
not only know, and give assent unto the truth of Gods word, Faith temporary.
but does also profes the same, yea and joy thereinto, yet it is but for a
small time (as says our Savior) and not because it has any hearty and lively
feeling of Grace offered in the word neither, but for other by causes, as vain
glory, Mat. 17. 1. Cor. 13.
worldly profit, and such like. I mean not a miraculous faith, Faith by
Miracles.
whereby through divine revelation, a man may be surely persuaded, that through
divine power he can remove mountains, or work other miracles. Faith
justifying and a true difinition thereof.
But I mean that sweet Justifying faith, which does not only know, give
consent, and profes: But which is further, a grounded and resolved assurance of
Gods free promise of Grace in Jesus Christ, which being sealed in my heart by
the holy Ghost through the means of the Gospel, works of necessity my
regeneration, and conversion from the old Adam, unto a new creature, from the
works of darkness, unto the works of light, and righteous obedience.


Object. Your meaning is now plain. Before one presumes to be partaker of
the Lords Supper, he must examine himself: First for Knowledge, Secondly for
a Justifying faith: But by your leave (good sir) a word: If this Justifying
faith does always show forth the fruits of regeneration, conversion, and
righteous obedience, in that party, whomesoeuer it does posses, what needs
then, any further examination? I mean, what needs a man examine himself for
a third point, namely, whether he finds in himself a resolute purpose, to
practice according to that his knowledge and faith, in the rest of his life?


Ans. I answer you thus. Too too many do blindly, and hypocritically imagine,
yt the outward profession of their belief, namely the Apostles creed, without
all respect had unto life and manners, is a true justifying and saving faith
which indeed is but a dead carkas of faith, as a dead man, wanting both life
and spirit, is no true man but a dead carkas of a man: now therefore least any
man examining himself for faith, should deceive himself with such a faith, and
again, because every one should have unto himself, and also show unto others
a sure mark and evidence of a justifying faith, without all deceit: I have
added hereunto this third point of examination, Namely, that every one should
examine themselves also, whether they come unto the Lords Supper, in
sincerity, and singlenes of heart, all hypocrisy laid aside, with a resolute
purpose in the rest of their lives, to practice and live according to the same
their knowledge and faith, that is, with a resolute purpose, to abhor and
fly sin, and to embrace godliness throughout their whole life. For to this
end the Apostle James, James 2.
reasoning very divinely, seems to make a double justification of man, the
one from God, the other from man him self. God apparently sees and knows as
all things else visible, and inuisable, spiritual, and earthly, so the
justifying faith of uery man, how it is seated in his heart, without any
helps, marks, or tokens, for it self, and in it self, without all other
respects, justifying the man. But to man this faith, being purely spiritual,
cannot without his faithful marks and fruits be seen and known, with flat
and resolute assurance, no not to him that has it.

Therefore as God does justify a man by his faith, so a man must justify
himself by his works, that is, his faithful actions, and works must resolve
him, and prove unto him, that he is possessed of a true justifying faith,
allowed and approved of God, least otherwise he be deceived with a shadow and
visard of faith. James 2.


The words of the Apostle are plain, first he says, show me thy faith by
thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my works: Secondly, was not Abraham
our father justified by works? That is, known by his works before men, to
have a iustifiing faith before God, when he offered Isaac his son upon the
Altar. Thirdly, ye see that a man is justified by works, and not by faith
only, namely of man.

By which places of the Apostle it is clearer then the noone day, that his
justifying faith cannot be known unto man, but by his works: That (I say) his
resolute purpose to lead a godly, and a Christian life, and indeed the due
execution of the same, must show and make it evident both unto himself and
unto others yt his soul is possessed of a justifying faith before God: yt in
this his examination of himself, he is not deceived, and so consequently, that
he eats, and drinks the Lords supper worthily unto Gods glory, and his own
everlasting comfort.


Object. This also now is very plain. This third point of examination is
doubtless as necessary, as the other two: and comes (me thinks) in a comely
and divine order. I have but one demand more (good sir) for a full conclusion.


Ans. Say on I pray you.


Object. I do hear your self and other preachers of the word daily teaching,
(and I believe assuredly, that you teach truly,) that a true justifying faith
does always bring forth the fruits of regeneration, newness of life, and
righteous obedience, and does always declare it self outwardly by works in
the party, whom it does possess. I know also, that, that notable instrument
of Gods glory the Apostle Paul in his Epistles, observes the like order, and
teaches the very same, who, after that he has first of all soundly laid down
the doctrine of faith, and strongly proved, that by only faith in the merits of
Christ a man is justified and saved: Then next of all he comes unto
exhortation, to manners and integrity of life, thereby plainly affirming as
much as you say: Namely, that Christians must adorn their faith and profession
with good works, and that a true justifying faith is ever abundantly fruitful
in the same good works.

Nay that which is more: I do know, that many zealous christians, even now in
our times do confirm the same doctrine by their lives and livings, who as
they do daily pray for a true justifying faith, and constantly profess
themselves to have the same, so do they also walk in all christian and dutiful
obedience to the commandments of God, ever endeavoring themselves to do well,
and to do good.

So that when I do lay their outward profession, of a justifying faith on the
one side, and their lives on the other side together, (me thinks) it does
strongly prove, this doctrine to be always infallibly true: That a true
justifying faith, and good works, are inseparable, and not to be found
asunder, no more then the Sun can be without his light, or fire his heat.
This (I say) I do hear, this I do know, both by the Scriptures, and examples
of these times, and this I do hold for truth.

But (the truth is) my self as many thousands more, do not yet in reason see,
how it does come to pass. My last suite therefore unto you is, that you would
prove by some-sound reasons, that a justifying faith, whersoeuer it does rest,
must needs be effectual, and fruitful, in holiness of life, and good
works: For doubtless though it be the truth, yet because they do not clearly
see it by manifest arguments and reasons, a great number cannot tell, whether
they should believe it or not. And therefore though they have but only a bare
Historical faith without all respect unto works and manners, yet they flatter
themselves, that the same is a true justifying faith, whereas if they were able
to convince them selves by sound reasons, many of them (I am persuaded) would
be as ready to forsake their error, they would be as willing to embrace the
true justifying faith, and to express the same, by all dutiful obedience to
the commandments of God in their lives, as ever they were to maintain a bare
Historical faith with looseness of life. And now I atend your answer.


Ans. If you desire my answer for your resolution, then mark it well. None can
thoroughly know what a justifying faith is, but he only that has it


As no man can understand or comprehend what honey, and his seetnes is, though
you speak never so much thereof, save he only that has seen and tasted it:
7. So no man can understand, or comprehend, what a justifying faith, and the
force thereof is, save he only, that has it, and does believe: And as he that
has seen and tasted honey, A justifying faith it self is the best reason of
all other to prove the effectual working of the same We believe not through the
light of natural reason and understanding but we understand by believing.
needs no reasons to prove unto him the sweetness thereof, so he which has a
justifying faith, and does believe, needs no reasons to prove unto him, the
effectual force, and working of the same, it will prove and show it self.
Neither comes a man by reason, and understanding, to faith, and to believe, but
rather by believing he comes to understanding: For in human Philosophy, and
matters of the world, we will first by the light of reason understand the
matter to be so, and then afterward we will believe it: But in spiritual
things, and heavenly mysteries, faith goes before reason, and understanding
comes after.

For here by the light of the word we do believe those things, which neither
sense can perceive, cogitation conceive, nor understanding of the mind
comprehend, without the word.

And hence it was, John 3. John 20.
that Nichodemus, and Thomas, were so sharply reproved of our Savior Christ,
even because they would not believe, except they might be brought unto it by
their natural reason and sense. Now therefore, the sum of mine answer to
your demand is this.

First, if a justifying faith does not ground it self, upon the light of
natural reason, to do that it does, and to believe that it does believe, but
does effectually work, and do yt it does, of i^^^e without reason, and beyond
ye c^^^city of man: Then surely it is impossible to show the effectual force,
and working of the same, by arguments, and proofs of any reason. Secondly, if
none can comprehend, what a justifying faith, and force thereof is, but he
only that has it, and does believe: then doubtless he, that has it not,
cannot comprehend the sanctified force and operation of the same, in the life
and conversation, by all the reasons in the world, to him they are all in vain.

Thirdly, if a justifying faith, be reason sufficient of it self, and the
best reason of all other, to prove the effectual working thereof in the life
of that party, whomsoever it does possess: Then what needs a man to seek
further.

Then for him which seeks reasons to prove, that a justifying faith must needs
be fruitful in a godly life, and works, The best course is, to procure unto
him, this justifying faith it self, which (as all other good graces, and gifts
besides) is had and obtained by that strong and ever prevailing means with the
Lord, faithful, fervent, The neglect of prayer is the Canker of Religion.
and diligent prayer, the neglect and cold practice whereof is the decay, and
Canker of all religion.


FINIS.
A Prayer and meditation before the receiving of the holy Communion, in no wise
to be forgotten in thy Chamber privately.
O Eternal, almighty, and most merciful Father, which of thy tender mercy
to thy children, have always fed them with spiritual and heavenly food,
feeding to blessed immortality, which is the bread of life, and this bread of
life is thy son, as it is written John 6.5. ver. 35. I am the bread of life,
which came down from heaven: he that comes to me shall not hunger in any
wise, and he that believes in me shall never thirst, and the bread which I
shall give, is my flesh: which I will give for the life of the world.

O most sweet bread, heal thou my sick soul, and feeble heart, that I may
taste the sweetness of thy love: heal me of all mine infirmities, that I
delight in no fairness besides thee.

I do acknowledge, O Lord, that I am not worthy the least of all thy mercies,
and most unworthy to receive thee under the roof of my soul, by participating
thy most precious body and blood. For horrible are the sins wherewith I am
defiled Woe is me Lord, for I am a man of polluted lips, and dwell among
people that have unclean hearts. And yet again, my heart is wonderfully
lightened when I call into mind, that thou the dear son of Almighty God,
came not into this world to call the righteous, but the sinners to
repentance: for they that be whole need not the Physician, but the sick: I
humbly therefore beseech thee, O Lord, by thy holy spirit, to work that in my
heart, which I cannot work in my self, of my self: though I can try for my
belly meat, from meat, and for my pursse, coin from coin, yet can I not
prove and try my conscience, so full of blindness and self-love am I, and yet
this trial is required, and must be had of true Communicantes. I beseech thee
therefore give me grace, that before I presume to come to the participation
thereof, I may examine my self by calling my sins to mind, searching out my
ways, and confessing my sins: I may by hearty repentance return unto thee my
Lord, least otherwise by concealing my sins with Judas the traitor, I eat
but the bread of the Lord, against the Lord. Power into me a true and lively
faith, that I never mistrust thy word annexed to thy Sacraments, which
promises unto mankind, the remission of sins: for to eat and drink with ye
mouth only, is to no purpose: But faith must come thereunto and apprehend the
word, with the promises annexed, for they are the grounds and principles of
this Sacrament: O Lord strengthen my faith and help me, so to use thy holy
Sacraments, that my weakness may be helped, true love and charity increased,
my sinful life amended, and my soul comforted, through Christ my Savior, to
whom with the father, and the holy spirit, be ascribed all honor, power, and
glory, for ever.

Amen.
A thanksgiving after the receiving of the holy Communion, especially to be
used in thy Chamber privately.
AS thou have (O Lord) given me ye pledges of thy love, even thy holy
Sacraments, and as thou have given me faith effectually to receive them, so
good Lord give me thy blessed spirit and grace, to be heartily thankful, least
I be like the nine unthankful leapers which our Savior cleansed: But rather let
me follow ye wise counsel of Jesus, the son of Sirach: Above al things give
thanks to him that made thee, and has replenished thee with his goods: and
what are these goods, even all that I have, or may have, either te^porall, or
eternal, either wtin me, or without me, above or beneath me, all is the Lords,
and of his mercy I have them, for this blessed meat, which thou have in thy
great mercy left to thy Church, and to me as one of thy members, does truly
witness that my body sprinkled with the virtue of thy quickening flesh, as it
were with celestial dew, shall rise again unto immortality and everlasting
glory. O most precious and heavenly treasures, more to be desired then all the
fair gold and pearls in the world. Let me never doubt of the forgiunes of my
sins, which thou assurest me of by thy body and blood in thy holy covenant,
concluded in thy last supper, by the breaking of bread, and giving forth the
cup to thy chosen disciples, and by them to as many as are incorporated into
thy Church. So that no tribulation nor anguish, nor persecution, neither,
hunger, nor nakedness, neither perils, nor sword, neither death nor life, may
separate me from my head, whereupon being made fast by this holy sacrament
received, I as a living member do depend. And I beseech thee, O Lord, at my
resurrection, from death, appoint me a place at thy heavenly table, where I may
taste the new wine in the kingdom of thy father, abiding with thine elect
Angels, and blessed Saints for evermore.

Amen
FINIS.

