THE Figure of Antichriste, with the tokens of the end of the world, most
plainly disciphered by a Catholic and Divine exposition of the second Epistle
of Paul to the Thessalonians, collected out of the best and most approved
divines, both old and new, very profitable for all men in this age to read:

Published by Thomas Tymme, Minister.

Jmprinted at London for Fraunces Coldocke. 1586.

The names of the authors, out of whose works this exposition is taken, are
these following.
Bullinger. Calvin. Pelican. Paraphrast. Orcamenius. Pomeranus. Erasmus
Sarcerius. Iodochus Willichius. Vitus Theodorus. Christoph. Hofman. Aug.
Marlorat Chitraeus. Musculus. Irenaeus. Tertullian. Augustine. Chrisostom.
Ambrose. Theophilact.
To the Right Worshipful Sir Robert Wingfeeld Knight, Thomas Tymme wishes
increase of worship, with all spiritual grace and benediction in this life, and
perfect felicity with the saints, in Jesus Christ, in the life to come.
THE Evangelist, Luke. 1. Acts. 1.
S. Luke (Right Worshipful) had his Theophilus to whom he dedicated his
Gospel: a divine matter, to a godly man. This example may seem to have
procured many good men since that time, to dedicate the fruit of their learned
studies, to some of godly quality, that they might be as a Rampire to their
virtues, to repel those whelps of Cerberus that hellish dog and a bar to
peevish Momus, which will ever be finding fault in Apelles woork. Seeing
therefore that many of the best learned fathers in these latter evil times,
have gladly sought the protection of great states, I thought it not good to
publishe this little book, without the countenance of such a one as might be a
patron to the sa^e against such peuish carpers. The matter of it self is
such, as it needs not the weak defense of man, being the doctrine of the
holy Ghost, uttered by the blessed mouth of S. Paul: and yet the children of
God, are bound to defend and advance it to the uttermost of their power, on
the behalf of the Lord Christ, (to show their zeal and love) against his
adversary, that monster Antichrist: for the underpropping of whose kingdom,
those kings and nations of the earth, Apoc. 17.2. and 18.3.
which have tasted of the enchaunted cup of fornication of the Babilonicall
Strumpet, (which is a more pestilent cup then that Nectar of Cyrces, which
transformed men into beasts) do band themselves together even at this day, and
thereto do bend their whole forces. But the Lord will shortly destroy that
man of sin with the breath of his mouth. 2 Thessalonians. 1.
This is the matter (Right Woorshipfull) in it self excellent, the common
knowledge whereof is very necessary, because it occasioneth a demonstration of
the end of the world thereunto annexed, to awake careless Atheistes, which are
lulled asleep with worldly pleasure in the cradle of security: The expounders
also of the Apostle Paul's mind in this argument, (whose names are hereto
prefixed) are such principal pillars of the christian Church, as their
judgment will stand firm with out any just controlement. My pains in the
collection and translation out of Latin into English, (the least, yet
faithfully herein bestowed) I offer to your woorshippe, craving acceptance of
so small a gift. And because my case may paraduenture now stand no better then
it did long since with the Philosopher Theodorus Atheniensis, who complained
of great discourtesie showed unto him, because those things which he gave with
the right hand, were snatched up and taken by his auditorie with the left:
meaning thereby his works and lectures which he publishing to good purpose,
were wrested and sunderly by captious carpers canuassed with sinister
interpretations: therefore in most dutiful humility, I shroud my self under
the cloak of your courtesy, which I hear and partly know to be such, as I
look not to be shouldred out and rejected, but freely to be allowed the
benefit of your goodness. In assured hope whereof, I rest, leaving this as a
testimonye to the world, what a reverend opinion I have of you, both in
respect of your humble courtesy, (wherein you show forth the right pattern
of a Gentleman) and also in respect of that godly zeal toward the Gospel of
Christ, which by effect has always appeared to be in you. Thus praying God to
bless your worship, I wish charity from God to the world, peace at length
to his warfaring Church, confusion of all manner of hypocrites, favorable
inclination and Judgment of great personages to his word, and to the godly
travelers in his Gospel long life, and most prosperous reign to our gracious
sovereign Prince, and true happiness to al her subjects that wish the same: And
even with my whole heart, I pray God the father of heaven, and his son our
Lord Jesus Christ, to be a bright pillar to us in the darkness of this
world, and to make all his chosen people at his time, partners of the most
joyful and heavenly kingdom. Amen.

Your Worships ever to be commanded Thomas Tymme.

The Argument.
BECAUSE the Apostle Paul could not conuenie^tly return any more to see the
Thessalonians, he confirms their minds by this Epistle, that they might
constantly bear and endure affliction for Christ's sake, for the which they
should receive their reward, and their adversaries also their just Judgment from
the Lord. This is the content of the first chapter. Furthermore, because he
had written unto them in the former Epistle, that the last day would come
unawares, and had for the same cause also admonished them to watch, and not to
be careless: the Thessalonians thought that they should live to see the last
day. Wherefore in the second chapter, he does confute that vain and false
opinion, concerning the coming of Christ at hand (which with most men at that
time had prevailed) by the argument, because first there must be a departing
away in the church, and a great part of the world must fall from God: and
Antichrist must reign in the Temple of God: upon the which son of perdition,
the Lord Jesus will at the last take vengeance, and will also kill him with the
breath of his mouth. The coming and kingdom of which Antichrist, the Apostle
does plainly discipher, that the latter age being forewarned thereof, might take
heed of the pestilent cup of that Babilonicall purple colored strumpette. In
the third chapter, after that he has commended himself unto their prayers,
and has breefly encouraged them to constancy, he commands that those men
be severely punished which through idleness and curiosity troubled the common
wealth: whom he would have to be excommunicated, if so be they would not be
admonished and warned. Finally, he finisheth his Epistle by recommending them
to the Lord of peace. The which Epistle although it be brief, yet a
contains vvoonderful profit and learning. In style it is nothing different
from the former Epistle, neither in any thing inferior. That it was sent from
Rome (as commonly the Greek books report) it is not like: for had it been so,
he would have made some mention of his bonds, according to his vvoonted
manner. Furthermore, he shows that he is in present peril of unreasonable
and evil men. Whereof it may be gathered, that he did write this Epistle as
he was in his journey tovvarde Jerusalem. And the Latins have a long time
been of opinion that it was vvritte^ from Athens. Some also think that it
was sent by Titus and Onesimus.

CHAPTER. I.
1 Paul, and Siluanus, and Timotheus unto the Church of the Thessalonia^s in
God our father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ.

2 Grace be with you, and peace from God our father, and from the Lord Jesus
Christ.


PAVL and Siluanus, and Timotheus. As in the former Epistle to the
Thessalonians, so in this Epistle also the Apostle begins, retayninge the
same form of subscription, title, and salutation. The Apostle Paul himself
being the author of this Epistle, does nevertheless vouchsafe, to make others
consortes with him of the same, which were his woorkefellowes in the ministry
of the word, not arrogating to him self alone the prerogative and
prehemine^ce (as those do which seek themselves) but showing his common
consent with others in doctrine, which were the servants of Christ; he joins
two with him as authors of the Epistle. Siluanus was a diligent helper of Paul
in the Gospel, who preached Christ to the Corinthians, as appears in the same
Epistle where it is said, For the son of God Jesus Christ, 2. Cor. 1.19.
Act. 15.22.
who was preached among you by us, that is, by me and Siluanus, and Tymotheus,
etc. This Siluanus, is even the very same which in the Acts of the Apostles is
called Silas, (as some conjecture) the name being somewhat enlarged and
deformed according to the manner of the Greeks and Latins. Tymotheus, was the
son of a certain godly and faithful woman of Judea, whom the Apostle
calls Eunice: but his father was a Greek, 2. Tim. 1.5.
and his graundmothers name was Lois. This man preached Christ at Thessalonica,
and kept Paul company going into Asia. Thus then we see, that the Apostle
writes his Epistle in the name of three, both to show that they did all agree
together in teaching, and also to bring the more authority and credit unto his
Epistle. For there is more credit given to many of one profession and mystery,
than to one alone: according to the common proverb, No man is so quick
sighted, that he can see all things perfitly. Wherefore Paul very prudently
has inserted the names of his consortes.

Unto the Church of the Thessalonians in God our Father. By these words he
declares y the true Church was among ye Thessalonians, and they do contain,
a notable description of the Church which is the true and lawful spouse of
Christ, which among other notes, may be known by this one, namely, A special
note of the true Church.
if it be a congregation gathered together in God the father, and in our Lord
Jesus Christ. For there is a Church gathered together in God our father, and in
the Lord Jesus Christ: and there is a Church gathered together in the Devil;
as is the malignaunt Church. This title then does testify, that this Epistle
was in the first beginning dedicated to that Church* which in Thessalonica
agreeing in the unity of faith, woorshipped one God the father, and the Lord
Jesus Christ, and which steadfastly believed the promises of the Gospel, that
in them alone is contained the doctrine of Christian righteousness, and of
eternal life. For without the knowledge of them, and faith, no man can be
truly reckoned to appertain to the Church of God the father, and of our Lord
Jesus Christ. And now let us think that this Epistle does no less appertain
to every one of us, then it did to the Thessalonians, which are also endued
with a true and lively faith in God the father, and in our Lord Jesus Christ:
yea rather it does most especially profit ye Church at this day, that it may
serve as a caveat in these latter times, wherein Antichrist is revealed, to
make us beware of deceivers: who, without this Epistle, could not so well be
known, Antichrist with them raging in the Church, and spoiling the same. It is
also to be noted, that the Apostle has joined God the father, and our Lord
Jesus Christ together, thereby to show, that the son is nothing inferior to
the father in this matter.

Grace be with you and peace from God our father etc. First of al, the Apostle
wishes unto them grace, that is to say, reconciliation and the endowment of
the holy Gh^^t, for there is nothing more to be desired, then to have God our
merciful father: then he wishes unto them peace, that is, all other good
gifts, which are needful for them. For this word, peace, signifies
generally, al joyful and prosperous success. Therefore what joy and
prosperity soever we have, if we have not the favor of God withal, our
blessing shall soon be turned into a curse. So that the only foundation of
our felicity, is the favor and love of God, whereof it comes to pass, that
our prosperity is firm and permanent, and our salvation most sure, in the
midst of adversity. He adds, that this grace and peace does come from God
the father, to give us to understand, that whatsoever good thing comes to us,
the same comes from the free grace, goodness, and favor of God. He puts
down the name of Father, and not of a Judge, that thereby we might have the
feeling of his unspeakable love toward us.

And from the Lord Jesus Christ. He joins God ye father and the Lord Jesus
Christ together, to teach us, y grace and al other good things are given unto
us for his sons sake our mediator. Secondly, that we may know how we
shall be sure to receive them, namely, if we ask them for his sons sake.
Thirdly, he gives us to understand, that the son is by nature God, reigning
in equal power with the father, and helping us by his divine power. Therefore
he intending to wish the sum of felicity to the Godly, comes to the
fountain it self, that is, to the grace of God: the which alone, does not
only bring unto us everlasting blessedness, but also is the cause of all good
things in this life.

3 We ought to thank God always for you, brethren, as it is meet, because
that your faith grows excedingly, and the love of every one of you toward
another abounds.

The first part of the Epistle is gratulatorie, and consists of thanks
giving: for thanks are given unto God, as the giver and confirmer of those
benefits. After this manner the Apostle for the most part begins all his
Epistles, giving thanks with them, upon whom the gift of Justification is
bestowed.

Always. He means that he has daily new occasion ministered to him of giving
thanks unto God.

For you brethren. That is to say, on your behalf, for your constancy and
increase in spiritual things, putting the persons for the things, as we shall
see hereafter.

As it is meet. In these words Paul shows that we are bound to give thanks
unto God, not only when he does power on us good things, but also when we
call to mind his benefits bestowed on our brethren. For whersoeuer we do see
the goodness of God to shine, we are bound to give thanks for the same.
Furthermore the saving health of our brethren ought to be so dear unto us,
that whatsoever is given unto the^, we ought to take it as bestowed on our
selves. Moreover, if we do consider the holy unity of the body of Christ, such
mutual communion and fellowship shall be among us, that we will reckon the
benefit of one member, to be the benefit and gain of the whole Church.
Therefore in praising the benefits of God we must always have respect unto
the universality of the Church.

Because that your faith grows excedingly. Here are repeated the principa^
points of our religion, as faith, charity, and sufferance; but not without
cause. For because in the former Epistle, he had praised the faith and charity
of the Thessalonians, now he speaks of the increase of them both. And in very
deed it is convenient for all the godly to observe this order, that they daily
make a trial and examination of themselves, how much they have profited. This
therefore is the true praise of the faithful, if they grow and increase daily
more and more in faith and in charity. Moreover, first he gave thanks unto
God for them: now, he says there is cause why he should again give thanks
for their daily profiting. And when he gives thanks unto God for their
profiting, he does thereby signify and declare that as well the increase, as
the beginning of faith and love, comes from God. For if these sprang from the
virtue that is in men, the giving of thanks should be feigned, or else for
nothing. Three causes of thanks giving.
There are therefore three causes of thanks giving: of the which the first is,
the increase of faith. For faith in such as are consecrated unto God, how true
and perfect soever it be, does not suddenly come to her full perfection: even as
young Trees do not by and by grow to their full bigness: but do first spring,
then shout up in tallness, and at the last come to a full groth of a Tree. Even
so faith has her degrees, and is not at the first beginning fully perfected,
but seeks and desires to increase it self daily more and more. And that is
the meaning of this place of Paul, Romans 1.17.
where he says From faith to faith: that is to say, that the same in the first
beginning do not decay, but rather yt it be confirmed more and more, until it
come to just perfection. For according to our common manner of speaking, Faith
of two sorts
there are two sorts of faith: one imperfect the which being once begun,
goes forward by degrees, and increases, and continues not always in weakness:
the other is perfect, the which being many ways confirmed, does consta^tly
rest it self on the sure knowledge and will of God.

And the love of every one of you toward another abounds. The Second cause of
thanks giving, is the mutual love of the Godly, which binds unto her every
one, whom she finds in affliction by many benefittes. And although according
to the common use of the sacred scriptures, he is our neighbor which is joined
to us by any manner of way, either of dwelling nere unto us, either of kindred,
or of friendship, or of society, or else of custom: yet notwithstanding he
also shall be our neighbor which stands in need of our help whatsoever,
although he be not a Citizen with us, a fellow, a cousin or any other way joined
unto us: Luke 10.30.
even as that man was which fell into the hands of thieves. But this love
differs from that which we owe unto God, 1. Ioh. 4.10.
which loves him in the highest degree which loved us first. This love is ye
piety and worship which we owe unto God. And as the duties of this love are
gathered out of the first table, so the duties of the other are taken out of
the second table: the which love in that it springs from the love of God as
from the fountain, it cannot be but very acceptable unto God. Whereupon it
comes to pass that God does often times more urge and require the love of
our neighbor then the love of himself. For, as it appears by the Prophet,
he does prefer the defense, and help of the widows, the fatherless, and
the oppressed, before the sacrifices offered unto him. Esaias. 1.17. Love is the
handmaid of faith. Gal. 5.6.
For this love is the handmaid of faith, and does so necessarily wait upon her,
as does the shadow on the body. Because faith, which is auailable before God,
is effectual and working through love.

4 So that we our selves rejoice of you in the Churches of God, because of your
patience and faith in all your persecutions, and tribulations that ye suffer.
The Apostle could not give unto them a greater praise, then when he says that
he propounds them as examples before other Churches to be followed: for that
is the meaning of these words: We our selves rejoice of you in the Churches
of God. And yet Paul does not ambitiously boast of the faith of the
Thessalonians, but sets them forth as a provocation, to make others the
more earnest to imitate them.

In the Churches of God. In that he calls them not his Churches, but the
Churches of God, it declares his humility and faithfulness. For they are
false and untrusty, who, whenas they ought to be the servants of God and the
ministers of Churches, desire to be called Lords, and do usurp authority
over other men's servants.

Because of your patience. The third and last cause of giving thanks is their
patience. But the Apostle says not that he does rejoice because of the faith
and love of the Thessalonians, but, of their patience and faith. Whereupon it
follows that patience is the fruit and testimony of faith. Therefore these
words ought to be resolved thus, we rejoice of the patience which comes of
faith and does testify ye faith excels in you. Otherwise the text should
not agree. And in very deed there is nothing that does hold us up more in
tribulations then does faith: the which does hereby evidently enough appear,
because so soon as we forget the promises of God we fall flat to the ground.
Therefore the more that a man does grow in faith, ye more he is armed through
patience, stoutly to endure all things: even as on the contrary part,
cowardice, and impatie^ce in adversity does bewray our Infidelity: especially
at such time as we are to suffer persecution for the Gospel, the force of
faith will show it self.

Therefore that rejoicing of the Apostle Paul, was no proud, or vain boasting,
but godly piety, by which he did exalt and advance with condign praises the
fruit of Gods word, and also did rejoice over the Thessalonia^s themselves,
that they were in such wise and so greatly confirmed, that by no manner of
perils or persecutions, they could be compelled to forsake the faith. And what
was this else, but to give the praise unto God for all this grace and virtue.
This place teaches that the saints are laid open to persecutions and are also
exercised perpetually in afflictions. For so many as will live godly in Christ
Jesus shall suffer persecution. 2 Tit. 3.12.


5 Which is a token of the righteous Judgment of God, that ye may be counted
worthy of the kingdom of God: for the which ye also suffer.

The simple and true meaning of these words is, that the injuries and
persecutions which the children of God do suffer at the hands of ye wicked and
reprobate, do show forth as in a glass, that God shall be one day the judge of
the world. And this sentence has in it a figure called Antistrophon, or
Conversion, by which is confuted the profane opinion which men do commonly
hold, so often as the good are afflicted, and the evil are in good case. For
then we think that the world is governed by fortune, and not by God. Hereupon
it comes that impiety and contempt do possess the hearts of men, as
Solomon says in the book of the Preacher, Chap. 9. ver. 2.3. For they which
suffer any thing unworthily, or without deserte, do either murmr and accuse
God, or else they do think that he has no care of the actions of men: as the
Prophet David says in the Psalm 73. Read the whole Psalm.

Contrariwise the wicked ware more proud of their prosperity, as if so be
there were no punishment remaining for them: even as Dyonisius in his
prosperous navigations, boasted that the gods were fre^dly and favorable unto
such as were guilty of sacrilege. Furthermore, when we do see that the
cruelty of the wicked against the innocent is not restrained, and that they
escape without punishment, flesh and blood persuades it self by and by, that
there is no judgment of God, no punishments of wickedness, nor any reward of
righteousness. But Paul on the contrary part pronounces, that when God does
so spare the wicked for a time, and does wincke at the injuries which his
children suffer, judgment to come is set before our eyes, as it were in a
glass. For he takes this as a clear case, that it cannot be, but that God as
he is a just judge, will one day give rest unto the miserable, which are now
unjustly vexed, and will also give unto the oppressors of the godly their just
reward. And hereunto tends this saying of Peter: If any man suffer as a
Christian, let him not be ashamed: but let him glorify God on this behalf. 1.
Pet. 4.16.
For the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God: if it first
begin at us, what shall the end be of them which obey not the Gospel of God?
And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner
appear? Wherefore, let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit
their souls to him in well doing, as unto a faithful creator.

Furthermore the judgment of God is called righteous in this place, because it
shall be executed upon those which have deserved the same by their wicked
persecution: and also because God shall exercise the same not only according to
the external, but also according to the internal things. A place surely very
notable: because it teaches how our minds are to be stirred up from all the
impedimentes of the world so often as we suffer any manner of adversity,
namely by calling to mind the just judgment of God, the which will lift up our
minds from this world to a higher consideration. Thus death shall be unto us the
image of life.

That ye may be counted worthy of the kingdom of God. The ordinance of God
is, that no man shall be worthy of the kingdom of God without the cross.
Whereupon Christ says, If any man will follow me, let him deny him self, Mat.
16.24.
and take up his cross, and follow me. Now, if any man will go about to prove
by the authority of this place, that salvation is due by desert unto our
afflictions, and not to the passion and blood of the Lord, let him way and
consider that place only which the same Apostle sets down to the Romans,
where he proves that we are justified by the benefit of faith, Romans 3.28.
and not by the merit of works. And in another place he says: I count that
the afflictions of this present time, Romans 8.18.
are not worthy of the glory which shall be showed unto us. Therefore we must
ascribe it to the liberality and fatherly beneficence of God, that eternal
life is said to be given unto us of right, and that we are made worthy of the
kingdom of God through afflictions, when as it is most clear that all our
ability and pliantnesse to any manner of goodnsse comes of God, by whose
grace we are sanctified and blessed. Moreover the Apostle Paul does not dispute
here of the cause of woorthynesse: but only takes the common doctrine of
Scripture, that God does abolish those things in us which belong to the
world, that he may frame and erect in us a better life: Furthermore that he
shows unto us through afflictions, the price of eternal life. Finally, he
does simply set down the mean by which the faithful are as it were hammered
and wrought upon Gods anuile: because by afflictions they are taught to
renounce the world, and to aspire to the heavenly kingdom of God. Beside this,
they are confirmed and strengthened in the hope of eternal life, when they
fight for the same. Whereupon he adds, For the which ye also suffer: Namely
under the assured hope of the promise made, which brings to pass that we do
obtain the kingdom of God. For so Christ himself speaks: Rejoice and be
glad, Mat. 5.12.
for behold plentiful is your reward which is in heaven. And the Apostle: Romans
8.17.
If we suffer together with him, we shall also be glorified with him. And
although no manner of afflictions of them selves do make us worthy of of the
reward and glory of eternal life, yet nevertheless to deny Christ for fear
of present perils, is a sin deserving to be punished with eternal death. For
as we do believe with the heart to righteousness, Romans 10.10.
so we do confess with the mouth to salvation.

6 For it is a righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble you. In these words the Apostle shows how the tribulation of the
saints may be unto them an instruction of the just judgment of God.

For God is an Indifferent judge counterpoysing in equal balances the
inequality of both parties, as here, the afflicted, and the afflicting. And
what can be more just, then that they which in this world do oppress the good
and godly, and do make them live in exile and banishment by persecutions,
should suffer the same things themselves in time to come, which they do to
others: and that they should be in rest with other saints, who coming out of
great tribulation, shall receive an eternal kingdom? Thus the Apostle touches
the vengeance of god against ye reprobate, to teach them that the faithful do
rest in the expectation of the judgment to come: because God does not as yet
take vengeance on the evil, who notwithstanding must needs suffer the
punishment of their wickedness. Withal notwithstanding the faithful do
understand, that there is no cause why they should envy the momentany and
transitory felicity of the wicked, which soon after shall be changed and turned
into horrible and most fearful destruction.

7 And to you which are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall show
himself from heaven with his mighty angels.

As it is agreeing with the justice of God, to repay unto wicked and ungodly
men condign punishments, so also it is agreeing with the same Justice, to give
unto godly and righteous men the rest and consolation of eternal life. Great
therefore shall be the misery and unhappiness of all the wicked, and most excellent
shall be the feli^^^ie and blessedness of the godly. The A^ostle has opposed rest
against the torment ^f tribulation, in the which the godly are ^xercised in
this world without intermission. For when we shall depart from this life, all
labor and sorrow shall cease, and rest and joy shall follow in steed thereof.
Apoc. 21.4
For God shall wipe away al tears from the eyes of his saints. This then
agrees with ye sentence of Peter, where he calls the day of ye last
judgment, ye day of rest. Notwithstanding in this declaration of the good and
of the evil, the purpose of the Apostle was to express more plainly how
preposterous and unjust the government of the world should be, if God did not
defer the punishments and rewards until another judgment. Hereunto also tends
that which was said unto Dives: Luke 16.25.
Son remember that thou in thy life past enioyedst thy pleasure, but
contrariwise Lazarus enjoyed pain: but now is he comforted, and thou art
tormented. The Apostle adds:

With us. That he might bring the more credit to his doctrine by the sense and
feeling of his own faith. For he shows that he does not speak of unknown
things, when as he places him self with them in the same cause and condition.
And we know that they do deserve to be best regarded, which are exercised by
long practice in those things which they teach, and do require nothing of
others, but that they be ready to prove and try. Therefore the Apostle does not
command the Thessalonians to fight as it were in a shadow: but fighting
valiantly him self, he exhorts them to the same war and fight.

When the Lord Jesus shall show him self. This is a figure called Occupatio
or prevention, which the Apostle uses that the Thessalonians might not be
careful concerning the time wherein the wicked persecutors shall be afflicted
with punishments, and the godly which are afflicted shall receive rest. The
time shall be the coming of Christ to judgment, or the time of judgment. For the
Lord shall come a judge: but from whence?

From Heaven. That is to say, from the habitacle of God, which is perpetual,
wherein is the glory of the invisible God, and the light whereunto no man can
attain, seeing it is a spiritual firmament, in the which dwells
sempeternall righteousness. From thence therefore do we look for our Lord and
savior Jesus Christ, who shall chang our vile body that it may be like to his
most glorious body. Philip. 3.21.
But this Judgment shall not be before the consummatio^ of al things. For, til
that consu^mation be, the Lord Jesus shall not be revealed from heaven, as
appears by many testimonies of Scriptures. For because one shall judge all,
it must needs be in that last judgment which shall be in the end of the world,
where he shall repay to every one according to his deeds. Christ therefore will
shut up and reserve the times of this present world, against the time of his
judgment in the latter day. But when this judgment shall be, it is uncertain.
Wherefore the Lord Jesus himself does testify, that the moments of times of
this judgment, and of the glory of Christ to come, ought not to be curiously
searched for, neither yet that they can be known aforehand. Act. 1.7.
It is not (says he) for you to know the times and seasons which the father
has reserved to himself. And in another place, Mar. 13.32.
Concerning that day and hour knows no man, neither the Angels which are in
heaven, nor the Son, but the father only. And the Apostle says: 1. These.
5.2. 2. Pet. 3.10.
That the day of the Lord shall come as a thief in the night. And yet for all
this some foolish men have gone about of late time to prognosticate, of this
day, yea and almost of the very hour of the day.

With his mighty Angels. These words do describe and set forth the form and
manner of the coming of Christ to judgment: As if he should say, the most
righteous judge shall not now any more come from heaven in humility and
contempt, as he did at his first coming in our flesh, but environed with an
Angelical band. For it is written: Thousand thousands ministered unto him, Dan.
7.10.
and ten thousand thousa^ds stood before him. As therefore a puisant and mighty
King having a huge host of picte and chosen men, marches forward against his
enemy, even so the Lord Jesus himself, shall use the ministry of Angels, in
suppressing and vanquishing the wicked, and in delivering the godly. And for
this cause the Apostle calls them mighty Angels, because by them and in
their ministry, the Lord will show forth his power and might: Whose force no
creature is able to resist, whose judgment must necessarily of all men be
endured, and by whose sentence the wicked shall be assuredly condemned, and
eternally punished.

8 With a flame of fire, rendering vengeance unto them, who have not known
God, and which obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. The present
description of the judgment tends to this end, that the Godly may understand,
that by how much the more fearful the judgment is which remains for their
enemies, by so much more, the Lord has a care of their afflictions. For this
is the chief cause of our grief and sorrow, that we think that God does
slightly ouerpasse our miseries. We do see into what complaints David bursteth
forth now and then, Psalm. 37.2.
when he fretteth at the pride and insolency of his enemies. Therefore the
Apostle has uttered all this here for the consolation of the faithful, that
he discribeth the tribunal and judgment of Christ to be full of horror. The
like description of the coming of Christ is set down by the prophet Esaias,
Esaias. 66.15.
Behold the Lord will come with fire, and his charriots like a whirle wind,
that he may recompense his anger with wrath, and his indignation with the flame
of fire. etc. The Lord Jesus to be revealed from heaven with Angels of might,
in the flame of fire, signifies that the Lord Jesus shall come to judgment
with great power and majesty in fire. Mat. 24.30.
For they shall see the son of man come in the clouds of heaven with power
and great glory. Genesis 7.21. 2. Pet.. 3.7.
God has once already destroyed the world with water, the second time he will
destroy it with fire. But what manner of fire that shall be, and of what matter
co^pounded, I leave it to be disputed of by such me^ as are foolishly curious.
It shall be sufficient for us only to note this, that Paul's purpose was to
teach, that Christ will be a severe revenger of all those injuries, which the
reprobate do unto us: For the metaphor of flame and of fire, is very common in
the Scriptures, where the wrath of the Lord is intended.

Rendering vengeance unto them which do not know God. Now it follows to show
what the Lord Jesus will do when he is revealed from heaven with angels of his
might in the flame of fire: namely, he will take vengeance of the wicked, and
upon such as know not God: that is to say, he will plague them in his wrath
which would not know God, but following the world and seeking for worldly
things, neglected the commandments of God.

And which obey not the Gospel. By these two titles he notes the unbelieving,
who know not God, nor obey the Gospel of Christ. For if men do believe the
Gospel through faith, Romans 1.5. and.16.26.
unbelief is the cause of resisting the Gospel. He condemns them also of ye
ignorance of God. For the lively knowledge of God does beget of it self
reverence: but incredulity is always blind. Not that the unbelieving are
altogether void of light and understanding, but because they have their minds
so darkened, that in seeing they cannot see. Esaias. 6.9.
Our savior Christ does not without cause pronounce, that this is eternal
life, Ioh. 17.3.
to know the true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent. Therefore of the
defect of this most wholesome knowledge, follows the contempt of God, and at
the last, death. And as it is the office of Christ one day to punish those
which have not known God, so also it is his office to reward those, which have
known God, and which have obeyed the Gospel of Christ.

9 Which shall be punished with everlasting perdition, from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power. These words appertain to the
amplification of those punishments, which persecutors and all the wicked in
general, shall one day feel, that no man might think that they shall be light
or easy, or of some small continuance. For he says that the perdition shall be
eternal, that is, without end, a death immortal. To the which saying of the
Apostle agrees also the sentence of Christ in his sermons, where he says that
the torments of the wicked shall be perpetual, Mat. 25.46.
even as the felicity of the righteous shall be everlasting: so that the
reprobate shall go into eternal torment, and pain, Mar. 9.44.
and the elect into everlasting life. And their woorme shall not die, and their
fire shall not be extinguished. Therefore the wicked shall sustain the
punishments of destruction for ever, always feeling them, and never ceasing:
insomuch that the very punishment it self shall after a sort as it were revive
them, to the end they may always be consumed.

From the presence of the Lord. The perpetuity of death, is proved hereby,
that it has the glory of Christ contrary unto it, the which glory is
eternal and has no end. Thereupon the horror of the terrible punishment may
be gathered, because, look how great the glory and majesty of Christ is, so
great shall their torment be. Therefore al they do deceive, and are deceived
themselves, which do promise, after a certain time, a deliverance from the
torments of hell fire, at which time, Origens Error.
(as Origin also thought) the wicked and the devils themselves shall be pardoned:
but how falsely and wickedly, it does hereby appear.

And from the glory of his power. With the which power he shall come to judge
the quick and the dead. He alludeth to the form of the coming of Christ to
judgment, and to his might and power, before the which the wicked shall not be
able to stand. By these words also he shows how easy a matter it is for God
to bring torment upon the wicked. For the Rebellious and obstinate, shall be
tormented with the terror only of his countenance. And contrariwise, the
presence of God shall bring to the saints felicity and glory. For he shall
come with glory and with power, insomuch that neither his glory shall want
power, neither shall hi^ presence and power be without glory.

10 When he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to be made marvelous
in all the^ that believe (because our testimony toward you was believed) in that
day. The Apostle having hitherto spoken of the punishment of the Reprobate,
returns to the godly, and says that Christ shall come, that he may be
glorified in them: that is to say, that he may make them to shine with his
glory. As if he should say, when Christ shall come to punish the impiety of
the wicked, he will then also show himself glorious to the saints, and will
make their vile and corruptible bodies like to his most glorious body. Philip.
3.21.
Therefore he will not keep this glory to himself alone, but will make the
same common to al his saints. This is the great and singular consolation of the
godly, that when the son of God shall be made manifest in the glory of his
kingdom, he shall gather them into the same society with him. And there is in
these words an Antithesis or Comparison between the present state, under the
which the faithful do labor and groan, and that last restitution. For now
they are laid open to the reproaches of the world: they are counted vile, and of
no estimation: but then they shall be precious and replenished with glory, when
Christ shall power his glory upon them. Therefore to all the godly and saints
he shall not come austere or terrible, but glorious and admirable: that they
may be led into an inheritance incorruptible. 1. Pet. 1.4.


In all them that believe. This is added for an exposition. For those whom
before he had called saints, he now calls believing: signifiyng, that there
is no holiness in men without faith, but that all being deuoid of faith, are
profane and unclean.

Because our testimony toward you was believed. That which he spoke generally
of the saints, he now applies to the Thessalonians, that they might not doubt
them selves to be of that number. Because, says he, you believed my preaching,
Christ has now gathered you into the number of his saints, whom he will make
partakers of his glory. Therefore ye shall be safe from all those evils, which
hang even over the heads of the wicked, and shall take hold of them: and they
also which before time have derided you as mad and furious men, shall have you
in great admiration. For these things are spoken to the faithful for their
consolation, which either have been, or are in affliction for Christ's sake.
He calls his doctrine a testimony, because the Apostles are the witnesses of
Christ. Therefore let us learn, that then the promises of God are firm in us,
when we do steedfastly believe them.

In that day. The Apostle does therefore repeat this, to restrain the desire o^
the faithful, that they might not be to^ hasty. For their life is hidden with
God i^ Christ: Colos. 3.3.
but when Christ which is our life shall be manifested, then shall we also
appear with him in glory. And in another place it is said. Heb. 10.35.
Knowing in your selves, how that ye have in heaven, a better and an enduring
substance. Cast not therefore away your confidence, which has great recompense
of reward. For ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of
God, ye might receive the promise. For yet a very little while, and he that shall
come, will come, and will not tarry.

11 Wherefore we also pray always for you that our God may make you worthy of
his calling, and fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness and the work of
faith with power.

This is the Epilogue, or conclusion of that which goes before, which
consists of prayer that the Thessalonians may be preserved in that knowledge
of spiritual things, and may grow more and more therein, and proceeding, at
the last may abide constant in the same. It is the manner of the Apostle in all
har^ and difficult things to add prayers. prayers. For faith and that
reverence which we bear to the divine majesty, do teach that the best gifts
of God must be sought for and gotten by prayers. To the end therefore the
Thessalonians might know, that they have need continually of the help of God,
he protests that he prays for them. As if he should say, ye are called by
my ministry through the Gospel unto salvation: but yet ye have need of farther
confirmation, namely of such confirmation, as may make you worthy of his
calling, and to profit and persevere in the same. For this confirmation and
perseverance, because it is a heavenly gift, I do diligently pray unto God to
give it you. And he speaks of the end and perfect accomplishment, which
consists in perseverance. For God had vouchsafed already to call them. But,
we being too ready to fall away, it is no gramarcie to us, that our vocation is
not after that made frustrate, and so should it be in deed, if so be God did
not establishe the same in us. Wherefore it is said that we are counted
worthy, when we come to the full scope and perfection. And, if so be that our
merit does make us worthy, to what end should it be needful to pray unto the
Lord that he would make us worthy of his calling? Therefore that worthiness
does depend upon the liberal goodness of God.

And fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness. The second thing for the
which he prays for, is the acco^plishment of the grace and goodness of God.
Paul is woonderful in extolling the grace of God. For not being contented that
he has named his good pleasure, he says, that the same does spring from the
goodness of god.

Now when we do hear that the free good pleasure of God, is the cause of our
salvation, and that the same is founded on the grace of God, are we not more
then mad if we dare arrogate unto our merits even the least thing?

And the work of faith with power. That is to say, that he would finish the
very work of faith through constancy and courage of the mind, the which being
once by God settled in men's minds, overcomes al adversities. In these words
there is no small weight. He might have said in one word yt your faith may be
fulfilled; but he calls it, good pleasure. And then he does proceed further
in explayning the matter, that God was by no other means induced the^ by his
goodness: for in us he found nothing but misery. Neither does Paul ascribe the
beginning only of our salvation to the grace of God, but all the parts thereof
also. Thus the sophistical comment and imagination of the scoole men is
confuted, how that we are prevented by the grace of God, but yet are helped by
merits following. But Paul in the whole course of salvation, does admit
nothing but the mere grace of God. And because the good pleasure of God is now
made perfect, he expounds his mind in these words, [The work of faith].
And he calls it a work in respect of God, which woorketh faith in us, as if
he should say, that he may perfect and finish the building of faith which he
has begun.

With power. That is to say, effectually. He alludeth unto the blessing or
efficacy of God, by which he does bless and make our faith effectual. And
withal he gives to understand, that the perfection of faith is a great matter,
and of great dificultie. The which we find too true by experience, the reason
whereof may easily be rendered, if we do weigh how great our imbecilitie is,
how many lets are thurst upon us from al parts, and also how greiuous and
minifold the temptations of Satan be. Therefore except we be woonderfully
helped by the power of God, faith shall never come to her full perfection. For
it is as easy a matter to finishe and make perfect faith in a man, as it is to
build a Tower of water, which shall be so firm and strong, that it shall abide
the beating floods, and tempestious storms, and shall reach higher then the
clouds. And we are even as fluible and vanishing as water, as appears by
these words of the woman of Thecoa, we are as water spilt on the ground, 2.
Sam. 14.
which cannot be gathered up again.

12 That the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and ye
in him, according to the grace of our God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ. The
Apostle had showed before what things, it is meet for us to ask at the hands
of God in our prayers. To this admonition he adds an exposition of the final
cause, why he prayed for the increase of faith, and for perseverance in others,
and why he teaches to pray after his example: namely, that the name of Jesus
Christ may be glorified in us, and that we also may be glorified by Christ, by
the benefit of the grace of our God and of o^^ Savior Jesus Christ. The which
espec^ally is to be noted, that they in like manner are to be glorified in
Christ, which have set forth his glory. For first of al ye woonderful
goodness of God does shine in this that he will have his glory to be seen in
(...) which are covered with reproach and sham^ But here is a double miracle. He
dot^ make us to shine with his glory, even as (...) he him self received glory
from us in like manner again: and therefore he adds.

According to the grace of our God. For nothing belongs unto us, neither i^
the action it self, nor in the effect and fruit. For our life is framed into
the glory of God, by the only direction and conducting of the holy Ghost. And
wherea^ there springs so much fruit from thence* we must attribute that to
the great mercy of God. Nevertheless, if we be not too far deuoide of
sense, we will think it our bounden duty to endeavor our selves all that
lies in us, to set forth and advance the glory of Christ, the which is also
joined with our glory. Therefore this ^ight to be the scope and end of all our
good works, that we do all things to the glory of God.

CHAP. II.
1 NOW we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
by our assembling unto him.


This is the other part of the Epistle, which consists of instruction, and
exhortation. For he teaches evidently by certain signs, when the day of the
Lord shall come. The Thessalonians had heard in the former Epistle, (which he
appointed to be read before al men) that the last day of the world was not
far off. There were also certain deceivers, who plainly affirmed, that now
already the end of al things was imminent: and so they greatly troubled the
Church. Wherefore that they might forsake that conceived opinion, and
understand the truth, Paul laboreth, showing what must first go before the
coming of the Lord, and with what signs and things precurrent men are to be
forewarned. These signs in the scriptures are many, Two sorts of signs which
shall be before the judgment day.
and yet of two sorts, whereof some shall precurre and be seen long before,
other some shall go before his coming to judgment but a short time. Concerning
the signs going long before the judgment day, our savior Christ says: Mat.
24.37.
As the days of Noah were, so likewise shall the coming of the son of man
be. Luke 17.26.
For as in the days before the flood, they did eat and drink, mary, and give
in marriage, unto the day that Noe entered into the Arc, and knew nothing till
the flood came, and took them all away: so shall also the coming of the son
of man be.

Also the Apostle sets down diverse signs in his Epistle to Timothy where
he says: 1. Tim. 4.1.
Now the spirit speaks evidently, that in the latter times some shall depart
from the faith, and shall give heed unto spirits of error and doctrines of
devils, which speak lies through hypocrisy, and have their consciences burned
with a hot iron, forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats.
etc. And in another place he says: This know, 2. Tim. 3.1.
that in the Last days shall come perilous times. For men shall be lovers of
their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, cursed speakers, disobedient to
parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers, false
accusers, intemperate, fierce, dispisers of them which are good, traitors,
heady, high minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, having a show
of godliness, but have denied the power thereof. Among these signs also those
which Paul reherseth here in his Epistle to the Thessalonians, concerning the
falling away from sincere doctrine, and the reueaing of antichrist, are to be
reckoned which shall long before the coming of Christ to judgment, be seen.
The signs which shall be more near the judgment day, and as it were within the
view of the same are these: Mat. 24.
Straight after the tribulation of those days, the sun shall be darkened, and
the moon shall loose her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and
the powers of heaven shall be moved, and then shall the sign of the son of man
appear in heaven. How these things shall be as touching the form and manner,
no man can tell until they come to pass. Romans 11.25.
Also the Apostle says, I would not, brethren, that ye should be ignorant of
this secret, that partly obstinacy is come to Israel, until the fullness of
the Gentiles be come in. And so all Israel shall be saved, as it is written: The
deliverer shall come out of Sion, and shall turn away the ungodliness from
Jacob. etc. This shall be a present sign of the coming of the Lord. But how
the same shall come to pass, and which shall be the very moment of the
fulfilling of the calling of the Gentiles, let him that can, define it. It
rather is in us to wish for it, then certainly to appoint the time. The time
will one day come (says Augustine) wherein the calling of the Jews, August.
lib. 2. Quest. Euang. cap. 33.
in the saving health of the Gospel, shall be manifest. But when, and how the
same shall be, he does not express.

By the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. The Apostle in these words does
adjure the faithful by the coming of Christ, that they do not rashly believe
the day of the same to be present, and to think no otherwise of it then
religiously and soberly. As if he should say, as the coming of Christ is a
thing very precious unto you, by which he shall gather us together unto
himself, and shall in very deed perfect and accomplish the unity of the
body, which as yet imperfectly we embrace by faith: even so by the same I
beseech you be not to light of credit, if some by one color or other, do
affirm that the same day is present. But as some in the Apostles time, were to
ready to believe the present coming of Christ, which gave Paul occasion to
write this exhortation so it is greatly to be feared, yt in this age there are
many Epicures, which offend in the other extremity, and living in security,
do contemn as a fable those things which in the Scriptures are spoken of the
coming of Christ to judgment: against whom the Apostle Peter writes this:
There shall come in the last days, mockers which will walk after their own
lusts, 2. Pet. 3.3.
and say, where is the promise of his coming? For since the fathers died, all
things continue in the same estate wherein they were at the beginning etc.
Wherefore as men ought not to be light of credit, to believe those vain
imaginations of such as are foolishly curious in pointing out the times and
moments of times, which God has by his prerogative reserved from the knowledge
of mortal men to himself alone: so on the contrary part they ought to beware
of that security which made the foolish virgins to be secluded from the joy
of the bridgrome, Mat. 25.
and to be vigilant, because they know neither the day nor the hour. 2 That
ye be not suddenly moved from your mind, nor troubled, neither by spirit, nor
by word, nor by letter, as it were from us, as though the day of Christ were
at hand.

By this word [mind] he understands a sound faith, which is grounded upon
wholesome doctrine. For they had been carried and rapt as it were into a
trance and astonishment by this forged imagination, which the Apostle
rejects. He reherseth here three kinds of deceit, of the which he would have
the Thessalonians to take heed. The first of which, is this: Neither by spirit:
That is to say, by revelation, or prophecy, by which, ungodly men have
deceived many, boasting of the spirit of God, when as they were led by their
wicked desires and lusts. They knew that the name of the spirit was
honorable, and that it brought great authority and credit to prophesiyng.
Wherefore as the manner of the Devil is, 2. Cor. 11.14.
to tra^sforme himself into an Angel of light, so the deceivers had stolen
this title to deceive the simple withal. And although Paul might have pulled
this visor from their face, yet he thought it better by way of concession to
speak thus: As if he should say, howsoever they pretend to have the spirit of
revelation, yet believe them not: according to the saying of Saint John, 1.
John. 4.
Prove the spirits whether they be of God or no. With such a spirit, sometime
the Montanistes, and Valentinians, and now the Catabaptistes, were and are
endued, by which they have greatly deceived the simple. Therefore the Apostle
would not have the faithful to be moved from wholesome doctrine, Gal. 1.8.
though an Angel come from heaven and teach otherwise then he has taught
already.

Nor by word. The other kind of deceit is by word, that is to say, by
doctrine delivered by the mouth, the which if it be furnished with eloquence
and probability, it is most pestilent. Such are those sophistical deceivers,
which gadding to and fro, from place to place, without calling, do cause great
stir, and do greatly trouble the godly preachers, and are therefore aptly
termed (...): which signifies a subtle kind of deceivers.

Nor by letter. The third kind of deceit is, by counterfeit Epistles or
writings. For it is the manner of wranglers to counterfeit an Epistle under the
name of some excellent man, to the end they may deceive, and may get that
commended by the authority of man, which else coming naked, would not be
received. Hereby the^ it does appear, that this impudency has been practiced
long since, to counterfeite the names of other men: Whereby the mercy of God
toward us appears the greater and more woonderful, that Paul being yet
living, and seeing his name falsely abused in forged writings, his Epistles
notwithstanding have been preserved safe and sound until this age. Verily this
could not so come to pass neither by chance, nor yet by the industry of men,
if so be God by his power, had not suppressed Satan and al his ministers. By
this sathanical practice, which Paul here condemns, it cannot be told how
filthily certain lewd varlets have deluded the Church of God, who have thrust
upon us many books, and many more Epistles and decretals, as if they had come
from the Apostles, or from Apostolical men, or else from such writers as were
had in great estimation, for their learning and holiness: which writings
notwithstanding these good men never knew, and if they were living would never
allow. For there are carried about, Canons and Decretals of Rome.
certain Canons of the Apostles, certain Epistles of Apostolical men, and
many other books beside, bearing the name of Augustine, or Ambrose, which
books these men never saw. And yet notwithstanding there want not some, who
taking this place for their ground and warrant, will thurst upon the Church of
God whatsoever they list, obiecting that all things are not revealed in the
Scriptures, which are necessarily required to true piety and godliness:
because mention is here made of spirit, of word, and of an Epistle by which
(say they) a more absolute doctrine has been revealed to posterities. But
these men do not see, that this same very place does forewarne men, that they
be not seduced from a sound faith already received, by the traditions of men;
which these men covering with the visor of spirit, word, and of Epistle,
decretal, or of Apostolical, and most holy, do enforce upon us. For thus they
offer unto us their Masses and all other things, which they are not able to
prove by the testimonies of Scriptures, ernestly affirming yt they were
justified by Apo^tolical tradition, and afterward confirmed ^oth by the
Epistles of Apostolical men, and also by the revelation of the holy Ghost. Let
us therefore beware of these ravenous woolues, Mat. 7.15.
which being covered with sheep ^kinnes, do come to no other end, but to
^rouble, rent, and devour. Let us faith^ully hold and keep the mind of
Christ, and the sound and Apostolical grounds ^f wholesome and true religion.
So shall we ^e deceived by no manner of means.

As though the day of Christ were at hand. This place seems to be con^rarie
to many other places of Scripture, where the holy Ghost does pronounce that day
to be at hand. But they are easily reconciled, for in respect of God it is at
hand, Psalm. 90.4. 2. Pet. 3.8.
with whom one day is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day.
Nevertheless the Lord would have us daily to wait and look for the same, and
not to appoint unto our selves a certain time. Watch (says our Savior
Christ) for ye know not when the time is. Mar. 13.33
But these false Prophets, whom Paul confuteth, seeing it stood them upon to
hold men's minds in suspense, least they should be wearied with the tediousnes
of delay, commanded them to be careless concerning the short and speedy
coming of Christ.

3 Let no man deceive you by any means: for that day shall not come, except
there come a departing first, and that that man of sin be disclosed, even the
son of perdition.

Paul again admonishes the Thessalonians to beware that they be not
deceived, that he might make them the more vigilaunt and heedefull to
themselves, and that he might discourage and dismay those which lay in wait
to hurt the simplicity of such as believed.

That day shall not come, except To the end the Thessalonians might not in
vain promise to them selves that the day of their redemption was at hand, he
propounds unto them a lamentable prophecy of the defection and dissipation
of the Church to come. This agrees with that sermon of Christ, which he made
unto his Disciples, when they questioned with him of the end of the world.
For ^e exhorts them to prepare themselves ^o hard conflictes. And after that
he ^ath spoken of great and strange calami^ies, with the which the earth
should be ^ell near wasted and spoiled, Mat. 24.
he ad^eth that the end comes not yet, but that these things are the
beginninges of ^orrowes. After the same manner Paul ^lso pronounces, that the
faithful must ^ight a long time before they can obtain ^he Crown.

But the defection or departure, which ^n Greek is called Apostasia,
signifi^th a flying or running away, like unto that of soldiers, which forsake
their Captain, or of subjects which refuse ^o yield their due obedience to
the civil Magistrate and ordinary power. Even ^o in like manner when the fault
of defecti^n, is committed in the Church, a two fold ^reason is committed. The
first is, when men depart from the faith of the promises of the Gospel. For we
are so tied to them, that we ought not to forsake them: and ^n like manner we
have God through them favorable unto us, and at the last bound unto us. The
second is when the du^ woorshippe of God, which he has commanded, is
forsaken, or by any manner of means violated. For by faith in Christ we are
made Christians and the people of God: from the which when we do fall, we are
made runawayes, Apostataes, and whatsoever else, save the people o^ God. In
like manner they which depar^ from the obedience of Gods commandments, are
rightly called the congregation of the wicked: and the name of Christians, or
of the people of God, cannot be defended rightly to apperteine unto them. And
the wickedness of either of these defections is increased, when the profession
of strange woorshippings is joined therewith, of the which God has commanded
nothing at all: especially when they are fained to be done to the honor of
him, o^ when they are said to be such as deseru^ the favor of God, and of the
gifts of remission of sins and of everlasting life* or else when they are
affirmed to be necessary, and such as cannot be omitted with out sin. For
they are contrary to the faith in Christ, and to that woorshippe^ which God
himself has commanded. This therefore is a notable place and worthy to be
marked. This was a sore and perilous temptation, which might quail the most
courageous, to see the Church which with so great labors, by little and little
and very hardly was erected in a mean estate, suddenly as shaken down with a
tempest, to fall. Paul therefore does before hand arm, not only the minds of
the Thessalonians, but also of all the godly, that when it shall befall the
Church to be dissipated and scattered, they be not terrefied as with a new and
strange thing.

But because the interpreters have diversely wrested this place, we must first
of all endeavor to get the true and proper meaning of the Apostle. He demeth
that the day of Christ shall come before such time as the world shall be fallen
into Apostasy or defection, and the kingdom of Antichrist shall have gotten
place in the Church. That properly is not the defection, when as there shall be a
departing ^way from the Roman Empire, as many ^aue thought: Apostasy defined.
but Apostasy or defection ^s a departure from the faith in Christ, and from
the purity of the Evangelical doctrine, and a declining to false worship,
according to the fantasies of men. And thus they are Apostataes, which forsake
ye Christian faith, serving idols, and delighting themselves with ceremonies
devised by men. Exodus 32.6.
Even as when ye Israelites worshipped the Golden calfe, being wearied with the
long absence of Moses, and declining from the prescript law of God, beca^e
Apostataes. Paul therefore calls a treacherous defection from God, apostasy,
and the same not to be of one man or of a few, but such a defection as
extends it self far and wide in the greater multitude of men. For seeing
the apostasy is named without any addition, it cannot be restrained unto a
few. Now, no other can be understood to be Apostataes, but such as have before
time given their names to Christ and to his Gospel. Paul therefore foresheweth
a certain general defection of the visible Church: as if he should say, the
Church must be brought into foul and horrible decay, before the full restoring
thereof do come. Hereby we may easily gather, how profitable this Prophecy of
Paul is. For it might have seemed not to have been the Lords buylding, which
suddenly was overthrown, which lay so long t^me in ruin and decay, if so be
Paul had not long-before showed, that this should come to pass. These 400.
years are to be accounted from the time of Pope Gregory the 7. until the time
of Martin Luther. From Gregory the 7. to this present year are expired, 511.
years, or thereabout.


Yea, many men at this day, waying with themselves the long time of the
Churches declining and desolatio^ under Antichrist, which continued by the
space of 400. years at the least, do begin to waver and doubt, as if this
came not to pass by the determination and counsel of God. The Papists to
cover the tira^nie of their idol ye Pope, make this excuse, that it could not
be, that Christ would so long time forsake his Church. But the weak have here
wherewith to sustain themselves, when they do hear that the deformity of
the Church which they behold, was so long ago foreshewed. But ye impudency of
the Papists is manifestly convinced, because the Apostle pronounces that
there shall come a defection, when the world is brought under the government
of Christ. So that the defection is a treacherous falsehood, by which men
depart from the Christian faith, and from the woorshippe which God has
commanded, or else when straung and Phariseicall woorshippings are instituted.
And it was meet that such a defection should be admitted by the subtle
practices of deceivers, (which preach and teach wicked things) before such
time as Christ should come, for a punishment to the unthankful and
unbelieving, but to the godly, for a trial and exercise of their faith.
Whereby also a way was made to Antichrist to invade the Church, and to oppress
the liberty of the same, and that enemy of the Churches of Christ and
adversary unto God, raygning, the defection grew more and more. For he came
to seduce and destroy ye world with the works of error. The fault of of this
spiritual defection is also spoken of by Christ in these words; Luke. 18.8.
Act. 20.29. 2. Pet. 2.1. Jude. a. 4. 1. Tim. 4.1.
When the son of man comes, think ye that he shall find faith on the
earth? The authors and masters of which Apostasy in the Church, are the
professors of false doctrine. Concerning whom the Apostles spoke many things
aforehand.

And that that man of sin be disclosed. The Apostle here puts down two
signs of the coming of Christ, namely, a departure from sincere doctrine and
from the true understanding of wholesome doctrine: and a revelation of that
defection or departing. What he meant by the former sign we have already
showed. Now we must entreat of the latter sign, that is to say, of the
revelation and original of Antichrist. And to the end the disciphering of this
beast and monster, may appear the more plain, we will first begin to describe
the place: secondly, Antichrist described by 3. things.
the person with his names, and thirdly his qualities.

The place and seat of this monster Antichrist, is Rome in Italy, The place
or seat of Antichrist.
as shall be proved by the 17. chapter of the Revelation of S. John, the 9.
verse, where the Angel expounding to saint John the mystery of the beast with
seven heads, evidently declares, that those seven heads do signify seven
hills, whereon the woman sits. T^^n this being manifest, that the woman
signifies a great City. Let us see where we can find a great City builded
upon seven hills, and that by the interpretation of the Angel is, Rome is
Babylon.
Babylon, or Rome, the seat of Antichrist. Now in all the world, there is not
a City to be found builded upon seven hills, but Rome in Italy, which all
writers, Poets, Historiers, Cosmographers, with one consent do confess to be
Rome, which is builded upon 7. hills, whose names are these: Palatinus,
Capitolinus, Auentinus, Exquilinus, Viminalis, Quirinalis and Caelius. This is
so evident a demonstration of Rome to be Babylon, builded on 7. hills, yt ye
Angel could not more plainly have expressed Rome though he had named her. But
if any man upon peevish obstinacy will except, that the word of hills have
another signification, and are taken metaphorically for some other thing, he
may easily be convinced by this reason: that this interpretation of the Angel
must either be plain and easy to be understood, or else it deserves not the
name of an interpretation. Therefore if the Angel going about to expound the
mystery of the seven heads, gives this exposition that they signify seven
hills: if hills be not taken in their proper sense, to what purpose serves this
exposition? For if the name of hills has need of another exposition, he had
been as good to have left the name of heads vnexpounded. Therefore except we
will say, that the interpretation of the Angel is in vain, we must needs
confess that hills are taken in their proper sense for hills, and then the City
builded upon seven hills, without all controversy, is the City of Rome.

Moreover in the last verse of the 17. Chapter of John's Revelation, the Angel
in plain words says, that the woman which Saint John saw, (which was the
great whore of Babylon) is that great City, which has dominion over the
kings of the earth. What brazen face is so impudent as to deny that Rome was
that great City, which had dominion over the kings of the earth at that time
when this was spoken? Or what other City had dominion over the kings of the
earth in saint John's time but Rome?

Irenaeus, a most ancient doctor of the Church, the scholar of Policarpe, and
Policarpe of Saint John, disputing of Antichrist, saw him no where else, but
in the City of Rome. The numbering of the beasts name by the greek letters.

l 30. a 1. t 300. e 5. i 10. n 50. o 70. 200.

Tertul. aduers. Martion. lib. 3.


And therefore he remembering the last verse of the 13. chapter of the
Revelation, where it is said that the number of the beasts name, is six
hundred, sixty and six, shows that the opinion of many in his time was,
that seeing this name (...), which in English signifies the Latin man, or
Roman, in the numeral Greek letters, it contains this number, that
Antichrist must be sought at Rome. This opinion of Irenaeus is about 14.
hundred years old. Tertullian also a very ancient writer plainly affirms,
that Babylon signifies Rome. And Chrysostom upon this Epistle to the
Thessalonians says thus, Toward the declyning of the Roman Empire,
Antichrist shall comme, and not without cause. For so long as this Empire shall
flourish, none will easily be subject unto it. But this being destroyed, he shall
invade the power of the Empire being void, and shall take it to him self,
insomuch as he will take upon him the Empire both of God and men. For as all
kingdoms which were before the Roman Empire, were destroyed: even so shall
the kingdom of the Romans be destroyed by Antichrist. S. Hierome also writing
to Marcella: Hier. in prefat. lib. de sancto. spirit.
This Babylon (says he) and this whore clothed with purple, which is painted
forth unto us in the Apocalypse, can signify no other thing unto us then Rome.
And Augustine says, Aust. lib. 18. de ciuit. Dei. cap 2.
Babylon is the first Rome, and Rome the second Babylon. By these and other
testimonies of old writers, which might be alleged, it is manifestly proved,
that Rome in Italy is Babylon, the seat of Antichrist.

Concerning the person of Antichrist there have been diverse fantasies and
opinions, some by a foolish opinion have thought that Antichrist should be one
only man, which should come of the tribe of Dan, and should be borne in
Babylon, and should reign certain years, to the great detrement and hurt of
the faithful. Some have deemed Mahomet to be this Antichrist, who has
alienated his Turks from Christ. Othersome have dreamed, yt Nero was translated
out of the woorlde to come again an Antichrist, with his tyranny to vex the
Church. But Paul does not speak here of one man, but of a kingdom which
Satan shall enjoy and possess, Mat. 24.15.
that he may set up the seat of abomination in the midst of Gods temple.
Now, it is manifest that the heathen Emperors Nero and the rest, did not sit
in the Church of God: therefore the heathen Emperor is not this Antichrist. And
by the same reason it is manifest that Mahomet is not that especial Antichrist,
because he sits without the temple of God. Again it is manifest in the
Scriptures that Antichrist should deceive the world with false doctrine, under
pretense and color of true religion, and therefore so often times the
scripture forewarneth men that they be not seduced by him, which were
needless, if any open professed enemy of Christ should be that Antichrist. For
there is no liklihood, that an heathen man, a Jew, or a Turk, should deceive
any multitude of true Christians: but he that under the pretense of the name of
Christ seeks most of all to deface the honor of Christ: he is a very subtle
adversary, and the very spirit of Antichrist: as Saint John also in his
Epistle does testify. For in the second Chapter speaking of those Antichrists
which were the forerunners of that great Antichrist, 1. John. 2.
he shows that they went out from the Church: 1. John. 4.
and in the fourth Chapter he calls them false Prophets, and teaches men how
to know the spirit of Antichrist, namely thus, He that denies Jesus to be
Christ: He that denies Jesus Christ to be come in the flesh. That is to say,
he that derogateth any thing from the honor of Jesus to be Christ, and in his
flesh to have performed the full work of man's redemption (as the Pope does
most blasphemously) he is Antichrist: and who so teaches any such doctrine,
speaks by the spirit of Antichrist.

Furthermore this kingdom of abomination, is described to us under the person
of one, because the kingdom is one, how soever they successively succeed one
another. Whereupon Saint Augustine says, August. lib. 20. de ciuit. Dei. cap.
19
Antichrist shall come toward the ending of the Roman Empire, and he shall
not be a prince, or one man alone, but a multitude of men are belonging unto
him, who together with him shall be called Antichrist, and he shall sit in the
temple of God, as though he and his were the Church of God it self. And in an
other place, Idem. lib. de Antichristo.
He shall renew idolatry, he shall scater the doctrine of the Gospel: and to
this end he shall keep Magicians, coniurers and enchau^ters. etc. Now, every
one knows ye falls miracles, wherewith he has abused ye people, to lead them
away from Christ. And he that will see how many of the Popes came to their
Popedom, by magic and sorcery, let him read yt which their own story
writers have written thereof: as Cardinal Benno, Peter the monk, Volateran,
Sabel licus, and Platina. Thus then we see ye Antichrist is not one man alone,
which must come at one instant of time, but is an estate, seat, and succession
of men, an Empire lifted up against Jesus Christ. And for this cause he is
called Antichrist, that is to say, contrary to Christ the mediator, and not
simplely against God. For as he is called Antistrategos, not only which sets
him self against his captain, but also which takes upon him the place and
authority of the captain, being in deed but a base soldier: even so he is
Antichrist, which is an adversary, and yet takes upon him to be the vicar of
Christ. The Apostle also in this Epistle calls him.

The man of sin. Because he is both sin, and a sinner, and an occasion to
others to sin, and which makes others, yea infinite numbers to sin. He
calls him also

The son of Perdition. Whereby he means that Antichrist, is not only of
himself evil, wicked, sinful, profane, and far from all goodness, and so the
son of everlasting perdition, but also a deceiuer, and to the faith and
manners of an innumerable sort, an offense, and so the author and cause of
their perdition, whom he seduceth from the way of truth and of righteousness.
For he is in all things contrary to Christ. In private and personal
wickednesses, he is hurtful to himself only, saving that he is enforced
through his own wickedness to be hurtful to others also. Therefore we must
know, ye Antichrist is a certain public mischief and pestilent cto^agion,
that does invade and reign in the Church of God.

4 Which is an adversary, and exalts himself against all that is called God,
or that is worshipped: so that he does sit as God in the temple of God, showing
himself that he is God.

In these words the Apostle Paul does paint forth unto us as in a table, The
qualities of Antichrist.
the lively Image of Antichrist in his qualities. By which words we may also
gather what his kingdom is, and in what things it does consist. He
attributes to Antichrist three vices especially, namely: To be an adversary
unto God, and his divine doctrine: Not to be contented with the true worship of
God: And to be proud and to rule over faith, as if he were some God. For as the
kingdom of Christ is spiritual, so this tyranny must needs be over men's
souls, that he may be contrary to the kingdom of Christ. Therefore that
thou may the better know Antichrist, set Christ over against him. For he is
an adversary unto Christ under whose tyranny and execrable dominion, they do
live, which despising the simplicity and truth of the Gospel of Christ, may
give credit to wicked, and devilish delusions. Such are they that deny
remission of sins to such as repent: which ascribe salvation to their goo^
works: which have falsely forged ye me^ sins are ^purged with purgatory fire:
whi^^ disgrace the authority of ye scripture: which prefer Councelles,
Archbishops, and certain Bishops, before the canonical scripture: which take
liberty to them selves to add to, or to subtract from the word of God: which
put no difference between theological or divine, and philosophical sayings:
which prefer an old custom before the word of God: which boldly affirm,
that an assembly of Bishops is the Church: which say that their Church cannot
err: which earnestly maintain that the keys of bynding and loosing are
granted to the whole church: which build the Church upon Peter, and not upon
the rock Christ: which will have the primacie of the Church a Lordship, and
not a ministry: which make their Pope a Bishop of Bishops for the
mainteinaunce of tyranny: which in making and appointing of Bishops, require
the judgment of courtiers only: which scorn this, that all Christians are
kings and priests, as from that number exempted: which condemn ^he marriage
of the ministers of the word, (...) it were with the Censors authority: which
do not see, that their good works whatsoever, without faith, are sin: which
do not leave the pardoning of sins to God alone, and to his word: which make
another manner of satisfaction in repentance then Christ himself has done:
which do allow that the mass is a sacrifice, and a iustifiing good work:
which pronounce that Christ died only for original sin, and not for all
sins in general: which sing dyrges for dead men's spirits: which have judged
that remission of sins is to be redeemed with buying of indulgences, and by
going on pilgrimages: which alter the institution of Christ in the Lords
supper: which abuse excommunications for another cause, then to make the
penitent sinner confess his sin: which in matters and causes of faith, quite
without the reach of humane reason, do attribute a certain strength to free
will, that is to the will and power of men: which will not have men justified
before God by faith only: which give great and divine honor to pictures and
images of saints: which defend that it is necessary for the obtaining of
everlasting life, to make choice of days and of meats: which flatter
themselves that they are able to fulfill the law of God without Christ: which
make a law concerning virginity and single life: which do not think that
chastity is the gift of God: which forbid oaths in causes of faith, and
godliness: which torment men's consciences with humane precepts: which
discharge subjects of their obedience unto maiestrates. The teachers and
defenders of these and such like opinions, which are contrary to the word of
God, are Apostataes, and the followers of Antichrist. The increace of these
kind of men, is a plain token that the last day approaches.

And exalts him self against all that is called God. The Pride of Antichrist.


The other wicked quality of Antichrist, is, to extol himself above all that
is called God. By which Paul means that Antichrist shall violently take to
himself those things which are proper to God alone, as, to exalt himself
above all that is called God, or that (...) woorshipped, that religion and the
whole woorshippe of God, may lie under his feet. For the Apostle does not
speak here of the name of God, but of his majesty and worship, and so
generally of al those things which God chalengeth to himself. As if Paul had
said, That is true religion, by which the true God alone is worshipped. This
religion the son of perdition transferreth unto him self. Now whosoever he be
that has learned out of the Scriptures, what things are most proper unto God,
and shall on the contrary part behold and consider, what the pope usurps to
himself, although he be but a child of ten years of age, he shall take no
great pains in learning to know Antichrist. Esaias. 33.22. James. 4.12
The Scripture pronounces that God alone is the Lawe-maker: who can save and
destroy: the only king to whom it belongs to rule and govern men's souls by
his word. It teaches that righteousness and salvation are to be sought at the
hands of Christ and no where else: and it shows the manner and way how. There
is none of these things which the Pope does not challenge to himself, in way
of his right. He boasts that it is in his power to bind men's consciences
with wha^ laws he lusts, and to subject them to eternal punishments. He is
woorshipped of kings as a good and faithful Pastor of the Church, he being a
most wicked deceiuer. And although he performs no one duty of a good
shepeheard, but does all things contrary to the duty of a good Bishop, yet he
is proclaimed the most holy and most vigilant Pastor of the Church, yea, which
is more, the Lord and head of the Church, who has authority and power to
prescribe articles of faith, and to make new laws for the performing of them,
But he condemns the true and pure doctrine of the Gospel as wicked and
heretical, so far off is he, from healing any man with the doctrine and
consolations thereof, and from inuiting any one to true and christian
repentance. And yet for all this, it is not lawful for any man to say without
peril, so much as, why do thou do this? But he has at hand those which
will defend him that he does all things well, and which will be ready severely to
punish those which shall reprehend him. These are called inquisitors of
heretical wickedness, which will not suffer a man so much as to mutter
against the Pope: who notwithstanding fayneth sin where there is no sin,
and proclameth righteousness where there is none at all. He either appoints
new Sacraments at his pleasure, or else he corrupts those which Christ has
already instituted. And why not if it be true which one has concluded in the
Parliament of Popes at- Rome. That God holds for well done, all that is done
of the Pope: Popish blasphemies.
that his will is the rule of all right and righteousness: that he can
absolutely do in this world all that God can do, seeing he is all, and above
all things: that if he change his purpose, it is to be presumed, that God
changes his: that his power extends it self to heaven and to earth, yea
and down to hell: that none may appeal from him to God: that he may ordain
against the Epistles of saint Paul, as greater then saint Paul, and against the
old Testament, as greater then any authors thereof. And yet one, has gone
further, who has disputed whether he may ordain any thing contrary to the
Gospel, whether he have not more power then Peter: whether he were simplely a
man, or as God. To be brief, the Devil has gone so far in this mystery of
iniquity, that another disputed in the scooles not long before Luthers time,
whether the Pope did not participate in both natures, the divine and humane,
with Jesus Christ. What I pray you is to exalt it self above all that is
called God, if it be not this, which is done by the Pope and his ministers?

The Pope spoiling and robbing God after this manner of his honor, leaves unto
him nothing but a bare and naked title, transferring his whole power unto
himself. And this is even that which Paul now adds, saying,

So that he does sit as God in the Temple of God.

Now the Apostle does more openly discover ye pride of Antichrist. Antichrist
sits in the temple of God, because he has his kingdom in the same: yt is
to say playing the false Prophet and the deceiuer, he does inwardly command
the Church, and plays ye king, or rather ye tyrant, where he ought not. Such
a kingdom has not Mahomet, nor the Turk (as is already said) yt it may be
either said or thought to be the kingdom of Christ, or of the Church of
Christ, for that kingdom has been gotten and enlarged hitherto by wars and
by seditions, and he does set upon the Church without. But the dominion of the
Pope constituted and erected by fraud and superstition, is said to be the
kingdom of the Church, of the elect, of God, and of Christ Jesus: and he by
his tyranny and iniquity does spoil all things belonging to Christian
religion. He is thought to be a godly Pastor, which is altogether a thief, a
spoyler, and a most greedy ravening woolfe. In these few words of Paul, their
error or rather wilful blindness is sufficiently confuted, who will have the
Pope therefore to be Christ's vicar, because he has his place and seat in the
Church by long succession, how wickedly soever he behave himself. For Paul
does not place Antichrist elsewhere then in the very sanctuary of God, because
he is no foreign, but a domestical enemy which is an adversary unto Christ
under the name of Christ. Christians, or rather the hearts of Christians, are
the temples of God, John. 14.23
as appears by sundry testimonies of Scripture. 1. Cor. 3.16. 2. Cor. 6.16.
In this temple of God Antichrist sits, when he binds their consciences
with his laws: when he commands, days, and months, and times to be kept:
when he will have some days to be fasted, and some to be kept holy, upon pain
of displeasure of the omnipotent God, and of the blessed Apostles Peter and
Paul. He puts great holiness in vestments, in shaven crouns, in chaunting
of quiremen, in adorning of temples, in unctions, and such like. In the
observation of such things, he teaches men to put their confidence, and for
the neglecting of these things, he commands them to repent. To such as
keep his statutes he gives fat benefices, prebends and dignities,
maistershippe, and doctorship, with seraphicall holiness, large indulgences, a
year of iubile, promising remission of all their sins, and everlasting life:
but such as keep not his laws, he depriueth of their goods, of all honor,
banisheth them (if it were possible) out of the world, he kills them, he
cursseth them, and adiudgeth them to eternal damnation, although they have
kept (if it might be) all the commandments of God.

But here it may be demanded, how a den of so many superstitions can be called
the Church, 1. Tim. 3.15
which ought to be the pillar of truth. I aunsweare, it is so called not that
it retains all the qualities of the Church, but because it has some
remainder or remnant. Thus our savior Christ called the Church a sheepfold,
for ye shepes sake, notwithstanding that the greater part were Lions, Bears,
and Woolues. So Jerusalem is called the holy City notwithstanding that the
greatest part were wicked. So the Church is called a corn feelde and yet the
greatest part is chafe, darnell, and tares. In like manner, it is the temple
of God, where the Pope rules, though it be defiled with an infinite number of
sacrileges.

Showing himself that he is God. By these words the Apostle means, that the
pride of Antichrist shall be so great, that exempting himself from the number
and order of servants, and ascending up to the tribunal seat of God, he will
take upon him to command, not by humane thoritie, but as it were by divine
power. 5 Remember ye not that when I was yet with you, I told you these things?

The Apostle puts the Thessalonians again in mind of the doctrine which he
delivered unto them, of the dissipation of the Church to come. And this
confirms the doctrine, that they had heard the same aforetime from his mouth,
lest they might think that it was devised for a time. And whereas he did
admonish them so timely of the kingdom of Antichrist, and of the ruin, and
decay of the Church which should be in time to come, when as yet there was no
question moved concerning these things, no doubt it seemed to be a doctrine
most profitable to be known. And in very deed so it falls out. They to whom
he spoke were to see many things which troubled them: but when the posterity
did behold a great part of those which had professed Christ and his Gospel, as
men stricken with a wood fury, to depart from godliness, and to run
headlong into destruction, what could they do else but stagger and stand in
doubt? But here was a brazen wall, that God had so appointed, because the
unthankfulness of men had deserved such vengeance. Here we may see how
forgetful men are, when their eternal salvation is in question. We are also
to observe and note the humanity of Paul, who having just cause to be angry,
does nevertheless gentlely reprehend them. For this is a fatherly check. As
if he should say, what do you mean to suffer false teachers to trouble you,
and to turn you away from believing my preaching? Remember those things which
I told you beforehand, concerning these matters, when I was yet with you in
Thessalonica. For I entreated and disputed of the Apostasy and abominations
of Antichrist, and of the coming of the judge Christ in glory.

6 And now ye know what withholdeth, that he might be revealed in his time.

The Apostle in these words preuenteth an objection which might have been
made thus: What cause is there why we should not believe that the adversary of
Christ does now reign, and is already come, when we see that all the Potentates
of this world do by all manner of means gainsay and resist the name of Christ
and his doctrine? To this the Apostle aunsweareth ye know what is the let, or
cause of delay. Many understand this to be spoken of the Roman Empire: Because
as the Monarchy of Babylon was overthrown by the Medes and Perses: and again
the Macedonians having vanquished the Persians, enjoyed the monarchy, and at
the last the Macedonians were subdued by the Romans: even so Antichrist shall
violently take unto himself the vacant Dominion and rule of the Roman Empier.
These things are most true as touching the history: but yet the meaning of
the Apostle was otherwise, namely, that the doctrine of the Gospel should have
passage from place to place, until such tim as almost the whole world were made
guilty of obstinacy and malicious wickedness. For there is no doubt but that
the Thessalonians had heard this impediment, whatsoever it was, from Paul's
mouth, before time: for he puts them in mind of those things, which he had
taught them before time, when he was personally present. Very many as the
forerunners of Antichrist, sought diligently in the time of Paul, and of the
other Apostles to overthrow the doctrine of the Gospel with their lies, and
deceivable sleights; (even as Saint John writes, that there were already many
begun to be Antichrists.) And yet notwithstanding as yet Antichrist was not
fully revealed. To whose full accomplishment, appertain blasphemies, sharp
and cruel persecutions, heresies, and such other like impieties. All which
things when the Gospel had been preached throughout the world were in due
time revealed. Paul therefore preached unto the Thessalonians concerning the
universal calling of the Gentiles, that to all sorts of men the grace of God
was to be offered, that Christ would make a passage for his Gospel throughout
all the world, to the end the empietie of men might the more appear, and be
more plainly convinced. Therefore this Impediment, let, and delay (whereof
Paul speaks) was to be made, until the Gospel had ended his full course:
because the free calling unto salvation ought to be first in order. Therefore
he adds:

In his time. Because vengeance was to follow and take place, when grace was
rejected: as in very deed, it came to pass.

7 (For the mystery of iniquity does already work: only he which now
withholdeth, shall let, till he be taken out of the way.)

The reason why Antichrist shall not be revealed now, but in his time, is taken
from the circumstance of time, until which time Antichrist shall reign by Gods
permission. Paul teaches that Antichrist has at no time ceased, but has
always labored to entangle and ensnare the Church of Christ, and has also
gone about in the very times of the Apostles to set abroch his practices of
iniquity. For as yet satan was not so strong, that Antichrist could openly
assail and oppress the Church: therefore privily and by stelth he sought to
do that, which afterward in due time, he would do openly. For then he did but
lay the foundations secretly, upon the which he might afterward rear his
building: as it came to pass. And hereby that is more fully confirmed, which
we have already said, that no one man is noted under the name of Antichrist,
This Phocas to aspire to the Empire, killed his master Mauritius the Emperor:
and then to make his seat more sure, he granted to Boniface 3. whatsoever he
would, giving him the supremacy, and name of universal Bishop over all
Christian Churches. Thus the first declining of the Church began in Anno. Domi.
610. or there about
but one kingdom, which extends it self into many ages. For the defection
has continued openly to be seen of all men from the time of Phocas, Emperor of
Rome, and Boniface the third, which was about the year of our Lord 610.
until this day. Moreover, although ye Apostle means here a secret working,
yet notwithstanding he rather uses the name of mystery, then any other,
alluding unto the mystery of salvation, of the which the Apostle speaks in
his Epistle to the Romans, Chapter 16.25. For he does diligently note the
conflicte of repugnancie, between the son of God, and the son of perdition.

Also this word mystery teaches, that it is no marvel if neither our
predicessors nor we our selves understood the impiety of Antichrist: because
it was a mystery, and because he secretly practiced his wickedness.

Only he which now withholdeth shall let, till he be taken out of the way.

These words are without al doubt to be referred unto Antichrist. For the
Apostle adds this for the consolation of the faithful, that the kingdom of
Antichrist shall be temporal, to the which God has appointed an end. For the
faithful might have objected, to what end is the Gospel preached, if Satan
now begins that tyranny which shall always endure? Therefore he exhorts
them to patience: because God will afflict his church but for a time only, and
will after that deliver it again: and on the contrary part, the perpetuity
of Christ's kingdom is to be considered, that the faithful may rest upon the
same,

8 And then shall the wicked man be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with
the spirit of his mouth, and shall abolish with the brightness of his
coming.

He shows that the kingdom of Antichrist shall not be always a mystery:
that thereby the faithful may receive consolation. For he shall be revealed, and
shall arise manifestly he shall be mighty, and shall bring to pass whatsoever he
will, both in the woorking of iniquity, and also of error. But when shall that
be? Even then (says he) when that let (whereof mention is made in the sixth
verse) shall be taken away. For the seventh verse is included in a parenthesis.
So that he does not appoint the time of revelation, when Antichrist is taken
away (of which mention is made in the seventh verse): but he has respect unto
the sixth verse: where he had said that there was a let which stayed Antichrist
that he could not openly get possession of ye kingdom: afterward he added that
he went about a privy work of impiety. And thirdly he joins hereunto in
the seventh verse, a consolation, that this tira^ny shall have an end. Now
again here he repeateth, yt he which as yet is hidden, shall be revealed in his
time: which repetition tends to this end, yt the faithful being armed with
spiritual weapons, may fight nevertheless courageously under Christ, and not
suffer themselves to be drowned, what flood of impiety soever does ouerflowe.

The wicked man. The Greek word (...), signifies him which will be subject to
no law, which neither cares for man, nor fears God. As if the Apostle should
say, that lawles deceiuer, and most wicked man, which will not be holden within
the listes of good and godly laws, but rusheth, headlong to the breath both of
humane and divine ordinances, and boasts himself to be above al men,
contemning al manner of persons, and al things, oppressing al men's liberty,
and not suffering himself to be judged of any, and requiring this especially,
that all men obey his unjust constitutions, without any regard had of profit
or of honesty etc.

Whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth.

Now follows the ruin and destruction of Antichrist. The ruin and fall of
Antichrist.
Paul has spoken in the seventh verse going before, of the disstruction of
this kingdom: now he describes the manner how it shall be distroyed, namely, it
shall be brought to nothing by the word of the Lord. Notwithstanding it may be,
that he speaks of ye last appearing of Christ, when he shall come a judge
from heaven, for so the words may seem to import. Howbeit Paul means not ye
Christ will do this thing in a moment. For Antichrist shall not fall down in a
moment as wounded with one stroke, but after many assaults and battles, he shall
at the last perish. But he shall not be destroyed with the hand of man, with the
multitude of an host, with the valor and courage of soldiers, nor with the
thunderclaps of Canon shot, but with the hand and power of God. Therefore we
must be well assured that Antichrist shall be utterly abolished and brought to
naught, when that last day of reformation of all things shall come.
Notwithstanding Paul does give us thus much to understand, that Christ with his
bright beams, which he will send forth before his coming, will drive away
the darkness in the which Antichrist shall reign: even as the Sun, before
it shyneth unto us, does drive away the darkness of the night. Therefore this
victory of Gods word shall be in this world: for the spirit of his mouth
signifies no other thing but his word: as also in Esaias, where it is said, He
shall smite the earth with the sword of his mouth, Esaias. 11.4.
and with the breath of his lips, shall he slay the wicked: To the which place
Paul seems to allude. For there the Prophet by the sword of his mouth, and
breath of his lips understands al one thing, which weapons he gives unto
Christ, therewith to distroy his enemies. For the word of God is more sharp
then any two edged sword, and it is that sword of might, which shall cut of
the head off this proud Goliath. For Antichrist pleads ye cause of the most
high, and says that all his power and authority is grounded upon divine
laws: under the pretense and color whereof, he has hitherto reigned in
security. But so soon as the light of the Gospel began to shine, by and by
the dark clouds of this deceiuer vanished away. For it is manifest to all men
(which will see) that this man of sin is clean contrary to Christ, both in
manners, and also in laws. Therefore it is come to pass, that all which fear
God, knowing his truth, do loath and abhor that Antichrist, and do forsake him.
Wherefore the sword that does kill him is the word of God. For then he is most
evidently slain, when his nature and disposition is manifestly known by the
doctrine of truth. The revelation and knowledge of him, does wound him to the
heart, and cast him down: and contrariwise the ignorance of him, does advance
him. For they which know him not, do believe him to be an Apostolical Prophet,
and a God. Whereas they which have truly known him, do know him to be an
Antichrist. Therefore when the Apostle says yt the Lord will kill Antichrist with
the breath of his mouth, he means that he will reveal, confound, and discover
him by his word. The which is come to pass this day in so much that his Lions
skin, being taken from him, little children do see his Asses ears, and he is
made a scorn unto men.

And shall Abolish with the brightness of his coming.

The Apostle means that such shall be the brightness of Christ his countenance,
that it shall swallowe up the darkness of Antichrist: withal he does
privily give to understand that it is permitted unto Antichrist: to take his
turn and, to enjoy his kingdom for a season, even so long as it shall please
Christ to withdraw himself the which our savior Christ has done, by ^aking
from men his light, when he has ^eene that they have abused the same. But ^f
we like better to understand the Apo^^le as speaking of the last appearing of
Christ, then it seems that he does allude ^o the words of the Prophet
Daniel, Dan. 7.11.
^here he says, The judgment was set, and ^he books opened. Then I beheld,
even till the beast was slain, and his bo^y destroyed and given to the burning
^re, etc. And therefore Paul says here, Whom he shall abolish with the
bright^esse of his coming. For the Lord says (...) the Gospel: Mat. 24.27.
As the lightning com^eth out of the East, and goes into the ^est, So shall
the coming of the son ^f man be: for he shall come in the ^ouds of heaven,
with power and great ^^orie. Therefore this opinion is false, that kingdom of
impiety shall utterly fall and ever appear again, at the time of reue^^tion,
whereof the Apostle has spoken hi^^erto: or ye Antichrist shall be abolished
be^^re ye day of judgment, by martial force and ^ight. But rather this battle
between christ and Antichrist shall continue to the ^d of ye world. Nevertheless
Christ at his ^ming, shall utterly deface and raze him out for ever. In the
mean time, it is certain^ true, at the time when Antichrist is ^euealed, a
great number of men shall fo^sake him, as we see it is come to pass (...) this
age. For although he, presuming upon the force of war, does spoil and oppress^
the saints of the most high, yet the members of Christ do withstand him, and do
strike him with the sword of Gods word pull of his visor, accuse his impiety,
an^ so at the last do kill him. For in the heart^ of these men he is slain,
and his author^tie defaced. But though he be over come he will furiously rage
still, until t^ be utterly abolished by the judge Christ, t^ whom alone this
victory is reserved. I^ the mean time every one of us mu^ watch vigilantly,
that he hurt none of v^ as before time he has done: for therefore the word of
God has detected him vnt^ us, that we might shun and beware (...) his
pestilent snares.

9 Even him whose coming is b^ the woorking of Satan, with all power and
signs, and lying woonders.

Hitherto the Apostle has entreated the kingdom, revelation, and ruin
Antichrist: and now returning to him back again, he does describe more at
large his power and works. And he confirms the sentence going before, with
an argument of the contraries. For seeing that Antichrist does not stand
without the subtle deceits of Satan, so soon as Christ does shine, he must
needs vanish away. Furthermore, because he reigns ^n darkness only, the day
arising, his kingdom is extinguished. Therefore the Apo^tle teaches that it
shall be a most easy thing for Christ to distroy the kingdom and tyranny of
Antichrist, which is vp^olden with no other thing, then with the ^eceiueable
sleights of Satan. Yet ne^erthelesse, he adds certain notes, ^hereby that
son of perdition may ea^ly be discerned. In this description he ^ttributeth
unto him Satan for his rec^r and guide, by whom Antichrist shall be ^ade able to
deceive others: lest the faith^ll might think that Antichrist should (...)
impotent, or his kingdom weak. ^ow, the power and woorkings of Sa^an do
consist in murder and in lies, as christ witnesses, saying. He was a
murderer from the beginning and abode not in the truth, John. 8.44.
because there is no truth in him. When he speaks of a lie, he speaks of
his own, because he is a liar, and the father of the same thing. And Paul in
this present place, expounding by repitition the working of Satan, reckons
up, power and signs, that is to say, monstrous lies, and the deceiueablenesse
of unrighteousness. And in very deed that this kingdom might be quite
contrary to the kingdom of Christ, it was necessary that it should consist
partly in false doctrine and in errors, and partly in false and feigned
miracles. For the kingdom of Christ does stand upon the doctrine of truth, and
on the power of the spirit. Therefore Satan to oppose himself in the person
of his vicar against Christ, has put on the name and visor of Christ: and yet
notwithstanding withal, he has chosen such weapons as wherewith he may
directly oppugn Christ. Christ with the doctrine of his Gospel does
illuminate our minds unto everlasting life: Antichrist being taught and
instructed by Satan, with wicked and false doctrine draws the wicked to
destruction. Christ showed forth the power of his spirit, confirming the
Gospel with miracles to save men's souls: the adversary, by the efficacy of
Satan, does withdraw us from the holy ghost, and with his falsehoodes and
sleightes, confirms miserable men in error. As touching signs wicked
Mahomet, was wont to say, Mahomet came not with miracles but with force.
that he came not in the power of signs, but in martial force, whereby he
manifestly confessed, that for the setting up of his new law, he did nothing
else, but play the wicked murderer. The wicked lying man and tyrannical
deceiuer saw that the Gospel of Christ had proper testimonies of divine power
by miraculous signs, the which when he wanted, he determined to bring all
things to pass, by cruel violence. In the papacy great boast has been
made of miracles the which manifestly appearing to be contrary to the word,
and doctrine of the Gospel, do plainly appear to come out of the shop of
Satan. The Apostle calls them lying wonders, not only which are lyingly and
falsely feigned, of crafty men to deceive the simple (with the which y^ papacy
does woonderfully abound): but also he places the lie and falsehood herein,
that Satan does abuse those miracles, which otherwise are the very works of
God, and draws them to a contrary end, to obscure the glory of God.
Notwithstanding there is no doubt but that he does deceive by illusions: Exodus
11.
example whereof we have in Pharaos Magicians.

Therefore, there are two sorts of signs: true, and false. Those are true
signs, which offer the very things, without any fantasy. Such are all the
signs of the Prophets, of the Apostles, of Moses and of Christ. They are false
signs, which by the sufferance of God, are done either by Satan himself, or
by his ministers, to the derogation of the truth, and confirmation of that
which is false. Of these false signs there are diverse kinds. Some there are
which beguile men under a false form: and there are some, which truly appear
as they are in deed, but to this end, to seduce men from truth to falsehood.
Concerning these signs read the 24. of Mathewe. Mat. 24.24.
Verily the estimation of popish religion increaced by nothing more, then by
the often use of miracles. By miracles Transubstantiation, prayer to saints,
and woorshipping of images got credit with the world. For no man is able to
rehearse the wonderful sleightes of legerdemaine, with the which Satan has
beguiled the whole world: in some place forsooth hogs worshipped ye bread of
the pix. At another time the bread left his form: and a little boy appeared:
and after that, a piece of flesh: Yea and that which is more monstrous, great
streams of blood were seen to run from the same. What will you say, if
images did go, or if they were sent by God from heaven: if such as were hid
were revealed: if some laughed and wept: if other some sent glistering and
shining beams wonderfully from them: if some grew and increased in bigness:
if other some vanished away: yea if many of them often times spoke? Of these
things it was not lawful for any man to doubt: nay, it was death not to
worship these impieties, and not to receive them as come from God himself,
and appointed to be woorshiped.

10 And in all deceiueablenes of unrighteousness among them that perish,
because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved.

In these words Paul does more plainly expound himself concerning the causes
of lying wonders: howbeit this may be referred to the coming of Antichrist. As
if he should say, Antichrist shall come in all deceitfulness of
unrighteousness. That is to say, when he comes, he shall bring with him all
manner of iniquities, by which he shall seduce men from that which is true,
honest, and just, and shall wrap them in hypocrisy and errors.

For by the name of seduction which in Greek is called (...), fraud and deceit
is signified, by which a man is seduced from the right way, not because he
which goes astray goes out of the way through his own fault, but being
deceived with the fraud and subteltie of another, lest he should walk in the
right way: even as when we do believe and obey those, which do turn us away
from the faith in Christ, and from true repentance toward God, being persuaded
that they teach us those things which are true and right. Therefore we say,
that by the working of Antichrist, common justice, all honesty, and sincere
truth shall be removed from their place, and in steed thereof,
unrighteousness, hypocrisy, impudency, lust, and most vain persuasion,
substituted. The which things, who sees not that they have possessed all
sorts and conditions of men at this day, but such as will see nothing?

In them that perish. He does limitte the power of Satan, lest some should
think, that he could hurt Gods elect: Mat. 24. ver. 24.
even as our savior Christ also exempteth them from this peril. Whereby it does
appear that Antichrist does not prevail so far as he does, but by Gods
sufferance. Neither were all seduced by Antichrist: nay rather many good
Christians, in the very kingdom of darkness and blindness, and of all iniquity,
were by the grace and goodness of God saved, as John Hus, Hierome of Prage,
and many others, as shall appear to them which read ecclesiastical
Histories. The which is therefore to be noted, least any man should think that
there ceased to be a Church under the kingdom of Antichrist: but we must
believe that always from the beginning of the world, God has had his Church,
one while greater, and another while less. This therefore was a necessary
consolation. For otherwise the godly must needs have been discouraged through
fear, if they should see no way for them to go, but into a gaping and
devouring gulphe. Therefore Paul, as he would have us to be careful, to look
unto our selves, lest by too much security we come unto destruction: so he
commands us to hope well, because the power of Satan is restrained and
brideled, that he cannot bring to ruin other then reprobates. For those cannot
be seduced whom Christ has in his hand, ^ohn. 10.8.
because he is a faithful and mighty preserver of them.

Because they received not the love of the truth.

Least the reprobate might complain, that they perish giltlesse, and that they
are appointed to destruction rather through cruelty in God, then for their own
offense: Paul shows for what just causes so severe vengeance of God shall
come upon them, namely, because they have not embraced the truth offered to
them, with such affection as became them: but have rather willingly rejected
their salvation. Therefore their obstinate rebellion against Christ deserves,
that they which have not received Christ, desiring through his great love to
save all men, and for his truethes sake revealing those things which pertain
to salvation, that they might be saved: now by the permission of God, falsehood
may prevail with them in steed of truth, tyranny for charity, a destroyer
for a Savior, and that now they may believe the lies of wicked men, which
refused to believe the son of God preaching the truth. And hereby that which
we have already said does more plainly appear, that it was expedient for the
Gospel to be preached to the world, before God gave so great scope and liberty
unto Satan: because God would never have suffered so foul a profanation of
his temple, if he had not been provoked thereunto with the extreme
unthankfulness of men. To be brief, Paul testifies that Antichrist shall be a
minister of Gods just vengeance against those, which being called to salvation,
have rejected the Gospel, and have rather given over their minds to impiety
and errors. Wherefore the papists have now no color to make this objection,
that it became not the clemency of Christ thus to cast off his Church. For
although Antichrist reigned like a tirant, yet none perished but they which
were worthy, and which willingly sought their own death. And in very deed,
when as the voice of Christ did sound every where, the ears of men were deaf
and wilfully stopped against the same: And although the profession of
Christianisme was very common, very few notwithstanding did truly and with
their whole heart give themselves unto Christ. Therefore it is no marvel, if
upon such wicked contempt, there ensued vengeance accordingly.

The love of the truth, is the love, study, and earnest desire of the truth,
especially of that doctrine, which is delivered in the Gospel, concerning our
eternal salvation through Christ. This truth the Papists do impugn with no
less cruelty, then they have always done the professors thereof.

11 And therefore God shall send them strong delusion, that they should
believe lies.

The Apostle still proceeds with the punishment of incredulity and
impenitencie, by which two vices it comes to pass that some do speak
against the doctrine of truth and salvation. He does not only say, that men
shall believe errors, but also that the reprobate shall be blinded in such wise,
that without all judgment they shall run headlong into death. For as God
does inwardly illuminate us with his spirit, that his doctrine may be
effectual with us, and does open our eyes and hearts, that it may pierce and
enter therein, even so by his just judgment he delivers those over into a
reprobate sense, whom he has appointed to destruction, that with closed eyes
and dulled minds, as men void of sense and astonished, they may yield them
selves to Satan and to his ministers, to be deceived. And being seduced, they
are most perilously beguiled: because when they do believe that they are in
the way of righteousness, of truth, and of salvation, they do walk in the
way of iniquity, of lies, and of everlasting destruction. And in very deed we
have a manifest spectacle of this thing in the papacy. It cannot be told what
a wonderful heap of errors are therein, what gross and shamfull absurdity of
superstitions, and what doting dilusions and dreams, far from common sense.
All they which have but a mean taste of the sacred Scriptures, cannot so much as
think of those monstrous things without great horror. How comes it to pass
then that all the world is astonished in such wise that they cannot see them,
but because the Lord has stricken them with blindness, and turned them as it
were into senseless blocks? For deceivable sleights are effectual in them,
because the Devil works together in the^, blinding the minds of ye
unbelieving, that the light of the glory of the Gospel which is the image of
God, 2. Cor. 4.
might not shine unto them. Therefore we must observe and note in this place
that impiety, lies, errors, sects, and heresies, with such like, are
punishments of the contempt of Gods word. For God is not wont to suffer the
contempt of his word to escape unpunished: but does most grievously take
vengeance on the same: that men may know that there is no dallying with God.
So our ancestors were punished with deceivable ways in the mist of
darkness, for the contempt of the word, because they believed lies. Now we
may easily gather by examples already past, what is to be feared will befall us
unthankful men at this day, for the contempt of the Gospel of Christ.

12 That all they might be judged which believe not the truth, but have
approved unrighteousness.

That is to say, that they might suffer the punishment due for their impiety,
and perish by the just judgment of God. So that there is no cause why they that
perish should any manner of way lay the blame upon God: because they have
gotten that which they sought for. For we must remember what Moses writes,
that our hearts are tried and proved, when false doctrines are published by
deceivers: because they do not prevail with any but with those which do not
love God with their whole heart. Deuteronomy. 13.3.
Therefore they which love unrighteousness shall reap the fruit thereof. So
Christ said unto the Jews: John. 5.40.
But ye will not come to me that ye might have life. I receive not praise of
men. But I know you, that ye have not the love of God in you. I am come in my
fathers name, and ye receive me not: If another shall come in his own name,
him will ye receive.

When the Apostle says here, That al, he gives us to understand that the
contempt of God is not excused, by their great rout and multitude, which refuse
to obey the Gospel. For God is a judge of the whole world, who will as soon
take vengeance upon a hundred thousand, as upon one man.

But have approved unrighteousness. He expounds by an Antithesis or
comparison, what it is, not to believe the truth. And the Greek participle
(...), signifies a willing promptness unto evil: and therefore it is
translated of some: But had pleasure in unrighteousness. Hereby all excuse is
taken from the unthankful, seeing they take so great pleasure in
unrighteousness, that they prefer the same, before the righteousness of God.
Now, if we do compare with these words, those things, which seducers, and
the seduced Papists, do account to be their great praise, we shall easily
see, what is ye chief reward, which is due to them, namely, most fearful
wrath, and double condemnation. ^or they will not believe the truth, but d^
^light in unrighteousness, and in impiety, being sedused by the prince of
da^^^es, and by Satan the father of lies. ^s far concerning the cruelty and
i^^^^ie of Antichrist, and concerning of the ^euils which he has brought into
the Church by wicked doctrines, and by the oppression of the Gospel of Christ.

13 But we ought always to give thanks to God for you, brethren, beloved of
the Lord, because that God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation,
through sanctification of the spirit, and the faith of truth.

The Apostle having before declared certain horrible things, which might
terrefie and trouble the hearers mind, does now comfort the hearts of the
faithful, and does more plainly segregate, and disseuer the Thessalonians
from the reprobate, least their faith might waver with the fear of the
defectio^ to come. Howbeit his intention was to provide not only for them: but
also for posterities to come: neither does he only confirm them that they
might not be carried into the same ruin with ye world: but also by this
c^^parison, he does the more commend the (...) of God toward the: that whereas
(...) behold almost the whole world to b^ ^ed headlong together, as it were
(...) ^iolent empest, they by the hand o^ (...) lived in a quiet and firm
state of l^fe. Thus it is convenient to behold the i^^^ments of God in the
reprobate, that the^ may be as it were looking glasses unto us, to consider his
mercy toward us. For we must make this accoumpt, that it comes to pass
only by the singular grace and favor of God, that we in like manner do not
perish miserably with them.

Brethren beloved of the Lord. He calls them so, that they may the better
consider that they are for no other cause delivered from the universal
destruction of the world, but because God has freely loved them. Of this
favor and grace of God, Moses remembered the Jews, saying: Deuteronomy. 7.7.
God has not therefore so greatly exalted you, because you were more mighty,
or mo in number than others but because he loved your fathers. For so often as
we hear mention made of his love, we ought by and by to remember that saying
of the Apostle, Not that we loved him first. John. 4.10.
And the certain and sure signs of the love of God toward us, are the
proclayming of the Gospel, and the preaching of remission of sins through
Christ. For by that publication of Gods will, it is both testified that we are
received into the grace of adoption through Christ, and also are reckoned in
the number of Gods sons, if so be we receive the doctrine of the Gospel
through faith, and do commit our selves to the grace of the most merciful
God. Psalm. 147.11. John. 3.16.
For the Lord loves those that fear him, and that put their trust in his
mercy. Moreover God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten son,
Ephe. 16.
that they that believe in him should not perish but have everlasting life. This
therefore is that grace of God, which makes us accepted through the beloved,
that is, through Christ. Woe therefore be unto those wicked teachers, which will
have us to doubt of the Grace of God, and whether we are loved of God, when as
God would have us, more sure of nothing, then that believing the Gospel, we
assure our selves to be in his favor, and to be beloved of Christ.

Because that God has from the beginning chosen you.

The Apostle expresses the cause, why all men shall not be overwhelmed in one
and the self same destruction: namely because Satan can do nothing against
those to hinder their salvation, although heaven and earth be confounded
together. For this saying of Christ shall always abide most firm. My sheep
hear my voice and I know them, John 10.27.
and they follow me: and I give unto them eternal life, neither shall they
perish for ever, and no man shall take them ou^ (...) my hand. There is no
doubt, but tha^ the Apostle speaks of Gods eternal election: For he means
yt there is no fear of the altering of their salvation, which is founded upon
gods eternal election, though there happen a troublesome alteration of things.
As if he should say, let this be a horror and fear to others, to those (I say)
which perish, and in whom the Devils can much prevail: but as for you, ye are
without peril, as the beloved of God, and such as are elected from the
beginning. Therefore what garboyle and trouble soever Satan woorketh in the
world, yet your salvation was laid up in safety for you, before the world was
made. For election signifies a purpose of showing mercy, and of saving those,
whom God has ordained by that purpose, to obtain eternal life for an
inheritance. But because it is not our part to enter into the secret counsel
of God, there to seek the certainty of our salvation, he delivers unto us
certain signs and tokens of election, which ought sufficiently to assure us
thereof.

Through sanctification of the spirit. That is to say by the holy Ghost, which
does purify our hearts, and give unto us a true faith. Therefore to know
whether God has elected us or no, we must not seek what God has done before
the creation of ye world: but we shall find in our selves a lawful trial,
namely if he has sanctified us with his spirit, and established us in the
faith of his Gospel. For it is ye office of the holy Ghost, to illuminate our
darkened hearts, which are naturally blind, to teach the ignorant, to comfort
the afflicted, to bring those that go astray into the right way, and so to
sanctify them, that their works may be acceptable to the omnipotent God. The
Apostle calls that the Faith of truth, by which the elect do believe the
Gospel of Christ. For this is contrary to that false persuasion, concerning
the which James pronounces, saying: Faith without works is dead And the faith
which we hear to the Gospel, ^^mes. 2.
is an assured testimony of our adoption: and the spirit does give that
adoption: and they which are led by the spirit of God, Romans 8.14. John. 3.36.
are the sons of God. And he which possesses Christ by faith, has
everlasting life. All which things are diligently to be noted, least we
pretermitting the revelation of Gods will, whereupon he commands us to rest,
we going about to draw the same from his secret counsel, in the which he
would not have us inquisitiue, should bring our selves into a confused
laberinth or maze. Therefore we must hold our selves contented, with the faith
of the Gospel, and with the grace of the spirit, by which we are regenerated,
that we may assure our selves to be elected of God, and that we shall have the
salvation of eternal life, if we do truly believe in Christ, the son of
God. And hereby their wickedness is confuted, which make Gods election a cloak
of all filthynesse, when as Peter so joins the same with faith and
regeneration, 1. Pe^
that they cannot be separated. And Paul himself in an other place testifies,
Ephe. 1.4.
that we were elected before the foundation of the world was laid, that we
might be blameless and holy in the sight of God, in love.

14 Whereunto he called you by our Gospel, to obtain the glory of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

The preaching of the Gospel pertayneth to ye confirmation of election. For
this is the mean by which we come unto salvation, whereunto God has chosen
us. God therefore has called us unto a true faith, not by the righteousness of
the law, but by the Gospel: even as Paul testifies in an other place, 2. Tim.
1.9.
He has saved and called us, with an holy calling, not according to our works,
but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given to us through
Christ Jesus, before the world was, but is now made manifest by the appearing
of our savior Jesus Christ, who has abolished death, and has brought life
and immortality unto light, through the Gospel. And therefore, by the
Gospel, because no man can believe in Christ, but by the publication thereof,
who being now glorified reigns at ye right hand of God the father in heaven.
Romans 10.17
For faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.

By our Gospel. He calls it his Gospel, not that it sprang from him, but
because the preaching thereof was committed to him. As if he should say: By the
Gospel which we have preached, which was committed to us to preach. And here
are to be noted certain degrees of our salvation. For we are from the
beginning chosen to salvation: and then we are made partakers of salvation
through sanctification of the spirit, through believing of the truth, and
through the Gospel.

To obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.

This does bring no small consolation to the faithful, when they know that does
they and their salvation are so in the hands of God, even as a fixed and firm
inheritance is in the power of some Lord. To this end pertain these places,
Psalm. 2.^
Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Again, Act. 20.28.
Christ has purchased a Church to himself by his blood. For God has called
us, that we might be a glorious and peculiar people, of Jesus Christ, a holy
nation, innocent, and immacylate, which might honor and worship God, and that
God himself might dwell in the hearts of those that worship him. The which
ought to allure us to holiness of life. For God has not called us to lust and
uncleanness, but unto holiness and sincerity, and that we might be his holy
temple.

15 Therefore brethren stand fast, and keep the instructions, which ye have
been taught, either by word, or by our Epistle.

This is the conclusion in tho which the Apostle requires perseverance, both
of faith, and also of manners, or of good works.

And therefore he brings in this exhortation very aptly upon the premises,
because our constancy, and power of perseuering does lean upon the trust and
confidence of Gods grace. For when God does call us to salvation, by reaching
forth as it were his hand unto us: when Christ does offer us to enjoy and
possess him^^lfe, by the doctrine of the Gospel, wh^^ the holy Ghost is given
unto us as a ^e^ and pledge of eternal life, although heaven should fall, we
ought not to fe^ or be discouraged. For he comman^ ^h the Thessalonians to
stand fast, not only when others do stand: but also when they saw almost all
men to fall away from the faith, and all things to be full of confusion, to
abide nevertheless then in their state. And in very deed the calling
wherewith God does call us, ought so to arm and confirm us against all
offenses, that the universal ruin of the world, should not shake our
firmenes. For we must stand like soldiers which are placed in their array, to
fight against the enemies of Cristianisme. For constancy, and the power of
perseuering is necessary for us, without the which it shall profit nothing,
that we have once begun well in the exercises of Godliness.

And keep the instructions which ye have been taught.

There are some which restrain these words unto the ordinances of civil
government, amiss: for he shows the man (...) of standing fast. But it is a
matter of greater importance, then external d^scipline. Paul therefore calls
all hose things instructions, which by hi^ teaching the Thessalonians had
lea^^ed, that is to say, the doctrine of the Gospel, concerning true
repentance toward God, and concerning true faith in the Lord Jesus. For it
was not lawful for the Apostle of Jesus Christ to teach any other thing. And
the writings of Paul do sufficiently show what matter he did especially teach,
and how he is to be imitated of al ye Godly teachers of the Church. For he
followed that order of teaching which Christ delivered unto him, being neither
inferior, nor contrary to any other Apostle in doctrine. The Papists do abuse
this place for the defense of men's traditions. And they frame their reason
thus: if it was lawful for Paul to command traditions, it is also lawful for
other teachers to do it likewise: and if it were a Godly thing to observe
them, then is it meet, that these be no less observed. But admit that Paul
spoke of the precepts which appertained to the external government of the
Church, yet we say that they were not made, or ordained by him, but commanded
of the Lord. For in another place he testifies that it is not his purpose to
ensnare the consciences of men: even as it was not lawful for him, 1. Cor.
7.35.
nor for any of the Apostles to do it: So that we do acknowledge that we
ought to receive the Apostolical traditions, even as well as the written
Epistles: but yet we do not acknowledge that all they are Apostolical
traditions, which those men thrust unto us under the title of Apostolical.
Therefore they show themselves very indiscreet, in going about to defend the
filthy heap of their superstitions, under this title, as if they were the
traditions of Paul. But the traditions of Paul are not contrary to his written
Epistles, as the traditions of these men are contrary unto the writings of the
Apostles. But we will leave those trifling toys, seeing we have the sincere
meaning of Paul. And it may be judged partly by the Epistle, what manner of
traditions they be, which he commends. For he says, Either by word: That is,
my sermons, my preaching, or present instruction. Either by Epistle. What does
that contain but pure doctrine, which does utterly overthrow all Popery, and
all other feigned things, which are contrary to the simplicity of the Gospel.

16 Now the same Jesus Christ our Lord, and our God, even the father which has
loved us, and has given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through
grace.

The Apostle having exhorted the Thessalonians, does now, according to his
manner bless them, and pray for them: thereby to make them more firm and
strong. Teaching thereby that all Christian virtues, and perseverance therein,
are given unto us of God: and that therefore we have need daily to pray unto
God for the same gifts, Therefore by this prayer he does prevent the
Thessalonians of a doubt, that they might not be careful where to get strength
constanly to abide in sincere doctrine. Neither is it negligently to be
pretermitted, that Paul testifies that our Lord Jesus Christ is the giver of
those gifts with God our father. For thereby he gives us to understand that he
is God, and that he does bring to pass with God the father that we do profit,
and persevere in every good work. And he does withal admonish us that we
cannot otherwise obtain any thing from God, then by seeking the same in Christ
himself. Also for so much as he prays that God would give unto them those
things which he had commanded, he thereby shows, how little exhortations
do prevail, except God do inwardly move men's hearts. Verily men's ears
should hear only a vain sound, if so be the holy Ghost should not make the
doctrine effectual.

And our God the father which has loved us.

Even when we were enemies: how much more shall he love us, Romans 5.10.
now that we are reconciled through Jesus Christ his son. This the Apostle
adds to make the Thessalonians the more assured, that God would give unto
them those things which he prayed for.

And has given us everlasting consolation.

This eternal consolation, which he will have always to remain in his church,
is the doctrine of the Gospel, and the preaching of remission of sin through
Christ.

And good hope.

The name of everlasting consolation, and of good hope, tends to this end,
that the faithful may assuredly look for an everlasting continuance of gifts.
He adds, Through grace, to exclude man's merits, for the gifts of the holy
Ghost are given unto us, through the free grace of God only, of the which we
speak the more often, that no man might proudly boast him self of the merits
of his righteousness. Cor. 4.7.
For what have thou, says Paul, which thou have not received? Moreover ye
Apostle has very artificially comprehended the whole su^me of the Gospel in
this verse: namely, that God has loved mankind, and has given everlasting
consolation unto him, Jesus Christ, who is our hope: and yt he has given it
him through his grace, and not for our merit, that we live for ever. But what
is ye Apostles petition? it follows.

17. Comfort your hearts, and stablishe you in every word, and good work.

He prays for the Thessalonians, that God so gentle and loving a father,
would sustain and comfort their hearts with his consolation, against all
stumbling blocks and offenses, by which they might be brought into doubt and
despair. For it belongs unto him to comfort and strengthen the hearts of
his faithful servants, that they might not faint through carfulness or
distrust.

And stablish you in every word.

Then he prays that God would confirm them in wholesome doctrine. For this is
the word whereof he speaks, and not of any common word: that it may agree
with that which went before.

And good work. This parteyneth to the whole course of a good and holy life,
wherein the faithful ought to persevere. Wherefore all the duties of a
Christian man, are comprehended in these two parts, namely, that they do
abide as well in wholesome doctrine, as in good manners of life. The which they
cannot perform without the grace and help of our Lord Jesus Christ. Who
says: John. 15.5.
Without me ye can do nothing. That is to say, without my power and strength
working in you. And in another place it is said, that we are framed by Jesus
Christ unto good works, Ephe. 2.10.
which God has prepared that we should walk in them. These therefore are
those good fruits which do spring from a sanctified breast, through the holy
Ghost, and a true faith, Heb. 11.6
without the which it is not possible to please God. Finally Saint Paul has so
tempered this his prayer that withal he has prescribed what becomes the
Thessalonians, namely, that they give themselves continually to all good words,
and good works, and that they do persevere in every good work, but especially
that they do acknowledge Christ to be the only hope, and everlasting
consolation of all the faithful for ever.

CHAPTER III.
1 FVrthermore brethren, pray for us, yt the word of the Lord may have free
passage, and be glorified even as it is with you


This is the last part of this Epistle which comprehends four exhortations:
of the which, one is, the supplication of the Church, the which is very
necessary and profitable. For although the Lord was mightily present with the
Apostle, and that he did exceed al others in the feruencie of prayer, yet
nevertheless he does not neglect the prayer of the faithful, with the which
the Lord will have us helped. We in like manner after his example, ought
always to require this help, and to stir up the faithful to pray for us.
For there is nothing more available with God then faithful prayer.

That the word of the Lord may have free passage.

For two causes the prayer of the Church is here required of the Apostle. The
first is, for the happy success of the Gospel, that the same being preached
to other nations, might be no less esteemed then it was of the Thessalonians.
Therefore by these words Paul shows that he has not so much care and
consideration of him self, as he has of the whole Church. For why does he
desire to be commended to the prayer of the Thessalonians? That the doctrine of
the Gospel might have his course. Therefore he would have them to have respect
not so much to him alone, as to the glory of Christ, and the common salvation
of the Church. And the word of the Lord is said to have free passage, when in
preaching and in doctrine, it has no let, but happy success, insomuch yt
many believe it, and believing it, do glorify God and are saved.

And be glorified. He desires that the word of God may have his force and
efficacy to reform men into the Image of God. Therefore holiness of life and
integrity in christians, is the beauty of ye Gospel: even as they do bring
infamy and slander to the Gospel, professing it with their mouth, and living
nevertheless filthylie and wickedlie. Mat. 5.15.
To this end partaine the exhortations of our savior Christ, of Peter, and of
others, 1. Pet. 2.12.
in the new Testament.

Even as it is with you. That is to say, after the same manner, form, and
happy success. For this ought to be a great encouragement to the Godly, that
they may see all other men like to them selves in godliness. Therefore they
which are already entered into the kingdom of God, are commanded to pray
daily that the same kingdom may come, so far off they ought to be from
envy, when they do hear that others are come to the knowledge of the truth.

2 And that we may be delivered from unreasonable and evil men: for all men
have not faith.

This is the latter cause, why the Apostle requires the prayers of the
faithful. The truth indeed was preached: but in the mean time there sprange
up diverse scismes, among them also which would seem to be the embracers of
true religion. And the public enemies of religion did both banish the truth,
and did also most cruelly persecute them which were maintainers of the truth:
neither did there want certain hypocrites and false brethren, which were worse
and far more pestilent the^ they, unto true godliness. For it is truly said,
that a counterfeit friend is much more hurtful then an open enemy. Wherefore
Paul desires to be delivered from such. For by unreasonable and evil me^ he
means those, which under ye name of christians, lurked in ye Church, or else
ye Jews, which through a mad zeal of the law, furiously persecuted ye gospel.
For he knew how great harm was like to come by them both. And this saying of
the Apostle may be extended to all manner of perils. For then Paul was going to
Jerusalem, and did write, being in the midst of his journey. But it was
already told him from above that bonds and persecutions waited for him there.
Act. 20.23.
From the which he does desire to be so delivered, that he may overcome whether
it be by death, or by life. But now at this day, the ministers of the word,
have the Pope and Papists for their principal adversaries, which are in deed
unreasonable and evil men, which do hinder the course of the doctrine of the
Gospel with their accusations, and do destroy so much as lies in them, the
fruit and glory of the word of God preached. There are beside these, many
wicked teachers, which thrust in many perverse and fanaticall things, in their
doings, as the Anabaptists, Libertine, Epicures, Atheistes, and such like.
Wherefore the Church ought to pray for the ministers of the word, that they
may be delivered from unreasonable and evil men.

For all men have not faith. The reason whereby he proves that unreasonable
and evil men are enemies and persecutors of the word of God, is taken from
faith, which is the singular gift of God. For God calls many, which do not
come in faith: many also do feign to come, but they are farthest off in heart.
But Paul does not speak of every one: for the Thessalonians did see, that very
many did forsake the faith: yea they saw how small the number of the believers
was. Wherefore this had been superfluous to be spoken: but Paul denies, that
all they which profess the faith, are faithful in deed. For many are called,
Mat. 20.16.
but few are chosen. If thou do comprehend all the Jews, they seemed to be
near unto Christ, who ought to have known him by the law and the Prophets.
But Paul in very deed, does especially note those, with whom he was afterward
to have to do. And it is very like that these were they, who having a show and
name of godliness, 2. Tim. 3.
were notwithstanding far from the same. Hereof came the conflict. Therefore if
it shall fall out that thou have to do with unreasonable and evil men, of the
which there are always a great multitude, thou shall consider that faith is no
common thing, and that the same is not given but to Gods elect, and to such as
are predestinate unto eternal life. Whereupon it is called the faith of Gods
elect. Tit. 1.1.
Therefore when we do hear that the Church is troubled with wicked factions,
let this be our buckler against such stumbling bluckes of offense. For we
shall be often times injurious, not only to godly teachers, if we do doubt of
their faith, so often as domestical enemies do trouble them: but also our
faith shall afterward waver, except we shall remember that many are unfaithful
among them which boast of the name of Christians. Many therefore have a
counterfeit faith, for so much as al do not believe the Gospel. 3 But the Lord
is faithful, which will stablish you, and keep you from evil.

He has spoken of the perils with the which some men might be turned away from
the faith. For there are many unreasonable and evil men which do vex the
Church of God many ways, and do destroy and corrupt the same, either with
wicked doctrine, either with profane ordinances, or else with the cruelty of
persecutions. Therefore the Apostle has added another special consolation, by
which they which have believed the Gospel and are in the foresaid troubles,
may hope well for the presence of Gods help, For it cannot be, that God will
fail such, but will strengthen them, and deliver them from evil. Moreover
because it may be that their minds being terrified with sinister rumors, they
came into some doubt of Paul's ministry: after that he has admonished them
that faith is not always to be found in men, he calls them back unto God,
and says that he is faithful, which will confirm and strengthen them against
all the practices of men, with the which they shall go about to assail them.
As if he should say, they indeed are false and untrusty, but yet God is able
enough to hold you up that you do not fall. The sum is this, he affirms
that the Thessalonians through the help of God, shall abide in the faith: and
withal he declares that constancy in the faith, is the gift of God. He
calls the Lord faithful, which is constant in the defending of the
salvation of his chosen, which helps them in due time, and never forsakes
them in perils. After the same manner we do see yt the Church is often times
afflicted, and is in great perils of afflictions and temptations, and yet
notwithstanding, the same is preserved and delivered out of all evils. For God
is faithful, 1. Cor. 10.13.
which will not suffer you to be tempted above that which you are able to
bear. For as he alone is able, so he will help them that are tempted, and
strengthen, and keep them, that they be not overcome in the afflictions of
tribulatio^s. Therefore our faith and patience is to be exercised in
adversities, and all the godly must look for help from God, who will not fail
to help them in due and convenient time. 4 And we are persuaded of you through
the Lord, that ye both do and will do the things, which we command you.

These words are in effect thus much, we speak these things not that we doubt
of your constancy: nay we are assured of you, through the help of the Lord
Jesus, that ye will do those things hereafter which we command you to do.
This form of speaking if we aptly use, we shall prevail more with them with
whom we have to do, then if we urge them with sharp reprehensions, and hard
threatenings: for it is not the office of a teacher of the Gospel to use always
sharp threatenings, and reprehensions, neither yet at all times gentle and
mild exhortations, but herein to be discrete according to present occasion,
that he may retain them in Godliness, whom he has under his charge to
reform. And by this preface Paul makes a way for him self to the precept or
commandment which he gives in the sixth verse following. For the confidence,
and persuasion which he says he has of them, made them much more prompt and
ready to obey, then if he had required their obedience, as distrusting or
doubting of them.

Through the Lord. Paul does not lean so much in persuasion on the
Thessalonians, as he does in trust and confidence on the most faithful God.
And therefore he sayeith yt this hope which he has conceived of them is
founded in the Lord: because it belongs unto him to bow the hearts of men
unto submission, and to retain them in the same. Or else herby he would
declare (which is more likely) that he did not intend to command any thing,
but yt which he had received warrant for from the Lord. Therefore he determined
thus with him self, that both his commanding, and their obeying, should be in
the Lord. Wherefore whosoever do not retain this modesty, do in vain
pretend the example of Paul, to bind and tie the Church with their laws.
Peradventure also it may be that he had a regard to maintain the reverence of
his Apostleshippe among the Thessalonians, though the wicked went about to
deface the same.

5 And the Lord guide your hearts to the love of God, and the waiting for of
Christ.

In these words the Apostle wishes unto the Thessalonians help and strength
from the Lord, that they may do those things which he commands them out of
the word of the Lord. The end of this prayer is, that we may al understand
that every good gift is given to us from above, least any man should ascribe to
much to his own strength. The Lord (says he) so direct and govern you in
true love toward God, that ye may do his commandments: and also in faith
toward Christ, that ye may show your selves patient in all troubles of
afflictions. Charity will make you to endeavor your selves continually to
behave your selves well toward all men: even as God is good and loving to all.
The waiting for the coming of Christ, will make you stoutly to suffer all
afflictions. Therefore we do understand by the name of the love of God in this
place, that love of ours toward God, by which we perform his commandments
with prompt obedience, honoring him which loved us first, and gave his only
begotten son, 1. John. 4.10.
to be the obtayner of mercy for our sins. For that true and effectual love
is the strength of such as believe the Gospel of Christ, which all they
declare to be in them which are endued with a true faith in Christ. He prays
also that the faithful may without doubting, wait for the coming of Christ
the defender of the afflicted, and that at the last they might be delivered
from their affliction. For the Apostle commonly uses to comfort such as are
afflicted, and himself also with the expectation of the coming of the judge
Christ. For thus he writes, If we suffer, 2. Tim. 2.11. 2. Tim. 4.
we shall also reign with him. And again, From henceforth is laid up for me
the croune of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous judge shall give
me, at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also which love his
coming.

Wherefore, seeing he does here briefly express those things which he knew to
be most necessary for Christians, if we desire to grow to perfection, let us
seek to profit in these two things. And in very deed the love of God cannot
reign in us, but that the love of our brother must be in us also. Also the
looking for Christ instructs Christians to contemn the world, to mortify
the flesh, and to bear the cross. Howbeit that may be expounded to be the
waiting for Christ, which the doctrine of Christ does beget in us, that is to
say, by which we suffer sundry persecutions of corporal afflictions for the
name and glory of Christ. But it is better to understand it of the hope of the
last redemption.

6 We command you brethren in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
withdraw your selves from every brother that walks inordinatly, and not
after the instruction which he received of us.

This is another exhortation concerning the shunning of the company of
inordinate brethren. The cause of this commandment was, for that immediately
after the Apostles times, certain curious persons, began to thrust themselves
into the Church of God: who, either under the pretense of religion, or else by
sinister means, that is to say, by idleness, sought to live a pleasant life.
These he calls inordinate men, not that they were of a dissolute life, or
infamed with notorious crimes, but because they were idle and slothful
persons, which exercised themselves in no honest trade of life. For this is a
confused disorder in deed, to have no regard wherefore we are made, and not to
frame our life to this end. For this is a well ordered life, when we live,
according to the rule of Gods word. Without this order, there is nothing in
the life of man but confusion. And this is worthy to be noted, least any man
should conceive a liking of him self, living out of his lawful vocation. For
God has put such a difference in the life of men, that one man cannot live
without another. Therefore he which lives to himself only, is no way
profitable to mankind, but a burden to others. Wherefore Paul pronounces that
such are to be driven out of the company of the faithful, least they bring
shame and infamy to the Church.

In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Apostle added this, that the Thessalonians might understand, that this
commandment ought to be reverently received, as coming, not from a mortal
man, but from Christ himself. As if he should say, those things which we
command you, we do not command as in our own name, but by the commandment
of Christ our Lord.

That ye withdraw your selves from every brother.

This withdrawing whereof he speaks, does not appertain to public
excommunication, but to private custom, or company keeping. For he does
simplely forbid, that the faithful have no manner of familiarity with such
idle droanes, as have no honest trade of life wherein they may live.

That walks inordinately.

Least any man should take this word inordinatly, in another meaning, the^ the
Apostle Paul himself understood, he will expound him self in the eleventh
verse following. And he does here make mention by name of brethren, who being
such, and professing themselves to be Christians, of all others are least to be
tolerated, because they are as it were the blots and spots of religion.

And not after the institution which he received of us.

By the institution, he means that, which he will add anon in the tenth
verse, that meat be not given to him which will not labor.

7 For ye your selves know how ye ought to follow us: for we behaved not our
selves inordinately among you:

8 Neither took we bread of any man for naught, but we wrought with labor and
travel night and day, because we would not be chargeable to any of you.

Before the Apostle comes to the institution, he shows what manner of
example he has given them in him self. For that doctrine is of great credit
and authority, when we lay no more burden upon others, then we take upon our
selves.

For we behaved not our selves inordinately among you.

As if he should say, there is just cause why ye should follow me, for I have
lived an honest, Godly, and Christian life among you.

Neither took we bread of any man for naught.

He proves that he did not behave him self inordinately among the
Thessalonians, and withal he does by the way reprehend those, which under the
pretense of the Gospel live idly, and are a burden to others. He shows
that he wrought day and night with his hands, that he might not be chargeable
to any man. Of the which matter he had said somewhat in the former Epistle to
the Thessalonians. 1. These. 2.9.
And whereas he denies that he has eaten any man's bread freely or of gift, in
very deed he should not have done so, although he had not labored with h^s
hands. For it is not of free gift, which is due by right: and the price of the
labor which the Ministers of the Gospel bestow on the Church is much greater,
then the living which they receive, from the same. But Paul had respect here,
unto disordered and careless men. For all men are not so equal and indifferent,
that they will acknowledge the reward which is due unto the ministers of the
word. But rather such is the malice of some, that although they do give
nothing of their own, yet notwithstanding they do grudge them necessary
living, as if they were idle men. Othersome by the example of Paul, do
contentiously affirm, that nothing is to be paid at al to godly Bishops, and
ministers: but these men, if they would consider the circumstances of the
place, time, and persons, and for what causes, every thing was done, they
should well see and know, that Paul did this for no other cause, but only for
charity, that others might not be offended. It is certain that he received
nothing of the Corinthyans: but for the false Apostles sake, he neglected his
own power and liberty, least they having Paul for their example, might thereby
have some color to excuse their gain. For it is most certain that Paul took
contribution of the brethren of Macedonia. And anon he will declare, Phil.
4.25.
that he departed from his proper right, when he took no stipend. Whereby he
gives to understand that it is less tolerable, that they which do nothing,
should live of contribution. He writes also, 1. Cor. 9.13.
that they must live of the Gospel, which preach the Gospel: and also that
they must be had in high reputation through love, for their works sake. 1.
These. 5.13 1. Tim. 5.17.
And in another place he says, that they which govern well, are worthy of
double honor. The like almost is to be red in the Epistle to the Galathyans.
Gal. 6.6. Heb. 13.7
And in the Epistle to ye Hebrews it is written: Remember those which have the
oversight of you, which have declared unto you the word of God.

There are very many testimonies, to prove that necessary maintenance, Luke.
10.7.
a stipend, double honor, contribution, prebends, and benifices, belong unto
the ministers of the Gospel. Mat. 10.8.
And whereas some aleadge this sentence: Freely ye have received, give freely:
the same is nothing repugnant to the former sentence, which is, That the
labourer is worthy of his hier. For in this place two things are commanded,
first that the disciples should comfort the weak, and put away diseases,
without taking any money for the same, because they did it by the power of
Christ, who would not have the gifts of the holy Ghost to be sold, as
appears by the example of Simon Magus. The second is, that the due hier and
reward, be given to the labourer. To Christ also and to the Apostles, the
necessary maintenance of life, was given by others: as appears in the
Gospel of Luke. Luke. 8.2.3.
But let us return again to the words of Paul: who adds saying:

9 Not, but that we had authority, but that we might make our selves an
ensample unto you to follow us.

As Paul intended to give an example by his labor, least slothful men should,
like idle droanes, eat up the honey which belonged to the painful bees: even
so he would not have his example hurtful to the ministers of the word, that
the Churches thereby should defraud them of their lawful maintenance. Wherein
we may behold the singular moderation, discretion, and humanity of the
Apostle, and how far he was from the ambition of those men, which abuse their
virtues, and gifts to this end, that they may deminish the right of their
brethren. It was to be feared least the Thessalonians, having the Gospel
preached unto them freely from the mouth of Paul, in the beginning, would
(according to the malicious nature of man) make the same a law for other
ministers. Paul to mete with this prejudice, and inconvenience, teaches that
he has power and authority to do more then he did: this he does that he
might not restrain others of their liberty. And by this reason he would make
the idle and slowbellies ashamed the more: as we have before touched. For it is
an argument from the greater to the less. Therefore that right ought to be
safely keept and defended, as granted from God, and confirmed by the law of
nature, because the labourer is worthy of his reward. Except, the time,
occasion, Luke. 10.7.
and other circumstances persuade to the contrary. For then the minister of
the Gospel must be content to leave some part of his right, least he give
offense to the Gospel of Christ. For what will come to pass, if they that be
teachers, through coueteousnesse, will depart from nothing? Therefore it is
evident enough, how far Paul would have his example to be followed, in that he
would not be sustained with the cost of the Church. For in all things, we
ought to seek especially the glory of the Gospel: and it belongs unto
charity, that we endeavor our selves, not to be grievous and offensive to any.
It is not lawful to be too chargeable and costly to the Churches, neither is it
lawful for the Churches to refuse to give and contribute liberally to their
ministers, when they are able. Concerning ye which matter, read more in the 9.
Chapter of the 1. Epistle to the Corinthyans. 10 For even when we were with
you, this we warned you of, that if there were any which would not work, that
he should not eat.

The reason why the Thessalonians ought to imitate Paul, is taken from the
institution going before, concerning the not suffering of those, which under
the pretense of the Gospel, follow idleness, and oppress others.

That if there were any which would not work he should not eat.

This is the very law and ordinance whereof he spoke in the sixth verse. For
seeing it is written, Psalm. 128.
Thou art blessed eating the labor of thy hands: And again, The blessing of
the Lord is upon the hands of him that works: It is certain that
slothfulness and idleness is likewise cursed of the Lord. Also we know that
man was created to do some thing: as not only the Scripture testifies, but
as nature also has taught the Gentiles. Whereupon they have made many
Proverbs. He that fears the mil, shall have no meal. Also, there is no honey
without the be. For he which cannot abide bees, because of their pricks, is
unworthy to possess ye honey. Again, thou suffer ye which hurts, that
thou may possess the profit. It is therefore meet and right that they which
exempt themselves from the common law which appertains to all men, be also
deprived of living, and of the reward of labor. These things if Kings and
Christian Princes had well considered four hundred years ago, they had had
more plenty of riches, and fewer monks. For how do the whole rowt and rabble
of the pouleshorne popish clergy, adorn the Gospel? and what profit do
they bring to the church? the great multitude whereof, what does it contain,
but sluggish, and idle persons, lazy lubbers, slowbellies, covetous and
ambitious Priests, fornicators, and all manner of lewd and wicked persons, men
unlearned, and utterly ignorant of the holy Scriptures, and beside this, the
most cruel enemies to the doctrine of the faith in Christ? Who notwithstanding
do swim in the wealth and riches of the Church (in other countries) at their
pleasure, and live like fat hogs in the stye. In whom most aptly are
fulfilled these words of the Apostle, 2. Pet. 2.12.
They count it pleasure to live deliciously for a season. Spots they are and
blots, deliting themselves in their deceiuings, in feasting with you, having
eyes full of adultery, and that cannot cease to sin, beguiling unstable
souls. etc.

Moreover by these words of Paul, as with thunderclappes from heaven, the
rites, ordinances, and rules of begging friars, and monks being touched, are
overthrown, who being a counterfeit sort of pore, do notwithstanding fill
their bellies with other men's trenchers, whom a man most truly may call idle
droanes. For this kind of beggary of all other, is most wicked and ungodly, and
no better then a kind of rapine and theft.

Furthermore we must note that there are diverse kinds of laboring. For
whatsoever he be that does any manner of way seek to benefit the society of
men by his industry, whether it be in governing a family, or in dealing in
public or private affairs, either in counsayling, or in teaching, or by any
other manner, of way, the same is not to be reckoned among idle persons. For
the Apostle here speaks against idle droanes, which live by the sweat of
other men's brows, they themselves doing nothing to benefit the common wealth.

11 For we heard that there are some, which walk among you inordinatly, and
work not at all, but are busy bodies.

Now he does speak more plainly and strictly of that, which hitherto he has
spoken at large. The cause (says he) why I do so greatly urge these things,
is, for that I do hear, that some do live inordinately among you, that is,
doing no work at all, but curiously busying them selves. It is very like that
this kind of slothfulnes, was a certain sede of idle monkery, for eue^ in the
very beginning of the primitive church, there were some which under the color
of Religion, did rob other men's tables, or else did subtly draw unto the^
selves, the substance and riches of the simple. And in Augustines time they had
so greatly prevailed, that he was constrained to write a special book
against idle Moonkes: wherein he does justly complain of their pride, who
contemning the admonition of the Apostell, do not only excuse them selves of
infirmity, but also will therefore seem to be more holy than other men,
because they labor not. But this mischefe has so increased and ouerflowed,
that slow bellies have almost possessed the tenth part of the earth, whose
only Religion is this, to have their bellies well filled, and to give them
selves from labor, to ease and pleasure. And this vile kind of life they
commend with this title, or that name of order. But what does Paul by the
mouth of the spirit one the contrary part pronounce? verily he pronounces
them al to be irregular and disordered, with what title soever they be covered.

And work not at all, but are busy bodies.

That is to say, living idly under the cloak of the Gospel, and hating
others. By these words he does expound what it is to live inordinately.

And he notes a special vice, with the which idle men are infected, namely
that they are troublesome to themselves, and to others, by being importunate
medlers, and busy bodies. For we do see by common experience, that those men
which have nothing to do, are much more weary doing nothing, then if they
were busy, and occupied about a very serious work. They run hither and
thither: whether soever they come, they make a show of weariness: they gather
up all the tales that they hear, and busily disperse them abroad again. A man
would think that they carried upon their shoulders the weight of a kingdom.
Can we have a more evident example of this matter in any other sort, then in
the monks? For what sort of men are more unquiet? Where does there reign
greater curiosity? Also in this place, those which are Bishops and Pastors
only in name, are noted, which have no care of ye Lords flock, but are only
curious in those things, which serve to maintain voluptuousnes,
coueteousnesse, oppression, and such like.

12 Therefore them that are such we command and exhort, by our Lord Jesus
Christ, that they work with quietness, and eat their own bread

At the inormities of the Church men ought not to wink, neither are idle and
curious men, under the pretense of the Gospel, to be tolerated in the Church.
Therefore Paul uses now a more severe and sharp reprehension, least such men
flatter themselves in that kind of life.

By our Lord Jesus Christ.

To the end all men may know that he does not command the^ in his own name,
but by the commandment and authority of the Lord Christ, he has added
this. Notwithstanding the word of exhorting, does signify that he does not
behave himself imperiously, or that he would rule, but that he would do all
things according to his office.

That they work with quietness.

He corrects both those vices, of the which he had made mention before, namely
troublesome unquiet meddling, and idleness from profitable labor. First of all
therefore he commands that they embrace quietness: that is to say, that they
do quietly keep themselves within the bounds of their vocation. For they are
most quiet of all others which occupy themselves in honest labors: but they
do both trouble themselves and others, which have no work to do. Secondly he
exhorts them to labor: that is to say, that they busy and occupy themselves
diligently in their vocation: and that they be doing in just and honest
exercises, without the which, the life of man is erroneous. Therefore to work
with quietness, is to labor in their vocation without curiousity: and so to
follow their labors, that they do not rashlye meddle in other men's functions.

And eat their own bread. Thereby he commands that they eat their own
bread: whereby he gives to understand that they must be contented with their
own, that they be not grievous and troublesome to others. Drink (says
Solomon) the Water of thine own cestern, Proverb. 5.
and of the rivers out of the midst of thine own well: Let thy fountaynes
flow forth, and the rivers of waters in the streets. This is the first rule
of equity, that no man vsurp that which is another man's, but use that only
which is his own: and which lawfully he may call his own. The second is, that
no man like a greedy gulf do swalow up al yt is his, by himself alone, but yt
he be beneficial to his neighbors, and do help their need with his abundance.
Ephesians. 4.2^.
Let al idle bellies, consider these things, and al bishops falsely so called,
abbots, priors, Moonkes, and such like. Let them hear I say the Apostle
commanding and exhorting by our Lord Jesus, that working with quietness they
eat their own bread, and cease to be grievous unto others, and let them be
ashamed that they have filthily and wickedly wasted and spoiled the goods of
the Church. Let them forsake their office, and commit the charge of
ecclesiastical ministration to meet and worthy men, least they bring
destruction to others: and much less let them vex the Churches through their
wicked censures, unprofitable laws, and hurtful constitutions. Or else if
they will still retain their offices, let them do that which becomes their
Apostolical charge, let them serve the honor of Christ, and let them not want
any thing concerning the doctrine of the Gospel: let them have care of the
pore, and preserve schools for the maintenance of godly learning. For those
Bishops and Pastors, which are negligent in these things, doing the
contrary, are unprofitable and hurtful, and not to be tolerated in the
Church of God. Finally this place makes against the Anabaptists, who deny that
it is lawful for a Christian man to have any thing of his own. But Paul
commands every man to work quietly that he may eat his own bread.

13 And ye brethren, be not weary of well doing.

The third exhortation is, concerning well doing and liberality, the which is
very necessary in the conservation of a well ordered Church. But the purpose
of Paul in this place was simplely to meet with a stumbling block, which
might come of the negligence of a few. For it is commonly seen that men which
of themselves are very liberal, when they see that they leese their benifites,
in bestowing them amiss, do withdraw their hand. Paul therefore exhorts
us, how unworthy soever many be, or how greatly soever some do abuse our
liberality, that we do not therefore cease, but do help still those which
have need of our help. Gal. 6.6.
Thus in another place he says, Let us not therefore be weary of well doing:
for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not. This sentence is worthy to be
noted, howsoever the unthankfulness, frowardness, pride, peevishness, and
other indignities may weary us, yet we ought to go forward still in well
doing, and never be discouraged from the same. There are many places of
Scriptures, which do commend liberality toward the poor, especially these.
Esaias. 58.7. Mat. 25.40. Luke. 6.38. and 11.41. and 16.9. Prou. 11.25. and
19.17. and 21.13. and 22.16. and 28.27. 1. Tim. 6.17.

14 If any man obey not our sayings, note him by a letter, and have no company
with him, that he may be ashamed

This is the last exhortation concerning the punishment of the disobedient. He
has already testified in the sixth verse, that he does command nothing, but in
the name of the Lord. Wherefore he which will not obey, shall not be disobedient
unto man, but rebellious against God himself. Therefore he teaches that such
are sharply to be punished: and first of al he requires that he may
understand of their names by a certain epistle, that being admonished by
Paul, and more vehemently terrified, they might return into the right way.
Furthermore he commands that they be excommunicated, that being made
ashamed they may repent.

Whereby we gather that their fame is not to be spared which can not be
otherwise reformed, but by the discovering of their wickednesses: but we must
take heed that we show the diseases to the Physician, which has a care to
heal them. But the apostle speaks especialy of those, which lived lewdly in
idleness, of whom we have already spoken.

And have no company with him. There is no doubt but that he speaks of
excommunication. For as the confused disorder which he noted before, deserved a
several punishment, even so contumacy is a vice intolerable. Before he had
said, Verse. 6.
withdraw your selves from the^ which live disorderedly: And now he says,
keep no company with such, because they do reject my admonition. He does
therefore express more in this second speech, then he did in the former. For
it is one thing to withdraw himself from the company of a man, and another
thing utterly to forsake the company of one. The same is this, that he
excludes them from the common company of the faithful, because they being
admonished, did not obey. Whereby we are taught that the discipline of
excommunication is to be used against all incorrigible, and obstinat persons,
which will not be reformed, until they being subdued and tamed, do learn to
obey.

That he may be ashamed. Ecclesiastical Discipline is not appointed to destroy
but to save. Wherefore the sinner is not utterly to be forsaken and shaken
off, but he is so to be shunned, that being secluded for a time from the
company of the faithful, he may at the last repent. There are also other
ends of excommunication, as that the contagion may not further increase, and
that the pryuate wickedness of one man do not redounde to the commonne shame
of the Church, and also that the example of severity may cause others to
fear: but Paul has here touched one thing only, namely that they which have
sinned, may through shame be drawn to repentance. For they which have pleasure
in their wickedness, are hardened more and more therein: thus sin is
fostered through indulgence, and dissimulation. This therefore is the best
Remedy, to make the sinner ashamed, that he may begin to mislike of himself.
This of it self without further proceeding, were to small purpose, for a man to
be ashamed: but Paul had regard to a further proceeding, as that the sinner
being made ashamed with the acknowledging of his filthiness, might thereby
perfectly be reformed. For shame is a profitable preparatiue to the hatred of
sin, even as is ye sorrow, whereof mention is made in the seventh Chapter of
the second Epistle to ye Corinthians, verse 10. Wherefore they are to be
restrained and checked with this bit, which are unruly lest boldness do
increace by impunitie.

15 Yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.

Because excommunication is instituted to a good and profitable end, the same
must be executed, according to charity, and not of hatred and evil will.
Therefore the disobedient, are to be shunned, not as enemies, but they are to
be warned as brethren: otherwise being forsaken they might be discouraged, or
else might more obstinately withstand Christian society. Therefore they being
warned as brethren, excommunication is a mean to bring them to repentance.
For it cannot be but that severity exceeding a measure, does exulcerate and
fret.

Therefore if we will do good, gentleness and lenity must necessarily be
used, that they which are reprehended. may nevertheless know that they are
beloved. And this end of ecclesiastical discipline, is especially to be noted.
For the Apostle would not have us to abhor others, that we might prefer our
selves before them in holiness: or pleasing our selves might show tyranny
toward the miserable: but that the sinner being reprehended of us, may descend
into himself, and may acknowledge the filthiness of his wickedness, and so
being made ashamed may repent. For this is not the end of excommunication to
deprive and sequester for ever, men from the flock of Christ, but rather to
call them home again to the same, which were wandering out of the way. But if
the malice of him that has sinned be such that he will not repent, then let
deliberation be had, by what means the obstinate sinner may best be helped,
that either he himself do not wholly perish, or else that he do not corrupt
others with his scab.

16 Now the Lord of peace give you peace always, by all means. The Lord
be with you all. This is his farewell, by which he first wishes unto them
peace: as well external as internal from God the author of peace: then he
wishes unto them the help of God against the assaults of Invasions of
Christianisme. Last of all he desires that they may have salvation and good
success of all things through Christ our Lord. He calls GOD the Lord of
peace, because he is the author and giver of concord, of lenity, and of
charity, even as Satan is the Prince and author of discord, contentions,
brawles, of envy, and of dissimulations.

The Lord be with you all. By this petition he wishes to the Thessalonians
the protection, and defense of the Lord. As if he should say, The Lord be
your guide and governor, who protect and defend you, and so prosper all your
affairs, dispose, order, and direct al your doings, that they may be to the
honor of his name, and profitable to you and to the whole Church,

17 The salutation of me Paul, with my own hand, which is the token in
every Epistle: So I write, Here again the Apostle provides for that peril,
whereof he had made mention in the second Verse of the second Chapter
goinge before, least those Epistles of the false Apostles, beeinge falselye
entitled, might be craftielye conveyed into the Church. For this was an old
practice of Satan, to thrust in false forged writings, to discredit those
which were in deed true. And further, that by the false titles of the
Apostles, he might spread abroad wicked errors, to corrupt wholesome doctrine.
But it came to pass by the singular goodness of God, that his subtle deceits
being made frustrate, the wholesome and pure doctrine of Christ, by the
ministry of Paul, and of others, is come unto us. Paul therefore very
prudently provided by that subscription of of his own hand, that the
certainty and truth of the Apostolical letters, might be approved to all men.
That no man afterward might complain that he was deceived, and bring the
sacred scriptures into doubt.

Thus I write. That is to say, this is the order and form of words of the
which I am wont to frame my salutatio^, the which I use as a certain sign,
and token of my Epistles. And for so much as he did constantly teach all
nations, that mankind was saved by grace, he taking his sign or subscription
from that principal point of religion, subsigned the same note of faith at the
end of all the Epistles, writing as follows in the 18. verse.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, be with you all, Amen.
Prophesies proving the Pope to be Antichrist.
Apocalips Chap. 13. verse. 11.
AND I beheld another beast, coming up out of the earth, and he had two
horns like a lamb, and he spoke as did the Dragon. And he does all that the
first beast could do in his presence, and he causes the earth and them that
dwell therein to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was healed. And
he does great wonders, so that he makes fire come down from heaven on the
earth in the sight of men: And deceives them that dwell on the earth, by the
means of those signs, which he had power to do in the sight of the beast:
saying to them that dwell on the earth, that they should make an image to the
beast which has the wound of a sword, and did live. And he had power to give
a spirit unto the image of the beast, that the image of the beast, should both
speak, and should cause that as many as would not worship the image of the
beast, should be killed. And he causes all, both small and great, rich and
poor, free and bond, that he should give them a mark in their right hand, or
in their foreheades: And that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the
mark, or the name of the beast, other the number of his name. Here is wisdom.
Let him that has wit, count the number of the beast: for it is the number of a
man, and his number is six hundred sixty, six.


ALthough the Popes friends do apply this Prophecy to Mahumet and the
Turks, yet it shall appear by certain reasons following that it does
necessarily appertain to the Bishop of Rome and none other. The first reason
is, for that this beast, is discribed to bear the horns of a lamb. By the
which lamb, no doubt is meant Christ. By the horns of the lamb, is signified
the outward show or resemblance of Christ: which show or resemblance, can have
no relation to Mahumet, for that he takes himself to be above Christ, and
Christ as an excellent Prophet of God sitting at his feet. Wherefore seeing
Mahumet comes neither as equal to Christ, nor as vicar under Christ, this
prophecy cannot agree in him, but only in the man, which openly and in plain
words protests, that all Christ's lambs and sheep, not singularly, but
universally through the whole world, are committed to him as vicar of Christ,
and successor of Peter, and yt al men must confess the same of necessity, or
else they are none of Christ's sheep. Wherein it is easy to see, where the
pretenced horns of the lamb do grow.

The second reason: And he spoke like the Dragon. etc. A lambs horns and the
mouth of a Dragon do not agree together. And as they do not agree together
in nature, so neither can they be found in any one person, either Turk or
other, so lively as in the Bishop of Rome. When thou hear him call him self
the Apostolical Bishop, the vicar of Christ, the successor of Peter, the
servant of Gods servants etc. Thou see in him the two horns of a lamb,
and would think him to be a lamb indeed, and such a one as would wash your
feet for humility: but hear him speak, and mark the behavior, condition,
and property, almost of all the Popes which have been these six hundred
years: and what Dragon or serpent could be more viperouse, then their own
doings and words can speak against themselves.

The third reason, And he does all the power of the first beast, presently
before his face, and causes the earth and all the inhabitants of the earth to
honor the first beast, the stripe of whose deadly wound was cured. etc.

In this prophecy two things are to be noted: First, what the first beast is,
whose power the second beast does execute. Secondly, what this second Beast
is, which so does exercise his power in his sight. The first of these beasts in
this thirteenth chapter, having seven heads, and ten horns must needs
signify the city of Rome, which may easily be proved by two demonstrations.
First by the e^position of the seventeen Chapter of the same Apocalypse, where
is declared and described the said beast to stand on seven hills, and to
contain ten kings, having the whole power of the Dragon given: and also the
same City to be named the Whore of Babylon, drunken with the blood of
Saints. All which properties joined together, can agree in no wise but only
to the Heathen Empyer of Rome: which City, at the time of writing these
prophesies, had the government of the whole world. The second demonstration,
may be brought out of the number of the months assigned to this Beast. For
it is written in the above named Chapter, that this Beast had power to make,
that is, to work his malice against the members of the Church of Christ,
forty two months. Which months counted by Sabbates of years (that is, every
month for seven years) makes up the just number of those years, in which
the primitive Church, was under the ten terrible persecutions of Heathen
Emperors of Rome.

Which thing thus standing, proved and confessed, that the first Beast must
needs signify the Empire and Cyty of Rome, then must it necessarilye follow,
that the second Beast with the Lambs Horns, must signify the Bishop and
Pope of the same City of Rome. The reason whereof is evident and apparent by
that which follows in the prophesy, where it is declared, that the second
beast having the two horns of a Lamb, received and exercised all the power of
the first Beast, before or in the sight of the said Beast. Which cannot
be verified, neither in the Turk nor in any other, but only in the Pope of
Rome: who receives, usurps, and deriueth to himself all the power of that
City and Monarchy of Rome: insomuch that he says, that when Constantine, or
Ludouicus yielded unto him the rule and kingdom of the city of Rome, he gave
him but his own, and that which of right and duty, belonged to him before.

And this authority or power over all the Empire of Rome, he works not in
Asia, or in Constantinople, as the Turk does, but in the sight of the beast,
which gave him the power, that is, in the City of Rome it self, which is the
first beast in the beginning of this 13. Chapter described.

The fourth reason is, And he causes the earth, and all the inhabitants
therein, to worship and honor the first beast, which had a deadly wound and
was cured, etc.

The interpretation of this part, as also of all the other parts of the same
Chapter, stands upon the definition of the first Beast. For being granted,
as it cannot be denied, that the first beast signifies the City and Empire of
Rome: It must consequentlye follow, that the Bishop (whom we call the Pope)
of the same City of Rome, must be understand by the second Beast:
for so much as neither Turk, nor any other but only the Bishop of Rome, has
holden up the estimation and dignity of that city, which began to be in ruin
and decay by the Vandalians, Gotthes, Herulians, and Lombardes, about the year
of our Lord four hundred, fiftye six. But afterward by the Bishop of Rome
the pristine, state and honor of that City revived again, and flourished in
as great veneration as ever it did before. And that is it which the holy
ghost seems here to mean of the first Beast, saying: That he had a wound
of the swoorde, and was cured. For so it follows.

The fifth reason, And he caused all the inhabitauntes of the earth to make
the image of the beast, which had the stripe of the sword and lived. And it
was given to him, to give life to the image of the Beast, and to make the image
thereof to speak, and to cause all them that worshipped not the image of the
Beast to be killed: forcing all persons both little and great, rich and
poor, bond and free, to take the mark of the beast in their right hand, or
in their foreheads: and that none might buy or sell, but ^hey which had the
mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name.

By giving life to the image of the beast, and making it to speak, is to be
presupposed, that the beast was (...) a near point of death, and lay
speachelesse before, insomuch that the City of Rome began to loose and change
his name, and was called a while, Odoacria, of Odoacer king of the Herulians,
who by dint of sword surprised the Romans: and yet notwithstanding, by the
means of this Romayn Prelate, the said City of Rome, which was then ready to
give the Ghost, so recovered her majesty and strength again, that it is hard
to say, whether Rome did ever rufle and rage in her tyranny before, in the
time of Nero, Domitian, Diocletian, and other Emperors, more tragically, then
it has done since under the Pope: or whether that Rome had all Kings,
Queens, Princes, Dukes, Lords, and all subjects, more under obedience and
subjection, when the Emperors reigned, or now in the reign of the Pope. And
therefore it is said not without cause of the holy ghost, That it is given to
him to give life and speech to the image of the Beast, causing all them to
be slain, which will not worship the image of the beast etc. As for example
hereof, who seethe not, what number and multitudes of Christian men, Women, and
Children, in all Countries, have been put to the fire and Sword? Stories of
all times will declare, what havoc has been made of Christian blood about
the pre-eminence and maiority of the sea of Rome: what Churches and Countries,
both Greeks and Latin, have been excommunicated: what Kings have been
deposed, and Emperors stripped from their imperial seat, and all because
they would not stoop and bend to the image of the beast, that is to the
majesty and title of Rome, advanced now so highly by the Bishop thereof, as
it was never higher before in the reign of Nero, or Diocletian. Wherefore
taking the first beast to signify the Empire of Rome (which cannot be denied)
it is plain, that the second beast must necessarily be applied to the Pope,
and not to the Turk, forsomuche as the Turk seeks nothing less then the
advancement of that empire, but rather stirs against it to pluck it down.

The last reason is grounded upon the number of the beasts name, expressed by
the holy Ghost in the same prophesy, by the Greek letters. ch, x, z. In which
letters although there lies great darkness and difficulty to be understood,
yet the same is by certain ancient Fathers expounded coniecturally to
contain the name of the beast. Of the which read that which is already
expressed in the exposition going before upon the Thessalonians.

Another prophecy out of Daniel. Chapter. 11. ver. 28.
HE shall return and fret against the holy covenant: so shall he do, he shall
return and have intelligence with them that forsake the holy covenant. And
arms shall stand on his part, and they shall pollute the sanctuarye of
strength, and shall take away the daily sacrifice, and they shall set up the
abominable desolation. And such as wickedly break the covenant, shall
flatter with him deceitfully: but the people that do know their God, shall
prevail and prosper: And they that understand among the people, shall instruct
many: yet they shall fall by sword and by flame, by captivity and by spoil many
days.

Now when they shall fall, they shall be helped with a little help: but many
shall cleave unto them fainedly. And some of them of understanding shall fall to
be tried, and to be purged, and to make them white till the time be out: for
there is a time appointed. And the king shall do what him list: he shall
exault himself, and magnify himself against all that is God, and shall
speak marvelous things against the God of Gods, and shall prosper, till the
wrath be accomplished: for the determination is made. Neither shall he
regard the God of his Fathers, nor the desires of Women, nor care for any
God: for he shall magnify himself above all. But in his place shall he
honor the God Mauzzim, and the God, whom his fathers knew not, shall he
honor with gold and with silver, and with precious stones, and with pleasante
things. etc.

Verses prophesiyng the coming of Antichrist.
Cum fuerint anni completi mill ducenti
Et decies seni, post partum virginis almae:
Tunc Antichristus nascetur daemone plenus.
These Verses are thus englished.

A thousand, two hundred and sixty years,
from Christ his birth expired,
Then shall the monster Antichriste be borne,
with devil full inspired.
FINIS.

