The Souper of the Lord. where unto, that thou may be the better prepared and
suerlyer enstructed: have here first the declaracion of the later part of
the.6. ca. of S. Ioha^, beginning at the letter C. the fowerth line before the
cross, at these wordis: Uerely ^ere. etc wheryn incidently M. Moris letter
agenst Johan Fry the is confuted.

When Christ saw those glotons seeking their be lies flocki^ge so fast^ unto
him Aftyr his wont manner (the occasion taken to teache and preche unto them of
the thing now moved) he said. Ue^ely verily I say unto you: ye seek me not
because ye have seen my miracles, but because ye have eten of the loves and
were well sylled^ But as for me, I am not comen into this world only to fill
mennis be lies: but to feed and satysfye their souls. ye take great pains to
follow me for the meat of your belyes: but o slougherdis, work, take pains
and labor rather to get that meat that shall never perysshe. For this meat
that ye have sought of me hitherto, perysheth with your belyes: but the meat
that I shall give you is spiritual and may not perysshe but abides for ever
geuinge life everlasting. For my father has con^eyg^ed and confyrmed me with
his assuered testimony to be that assuered sa^^yng health and ernest penny of
everlasting life when the I we^ understood not what Christ meant bydding them to
work and labor for that meat that should never peryssh, they asked him what
shall we do that we might work the workis of God? supposing that he had spoken
of some vtwarde work required of the^^ wherefore Jesus answerde sayng. Even
this is the work of God, ^o believe and trust in him whom the father has
sent. Lo, here may ye se that work of God which he requires of us even to
believe in Christ. Also consider again what this meat is, which badde them here
prepare and seek for sayng: work, take pains and seek for that meat etc. and
thou shall se it no another meat then the belief in Criste wherefore he
concludes that this meat so often me^ c^oued, is faith: of the which meat
says the Prohet the just lives. Abacuk, ^^
Faith in him is therefore the meat which Christ prepares and dresseth so
purely: powldering and spycyng it with spiritual allegoryes in all this chap^^er
folowinge to give us everlasting life through it.

Then said the ^ues unto him^ what token do^t thou whereby we might know that
we should believe in the? Do some what that we might believe the? what thing
workest the^ that we might know the to be god? Thou know well enough that
our fathers did e^e dread or Ma^na in the deserte as it is wryte^^ he gave them
bread from above Jesus answered Uerely verily I say unto you: Psalm. 7.
Moses gave ye not that bread from heaven: for though it fill down from the
air: yet was it not heavenly fode, for it did but feed the belly. But this
bread of god that is descenden from heaven whom my father gives, refressheth
the ^oule so abu^da^tly that it gives ly^e unto the wor^de^ wha^ the ^wes
understood not this saying. which was not else then the declaring of the
gospel) for by the etinge of this bread he meant the belief of this his gospel):
they said. Sir give us this bread evermore. Jesus said unto them. I am the
bread of live, and who so come to me, ^^al not honger: and who so believe in me
shall never thri^^e. when the ^wes herd Christ say the bread that descended
from heaven sh^^de give life to the world: they desye^d to have this bread
given them for ever. And Jesus percey^ing that they understood not the sense of
this gospel, he expowned them who was this so lively bread that gives life to
all the world sayng: I am the bread of life, and who so come to me, that is to
say, who so is gryffed and joined to me by faith shall never honger, that is,
who so believe in me is satisfied. It is faith therefore that sta^cheth this
honger and thirste of the soul. Faith it is therefore in Crist that fills our
hongerye hartis, so that we can desire no another if we once thus eat and drink
him by faith, that is to say, if we believe his flesh and bodi to have been
broken and his blood shed for our sins. For then a^ ou^ soulis satisfied and
we be justified.

Over this it folowith. But I have told ye this because ye look upon me and
believe me not that is, ye be offended that I said, he that comes to me shall
nether honger nor thirste, seeing that your selves being present, be yet both
hongry and thirste. But this comes because ye have seen me with your bodily
eyes, and ye see me and believe not in me. But I speak not of such sight nor
coming: but of the light of fai^he, which who so has, he shall no another
desyer he shall not seek by night to love a another before who^ he would lay his
grief: he shall not run wandering here and there to seek deed stockis and
stones. For he is certifyed by his faith to whom he shall cleave: he is coupled
by faith unto me his very spouse and lively food the only tresure of his
soul never more to thirste for any other. This light of faith ye have not, for
ye believe not nor trust in me: wherefore ye understand not how I am the very
bred and meat of your soulis, that is to say, your faith and hope. And the
cause of this your blyndenes is (I will not say over hardly to you) that the
father has not drawn you into the knowledge of me, or else ye had received me.
For all that the father gives me, must come unto me. And as for me, I cast
out noman that comes to me. For I am not come^ down from heaven to do my will,
which ye attribute unto me as unto each any other man, for I am verily a very
man: and according to that nature I have a special proper will: but miche more
obedient to my father than one of you For your will of^e resists and
repugneth gods will, but so do mine never. I am therefore come^ down to do his
will that has sent me. And to do ye to we^e what his will is. This (I say) is
my fathers will that has sent me. That of all that he has given me, I leese
non: but must rease him up again in the last day: and to be plain. This is
his will that sent me That who so se that is know the sone and believe in him,
he must have life everlasting: and I shall stere him up in the last day. Here
may ye se what meat he speaks of. God sent his son into this world that we
might live through him. who lives by him? they that eat his flesh and drink
his blood. who eat his fl^sshe and drink his blood? they that believe his body
crucified and his blood shed for their sins, these cleave unto his gracious
favor. But how coud they cleave thus unto him except they knew hy^? And
therefore he hadded sayng: Every man that seith the sonne^ that is to say,
understands wherefore the son was sent into this world and bel^ueth in him,
shall have everlasting life.

Here it pered to the carnal iwes that Cri^te had taken to myche upon himself
to say: The ca^se ^f the iwes murmur.
I am the bread of life, which am come^ down from heaven to give life to the
world wherefore the flesh, that is to say the iwes now murmured, and not
merueled (as M. More seweth his own dreme to a another text following which I
shall touch ano^) they murmured at this sayng of Christ. I am the bread which
am come^ from heaven, sayng. Is not this Jesus Joseph's son whose father and
mothe^ we know well enough? How then says he, I am co^en from heaven? Jesus
answered saing Murmur not among your selves. Herd ye not what I told ye even
now? All that my father gives me, come to me? your unbelief, whereof follows
this false understanding of my wordis spiritually spoken compels me to tell
ye one thing more then once or twyse. This therefore it is: Noman may come to
me thonely ernest penye and pledge of your salvation unless my Father that
sent me draw him: and whom he draws unto me, that is joins unto me by
faith, him shall I stere up in the last day. I wonder ye take my wordis so
strangelye believing the^ to be some hard rydels or derke parables, when I say
nothing else then is wry^en in your own prophe^is, Isam. 54.
both in Isaye and Ieremye, Iere. 31.
sayng that all shall be taught off the lord. Since even your prophetis testifye
this knowledge to be given ye of my father: what can be spoken more plainly then
to say: what my father gives me, that comes to me? or this, noma^ may come
to me, excep^e my father draw him: and yet have it more manifestly. who so
have herd my father and is learned of him, he comes to me as unto the very
only ancore of his salvation. Heb. 6.
Not that any man has seen the father, lest peradventure ye mistake these
wordis to here and to learn, as though they perteyned to the vtwarde sensis,
and not rather to the mind and inward illumininge of the soul. For noman
ever saw the father although he works secretly upon his heart, so that
what so ever he wills, we must hear and learn, Noman (I say) seith him, but
he that is sent of God, as I said before of my self, he it is that seith the
father. Now therefore say I unto you so verily verily as plainly plainly. That
who so believe and trust in me, he has life everlasting. Now have ye the some
of this my doctrine, even my very gospel the wholl tale of al my legacye and
message wherefore I am sent in to the world. Had M. More have understand this
short sentence, who so believe in me has life everlasting, and known what
Paul with the other apostles preched: especially Paul being a pere and an
half among the Corinths, determi^inge not nether presuminge not to have
known any other thing to be preched them (as him self says) then Jesus
Christ, and that he was crucyfyed. Had M. More understood this point. he should
never have thus blasphemed Christ and his sufficient scryptures, 1. Cor. 2.
another have so belyed his eu^ngelistis and holy apostles, as to say, they
wrote not al things necessary for our salvation, but left out things of
necessite to be believed, making gods holy testament insufficient and
imperfect: first reveled unto our fathers w^iten eft sent by Moses, and then
by his prophets, and at last written both by his holy euangelestis and
apostles to.

But turn we to Johan ageyn and let More mock still and lie to. I am the bread
of life says Christ. And noman denies that our fathers and elders did ete
Manna in the deserte, and yet ar they deed. But he that eteth of this brede^
that is to say beleuethe in me, he has life everlasting. For it is I that
am this lively bread which am common from heaven, of whom who so ete by faith,
shall never dye. Here therefore it is to be noted diligently that Christ means,
as every man may se, by the etinge of this bread non other thing then the
belief in him self offered up for our sins: which faith only iustifyethe
us: which sentence to declare more plainly, and that he would have it noted
more diligently, he repeteth it yet age^ ne sayng. It is I that am the lively
bread, which am come^ down from heaven: who so eteth of this bread, shall live
everlasting. And to put ye clear out of doubt, I shall show you in few wordis,
what this matter is, and by what ways I must be the savior and redemer of the
world to give it this life so often reherced. And therefore now take good heed.
This bread which I speak of so myche, and shall give it you: It is mine own
f^esshe which I must lay forth and pay for the life of the world. Here is
it now manifest, that he should suffer death in his own flesh for our
redemption to give us this life everlasting, Thus now may ye se how Cristis
flessh, which he called bread, is the spiritual food and meat of our soulis.
When our soulis by faith see god the father not to have spared his only so
dear beloved son but to have delivered him to suffer that ignominious and so
paynfull death to restore us to life, then have we even his flesh and drunk
his blood, assuered fermely of the favor of God, satisfied and certefyed of
our salvation.

Aftyr this communicacion, that he said. The bread which I shall give you, is
my flesh, which I shall pay for the life of the world: ye^ were the
carnal iwes never the wyser. For their unbelief and stourdy hatered would not
suffer the very spiritual sense and mind of Crystis wordis to enter into their
hertis. They could not see that Crystis flesh broken and crucified, and not
bodily eaten, should be our salvation, and this spiritual meat: as our souls to
be fed and certifyed of the mercy of God and forgeuenes of our sins through
his passion, and not for any ea^inge of his flesh with our tethe. The more
ignorant therefore and flesshly they were the more fyerce were they full of
indignacion stryuinge one agenst a another sayng. How may this fellow give us his
fless^ to ete it? They stoke fast yet in his flesh before their eyes: these
flesshely, ^wes wherefore no meruel though they aborred the bodily etinge
thereof: although our flesshely papistis being of the iwes carnal opinion, yet
aborre it not, nether cease they daily to crucifye and offer him up again
which was once for ever and al o^^ered as Paul testifyeth. ^^br. 10.
And even here, sithe Christ came to teache, to take a way all doubt, and to
break strife, he might, his wordis otherwise declared then he has declared and
will heraftyr expowne them, have soluted their question: sayng, if he had so
meant as More meanethe, that he would have been conuayed and converted, as our
iuggelers sleyghly can co^uay^ him with a few wordis, into a singing lofe
orels, as the thomisticall papistis say, been inuisyble with al his
dymencioned body under the form of bread transsubstauncyated into it^ And
aftyr a like thomysticall mystery, the wine tra^ssubsta^cyated to, into his
blood: so that they should eat his flesh and drink his blood aftyr their
own carnal understanding, but yet in a another form, to put away al gruge of
stomach^ Or since saint Johan, if he had thus understood his masters mind, and
took upon him to write his wordis, would leave this sermon unto the world to be
read: he might now have delivered us and them from this doubt. but Christ
would not so satisfye their questyon: but answerde. Uerely verily I say unto
you: except ye ete the flesh of the son of man and drynk his blood, ye shall
not have that life in your selves. He that eteth my flesh and drynketh my
blood, has life everlasting: and I shall stere him up in the last day: for
my flesh is very meat and my blood the very drink. He says not here that
bread shall be transsubstanc^a^ed or converted into his body, nor yet the wine
into his blood: but now confer thy^ saying to his purp^s at the begynnyng^
where he bad them work for that meat that should never perysshe: tellinge
them, that to believe in him who^ God has sent, was the works of God. and
whosoever believes in him should never thirste nor h^nger, but have life
everlasting. Confer also this that follows and thou shall se it plain that
his wordis be vnderstande^ spiritually of the beleyfe in his flesh crucyfyed
and his blood shede, for which belief we be promised everlasting life: himself
sayng who so believes in me has life everlasting. Here therefore their
question, how may this man give us his flesh to ete it, is soluted: even
when he gave his body to be broken and his blood to be shed. And we ete and
drink it in deed, when we believe steadfastly that he dyed for the remission of
our sins: Austen and Tertulliane to witness.

But here makes More his argument agen^te the young man. Because the iwes
merueled at this sayng: M^ flesh is very meat, and my blood drink. And not
at this: I am the door and the very vine, therefore this text (says he) My
flesh etc. must be understood aftyr the litterall sense, that is to wit
even as the carnal iwes understood it, murmuryng at it being off^nded going
there ways from Christ, for their so carnal understanding thereof. And the to
there textis. I am the door. etc. must be understood in an allegorye and
spiritual sense, because his hearers merueled nothing at the manner of the
speech lo christian reder, her have thou not a taste: but a great tu^^c full of
Moris myscheif and perniciouse peruertinge of Gods holy word: and as thou
seist him here falsely and pestelently destroy the pure sense in Gods word,
so does he in all other placis of his bokis. First where he says they
maru^led at this Cristis sayng. My flesh is very meat etc. that is not so,
nether is there any siche word in the text, e^cepte More will expowne
Murmurabant, id est, mirabant, they murmured, that is to say, they meru^led,
as he expowneth. O portet, id est, expedit et conuenit. He must dye, or it
behooves him to dye, that is to say, it was expedient and of good congruence
that he should dye, etc. Thus this poet may make a man to signifye an ass and
blak whyght to blere the simple eyes? ^oris (...) reason ^o^futed
But yet for his lordely pleasure, let us grant him that they murmured is as
myche to say as they merueled: because perchance the one may follow at the to
there. And then do I ask him: whether Cristes disciples and his apostels herd
him not, and understood him not when he said. I am the door and the vine: and
when he said My flesh etc. if he say no or nay then scripture is plain agenst
him. Io. 6.10.15 if he say ye or yisse. Then yet do I ask him whether his
disciples and apostles thus hearing and understanding his words in all these.
3, said chapiters wonderd and marueled (as More says) or murmured (as has the
text) at their masters speech: what think ye More must answer here? here may
ye se whother this old holy vpholder of the popis church is brought: eue^ to
be taken in his own trappe. For the disciples and his apostles nether murmured
nor merueled, nor yet were not offended with this their master Crystes wordis
and manner of speech: for they were well aqueaynted with siche phrases: and
answered their master Christ when he asked them, will ye go hence fro me to?
Lord said they to whom shall we go? thou haste the wordis of everlasting life:
and we believe that thou art Christ the son of the living God. Lo M. More,
they nether me^ueled nor murmured. and why? For because as ye say they
understood yt in an allegory sense, and perceived well that he meant not of his
material body to be eaten with their tethe, but he meant it of him self to be
believed, to be very God and very man having flesh and blood as they had and
yet was he the son of the living God, This beleyf gatherd they of all his
spiritual sayngi^ as him self expowned his own wordis sayng. My flesh
profits nothing, meaning to be eaten, but it is the spirit that gives this
life. And the wordis that I speak unto you ar spirit and life: so that whosoever
believe my flesh to ^e crucyfyed and broken, and my blood to be shede for his
sins, he eats my flesh and drynketh my blood, and has life
everlasting. And this is the life where with the rightwyse live the even be
faith. Abac. 2.

The secounde argument of More.
Aftyr this text thus wyselye proved to be understood in the lyterall se^ce
with the carnal iwes, and not in the Allegoryke or spiritual sense with
Christ and his Apostles: The hole some of Moris confutacyon of the young man
stands upon this argument. A Posse ad Esse. That is to wit, God may do it,
ergo it is done. God may make his body in many, or in all places at once, ergo
it is in many or in all places at once. which manner of argumentacion, how false
and naught it is every sophister, and every man that has wit perceyueth. ^he
co^fu^cion of (...). 2. argu^ent.
A like judgment: God may show More the truth and call him to repentance as
he did Paul for persecutinge his church: ergo More is converted to God? Or,
God may let him run of an indurate heart with Pharao and at last take an open
and sode^ vengance upon him for persecutinge his word and burninge his pore
members: ergo it is done all ready? M. More must first prove it us by express
wordis of holy scripture, and not by his own vnwryte^ dremes, that Cry^tis
body is in many placis or in all placis at once: and then, though our reason
cannot reche it, yet our faith mesured and directed with the word of faith
will both reche it, receive it, and hold it faste^^: not because it is
possible to God, and impossible to reason: but because the written word of our
faith says it But when we read gods word in mo the^ x.x. places contrary,
that his bo^y should be here. More must give us leave to believe his vnwryte^
vanites, verites I should say, at laysour, Here may thou se Christian reder
wherefore More would so feign make the believe. That thapostles left aught
unwritten of necessite to be believed eue^ to stablesshe the popis kingdom which
stands of Moris unwritten vanites. as of the presence of Crystis body and
making thereof in the bread, of purgatory, of inuocacion of saints, worshipping
of stones and stockis, pylgrimagis, halowing of vows and bellys and crepyng to
the cross etc. If ye will believe what so ever More ca^ fay^e without the
scripture, then can this poet feign ye a another church then Crystis and that,
ye must believe it what so ever it teache you, for he has feigned to that it can
not err, though ye se it ^rre and fight ag^nst it self a thousand times. ye
if it tell ye blak is whighte, good is badde, and the deuel is god: yet must
ye believe it, orels be burned as heretyks^ but let us return to our propose.

To dispute of Gods almighty absolute power, what God may do with his body, it
is great folly and no less presumpcion to More, sith the pope which is no hole
god but half a god by their own decrees have decreed noma^ to dispute of his
power. But Christian reder, be thou content to know that gods will, his word,
and his power be all one and repugne not And nether wylleth he, nor may not do
any thing includyng repugnance, imperfeccion, or that should derogate myness^
or hurt his glory and his n^me. The glory of his godh^d is to be present and
to fill all pl^c^s at once essencyally presently with his almighty power,
which glory is denied to any other creature, him self sayng by his Prophet:
I will not give my glory to any other creature: Isa. 4 2.
now therefore sith his manhed is a creature, it cannot have this glory which
only is appropryed to the godhed. To attrybute to his man^ed that property
which only is appropried to his godhed is to confound both the natures of
Cryste^ what thing so ever, is every where ^f^yr the said manner, that must
nedis he infinite, with out beginning and end, it must be one alone, and
almighty: which propertys only ar appropryed unto the gloriouse majesty of
the godhed. wherefore Crystis body may not be in all or in many places at once.
Christ himself saying as concerning his manhed: He is less then the father,
^oa^. 14.
but as touching his godhed, the father and I be both one thing. ^oa^. 10.
and Paul rec^tyng the Psalm affirms: ^ebr. 2.
Christ as concerning his manhed to be less the^ god: or less^ then angellis
as some te^te has it: Here is it plain that all thyngis that More ymagineth
and fayneth are not possible to God, for it is not possible for God to make a
creature egall unto himself, ^or it includes repugnaunce and derogateth his
glory. God promised and swore that all nations should be blessed in the death
of that promised sede which was Christ God had determyneth and decreed it
before the world was made: ergo Christ must nedis have dyed, and not to
expowne this word oportet as More mynseth it. For it was so necessary that the
contrary was impossible: except More would make God a liar, which is
impossible. Paul concludes that Christ must nedys have dyed, ^eb. 9.
using this latin term Necesse. Sayng: wherso ever is a testement, there
must the death of the testement maker go betw^ne: or else the testement is not
ratyfyed and suer but ryghtuosnes and remyssion of sins in Crystis blood is
his new testement, where of he is mediator: Ergo the ^estament maker must
nedis have dyed. wreste not therefore (M. More) this word Oportet (though ye
find potest for oportet in some ^orrupt copye) unto your unsavory sense. but
let oportm signifye^ he must or it behooves him to dye. for he took our very
mortal nature for the same decreed couns^l: himself sayng. Io. 2. and. 12
Oportet exaltari filium hominis etc. It behooves, or the son of man must dye,
that every one that believe in him perysshe not etc. Here may ye se also that it
is impossible for God to break his promise. It is impossible to God which is
that verite to be fownde contrary in his dedis and wordis: as to save the^ whom
he has dampened, or to dampne them whom he has saved, wherefore all things
imagyned of Moris brain are not possible to God.

And when More says, that Chris^e had power to let his life and to take it
again, and therefore not to have dyed of necessite: I wonder me, that his
scollematter here failed him, so conynge as he makes him self theryn: which
grants and affirms (as trwe it is) that with ye necessary decreed workis
of gods forsyght and providence stands right well his fre liberty. But M.
More says at last, If God would tell me that he would make each of both
their bodies too (meaning the young mannys body and Christis) to be in fyften
placis at once, I would believe him I, that he were able to make his word true
in the bodies of both twayn, and never would I so myche as ask him whyther he
would gloryfye the^ both first or not: but I am suer gloryfyed or vnglorifyed,
if he said it, he is able to do it. Lo here may ye se what a fervent faith
this old man has, and what an ernest mind to believe Christis wordis if he
had told him: but I pray ye M. More, what and if Christ never told it you,
nor said it nor never would: would ye not be as hasty to not believe it? if he
told it you: I pray ye tell us where ye speak with him, and who was by to bear
ye record: and yet if ye bring as false a shrewe as your self to testifye
this thing: yet by your own doctrine, must ye make us a miracle to co^fyrme
your t^le, ere we be bownde to believe you: or yet to admit this your argument,
God may make his body in many placis at once, erg^ it is so. Sir ye be to besy
with gods almighty powr^^ have taken to great a burden upon your weke shuldern,
ye have ouerladen your self with your own ^arnes and weapens: and young David
is lykely to prevail agenste ye with his s^ynge and stone. God has infatuaded
your high subtyl wysedome^ your crafty conuayance is spyed. God has sent your
church a met ko^^r for siche a cup, even siche a defender as ye take upon
your self to be, that shall let all their wholl cause fall flat in the myer
unto both your shames and utter confusion. God therefore be praised ever Amen.

Then says M. More, though it seems repugnant both to him and to me, one
body to be in two placis at once: yet God seith how to make them stand to
gither well enough. This man with his old eyes and spectacles seithe far in
goddis sight, and is of his pre^ey counsel: that knows belyke by some
secret reuelacion how god seyth one body to be in many placis at once,
includes no repugna^ce. For word has he no^ for him in all scripture no more
then one body to be in all placis at once. It impllyeth first repugnance to my
sight and reason, that all this world should be made of nothing: and that a
virgen should bring forth a child. But yet^ when I se it written with the
wordis of my faith, which God spoke: and brought it so to pas: then implies
it no repugnance to me at all. For my faith ^echeth it and receives it
steadfastly. For I know the voice of my herdema^: which if he said in any place
of scripture that his body should have been contained under the form of bread
and so in many placis at once here^ in earth, and also abydinge yet still in
heaven to. Uerely I would have believed him I, as soon and as fermely as. M.
More. And therefore even yet, if he can show us but one sentence truly taken
for his part, as we can do many for the contrary, we must give place. For, as
for his unwritten verites, and thaustorite of his anticristen sy^agoge, unto
which (the scripture forsaken) he is now at last with shame ynough^ compelled
to flee: they be prouede stark lies and very deuelrye.

Then says he^ that ye wot well that many good folk have used in this matter
manygood frutefuull exsamples of gods other workis: not only miracles, written
in scripture. vnde versus? (where one I pray ye?) but also done by the comen
course of nature hearein earth. (if they be done by the comen course of nature:
so be they no miracles) And some thingis made also by mannis hand. As one ^ace
beholden in dyue^se glasses: and in every pese of one glass broke into twenty
etc. Lord how this po^ti^icall poe^e plays his part. Because (as he says)
we se many facis in many glasses: therefore may one body be i^ many placis, as
though every shadew and similitude representinge the body, were a bodily
substance. But I ask More, when he seith his own face in so mani glasses,
whither al those faces that apere in the glasses be his own very facis having
bodily substance skin flesh and bonne, as has that face, which has his
very mouth nose yen etc. wherewith he faceth us out the truth thus falsely
with lies? and if they be all his very faces: then in very deed there is one
body in many placis, and he himself barethe as many faces in one hoode. But
acordinge to his purpose, even as they be no very faces, nor those so mani
voices, sownes, and similitudes multiplied in the air between the glass or
other obiecte and the body (as the philosopher proves by natural reason) be no
very bodies: no more is it Crystis very body: as they would make the believe in
the bread in so ^any places at once. But the bread broken and eaten in the
souper monessheth and puts us in remembrance of his death, and so exciteth
us to tha^kis giving to laud and prease: for the benefit of our redemption.
and thus we there have Christ present in the inward eye and sight of our
faith. we ete his body ^ drink his blood, that is, we believe suerly that his
bodi was crucified for our sins and his blood shed for our salvation.

At last, note, Criste^ reder, That M. More in the 3 book of his co^futacion
of tyndall the 249 side, to prove S. Iohn^s gospel imperfect and insufficie^t
for leuinge out of so necessary a point of our faith, as he callethe the last
souper of Criste his maundye: says that John spoke nothing at al of this
sacrament. And now see again in these his letters agenst ^^rythe, how him self
bryngethe in John the 6 cap. to impugn frythes wrytinge, and to make all for
the sacrament, even thus, My flesh is verily mete, and my blood drink.
belyke the man had there ouershette himself ^owle, the young man here causyng
him to put on his spectacles and poor better and more wysshely with his old
eyes upon saint Iohn^s gospel to find that thing there now written, which
before he would have made one of his unwritten verites. As yet if he look
narowly he shall espy that himself has proved us by scripture, in the 37
lefe of his dialoge of quod he and quod I^ our ladys perpetual virginite
expowninge non cognosco, id est^, no^ cognoscam, which now written unwritten
verite he nowmbereth a little before emonge his unwritten vanites. Thus may ye se
how this old holy vpholder of the popis chirch, his wordis ^ight agenst
themself into his own confusion, in fyndinge us forth his unwritten written
vanites verites I should say. But return we unto thexposicion of S. John^.

when the iwes would not understand this spiritual sayng of the eti^ge of
Cristis flesh and drynkinge of his blood, so often and so plainly declared: he
gave them a strong strype and made them more blind, for they so deserved it
(siche are the secret judgments of god) addinge unto all his s^yngis thus. who
so e^e my flesh and drink my blood: abides in me and I in him. These wordis
were spoken unto these unbelievers into their farther obstinacion, but unto the
faithful for their better instruccion. Now gather of this the contrary. and
say, whosoever eteth not my flesh and drinks not my blood: a bydeth not in
me, nor I in him, and ioyn this to that foresaid sentence E^cept ye eat the
flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ^bac. 2.
ye have no life in you, let it never fall fro thy mind Christen reder, that
faith is the life of the ryghtwyse, and that Christ is this living bred
whom thou etest that is to say, in whom thou beleuest. For if our papistis
take eting and drinking here bodily, as to eat the natural body of Criste
under the form of bread and to drink his blood under the form of wine: then
must al yong^ children that never came at Gods board departed, and all lay
me^ that never drank his blood be dampned^ ^. Ioh. 4.
By love we abide in God and he in vs^ love follows faith in the ordyr of our
understanding and not in order of succession of time, if thou lokest upon the
self giftis and not of their fruits. So that princypally by faith whereby we
cleue to gods goodness and mercy, we abide in God, and God in us, as declare his
wordis following, sayng, as the living father sent me, so live I by my father.
And even so he that eatethe shall live because of me, or for my sake. My father
sent me whose will in all things I obaye, for I am his son. And eue^ so
verily must they that e^e me, that is believe in me, form and fasshion them
aftir my ensample mortifyng their flesh and changyng their living: olers
they eat my in vain and desse^ble their belief. For I am not comen to redeem
the world only, but also to change their life. They therefore that believe in
me shall transform their life aftyr my example and doctrine, Christian lygion^
faith, a^ a life c^^respo^de^
and not aftyr any mannys tradicions. This is the bread to men from heaven, as
theffecte self declares, whom whosoever eteth shall live ever. But he that e^^th
bodily bread lives not ever, as ye may se of your fathers that e it Manna, and
yet ar they deed. It is not therefore no material bread nor bodily food that
may give you life eternal.

These wordis did not only offend them that hated Christ, but also some of his
discyples (they where offended said the text and not merueled as, More
tryfleth out the troth) which said This is an hard sayng. who may here
this? These discyples yet stoke no less in Crystis visyble flesh, and in the
bark of his wordis, the^ did the other iwes: and as do now More, belyuyng him
to have had spoken of his natural body to be eaten with their tethe. which
offense Christ seeing, said: Do this offend ye? what then will ye say, if ye
se the sone of man ascend thither where he was before? If it offend ye to ete
my flesh while I am here, it shall myche more offend ye to ete it when me
body shall be gone out of your sight ascended into heaven there syttyng on the
right hand of my father until I come ageyn as I went, that is to judgment.
Here might Christ have enstructed his disciples the truth af the etinge of his
flesh in form of bread, had this be^ his meaning. For he left the^ ^euer in
any perplexite or doubt: but sought all the ways by similitudes and familiare
examples to teache these plainly. He never spoke them so hard a parable, but
where he perceived their feeble ignorance, a non he helped them and declared it
them. ye and some times, he prevented their askinge with his own declaration,
and think ye not that he did not so here? yisse verelye. For he came to teache
us, and not to leave us in any doubt and ignorance, especially in the chief
point of our salvation, which standethe in the belief in his death for our
sins. Where for, to put them out of all dout as concerning this etinge of his
flesh, and drinkinge of his blood, that should give everlasting life: where
they took it for his very body to be eten with their tethe: he said, It is the
spirit that gives this life, My flesh profits nothing at all, to be eten
as ye mean so carnally. It is spiritual meat that I here speak of. It is my
spirit that draws the hertis of men to me by faith and so refressheth them
gostely, ye be therefore carnal to think that I, speak of my flesh to be
eten bodily, for so it profitethe you nothing at al. How long will ye be
without understanding? It is my spirit I tell you that gives life, My flesh
profits you nothing to eat it: but to believe that it shall be crucified and
suffer for the redemption of the world it profyteth, And when ye thus believe,
then ete ye my flesh and drink my blood, that is ye believe in me to suffer
for your sins. The verite has spoken these wordis My flesh profits
nothing at all: it cannot therefore be false. For both the iwes and his
disciples murmured and disputed of his flesh how it should be eaten, and not
of the offering thereof for our sins as christ me^t. This therefore is the suer
ancor to hold us by agenst all the obieccions of the papists for the eting of
Cristes body as they say in form of bread. Christ said My flesh profyteth
nothing: meaning to ete it bodily. This is the keye that solueth all their
argumentis and opens the way to show us al their false and abominable
blasphemous lies upon Cristis wordis, and utters their sleighe iuggelynge
over the bread to mayntayn anticrystes kingdom there with. And thus when Criste
had declared it and taught them that it was not the bodily eatinge of his
material body: but the eating with the spirit of faith: he added sayng. The
wordis which I here speak unto you ar spirit, and life. that is to say, this
matter that I here have spoken of with so many words must be spiritually
understood to give ye this life everlasting. wherefore the cause why ye
understand me not is. that ye believe not. Here is lo the conclusion of all
this sermon. Christ very God and man, had set his flesh before them to be
received with faith that it should be broken and suffer for their sins, but
they could not ete it spiritually because they believe not in him. wherefore
many of his disciples fill from him and walked no more with him. And then he
said to the twelve. will ye go a way to? And Simon Peter answerde: Lord, to
whom shall we go? Thou haste the wordis of everlasting life, and we believe,
and a^ suer, that thou art Christ the son of the living god. Here is it
manifest what peter and his fellows understood by this etinge and drynkinge of
Christ. for they were perfitly taught that it stood all in the belief in Christ
as their answer her^ testifies. If this matter had stood upon so deep a
miracle, as out papist is feign with out^ any word of god, not comprehended
under any of their common sensis, that they should eat his body being under the
form of bred as long, deep thycke and as broad as it hanged upon the cross,
they being yet but feeble of faith not confirmed with the holy ghost, must here
nedis have wondered, stonned and staggerd, and have been more inquisy^yue, and of
so strange a matter then they were. But they nether douted nor marueled, nor
murmured, nor nothing offended with this manner of spethe, as were the other
that slipte away, but they answerde fermely. Thou haste the wordis of
everlasting life: and we believe etc. Now to the exposicon of the wordis of
our lordis souper.

Among the holy euangelistis, wrytinge the story of Cristis souper: Ioha^,
because the other three had written it at large, ^at. 26.
did but make a mention thereof in his 13. cap. Matthe^ ^ath. 14.
Mark and Luke declaryng it clearly, ^uck. 22.
orderly and with just nowmber of wordis. with whom Paul agrees, thus
writing unto the Corynthis. Co. 11^
Our lord Jesus, the same night he was betrayed: he took the bread, and after
he had given thank^s: he brake it, saying: Take ye it, eat it. This is my
boodye, which is for you broken. Here is now to be noted the ordyr of this
accion or act. First Criste ^oke the bread in his handis, secondarylye he
gave thankis, thirdelye he brake it: The o^^der of t^^ accio^.
fo^^ertly he raught it them sayng, take it, fyftely he had them eat it. At
last after all this he said. This is my body which is for you broken, this
thing do ye into the remembera^ce of me. Her ye se, that this bread was
first broken delivered them, and they were commanded to eat it to: ere
Criste said This is my bo^dye. And for because it is to suppose verily, that
they took it at his hand as he bad them, and did eat it to, when they had it
in their handis, their master (whose wordis they did ever obaye) commandinge
them. It must nedis follow (if these be the words of the consecracion) that
^hey were houseled with vnco^secrated bread, or else now eaten, or at l^ste wise
part of it, ere Christ consecrated it, ye it follows that it was out of
Cristis handis and in their mouths when Criste consecrated it, and so to have
consecrated it when it was now in his disciples handis or in their mouths or
rather in their belyes.

Here it is manifest that Christ consecrated no bread, but delivered it to his
disciples, and ba^ them ete it. In somyche that S. Thomas they^ own doctor,
that made their transsubstanciacion confesses that some there were, that said
that Criste did first consecrate with w^ other wordis, ere he now reching the
bread to his disciples said. This is my body. etc. and yet calls he it no
heresye so to say. Now sith in all this act and souper, there be no wordis
of consecracion, but of the delyuering of the bread broken after thankis geuyng
with a commandment to eat it: bring us your wordis of consecracion? and show
us by what words God promised you and gave ye pow^ to make his body? There is
nether commandment, nor yet any wordis left in all the scripture to make or
to consecrate Christ's body, to bring it into the bread. But therbe the wordis
of God left in the first cap. of Genesys, whereby he made all the world: with
which wordis, all be it we yet have them: yet is it denied us to make that
thing that he made with them. Now, since we having his wordis of the creacion,
cannot yet make any new creature of nothing: how then shall we with out any
wordis of consecracion and making, make y^ maker of all thyngis?

Unto this accion or souper or delyuerance of the bread, he added a reason and
significacion of this sign or sacrement, and what also is the use thereof: ^he
use ^f ye souper
as though any should ask them theraftir: what sacrement, religion, or ryte
is this? They should answer even in a like manner of spech as it was commanded
their fathers to make answer to their children at the eating of the old
passover whereof this new passover was the veryte, and that the figure sayng.
When your chyldern ask ye what religion is this? ye shall answer them. It is
the sacrifyce of the passyngby of the lord etc. Lo here the lamb that
signified, and did put them in rememberance of that passyngby in Egyp^e ^he
Israelitis spared, and the egyptians smyten, was called in like phrase the
self thing that it represented, signified and did put them in remembrance of:
No notherwyse then if Christ's disciples, or any man else, seeing in that souper,
the bread taken, thankys given, the bread broken distributed and eaten: should
have asked him. what sacreme^t or religion is this? He had to answer the^ yt
Christ said. This is my body which is for you broken. This thing do ye into
the remembrance of me, that is to say, so often as ye celebrate this souper,
give thankis to me for your redemption. In which answer he callethe the
vtwarde sensible sign or sacrement, that is the bread with all y^ other
accion, even the same thing that it sygnifyeth, represents, and puts
syche eaters of the lordis souper in remembrance of.

For when he said, which is broken for you, every one of them saw that the^
it was not his body that was there broken: but the bread: for as yet he had not
suffered, but the bread broken was divided into pesis every one of the twelve
taking and eatinge a peace before he sayde^ ^hys is my body etc.

Now since M. More will steke so fast in his literal sense upon these wordis.
This is my body etc. Then do I ask him, what thing he shewethe us by this
first word and pronowme demonstratyue Hoc, in english (this)? If he show us
the bread: Mo^^terall ^^ce is (...)
so is the bread Christis body, and Christis body the bread, which sayng in
the literal sense is an high heresye aftir them. And for this sayng they
^u^^ned Lord Cobham. Also I ask whither Christ speking these wordis This is
my body etc. had then the bread in his handis wherewith he houseled his
disciples or no? That he had it not, but had now delivered it them: and had
commanded them to ete it to, the ordyr and wordis or the text plainly prove
it, as is declared before. And S. Mark ^ar. 14.
relleth the story also in this ordyr. The Cup taken in his handis, aftyr he
had given thankis, he gave it them, and they all drank thereof. And he said to
them. This is my blood of the new testament: which is shed for many. Here is
it manifest that they had all dronken thereof first ere he said the wordis of
consecracion (if they be the wordis of any consecracion.) Besydis this yet: if
ye be so sworn to the litterall sense in this matter, that ye will not in these
words of Christ. This is my body etc. admit in so plain a speech no troop
(for Allegorye there is none, if ye knew the proper difference of them both,
which every gramma^ion can teache you (then do I lay before your old eyes and
spectacles to, Crystes wordis spoken of the Cup both, in Luke cap. 2^2. and
Paul. 1. Ca 11. sayng. This Cup is the new testament through my blood which
is shed for you. Here Christ calls the wine in the cup the self cup
which every man knows is not the wine. Also he calls the cup the new
testame^t^ and yet was not the cup, nor yet the wine contained theryn the
new testament, and yet he calls it the new testament co^teigned and
confirmed with his blood, here ye se he called not the cup his blood but the
testament. Where is now your litterall sense that ye would so feign frame for
your papisti^ pleasure? If ye will so sore steke to the letter: why do your
faccion leave here the plain letter: sayng that the letter slays: goinge
about the busshe with this exposicion and circumlocucion, expownyng T^ys is my
body. that is to say, This is converted and turned into my body, and this
bread is transsubstancy ^^ed into my body? How far lo, M. More is this your
strange thomisticall sense ^rome the statte letter? If ye be so addi^^e to the
letter: why traye ye the common people from the letterall sense with thy^ ^ugge,
tellyng them the letter slays? but there is nether, ^^tter nor spirit that
may bridle and hold your styfe necked headis.

Also ye shall understand that Christ rebuked the iwes. Io. 6. for the^r
litteral sense and carnal understanding of his spiritual wordis Sayng My
flesh profits you nothing at all to eat it. etc. And their litterall
taking of his spiritual wordis was the cause of their murmr. etc. For even
there, as also like in other placis. To ete Crystis flesh. etc. aftyr the
common phrayse of the scripture, is not else, then to believe that Christ suffered
death, and shede his blood for us. Read ye. 1. Cor^n. 10. To ^^e ^rstis fless^
is to believe in him.
that our fathers all did ete the same spyritual meat and drank the same
spirytuall drink that we now ete and drink? Here I think M. More must leave
his litteral (...) and material meat, or else deny Paul, and deny to that
our fathers did ete Christ and drank his blood, which all here Paul says,
for to eat and to drink this spyrituall meat and dri^ke, was as himself
declarethe to eat and drink Christ. They drank of the stone (says Paul)
that went with them. which stone was Christ. And we ete and drink the very
same stone. which is not else, then to believe in Christ. They believed in
Christ to come and we believe in him comen and have suf^red, where is now think
ye M. Moris litterall sense for the ^^ing of Christis material body? Our
fathers were one, and the same church with us, under the same testament and
promise, and eue^ of the same faith in Christ, And even as they eat him and
drank his blood even the same spiritual meat and drink that we do ete and
drink: so do we now in the same faith. for what else was signified by this
manner of speech our fathers did eat and drink Christ, then that they believed
in Christ to be incarnated and to suffer death? what else meant the pore woman
of Chanane by eating, then to believe? when she answerde Christ, saying. Mat.
15.
ye say sothe my lord. But yet ^o the little whelpis ete of the crummes that
fall from their masters table? This did she answer in an allegory according
to Christis first answer unto her, she meaning by the etinge of the crummes,
the belief of his wordis and gospel to be s^atred among the gen^yls as Christ
answering, comfirmed her meaning saing: O woman great is thy faith. He said
not, thou art a great eater and deouwere^ of bread. Here is it plain that to
ete in escr^p^ure is taken to believe: as Chy^te himself expowneth it Io. 6. so
often, and so plentuously: and I am here compelled to inculke and iterat it
which so many wordis, to satisfye if it were possible this carnal flessh
vowerer and flesshely iwe.

Now to examyn and to discuss this matter more depely and plainly, I shall
compare the old passover with the new and souper of the Lord. And to show
ye how the figur^s corresponde their verites: I will begin my comparison at
Baptysme co^paryng it with the lordis souper which be the two sacrame^tis
left us now under the grace of the gospel. And aftirwarde, to set forth both
these sacramentis plainly, I will compare Cyrcumcision with baptysme: and the
pass lamb with Crystis souper.

Cy baptysme, as we testyfyed unto the congregation our entering into the
body of Criste (take here Crystis body, 1. Co, 10 11, and. 12.
as does Paul for his congregation) to dye, be buried, To. 6.
and to rise with him, to mortifye our flesh, Ephe. 4.
and to be reuyued in spirit, to cast of the old man, and to do upon us the
new: even so, by the thankys geuynge (for so did the old greek doctors call
this souper) at Goddis board, Euchary^stia ta^hk^^geuynge^ 1. co. 10.1^
or at the lordis souper (for so does Paul call it) we testifye the unite and
communion of our hertis, glued unto the hole body of Christ in love: ye and
that in siche love as Christ at this, his last souper expressed: what time he
said, his body should be broken and his blod shede for the remission of our
sin?, And to be short: As baptism is the badge of our faith so is the
lordis souper the token of our love to god and our neghbours: 1. Tim. ^
where upon stands the law and prophetis. For the end of the precepte, is
love out of a pure heart, and good conscience and faith unfeigned. So that by
Baptism we be iniciated and conseigned unto the worship of one god in one
faith: And by the same faith and love at the lordis souper. we show our
selves to continue in our possession, to be incorporated and to be the very
members of Crystis body.

Both these sacramentis were fygured in Moses law. Baptysme was fygured by
circ^ncisyon: and the lordis souper, by the etynge of the passelombe^ where
like as by cyrcuncysion, the people of Israel were rekened to be goddis people,
several from the gentyls: so be we now by baptism rekened to be: conseigned
unto Crystis church several from iwes paynyms etc. And as their passover,
that is to say their sole^pne feste yearly in etynge their passelombe, was an
vtwarde token of their perseverance in their relygion, and in remembrance of
their passage out of egypt into the land of Chanaa^: ^uc. 22.
Cor 5.
so is now the etinge of the lordis souper (which Christ and Paul called our
passover) a token of our perseverance in our christian profession at baptism:
and also thankis geuynge with that joyful remembrance of our redemption from
sin, death, and hell by Crystis death. Of the figure of this souper, our new
passover: Exo. 12.
thus is it written. Aftir ye be entered into that land which the lord God
shall give you according to this promise: ye shall keep this ceremony. And when
your children ask ye: what relygion is this? ye shall answer them. It is the
sacryfice of the passyngouere of the lord, when the lord passed forebye the
houses of the chyldern of Israel in egipte, smyting the gipcians and delyuering
our houses. This etinge therefore of the pass lamb was the figure of the
lordis souper, which figure when the howr was comen that he would i^ to cease
and give place unto the verite, as the shadewe to vanisshe away at the
presence of the body: He said thus^ Luc. 22.
with a fervent desyer do I long to eat this passover with you ere I suffer.

Agene, let us compare the figure with the trwthe, the old passover with the
new, and diligently consider the properte of spekinge, in and of either of
them. Let us expende the succession, imitacion, and time, how the new
succeding the old, the mediator Criste between both sittinge at the souper
celebratinge both with his presens, did put out the old and bryngyng the
new. For there is in either of them syche like composicion of wordis, siche
affinite and proporcion in speech, syche symilitude and property in them
both, the new so corresponding in all thingis the old, that the old
declarethe the new, what it is, wherefore it was instituted, and what is the
very use thereof. And to begin at circuncision the figure of baptism. ye
shall understand That in sick rytes and sacraments there ar two thingis to be
considered, 2. things to be co^sydered i^ the sacrame^^tis.
that is to wit. The thing, and the sign of the thing. The thing is it
wherefore the sign is institued to sygnifye it: as in circuncision, the thing
is the covenant to be of the people of God and the sign is, the cuttyng of the
foreskinne of the preuey member. In the passover, the thing was, the
rememberance with thankis geuinge for the delyuerance out of the hard
^seruitute of egypt: but the sign was, the lamb roasted with siche ceremones
as were there prescrybed them. So in baptism: The thing is, the promise to be
of the church of Christ: the sign is, the dippinge into the water with the
holy wordis. In our Lor^is souper, the very thing is, Christ promised and
crucified, and of faith thankis geuinge unto the father for his son given to
suffer for vs^ but the sign is, the dealyng and distributing or rechinge forth
of the bred and wine, with the holy wordis of our lord spoken at his sauper,
after he had thus dealte the bread and wine, unto his disciples.

The syg^e is cal^ed the ^hinge.
And here is it diligently to be noted: That sith in all these ri^es,
ceremones, or sacraments of God thus institued: these two things that is to
went the thing sygnyfyed, and the sign that signifiethe ^e concurrant and
inseparable: it ^s ^he comen use and proper^ye of the spe^he i^ the scripture,
to call the sign, the thing, as is circumcision called the cou^nant Every
manchylde must be cyrcumcysed that my couen^nt might be in your flesh for a
perpetual bond. Genesis 17.
And yet was it only but the vtwarde sign and seal of the covenant, that the
sead of Abraham should be his especial chosen people, and that he would be their
God. The lamb, Ero. 12.
that was but the sign, was called the passover: and yet was not the lamb the
passing over, but the sign only excitinge and monesshinge them to remember
that delyuerance by the angel passing by the Israelitis in egypt, smyting the
gipcians. And sith this trope or manner of speech the scripture did use with so
great grace in the old rytes and ceremones that figured our sacramentis: why
may it not with like grace, for that analogye and propercongruence of the
fygures with their verites, use the same phrase and manner of speech in their
verites? If the scripture called the sign the thing in circumcision and
passover, why should we be offended with the same speech in our baptism and in
the lordis souper? sith siche manner of speech have no less grace and fulness
here then there to bring the thing sygnifyed into our hertis by siche vtwarde
sensible signs. For when that sign of circumcision was given the child: then
were they certified (as an vtward toke^ may certifye) that the child was of
the people of Israel. And therefore did the syg^es the^, as they do now ^ere the
names of the things which they signified as the lamb eten in they passover
wa^ called the sacrifyce and the self passover, no another wise than in our new
passover, that is the lordis souper, the bread broken etc. is called the body
of Christ, and the wine powerd forth and distributed to each man, the blood of
Christ, because the bread so broken and dealte signifies unto the receyuers
and put^eth them in rememberance of the sacrifyce of his body one the altar
of the cross and of his blood powerde forth for our redemption. So that this
manner of speech in thadministr^cion and use of the souper of our lord: to say
This is my body, and this is my blood: is as miche to say as, This
signifies my nody, this sygnifyethe my bloode^ which souper is here
celebrated to put us in rememberance of Cristes death, and to excyte us to
thankis geuinge.

Nether let it not offend the, ^ christian reder, That Est is taken for
significat: Est is ta^e^ for sig^ificat.
that is to say, This is that, is as miche to say, as this signifyethe that.
For this is a comen manner of speech in many placis of scripture, and also in
our mother tongue: as when we se many pictures or images, which ye know well
are but signs to represent the bodies whom they be made like: yet we say of
the image of our lady. This is our lady. and of. s. Kataryne, this is saint
Kataryne. and yet do they but represent and sygnyfie us our lady or saint
Kataryne. And as it is wryte^ Genesis. 40. ca. The three branches ar three days.
The.3. baskettes ar.3. dayes^ which was not else but they sygnyfyed three days.
Also in the 28. ca. Jacob said This stone which I have set up an end, shall be
goddis house, which stonne yet was never gods house, nor never shall be: but only
did signifye goddis house to be builded in that same place^ Agay^, Pharao
dremed to have seen.7. fayer fatt oxen, and efte sone.7. pore lene oxen. which
Ios^ph expowning said: The.7. fat oxen ar.7. plentuouse yeris: and the.7.
lene are 7. dear yeris, in which phrase or manner of speech every man seithe
that the oxen were no years: but they signif^ed siche yeris. Meruel not
therefore though Est like wise in this sentence: Hoc est corpus meu^. be taken
for significat, as miche to say, as this signifies my body. And yet for
because the scriptures co^ferred together expowne them self as says S.
Austen. And Peter. 2. pe 1. That we have before a ferme and suer prophetical
speech unto which if ye attend as unto a light set up in a derke place, ye do
well: I shall show ye a lyk phrase in Ezechiel where the destruction of Jerusalem
was thus fygured: Eze. 5.
God commandinge Ezechiel to take a sword as sharp as raser, and shave of his
head and berde, and then take a certain weight of the hearis divided into.3.
parts: of the one, he should burn in the mids of the cite a another he should
cut rowndabout, and the chirde cast it up into the wind. etc. which done
he said: Thus says the lord god This is Jerusalem. which act and dede^ so
done, was not Jerusalem: but it signified and preched unto the beholders of it,
Jerusalem to be destroyed: no another wise then the brekinge and distributing of
the bread and wine called Crystis body and blood signifies and precheth us the
death of Christ, the figure and sign beringe the name of the thing signifyed^
as in the prophetis speech, sayng: This is Jerusalem: which did but signifye
Jerusalem. Ioa^. 2.
when Christ did brethe into his discipules sayng. Take ye the holy ghost: the
same brethe was not the holy ghost, but signified and represented them the holy
ghost, with a thousand like manner of speech in the scripture.

In the old passover thankis were given for the slaughter of the first
begoten, wheryn the kyngis posterite of egipte fill a way, the Hebrews spared,
passed over, and delyuered^ But in the new passover, thankis ar given, that
the only begoten son of the most highest was crucified, whereby al faithful ar
spared passed over, and not smyte^ with the sword of dampnacion: but delivered
and^ saved in the lambis blood that have taken away the sin of the world In
the old passover, The lamb or festes is called the lordis passover. and yet
was nether the lamb nor the feste his passing over; but the sign and
commemoracion of his passyngby. And even so is it now in ye new souper of our
lord. It is there called the body of our lord, not that there is any thing
wheryn his very natural body is contained so long and broad as it hanged on
the cross, for so is it ascended into heaven and sits one ye right hand of
the father: but that thing that is there done in that souper, as the breking
and dealing and eting of the bread, and the wholl like accion of the wine,
signifies represents and puttethe into our hertis by the spirit of faith
this commemoracion, joyful remembera^ce, and so to give thankis for that
inestimable benefit of our redemption, wheryn we se with the eye of our faith
presently his body broken, and his blood shed for our sins. This is no
small sacrament, nor yet irreuerently to be entreted: but it is the most
gloriouse and highest sacrament, with all reverence and worsehip, with thankis
geuinge to be ministered, used received, preched and solempnely in the face of
the congregation to be celebrated: of whose holy administracion and use I shall
peradventure speak in the end of this souper.

The use o^ the souper.
But in the mean ^eason (Christian reder) let these sensible signs signifye and
represent the his death, and prynte it in thy heart, geuinge thankis
incessantly unto God ye father for so incomparable a benefit, that has given
y^ his own only so dear beloved sone our savior our Jesus Christ to dye for
thy sins, ye and that when we were not his chyldern but his enmyes^ Crystis
disciples said to the man, Lu^ 22.
where is this geste chamber where I might ete the passing by with my
disciples? and they prepared the passover. And yet christ eit not the passover,
but the lamb with his disciples. where it is plain, the sign to do on the
name of the things

At last, consider unto what end all thingis tended in that last souper, how
the figure teched the verite, the shadew the body, and how the verite
abolesshed the figure, and the shadewe gave place to the body. Look also with
what congruence, proporcion, and similitude both in the accion and the speech,
all things were consona^t and finesshed, and all ^o led us by siche sensible
signs from the figure unto the verite, from the flesh unto the spirit, And
take thou here this infallible and assuered sayng of Christ never to fall fro
thy mind in this last souper. Lu. 22.
Do ye this into the remembera^ce of me. And also of Paul, sayng 1. co. 11. So
often as ye shall ete this bread, lo this heretic calls it bread even aftyr the
wordis of the popis consecracion, and drink of this cup, praise, declare,
and give thanks for the death of the lord, until he shall come agene to
judgment. Remember thou also: what Christ said to the carnal iwes taking the
etinge of his flesh and drinkinge of his blood so carnally, answeringe them.
My flessh profits n^ meni^g to ete it bodily. Ioh^^. ^
but the spirit makes life. And to this set the prophet A^a^uke sentence. The
just lives of his faith. Abac. ^


And now (Christian reder) to put the ^le^e out of doubt, that Crystis body is
not here present under the form of bread (as the papistis have mocked us many
a day) but in heaven, even as he rose and ascended, Thou shall know that he
told his disciples almost twnty times between the.13. and.18. cap. of Johan,
that he should, and would go hence, and leave this world. where to conforte
them agene for that they were so heavy for his bodily absence, he promised to
send them his holy ghost to be their conforter, defender, and techer: in whom,
and by whom, he would be present with them and all faithful unto the worldis
end. He said unto his disciples. I go hence, I go to the father, I leave the
world, and now shall I no more be in the world. but ye shall abide still in the
world. Father I come to the. Pore men have ye eue^ with you, but me shall ye
not alwais have with you. And when he ascendid unto heaven, (...). 2.
they did behold him and saw the cloud take his body out of their sight:
and they fastening their eyes aftir him, the two me^ clothed in whight, said
unto them. ye men of galyle, wherefore stand ye thus lokinge up in to heaven?
This is Jesus that is taken up from you into heaven, which shall so come agene,
even as ye have seen him going hence. Here I would not More to ^^itte from his
litteral plain sense. All these so plain wordis be sufficient, I trow, to a
christian man to certifye his conscience that Christ went his way bodily
ascending into heaven. For when he had told his disciples so often of his bodily
departing from them: they were meruelouse heavy and sad. Unto whom Christ
said. Because I told ye that I go hence, Io. 14. and. 16.
your herts ar full of heuenes. If they had not believed him to have spoken of
his very bodily absence: they would never have so morned for his going away And
for because they so understood him, and he so meant as his wordis sowned: He
added (as he should have said) be ye never so heuye or how heuely so ever ye
take my going hence, yet do I tell ye truth. For it is expedyent for you that
I go hence^ For if I should not go hence, that counforter shall not come unto
you. But and if I go hence, I shall send him unto you. And again in the same
Cap. I am come^ from the father, and am comen into the world, and shall leave
the world agene and go to my father. what mystery, think ye, should be in
these so manyfeste wordis? Did he speak them in any dark parables? Did he mean
other wise then he spoke? Did he understand by going hence so often repered, to
tarry here still? or did he mean by forsakyng and leuyng the world to be but
invisible being still in the world with his body? No suerly. For he meant as
faithfully and as plainly as his wordis sowned^ and even so did his disciples
with out any more meruelynge understood him. For they answered him sayng: Lo now
spekest thou apertely: nether spekest thou any proverb. But what a derke
proverb and subtyle rydle had it been: if he had meant by his going hence to
have tarried here still? and by forsakynge the world, to abide ^tyll in the
world? and by his going hence to his father by his very bodily ascencion, to
be but invisible? who would interpret this plain sentence thus? I go hence,
that is to say: I tarry here still I forsake the world and go to the father,
that is to say I will be but invisible and yet here abide still in the world
bodily? For as concerning his godhed, which was ever with the father, and in
all placys at once, he never spoke syche wordis of it. when Christ said, his
death now at hand, unto his disciples: now agene I forsake the world and go
to my father, but ye shall tarry still in the world. If they will expowne by his
forsakyng the world, to tarry here still bodily, and to be but inuysyble: why
do they not ^y like exposicion interpret the tarynge here still of the
disciples at that time, to be gone hence bodily and to be here visible? For
Crist did set these contraryes one agenst a another to declare each other. as if
to tarry here still, did signyfye to the disciples that they should abide in
the world, as it does in deed: the^ must nedis his going hence and forsakyng
the world signify his bodily absence as both the wordis plainly sown,
Christ meant, and they understood them. But in so plain, a matter what need all
these wordis? Be thou therefore suer, Christian reder, that Crystis glorified body
is not in this world, but in heaven, as he thither ascended in which body he
shall come eue^ as he went gloriously with power and great majesty to judge all
the world in the last day, Be thou therefore assuered, that he never thus
i^geled no^ mocked his so dear beloved disciples so full of heuines now for his
bodily depertynge. For if he had so meant as our papistis have paruerted his
sayngis, his disciples would have wondered at so strange manner of speech, and
he would (...) ^xpressed his mind plainly, sith at this time he was so full
set to leave them in no doubt, but to counfort them with his plain and
confortable wordis. And if he would have been but invisible and still bodily
present: he would never have covered himself with the cloud showing them
and testifyenge also by those two men his very bodily ascension out of their
syghtis. we may not make of his very bodily ascension, siche an inuysyble
iugelynge cast as our papistis fay^e, Fasshoning and fayning Christ a body
now invisible, now in many placis at once, and then so great and yet in so
little a place, not discerned of any of our sensis now gloryfied, now
vngloryfied, now passible, and then impassible, and I wot ner what they imagyn
and make of their maker, and all with out any word, ye clean against all the
wordis of holy scripture. For suerly, in this their imaginacion and so sayng
they bring in a fresshe the heresye of that great hereti^ Marcyon, which said
that Criste took but a pha^tasticall bodye^ and so was nether verily borne, nor
suffered, nor rose, nor ascended verelye, nether was he very man. which
heresye Tertullian co^futeth. Christ took verily our nature, siche a passible
and mortal body as we here about with us, save that it was with out all manner
of sin. In siche a body he suffered verily, and rose again from death in siche
a glorified body now immortal etc. as every one of us shall rise in at the
general judgment. It is appropryed only to his godhe^ to be every whore and
not to be circumscribed nor contaned in no place. And as for our papistis
profane void voices, his body to be in many places at once, indiffinitiue
incircu^scripti^e non permodum quanti neque localiter etc. which includes in
it self contradiccion, of which Paul warned Timothe. 1. Timo. 6: and. 2.
Tim. 2. calling them thopposicions of a false named science (for that their
scolasticall divinity must make obiec^ions against every truth, be it never
so plain with pro and contra: which science many that profess it says Paul.
1. Tim. 2. have erred from the fai^he) as for this conte^cion and bataill
about wordis profitable for nothing else, but to subuerte the herers I care
not for them. For I have the almighty testymony of the^erlastinge word of God
ready to soil all their mad and unreasonable reasons, to wype them clean a
way, and to turn them into their own confusion.

And for because they hold them so fast by Paul. 1. Co. 11. I shall loose
their hold, expownynge the lordis souper aftir Paul, which adds immediately
unto the cup, this that Luke there leaued forth: Do ye this in to my
remembera^ce^ This does Paul repete so of^e to put us in mind, that these
thankis geuyng and souper is the commemoracion and the memorial of Crystis
death. wherefore aftir all he repeteth it yet again the third time saying. So
often as ye shall ete this bread (he calls it still bread even aftir the popis
consecracion) and drink the cup (he says not drink this blood) se that ye
give thanks, be ioyouse and preche the de^he of the lord, for somyche
sygnifieth annunciate in this place, until he come that is to say, fro the
time of his death and ascencion until he come again to judgment.
Forthermore, says Paul, whosoever ete this bread, he calls it still bread, or
drink of the c^ppe of the lord vnworthely^he is gilty the body and blood of
the lord. The body and blood of the lord Paul calls here the congregation
assembled toghyther to ete the lordis souper. For they at his body and blood
which ar remeded with his body and blood, as he said in the.10. cap. before.
The cup of thankis geuynge which we receive with thankis: is it not the
fellowship of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the
fellowship of the body of Christ? For we being many together ar one bread, even
one body. Lo here Paul expownyng himself uses the same form of speech that
is used in these wordis This is my body, taking Is, for signifies. we are one
bread even one body, that is to say, we are signified be one lofe of bred to
be one body, he shewethe the cause, adding because we be all partakers of one
lofe or pese of bread. And in the.12. cap. following, he says plainly, ye be
the body of Christ and his partyclar members, and in the first cap. to
thephesians^ God did set Christ to be the head over all unto his congregation
which his body. etc.

And because the comparyson in the.10. cap. between the lordys board and his
cup, and the deuillys board and his cup, do declare this matter. I shall
recy^e Paulys wordis saying ye may not drink the cup of the lord, and the
cup of the devil both togyther^ ye may not be partakers of the lordis board
and the deuylls board both at once. The deuyls board and his ^upp^ was not his
body and blood, but the ety^ge and drinking before their images and Idols as
did the haithen in the worship and th^nkys of thyr Gods^ of which thing thou
may gather what Paul meant by the lordis board and his cup. Now let us
return to Paul in the.11. cap. They eat this bread and drink of this cup
unworthily, that come not unto this board with such faith and love as they
professed at their baptism. They ete unworthily that thru^ted them selves in
among this congregation having not the love that this sacrament and sign of
unity techethe and s^gnyfyeth. which manner of people Paul in thyssame ca.
rebukethe, and bendethe all his sermon agenste them: for that thy were
contensyouse, and came together not for the better but for the worse^ So that
thyr coming together which should have ^ene a token of faith and love, was
turned into thoccasyo^ and matter of di^sencion and strife: because every man
did e^e (as Paul says) his own souper and not the lordys souper: wheryn the
bread and drink is common as well to the pore as to the rich. but here the
rich dysdayned the pore and would not tarry for them. so that some (as ye
rich) wen^e th^yr way dronken and full: an^ the pore departed ^ongrye and
dry, which was a toke^ of no ^gal distrybucion of the bread and drink: and
that the rich comtemned the pore and so became sclaunderouse and gyltie of ye
body and blood of Christ: that is to wite, of ye pore congr^gacion redeemed with
Crystis body and blo^e. Thus they that came together ape^yng to have had that
love which the souper signified, and had it not, uttered them selves by this
contenciouse and vnlouynge dealyng not to be members of Crystys body, but
rather gyltye and hurtful unto them. As if a soudyer of our adversaries part
should come in among us with our lordis badge, having not that heart faith
and love to our captain that we have, we would (if we espy^d it by any token)
take him for a spy and betrayer rather then one of us.

Let a man therefore says Paul prove him self well before, whyther he has
this faith to Christ and love to God and his neghbour which all he professed
at baptism, and this souper signyfyed: and so come in emonge the congregation
to ete of this bread and drink of this cup (he calls it still bread and
wine: and nether his body nor blood). For he that etith and drinks
unworthily, eteth and drynketh his own dampnacion: because he discry^eth not
the lordis body. He calls still the lordis body the congregation redeemed
with Crystis body, as he did before, and also in the chap. following fe^chyng
^ys analogy and simyle^ude at the natural body. In which although there be
diverse members one exellynge a another, one inferior, vyler and more
conte^ptible then a another yet may not the body want them: but must kouer them
reverently, and hold them in honor. Ageyn, in the body, though ^herbe
diverse members of diverse e^^ices: yet is there no discord emonge them: but
every member, bent never so low and vile: yet does it mynister and serve a
another, and al together hold up and help the ^^oll body. This co^sideracion
with these co^parysons so eloque^tly, so playntuously, so lively does Paul
set forth in that.12. chap. that noman can desyer any more. And all to bring
us into the consyderacyon and discrecyon of the body of Christ which is his
congregacyon: without which consyderacion and discrecio^, if we thrust our
selves in with this sign and cognisans faynedly: we be but hypocrites and ete
and drink our own judgment. For this cause many are syke emonge you, and many
ar a sleep, that is, ar deed. Here it seems some plage to have been cast upon
the Cori^th for this abuse in the e^yng of the lordis souper. For both the
law and prophetis thretened us plages as pestilence, famyne: and sword for
our sins. For if we had iuged our souls, that is, If we had dilyge^tly
examined our own lyuinge and repented: we should not have be^ iuged, that is
to say, punisshed of the lord. But while we be punyshed, we be corrected of
the lord lest we should be condemned with the world. wherefore my brethern,
when ye come together to eat, tarry one for a another. Here is the cause of all
this dissension wherefore Paul rebukes them. But here might some of them
obiecte and tell Paul, Sir we come hither hongry and may not tarry so long.
where unto Paulle answers as he did before: saying, Have ye not houses to ete
and drink in? Do ye contempne the co^gregacyon of God and shame them that have
non? Here he calls the pore, the church of god, whom aftyrward he called the
body of the lord: and now at last he says. If any man be so hongry, let him
ete somewhat at home, and so delay his honger that he may the beter tarry for
the pore, lest ye come together unto your condempnacyon. And as for other
thyngys I shall dispose and set in ordyr when I come. These other things were
concerning this souper and siche as were out of frame among them which if ye
read the wholl pystle, ar efte esye to se: and that they were no necessary
trouthes for their salvation, for all syche trouthes Paul had preched them
before and written the^ to Nether were these other thyngys lent, fast,
thassumpcio^ of our lady, halowyng of bows bellis and ashes, halowyng of
vestymentis, and crepynge to the cross, with siche other unwritten vanites, as
M. More li^tethe to ieste and tryfull out the truth.

Now have ye the very pure sense of these Crystis wordis. This is my body,
that is to say. This signifyethe or reprensente the my body, taking Est for
significat. As M. More himself uttered it in his Dyaloge put forth in wylliam
Barlows name, reciting the opinyons of Ecola^padius and zwinglius: saying, this
is my body, is as miche to say as this sygnyfyeth my body, where he says that
Ecolampadius allegeth for him Tertulya^, Chrysostom, and Austen, but falsely
sometime adding more to their wordis, sometime taking a way from their
sentencis. which sayng is plain false, and he belyethe the man now departed,
for first his incomparable learning and very spiritual judgment would not
suffer him to be ignorant in the understanding of these old holy doctors
(whom I dare say) he understood as well as More. And his conscience and
faythf^lnes would not suffer him falsely to peru^rte them as More belyethe and
peruertethe Crys^e and Paul and all holy scripture. And if this man had thus
delte with these doctors sayngis: Luther against whom he did contend in this
matter would not have left it untold him

But (Christian reder) to put the out of do^te have here these Doctors own
wordis both in la^yne and in english. And first hear Tertullyan, where
thou must first understand that there was an heretyk called Marcyo^, sayng
that Christ took not to him the very body of man, but an imagined and
fantastical body, to put of, and on, when he lysted: and so not to have be^
borne verily of the virgen Marye, nor yet to have suffered verily death etc.
Agenst who^, ^^^^lya^^
thus writes Tertullian in h^s. 4. book.

Professus itaque se concupiscentia concupisse edere pascha, vt suum acceptu^
panem and distributum discipulis corpus suum illum fecit, h^e est corpus meum
dicendo: id est figura corporis mei. Figura autem non fuisset, nisi veritatis
esset corpus. Ceterum, v^cua res, quod est phantasma, figuram capere non
posset. which wordis are thus in english spoken of Christ. which
acknowleginge himself with how fervent desyer he longed to eye the passou^r,
as his bread taken and distributed to his disciples: made it his body saying:
This is my body: that is to say, the figure of my body. For figure had it be
none, except it were a very body. For a void thing which is a pha^tasye
can receue no figure. Here is it plain, that This is my body after old holy
doctoure is as miche to say as this is the ^ygure or sign that r^presenteth
or signifies my body.

Also, thus says Austen. Auste^ 12, aga adima
Lex dicit no^ esse manducandu^ sanguine^, quod anima sit sanguis. Quod lex
dicit, sanguis est anima: esse positu^ dicimus, sicut ali^ multa et pene oi^a
scriptura illa sacramenta signis et figuris plena future predicatio^is, que ^am
per dn^m nostrum Jesus Christum declarata est etc. Possum etia^ interpretari
preceptum illud in signo esse posirum. Non enim dubitauit dn^s dicere: Hoc est
corpus meu^, quum signum daret corporis sui. Sic est enim sanguis ai^a, quomodo
petra erat Christus. Net tamen quu^ hec diceret, ait: petra significab at
Christum, sed ait: petra erat Christus. Que rursus ne carnaliter acciperetur,
spiritua lem illam vocat. id est spiritualiter intelligi docet. which wordis
ar thus in englisshe. Genesis 9
The law says that blood should not be eten, Leui. ^
because the life is blood. which precept of the law and because that blood
is life: Deuteronomy. ^
we affirm it to be set like as many other almost innumerable sacrame^tis of
those scriptures, full of signs and fygures of the prechinge to come: which
now is declared by our lord Jesus Christ etc. And I may interpret that
precept to be laid in a sign. For the lord douted not to saye^ This is my
body: when he gave the sign of his body. And even so is the blood life, as
the stone was Christ. And yet when he said these words: he said not the stone
signified Christ: but he said, the stone was Criste. which le^te they should
be taken carnally, he callethe it spiritual, that is to say, he techeth it to
be understand spiritually, where is now Moris litter^ll sense, and material
meat?

^^m. ^m o (...) imper^e^^
Now shall ye hear Chrysostom. Nihil fensibile tradidit Christus: licet dederit
panem et vinum: non quod panis and vinum non sint sensibilia, sed quod in illis
mentem herere noluit. Nam in suum corpus, quod est panis vite, subuehit dicens.
Hoc est corpus meum: perinde ac dicat H^c licet panis sit, significat tamen
tibi corpus. Thus it is in english. Christ geuing^ bread and wine, gave no
sensible thing: not that bread and wine be not sensible: but that he would not
our mind to steke still in them, For he lyfted us up into his body, which is
the bread of life: sayng. This is my body: as though he should say. Though
this be but bread, yet it sign^fyethe unto the, my body. Now judge thou
(Christian reder) whither M More reportethe right, of this man that alleged
these old holy doctors, or no.

^he co^fu^cion of (...) papis^^s glo^^^.
Now have ye the pure understanding of the wordis of the lords souper
confirmed with the old holy doctors. That this is my body, is as miche to
say, as this signifies my body. And this is my blood: is, this sygnyfyethe
my blood. But yet was there never siche manner of speking i^ the scripture This
is that That is to say, This is converted and transsubstanciated into that. Or
this is contained in that: the thing converted and changed, kepping still her
form, qualites, quantite etc. As to say. This is my body, that is to say.
This bread is converted into my body, the bread abiding still in his fasshio^,
taste, color, weight etc. For Christ when he converted water into wine, did
not leave the form, color, and taste still in the water. For so had it been no
changing. But let our couetouse conuerters choppe and change bread and wine
till we there feel se and taste nether bread nor wine, and then will we beleme
them so they bring for them the word of god. For as for their false iug^linge
we feel it at our fyngers end: we se it, had we but half an eye: we cast it
at our tongues end, and know it with all our wittis and understanding so
manifestly, that we parc^yued the^ openly long a goo, to be the very
anticrystis, of whom Christ and his apostles warned us to come in this last
time.

And if they say. That this conversion is made by miracle. Then must every
one of the^ as often as he say a miss make us many a miracle the very markis of
Moris church. For it is one great miracle that Crystis body should come so
suddenly invisible and so often out of heaven, and that such a miracle as the
word of god never knew: a another that to great a body should be contained in so
litel a place, and that one body should be at once in so many placis and two
bodies in one place, an other that it is eten nether the eter feling it, nor
the body eten suffering nor feling the tethe of the eter. which as many mo
meruelouse and like miracles or rather absurdites of the bread and wine, that
there must be the form, color, taste, weight, broken etc. and yet nether to
be bread nor wine in our belife except we will be burned of them because we
believe not their iugelinge castis. O mischeuous miracle makers. O cruel
conuerters. O blodye vouchers.

But herke, Christian reder, and I shall lernethe to know Crystis plain and t^we
miracles^ from the sleighthy iugglinge of these crafty conuayers. Christ would
never have done miracle had men believed him only by his wordis, but when he
said first these wordis. This is my body, noman donted at them, noman was in
any unbelief of them. wherefore these wordis m^ste nedis be plain single and
pure without miracle, as these. The.3. branchis ar.^. days: without any
subtyle tran^substanciacion, siche insensible conversion, or any false miracle.
Christ wrought al his miracles for the glory of god to declare him self both
god and man so that all Crystis miracles were comprehended under man's senses
or common writes, which bring in siche knowledge unto the understanding. As when
he changed water into wine, the miracle was first received with the sight,
open at the eye, tasted with the mouth and so co^uayed unto the
understanding. And now, though we nether se nor taste that miracle, yet we
hear it, se it, read it, and so understood that it was once a miracle do^e of
christ: when he restored the sight to the blind, heled the lame, cleansed the
leprose, reared the dead: all was seen, herd and so comprehended under our
most suerest sensis: that his very enimes were compelled to confess them for
miracles, But our miracle makers, that make daily so often and so many, ar so
far from this clear point: that their miracles in this matter, be not, nor
never shall be contained nor comprehended under any of our 5 wits, but they
rather delude and deceive both sight, taste, felinge, hering, and smellinge:
ye our faith and understanding to. Beware therefore of these mischeuous miracle
makers for their own glory and profit: and will kill the to, if thou
beleueste not their lies. Beware I say of those marcha^ts that will sell the
wares, which the^ will not suffer the to se, ^^r to taste. nor to touch: but
when they show the whight, thou must believe it is blak: If they give the
bread, thou must bele^e it without any word of thy faith, that it is
Crystis body, and that of their own making. If thou taste, se, and feel it
bread yet thou must say it is none though the scripture calls it bread.xx.
times. Beware beware I say of Anticryste: whose cominge said Paule^ 1 Thessalonians.
2, (he is come al ready says John. 1. Ioa^^ 2.^ now ar there many anticrystis)
shall be aftir the workinge of Satan with an almighty power, with false signs
and wonders lyinge miracles, and with all deceit of v^rightuousnes. etc.

To be to curiouse in so plain a sacrament and sign, to cavil Crystis clear
wordis with sophistical sophismes, and to tryful out the tro^^ the with
tauntis and mockis, as More does, is no christian manner. And if our papistis,
and sc^lasticall sophisters will obiecte and make answer to this souper of the
lord, bringing in for them, their vnwryte^ wordis, deed dremes (for we have
compelled More with shame to flitte from the scripture) strewed with their
vayn strange te^mes wihche Paul damneth, and gives Timothe warning of. I
shall, by goddis grace, so set the almihgty word of god agenst the^ that all
christen shall se their falshed and deceit in this sacrament: and so disclose
their deuilessh doctrine and ^^eighe iugelynge, that all that ca^rede
english, shall se the truth of Goddis word openly ^ere down their
vnwryte^ lies. For it is verily the thing that I desyer, even to be wryte^
agenste in this matter, for I have the solucions of al their obieccio^s redye.
And know right well, that the more they stere this sacrament, the brother shall
their lies be sprede, the more shall their falshed apere and the more gloriously
shall the trowthe triumph: as it is to se this da^e by the long contencion in
this same, and other like articles: which the papi^tis have so long abused,
and how More his lies utter the tr^^the every day more and more. For had he
not come begging for the clergy from purgatory, with his supplicacion of
soulis, and Rastel and Rochelter had they not so wisely played their partis:
purgatory paradue^ture had served them yet a another year: nether had it so sone
have been quenched, nor the pore soul and proctour there be with his blody
bishop cryste^ catte so far co^iured into his own Utopia with a sechel
about his neck to gather for the proud preistis in Synagoga papi^tica.

When Christ was ascended into heaven: and had sent his Apostles the spirit of
truth, to lead them into all truth perteyning unto our salvation even in
to him that said: I am the truth of which truth he enstructed them aftir
his resurrection. Luke 24. and they had preched the same truth now in
Jerusalem Act. 2. at which preching there were that received their words and
where baptized, abouthe, z. M. his apostels rememebringe how their master
Christ at his last souper did institute and leave them this holy sacrament of
his body and blood to be celebrated and done in his rememberance emonge siche
as had received his gospel, were baptized, had professed his faith, and would
persevere in his religion, did now in this first congregation celebrate the
lordis souper brekinge the bread and etinge it as Christ did ^eche them, which
souper, Luke and Paul called afterward the brekinge of the bread. As Acto, 2.
saying. That they which gladly had now received Peter's act, and were
baptized: were persevering in the doctrine of the apostles, and in the
communion, and in the breakinge of the bread, and in prayer, which sacrament
was now a token of the perseverance in their christian religion now professed.
Off this brekinge of bread, Luke writing of Paul coming^ upon Troadem, says
Act. 20^ also, that there upon a sabbot day, when the disciples were come
together unto the brekinge of the bread: Paul made a sermon during to mydnight
etc. And that this was no come^ nor profane use but an heavenly sacrament and a
reverent ryte and usage, the cricumstancis of the accion declare, both in Luke
and Paul, showing it to be the very institucion that Christ ordened at his
soupere, Paul thus recy^ynge this brekeynge of the bread: say^g. The bread
which we break, is it not the felawship of the body of Christ? that is to say
does it not signify us to be the body of Criste that is his congregation and
his people, as does the words folowinge declare? Paul addinge the cause
saying For we being many are all together signified by the one lofe to be one
body: for that we be partakers of the same bread. Also before, he callethe in
the same souper, the cup of thankis geuinge the felawshyp of the blood of
Cry^t^, that is to say, the congregation redeemed with Crystis blood.

This holy sacrament therefore, would god it were restored unto the pure use, as
thapostles used it in their time. would God, the seculare princes which should
be the very pastors and head rulers of their congregacions committed unto their
cure, would first command or suffer the trwe prechers of goddis word to
preche the gospel purely and plainly with discrete lyberte: and constitute
over each particulare parysshe syche curatis as can and would preche the word,
and that once or twyse in the weke, apoyn^ynge unto their flock certain days
aftyr their discrecion and zele to godwarde, to come to gyther to celebrate the
lordis souper. At the which assemble the curate would propowne and declare
them first this text of Paul. 1. Corynth. 11^ So of^ as ye shall ete this
bread and drink of this cup: se that ye be ioyouse, praise, and give thankys
prechyng the death of the lord. etc. which declared, and every one exhorted
to prayer, he would preche them purely Christ to have dyed and ben offered upon
the altar of the Cross for their redemption: which only oblacio^ to be a
sufficyent sacryfice to peace the fathers wrath, and to purge all the sins
of the world. Then to excyte them with all homble dilygence every man unto the
knowledge of him self and his sins: and to believe and trust to the
forgeuenes in Crystis blood: and for this so incomparable be^efyt of our
redempcio^ (which were sold bondmen to sin) to give thankis unto God the
father for so merciful a delyuerance through the death of Jesus Christ, every
one, some synginge and some saying deuoutely, some or other psalm or prayer of
thanks geuinge in the mother ^onge. Then, the bread and wine set before them
in the face of the chi^che upon the table of the lord purely and honestly
laid, let him declare to the people the significacions of those sensyble
signs, what the accion and deed mouethe, techethe and exhortethe them unto:
and that the bread and wine be no profane comen signs: but holy sacraments
reverently to be considered and received with a deep fait^e and rememberance of
Crystis death and of the shedynge of his blood for our sins, those sensible
things to represent us the very body and blood of Christ, so that while
every man behold with his corporal eye those sensible sacramentis: the
inward eye of his faith may se and believe stedfastlye Christ offered and
dying upon the cro^se for his sy^nes, how his body was broken and his blood
shed for us, and has given himself wholl for us, himself to be all ours,
and what so ever he did, it to serve us, as to be made for us of his father our
rightwysnes, our wisdom, holiness, redemption satisfaccion etc. 1. Corinthians. 1.

Then let this preacher exhort them lovingly to draw nere unto this table of
the lord, and that not only bodily, but also (their hertes pourged by
faith, garnyshed with love and innocencye) every man to forgive ^ache other
unfeignedly, and to express or at lestwyse to endeavor them to follow that love
which Christ did set before our eyes at his last souper when he offered
himself willingly to dye for us his enymes. which incomparable love to
commend, bring in Paulis argumentis. Roma. 5. so that thus, this flock may
come to gyther, and be joined into one body, one spirit, and one people. This
done, let him come down: and accompaned honestely with other ministers come
forth reverently unto the lordis table, the congregation now set rownd about
it, and also in their other convenient seatis, the pastor exhortinge them all
to pray for grace faith and love, which all this sacrament signifyethe and
puttethe them in mind of. Then let there be read apertely and distinc^ly
the.6. cap. of Ioha^ in their mother tongue: whereby they may clearly
understand, what it is to eat Crystis flesh and to drink his blood. This
done, and some breyfe prayer and praise song or read, let one or other
minister read the.11. chap. of the first to the Corinths, that the people
might perceive clearly of those wordis the mystery of this Crystes souper, and
wherefore he did institute it

These with siche like preparacions and exhortacions had, I would every man
present should profess the articles of our faith openly in our mother
tongue, and confess his sins secretly unto God, praynge intierly that he
would now vouchsafe to have mercy upon him, receive his prayers, g^we his
heart unto him by faith and love increase his faith, give him grace to forgive
and to love his neighbor as himself, to garnesshe his life with pureness and
innocencye, and to co^fyrme him in all goodness and virtue. Then again it behooves
the curate to warn and exhort every man depely to consider and expende with
him self the sygnificacyon and substance of this sacrament so that he sytte
not down an ypocryte and a dissembler, since god is sercher of heart and raynes
thoughtis and effectis: and see that he come not to the holy table of the lord
without that faith which he professed at his baptism, and also that love which
the sacrament precheth and testifyeth unto his heart, lest he now fownde
gyltie the body and blood of the lord, that is to wit a dessembler with
Crystis death and sclau^derouse to the congregacyon, the body and blood of
Christ: receive his own da^pnacion. And here let every man fall down upon his
knees sayng secretly with al devotion their Pater noster in english, their
curate as ensample knelyng down before them. which done, let him take the
bread and efte the wine in the sight of the people herynge him with a loud
voice, with godly grauite, and aftir a cry^te^ relygiouse reverence rehersynge
distinctely the wordis of the lordis souper in their mother tongue. And them
distrybute it to the ministers, which taking the bread with great reverence,
will deuyde it to the congregacyon every man breking and rechyng it forth to
his next neghbour and member of the mystik body of Christ, other mynisters
following with the cuppis powering forth and dealing them the wine, all
together thus being now partakers of one bread and one cup, the thing
thereby sygnifyed and precheth prynted fast in their hertys, But in this mean
whyll, must the minister or pastor be readyng the communicacion that Christ
had with his disciples aftyr his souper. Io. 13. beginning at the washing of
their fete: so redynge till the bread and wine be eten and dronken and all the
accion done. And then let the^ all fall down on their knees geuinge thankis
highely unto god the father, for this benyfyt and death of his sone, whereby
now be faith every man is assuered of remyssion of his sins, as this
blessed sacrament had put them in mind and preched it them in this vtwarde
accion and souper. This done, let every man commend and give them self whole
to god, and depart. I would have herto put mi name, good reder, but I know well
that thou regardest not who writes, but what is written thou estemest the word
of the veryle, and not of the author. And as for M. Mock, who^ the veryte most
offends, and does but mock it out when he ca^ not soil it: he knowth my
name well inoughe. For the devil his gardia^, as him self says, comes every
day into purgatory, if thereby there any day at all, with his emnyouse and
enuyouse laughter, gnasshyng his tethe and gryning, tellyng the proctour with
his popis presoners, what so ever is here done or written a^sten them, both his
person and name to. And he is now, I dare say, as great with his guardian, as
ever he was.

If any man tell ye, lo here is Christ, or there is he believe him not, For there
shall a^yse false crystes false anointed geuyng great miracles. ^at. ^4.
Taken head, I have told ye before, if they ther^ore tell ye: ^o, he is in the
deser^t, go not forth: ^o he is in the preuye pixe, believe it not.

Imprinted at Nornburg by Niclas twonson.

5 April. An. 1533.


