: An exposycyon upon the.v.vi.vii. chapters of Mathewe / which three chapters
are the keye and the door of the scripture, and the restoring again of Moses
law corrupt by ye Scrybes and Pharyses. And the exposycyon is the restorynge
again of Christ's law corrupt by the Papystes. Item before the book, thou
have a prologe very necessary, containing the whole sum of the covenant made
between God and us, upon which we be baptized to keep it.

And after thou haste a table that ledeth the by the notes in the margentes,
unto all that is entreated of in the book.

CVN PRIVILEGIO.

Unto the reader.
HEre have thou dear Reader an Exposicion unto the.v.vi. and.vii. Chapters of
Mathewe. wherein Christ our spiritual Isaac diggeth again the wells of
Abraham, which wells the scrybes and phareses, those wicked and spiteful
philistines, hade stopped and filled up with the earth of their false
exposicyons. He opens the kingdom of heaven which they had shut up that other
men should not enter, as they them selves hade no lust to go in. He restores
the keye of knowledge which they hade taken away and broken the wards with
wrestynge the text contrary to his due and natural course, with their false
gloses. He pluckethe away from the face of Moses, the veil which the scrybes
and phareses hade spread thereon, that no man might perceive the bryghtnes of his
countenance. He wedeth out the thorns and busshes of their pharesaicall
gloses, wherewith they hade stopped up the narowe way and strayt gate, that few
could find them.

The wells of Abraham, are the scripture. Abraham's wellos The kingdom of
heaven who it is.
And the scripture may well be called the kingdom of heaven, which is eternal
life, and nothing save the knowledge of God the father and of his son Jesus
Christ. Johan. xvii. Moses face is the law in her right understanding. And
the law in her right understanding is the keye or at the leest way the first
and princypal keye to open the door of the scripture. The keye what it is. The
law is the way that ledeth to Christ.
And the law is the very way that bryngethe unto the door Christ, as it is
written. Gala. iii. The law was our scole master to bring us to Christ,
that we might be iustefyed by faith. And Roman. x. the end of the law, that
is to say, the thing or cause why the law was given, is Christ, to iustefye
all that believe. That is to say, the law was given to prove us unrighteous
and to drive us to Christ, law what ^er office is
to be made ryghtwyse through forgyuenes of sin by him. The law was given to
make the sin known say the saint Paul. Romans iiii. and that syn committed
under the law might be the more sinful. Roma. vii. The law is that thing,
which Paul in his inward man granted to be good, but was yet compelled often
times of his members to do those things which that good law condemned for
evil. Roma. vii.

The law makethe no man to love the law or less to do or commytte sin, but
gendereth more lust. Roma. vii. and increseth syn. Roma. v. For I can not but
hate the law, in as much as I find no power to do it, and it nevertheless
condemns me because I do it not. The law sets not at one with God, but
causes wrath. Roma. iii.

The law was given by Moses, but grace and veryte by Jesus Christ. Johan. i.
Behold though Moses gave the law, yet he gave no man grace to do it or to
understand it a right or wrote it in any man's heart, to consent that it was
good, and to wyshe after power to fulfill it. But Christ gives grace to do it
and to understand it a right, and writes it with his holy spirit in the
tables of the hearts of men, and makes it a true thing there and no ypocresy.

The law truly understand, The brase^ serpente. Number. xxi.
is those Fyrye serpe^tes that stonge the children of Israel with present
death. But Christ is the brazen serpent on whom who so ever being stonge
with conseyence of sin, looks with a sure faith, is heled immediately of
that styngynge and saved from the pains and sorrows of hell.

It is one thing to condemn and pronounce the sentence of death, The law and
faith be of contrary operacyons.
and to stynge the conscience with fear of everlasting pain. And it is
another thing to iustyfye from sin, that is to say, forgive and remytte
sin and to hele the conscience, and certefy a man not only that he is
delivered from eternal death, but also that he is made the son of God and
heir of everlasting life. The first is the office of the law. The second
partayneth unto Christ only through faith.

Now if thou give the law a false gloss and say, The scripture how it is
locke^ up.
that the law is a thing which a man may do of his own strength, even out
of the power of his frewyll. and that by the deeds of the law thou may
deserve forgyuenes of thy fore sins. Then dyed Chiste in vain, Galat, ii,
and is made almost of no stead, seeing thou art become thine own sauyoure.
Nether can Christ (where that gloss is admitted) be otherwise taken or esteemed
of Christen men (for all his passion and promyses made to us in his blood)
then he is of the turks, how that he was a holy prophet. and that he prays
for us as other saints do, save that we Christen think that he is somewhat
more in favor then other saints be (though we ymagyne him so proud that he
will not here us but through his mylde mother and other holy saints, which
all we count much more meke and merciful then he, but him most of might)
and that he has also an higher place in heaven, as the graye freres and
obseruauntes set him, as it were from the chynne upward above saint Fraunces.

And so when by this false interpretacion of the law, Christ which is the
door, the way and the ground or foundacyon of all the scripture, is lost
concerning the chefest frut of his passion, and no more seen in his own
likeness, then is the scripture locked up. and henceforth extreme darkness and
a mace, wheri^ if thou walk thou wotteste nether where thou a^te, nor canste
find any way out. It is a confused Chaos, and a mynglynge of all things
together with out order, every thing contrary to another. It is an hedge or
grove of briars. wherein if thou be caught, it is impossyble to get out, but
that if thou lowse thy self in one place 'thou art tangeled and caught in
another for it.

This wise was the scripture locked up of the scrybes and phareses, that the
Jews could not se Christ when he came, nor yet can. And though Christ with
these.iii. chapters did open it again, yet by such gloses, for our vnthanke
fulness sake that we hade no lust to live according. have we Christen lost
Christ again, and the understanding of the most clear text wherewith
Christ expounds and restores the law again.

For the ypocrytes what so ever seems ympossyble to their corrupt nature
vnrenued in Christ, that they cover over with the myste of their gloses, that
the light thereof might not be seen. As they have interpretate here the words
of Christ wherewith he restores the law again to be but good counselles
only, but no precepts that bind the conscience.

And thereto they have so rofelled and tangeled the temporal and spiritual
regimente together, Christ vse^ no te^pora^ regyment*
and made thereof such confusyon that no man can know the one from the other,
to the intent that they would seem to have both by the auctorite of Christ,
which never usurped temporal regyment unto him.

Notwithstanding (most dear reder) if thou read this exposycyon with a good
heart only to know the truth for the amendynge chefely of thyn own lyuinge
and then of other me^nes (as charity reqyreth where an occasyo^ is given) then
shall thou perceive their falshepe, and se their myste expelled with the
brightness of the incuytable truth.

Christ is a gift given only to the^ that love law and profess it.
A another conclusyon is this, all the good promyses which are made us through
out all the scripture for Christ's sake, for his love, his passion or
suffrynge, his blood shedynge or death al are made us on this condicyon and
covenant on our party, that we henceforth love the law of God, to walk
therein and to do it and fassyon our lives thereafter. In so much that who so
ever has not the law of God written in his heart, that he love it, have his
lust in it, and record therein night and day, He that professes not ^he law
^ath no par^e in the ^romyses.
understanding it as God has given it, and as Christ and the Apostles
expound it, The same has no part in the promyses, or can have any true
faith in the blood of Christ, because there is no promise made him, but to
them only that promise to keep the law.

Thou will happily say to me again, if I can not have my sins forgyuen
except I love the law, and of love endeavor my self to keep it, Yorkes ^o
not iu^yfye.
then the keeping of the law iustefyethe me, I answer that the argument is
false and but blind sophestrye, and like unto this argument, I can not have
forgyuenes of my sin except I have sinned, Ergo to have sinned is the
forgeuenes of syn. And it is like to this also, No nan can be heled of the
pokes but he that has the^, Ergo to have the pockes does heal the pockes. And
like sophestrye are these arguments, if thou wylt enter into life, keep the
commandments. Matthew. xix, Ergo the deeds of the law iustefye us. Item the
herars of the law are not ryghteous in the sight of God, but the doers of the
law shall be iustefyed. Roma. ii. Ergo the deeds of the law iustefye from syn.
And again we must al stand before the judgment seat of Christ, ii. Cor. v.
to receive every man according to the deeds which he did in the body. Ergo
the law or the deeds of the law iustefye.

These and all such are naughtye arguments For ye se that the king pardons
no murderar but on a condycyon, that he henceforth keep the law and do no more
so, and yet ye know well enough that he is saved by grace, favor and pardone,
yer the keeping of the law come. Howebeit, if he break the law afterward, he
falls again into the same danger of death.

Even so, The law by keeping ye law we continue in grace.
none of us can be received to grace but upon a condition to keep the law,
nether yet continue any longer in grace then that purpose lasts. And if we
break, the law we must sue for a new pardon, and have a new fight against
syn, hell and desperacion, yer we can come to a quiet faith again and feel
that the sin is forgiven. Nether can there be in the a stable and an undoubted
faith that thy syn is forgyuen the, except there be also a lustye courage in
thine heart and a trust that thou will sin no more for on that condycyon
that thou endeavor thy self to sin no more, is the promise of mercy and
forgyuenes made unto the.

And as thy love to the law increases so does thy faith in Christ, Faith,
love and hope are inseparable i^ this life.
and so does thine hope and longing for the life to come. And as thy love is
cold, so is thy faith weak, and thine hope and longing for the life to come
little. And where no love to the law is, their is nether faith in Christ for
the forgyuenes of sin, nor longing for the life to come, but instead of
faith, wicked ymagynacyon that God is so unrighteous that he is not offendyd
with sin. And instead of hope, a desyer to live ever here, and agredynes of
worldly voluptuousnes.

The law they that love not the law can not understand the scripture to
salvation.
And unto al such is the scripture locked up and made ympossyble to
understand. They may read it and rehearse the stories thereof, and dyspute of
it, as the turks may, and as we may of the turks law. And they may suck
pride ypocresye and all manner of poison therout to slaye their own souls, and
to put stomblynge blocks in other men's ways, to thruste them from the
truth, and to get such learning therein as in Arystotelles Etykes and moral
Philosophy, and in the precepts of old philosophers But it is ympossyble for
them to apply one sentence thereof to their souls health or to fassyon their
lives thereby for to plese God, or to make them to love the law or understand
it, either to feale the power of Christ's death and might of his resurrection
and swetnes of the life to come. So that they ever remain carnal and fleshly,
as thou haste an ensample of the Scrybes, Pharisees and Jews in the new
testament.

Care how God cares for the weak
A another conclusyon is this, of them that believe in Christ for the remyssyon
of syn and love the law, are a thowsande degrees and not so few, one
perfecter or weaker than another, of which a great sort are so feeble that
they can nether go forward in their profession and purpose, nor yet stand
except they be helped and borne of their stronger brethren, and tendyd as
young children are by the care of their fathers and mothers. And therefore does
God command the elder to care for the younger. As Paul techeth. Roma. xv.
saying. we that be stronger, ought to bear the feebleness of the weaker. And.
Cala. vi. brethren if any man be caught in any fault, ye that be spiritual
(and are grown in knowledge and have gotten the vyctorye of your flesh)
teach such with the spirit of softenes. not calynge them heretykes at the
first choppe, and thretenynge them with fire and faggotes. But alter alterius
onera portate (says he) et sic adimplebitis legem Christi, That is to say,
bear each others burden, and so shall ye fulfill the law of Christ. Even so
verily shall ye fulfill the law of Christ, and not with smytinge your
brethren and puttyng stumblinge blocks before their weak fete, and killing
their conscience, and making them more afraid of shadows and bugges, then to
break their fathers commandments, and to trust in words of wind and
vanyte more then in their fathers promise.

And for their sakes also, Rulers why they were or. dayned.
he has ordyned rulers both spiritual and temporal to teach them and
exorte them, to warn the^ and to keep occasyons from them, that with custom
of syn^ they fall not from their possessyon.

Now when they that take upon them to be the elder brethren, are become
ypocrytes, and turned to wyly foxes and cruel wolves and ferc^ lions, why God
scourges his.
and the officers be waxen evil and ser^uauntes to Mammon, mynystrynge their
office^ for their own lucre only, and not for the pro^fyte of their
brethren, but fauorynge all vyce^ wherbye they may have advantage. Then i^
God compelled of his fatherly pytye to scourg^ his weke him self, with
pouertye, oppressy on wrong, loss, danger, and with a thousand^ manner of
deseases, to bring them again y^ they be fallen, and to keep their hearts
fast to their professyon, So that Diligentibus deuz on^ usa co operantur in
bonum. Roma. viii. They that love God, that is to say, the law of God (for
that is to love God) unto them God turns al to the best, and scourges them
with the lusts of their own weakness to their own salvation*

Another conclusyon is this, God receaueth both perfyte and weak in like grace
for Chri^stes sake, as a father receive the all his children both small and
great in like love. the co^dycyons of the covenant.
He receaueth them to be his sons and makes a couenaun^ with them, to bear
their weakness for Christ's sake, till they be wa^en stronger, and how so often
they fall, yet to forgive them if they will turn again, and never to cast of
any, till he yield him self to syn, and take sinners part, and for affeccion
and lust to syn, fight agaynsts his own professyon to destroy it, And he
corrects and chastyseth his children ever at home with the rod of mercy and
love, to make them better, but he brings them not forth to be judged after
the condemnacyon of the law.

Another conclucyon is this. every man is ^wo men, flesh and spirit, which
to fight parpetually one against another, that a man must go either back or
forward, Flesh and spirit.
and can not stand ^onge in one state. If the spirit overcome the ^emptacyon,
then is she stronger, and the flesh ^eaker. But and if the flesh get a
custom, then ^s the spirit none other wise oppresses of the ^leshe, then as
though she had a mountain upon ^ere back, and as we sometime in our dremes
^hynke we bear heuyer then a mylstone on our ^reastes, or when we dreme now
and then that ^e would run away for fear, our legs seem ^enyer then lead.
Even so is the spirit oppres^ed and over lade^ of the flesh through custom
that she struggeleth and stryueth to get up and to ^reake louse in vain,
until the God of mercy ^hiche hereth her groan through Jesus Christ, ^ome and
louse her with his power, and put his ^rosse of trybulacyon on the back of the
flesh ^o keep her down, to minyshe her strength and ^o mortefye her.

wherefore every man must have his cross to ^ayle his flesh to, for the
mortefyenge of her. Cross.
Now if thou be not strong enough and dyscret ^herto, to take up thy cross
thy self and to ^ame thy flesh with prayer and fasting, watchynge ^ deeds of
mercy, holy medytacyons and reading the scripture and with bodily labor and
in withdrawynge all manner of pleasures from the flesh, and with exercyses
contrary to the vices which thou markeste thy body most enclyned to, and
with abstaynynge from all that courage the flesh against the spirit as
reading of wanton books, wanton communycacyon, foolyshe testynge and
effemynate thoughts, and talking of covetousness, which Paul forbyddeth
Ephesy. v. and magnyfyenge of worldly promocyons. And take I say up such a
cross by thine own self or by the counsel of other that are better learned
and exercysed then thou. Then must God put his cross of aduersyte upon the.
For we must have every man his cross in this world, or be damned with the
world.

To syn under grace and to syn under the law.
Of this ye se the dyfference between the syn of them that believe in the blood
of Christ for the remyssyon of sin, and consent and submit them selves
unto the law. and the sin of them that yield them selves unto syn to serve
it. etc. The first sin under grace ^ and their sins are venyall, that is
to say, forgeueable. The other sin under the law and under the damnacyon of
the law, and fight (for a great part of them) against grace and against the
spirit of grace, and against the law of God and faith of Christ, and corrupt
the text of the covenant with false gloses, and are dysobedyent to God and
therefore sin dedly.

Of this also ye se the dyfference between the lambs of true beleuers, Lambs.
Swyne. Dogs.
and between the unclean swyne that follow carnal lusts and fleshly lybertye,
and the churlyshe and ypocrytyshe dogs, which for the blind zele of their
own ryghtwysnes, persecute the ryghtwysnes of the faith in Christ's blood.
Swyne have no faith
The effemynate and careless swine which continue in their fleshlynes and cease
not to walow them selves in their old podell, think that they believe very
well in Christ's blood, but they are deceived (as thou may clerly perceive)
because they fear not the da^nacyon of evil works, nor love the law of good
works, and therefore have no part in the promise.

(...) and doggyshe ypocrytes which take upon them to work, Dogs love not
the law.
think they love the law, which yet they never saw, save under avayle. But
they be deceived (as thou may perceive) by that they believe not in Christ
for the forgeuenes of sin, wherbye also (I mean they that believe not) thou
may perceive that they understand not the law. For if they understood the
law, it would either drive them to Christ or make dyspare ymmedyatly.

But the true beleuers behold the law in her own lykenes and se the
ympossybilite there of to be fulfilled with natural power, True faith is coupled
with love to the law
and therefore fle to Christ for mercy, grace and power, and then of a very
thankefulnes for the mercy received, love the law in her own lykenes, and
submytte them selue to learn it and to proffyte therein and to do to morrow that
they can not do to day. Ye se also the dyfference of all manner of faythes. The
faith of the true beleuer is that God iustefyeth or forgeueth, and Christ
deserves it, The difference of faythes, and how it is to be understand faith
iustfyeth.
and the faith or trust in Christ's blood receueth it and certefyeth the
conscience thereof, and saves and delyuereth her from fere of death and
damnacion. And this is that we mean when we say, faith iustefyeth, that
faith (I mean in Christ and not in our own works) certefyeth the
conscience that our sins are forgeuen us for Christ's blood sake.

Faith of ypocrytes.
But the faith of ypocrytes is that God forgeueth and that works deserve it,
And that same false faith in their own works receaueth the mercy promised
to the merytes of their own works, And so Christ is utterly excluded And
thus ye se that faith is the thing that is affyrmed to iustefye, of all
parties, For faith in Christ's blood (which is Gods promise) quieteth the
conscience of the true beleuers, And a false faith or trust in works (which
is their own fayninge) begyleth the blind ypocrytes for a ceason, till god
for the greatness of their sin, Faith of swyne.
when it is full opens their eyes, and then they dyspare, But the swyne say,
God is so good that he will save deuelles and al, and damn no man perpetually,
what so ever he do.

Another co^clusyon is this, to believe in Christ for the remyssyo^ of sins,
and of a thankfulness for that mercy to love the law truly, that is to say, to
love God that is father of all and gives all, and Jesus Christ that is lord
of us all and bought us al, with all our hearts, souls, power and might, and
our brethren for our fathers sake (because they be created after his image)
and for our lord and master Christ's sake because they be the price of his
blood, and to long for the life to come, because this life can not be led
with out sin. These. iii. points (I say) are the professyon and relygion of
a Christen man, and the inward baptyme of the heart sygnified by the outward
washing of the body. The right baptyme.
And they be that spiritual charactter, badge or sign, wherewith God through
his spyrite marketh all his immedyatly and as soon as they be joined to Christ
and made members of his church by true faith.

The church of Christ then, The church of Christ
is the multitude of al the^ that believe in Christ for the remyssyon of syn.
and of a thankfulness for that mercy, love the law of God purely and without
gloses, and of hate they have to the syn of this world, long for the life to
come,

This is the church that can not err dampnablye nor any long time, or all of
them, but as soon as any questyon aryseth, the truth of Gods promise stereth
up one or other to teache them the truth of every thing needful to salvation
out of Gods word, and lyghteneth the hearts of the other true members to se
the same and to consent thereto.

And as all they that have their hearts washed with this inward baptyme of
the spyryte are of the church and have the keys of the scripture, ye and of
byndynge and lowsynge and do not err, Even so they that sin of purpose and
will not hear when their fautes be told them, but seek lybertyes and
pryuyleges to syne unpunished, and gloss out the law of God, and mayntene
ceremonies, tradicyons and customs, to destroy the faith of Christ, the same
be members of Satan, and all their doctrine is poison, error and darkness,
ye though they be Popes, Bysshoppes, Abbotes, Curates and doctoures of
dyuynyte, and though they can rehearse all the scripture without book, and
though they be seen in greek, Ebrewe and latyne, ye and though they so preach
Christ and the passion of Christ that they make the poor women weep and
howl again. ^hey that ^aue not ye ^awe wryt^en in their ^artes, can ^ot
vnder^tande the passion of Christ to ^aluacyon.
For when they come to the point that they should mynyster Christ's passion
unto the salvation of our souls, there they poison all together, and gloss out
the law that should make us feel our salvation in Christ, and drive us in that
point from Christ, and teach us to put our trust in our own works for the
remyssion and satysfaccion of our sins, and in the apysplay of ypocrytes
which sell their merits instead of christ's blood and passion.

A short repetynge.
Lo (now dear reader) to believe in Christ's blood for the remyssyon of sin
and purchasing of all the good promyses that help to the life to come, and to
love the law, and to long for the life to come, is the inward baptyme of the
soul, the baptyme that only aualeth in the sight of God, the new generacyon
and image of Christ, the only keye also to bind and lowse sinners. The
towchestone to try al doctrynes. The lantern and light that skatereth and
expels the mist and darkness of al ypocrisy. and preseruatyue against al
error and heresy, The mother of all good works.

The ernest of everlasting life and title whereby we challenge our enherytaunce.

And though faith in Christ's blood make the marriage between our soul and
Christ, and in properly ye marriage garment, ye and the sign Thau, that
defends us from the smiting and power of the evil aungelles, Thau.
and is also the rock whereon Christ's church is buylte, and whereon all that
is buylte, stondeth against all wether of wind and tempests, yet might the
professyon of the faith in Christ's hloude, Faith, ho^pe and ch^^rite are
in^seperabl^*
and of the love to the law and longing for the life to come, be called all
these things, were malice and froward understanding away, because that
where one of them is, there be all three and where all are not, there is none of
them. And because that the one is known by the other and is ympossyble to
know any of them truly and not be deceived, but in rispecte and comparyson of
the other.

For if thou will be sure that thy faith be perfect, Faith ^^^pe and
^^^ryte are.
then examyne thy self whether thou love the law. And in like manner, if thou
will know whether thou love the law aryght, then examyne thy self whether
thou believe in Christ only, known one by the other.
for the remyssyon of syn, and obtaynynge the promyses made in the scripture,
And even so compare thy hope of the life to come unto Faith and love, and to
hatyng the sin of this life, which hate, the love to the law engendereth in
the. And if they accompany not one another, all three, together, then be sure
that all is but ypocresye.

If you say, seeing faythee love and hope bethre virtues inseparable. Ergo
faith only iustefyeth not. I answer, though they be inseparable, The office
of faith.
yet they have seperable and sundry offices as it is above said of ye law an
faith, Faith only which is a sure and an undoubted trust in Christ, and in
the father through him, certefyeth the conscience that the sin is forgeuen
and the dampnacyon and impossybylyte of the law taken away (as it is above
rehearsed in the condycyons of the covenant) And with such persuasyons
mollefyeth the heart and makes her love God again and his law,

And as often as we sin, faith only keeps that we forsake not our
professyo^, and that love utterly quench not, and hope fail, and only makes
the peace again, For a true beleuer trusts in Christ only, and not in his
own works or ought else, for the remyssyon of syn.

The office of love.
And the office of love is to power out again the same goodness that she has
received of God, upon her neighbor, and to be to him as she feleth Christ to
her self. The office of love only is to have co^passyon and to bear with her
neighbor the burden of his infyrmytyes. And as it is written. 1. Pe. 4.
Operit multitudinem peccatorum, covers the multitude of sins. That is to
say, consydereth the infyrmytyes and interprets all to the best, and takes
for syn none at al, a thousand things of which the least were enough (if a
man loved not) to goo to law for and to trouble and unquiet an hoole town,
and sometime an hoole realm or two.

And the office of hope is to comfort in aduersyte and make pacyent, The
office of hope.
that we faint not and fall down under the Cross, or cast it of our backs.
And thus ye se that these.iii. inseparable in this life have yet seperable and
sundry offices and effects, as hete and dries being inseparable in the fire,
have yet their seperable operacyon. For he dries only expels the moystnes
of all that is consumed by fire and hete only destroys the coldenes.

For dries and cold may stand together, and so may hete and moystenes. It
is not all one to say the dries only, and dries that is alone, nor all one
to say, faith only, and faith that is alone.

Goo to then and desire God to prynte this professyon in thine heart, and to
increase it daily more and more, that thou may be full shape^ like unto the
image of Christ in knowledge and love, meke thy self and crepe low by the
ground, and cleue fast to the rock of this profession, and tie to thy shype
this anchor of faith in Christ's blood, with the gable of love, to east it
out against al tempests and so set up thy sail and get the to the main se
of Gods word And read here the words of Christ with this exposycyon
following, and thou shalt se the law, faith and works, restored each to his
right use and true meaning. And thereto the clear dyfference between the
spiritual regyment and the temporal, and shall have an ^ntraunce and open way
into the rest of all the scripture wherein and in all other things the spyryte
of veryte gyde the and thine understanding. So be it

The.v. chapter of Mathewe.
WHen he saw the people,
Christ Here in his first sarmone begins to restore the law of the ten
commandments unto her right understanding, against the scrybes and
Pharyses which were ypocrytes, false prophets and false preachers, and had
corrupt the scripture with the leaven of their gloses, Pouertye in spyryte
And it is not without a great mystery that Christ begins his preaching at
pouertye in spyryte, which is nether beggary nor against the possessynge of
richesse, But a virtue contrary to the vice of covetousness, the inordynate
desire and love of reches and putting trust in richesse.

Riches is the gift of God given man to maintain the degrees of this world,
Riches.
and therefore not evil ye and some must be poor and some rich, if we shall
have an order in this world. And God our father deuydeth richesse and pouertye
among his children according to his godly pleasure and wisdom. And as
richesse does not exclude the from the blessyng so does not pouertye certefye
the. But to put thy trust in the living God makes the heir thereof. For if
thou trust in the living god. Then if thou be poor, thou coueteste not to be
rich, for thou art certefyed that thy father shall mynystre unto the fode and
raiment, and be thy defender, and if thou have riches, thou know that they
be but vanyte, and that as thou brough test them not into the world, so
shalt thou not carye them out, and that as they be thine to day, so may they
be another man's to morrow, and that the favor of God only both gave and
also keeps the and them, and not thy wisdom or power, and that they nether
ought else can help at need, save the good will of thy heavenly father only,
Happy and blessed then are the poor in spyryte, that is to say the rich that
have not their confidence nor consolacyon in the vanyte of their richesse, and
the poor that desire not inordynatly to be rich, but have their trust in the
living God for fode and raiment and for all that partayneth either to the body
or the soul, for there is is the kingdom of heaven.

Rich in spirit.
And contrary wise, unhappy and accursed and that with the first and depest of
all cursses, are the rich in spirit, that is to say, the couetouse that
being rich and trust in their richesse, or being poor long for the
consolacyon of richesse, and comfort not their souls with the promyses of
their heuenlye father, confyrmed with the blood of their Lord Christ. For unto
them it is harder to enter into the kyngedome of heaven, then for a camel to
enter through the eye of an nedle. Mar. 10. No they have no part in the
kyngedome of Christ and God. Ephe. v. Therefore it is euydent why Christ so
dylygentlye warns all his to be ware of covetousness and why he admytted none
to be his dyscyples except he first forsake altogether. For there was never
covetous person true yet either to God or man.

If a covetous man be chosen to preach gods word, Covetousness is a thing
contrary to the word of god and to the mynysters of the same.
he is a false prophet immedyatlye. If he be of the lay sort, so joins he
him self unto the false prophets, to persecute the truth. Covetousness is
not only above all other lusts those thorns that choke the word of God in
them that posesse it. But it is also a dedelye enemy to all that interpret
gods word truly. All other vices though they laugh them to scorn that
talk godly, yet they can soffre them to live and to dwell in the contre. But
covetousness can not rest as long as there is one that cleueth to gods word
in all the land.

Take heed to thy preacher thereof, By couetousenes is a false prophet chefely
known
and be sure, if he be covetous and gape for promocyon, that he is a false
Prophet and leueth the scripture, for all his c^yenge fathers, fathers holy
church and fyftene hundred years, and for all his other holy pretenses.


This mourning is also in the spyryte, and no kynne to the sour lokynge of
Ypocrytes nor to the impacie^t weywardnes of those fleshly which ever whine and
complain that the world is naught, because they can not obtain and enjoy
their lusts therein, Nether forbydyth in always to be merry and to laugh, and
make good chere now and then, to forget sorrow, that ouermoche heaviness swalowe
not a man clean up For the wise man says, sorrow has cost many their lives.

And prouer.xvii. and heavy spirit dries up the bones. And Paul commands.
Phili. iiii. to rejoice ever. And Roma. xii. he says rejoice with them that
rejoice, and sorrow with them that sorrow, and weep with the^ that weep, which
seem two contraryes.

Godly mourninge
This mourning is that cross without which was never any dysciple of Christ or
ever shall be, For of what so ever state or degree thou be in this world, if
thou profess the Gospel, there follows the a cross (as warmenesse
accompanyeth the son shynynge) under which thy spy ryte shall groan and
mourn secretlye, not only because the world and thine own flleshe carry the
away ^lene contrary to the purpose of thine heart. But also to se and behold
the wretchedness and mys fortunes of thy brethren, for which (because thou
loueste them as well as thy self) thou shalt mourn and sorrow no less then
for thy self. Though thou be king or Emperor, yet if thou knoweste Christ
and god through Christ, and entendeste to walk in the sight of God, and to
mynyster thine office truly, thou shalt (to keep justice with all) be
compelled to do daily that, which thou art no less loathe to do, then if
thou shuldeste cut of arm hand or any other member of thine own body, ye
and if thou wylt^ follow the right way and nether torn on the right hand nor
on the left, thou shalt have ymmedyatly thine own subjects, thine own
servants, thine own lords, thine own councillors and thyn own prophets
thereto against the. Unto whose froward malice and stouburnesse, thou shalt
be compelled to permytte a thousand things against thy conscience, not able
to resyste them, at which thine heart shall blede inwardly, and shall sawse
thy sweet soppes which the world weneth thou haste, with sorrows ynowe and
still murnyng, studieng either alone or else with a few friends secretly night
and day, and syghynge to God for help / mytygate the fury ouse frowardnes of
the^ who^ thou art not able to wtstand that al go not after ye will of the
ungodly, what was Dauyd compelled to soffer all the days of his life of his
own servants the sons of Seruya, Beside the mychaunses of his own
children? And how was our king Johan forsaken of his own lords / King.
Johan.
when he would have put a good and godly reformacy on in his own land? How
was Henry the second compased in like manner of his own prelates whom he hade
promoted of naught / Henry the second.
with the secret conspyracye of some of his own temporal lords with them? I
spare to speak of the murning of the true preachers and the poor comen people
which have no another help / but the secret hand of God, and the word of
his promise.

But they shall be comforted of al their trybulacyon and their sorrow shall be
turned into joy and that infynyte and everlasting in the life to come. Nether
are they without comfort here in this world, for Christ has promised to
send them a comfortour to be with them for ever even the spirit of truth
which the world knows not. John. xiiii, And they rejoice in hope (of the
comfort to come) Roma. xii.

And they overcome through we faith / as it is written Hebre. xi. the saynctes
through faith overcame kyngedomes and obtained the promyses. Faith is our
victory
And.1. Io. v. this is the vyctory that over comes the world, even our faith.
But the blind world nether seyth our comfort nor our trust in God, nor how god
through faith in his word, helps us and makes us overcome.

How overcome they (wylt thou say) that be all ways persecuted and ever
slain? verily in every battle sum of them that win the field / be slain,
yet they leave the vyctorye unto their dear friends for whose sakes they took
the fight upon them / and therefore are conqueroures, seeing they obtain their
purpose and maynteyne that they fought for. The cursed rich of this world
which have their joy and comfort in their riches / have sense the beginning
fought against them / to wede them out of the world. But yet in vain. For
though they have all ways slain sum yet those that were slain / wanne the
vyctorye for their brethern with their death / and ever increased the number
of them. And though they seemed to dye in the sight of the folysshe / yet they
are in peace and have obtained that everlasting kingdom for which they
fought. And beside all this when God plageth the world for their sin / The
mourners for ryghtwysnes are saved w^ God takes vengeance on the unright wise.
these that mourn and sorrow are marked with the sign of Thau in their fore
heddes and saved from the plage / that they peryshe not with the wicked / as
thou seeste Ezechiel. 9. and as lot was delivered from among the Sodomytes.

And contrary wise / cursed are they that laugh now, that is to say / which
have their joy, solase and comfort in their riches / for they shall sorrow and
weep / Luke. 6. And as it was answered the rich man, Luke. 16. son remember
how that thou receauedest thy good days in thy life time, and Lazarus
likewise evil*

And therefore is he comforted and thou tormented.


Mekenes possesses the earth.
By the earth understand all that we possess in this world, which al god will
keep for us if we be soft and meke. And what so ever trouble arise, yet if we
wylbe pacient and abide, the end will go on our side, as it is written in the
xxxvi. Psalm. the wicked shall be weded out, but they that abide the lords
layser, shall enherete the earth. And again, with in a while the wicked shall be
gone, thou shall behold the place where he was and he shall be away / but the
meke or soft shall enheryte the earth. Even as we say / be still and have thy
will / and of little medlynge comes much rest / for a pacyent man shall were
out all his enemies.

It is impossyble to dwell in any place where no dylplesure should be done
the* If it be done vnwyllyngly / as when thy neighbors beasts break into thy
corn by some chance against his will. then it is reason that thou be soft
and forgive. If it be done of malice and selffe will / then with reuengynge
thou do but with poderynge in the fyere make the flame greter / and geuest
an occasyon of more evil to be done the. If any man rail on the and rebuke
the / answer not again / and the hete of his malice shall dye in it self and
goo out ymmedyatly / as fire does when no more wode is laid thereon. If the
wrong that is done / be greater then thou art able to bear / trust in God
and complain with all mekenes unto the offycer that is set of God to forbid
such vyolence, And if the gentylmen that dwell about the / be tyrauntes / be
ready to help to fet home their wode / to plowe their land / to bring in
their heruest and so forth / and let thy wife vyset my Lady now and then
with a cople of hens or a fat capon and such like / and then thou shall
possess all the remmanaunt in reste^ or else one quarrel or other may be pycked
to the, to make the quyte of all together.

Chose whether thou will with softnes and sofferynge have God on thy side /
ever to save the and to give the ever enough / and to have a good conscience
and peace on the earth / or with furyousnesse and ympacyency to have God
against the and to be polled a little and little of altogether / and to have an
evil conscience and never rest on the earth, and to have thy days shortened
thereto, God has promised if thou he meke and soft, and soffer a little
persecucyon to give the not only the life to come / Hundred fold.
but also an hundred fold here in this life, that is to say to give the his
own self and to be thy protector and to minyster the ever enough, which may
of right be called an hundred fold, and that is a treasure passing the
treasure of al princes.

Finally Christ teaches here how every man must live for him self among
them to whom he is a neighbor / The pryuat person.
and in pryuat matters in which he is but as a neyboure (though he be a
king) and in which thou canste not be to soft But and if thou be an offycer
/ may not aduenge But the officer must.
then thou must be good, kind and mercyful, but not a mylkesoppe and
neegligent, As to whom thou art a father, them must thou rule and make obey
and that with sharpenes. if softenes will not be hard, and so in all other
offices.


Ryghtwysnes.
Ryghteousnes in this place is not taken for the pryncypall ryghtuousnes of a
christen man through which the person is good and accepted before God. For
these.viii. points are but doctrine of the fruits and works of a christen man
before which the faith must be there, to make ryghteous without all
deseruynge of works and as a tree out of which al such fruits and works must
spring. wherefore understand here the outward ryghteousnes before the world
and true and faithful dealing each with other / and just executynge of the
offices of all manner degrees / and meke obedyence of all that are under power /
So that the meaning is / happy are they which not only do their duties to
all men, but also study and help to the vttermoste of their power with word,
dead, council and exortynge, that all other deal truly also aceordynge to
the degree that every man bears in the would, and be as desyerous to further
good order order and ryghtuous dealing, as the hongrye and thyrsty be desirous
to eat and drink.

And not that it is not for naught that he says hongre and thurst. For except
thy soul hongre and thyrste for this ryghteuosnes of her new nature, as the
body does for meat and drink of his old nature, the deuell and the
children of this world (which can not soffer that a man either deal truly him
self or help other) will so resyste the, Monk.
plage the and so weary the, that thou haddeste lever of very mystruste and
desperacion that ought should be better, Monks. why they run into relygyon.
forsake al and make thy self a monk or a friar, ye and to run into a
strange country and leave all thy fre^des, then to abide in the world, and to
let it chose whether it will synke or swyme.

But to comfort us, that we faynte not or be weary of well doing, Christ
promyseth that all that have this thruste and hongre, shall have their lust
satysfied, and be translated into a kingdom, where none vnryghtwysnes is, be
sides yt thou shall here and se at length many come to the ryghtway and help
with the, and many things that cannot be al together me^ded, yet somewhat
better and more tolerable so that all ryghtwysnes shall not be quenched.

And contrary wise cursed be all they that are full, as Luke in the.vi. Luc. vi.
says ^ that is to say they pocrytes which to avoid all labor, so row,
care, comberaunce and, Monks be cursed.
sofferynge with their brethren, get them to dens to live at rest and to
fill their belyes, the wealth of other men not regarded. No, it were a grefe to
them that other were better, that they alone may be taken for holy, and that
who so ever will to heaven must bye it of them, ye they be so full, that they
compare them selves to other poor sinners and lo^^ as narowly on them as the
phareseye did on the publycane, thanking God that he alone was good, and the
other evil. Cursed are they yet for all their fulness, for they shall honger with
everlasting honger where none shall give them to eat, nor they have any
refresshynge of their pains.


To be mercyful what ^t is.
To be merciful, is to have compassyon and to feale a another man's desease,
and to mourn with them that mourn, and soffer with them that soffer, and to
help and socoure them that are in trybulacyon and aduersyte, and to comfort
them with good council and wholesome instruccyon and loving words. And to be
merciful, is louyngly to forgive them that offended the as soon as they
knowledge their mysdoynge and axe the mercy. To be mercefull / is pacyently
long to abide the conuersyon of sinners with a lusty courage and hope that God
will at the last convert them, and in the mean time to pray instauntlye for
them, and ever when he seythe an occasyon / to exhort them, warn them /
monyshe them and rebuke them. And to be merciful / is to enterprete all to the
best. and to look through the fyngers at many things and not to make a grievous
sin of every small tryfle / and to soffer and forbere in his own cause the
malyse of them that will not repent nor be a known of their wekednes, as
long as he can soffer it, and as long as it ought to be soffred, and when he
can no longer, then to complain to them that have auctoryte to forbyde wrong
and to punyshe such evil doers.

But the ypocrytes clean contrary condemn all them for grievous sinners, Monks
save them only that bye their holiness of them, And because they will soffer
with no man, they get them to silence. And because they will help no man ^ll
that they have (they say) partayneth to the covent and is none of theyrs.
Couent^
And if they be offended, they will be aduenged immedyatly. And to cloak, that
they should not seem to aduenge them selves, the matter (say they) pa^tayneth
to God and holy church, or to some saint or to one or other holy thing, as
if thou smite one of them on the one cheke, he will turn to him the other yer
he will aduenge him self. Oil. Holy oyl^ must be aduenged.
But the iniurye of the holy Oil wherewith he was anointed, that must he
aduenge, and that with a spyrytuall punyshmente / that thou must be accursed
as black as a colyer and delivered to Satan. And if thou come not in and axe
absolucyon and offer thy self to penance and to paynge thereto, they well not
soffer till the deuell fetch the. But will deliver the to the fire in the
mean time. And al for zele of ryghtwysnes (say they.)

^ele of ^yghtwys^es what ^t is.
O ypocrytes / the Zele of ryghtwysnes is to hongre and thryste for
ryghteousnes, as it is above descrybed, that is, to care and study and to do
the vttermoste of thy power, that all things went in the right course and due
order both through all degrees of the temporalty and also of the spyrytualty,
and to Ieoperde life and goods thereon.

Care how ^e spiritual ^are for ye ^e^poral co^e^ wealth
All the world can bear record what pain ye take and how ye care for the
temporal comune welthe, that all degrees therein did and had their duty, and
how ye put your lives in adventure to preach the truth, and to inform
lords and princes and to cry upon them to fear God and to be learned, and to
mynyster their offices truly unto their subjects, and to be merciful and an
exsample of virtue unto them / And how help ye that youth were brought up
in learning and virtue / and that the pore were provided for of fode and
raiment etc. And how provide ye that your prestes be al learned, and preach
and do their duties truly every man in his paryshe? how provide ye that sects
arise not to poole the people and lead them out of the way under a color of
long praynge and ypocretyshe holiness, living them selves idle and being
utterly unto the comenwealthe improfytable? who smells not the sweet odoure
of chastyte that is among you? what ryghtuousnes is in your sanctuaryes, and
what indyfferent equity is in all your exempcyons, pryueleges and lybertyes? By
your works we Judge you and your Zele to ryghtuousnes. and not by your
sophystycall sottle reasons, with which ye would clawe our ears, bleare our
eyes and begyle our wits, to take your tyrannous covetous crudelyte for the
Zele of ryghtuousnes.

Finally he that will not be merciful, to be blessed of God and to obtain
mercy of him both here and in the life to come, let him be accursed with the
unmercifully and to him be judgment without mercy / according to the words of
saint James in the second chapter of his Epistle.

Blessed be the pure in heart, for
That which enters in to a man defyleth not a man. But the things that
defyle a man / proceade first out of his heart / as thou may se Mat. xv.
Thence come out evil thoughts says (Christ) as murder / adultrye,
fornycacyon, thief, false wytnessynge and blasphemies, These are the things
which make a man foul A man then is not foul in the syghte of God, The
fylthynes of the heart what
till his heart be foul. And the fylthynes of the heart are thoughts that
study to break gods commandments, The pureness of the heart what.
wherefore the pureness of the heart is the consenting and studyous purpose to
keep the law of God and to mean truly in all thy words and works, and to do
the^ with a true intent.

It follows then that thou may be pure hearted and therewith do all that God
has commanded or not forboden. Thou may be pure hearted and have a wife
and get children, be a judge and condemn to death them that have deserved it
/ hang or heed evil doers, after they be by a just process condemned. Thou
may be pure hearted, and do al ye drudge in the world. Lot was pure hearted
among the Sodomytes. Nycodemus being in the council among them that
conspyred the death of Ghryst was pure hearted and consented not with them to
the death of that innocent.

If the law be written in thine heart it will drive the to Christ, which is the
end of the law to iustefy all that believe. To. x. And Christ will show the
his father, for no man sees the father but the son, and he to whom the
son will show him Luke. 10. If thou believe in Christ, that he is thy
sauyoure, that faith will lead the in ymmedyatlye and show the God with a
lovely and an amiable countenance, and meke the feale and se how that he is
thy father, all mercyful to the and at one with the, and thou his son and
hyghlye in his favor and grace, and sure that thou pleseste him, when thou do
este an hundred things which some holy people would suppose them selves
defiled. if they should but think on them. And to se God is the blesshynge of
a pure heart.

Impure and unclean hearted then are all they that study to break Gods
commandments, Impure hearted are all that believe not in Christ to be
iustefyed by him. Impure hearted are al ypocrytes that do their work for a
false purpose either for praise, profit or to be iustyfyed thereby, which
painted sepulchers (as Christ calls them) can never se God, Impure ha^^ted
who?
or be sure that they be in state of grace and that their works be accept,
because they have not Gods word with them, but clean against them.

Blessed are ye peacemakers, for they
To enheryte this blyssynge, Peace ma^kyng wha^
it is not only required that thou have peace in thy self, and that thou take
all to the best, and be not offended lightly and for every small tryfle, and
all way redye to forgive, not sow no dyscorde nor aduenge thine own wrong.
But also that thou be fervent and diligent to make peace and to go between.
where thou know or herest malice and envy to be, or see bate or strife to
arise between person and person, and that thou leave nothing unsought, to set
them at one.

And though Christ here speak not of the temporal sword, but techeth how
every man shall live for him self toward his neighbor / Princes what they
ought to do yer they make war*
yet Princes (if they will be Gods children) must not only give no cause of
war nor begin but also (though he have a just cause) soffer him self to be
entreated, if he that gave the cause repent, and must also seek all ways of
peace before he fight. How be it, when al is sought, and nothing will help,
then he ought and is bound to defend his land and subjects, and in so
doing he is a piece maker, as well as when he causes thieves and murderers to
be punished for their evil doing and brekynge of the common peace of his land
and subjects.

If thou have peace in thy self and love the peace of thy brethern after
this manner, so is god through Christ at peace with the, and thou his beloved
son and heir also.

Moreover if the wrong done to the, be greter then thou may bear, as when
thou art a person not for thy self only. But in respect of other, in what
soever worldly degree it be, and have an office committed the, then (when thou
haste warned with all good manner him that did it, and none ame^dement will be had)
keep peace in thine heart and love him still, and complain to them that are set
to reform such things, and so art thou yet a peace maker and still the son
of God, But if thou aduenge thy self or desyreste more then that such wrong
be forboden, thou synnest against God, ^engeau^ce ^artayneth ^o God ^nely.
in taking the auctoryte of god upon the with out his commandment. God is
father over all, and is of right Judge over al his children, and to him only
pertayneth all aduengynge, who therefore without his commandment aduengeth
either with heart or hand / the same does cast him self into the hands of
the sword and loses the right of his cause.

And on the other side, cursed be the peace breaks, picquarels, whysperers,
backebyters sowers of dyscorde, dyspraysers of them that he good to bring them
out of fauore, interpreters to evil that is done for a good purpose, fynders
of faults where none is, sterers up of princes to battle and war, and above
al cursed be they that fasly belly the true prechers of gods word to bring
them into hate, and to shede their blood wrongfully for hate of the truth, For
all such are the children of the deuel.

Blessed are they that suffer persecucyon
If the faith of Christ and law of God in which two all ryghtuousnes is
contained, be written in thine heart, that is, if thou believe in Christ to be
iustefyed from syn or for remyssyon of syn, and consentest in thine heart, to
the law that it is good, holy and just and thy duty to do it and submytest
thy self so to do, and there up on go forth and testefyeth that faith and
law of ryghteousnes openly unto the world in word and dead. Then will
Satan stere up his members against the, and thou shalt be persecuted on
every side. But be of good comfort and faynte not. Call to mind the saying
of Paul. 2. Tymo. 3. how all that will live godly in christ Jesus, shall so fer
persecucyon, Remember how all the prophets that went before the, were so dealt
with, Luke. vi. Remember the ensamples of the apostels, and of Christ him
self, and that the dyscyple is no better then his master, and that Christ
admytteh no descyple which not only leueth not all, peace, the peace of
Christ is peace of conscience
but also takes his cross to, we be not called to a soft living and to
peace in this world. But unto peace of conscience in God our father through
Jesus Christ, and to war in this world.

Moreover comfort thy self with the hope of the blessing of the enherytaunce
of heaven, there to be gloryfyed with Christ if thou here soffer with him. For
if we be like Christ here in his passions, and bear his image in soul and
body, and fight manfully ye / that Satan blot it not out / and soffer with
Christ for berynge record to ryghtuousnes, then shall we be like to him in
glory. Saint Johan says in the.iii. Chapter of his first pystle. yet it
apereth not what we shall be. But we know / that when he apereth / we shall be
like him. And Paul. Phil. 3. our conuersacyon is in heaven, whence we look for
a savior, the Lord Jesus Christ which shall change our vile bodies and make
them like his glorious body.

It is an happy thing to soffer for ryghteousnes sake / but not for
unrighteousness. For what praise is it (say the Peter in the second of his
first epistle) though ye soffer, when ye be bofetted for your offenses,
wherefore in the fourth of the same he says, se that none of you soffer as a
murtherar or a these or an evil doer or a busye body in other men's matters,
Such sofferynge gloryfyeth not God, nor thou art thereby heir of heaven.
Beware therefore that thou deserve not that thou sofferest. But if thou do,
Pain No bodily pain can be a satysfaccyon to God save Christ's passion.
then beware much more of them that would bear the in hand, how that such
sofferynge should be satysfaccyon of thy sins and a deseruynge of heaven. No,
sofferynge for ryghtuousnes (though heaven be promised theyrto) yet does it
not deserve heaven, nor yet make satysfaccyon for the fore sins, Christ does
both twane. But and if thou repent and believe in Christ for the remissyon of
sin, and them confess, not only before God, but also open before all that
se the soffer / how that thou haste deserved that thou soffrest, for breaking
the good and ryghtwyse law of thy father, and then take thy punyshement
patiently / as an wholesome medecyne to hele thy flesh that it sin no more /
and to fear thy brethern that they fall not in to like offense / as Moses
teaches every where. Then as thy pacyence in sofferynge is plesaunt in the
sight of thy brethren which beholds, petye the and soffer with the in their
hertes, even so is it in ye sight of God, and it is to the a sure token that
thou haste true faith and true repentance.

And as they be blessed which suffer for ryghtousnes, even so are they accursed
which run away and let it be trodden under the fete / and will not suffer for
the faith of their Lord and law of their father, nor stand by their
neighbors in their just causes.

Blessed are ye, when they reuyle you, and persecute you and say all manner of
evil saynges against you for my sake, and yet lie. Rejoice and be glade, for
your reward is great in heaven. Even so verily they persecuted the prophets
that were before you.
He^^ seyst thou the vttermoste what a Christen man must look for. It is not
enough to soffer for ryghtwysnes. But that no bytternes o^ poison be left out
of thy cup, thou shalt be reuyled and rayled upon, what the most cruel
persecucyo^ is
and even when thou art condemned to death then be excomunycate and delivered
to satan, depryued the felowshype of holy church, the company of the angels
and of thy part in Christ's blood* and shall be cursed down to hell, defied,
detestat, and execrate with all the plasphemous ralynges that the poison hearts
of ypocrytes ca^ think or ymagyne, and shall se before thy face when thou
go to thy death, that all the world is persuaded and brought in believe that
thou have said and done that thou never thoughteste, and that thou dyest for
that thou art as gyltles of as the child that is unborn.

well though inequite so hyly prevail, and the truth for which thou dyest,
be so low kept under and be not once known before the world in so much that
it seems rather to be hyndered by thy death, then (furthered) which is of all
greffes the greateste) yet l^^ not thine heart fail the nether dyspare, as
though God hade forsaken the or love the not. But comfort thy self with old
ensamples, how God has sufred all his old friends to be so entreated, Set
the ensample of Christ before the.
and also his only and dear son Jesus* whose ensample above all other set
before thine eyes, because thou art sure he was beloved above all other, that
thou doubt not, but thou art beloved also, and so much the more beloved, the
more thou art like to the image of his ensample in sufferynge.

Did not the ypocrytes watch him in all his sermones, to trappe him in his own
words? was he not subtellye aposed, whether it were lawful to pay trybute to
Caesar? were not all his words wrong reported? were not his miracles ascrybed
to Belsabub? said they not, he was a Samarytane and had a deuell in him? was
he not called a breaker of the Sabothe, a wine drynker, a friend of publicans
and sinners? did he ought wherewith no fault was found, and that was not
interpret to be done for an evil purpose? was not the pretense of his death,
the destroynge of the temple, to bring him in to the heart of all men, was he
not thereto accused of treson, that he for bade to pay trybute to Caesar? and
that he moved the temple to insurreccyon? Rayled they not on him in the
bytterest of all his passion, as he hanged on the Cross, saying, save thy
self thou that saueste other, come down from the Cross and we will beleuen
in the, fie wretch that destroyest the temple of God.

Yet was he beloved of God, and so art thou his cause came to light also / and
so shall thine at the last, ye and thy reward is great in heaven with him, for
thy deep sofferynge.

Cursed. Most accursed? who?
And on the other side, as they be cursed which leave ryghtuousnes destytute and
will not soffer therewith / so are they most accursed which know the
truth, and yet not only fle there from because they will not soffer. But also
for lucre, become the most cruel enymyes thereof and most suttyll
persecuters, and most falslye lie thereon also.

works iustyfye not.
Finally though God when be promyseth to bless our works / do bind us to
work if we will obtain the blessing or promise / yet must we beware of this
pharesa^cal pestylence / to think that our works did deserve the promyses.
For what so ever God commands us to do, that is our duty to do, though
there were no such promise made to us at all. The promise therefore comes not
of the deseruynge of the worker (as though God had need of ought that we
could do) but of the pure mercy of God, to make us the more willing to do
that is our duty. etc. For if when we had done all that God commaundethe us to
do he then gave us up in to the hands of tyrauntes and killed us / and sent
us to purgatory (which men so greatly fear) or to hell / and all the
aungelles of heaven with us / he did us no wrong nor were unrighteous for ought
that we or they could calynge of deseruynge, how so ever that God uses his
creatures / he ever abides ryghtuous, till thou can prove that after he has
bound him self with his own word of mercy, he then break promise with them
that keep covenant with him. So now if naught were promised / naught could
be callenge, what so ever we did And therefore the promise comes of ye goodness
of the promyser only / and not of the deseruyng of those works of which God
has no need / and which were no less our duty to do / though there were no
such promise.

ye be the salt of the earth. But if the salt be waxen unsavory, what can be
salted therewith, It is henceforth nothing worth. But to be cast out and to
be trodden under foot of men.
The office of an Apostle and true preacher is to salt^ not only the corrupt
manners and conuersacyons of erthye people / but also the roten heart within and
all that spryngeth out thereof / their natural reason / their will / their
understanding and wisdom / ye and their faith and believe and all that they
have ymagyned without Gods word, concerning ryghtuousnes iustifyenge /
satysfaccyon and sercynge of God. And the nature of salt is to byte / frete and
make smart. And the sick pacientes of this world are marvelous impacyent, so
that though with great pain they can suffer their gross sins to be
rebuked under a fassyon / It is a ieopardous thing to salt ypocrysye.
as in a parable a far of, yet to have their ryghtuousnes their holiness and
serving of God and his saints / dysalowed / improued / and condemned / for
damnable and deuely she / that may they not abide In so much that thou must
leave the saltynge or else be prepared to suffer again, even to be called a
rayler / sedicyous / a maker of dyscorde and a troubeler of the common peace, ye
a scysmatyke and an heretyke also / and to be lied upon that thou have done
said that thou never though test / and then to be called (coram nobis) and to
sing a new song and forswere saltynge or else to be sent after thy fellows
that are gone before / and the way thy master went.

Salt who is mete to salt.
True preaching is a saltynge that stereth up persecucyon, and an office that
no man is mete for save he that is seasoned him self before with pouertye in
spyryte / softenes / mekenes / pacyence / mercyfulnes / pureness of heart and
honger of ryghtuousnes and longing for persecucyon to / and has al his hope
/ comfort and solace in the blessing only / and in no wordly thing,

Nay will some say / a man might preche long enough without persecucyon / ye
and get favor to / if he would not meldle with the pope / byshopes / prelates
and holy gosty people that live in contemplacyon and solytarynes nor with
great men of the world. I answer / true preaching is saltynge and all that is
corrupt must be salted. And those persons are of all other most corrupt, and
therefore may not be left untouched.

The popes perdones must be rebuked / the abuse of the mass / of the
sacramenentes and of all the ceremonies must be rebuked and salted. And
selling of merytes and of prayers must be salted. The abuse of fasting and of
pylgrimage must be salted. All ydolatrye and false faith must be rebuked. And
those freres that teach men to believe in saint Fraunces cote / how that they
shall never come in hell or purgatory / if they be buried therein / may not be
passed over with silence.

The pain and grefe of saltynge made monks fle to their cloysture. Monks why
thy run to cloystures
Nay (say they) we went thither of pure devotion to pray for the people. ye
but for all that the more ye increase and the more ye multyplye your prayers /
the worse the world is. That is not our fault (say they) but theyrs / that
they dyspose not them selves but continue in sin / and so are ynapte to
receive the influence of our prayers O ypocrytes if ye were true salt and had
good hearts and loved your neighbors (if dead men be neighbors to them
that are a live) and would come out of your dens and take pain to salt and
season them, ye should make a great many of them so apt, that your prayers
might take effect. But now seeing as ye say they be so unsavory that your
prayers be to them hem improfitable / though their goods be to you profitable
/ and yet ye have no compassion to come out and salt them / it is many feste
that ye love not them, not theyrs, and that ye pray not for them / but under
the color of praynge mock them and rob them.

Finally salt which is the true understanding of the law / of faith / and of
the intent of all works / has in you lost her virtue / nether be there any
so unsavory in the world as ye are / nor any that so sore kycke against true
saltyng as ye / and therefore to be cast out and trodden under foot and despised
of al me^ / by the ryghtuous judgment of God.

Spirytuallye / why they be despised.
If salt have lost his saltnes, it is good for nothing but to be trodden under
foot of men That is / if the preacher which for his doctrine is called salt /
have lost the nature of salt / that is to say, his sharpenes in rebukynge all
unrighteousness / al natural reason / natural wit and understanding / and all
trust and confydence in what so ever it be / save in the blood of Christ / he
is condemned of God and dysalowed of all them that cleave to the truth. In
what case stand they then that have benefyces and preach not? verily though
they stand at the alter / yet are they excomunycate and cast out of the
living church of almyghtye God. And what if the doctrine be not true salt?
verily then is it to be trodden under foot. Ceremonies must be salted.
As must all weary she and unsavory ceremonies which have lost their
sygnyfycacyons, and not only teach not and are become unprofitable and do no
more service to man. But also have obtained auctoryte as God in the heart of
man, that man serves them and puts in them the trust and confydence that he
should put in God his maker thorough Jesus Christ his redemer. Are the
instytucyons of man better then Gods ye are Gods ordynaunces better now then
in the old time? The prophets trodden under foot and defied the temple of God
and the sacrefyces of God and all ceremonies that God had ordained, with
fastings and prayenges, and all that the people perverted and comytted
ydolatrye with. we have as strayte a commandment to salt and to rebuke al
ungodliness as had the prophets. will they then have their ceremonies
honorably spoken of, then let them restore them to the right use, and put the
salt of the true meaning and signyficacyons of them to them again. But as they
be now used / none that loves Christ can speak honorably of them? what true
Christen man can give honor to that / that takes al honor from Christ? who
can give honor to that / that sleyeth the soul of his brother / and robs
his heart of that trust and confydence which he should give to his lord that
has bought him with his blood?

Ye are the light of the world. A city that lies on a hyl can not be hyd /
neither do men light a candel and put it under a bushel / but on a ca^delstyke
/ and also gives it light to all that are in the house. Let your light so
shine before men / that they see your good works / and praise your father
that is in heaven.
Christ goes forth and describes the office of an apostle and true preacher
by another likeness calling them as before the salt of the earth. Even so
here the light of the world / sygnyfyenge thereby that all the doctrine / all
the wisdom and hye knoweledge of the world / whether it were phylosophye of
natural conclusyons, of manners and virtue, or of laws of ryghtuousnes,
whether it were of the hole scripture and of God him self / was yet but a
darckenes, Darkness ^ll know^edge is ^arckenes ^ntyll the ^nowlege ^f Christ's
^loude she ^lyng be in ^he heart.
until the doctrine of his Apostles came That is to say, until the knowledge
of Christ came / how that he is the sacrefyce for our sins / our
satysfaccyon / our peace / atonement and redempcyon / our life thereto and
resurreccyon, what soever holiness / wisdom virtue / perfectness or
ryghtwysnes in the world among men, how so ever perfect and holy they
appear / yet is all damnable darckenes / except the right knowledge of Christ's
blood be there first / to iustefye the heart before all other holiness.

Another conclusyon. As a cetye buylt on a hyl can not be hyd / no more can the
light of Christ's gospel. Let the world rage as much as they will / yet it will
shine on their sore eyes whether they be content or no.

Another conclusyon as men light not a candell to whelme it under a bushel /
but to put it on a candelstycke to light all that are in the house even so the
light of Christ's gospel may not be hyde nor make a several thing, as
though it pertaynethe to some certain holy persons only. Nay it is the
light of the whole world and pertaynethe to all men / and therefore may not be
made several. It is a madness that diverse men say / Lay. The lay ought to
have the gospel
the lay people may not know it / except they can prove that the lay people
be not of the world. Moreover it will not be hyde / but as the lightening
that breakyth out of the clouds / shynethe over all / even so does the
gospel of Christ. For where it is truly received, there it purefyeth the
heart and makethe the parson to consent to the laws of God and to begin a
new and a Godly living, facyoned after gods laws and without all
dyssymulacyon. Gospel The propertye of the gospel
And then it will kyndle so great love in him toward his neighbor, that he
shall not only have compassyon on him in his bodily aduersyte / but much more
petye him over the blyndnes of his soul and to mynyster to him Christ's
gospel / Gospel. The true gospel not hyd in dens.
wherefore if they say, it is here or there, in saint Fraunces cote or Domynykes
and such like, and that if thou thou wylt put on that cote / thou shall find
it there / it is false. For if it were there / thou shuldeste se it shine
abroad de though thou crepeste not into a sell or a monks coulle / as thou
see lyghtenyng without crepyng into the clouds ye their light would so shine
/ that men should not only le the light of the gospel / but also their good
works / which would as fast come out / as they now run in. In so much that
thou should se them make themselfes pore to help other / as they now make
other pore / to make them selves rich.

Kings. ought to be learned.
This light and salt partayned not then to the Apostles and now to our
bishops and spiritualty only. No it pertayneth to the temporal men also. For
all kings and all rulers are bound to be salt and light not only in exsample
of living, but also in teaching of doctrine unto their subjects, as well as
they be bound to punyshe evil doers. Does not the scripture testefye that
king Dauyd was chosen to be a sheparde and to feade his people with Gods
word. It is an euel skole master that can naught save beat only. But it is a
good skole master that so teaches that few need be beaten. This salt and
light therefore pertayne to the temporalty also, and that to every member of
Christ's church / so that every man ought to be salt and light to other.

The order how every man may.
Every man then may be a comen preacher thou wylt say / and preach every where
by his own auctoryte, Nay verily, No man may yet be a comen preacher save he
that is called and chosen thereto by the comen ordinance of the congregation,
be a preacher, and how not.
as long as the preacher teaches the true word of God. But every private man
ought to be in virtuous living both light and salt to his neighbor / in so
much that the poreste ought to strive to overcome the byshope and to preach
to him in ensample of living. Moreover every man ought to preach in wordand
dead unto his household and to them that are under his governance. etc. And
though no man may preach openly, save he that has the office committed to
him, yet ought every man to endeavor him self, to be as well learned as the
preacher, as nigh as it is possible, And every man may pryuatlye inform his
neighbor, ye and the preacher and byshope to, if neade be. For if the
preacher preach wrong, then may any man what so ever he be rebuke him,
first pryuatlye and then (if that help not) to complain further. And when
all is proved, according to the order of charity / and yet none amendment had,
then ought every man that can to resyst him / and to stond by Christ's
doctrine, and to ieoparde life and al for it. Look on the old ensamples and
they shall teach the.

The gospel has a another fredome with her then the temporal regyment. Though
every man's body and goods be under the king do he right or wrong / yet is
the auctoryte of Gods word free and above the king / so that the worste in
the realm may tell the king, if he do him wrong, that he does naught and
other wise then God has commanded him, and so warn him to avoid the wrath
of God which is the pacyent aduenger of all vnryghtwysnes. May I then and
ought also, to resyste father and mother and all temporal power with Gods
word, when they wrongefully do or command that hurts or kylleth the body,
and have I no power to resyste the Bishop or Preacher that with false
doctrine sleyethe the souls for which my Master and and lord Christ has
shede his blood? Be we otherwise under our byshopes then Christ and his
apostles and all the prophets were under the bishops of the old law? Nay
verelye, and therefore may we and also ought to do as they did, and to answer
as the apostles did. Act. 5. O Portet magis obedire deo quam bominibus. we
must rather obaye God than men. In the gospel every man is Christ's dyscyple
and a person for him self to defend Christ's doctrine in his own person.
The faith of the bishop will not help me. nor the bishopes keeping the law
is suffycyent for me. But I must believe in Christ for the remyssyon of al syn,
for mine own self and in mine own person. No more is the bishops or
preachers defending Gods word enough for me. But I must defend it in mine
own person and ieoperde life and all thereon when I senede and occasyon.

I am bound to get worldly substance for my self and for my household
with my just labor and some what more fore them that can not, to save my
neighbors body. And am I not more bound ^o labor for Gods word to have
thereof in store, to save my neighbors soul? And when is it so much time to
resyste with Gods word and to help, as when they which are believed to
mynyster the true word, do slay the souls with false doctrine, for
covetousness sake? He that is not ready to give his life for the mayntenaunce
of Ghrystes doctrine against ypocrytes, with what so ever name or title they be
dysguysed, the same is not worthy of Christ nor can be Christ's dyscyple / by
the very words and testymonye of Christ. Nevertheless we must use wisdom,
pacyence, mekenes and a dyscrete process after the due order of charity in our
defendyng ye word of God lest while we go about to amend our prelates we make
them worse. But when we have proved all that charity binds us and yet in
vain, then we must come forth openly and rebuke their wykednes in the face
of the world and ieoperde life and all thereon.

Ye shall not think that I am come to dystroye the law or the prophets / no
I am not come to dystroye them / but to fulfill them. For truly I say unto
you / till heaven and earth peryshe / there shall not one Iott or one title of
the law escape / till all be fulfilled.
A little before Christ calls his dyscyples the light of the world and the
salt of the earth and that because of their doctrine / wherewith they should
lyghten the blind understanding of man / and with true knoweledge drive out
the false openyons and sophystycall persuasyons of natural reason, and deliver
the scripture out of the captyuyte of false gloses which the ypocrety she
phareseys had patched thereto and so out of the light of true knowledge, to
^^ere up a new living. and to salt and ceason the corrupt manners of the old
blind co^uersacyon. False doctrine cau^het evil works.
For where false doctrine / corrupt opynyons and sophistycal gloses raygne i^
the wit and understanding / there is the living deuelyshe in the syghte of
God / how so ever it appear in the sight of the blind world. And on the
other side, where the doctrine is true and perfect, True doctrine is the cause
of good works.
there follows godly living of necessyte. For out of the inward believe of
the heart, flows the outward co^uersacyon of the members. He that believes
that he ought to love his enemy, shall never cease fighting against his own
self / till he have weded all rancoure and malice out of his heart, But he that
believes it not / shall put a vysure of ypocresye on his face, till he get
oportunite to adue^ge him self.

And here he begins to teach them to be that light and that salt of which
he spoke, and says. Though the scrybes and phareses bear the people in
hand, that all I do / is of the devil and accuse me of breaking the law and
the prophets (as they afterward rayled on the Apostles / that they drove the
people from good works, thoroughe preaching the iustefyenge and ryghtwysnes of
faith) yet se that ye my dyscyples be not of that believe. For heaven and earth
shall sooner peryshe, then one my nume or title of the law should be put out. I
come not to destroy the law ^ but to repare it only, and to make it go
vpryght where it halteth, and eue^ to make crooked strayte, and roughe smothe,
as Johan the Babtyste does in the wyldernes / and to teach the true
understanding of the law, without me the law ca^ not be fulfilled nor ever
could. For though the law were given by Moses / yet grace and verite /
Grace and truth thoroughe Jesus Christ
that is to say / the true understanding and power to love it and love to
fulfill it / comes and ever came thorough faith in me.

I do but only wype away the fylthy and roten gloses which the scrybes and
the pharyseys have smared to the law and the prophets and rebuke their
damnable living which they have facyoned / not after the law of God / but
after their own sophistycall gloses feigned to mock out the law of God / and
to begyle the whole world, and to lead the^ in blyndnes, and that the scrybes
and phareseys falsely belly me / how that I go about to destroy the law, and
to set the people at a fleshelye lyberte, and to make them first dysobedyent
and to despyce their spyrytuall prelates, and then to rise against the
temporal rulers and to make all comune, and to give license to syn vnponyshed,
comes only of pure malice, hate, envy and furyouse impacyencye, that their
vysures are plucked from their faces and their ypocresy dysclosed. How be it
what I teache and what my learning is concerning the law, ye shall shortly
here / and that in few words.

Who so ever breaks one of these least comaundementes and teach men so /
shall be called the least in the kyngedome of heaven. But he that does them and
teaches them / the same shall be great in the kingdom of heaven.
who so ever study to destroy one of the commandments following which are
yet the least and but chyldyshe things in respect of the perfect doctrine
that shall here after be showed, and of the mysteryes yet hyde in Christ and
teach other men even so, in word or ensample, Gloses They that destroy the
law of god with gloses must be cast out
whether openly or under a color and thoroughe false gloses of ypocresye that
same doctoure shall all they of the kyngedome of heaven abhor and despyce, and
cast him out of of their company, as a seething pot does cast up her foam
and skome and purge her self. So fast shall they of the kyngedome of heaven
cleave unto the pure law of God without all men's gloses.

But who so ever shall first fulfill them him self and then teach other, and
set all his study to the furtheraunce and mayntenyng of them that doctoure
shall all they of the kyngedome of heaven have in price, and follow him and seek
him out as does the Egle her pray, and cleave to him as burres. For these
commandments are but the very law of Moses (the draffe of the phareses
gloses, cleansed out) interpreted according to the pure word of God and as the
open text compels to understand them, if he look dylygently thereon.

The kingdom of heaven take for the congregacyon or church of Christ. The
church
And to be of the kyngedome of heaven, is to know God for our father, and
Christ for our lord and sauyoure from all sin. And to enter in to this
kyngedome it is impossyble, except the heart of man be to keep the
commandments of God pure lie, as it is written. Johan. 7. Lawet Except a
man love gods law he can not understand ye doctrine of Christ.
if any man will obaye his will, that is to say, the will of the father that
sent me (says Christ) he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God,
or whether I speak of mine own head. For if thine heart be to do the will of
God which is his commandments, he will give the a pure eye, both to dyscerne
the true doctrine from the false / and the true doctrine from the howlyng
ypocryte. And therefore he says.

The ryghteousnes of pharyseys.
For I say unto you / except your ryghtwysnes excede ye ryghtwysnes of the
scrybes and pharyseys / ye can not enter into the kingdom of heaven.
The ryghtwysnes of the scrybes and pharyseys can not enter into the kingdom
of heaven the kingdom of heaven is the true knowledge of God and Christ / ergo
the ryghtwysnes of the Scrybes and Pharyseys neither knowethe God nor Christ.
He that is willing to obey the will of God / understands the doctrine of
Christ / as it is proved above / the scrybes and the phariseys understand not
the doctrine of Christ / ergo they have no will nor lust to obaye the will of
God. To obaye the will of God, is to seek the glory of God (for the glory of a
master is the meke obedyence of his servants, the glory of a Prince is the
vmble obedyence of his subjects, the glory of a husband is the chaste
obedyence of his wife / the glory of a father is the loving obedyence of his
children) the scrybes and the pharyseys have no lust to obey the will of God,
Glory. H^ that seeks his own glory teaches his own doctrine / and not his
masters
ergo, they seek not the glory of God. Furthermore the scrybes and pharyseys
seek their own glory / they that seek their own glory, preach their own
doctrine, ergo, the scrybes and pharyses preach their own doctrine. The mayor
thou have. Math. xxiii. the scrybes and pharyseys do all their works to be
seen of men / they love to sytte vppermoste at feasts and to have the chief
seats in the Synagoges, and salutacions in the open markettes, and to be
called Raby. And the mynor follows the text above rehearsed Iho. vii. he that
speaks of him self or of his own heed, seeks his own glory / that is to
say, he that preaches his own doctrine is ever known by seeking his own
glory, so that it is a general rule to know that a man preaches his own
doctrine / if he seek his own glory. Some man will happily say, the scrybes
and pharyseys had no other law then Moses and the prophets nor any other
scripture, and grounded their sayenges thereon. That is truth, how then
preached they their own doctrine? verily it follows in the said, vii. of Iho.
Glory He that seeks his own glory alters his masters message.
He that seeks tbe glory of him that sent him ye same is true and there is no
vnryghtwysnes i^ him, that is to say, he will do his masters message truly and
not alter it, where contraryewyse he yt seeks his own glory will be false
(when he is sent) and will after his masters message, to turn his masters
glory unto his own self. Even so did the scrybes and pharyseys alter the word
of God for their own profit and glory. word. gods word altered is not his.
word.
And when Gods word is altered with false gloses, it is no more Gods word. As
when God says, love thy neighbor and thou put to thy leu^e and say, if
my neighbor do me no hurt nor say me any. I am bound^ to love him, but not
to give him at his nead^ my gooddes which I have gotten with my sore labor.
Now is this thy law and not Gods. Gods law is pure and single, love thy
neighbor whether he be good or bad. To love is to help at need.

Prayer. The prayer of Monks robs and helps not.


And by love God meanethe, to help at neade. Now when God byddeth the to
get thy living and some what over to help him that can not, or at atyme
has not wherewith to help him self, if thou and.xxx. or.xl. with the get
you to wilderness / and not only help not your neighbors but also rob
a great number of two or three thousand pound verelye, how love ye your
neighbors? Such men help the world with prayer, thou will say to me.
Thou were better to say, they rob the world with their ypocresye, say I to
the* and it is truth in deed, that they so do. For if I stycke up to the
myddle in the myer like to peryshe with out present help, and thou stand by
and wylt not socoure me, but knel^ste down and prayeste, will God here the
prayers of such an ypocryte? God byddeth the so to love me that thou put thy
self in ioperdye to help me. and that thine hart^ while the body labourethe
do pray and trust^ in God, that he will assyste the. and through the to save
me. An ypocryte that will put neither body nor gods in parell for to help
me (...) my neade, louethe me not nether has compassyon on me, and therefore
his heart can not pray though he wagge his lyppes never so much. It is
written, Johan. ix. If a man be a worshypper of God and do his will (which is
the true worshype) him God herethe, Now the will of God is / that we love one
another to help at need. And such lovers he hereth and not sottle ypocrytes.
Love prays.
As love makes the help me at my need, so when it is paste thy power to
help, it makes the pray to God, Even so where is no love to make the take
bodily pain with me. there is no love that makes the pray for me. But thy
prayer is in deed for thy belie which thou loueste.

what were the scrybes and pharyseys? Scrybes and Pharyseys what they were.
The scrybes besides that they were pharyseys (as I suppose) were also
officers, as are our bysshopes / Chauncelers / Comyssaryes / Archedeacones, and
offycyalles. And the phariseys were relygyouse men which hade professed, not
as now, one Dominycke the other fraunces, another Barnardes rules. But even to
hold the very law of God / with prayer / fasting / and alms deed / and were
the flower and perfectyon of all the Jews, as S. Paul reioyseth of him self
philippen. 3. saying I was an Ebrue and concerning the law a pharyse, and
concerning the ryghtwysnes of the law I was fautles. They were more honorable
then any sect of Monks with us. whether obseruau^t or Ancre or what so ever
other be had in price.

They might much better have reioysed to The pharyses might better have proved
the^ selves the true church then our spyritualty may.
have been the true church and to have had the spyryte of God, and that they
could not have erred they men whom all the world sees / neither to keep
Gods laws nor man's, nor yet yt deuelyshe law of their own making. For God
has made the^ of the old testament as great promyses / that he would be their
God and that his spirit and al grace should be with the^, if they kept his
law, as he has made to us, Now seeing they keep the uttermost rote of the
law in the syghte of the world and were fautles, The promyses are made upon
the profes. syon of the keeping the law of God so that the church that will not
keep Gods law has no promise yt they can not err.
and seeing thereto that God has promised neither us nor them ought at al /
but upon ye professyon of keeping his laws, whether were more like to be the
right church and to be taught of the spyryte of God and they could not err /
those pharyseys and ours? Might not the general councelles of those, and the
things there decreed with out scripture seem to be of as great actoryte as the
general councelles of ours and the things there ordained and decreed both
clean with out and also against Gods word? Might not the ceremonies which
those hade adyde to the ceremonies of Moses, seem to be as holy and as well to
plese God, as the ceremonies of ours. The things which they added to the
ceremonies of Moses, were of the same kind as those ceremonies were / and no
more to be rebuked then the ceremonies of Moses. As for as ensample if Moses
bade wash a table or a dyshe when an unclean worm had crepte thereon, the
pharyseys did wash the table with a wete cloute before every refection, lest
any unclean thing hade touched them unawares to all men, as we put unto our
tithes a mortuarye for all forgotten tithes. The wyckednes of the Pharyseys
what it was.
what was then the wyckednes of the pharyseys? verily the leven of their gloses
to the moral laws, by which they corrupt the commandments and made them
no more Gods, and their false faith in the ceremones that ye bare work was a
sacrefyce and a service to God, the sygnyfycacyons lost and the opinyon of
false ryghtwysnes in their prayers fasting and almos deeds, that such works
did iustefy a man before god, and not that God forgeueth syn of his mere mercy,
if a man believe, repent and promise to do his uttermost to sin no more.

when these thus sat in the hertes of the people, with the opinion of virtue,
holiness, Preacher why the true preacher is accused of treso^ and heresy.
and ryghtwysnes, and their law the law of God their works, works comau^ded
by God and confyrmed by all his prophets, as prayer, fasting and almose deed,
and they looked upon as the church of God that could not err, and finally they
the^ selves either every where were the chief rulers or so sat in the hearts of
the rulers, that their word was believed to be the word of God.

what other thing could it be, to preach against all such and to condemn
their ryghtwysnesse for the most damnable sin that can be, than to seem to
goo about to destroy the law and the prophets? what other thing can such a
precher seem to be before ye blind world / then heretycke / scysmatycke /
sedicyous / Ypocrysy why ypocrysy must be first rebuked though it be ieoperdy
to preach against it.
possessed with the deuel and worthy of shame most vile and death most cruel?
And yet these must be fyrsterebuked and their false ryghtwysnes detecte, yer
thou may preach against open sinners.

Or else if thou should convert an open senner from his evil living, thou
shuldeste make him nine hundred times worse then before. For he would attonce
be one of these sort / even an obseruaunt or of some like sect of which
among an hundred thousand, thou shalt never bring one to believe in Christ,
where among open sinners many believe at the hour of death, fall flat upon
Christ and believe in him only without all other ryghtwysnes. It were an
hundred thousand times better never to pray, then to pray soche lyppe prayers
and never to fast or do alms then to fast and to do alms with a mind thereby
to be made ryghtuous / and to make satysfaccyon for the fore sins.

Ye have hard how that it was said to them of old time / kyl not / for who
so ever kelleth shall be in danger of judgment. But I say unto you / who so
ever is angrye with his brother / shall be in danger of judgment. And
whosoever say unto his brother Racha / shall be in danger of a council. But
whosouer say to his brother / thou fool / shall be in danger of hell fire. The
law is restored.

Here Christ begins, not to destroy the law (as the pharyseys had falsely
accused him) but to restore it again to the right understanding and to purge
it from the gloses of the pharyseys. He that sleyeth shall be gyltye or in
danger of judgment / that is to say / if a man murder, his deed testefyeth
against him, there is no more to do / then to pronounce sentence of death
against him. This text did the pharyseys, extend no further then to kill with
the hand and outward members, But hate / envy / malice / churlyshnesse and
to withdraw help at neade, to begyle and cyrcumuent with wyles and sottle
bergenynge, was no sin at all, No, to bring him home, thou hatedest to death
with craft and falshed, so thou dyddeste not put thine hand thereto / was no
sin at al. As when they had brought Christ to death wrongefully and
compelled Pylate with sotteltye to sleye him / they thought them selves pure.
In so much that they would not go into the hall for defylynge them selves and
being partakers with Pylate in his blood. And Ac. 5 they said to the Apostles,
ye would bring this man's blood upon us / as who would say, we slew him not.
And Saul in the first book of the Kings in the.xviii. Cha* being so wroth
with David, that he would gladly have had him slain determined yet that he would
not defyle him self, but to thrust him into the hands of Phylystynes, that
they might sley him, and he him self abide pure.

And as our spyrytualtye now offer a man mercy / once though ye have spoken
against holy church / only if he will but periure and bear a faggot. But if
he will not, they do but dyote him a season / to win him and make him tell
more, and then deliver him to the lay power saying, he has deserved the
death by our laws and ye ought to kill him / how be it we deserc it not.

But Christ restores the law again and says / to be angry with thy
neighbor to sle him and to deserve death. For the law goes as well on the
heart as on the hand, He that hates his brother is a mutherar.i. Io. 3. If
then the blind hand deserve death how much more those parts which have the
sight of reason. And he that says Racha / Racha.
lewd or what so ever sign of wrath it be, or yt provoke to wrath* has not
only deserved that men should immedyatly pronounce sentence of death upon him,
but also yt when death is pronounced, they should gather a council / to decre
what horrible death he should suffer. And he that calls his brother fool /
has sinned down to hell.

how a man may be angrye without si^nyng
Shall then a man not be angry at al nor rebuke or ponyshe? yes if thou be a
father or a mother / master / maystresse / husband / lord / or ruler / yet
with love and mercy / that the anger / rebuke / or ponyshmente excede not the
fault or trespass. May a man be angrye with love? ye, mothers can be so with
their children It is a louinge anger that hates only the vice and studyeth to
mende the person. But here is forboden not only wrath against father / mother
/ and all that have governance over the / which is to be angry and to grudge
against God him self / and that the ruler shall not be wrath without a cause
against the subject. But also al pryuate wrath against thy neighbor over
whom thou haste no rule nor he over the, no though he do the wrong. For he
that do the wrong lacks wit and dyscrecyon and can not amend till he be
informed and taught louyngly. Therefore thou must refrain thy wrath and tell
him his fault louyngly and with kyndenes wyn him to thy father / for he is thy
brother as well made and as dear bought as thou / and as well beloved, though he
be yet chyldyshe and lack dyscrecyon.

But some will say, I will not hate my neighbor / nor yet love him / or do him
good. Love is the keeping of the law.
yes thou must love him for the first commandment out of which all other
flow, is, thou shall love the lord thy God with all thine heart / with all
thy soul / and with all thy might. That is / thou must keep all his
commandments with love. Love must keep ye fro killyng or hurting thy
neyboure and from coveting in thine heart what so ever is his. And.1. Ioh. 4.
This commandment have we of him / that he which loves God, love his brother
also. And again 1. Johan. iii. he that has substance of this world and see
his brother have necessyte, and shuts up his compassyon from him, how is
the love of God in him? he then that help the not at neade louethe not God,
but breketh the first commandment. Let us love therefore says saint Io, not
with word and tongue, but in the deed and of a truth. And again saint Ioha^
said in the said place / he that loves not his brother by death yet still in
death. And of love has Moses textes enough. But the pharyseys glosed them
out, saying they were but good councelles if a man desired to be perfect /
but not precepts. Exodi. xxiii. if thou mete thine enemies ox or ass going
a straye thou shalt in any wise bring them to him again. And if thou se
thine enemies ass fall down under his burden / thou shall help him up
again. And Leuyti, xix. thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart / but
shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, Sinners he yt helps not to men^de
sinners must suffer with them when they be ponyshed.
that thou bear no syn for his sake. For if thou study not to amend thy
neighbor when he synneth, so art thou partaker of his sins. And therefore
when God takes vengeance and sends what so ever plage it be, to ponyshe
open sinners, thou must peryshe with them. For thou dydest sin in the sight
of God as deep as they / because thou dydest not love the law of God to
maynteyne it with all thine heart, soul / power and might. Is not he that
sees his nyghboures house in ieoperdye to be set on fire and warns not, nor
helps in time, to avoid the parell, worthy if his neighbors house be brent
up, that his be brent also / seeing it was in his power to have kept all out
of ieoperdy, if he had would / as he would no doubt if he had loved his
neighbor? Even so when God sends a general pestylence or war to thy
city / to ponyshe the sin thereof / art not thou worthy that thine house
should be infected or peryshe, if thou myghtest have kept it from synnynge,
and thou had ben willing thereto? But if thou do thy best to further the
law of God and to keep thy land or neighbors from synnyng against God, the^
(though it pelpe not) thou shalt bear no sin for their sakes when they be
ponyshed. He therefore that loves the law of God, may be bold in time of
pestylence and all ieoperdy to believe in God. And again in the same place thou
shall not avenge thy self nor bear hate in mind against the children of thy
people. But shall love thy fellow as thy self, I am the lord. As who should
say, for my sake shall thou do it. And Deuteronomy.10. The lord your God. is
the God of Gods and lord of lords, a great God / mighty and terryble,
which regards no man's person or degree or takes gifts. But does right
to the fatherless and the wydowe, and loves the staunger, to give him raiment
and fode / love therefore the stranger / for ye were strangers in the land of
Egypt. And Leuytycum,.xix. if a stranger soiourne by the, in your land, se
that ye vex him not. But let the stranger that dwells among you, be as one
of your selfs, and love him as thy self. For ye were strangers in the land
of Egypt / I am the lord. As who should say, love him for my sake. Hate when
a man may hate his neighbor
Notwithstanding when thy neighbor has showed the more unkindness then God
has love / then may thou hate him / and not before. But must love him for
Gods sake / till he fight against God to destroy the name and glory of God.

Therefore when thou offerest thy gift at the alter / and there remembreste
that thy brother has ought against the / leave there thy gift before the
alter / and go first and reconsyle thy self unto thy brother / and then come
and offer thy self. Agree with thine aduersarye attonce / while thou art in
the way with him / least thine aduersarye deliver the to the judge / and the
judge deliver the to the mynyster / and thou be cast into prison. Verily I
say unto the / thou shall not com out thence / till thou have paid the
uttermost farthynge.
This text with the similitude is somewhat sotle / and byndeth both him that
has offended to reconsyle him self as much as in him is and him that is
offended to forgive and be atone. Offeringes or sacrefyces what they mente
The offerynges were signs and did certefye a man that God was at one with him
and was his friend and loved him. For the fat of beasts was offered and wine
thereto, as though God had sat and eat and drunk with them, and the rest they
and their husholdes did eat before god / as though they had eat and drunk
with God, and were commanded to be merry and to make good chere / full
certefyed that God was at one with them and had forgote all old offenses, and
now loved the^ / that he would fulfill all his promyses of mercy with them.

Now will God receive no sacrefyce / that is to wit / neither forgive or
fulfill any of his promyses, eycept we be first reconcyled unto our brethren /
whether we have offended or be offended. In the Chapyter following thou redest
ye forgive, your father shall forgive you And Osia, 6. I love mercy and not
sacrefyce and the knowledge of God more then I do burnt offerynges / that is to
say / the knoweledge of the poyntementes made between God and us what he will
have us to do first, and then what he will do for us again. And Esaias. 58. God
refused fasting and ponyshynge of the body that was coupled with crudelyte /
and says that he desired no such fast, But says this fast require I, that
ye be merciful and forgive, and clothe the naked and feed the hungry. etc.
Then call (says he) and ye lord shall answer, cry, and he shall say, see, here
I am.

And that symylytude will, that as a man here if he will no otherwise agree / he
must suffer the extremite of the law, if he be brought before a judge (for the
judge has no power to forgive or to remyte, but to condemn him in the utmost
of the law) even so / if we will not forgive one another here, we shall have
judgment of God, without mercy.

And that some make purgatory of the last farthynge, Last ferthynge.
they show their deep ignorance. For first no symylytude holds every word
and syllable of ye similitude, furthermore when they dyspute / till he pay the
last ferthynge, ergo he shall pay. But not in hell, ergo in purgatory. A wise
reason. Joseph knew not Marye till she had borne her first son, ergo she bare
the second or he knew her after, I will not forgive the till I be deed or
while I leave* ergo I will do it after my death / and a thousand like.

Ye have hard how it was said to them of old time / commyt not adultery. But
I say to you / that who so ever looks on a wife lustynge after her / has
committed aduoutrye with her all ready in his heart.
This commandment commytte none adulterye had the phareseys blinded and
corrupt with their sophystry and leven / interpretynge the concupyscence of
the heart / lewd toys / filthy gestures / unclean words, clappynge,
kessynge and so forth / not to be imputed for syn. But even the act and deed
alone, though Noyses say in the text / thou shall not covet thy neighbors
wife, etc. But Christ puts to light and salt, and brings the precept to
his true understanding and natural taste again and condemns the rote of
sin, the concupyscence and consent of the heart. Before the world I am no
murderer till I have killed with mine hand. But before God I kill, if I hate,
ye if I love not, and of love keep me both from doing hurt, and also be redye
and prepared to help at need. Even so the consent of the heart with all other
menes that follow there of / be as well aduoutrye before God / as the deed it
self. Finally I am an aduouterer before God / if I so love not my neighbor,
that very love forbid me to covet his wife, Love is the fulfyllynge of the law
Love is the fulfyllynge of al commandments. And without love it is
impossyble to abstain from synnyng against my neighbor in any precept if
occasyon be given.

Carnal love will not suffer a mother to rob her child / no it makes her
rob her self / to make it rich. A natural father shall never lust after
his sons wife. No / he cares more for her chastyte then his son does him
self. Even so would love to my neighbor, keep me from synnynge against him.

Aduoutry.
Aduoutry is a damnable thing in the sight of God, and much meschefe follows
thereof. David to save his honor was dreuen to commytte grievous murder also.
It is unright in the sight of God and man that thy child should be at another
wannes cost and be another man's hair. Neither canste thou or the mother have
lightly a quiet conscience to God / or a merry heart so long as it is so.
Moreover what greater shame can thou do to thy neighbor, or what greater
dyspleasure? what if it never be known nor come any child thereof? The
precyousest gift that a man has in this world of God, is the true heart of
his wife, to abide by him in welthe and woe, and to bear all fortunes with him.
Of that have thou robbed him for after she had once coupled her self to the
she shall not lightly love him any more so truly but happily hate hi^ and procure
his death. More over thou haste untaught her to fear God and have made her to
syn against God. For to God promised she and not to man only / for ye law of
matrymony is Gods ordinance. For it is written Ge. 39. when Puthyphars wife
would have had Joseph to lie with her, he answered / how could I do this
wykednes and syn against God, ye verily it is impossyble to syn against man
except thou syn against God first. Finally read Chronicles and stories / and see
what has followed of aduoutrye.

what shall we say, that some doctores have dysputed and douted, whether syngle
fornycacyo^ should be syn^ when it is condemned both by Christ and Moses to,
and Paul testefieth. 1. Cor. 6. that no fornycatoure or whore keeper shall
possess the kingdom of God. It is right that al men that hope in God, should
bring up their fruit in the fere and knowledge of God, and not to leave his
sede where he cares not what come thereof.

Wherefore if thy right eye offend the pluck it out and cast it from the. For
it is better for the that one of thy members peryshe / then that thy hole body
should be cast into hell. And even so if thy right hand offend the / cut it
of / and cast it from the. For it is better for the / that one of thy members
peryshe / then that thy hole body should be cast into hell.
This is not mente of the outward members For then we must cut of nose, ears,
hand and foot / ye we must procure to destroy the saying herynge, smelling,
tastynge and feeling, and so every man kyl him self. But it is a phrase or
speech of the Ebrue tongue / and will that we cut of occasyons / daunsynge /
kyssyng / ryotous eating / Filthy,
and drinking / and the lust of the heart and fylthy ymagynacyons that move a
man to concupyscence. Let every man have his wife think her the fairest and
the best co^dicyoned and every woman her husband so to. For god has blessed
thy wife and made her without syn to the / A wife how good a thing.
which ought to seem a beautyful fayrnes, And all that ye suffer to gether / ye
one with the other / is blessed also and made the very Cross of Christ and
plesaunt in the syghte of God / why should she then be loathe some to the
because of a little sufferynge, that thou should lust after a another / that
should defyle thy soul and flee thy conscience and make the suffer
euerlastynglye?

It is said / whosoever put away his wife / let him give her a testymonyal of
the deuorcement. But I say unto you / who so ever puts away his wife
(except it be for fornycacyo^) makes her to break wedlock / and whosoever ever
maryeth the deuorced / breketh wedlock.
Moses Deuteronomy. 24. Right eye.
permytted his Israelites in extreme necessyte, as when they so hated their
wives that they abhorred the company of the^ then to put them away, Right hand
to avoid a worse inconuenyence, whereof ye read also Nath. xix. And he knytte
thereto that they might not receive them again after they hade ben known of
any other persons, which license the Jews abused and put away their wives
for every light or feigned cause, and when so ever they lusts. But Christ
calls back again and enterpreteth the law after the first ordinance and
cutteth of all causes of deuorcement, save fornycacion of the wives party, when
she breketh her matrymony. In which case Moses law pronounces her deed, and
so do the laws of many othercontres, which laws where they be used, there is
the man free without all questyon. Now where they be let live / there the man
(if he see sign of repentance and amendment) may forgive for once. If he
may not find in his heart (as Joseph as holy as he was could not find in his
heart to take Christ's mother to him, when he spyed her with child) he is fre
no dout to take another while ye law interprets her deed, for her syn ought
of no right to bind him.

what shall the woman do, if she repent and be so tempted in her flesh that she
ca^ not leave chaste? verily I can show you nothing out of the scripture. The
office of the preacher is, to preach the, x. commandments which are the
law natural, The office of a preacher.
and to promise them which submytte them selves to keep them of love and fear
of God, everlasting life for their labor through faith in Christ / and to
threaten the dysobedyent with everlasting pain in hell. And this ponyshment
is. if any man have offended throught fraltye, and when he is rebuked turn and
repent, to receive him into grace and absolve him, and if any will not amend
when he is rebuked / to cast him out among the infydeles. This I faye if the
temporal power shut her up, as a conuicte person appoyntynge her a sober
living / to make satysfaccyon to the congregacyon for her dampnable exsample,
they did not a mysse. It is better that one mysdoer suffer then a comen welthe
to de corrupt.

where the officers be neglygent and the woman not able to put herself to
penance, if she went where she is not known and there mary God is the God of
mercy. If any man in the same place where she trespaseth, petyed her and
married her. I could suffer it. were it not that the lyberty would be the next
way to provoke all othar that were once weary of their husbands / to commytte
adulterye, for to be deuorsed from them / that they might marye other which
they loved better. Let the temporal sword take heed to their charge
therefore. For this is truth, Law / what follows the keeping of the law
all the temporal blessings set in the law of Moses for keeping their laws
/ as welthe and prosperyte / long life / the upper hand of their enemies /
plenteousnes of fruits and chepe of all thing / and to be without pestylence /
war and famyshment / and al manner other abhomynable dyseases and plages /
pertayne to us as well as to the^ / if we keep our temporal laws.

And al ye cursses and terryble plages which are threatened through out the
law of Moses, Law / what follows the breakyng of ye law.
as honger / derth / war and dyssencyon / pestylence / fevers and wonderful
and strange ferefull dyseases / as the sweet / pockes / and falling syckenes
/ shorting of days / that the sword / honger / and such dyseases / shall
eat them up in their youth / that their enemies should have the vpperhande /
that the people of the land should be mynyshed and the towns decayed and the
land brought unto wyldernes, and that a plenteous land shall, be made baren or
so ordered that derthe shall devour the enhabyters / and wealth be among few
that should oppress the rest / with a thousand such like, so that nothing
they begin should have a prosperous end / all those cursses (I say) partayne
to us as well as to them / if we break our temporal laws.

Let England look about them and mark what has chanced them sense they
slew their right king whom God has anointed over them, King Richard the
second.

Their people / towns and vyllages armynyshed by the third part. And of their
noble blood remains not the third nor I believe the syxte / ye and if I
durst be bold, I wene I might saflye swear that there remains not the
syxteneth part. There own sword has eaten them up. And though pastures be
enlarged above all mesure, yet rotte of sheep, Moren of beasts with parkes and
warrans, with reysynge of fynes and rent, make all things twyse so dear as
they were. And our own conmodytes are so abused that they be the destruccyon
of their own realm.

Tyrants / why God gives us up, and leuethe us in the hands of tyrants and
in all myserye.
And right, for if we will not know god to keep his laws, how should God know
us, to keep us and to care for us and to fulfill his promyses of mercy unto us?
says not Paul. To. 1. of the hethen. Sicut non probauerunt habere deum in
noticia, it a tradidit illos deus. As it seems them not good, or as they had
no lust / or as they admytted it not, nor allowed for right in their hertes to
know God as God, to give him the honor of God / that is, to fear him as God,
and as auenger of all euel, and to seek his will, even so God gave them up to
follow their own blyndenes, and took his spyryte and his grace from them / and
would no longer rule their wits. Even so if we cast of us the yocke of our
temporal laws which are the laws of God and dreuen out of the.10.
commandments and law natural / and out of love thy neighbor as thy
self. God shall cast us of and let us slyppe, to follow our own wit. And
then shall all go against us / what so ever we take in hand, in so much that
when we gather a perlyament to reform or amend ought / that we there determe
shall be our own snare / confusion, and utter destruccyon. so that all the
enemies we have under heaven could not wyshe us so great myschefe as our own
council shall do us, God shall so blind the wisdom of the wise. If any man
have any godly council, it shall have none audyence, Error / madness and
daunsynge shall have the upper hand.

And let the spyrytualty take heed and look well about them and see whether they
walk as they have promised god, An admonycyon.
and in the steps of his son Christ and of his apostles whose offices they
bear, For I promise them / all the deuelles in hell / if God had let them all
lowse* could not have given them worse counsel / then they have given them
selves this.xx. year long. God gave up his Israeltites oftentimes when they
would not be ruled nor know the^ selves and their duty to God / and brought
them into captyuyte under their enemies / to prove and feel (says the text)
whether were better service, either to serve God, and wyllynglye to obaye his
law coupled with so many fold blessings / or to serve their enemies / and to
obaye their cruelnes and tyranny spyte of their hedes in need and necessyte.
And let the temporaltye remember, that because those nacyo^s under which the
Israelites were in capteuyte, did deal cruelly with them, not to ponyshe them
for their ydolatrye and syn which they had committed against God / but to have
their lands and goods and service only, r^ioysinge to make them worse and
more out o^ their fathers favor, therefore when God had scorged his children
enough / he did beat the other for their labor.

But to our purpose / what if the man run from his wife and let her set.
Verily the rulers ought to make a law / if any do so and come not again by a
certain day / as within the space of a year or so that then he be banyshed
the contry / and if he come again, to come on his head, and let the wife be
fre to mary where she will. For what right is it that a lewd wretch should
take his goods and run from his wife without a cause and sytte by an whore
ye and come again after a year or two (as I have known it) and rob his wife
of that she has gotten in the mean time / and go again to his whore? Paul
says to the Corinthyans. that if a man or woman be coupled with an infydell /
and the infydel depart, the other is free to mary where they lust. And.1.
Timothe. 5. he says. if there be any man that prouydeth not for his, and
namely for them of his own household, the same denies the faith and is worse
then an infydel. And even so is this man much more to be interpretat for an
infydel that causeles runs from his wife. Let (I say) the gouerners take heed how they let syn be vnponyshed and how they bring the wrath of god up
on their realms. For God wylbe aduenged on all iniquyte and ponyshe it with
plages from heaven. In like manner if the woman depart can seles and will not be
reconcyled, though she committee none adultery, the man ought of right to be fre
to mary again. And in all other causes if they seperat them selves of
impacience that the one can not sufferthe others infirmite, they must remain
unmarried. If any part burn / let the same suffer the pain or infirmytes of
the other And the temporaltye ought to make laws to bridle the unruly party.

Again ye have hard how it was said to them of old time / forswere not thy
self / but pay thine oaths unto thy lord. But I say unto you / that ye
swear not at all / neither be heaven / for it is the seat of God / nether by
the earth / for it is his fotestole / nether by Jerusalem / for it is the cety
of the great king nether thou shalt swear by thine heed / for thou canste not
make a white here or a black. But your communycacyon shall be ye ye / nay nay.
For if ought be above that / it proceeds of evil.
Swerynge.
As to hate in the heart, or to covet another man's wife / was no sin with
the phareseys, no more was it to hyde one thing in the heart and to speak
another with the mouth, to deceive a man's neighbor / if it were not bound
with an oath. And though Moses say Leuitici. xix. Lie not nor deceive any man
his neighbor or one another, yet they interpreted it but good council / if a
man desired to be perfect. But no precepte to bind under pain of sin. And
so by that means not only they that spoke true / but also they that lied to
deceive, were compelled to swear and to confyrme their words with oaths, if
they would be believed.

But Christ brings light and salt to the text which the phareseys had
darkened and corrupt with the stynkyngemyste of their sophystry, To swear by
God.
and forbyddeth to swear at all* either by God or any creature of Gods, for
thou can swear by none oath at al, except the dyshonoure shall redowne unto
the name of God. If thou swear, by God it is so, or by God I will do this or
that, the meaning is, that thou make God judge, to avenge it of the, if it
be not as thou say, or if thou shalt not do as thou promysest. Now if
truth be not in thy words thou shameste thine heuenlye father, and testyfyest
that thou beleuest that he is no ryghtwyse judge nor will aduenge vnryghtwysnes
/ but that he is wicked as thou art and consents and laugheth at the / while
thou deceyuest thy brother, as well created after the lykenes of God and so
dear bought with the precious blood of Christ as thou. And thus through the a
wicked son is the name of thy father dishonored, and his law not fered nor
his promyses believed. And when thou swereste by the gospel book or bible, the
meaning is, that God if thou lie. shall not fulfill unto the, the promyses of
mercy therein written. But contrary wise to bring up on the all the cursses /
plages / and vengeance therein thretened unto the dysobedyent and evil doers.
And even so when thou swerest by any creature, as by bread or salt. the
meaning is, that thou desyreste / that the creator thereof shall aduenge it of
the, if thou lie. etc^. wherefore our dealing ought to be so substancyal that
our words might be believed without an oath. Our words are the signs of the
truth of our hearts, i^ which ought to be pure and si^gle love toward thy
brother, for what so ever proceeds not of love is damnable. Now falshed to
deceive him and pure love can not stand together. It ca^ not therefore be but
dampnable syn to deceive thy brother with lyenge, though thou add no oath to
thy words. Much more dampnable is it then to deceive and to add an oath
thereto. etc^.

How be it al manner of sweryng is not here forboden, no more then all manner of
kyllyng. Swerynge.
when the commandment says, kill not / for judges and rulers must kill.
Even so ought they, when they put any man in office, to take an oath of him
that he shall be true and faithful and dylygent therein. And of their subjects
it is lawefull to take oaths, and of all that offer them selves to bear
wytnes. But if the superior would compel the inferior, to swear that should be
to the dishonor of God or hurtynge of an innocent, the inferior ought rather
to dye then to swear. Nether ought a judge to compel a man to swear against him
self, that he make him not sin and for swear whereof it is enough spoken in
another place. But here is forboden sweryng between neighbor and neighbor,
and in all our pryuate business and daily communycacyon. For customable
sweringe, though we lied not, does rob the name of God of his due reverence
and fear. And in our daily communicacyon and busynes one with another is so
much vanyte of words that we can not but of many things lie, which to
co^fyrme with an oath, though we begyle not is to take the name of God in vain
and irreverently against the second precepte. Now to lie for the intent to
begyle / is dampnable of it self / how much more then to abuse the holy name
of God thereto, and to call to God for vengeance up on thine own self.

Charity moderateth ye law.
Many cases yet there chance daily between man and man, in which charity
compels to swear, as I know that my neighbor is fasly scalundered, I am
bound to report the truth and may lawfully swear, ye and am bound if it
need, and that though not before a judge. And unto the weak where ye and nay
have lost their credence through the multitude of liars, Oath. To perform an
evil oath is double sin.
a man may lawefully swear to put them out of doubt. which yet comes of the
evil of them that abuse their language to deceive with all. Finally to swear
to do euel is dampnable, and to perform that is double dampnable. Herodes oath
made him not innocent and gylties of the death of Johan the Baptyste though
the ypocryte had not known what his wyfes daughter would have asked. And when
men say, a kings word must stand / that is troth, if his oath or promise
be lawful and expedyent.

In all our promyses it is to be added, if God will and if there be no lawful
let. And though it be not added, it is to be interpret, as added As if I
borowe thy sword, and by the hour I promise to bring it yt again, thou be
beside thy self. If I promise to pay by a certain day, and be in the mean
time robbed or decayed by chance that I can not perform it. I am not
forsworn if mine heart meant truly when I promised. And many like cases there
be of which are touched in other places. To lie also and to dyssemble is not
always sin. David. 1, Regum. 27. Told King Achis the Phylystyne that he had
robbed his own people the Jews, when he had been a rouyng among the
Amalekytes, and had slain man / woman and child for telling tales. And yet
was that lie no more sin then it was to destroy the Amalekites those deedly
enemies of the faith of one almyghtye God. Nether sinned Cusay Dauydes trusty
friend. 2. Reg. 18. in faynynge and begylynge absolon. But plesed God hiely To
bear a seek man in hand that a wholesome bitter medecyne is sweet. to make him
drink it, is the duty of charity and no syn. To persuade him that pursues his
neighbor to hurt him or slay him, that his neighbor is gone another contrary
way, is the duty of every christen man by the law of charity and no syn, no
though I confyrmed it with an oath. But to lie for to deceive and hurt, that is
damnable only. etc.

Ye have hard / how it is said / an eye for an eye / tothe for a tothe, But
I say unto you / that ye withstand not wrong. But if a man give the a blow
on ye right cheke / turn to him the other also. And if any man will go to law
with the and take away thy cote / let hi^ have thy cloak thereto. And if any man
compel the to go a mile / go with him twane. Give to him that axeth and from
him that would borowe turn not away.
Christ here ente^deth not to disanul the temporal regyment, and to forbid
rulers to punyshe evil doers, no more then he meant to destroy matrymony when
he forbade to lust and covet another man's wife in thy heart. But as he there
forbade, that defyleth matrymonye, eue^ so he forbeddeth here yt which
troubles, vnquyeteth and destroys the temporal regyment, and that thing
which to forbydde, the temporal regyment was ordyned which is that no man
aduenge him self.

Christ medleth not with the temporal regyment. But in all this long sermon
fyghteth against the phareseys false doctrine and salteth the law, to purge it
of the corrupcion of their fylthy gloses, and to bring it unto ye right taste
and true understanding again.

For the phareseys had so enterpret that law of Moses (which partayned only
unto the rulers) that every pryuat person might adueng him self, and do his
adversary as much harm again as he had received of him.

Now if he that is angry have deserved that then pronounce death upon him, and
he that says Racha has deserved that men should rather a council to
determyne some sundry and cruel death for so haynouse a crime, and he that
calls his brotherfole, have deserved hell what deserves he yt smyteth or
aduengeth him self with his own hand. Here is forboden therefore pryuate
wrath only, and that a man aduenge him self.

Cheke. To turn. the other cheke what it is.
To turn the other cheke is manner of speaking and not to be understand as
the words sound as was to cut of the hand and to pluck out the eye. And
as we command our children not only not to come nigh a brook or a water, but
also not so herdye as once to look that way* either to look on fire or once to
think on fire, which are impossyble to be observed. More is spoken then meant
to fear them and to make them perceive that it is ernest that we comau^de.
Even so is the meaning here that we in no wyle aduenge / but be prepared ever
to suffer as much more / and never to think it lawful to aduenge, how great
so ever the injury be, for he him self turned not the other cheke, when he was
smyten before the byshope, nor yet Paulus when he was bofetted before the
bishop also. But ye have hard a little above. Mekenes.
Blessed are the meke, for they shall possess the earth. Let all the world
study to do the wrong, ye let them do the wrong, and yet if thou be meke,
thou shalt have fode and raiment enough for the and thine. And more over if
the worste come, God shall yet set such a tyrant over the, that (if thou be
meke and can be content that he poll the properly, Polling how to aduoyde
it.
and even thou may bear) shall defend the from al other who is polled
intollerably, that his life is better and even death to him, save he that is
impacyent and can not suffer to be polled. Ye, poll thy self. and prevent
other, and give the baylly or like offycer now a capon, now a pygge. now a
goose, and so to thy land lord likewise, or if thou have a great ferme, now
a lamb / now a calfe / and let thy wife vyset thy land lady three or four
times in a year* with spysed kakes and apples / perrs / chyrese and such like.
And be thou redye with thine oxen or horses three or four, or half a dossen
days in a year to set whom their woodde or to plowe their land, ye and if
thou have a good horse, let the^ have him good chepe or take a worse for him,
and they shall be thy shylde and defend the / though they be tyrants and care
not for God / that no man else shall dare poll the. And thereto thou may
withwysdome get of them, that shall recompense all that thou doyst to them. All
this I mean if thou be pacyent and wise and fear God, thereto, and love thine
neighbor and do none evil, For if thou keep thy self in favor with hurtynge
thy neighbor / thine end will be evil / and at the last desperacyon in this
world and hell after.

But and if thou can not pol thy self with wisdom, and laugh and bear a
good countenance as though thou reioysedest while such persons poll the,
every man shall poll the and they shall maynteyne them / and not defend the. Let
this the fore be a comen proverb / be contented to be polled of some man / or
be polled of every man.

Ye must understand that there be two states or degrees in this world / Two
maaer states. degrees, of regyme^tes.
the kyngedome of heaven which in the regyment of the gospel. And the kingdom
of this world which is the temporal regyment. In the first state there is
nether father / mother / son / daughter / neither master / maystres / maid
/ man servant / nor husband nor wife / nor lord or subject, nor man or
woman, but Chyrste is all, and each to other is Christ him self. There is none
better then other, but al like good, al brethren, and Christ only is lord over
al. Nether is there any other thing to do or other law save to love one
another as Christ loved us. In the temporal regyment is husband / wife /
father / mother / son / daughter / master / maystres / maid / man servant /
lord and subject,

Every man is of ye spyrytualty and of the temporaltye both.
Now is every person a double person and under both the regymentes. In the
first regyment thou art a person for thine own self / under Christ and his
doctrine, and may nether hate or be angry and much les fight or adue^ge But
must after the ensample of Christ vmble thy self, forsake and deny thy
self, and hate thy self, and cast thy self away, and bemeke and pacyent,
and let every man go over the* and tread the under foot and do the wrong, and
yet love them and pray for them, as Christ did for his crucyfyers. For love is
al and what is not of love / that is damnable and cast out of that kyngedome.

Love. He that loves not. his neighbor has not the true faith of Chryst^.
For that kingdom is the kingdom of God and Christ. But he that loves not /
knows nether God nor Christ, therefore he that loves not is not of that
kingdom. The minor is this wise proved / he that knowith God and Christ sees
light, for Christ is light. But he that hates his brother / is in darckenes
and walks in darkness and wotteth not whyther he goes for darkness has
blinded his eyes. 1. Ioh. 2, Ergo he that hates his brother / knows not what
Christ has done for him, and therefore has no true faith / nor is of the
spyritual kingdom of God.

To hate thy self, hat shall thou get, if thou consider thine own sins and
deep dampnacyon that long thereto with due repentance And to love that shall
thou obtain if thou behold the great and infinyte mercy of God with strong
faith. There is none so great an enemy to ye in this world. But thou shall
lightly love him if thou look well on the love that God showed the in Christ.

In the temporal regyment thou art a person in respect of other, thou art an
husband / The temporal regiment
father / mother / master / maystresse / lord / ruler / or wife / son /
daughter / servant / subject. And there thou may do according to thine
office. If thou be a father / thou must do the office of a father and rule or
else thou dampnest thy self. Thou must bring all under obedyence whether by
fair means or foul. Thou must have obedyence of thy wife / of thy
servants / and of thy subjects / and the other must obey. If they will not
obey with love, thou must chyde and fight / as far as the law of God and the
law of the land will suffer the. And when thou canste not rule them / thou
art bound in many cases / to deliver them unto the hyer offycer of whom thou
dydest take the charge over them.

Vyolence. Not to resyst vyole^ce hawe it is understand.
Now to our purpose, whether a man may resyste vyolence and defend or aduenge
him self. I say nay in the first state, where thou art a person for thy
self alone and Christ's dycyple. There thou must love, and of love do study
and enforce ye and suffer all thing (as Christ did to make peace / that the
blessyng of God may come upon the / which says. Blessed be the peace makers,
for they shall be the children of God. If thou suffer and kepest peace in thy
self only, the blessing is, the possessyon of this world. But if thou so
love the peace of thy brethren that thou leave nothing undone or vnsuffred to
forther it / thy blessing is, thou shall be Gods son and consequently
possess heaven.

But in the worldly state / where thou art no pryuate man, but a person in
respect of other* thou not only may / but also must and (...) bound under
pain of dampnacyon to execute thine office, where thou art a father, thou must
have obedyence by fair means or by foul, and to whom thou art an husband /
of her thou must require obedyence and chastyte / and that to get, tempte all
that the law of the land commands and will. And of thy servants thou
must exact obedyence and fear, and may not suffer thy self to be despised.
And where thou art a ruler thereto appointed, thou must take, prison and slay
to / not of malice and hate, to aduenge thy self / but to defend thy
subjects, and to maynteyne thine office.

Concerning thy self, oppress not thy subjects with rent, fynes or custom
at all, / neither pylle them with taxes and such like / to maynteyne thine
own lusts. But be loving and kind to them, as Christ was to the / for they
be his and the price of his blood. But those that be evil doers among them
and vex their brethren, and will not know the for their judge, and fear thy
law, the^ smite, and upon them draw thy sword, and put it not up until thou
have done thine office, yet without hate to thy person for his masters sake and
because he is in the first regyment thy brother / but amend him only / or if
it can not be / but that thou must lose one to save many / then execute thine
office with such affection / with such compassyon and sorrow of heart, as
thou woldeste cut of thine own arm to save the rest of thy body.

Take an exsample, An ex^pul of two reamentes.
thou art in thy fathers house among thy brethren and systers. There if one
fight with a another / or if any do the wrong, thou may not aduenge nor
smite. But that perteyneth to thy father only. But if thy father give the
auctoryte in his absens, and command the to smite if they will not be ruled*
now thou art another person. Notwithstanding yet thou haste not put of the
first person / but art a brother still / and must ever love and prove all
thing to rule with love. But if love will not serve, then thou must use the
office of the other person or sin against thy father. Even so when thou art
a temporal person, thou put not of the spyrytual. Therefore thou must ever
love. But when love will not help, thou must with love execute the office of
the temporal person or sin against God. A mother can smite and love, and
so may thou with love execute the office of thy second state And the wife /
son / servant / and subject are brethren in the first state and put not
that person of / by reason of the second degree, and therefore must they love
ever* and with love pay custom / trybute / fear / honor and obedience to
whom they belong as Paul teaches Roma. 13. And though the other do not his
duty and love the, but rule the with rigorousnes and deal unkindly with the /
thou not deseruynge cleave thou to Christ and love still / and let not his evil
overcome thy goodness / and make the evil also.

And as after the ensample above / thy father has power over the to comau^de
the to use hye power over thy brethren / even so has thy master / to give the
his auctoryte over thy fellows which when thou have thou must remember that
thou art a fellow still / and bound to love still. But if love alone will not
help / then put thy masters auctoryte unto thy love. And so has the ruler
power over the / to send the to use vyolence upon thy neighbor, to take him
/ to prison him and happily to kyl him to And thou must ever love thy neighbor
in thy^ heart by the reason that he is thy brother in the first state, and yet
obey thy rular and go with the constable or like offycer and break open thy
neighbors door / if he will not open it in the kings name / ye and if he will
not yield in the kings name / thou must lay on and smite him to ground till
he be subdued. And look what harm he gets / ye though he be slain / that
be on his own head. For thine heart loved him and desyredest him louyngly to
obey and haste not aduenged thy self in that state where thou art a brother /
but in the worldly state where thou art another manner person in this case /
thou haste executed the auctoryte of him that has such power of God to
comau^de the and where thou were dampened of God, if thou dyddest not obey.

And like it is / if thy lord or prince send the a warfare into a another
land, How to be a warry ou^
thou must obey at Gods commandment and go and avenge thy princes quarrel
which thou know not but that it is right. And when thou come thither /
remember that thou art in the first state with them against whom thou must
fight, how that they be thy brethren and as depely bought with Christ's blood
as thou, and for Christ's sake to be beloved in thine h^rte. And se that thou
desire nether their life or gooddes, save to aduenge thy princes quarrel and to
bring them under thy princes power. And be content with thy princes wages and
with such part of the spoil (when thou have won) as thy prince or his
debyte appointed the / for if thou hate them in thine heart and couetest their
goods and art glade that an occasyon is found (thou ^arest not whether it be
right or wrong) that thou may go a robbynge and murtherynge vnponyshed,
then art thou a murtherar in ye sight of God / and thy blood will be sheed
again for it / either in the same war following, or when thou art come home
(as thou there dydest in thine heart) so shall thou rob and steal / and be
hanged for thy labor, or slain by some other myschefe.

Goods.
Now concerning the goods of this world it is easy to judge. In the first
state or degree thou ought to be thankeful to Christ. and to love / to give
and to lend to them that are bought with his precious blood / all that thou
art able. For all that thou owe to Christ whose servant thou art to do his
will / that must thou pay them. ^ath. 25.
And that thou do to them / that same do thou to Christ / and that thou
art not redye to do for them / that denyest thou to do for Christ. But and any
of thy brethren will with hold or take away by force above that thou may
spare by the reason of some office that thou have in the second state / or
invade the vyolently / and lay more on thy back then thou canste bear, then
hold thine heart and hand, that thou nether hate or smite and speak fair
and louyngly / and let neighbors go between. And when thou have proved
almenes of love in vain, then compain to the law and the offycer that is
set to be thy father and defend the, and to judge between the and thy brother.

Thou wylt say the text forbyddeth me to go to law, for it says, To go to
law.
if a man will law with the and take thy cote / thou must let him have gown
and all. If I must suffer my self to be robbed by the law, will thou say /
by what right can I with law recover mine own? I answer. Behold the text
dylygently. For by no right of law can a man take thy cote from the. For the
law was ordained of God / to maynteyne the in thy right and to forbid that
wrong should be done the, wherefore the text means thus, yt where the law
is unjustly mynystred, and the gouerners and judges corrupt and take brybes and
be percyal / there be pacyent and ready to suffer ever as much more, what soever
unright be done the / rather then of impacyency, thou shuldeste aduenge thy
self on thy neighbor and rail or make insurreccyon against the superyours
which God has set over the. For to rise against them is to rebel against God
and against thy father when he scourges the for thine offense, and a thousand
times more sin then to aduenge the on thy neighbor. And to rail on them is
to rail on God as though thou would blaspheme him / if he make the syke,
pore or of low degree or otherwise then thou would be made thy self.

Princes / whether they may be resysted or put down of their subjects in
any case.
Thou wylt happily say, the subjects ever chose the ruler and make him swear
to keep their law and to maynteyne their priuyleges and lydertyes / and upon
that submytte their selves unto him. Ergo if he rule amysse they are not bound
to obey. But may resyste him and put him down again? I answer your
argument is naught. For the husband swereth to his wife / ye though he
forswere him self / she has no power to compel him. Also though a master
keep not covenant with his servant, or one neighbor with a another, yet
has nether servant / no nor yet neighbor (though he be under none
obedyence) power to aduenge. But the vengyaunce pertayneth ever to an hyer
offycer / to whom thou must complain,

Ye but thou will say / it is not like. For the hole body of the subjects chose
ye ruler. Now Cuius est ligare, eius est soluere. Ergo if he rule amysse, they
that set him up / may put him down again. I answer, God (and not the
comen people) choseth the prince / though he chose him by them. For Deutero.
16. God commands to chose and set up officers / and therefore is God the
chief choser and setter up of them / and so must he be the chief putter down
of them again, so that without his special commandment, they may not be
put down again. Now has God given no commandment to put them down
again. But contrary wise / when we have anointed a king over us at his
commandment / he sayethe, Touch not mine anointed. And what ieoperdye it is
to rise against thy prince that is anointed over the / how evil so ever he
be, se in the storye of King Dauyd and through out all the books of the kings.
The auctoryte of the king is the auctoryte of God, and all the subjects
compared to the king, are but subjects still (though the king be never so
evil) as a thousand sons gathered to gether are but sons still / and the
commandment obey your fatehrs goes over all as well as over one. Even so
goethe the commandment over all the subjects / obey your prince and the
hyer power / and he that resysteth him, resysteth God and geteth him
dampnacyon. And unto your argument. Cuius est ligare, eius est soluere. I
answer, he that byndeth with absolute power / and without any hyer auctoryte,
his is the might to lowse again. But he that byndeth at a another man's
commandment, may not lowse again with out the commandment of the same. As
they of London chose them a mayre. But may not put him down again how euel he
be with out the auctoryte of him with whose ly^ence they chose him. As long as
the powers or officers be one under another / if the inferior do the wrong,
complain to the hyer. But if the highest of al do the wrong, thou must
complain to God only. wherefore the only remedy against evil doers is, that
thou turn thine eyes to thy self and thine own sin / and then look up to
God and say. O father, for our syn and the sin of our fathers is thy^ misery
come upon us. we know not the as our father, to obey the and to walk in thy
ways / and therefore thou know not us as thy sons to set louinge scole
masters over us, we hate thy law, and therefore haste thou through the
wyckednes of vnryghtwyse judges, made that law that was for our defense, to be
a tyrant most cruel and to opresse us and to do us iniurye above al other
kinds of vyolence and robbyng. And amend thy living, and be meke and
pacyent, and let them rob as much as they will. yet shall God give the fode and
rament and an honest possession in the earth to maynteyne the and thine with
all.

Gooddes.
Moreover concerning thy goods / thou must remember how that thou art a
person in the temporal regyment, and the king as he is over thy body, even so
is he lord of thy good and of him thou hold them, not for thy self only,
but for to meynteyne thy wife, children and servants, and to meynteyne the
king / the realm and the country and town or cetye where thou dwell,
wherefore thou may not suffer the^ to be wasted / that thou were not able to
do thy duty, no more then a servant may suffer his masters good to go to
wrack neglygently. Eor he that prouydeth not for his, and namely for them of
his own household, faith Paul / denies the faith and is worse then an
infydell. But every man is bound to labor dylygently and truly and therewith
so soberly to live, that he may have enough for him and his and somewhat above
for them that can not labor or by chance are fallen into necessyte. And of
that give and lend and look not for it again. And if that suffice not thy
neybours necessyte, then speak and make labor to thy brethren. to help also.
For it is a come^ proverb many hands make light work / and many may bear
that one alone can nor.

And thy wife / thy children / and servants art thou bound to defend. If
any man would force thy wife / thy daughter / or thy maid / it is not enough
forth to look on and say. God amend you. Nay thou must execute thine office
and auctoryte which the king gives the. And by the way thou must defend
thy master and his good / and the kings good / which thou haste to maynteyne
thy wife and household, and thy neighbor that goes with the against thieves
and murtherars.

And against al such persons lay about the, and do as thou woldeste do if
thou were under the kings standerde against his enemies which had invaded
the realm. For all such persons are mortal enemies to the realm and seek
to put down king and law and altogether, and to make that it might be lawful
to sin vnponyshed. And of this manner* if thou mark well the dyfference of
these two states and regyme^tes / thou may soil al like doutes that shall be
laid against the.

Regymentes. Every man is under both regime^tes.
More over when I say, there be two regymentes, the spyrytual and the
temporal. Even so I say that every person baptized to keep the law of God
and to believe in Christ. is under both the regymentes, and is both a
spyrytuall person and also a temporal / and under the officers of both the
regymentes / so that the king is as deep under the spyrytual offycer, to hear
out of Gods word what he ought to believe and how to live and how to rule /
as is the porest beggar in the realm. And even so the spyrytuall offycer if he
syn against his neighbor or teach false doctrine, is under ye kings or
temporal correccyon, how hye so ever he be. And look how dampnable it is for
the king to withdraw him self from the obedyence of the spyrytual offycer /
that is to say / from heringe his duty, to do it, and from herynge his vices
rebuked, to amend them / so damnable it is for the spyrytuall offycer, how
hye so ever he be, to withdraw him self from under the kings correccyon, if
he teach false or syn against any temporal law.

A preacher of the gospel may use no vyolence.
Finally ye must consider that Christ here teaches his dyscyples and them that
should be the light and salt in living and doctrine / to shine in the weke and
feeble eyes of the world deseased with the mygrym and accustomed to darkness /
that without great pain they can behold no light, and to salt their old
feastered sores and to frete out the rotten flesh even to the hard quycke.
that it smart again, and spare no degree. But tell all men hye and low, their
fautes, and warn them of the ieoperdye / and exhort them to the right way.
Now such scole masters shall find small favor and frendshyppe with the
rulers of this world or defense in their laws. As Christ warns the^. Mat.
10. saying (I send you out as sheep among wolves. Beware therefore of men /
for they shall deliver you up to their cou^celles, and shall scorge you in their
synagoges or council houses / and ye shall be brought before the chief rulers and
kings for my sake) and there taecheth them as here / to arm them selves with
patience and to go forth boldly with a strong faith and trust in the
socoure and assystence of God only / and to plant the gospel with all love
and mekenes and to water it with their own blood, as Christ did. Thou may
not in that state come with a sword / to defend either thy self or thy
gospel, and to compel men to worship the as God and to believe what thou wylt
Nay, sheep use no such regyment among wolves. If thou be a sheep, thou art not
in evil taking if thou canste bring to pass that the wolf be content with
thy flesh only and to shere the yearly. Give to him that axeth, and from him
that would borowe we turn not away, Luke says, give to whosoever axeth the.
That is to say, whosoever thou see need or see not the contrary but there
may be need, to the uttermost of thy power there open thine heart and be
merciful only. And of mercyfulnes set God thy father and Christ thy lord
and master for an ensample and enforce to be as like the^ as thou can. If
thou be mercyful God has bound him self to be mercyful to the again Lo / is
not this an exceeding great thing, that God which of no right ought to be
bound to his creatures / has yet put it hole in thine own hands, to bind
him against the day of thy trybulacyon, then to show the mercy?

Concerning lendyng, proceed by the foresaid rule of mercy, Many in extreme
need, yet ashamed to b^gge, shall desire yt to lend. Unto such instead of
lendynge give, or say this* lo / here is as much as ye require. If ye can pay
it again well, do / and ye shall find me ready against a another time to lend
or give (if need be) as much more. But and if ye shall not be able to pay it
agyne / trouble not your conscience, I give it you, we be all one man's
children, one man has bought us all with his blood and bound us to help one
another. And with so doing / thou shall win the heart of him to thy father.
Concerning marchaundyse and chapmen the less borowinge were among the^ the
better should the commonwealth be, if it we^^ possible, I would it were / ware
for ware or money for ware / or part money and part ware. But if it will not be
/ but that a man to get his living with must needs lend and call for it
again to find his householde / and to pay^ his dettes / then in the lendynge
/ be first syngle and harmeles as a dove / and then as wise as a serpent / and
take heed to whom thou lendest. If when thou have lent an honest man / God
vyset him / and take away his gooddes with what chance it be / whether by see
or land / that he is not able to pay the / then to prison him or to sue him
at the law, or once to speak an unkind word, mere against the law of love
and contrary to showing mercy. There thou must suffer with thy neighbor and
brother as Christ did with the, and as God does daily, If an vnthryste have
begyled the, and spente thy good away and has not to pay / then hold thine
hand and heart that thou adue^ge not thy self But love him and pray for him
and remember how God has promised to bless the pacye^t and meke.
Nevertheless because such persons corrupt the comen manners and cause the name
of God the less to be feared / men ought to compain upon such persons to
the offycer that is ordained of God to ponyshe evil doers / and the offycer is
bound to ponyshe them. If thou have lent a fox which with cauelacyon will
keep thy good from the / then if the ruler and the law will not help the to
thy right. do as it is above said of him that will go to law with the and
take thy cote from the. That is to say / be content to lose that and as much
more to it / rather then thou would aduenge thy self. Let not the wykednes
of other ^^en pluck the from God. But abide still by God and his blyssynges
and ^arye his judgment. Covetousness.
Lyberalyte is mercy fulness that bynd^^^ God to be merciful again.
Covetousness (the root of all evil and father of all false proph^tes, and the
seole master that teaches (...) messengers of Satan to dysguyse them selves
like to the messengers of Christ) is mercyl^^ that shall have judgment
without mercy. Iaco. 2.
And therefore exhorts Christ al his so dyligently and above all thing, to
be lyberall and to beware of covetousness.

Ye have hard / how it is said / thou shall love thy neighbor and hate
thine enemy. But I say unto you love your enemies. Bless the^ that curse you /
do good to the^ that hate you. Pray for them which do you wrong and persecute
you. That ye maybe the children of your heavenly father. For he makes his son
to arise over the evil and over the good / and sends rain upon the
ryghtuous and unrighteous. For if ye love them that love you / what reward
shall ye have? do not the publycans so? and if ye be frendely to your brethren
only / what synguler thing do ye? do not the publycans likewise? ye shall
therefore be perfect / as your father which is in heaven / is perfect.
This text of hatynge a man's enemy / stands not in any one place of the
bible / but is gathered of many places in which God commands the children of
Israel to destroy their enemies / the Cananytes / the Amorytes / the
Amolekites / and other hethen people / as the Moabites / and Amonytes / which
sought to bring them out of the favor of God / and to destroy the name of
God. The Amalekites came behind them and slew all that were fayntye and weary by
the way as they come out of Egypt. The Moabites and Ammonites hired Balam to
curse them / and begyle the^ with their women and made a great plage among
them. These and like nacyons were perpetual enemies to their land which God
had given them, and also of ye name of God and of their faith. For which cause
they not only might lawfully, but were also bound to hate the^ / and to study
their destruction again / how be it they might not yet hate the said nacyons
such as were converted to their faith.

Now by the reason of such textes as commanded to hate the comune enemies of
their contrye and of God and his law, and of their faith / the pharyseys
doctrine was / that a man might lawfully hate all his pryuate enymyes without
excepcion, nor was bound to do them good. And yet Moses says. Thou shall not
hate thy brother in thine heart. And again thou shall not aduenge thy self
nor bear hate in mind against the children of thy people. And if thine enemies
ass synke under his burden, help to lift him up again, and if his ox or
ass go a straye / bring them home again, which all no doubt, the pharyseys
did enterprete for good council, but for no precepts, wherefore Christ salteth
their doctrine and proves that a man is bound both to love and to do good to
his enemy, and as a natural sone, though his brethren be never so euel yet to
love them and show them kyndnesse for his fathers sake, and to study to
amend them, what have thou to rejoice of, if thy relygyon be not better then
the religion of thieves? For thieves love among themselves, Publycans what they
were.
and so do the couetouse of the world, as the vsurars and publycans, which
bought in great the emperoures trybute / and to make their most advantage,
did over set the people. Nay, it is not enough for the to love thy
benefactoures only / as monks and freres do, and them of thine own cote and
order / or the brethren of thine own Abbaye only (for among some there love
stretches no further, and that shall he that is removed out of another
cloysture thither, well find / ye and in some places charity reaches not at
all the celles of the same cloysture and to all the monks that were professed
in the same place.) But lift up thine eyes unto thy heavenly father, and as thy
father does so do thou love al thy fathers children. He mynystreth son and
rain to good and badde / by which two understand all his benefytes. For of
the heat and dries of the son and cold and moist of the rain, spring al
things that are necessary to the life of man. Even so provoke thou and draw
thine evil brethren to goodness / with pacyence / with love in word and deed /
and pray for them to him that is able to make the^ better and to convert them.
And so thou shall be thy fathers natural son and perfect, as he is perfect.
The text says not, ye shall be as perfect as God. But perfect after his
ensample. To be perfect ye scripture is not to be a monk or a friar, or never
to syn. For christ teaches not here monks or friars, To be perfect what it
means.
but his dyscyples and every Christen man and woman. And to be in this life al
to gether without syn / is impossyble. But to be perfect, is to have pure
doctrine without false opinyons / and that thine heart be to follow that
learning.

FINIS.
An exposycyon of the syxte Capiter.
Take heed to your almose / that ye do it not before men / to be seen of them /
or else ye get no reward of your father which is in heaven. Therefore when thou
gyueste almose / make not a trompet to be blown before the / as the ypocrytes
do in the synagoges and in the streates / to be praised of men. Verily I say
unto you / they have their reward. But thou when thou gyuest almose / let not
thy left hand know what thy right hand does / that thine almose may be in
secret. And then thy father which sees in secret / shall reward the openly.
As he rebuked their doctrine above, even so here he rebukes their works, for
out of deuelyshe doctrine can spring no godly works. But what works rebukes
he? Verelye such as God in the scripture commands, and without which no man
can be a christen man / even prayer fasting and almose deed. For as the
scripture corrupt with gloses, is no more Gods word, even so the deeds
commanded in the scripture (when the intent of them is perverted) are no more
godly deeds. what said the scrybes and pharyseys of him (think ye) when he
rebuked such manner of works? No doubt as they said (when he rebuked their
false gloses) how he destroyed the law and the prophets, interpretyng the
scripture after the lyterall sense* which kylleth, and after his own brain,
clean contrary to the comune faith of the holy church and minds of great
clerks and autentyke exposycions of old holy doctoures. Even so here what
other could they say, then. Behold the heretyke and did not we tell you
before whereto he would come, and that he kept some myschefe behind and spued
not out all his venom attonce, see to what al his godly new doctrine that
sounded so swetly, is come? he preached all of love, and would have the people
saved by faith / so long till yt now at the last, he preached clean against
all deeds of mercy, as prayer / fasting and almose deed, and destroys al
good works. His dyscyples fast no more then d^ (...) they despyce their
dyuyne service and come not to church, ye and if the holiest of al saint
Fraunces order axe them alms / they bid him labor with his hands and get
his living, and say that he that labors not is not worthy to eat / and
that God bade that no such strong loboures should loyter and go a beggynge
and be chargeable to the congregacyon and eat up that other pore men get with
the sweet of their bodies / ye and at the last ye shall see / if we resyste him
not be times / that he shall move the people to insurreccyon / as Cayphas said /
and the Romans shall come and take our land from us. As ye se in the text
Luke 13. How (when they could not drive ye people from him with these
persuasyons) they accused him to Pylate saying, we have found this fellow
peruertyng the people and forbyddyng to pay trybute to Caesar / and saying that
he is Christ a king, wherefore thou can not be Cesars friend, Johan. 16.
if thou let hi^ escape. But after al these blasphemies / yet must the holy
ghost rebuke ye world of their ryghtwisnes ye of their false ryghtwysnes and
false holiness, which are nether ryghtwysnes or holiness. but color of
ypocresye.

Christ here destroys not prayer, fasting, and almose deed. But preaches
against the false purpose and intent of such works and peruertynge the true
use / that is to say / their seeking of glory / and that they esteemed them
selves righteouse thereby and better then other men, and so despised and
condemned their brethren. with our almose which is as much to say as deeds of
mercy or co^passyon / we ought to seek our fathers glory only, even the wealth
of our brethren and to win them to the knowledge of our father and keeping of
his law. He that seeks the glory of his good works, seeks the glory that
belongs to God / and makes him self God. Is it not a blind thing of the
world / that either they will do no good works at all / or will be God for
their good works and have the glory them selves.

Concerning blowynge of trompettes and ryngynge of belles or making a cry /
Tro^pettes To blow trompettes what.
to call men to fet alms (though the right way be, that we should know in
every paryshe all our pore and had a comen coffer for them / and that
strangers should bring a letter of recomme^dacion with them of their
necessyte / and that we had a comen place to receive them in to for the time /
and though also we ought to flee all occasyons of vain glory) yet while the
world is out of order / it is not dampnable to do it. So that the very menynge
/ both that we blow no trompettes and that the left hand know not what the
right hand does, is that we do as secretly as we can / and in no wise seek
glory / or to receive it / if it were proffered. But to do our deeds in
synglenesse of conscience to God / because it is his commandment / Left hand
and even of pure compassyon and love to our brethren / and not that our good
deades through standing in our own consayte, should cause us to dyspyce them.
Vain glory. A good remedy^ against it.
If thou be tempted to vain glory for thy good deeds, then look on thine euel
thereto and put the one in the one balaunce and the other in the other. And then
if thou understand the law of God in any thing at all / tell me whether
weyeth heuyer.

If that thou do, do tempte the / then consider what thou do not. If it
move the to set up thy comb when thou gyueste thy brother a fathynge or an
half penny / ponder in thine heart / how far thou art of, from loving him
as well as thy self, and carynge for him as much as for thy self. And be
sure how much thou lakest of that, so much thou art in syn, and that in
da^pnable syn, if god for Christ's sake did not perdone the / because thine
heart morneth therefore, and thou fyghteste (...) thy self to come to such
perfeccyon. If a pecocke did look well on his fete and mark the evil favor
shrykynge of his voice he would not be so proud of the beutye of his tail.
works iustefye not from sin ^ether deserve the reward promised.
Finally that many dyspute, because god has promised to reward our deeds in
heaven. that our deeds deserve heaven / and because he promyseth to show mercy
to be merciful, that with our deeds we deserve mercy, and because he
promyseth forgyuenes of sins to them that forgive, that our deeds deserve
forgyuenes of sin and so iustefye us. I answer^ first there is enough
spoken thereof in other places, so that to them that have red that, it is
superfluouse to rehearse the matter again. Furthermore the argument is naught
and holds by no rule. See ye not that the father and mother have more right
to the child and to al it can do, tha^ to an ox or a cow. It is their flesh
and blood, nouryshed up with their labor and cost. The life of it and the
mayntenaunce and countenance thereof is their benefyte / so that it is not able
to recompense that it owes to father and mother by a thousand parts. And
though it be not able to do his duty nor for blyndnes to know his duty / yet
the father and mother promise more gifts still without ceasynge, and that such
as they think should most make it to see love and to provoke it to be willing
to do part of his duty, And when it has done amysse, though it have no
power to do satysfaccyon, nor lust or courage to com to the right way again,
yet their love and mercy abides still so great to it, that upon a poyntment
of mendinge, they not only forgive that is paste and fulfill their promise not
the later / but promise greater gifts then ever before, and to be better
father and mother to it then ever they were. Now when it can not do the
thousand part of his duty, how could it deserve such promyses of the
father and mother / as a labourer does his hyer? the reward therefore comes of
the love, mercy and truth of the father and mother as well when the child
keeps the apoyntment, as when they fulfill their promise, when it has broken
the appointment / and not of the deserving of the child.

Even so if we were not thus drowned in blyndenesse, we should easily see /
that we can not do the thousand part of our duty to God, no though there
were no life to come. If there were no life to come it were not right that I
should touch any creature of God, otherwise then he has appointed. Though
there were no life to come, it had nevertheless ben right that Adam hade
abstayned from the forboden aple tree / and from all other to, if they had been
forboden. Ye and though there were no life to com it were not the less right
that I loved my brother and forgave him to day, seeing I shall syn against him
to morrow. Because a father can not give his children heaven / has he no power
to charge them to love one another and to forgive and not aduenge one another?
And has he not right to beat them. if they smite each other, because he can
not give them heaven? A boundeman that has a master more cruel then a
reasonable man would be to a dog / if there were no heaven / might this bound
servant accuse God of vnryghtwysnes / because he has not made him a master?
Now then when we can not do our duetye by a thousand parts, though there
were no such promyses / and that the thing commanded is no less our duty
though no such promise were, it is easy to perceive that the reward promised
comes of the goods, mercy and truth of the promyser to make us the gladder
to do our duetye / and not of the deserving of the receyuer, when we have done
all that we ca^, we ought to ^ay in our heart that it was our duty and that we
ought to do a thousand times more, and that God (if he had not promised us
mercy of his goodness in Christ) he might yet of right damme us for yt we
have left undone.

And as touching forgyuenes of sin, though forgyuenes of sin be promised
unto the / yet challenge it not by thy merytes / but by the merytes of Christ's
blood, and hear what Paul says Phylyppenses. 3. Concerning the
ryghtwysnes of the law, I was fautlesse or such as no man could rebuke. But ye
things that were to vauntage, I thought damage for Christ's sake ye / I think
all thing to be damage or loss, for the excellent knowledges sake of Christ
Jesus my lord, for whose sake I let all go to loss, and count them as chafe
or refuse (that is to say, as things which are purged out and refused when a
thing is tried and made perfect) that I might win Christ and might be
found in him / not having my ryghtwysnes that comes of the law. But that
which comes of faith in Christ Jesus / which ryghtwysnesse comes of God
thorough faith / and is to know him and the power of his resurreccyon (how he
is lord over al syn* and the only thing that sleyeth and vanquesheth syn) and
to know also the fellowship of his passions that I might be made like unto his
death. So that when ryghtwysnesse and true merytes be tried, we must be
content that ours be the chafe and Christ's the pure corn / ours the skome
and refuse, and Christ's the pure gold And we must fashyo^ aur selves like
unto Christ and take every man his cross and slay and mortefye the sin in
the flesh, Cross.
or else we can not be partakers of his passion, The sin we do before our
conuersyon is forgyuen clerly thorough faith if we repent and submyt our selves
to a new life. And the sin we do agaynst^ our wylles (I mean the will of the
spyryte for after our conuersyon we have two wylles fygtynge one against the
other) that sin is also forgyuen us thorough faith, works what they do.
if we repent and submytte our selves to amend. And our dylygence in workynge
keeps us from synnynge again and mynysheth the syn that remains in the
flesh and makes us pure and less apt and dysposed to sin, and it makes
us merry in aduersytes and strong in temptacyons and bold to go in to God with
a strong and fervent faith in our prayers / and sure that we shall be hard
when we cry for help at need / either for our selves or our brethren, Now
they that be neglygent and sin / are brought in temptacyon unto the point of
desperacyon and feel the very pains of hell, so that they stand in doubt
whether God has cast them away or no. And in aduersyte they be sorrowful and
dyscouraged and think that God is angrye and ponysheth them for their sins.
when a child takes pain to do his father pleasure and is sure that he shall
have thank and reward of his labor, he is merry and reioyseth in his work
and pain that he suffers / and so is the aduersyte of them that keep them
selves from synnynge. But a child when he is beten for his fault, or when he
thinks his father is angrye and love him not, is anon desperate and
dyscouraged, so is the aduersyte of them that are weak and syn often. A child
that never dyspleseth his father, is bold in his fathers presence to speak
for him self or his friend. But he that often offends and is correct or
chydde, though the peace be made again, yet the remembrance of his offenses
makes him fearful and to mystrust and to think his father would not hear
him / so is the faith of the weak that sin often. Promise. he that professes
not a new life has no promise of mercy in Christ.
But as for them that profess not a new living how ever so much they dream
of faith* they have no faith at al, for they have no promise, except they be
converted to a new life. And therefore in aduersytes, temptacyon and death, they
utterly dyspare of all mercy and peryshe.

And when thou prayest / thou shall not be like the ypocrytes. For they love to
stand and pray in the synagoges and in corners of the streets / that they
might be seen of men. Verily I say unto you / they have their reward. Thou
therefore when thou prayest / go in to thy chamber / and shut thy door and pray
to thy father which is in secret. And thy father which seyth i^ secret / shall
reward ye openly.
Prayers.
After almose follows prayer. For as it is a Christen man's part, to help
his neighbor and to bear with him when he is ouercharged / and suffer with
him, and to stand on^ by another, as long as we live here on this ert^ Even
so because we be ever in such perell and combraunce / that we can not rydde
our selves out we must daily and hourly cry to God for aid and socoure / as
well for our neighbors as for our selves.

works must be seasoned with gods word if they shall please god
To give almose / to pray / to fast / or to do any thing at all / whether
between the and God, or between the and thy neighbor / can thou never do to
please God therewith / except thou have the true knowledge of Gods word to
season thy deeds withal. For God has put a rule in the scripture without
which thou can not move an here o^ thine head but that it is dampnable in
the sight of God. As it is of the Jews, though (as Paul bears them record)
they have a fervent zele to God / ye and have the scripture thereto yet because
they have not the true understanding, all is dampnable that they do, ypocrytes
with scrappes of almose get an hundred fold. And with prayer they get praise
(as thou seyst here) and pray thereto and rob wydowes houses / as thou
redeste Math. 23. And with fasting they get fat belyes / full dyshes / and
ever more then enough. And yet there is none almose / prayenge or fasting
among them in the sight of God, with their prayers they exclude all true
prayers, and make it impossyble that there should be any among them. For prayer
is, Prayer. what it is.
either alongynge for the honor of the name of God that all men should fear
him and keep his precepts and believe in him. And contrary to that seek they
their own honor / that men should fear them and keep their ordinances and
be leave in their sweet blessings / prayers / pardones / and what so ever they
promise. If they bid fast thou must do it or be dampened and be an heretyke and
rebellyous to holy church. If they dyspence and give the clean remyssyo^ for
to eat flesh on good friday (though thou be never so lusty) thou must obey,
or else thou art damned and an heretyke, because thou do not believe in holy
church. Either prayer is to give God thanks for the benefytes receyued^
Contrary to which, they will first have thanks of the world for their
prayers, and rob not only wydowes houses. But also lord / prince Emperor /
and all the world / of house and land ye and of their wits to. And then
they bind God to thank the^ / and to give the^ (beside the thanks which they
have gotten in the world) not only heaven and an hyer place, but that he give
heue to another man, save through their merytes.

Either prayer is a co^playnyng and a showing of thine own myserye and
necessyte, or of thy neighbors before God / desiring him with all the power
of thine heart, to have compassyon and to socoure. Contrary to this / they have
excluded with their prayers all necessyte and myserye from among them. They be
^ordes over all, and do what they will thorough the whole world. King and
Emperor are their servants, they need but say the word, and their will is
fullfylled. And as for their neighbors, they have no compassyon upon them, to
bring their complayntes before God. But with their prayers rob the^ of that
^ytle they have, and so make them more miserable.

Chamber. To shut thy chamber door, what it means.
Of entryng into the chamber and shutting the door to. I say as above of that
the left hand should not know what the right hand does, that the meaning
is / that we should avoid all worldly praise and profit, and pray with a
syngle eye and true intent according to Gods word, and is not forboden
thereby, to pray openly. For we must have a place to come to gether to pray in
general, to thank and to cry to God for the comune necessyte as well as to
preach the word of God in, where the pressed ought to pray in the mother ^onge,
that the name of God may be hallowed and his word faithfully taught and truly
understand and faith and godly living increased, and for the king and rulers,
that God will give them his spirit, to love ye comune wealth and for peace, that
God will defend us from all ennymyes, for wederynge and fruits, that God will
keep away pestylence and al plages And the priest should be an ensample to the
people how they should pray. There be of such things as the prestes and other
babble (and not pray) many good collectes that should much edifye the people
if they were spoken in the mother tongue. And then while the prestes sing
psalms, let every man pray pryuatly and give God thanks for such benefytes
as his heart knowed he has received of God and comend to God his pryuate
necessytes and the pryuate necessytes of his neyboures which he knows and is
pryuy to. Nether is there in all such any ieoperdy of vain glory. But and if
God have given any man the spyryte of prayenge, as all men have not like
gifts, that he pray often and when other do not, then to have a secret place to
pray in both for the auoydyng of vain glory and speech of people / and that
thou may be fre / to use thy words as the lusts and what so ever gestures
and behauoures do move the most to devotion is necessary and good.

And finally what so ever necessyte thou have though thou feel thy self a
great sinner, Prayer. Gods commandment and promise should move us to pray.
yet if thine heart be to amend / let not that dyscourage the. But go boldly
to thy father / seeing thou haste his commandment / ever to pray / and
promise that he will hear the / not for thy goodness / but of his goodness
and for his truth.

Moreover when we pray / babyll not much as the hethen do. For they think
that they shall be hard for their much bablynges sake. Be not therefore like
unto them. For your father knows of what things ye have need / before ye axe
him. Of this manner therefore pray ye. Our father which art in heaven / honored
be thy name / thy kyngedome come. Thy will be fulfilled / Give us this day our
daily bread even in earth / as it is in heaven. And forgive us our trespasses /
as we forgive our trespassers. And lead us not into temptacyon. But deliver us
from evil. For thine is the kyngedome / the power and the glory for ever. So
be it.
As before he rebuked their false intent in prayenge / that they sought praise
and profit of that work which ought to be dyrecte to God alone, either to
give him thanks / that is to say, to be a known and to confess in the
heart, that all we have comes of him, or to call upon him for aid and socoure
in temptacyo^s and all necessyte. Even so here he rebuked a false kind of
prayenge, wherein the tongue and lyppes labor and all the body is payned, but
the heart talks not with God nor feleth any swetnes at all, nor has any
confydence in the promyses of God, but trusts in the multitude of words and
in the pain and tedyousnes of the lenght of the prayer / as a coniurar do the
in his cyrcles. Characters and supersticyouse words of his coniuracyon. As ye
se now to be among our friars / monks / chanons nuns / and even through out
all the spyrytualty, which (as I have proved above) have with their false
intent of prayenge, excluded al occasyons and the whole matter of true prayeng,
and have turned it into a bodily labor, to vex the tongue, lyppes, eyes, and
troth with roryng, False prayer is paynfull.
and to weary all the members, so that they say (and may truly swear it) that
there is no greater labor in the world / then prayer, for no labor what
soever it be, when the body is compelled and the heart vnwyllynge, can be other
then grievous and paynful. true prayer is plesaunt
But true prayer (if they complained and sought help either for the^ selves or
for their neighbors and trusted in the promise of God) would so conforte the
soul and courage the heart, that the body (though it were half dead and
more) would reuyue and be lusty again, and the labor would be short and
easy (as for an ensample, if thou were so oppressed that thou were weary of thy
life, and wentest to the king for help, and had speed, the spirits would
so rejoice, that thy body would receive her strength again and be as lusty as
ever it was) even so the promyses of God work joy above al mesure. where they
be believed in the heart.

But our hyrelinges have no Gods word save trust in the multitude of
words, length of babbling and pain of body as bound servants. Nether know
they any other virtue to be in prayer, as ye may se by the ordynaunces of all
foundacyons. Syon. Shene.
King Henry the fyfte build Syon and the Charterhouse of sheue on the other
side the water of such a manner that lyppe labor may never cease. For when
the friars of Syon ring out, the Nuns begin And when the Nuns ring out
of service / the Monks on the other side begin. And when they ring out, the
friars begin again / and vex them selves night and day. And take pain for
Gods sake / for which God must give them heaven. Ye and I have known of some
year this, that for vere pain and tedyousnesse have bydden the deuell take
their founders. They call Lent the holyes^e time of the year. But wherein is
that holiness, verily in the multitude of words and tedyous^ length of the
service. For let them begin at six, and it wylbe twelve or they can end. In
which time they be so weryed that by the time they have dyned / they have lust
to nothing save to sleep And in the end of all they think no farther, then
that God must reward their pain. And if thou axe how they know it. They
will answer, he must reward it or be vnryghtwyse. No God looks not on the
pain of thy prayer but on thy faith in his promise and goodness nether yet on
the multitude of thy words or long babyllynge. For he knows thy matter
better the^ thou thy self. And though the Jews and the hethen were so folyshe
through their unbelief to babble many words, yet were they never so mad, as
to mumble and buffe out words that they understand not. Thou will say. what
matter makes it, if I speak words which I understand not. or if I pray not
at all, seeing God knows my matter al ready. I answer, he will have the to
open thine heart to hi^ / to inform and edefy thine own self, that thou
myghtest know how that all goodness is of him, to put thy trust and confydence
in him / and to flee to him in time of need, and to be thankful / and to love
him and obey his commandments, and turn and be converted unto thy lord
God, and not to run wild / as the ungodly do, which know not the benefytes
of God, and therefore be unthankful to obey his commandments.

And that thou may know how and what to pray, he gives the a short
instructyon and ensample saying / after this manner pray.

The Pater noster is expounded.
O our father which art in heaven.
First must thou go to him as a mercyful father which of his own goodness and
fatherly love yt he bears to the, is ready to do more for the than thou can
desire, though thou have no merytes. But because he is thy father / only if
thou will turn and hensforthe submytte thy self to learn to do his will.

To honor gods name what it is.
Honored be thy name.
Honored and praised be thy name or honored and praised be thou, for to
honor God and to honor the name of God is all one. And to honor the name
of God is, to dread him to love him and to keep his commandments. For when
a child obeys his father, he honoreth and prayseth his father and when he is
rebellyous and dysobedient, he dyshonoreth his father. This is then the
understanding and meaning of it. O father / seeing thou art father over al /
power out thy spyryte upon al flesh / and make all men to fear and dread and
love the as their father, and in keeping thy commandments to honor the and
thy holy name.

Thy kingdom come.
That is, seeing thou art king over al, make all to know the and make the
kings and rulers which are but thy substitutes, to command nothing but
according to thy word / and to them make all subjects obey.

Thy will befulfylled in earth / as it is in heaven.
This is al one with that goes before. For as much then as thou art father
and king over all, and all we thy children and brethren among our selves, make
us all as obedyent to seek and to do thy will as the aungelles do in heaven.
Make that no man seek his own will but all thine. But and if thou withdraw
thine hand to tempte thy children, that the rulers command ought contrary
to thy will / then make the subjects to stand fast by thy word and to offer
them selves to suffer all extremyte, rather then to obey. Finally when we pray
to the in our te^ptacions and aduersites desirynge the of what so ever thing
it be, and mean truly yet if thou that know al, seyst a better way to thy
glory and our profit, then they wylbe and not ours. As thy son Jesus gave us
an ensample / when he desired (if it had been possible) that / that cup of
better death might have deperted from him saying, yet not as I will, but as thou
wylt.

Give us our daily bread.
By bread is understand al manner of fusty naunce in the Ebrue speech / ye and
here is understand thereby all that pertayned unto the necessyte of this life.
If we have bread there is dearth of nothing that can pynche / namely in that
land. Give us our daily bread. Give us all that the necessyte of this life
daily requires. Give it us day by day, as we need it. we desire not to have
store for many years, to exclude all necessyce of prayenge to the, and to be as
it were out of thy danger, and to forget the. But mynyster it day by day,
that we may daily feel thy benefytes and never forget the. Or if thou give us
abundance above that we desire, then give us an heart to use it and to
bestow it for that purpose thou gave it and to deal with our neighbors,
and not to love it inordynatly, but to think that it is thine, and that thou
may take it away every hour and that we be content that thou so do at thy
pleasure, and so ever to have it but for daily bread.

Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive our trespassers.
Because he knows that our nature is so weak that we can not but sin
daily, therefore he teaches us daily to repent and to reconsyle our selves to
gether / and daily to axe God forgyuenes. Seeing he commands us to axe, we
may be bold so to do, and to believe that he will forgive us. No man therefore
needs to despare that can repent and axe forgyuenes, how ever so deep he
has sinned. And me thinks, if we looked a little nere upon this text, we
neaded not to make the pope so great a God for his perdons. For Christ (which
is a man to be believed) shows us here a more sure way, ye and that a sensyble
way which we may feel that we be perdoned and our sins forgyuen. we can have
none experyence of the popes things whether they be so or no. He can with all
his perdons deliver no man of any purgatory that God puts us unto in this
world. He can not bless or heal any man so much as of a pore ague or tothe
ache. which deseases yet by his own confession God puts on us to purge us
from sin. But where we can not see / feel / or have any experyence at all,
that it so is, there is he mighty. If I were come whom out of a land where
never man was before, and were sure never man should come, I might tell as many
wonders as master More does of Vtopia, and no man could rebuke me.

But here Christ makes the sure of perdon, for if thou can forgive thy
brother / god has bound him self to forgive the, what if no man have sinned
against me? That were hard in this life, nevertheless yet if that professyon
be in thine heart / that thou know that it is thy duetye to forgive thy
brother for thy fathers sake / and art obedyent to thy fathers ordinance / and
would forgive, if any of thy brethren had offended the and did axe the
forgiveness. Then have thou that same spirit which which God desires to be in
the. Mark what Christ says above in the beginning of the.5 chapter. Blessed
be the merciful / for they shall have mercy / doeste thou pety thy brethren
that syn, and do thy best to amend the^, that thy fathers name may be
honored. Then have thou if whereby thou art sure of mercy as soon as thou
desyrest it. And again. Blessed be the peace makers for they shall be Gods
children. Lo, if there be any varyau^ce among thy brethren, that one have
offended the other, do thy best to set them at one, and thou have the same
thing that God desires of the / for which he has bound him self to forgive
the.

Lead us not into temptacyon.
That is. Let us not slyppe out of thy leaf, but hold us fast, give us not
up nor cease to govern us, nor take thy spirit from us. For as an hounde can
not but follow his game when he seyth it before him if he be lowse, so can we
not but fall into sin when occasyon is given us, if thou withdraw thine
hand from us. Lead us not into temptacyon. Let no temptacyon fall upon us,
greater then thine help in us. But be thou stronger in us than the temptacyon
thou sendeste or letteste come upon us. Lead us not into te^ptacyons. Father
though we be neglygent, ye and unthankful, and dysobedyent to thy true
prophets / yet let not the dyuell lowse upon us to deceive us with his false
prophets and to harden us in the way, in which we gladly walk, as thou
dydest Pharao with the false miracles of his sorserars, as thine Apostle Paul
threateneth us. 2. The. 2. A little threde holds a strong man where he gladly
is. A little pullyng draws a man whether he gladly goes. A light wind
dryueth a great ship with the screme. A light persuasyon is enough to make
a lecherous man believe that fornycacyon is no sin. And an angrye man that it
is lawful to aduenge him self, and so forth by all the corrupt nature of man.
A little miracle is able to confirm and harden a man in that openyon and faith
which his blind reason believes all redye. A few false miracles were enough
to persuade the covetousness of Pharao and his gredynes to hold the children of
Israel in bondage for their service, that thy true miracles showed by Moses
for their delyueraunce / were not of the. But of the same kind and done by the
same craft / as were the miracles of his sorserars, and so to harden his heart.

Even so father if thou give us over for our unkindness / seeing the blind
nature of man delyteth in evil / and is ready to believe lies, a little thing
is enough to make them that love not to walk in thy truth (and therefore
never able to understand thy sons doctrine. Johan. 7) for to believe the
faynynges of our most holy father, al is superstycyous popetry and inuysyble
blessings / and to harden them therein. As a stone cast up in to the air, can
nether go any hyer nether yet there abide / when the power of the hurler
cease to drive it. Even so father, seeing our corrupt nature can but go
downeward^ only, and the deuell and the world dryueth thereto the same way,
how can we proceed further in virtue or stand therein, if thy power cease in
us. Lead us not therefore o merciful father into te^ptacyon nor cease at any
time to govern us. Now seeing the God of al mercy which knows thine
infirmite commanded the to pray in all temptacion and aduersite, and has
promised to help / if thou trust in him, what excuse is it to say, when thou
have sinned, I could not stand of my self when his power was ready to help
the, if tho^ hade axed it.

But deliver us from evil.
First (as above) let us not fall into temptacyon. Seconderely, if we be fallen,
as who lives and falls never? for never to fall were enough to make a man
as evil as Lucyfer, and to believe that he stood by his own power. If therefore
we be fallen even to the botome, how so ever deep it be, put in thine arm
after, for it is long and strong enough, and pluck us out again. Thyrdly,
deliver us from euel, and pluck us out of the flesh and the world and the
power of the deuel, and put us in the kingdom where we be past al ieoperdy and
where we can not sin any more.

For the kingdom and the power and the glory is thine for ever. So be it.
Because that t^ou only art the king, and al other but substytutes. And
because al power is thine, and all other men's power but borrowed of the,
therefore ought all honor and obedyence to be thine of right as chief lord,
and none to be given other men, but only for the office they hold of the.
Nether ought any creature to seek any more in this world, then to be a brother
till, thou have put him in office then (if brotherlynes will not help / which
he ought first to prove) let him execute thy power. Nether may any man take
auctorite of him self, till God have chosen him / that is to wete* till he be
chosen by the ordyna^ce that God has set in the world to rule it. Finally no
king / lord / master / or what ruler it be, has absolute power in this
world / and is the very thing which he is called. For then they ceased to be
brethren still, nether could they syn what so ever they commanded. But now
their auctoryte is but a lymeted power / which when they tra^sgresse, they syn
against their brethren, and ought to reconsile them selves to their brethren
and to axe forgiveness, and they are bound to forgive.

Finally let kings / rulers / and officers remember that God is the very king
/ and refer the honor that is given to them for their offices sake / to him
/ and vmble them selves to him and knowledge and confess in their hearts, that
they be but brethren and even no better before God / then the worst of their
subjects. So be it.

For if ye forgive men their fautes your heavenly father shall forgive you also.
But and if ye do not forgive men their fautes / no more shall your father
forgive your fautes.
A covenant where with god is bond to forgive us, and we to forgive each
other.
This is Gods covenant with us and a co^fyrmacyon of the petycyon above
rehearsed in ye Pater noster / forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive our
trespassers. If thou wylt enter into the covenant of thy lord God / and
forgive thy brother, then what so ever thou have committed against God, if thou
repent and axe hi^ forgyuenes, thou art sure that thou art so absolved by these
words, that none in heaven nor earth can bynd the* No though our most holy
father curse the as blake as coals, Gods covenant is a sure absolucyo^ to al
yt keep it.
seven foot under the earth and seven foot above, and cast al his lightening
upon the, to burn the to powder. Keep the covenant of the lord thy God
therefore, and fear no bugges. But and if thou wylt not come with in the
covenant of God, or if when thou haste professed it and received the sign
thereof, thou cast the yoke of the lord from of thy neck, be thou sure, thou
art bound by these words so fast yt none in heaven or in earth can lowse the.
No, though our erthyshe god whysper al his absolucyons over the, and clawe the
and stroke thy head with all his sweet blessings.

Furthermore though forgiuene^ of thy sins be annexed to thy work and
forgeuynge thy brother / yet does not (as I said) thy works iustefye the
before God. But the faith in Christ's blood and in the promyses made us for
his sake, does bring ryghtwysnesse into the heart. And the ryghtwysnes of the
heart by faith, is felt and known by the work. As Peter in the first of his
second epistle commands to do good works / for to make our vocacyo^ and
election sure / that we might feel our faith, and be certefyed that it is
right. Eor except a man be proved and tried, it can not be known / nether to
him self or other men / that he is ryghtwyse and in the true faith. Take an
ensample lest thou be begyled with sophystrye Christ says Mat. 13. The
kingdom of heaven is like leven which a woman takes and hydeth in three peckes
of meal till all be leuended or sour. Leven.
Leven is some tym taken in an euel sense for the doctrine of the phareseys
which corrupted the swetnes of the word of God with the leven of their gloses,
and some time in a good sens, for the kyngedome of heaven that is to say the
gospel and glad tydinges of Christ. For as leven alters the nature of dowe
and makes it through sour / even so the gospel turns a man into a new
life and alters him a little and a little / Faith.
first the heart and then the members. Faith in Christ first certyfyeth the
conscience of the forgeuenes of sins, and delyuereth us from fear of
everlasting dampnacyon / and then brings the love of God and of his law
into the heart, which love is the ryghtwysnes of the heart. Love brings good
works in to the members / which works are the outward ryghtwysnesse and the
ryghtwysnesse of the members. Love is ryghtwysnes.
To hate the will of God is the vnryghtwysnes of the heart and causes evil
works which are the vnryghtwysnesse of the members. As when I hatyd my
brother / my tongue spoke euel, my hands smote and so forth To love is the
ryghtwysnesse of the heart / and causes good works which are the ryghtwysnes
of the members. As if I love my brother and he have need of me and be in
pouerte, love will make me put mine hand in to my pursse or almorye and to
give him some what to refresh him. etc. That the love of God and of his
commandments is the ryghtwysnesse of the heart, does no man doubt save he
that is hertlesse. Faith brings love.
And that love spryngeth of faith thou may euydently see. 1. Johan. 2. ^e
that loves his brother dwells in the light. But he that hates his brother,
is in darckenesse and walks in darckenesse / and woteth not whether he goes
/ for darckenesse has blinded his eyes / why is he that hates / in
darckenesse (verily because he seyth not the love of God. For (if he saw that,
he could not but love his brother for so kind a fathers sake. If any man hate
his brother, thou art sure that the same man is in darkness and has not the
light of true faith nor seyth what Christ has done. If a man so love that
he can forgive his brother, thou art sure that he is in the light of the true
faith and seyth what mercy is showed him in Christ.

This is then the sum of all together works are the outward ryghtuousnes
before the world, works.
and may be called the ryghtuousnes of the members and spryng of inward love.
Love.
Love is the ryghtwysnes of the heart, and spryngethe of faith. Faith is the
trust in Christ's blood, Faith.
and is the gift of God. Ephe. 2. where unto a man is drawn of the goodness
of God, and dreue^ through true knowledge of the law and of beholdinge his
deeds in ye light of the law and with comparynge the lust and desire of ye
members unto the request of the law, and with seeing his own dampnacyon in
the glass of the law. For if a man saw his own dampnacion in the law, he
should ymmedyatly hate God and al his works and utterly dyspare, except that
God offered him Christ, and forgave all that were paste, and made him his son
and took the dampnacyon of the law away, and promised that if he would submytte
him self to learn and to do his best, that he should be accept as well as an
angel in heaven, and thereto if he fell of frayltye and not of ma^yce and
stoburnesse, it should be forgeuen upon a me^dment, and that God would ever
take him for his son, and only chastyce him at home when he did a mysse, after
the most fatherlyest manner and as easily as his deseases would suffer, but never
bring hi^ forth to be judged after the rygorousnes of the law And as thou
could not se leven though thou brakest up a lose, except thou smellest or
tastedest the sourenes, even so could thou never se true faith or love,
except thou saw works / and also saw the entente and meaning of the
worker, leest ypocresy deceive the.

Our deeds are the effect of ryghtwysnes and thereto an outward testymony and
a certefyenge of the inward ryghtwysnes, as soreness is of leven. that
faith iustefyeth what it meanethe.
And when I say faith iustefyeth, the understanding is, that faith receaueth
the iustefyenge. God promyseth to forgive us our sins and to impute us for
full rightwysse And God iustefyeth us actyuely, that is to say forgeueth us and
rekeneth us, for full ryghtwyse And Christ's blood deserves it, and faith in
the promise receaueth it and certyfyeth the co^scye^ce thereof. Faith chalengeth
it for Christ's sake, which has deserved all that is promised and cleueth ever
to the promise and truth of the promyser, and pretends not the goodness of
her work. But knowledgeth that our works deserve it not, save are crowned and
rewarded with the deseruynge of Christ. Take an ensample of young children, when
the father promyseth them a good thing for the doing of some tryfle, and when
they come for their reward, dalyethe with them saying, what, that thou have
done is not worth hafe so much, should I geuethe so great a thing for so little
a tryfle? They will answer, ye did promise me it, ye said I should have it,
why did ye promise, and why then did ye say so? And let him say what he will
to drive them of, they will ever say again ye did promise me, so ye did, ye
said I should have it, so ye did. But hyrelinges will pretend their work and
say, I have deserved it, I have done so much, and so much, and my labor is
worth it.

Now at the first covenant making with God and as often as we be reconsyled,
after we have sinned, Faith.
the ryghtwysnesse comes of God all together. But after the atonement is made
and we reconsyled, then we be partlye ryghtwyse in our selves and vnrightwyse,
ryghtwyse as far as we love, and vnryghtwyse as far as the love is
imperfect. And faith in the promise of God that he does reken us for full
ryghtwyse does ever supply yt vnryghtwysnes and imperfectnes, as it is our hole
ryghtwysenes at the beginning.

Finally our works which God commands and unto which he annexed his
promyses that he will reward them / works are sacraments
are as it were very sacraments and visyble and sensible signs, tokens,
yernest, oblygacyons, witnesses, testimonies, and a sure certefyenge of our
souls / that God has and will do according to his promise to strength our
weak faith and to keep the promise in mind. But they iustefye us not, no
more the^ the visible works of the sacraments do. As for an ensample, the
work of baptyme that outward washing which is the vysyble sacrament or
sign, iustefyeth us not. But God only iustefyeth us actyuely as cause
effycient or workman. Baptym.
God promyseth to iustefye who so ever is baptized to believe in Christ, and to
keep the law of God that is to say, to forgive them their fore sins and to
impute ryghtwysnesse unto them, to take them for his sons and to love them
as well as though they were full ryghtwyse. Christ.
Christ has deserved us that promise and ryghtwysnesse. And faith do the
receive it. and God does give it, and impute it to faith and not the
washing. Faith.
And the washing does testefye it / and certyfye us of it, as the Popes
letters do certyfye the beleuers of the Popes perdones. Now the letters help
not or hyndre / but that the perdone were as good without them / as with them /
save only to stablyshe weak souls that could not believe except they read
the letters / looked on the seal and saw the prynte of saint Peter's keys,

O merciful God and a most loving father / how cares he for us / first
above all and beside all his other benyfytes / to give us his own son Jesus /
and with him to give us him self and all, and not content therewith, but to
give us so many sacraments or visible signs to provoke us and to help our
weak faith and to keep his mercy in mind, as baptyme, the sacrament of his
body and blood, and as many other sacraments as they will have / if they put
sygnyfycacions to the^ (for we destroy none, but they destroy which have put
out the sygnificacio^s or feigned some without) as wedlock to sygnefy that
Christ is the husband and we his wife and partakers with him, as the wife with
her husband of al his riches. etc. and beyond all those vysible sacraments
to give us yet more sensyble and surer sacraments and suraunce of his goodness,
even in our own selves as if we love and give alms to our neighbor, if we
have co^passyon and pray for him if we be mercyful and forgive him, if we deny
our selves, and fast, and withdraw all plesures from the flesh for love of
the life to come and to keep the commandments of God. For when such things
being before impossible / and now are easy and natural / we feel, and are
sure that we be altered and of a new nature / and a new creature shapen in
ryghtwysnes after the image of Christ and God our father / seeing his laws of
ryghtwysnesse are written in our hearts.

When ye fast, be not sade as the ypocrites are. For they fassyon them a new
countenance, that it might appear unto men, how they fast. Verily I say unto
you, they have their reward. Thou therefore when thou fastest, annoynte thine
heed and wash thy face, that it appear not unto men how thou fasteste. But
unto thy father which is in secret And thy father which seythe in secret,
shall reward the openly.
As above of almose and prayer, even so here Christ rebukes the false entente
and ypocrysye of fasting. That they sought praise of that work that was
ordained for to tame the flesh and used such fassyons / that all the world
might know that they fasted / to praise them and to say O what holy men are
these / how pale and petyfull they look even like death / hanging down
their hedes and beholdynge the earth, as men clean out of the world? If these
come not to heaven / what shall become of us poor wretches of the world? If
these be not great in the favor of God, and their prayers hard what so
ever they axe / in what case are we lay people? Happy is he that may be a
brother among them and partaker of their prayers and fastings and other holy
living, In an unhappy. In an happy (I would say) hour was he borne that
buyldethe them a sell or a cloysture / or gives them a porcyon of his land to
comfort them good men, in this paynefull living / and strayte penance which
they have taken upon them. Blessed were he that might kiss the edge of the
cote of one of the^. Oh, he that might have his body wrapped in one of their
old cotes at the hour of death, it were as good to him as his Chrystendome.
etc. It apereth also by yt they axed Christ why his dyscyples fasted not as
well as the pharyses, yt they often fasted when the comen people fasted not and
al apere holy. As ours fast aduent, and begin before lent at Septuagesima /
when. Laus tibi domine comes in.

And concerning the annoyntynge of thy heed. etc. is meant, To annoi^t the heed
what it meneth.
as before of turnyng the other cheke and of that the left hand should not
know what the right did, that is yt they should avoid al vain glory, and fast
to god, and for the intent that God ordained it for, and that with a merry heart
and cherful countenance thereby to feel the workyng of God, and to be sure of
his favor, Such is the meaning, and not to bind the^ that will fast to
anoint their heed and wash their faces. And the manner or phrase of speaking
comes of an usage, that was among the Jews, to anoint the^ selves with sweet
and odoryferouse annoyntmentes when they were dysposed to be merry and to make
good chere, as ye se how Mary of Bethany poured a box of precyouse oyntmente
upon Christ's heed at souper.

As concerning fasting, Fasting.
it were good that kings and rulers did set an order of soberness among
their subjects / to avoid derthe innumerable deseases and the great hepe of
vices that spring of inte^perancy / and that they forbade not only ryote and
excess. But also all manner wanton, delycyous and customable eating and
drinking of such things as corrupt the people and make the men more
effeminate then the woman, so that there remains no more tokens of a man in
the^ save their berdes. Our fassyons of eatinge make us sloth full and unlusty
to labor and study / unstable inconstant and light manered / full of wits,
after wytted (as we call it) incyrcumspecte in consyderat, hedy, rash, and
hastye to begin unadvisedly and without casting of parelles the end not
considered what may follow nor the means well looked upon / how and by what
way the matter might be brought to pass tryfelers / mockers / rude / unsavory /
iestere with out all manner of salt / and even very apes, and Marmesettes, and
full of wanton and rebaldyshe communycacyon and lewd gestures. It corrupts
the wit with false judgment, and infecteth the body with lust, and makethe
the hole man so unquiet in hi^ self, that the body can not sit still and rest
in one place and co^tynue in his work, nor the mind persevere and endure in
our purpose.

Let them provide that there be diligent fysshynge in the se, and command the
se cost and towns whyther fyshe may easily come, to fast friday, saturday and
we^sday to, if need be, and on the friday to eat no white meat. And let the
countries which have none abundance of fyshe, yet have white meat enough,
fast friday and saturday from flesh only. And let those contreys where scasty
of both is, fast frydaye from flesh only / and eat flesh wensday and
saturday. But absteyne from super or from dinner / or eat soberly those days,
And let them so moderate their fastes that the people may bear it / a
prouysyon made for the old / the sick, and feeble, etc. which fast shall be a
temporal thing* for a temporal comen welthe only, and not a service to God.

Then let the prestes preach first the law^ truly and teach the people to se
their sins / and so bring them to repentance. And secondarelye the faith
of Christ and the forgyuenes of sin through faith. And thyrdlye almose /
prayer and fasting / which are the hole life of a Christen man, and with out
which there is no Christen man a live. Almose.
And let them preach the true use of their almose, which is to help thy
neighbor with council, with body and goods and all that is in thy power,
Prayer.
and the true use of prayer which is to bring his necessyte and thine own
before God with a strong faith in his promyses, Fasting.
and the true use of fasting which is to tame the flesh unto the spirit,
that the soul may atte^de to the word of God and pray through faith.

By these three we keep the spirit of God, Almose. Prayer and fasting how
necessary.
and does continue and also grow in ryghtwysnes and wax perfecter and
perfecter in soul and body. And if these fail or that we understand not the
right intent, we lose the spirit again and the ryghtwysnesse of faith / and
the true understanding of the scripture, and al our learning shall be but
darckenes. And then what a blyndenes is that, when the darcknes of hell is
called the light of heaven.

Almose. Prayer and fasting are inseparable.
As it is of almose and prayer, so it is of fasting, judge of al three, where
any one of them is, there are they all three, and where any one is away, there
is none at all, we must have the professyon of al three ever written in our
hearts I must ever love my neighbor and be ready to help, and when occasyon
is offered, then do it I ought to consider and know that al comes of God, and
to knowledge that same to him in mine heart. And what soever we need we ought to
know, that we must receive that of God, and therefore to call ever to him with a
strong faith. Even so I must ever fight against my flesh, and therefore ever
withdraw from it all that moves it to rebelle against the spirit.

Fasting is not in eating and drinking only.
So now fasting stands not in eating and drinking only, and much less in
flesh alone But in abstynence of all that mouethe the flesh against the
spirit, as long sleapynge, ydlenes, and filthy communycacyon and al world
lie talking, aa of covetousness and promocyon and such like, and wanton
company. soft clothes, and soft beds, and so forth, which are that right
hand, and right eye that must be cut of and plucked out, that the holeman
peryshe not. And as ye can put no general rule of almose or prayer, no more
can ye of fasting But I must be all way redye to cut of what so ever I
perceive to strenght the flesh against the spirit. And I must have a
dylygent eye to the flesh and his complexyon and if ought escape me in word or
deed, seek whence the occasyo^ came, and attonce cut of that right hand and
pluck out that eye.

If this fast be truly preached, works make ypocrytes, if the true intent be
away.
then is fasting good / and not before / for making of ypocrytes / as Christ
would not let his disciples fast before they were learned, lest they should
thereby have been no better then the pharesyes. And then the outward fasting
ordained by the temporal rulers helps much / for the weakes sake, ye and
though the land were so plenteouse that it need not to command such fast
for to avoid derth, ye they ought to set such up, because of them that can
not rule them selves, Rulers be ordained for them that ca^ not rule them selves.
for whose sakes they ought to forbyde excesses of tauerns and ale houses and
ryotyng out of season. For if the people could rule them selves, what need
rulers. More over if any man pryuatlye show the priest his infyrmytyes / and
the prestes se any manner of abstinence or chastifyng apt for the person, that
let him council him to do for the subdewinge of the flesh, and not command
as a tyrant under pain of dampnacyon and to make satysfaccyon. Thus wise let
him say, brother or sister, ye be bound under pain of deedlye sin to tame
your flesh by some manner of way that ye sin not against God, and I know
no better then this, my council and my desire therefore is, that ye use this
till either ye have no more need / or till God show you some better. etc. And
let the elders consider dyligently the course of their youth and with wisdom
/ council and dyscrete governance / and help the younger to avoid the
perelles and ieoperdyes which they have learned by their own, experyence to be
in yt dangerous journey.

Preacher the office of a true preacher.
More over when the people be fallen from their profession and from the law, as
it shall be impossyble for the preacher, to keep the great multitude to gether,
if the temporal sword be slack and necglygent in punyshynge open offenses (as
they ever have and wylbe, save in those points only wherein lies the pythe of
their own profit and advantage / and the weight of their honor and
mauntenaunce of their dygnytyes) and when God also (as his promise is) has
brought upon them the curses of the law, hungre, derth, battle, pestilence
and al manner of plages with all mysfortune and evil luck. Then let the true
preachers be importune, and show the people the causes of their mys^ ^d
wretched aduersyte, and expound the ^awe to them and bring them to knowledge
of their sins, and so bind their conscyences and draw them to repentance
and to the apoyntmente and covenant of the lord again. As many holy
prophets, prestes and kings in the old testamente did call the people back
and brought the^ again in time of aduersyte, unto the apoyntme^t of the lord.
And the priest, prophet, or king in Gods stead smote hands with the^, and
took an oath of the^, to be ye lords people and to turn again to the lords
couenaunte, for to keep his law and to believe in his promyses. And God
ymedyatly withdrewe his hand and rydde the^ out of all captyuyte and danger,
and be came as mercy full as ever before.

But we Christen have been very seldom or never called again to the couenaunte
of the lord ye law of god and faith of Christ. But to the covenant of the
pope often. As he now clocketh a pase of his chekyns and will both prove al
his old polyces, and seek and ymagyn new, practikes. And if the people come
again let the priest or byshope after the ensample of the prophets and hye
prestes of the Israelytes take an oath in Gods stead of the king and lords.
And let the king and lords receuyng an oath of the people, and follow the
ensample of the Neniuites in fasting and prayenge.

Some man will say, seeing fasting is to withdraw al plesures from the body
and to punyshe the flesh, then God deliteth in our pain taking. etc. I
answer God delyteth in true obedyence and in all that we do at his
commandment and for the intent that he commands it for. If thou love and
pety thy neighbor and help him, thy almose is acceptable. If thou do it of
vain glory to have the praise that belongs to God, or for greatter profit
only, i^ to make satysfaccyon for thy sins past and to dyshonoure Christ's
blood which has made it all redye, Pain how God delyteth in our pain
taking.
then is thine almose abhomynable If thy prayer be thanks in thine heart or
calling to God for help, with trust in him according to his promise, then
thy prayer pleases If thou believe in Christ's blood for the remyssyon of
sins, and hence forth hate syn, that thou punyssheste thy body to flee the
lusts and to keep them under that thou syn not again / then it pleases God
exceadyngely. But and if thou think that God delyteth in the work or the
work it self / the true entente away / and in thy pain for the pain it
self, thou art as far out of the way, as from heaven to the earth, If thou
would kyl thy body or when it is tame enough, pain him further that thou
were not able to serve God and thy neighbor / according to the room and
estate thou art in / thy sacrefyce were clean with out salt and al to gether
unsavory in the taste of God, and thou mad and out of thy wit, but and if thou
trust in thy work, then art thou abhomynable.

Fast, The intent of fasting what it is.
Now let us look on the popes fast. First the intent should be to tame thy
lusts / not letchery only, but pride cheflye, wrath, malice, hate envy, and
covetousness and to keep the law of God / and therefore standethe not in meat
and drink only, but how they keep goods law compare it to their deeds and
thou shall se. Fast, How the Jews. fast.
Secondarely the fast of the old law was, to put ^n mourning clothes as
heir or sack / and nether to eat nor drink until night, and all the while to
pray and to do almose deeds and show mercy. And at even they eat flesh and
what god gave soberly as little as would sustain the body etc. The Popes fast is
comenly, Fast. The popes fast.
only to eat no flesh. I say not look how lene they be but co^sydre what
tamynge of the flesh it is to eat ten or twenty manner of fisshes dressed
after the costelyest manner, and to sytte a cople of hours and to pour in of
the best wine and ale that may be gotten. And at night to ba^ket with dew (as
they say) of al manner of fruits and confectyons Marmeled, Succad, Grenegynger,
Comfettes, Sugar plate, with Malmesay, and Romney, burnt with Sugar, Synamond,
and Cloves with Bastade, Muscadel, and Ypocras, etc. Think ye not that such
dewes, with drinking a piece of salt fyshe or a pyckrell / does not tame the
body excedyngly?

Furthermore that the true intent is away both of their fasting and prayers /
Fasting. The true intent is away from the Popes fasting.
it is euydente, first by the multeplyenge of them / for when the Jews hade
lost the understanding of their sacryfyces and did believe in the work, then
they were mad upon them, that well was he that could rob him self to offer
most in so much yt the prophets cried out against them, that their
offerynges stanke in the nose of God. And ours hade so multeplyed their
fasting that they could no longer bear them. At the beginning they were
tolerable for the vauntage. Quia leuis est labor cum lucro, But when they had
purchased enough and enough again, they became intolerable. And therefore al
our monks whose professyon was never to eat flesh, Monks made the Pope a
God for his dyspensacyons.
set up the Pope and took dispensacyons both for that fast and also for their
strayte rules, and made their strayte rules as wide as the hodes of their
cowles. And as for the ypocrysy of the fratrye where they eat but inuysible
flesh, or that is interpret to be no flesh is spoken of in other places. A
another proof is that they so long a time have given pardons of the merytes of
their fasting, as though they had done more then enough for them selves /
and of that marchaundyse have gotten al they have, and have brought the
knoweledge of Christ's blood clean into darckenes And fast of al what shall I
say of the open ydolatry of innumerable fastes, of S. Bra^dons fast, S.
Patryckes fast, of.iiii. holy frydayes of S. Anthones between S. Mary days, of
our lady fa^t, every.vii. year the same day that her day falls on in march
and then begin, or one year with bread and water, and all for what purposes, ye
know well yno^ghe and of such like. I trow ten thousand in the would. And
who has rebuked them?

Se that ye gather you not treasure upon the earth, where rust and mothes
corrupt, and where thieves break up and steal. But gather ye you treasure in
heaven, where nether rust nor mothes corrupt, and where thieves nether break up
nor steal. For where your treasure is, there wylbe your hearts also.
Note the goodly order of Christ's preaching. First he restored the true
vnsterstandynge of the law, then the true entente of the works. Covetousness
what a pestylence it is.
And here consequently he rebukes the mortal so and sworn enemy both of true
doctrine and true living, which is covetousness the ro^e of al euel says
Paul. 1. Tim. 6. Covetousness is image service. Collo. 3. Yt makes men to err
from the faith. 1. Tymothe. 6. Yt has no part in the kingdom of Christ and
God Ephe. 5. Covetousness hardened the heart of Pharao that the faith of the
miracles of God could not synke in to it. Covetousness did make Balam which
knew all the truth of God. to hate it, and to give the most pestilent and
poison council against it that heart could ymagyne, even for to destroy it,
if it hade been possible. Covetousness taught the false prophets in the old
testamente to enterprete the law of God faslye / and to peruerte the meaning
and entente of all the sacrefices and ceremonies, and to sle the true preachers
that rebuked them.

And with their false persuasions they did le^de all the kings of Israel out
of the right way, and the most part of the kings of Judah also. 2. Pe. 2.
And Peter in the chapter epistle of his second epistle prophesyeth that
there should be false teachers among us, that should follow the way of Balam
(that is to say for covetousness persecute the truth) and through covetousness
with feigned words to make marchaundyse of the people, and to bring in
damnable sects to. Covetousness can not but err.
And here ye have an infallyble rule that where coutouesnesse is / there is no
truth / no though they call them selves the church and say thereto that
they can not err. Covetousness kept Judas still in unbelief though he saw
and did miracles also in the name of Christ, and compelled him to sell him to
the scrybes and pharesyes / for covetousness is a thing mercylesse.
Covetousness made the pharesyes to lie on Christ, to persecute him and falsely
to accuse him. And it made Pilate though he found him an innocente yet to slay
him. It caused Herod to persecute Christ yet in his cradel. Covetousness make
the ypocrites to persecute the truth against their own conscyences and to lie
to princes / that the true preachers move sedicion and make their subjects to
rise against them, and the said covetousness makes the princes to believe
their wicked perswacyons and to lend their sword to sheed ynnocent blood.

Finally covetousness makes many (whom the truth pleases at the beginning)
to cast it up again and to be afterward the most cruel enemies thereof
after the ensample of Simon Magus. Acts. viii. Ye and after the ensample of
Sir Thomas More. K. More.
which knew the truth and for covetousness forsook it again and conspyred
first with the Cardynal to dysceaue the king and to lead him in darckenes And
afterward when the light was spronge upon them and had driven them clean out
of the scripture / and had delivered it out of their tyranny, and had expelled
the darcke stynkynge mist of their deuelyshe gloses, and had wyped away the
cobwebbes which those poisoned spyders had speade upon the face of the clear
text / so that the spiritualtye (as they call them selves) were asshamed of
their part, as shameless as they be, yet for all that. Covetousness blinded
the eyes of that glerynge fox more and more and hardened his heart against
the truth / with the confydence of his painted poetry. babyllynge eloquence
and iuggelynge arguments of sutle sophystry, grounded on his in written
verytes, as true and as autentycke as his storye of Vtopia. Paul therefore
byddeth Tymothe to charge the rich to believe in the living God and not in
their uncertain riches, for it is impossyble for a covetous ydolater or image
seruer that trusts in the deed God of his riches, to put his trust in the
lyuinge God.

One mysery is that they which here gather and leye up / can not tell for
whom. An other i^, rust, canker, mothes, and a thousa^de mysfort^nes beside
thieves, extorcyoners, oppressers and mighty tyrants, to the which the rich
^e ever pray. And though they prosper to the end outwardlye / yet fear ever
gnawethe their hearts inwardly. And at the hour of death they know and feel
that they have gathered naught / and then sorrow they and are like one that
dremeth of rechesse / and in the morning when he fyndeth naught / is heuye
and sorye for the remembrance of the pleasant dreme. And finally when they be
most lotheste to dye and hope to live long then they peryshe sodaynlye /
after the ensample of the rich man which intended to make him larger barnes
and store houses. Luc. 12.
Happy therefore is he that lays up treasure in heaven and is rich in faith
and good works, for the reward thereto promised shall God keep sure for him.
No man can take it away. Here is not forboden to have ry^hes. But to love it,
to trust in it, and to be careful for it. For God has promised to care for us
and to give us enough and to keep that which is gotten, if we will care to
keep his commandments. what so ever office or degree thou art in, in this
world, do the duty of thy office dylygently and trust in God and let him
care. If thou be an husband man. Ear and sow and husband thy ground and let
God alone for the rest he will care to make it grow plenteously and to se^de
seasonable wether to have it in / and will provide the a good market to sell.
etc.

In like manner if thou be a king, do the office of a king, and receive the
duties of the king and let God care to keep the in thy kingdom. His favor
shall do more for the then a thousand myllyons of gold / and so of all other.
He that has but a little and is sure that God shall keep both him and it, is
rycher then he which has thousand, and has no other hope then that he and it
must be kept with his own care and polycye.

And finally mark one point in Lu. 14. Luke. 14.
none of them that refuses not all that he posesseth can be my dyscyple, that
is / he that cast the not away the love of all worldly things can be no
scoler of Christ's to learn his doctrine, Then he adds that salt is good,
Covetousness makes the salt of Gods word unsavory.
but if the salt be unsavory or has lost his virtue / what can be seasoned
therewith / verily nothing. Now by salt is understand the doctrine, and the
menynge is, if ye be couetouse and love worldly things, it will corrupt the
salt of your doctrine, so that what so ever you powder therewith it shall be more
unsavory then before.

where your treasure is / there are your hearts, If your treasure be in the
world, so is the love of your hearts. And if ye love the world and the
things of the world, the love of God is not in you, Covetousness makes
and the love of God is the love of his commandments, and he that loves not
Gods commandments shall never preach them truly, A false prophet.
because he louethe them not But shall corrup them with gloses that they may
stand with that which his heart loves, and until they have a another sense the^
ever God gave them. Ergo no couetouse person can be a true prophet. It is not
for naught the^ that Christ so often and so dylyge^tly warns his dyscyples to
beware of covetousness, as of that thing which he wist will had ever corrupt the
word of God and ever should.

The light of thy body is thine eye, wherefore if thine eye be syngle, al thy
body shall be full of light. But and if thine eye be wicked, then shall thy whole
body be darcke If therefore the light that is in the be darkness, how great
is that darkness.
Darkness.
Note the conclucyon with a proper symylytude. The eye is the light of the body*
and by the light of the eye all other members see and are governed. As long as
the eye seyth, hand and foot do their duties, neither is there any fear that
a man should stomble or fall into fire or water. But if the eye be blind, all
the body is blind, and that so blind that there is no remedy at all, set a
candel before him he seythe not, give him a lantern in his hand, and yet he
can not go straight. Bring him out into the son and point him unto that which
thou would have him se, it boteth not. Even so, Covetousness causes Darkness.
if covetousness have blinded the spyrytuall eye and perverted the right
intent of the law of God and of the works commanded by God and of the
sacrefyce / ceremonies and sacraments / and of al other ordynau^ces of God
(which entente is the spiritual eye) then is all the doctrine dark and very
blyndenes / ye and then how darcke is the darckenesse, when that which is
pure blyndenes is believed to be light? how darcke is the doctrine of them that
teach that a man may compel God with the works of frewyll to give them his
favor and grace / or make God vnryghtwyse? How darcke is the doctrine of
the^ which (to ye rebuke of Christ's blood) teach that works do iustefye
before God and make satysfaccyon for sins? how blind are they which think
prayer to be the paterynge of many words and will therefore not only be
praised and paid of the world, but also by the title thereof challenge heaven
and not by the merytes of Christ's blood? How dark is the doctrine of the^
whose faith is only and al together apoyntmentes which they them selves have
feigned between the^ and God, unto which yet God never subscribed. In which also
they assygne what work and how much they will do, and what reward, and how
great God must give them, or chose whether he will be vnryghtwyse.

Darkness.
How dark is the doctrine of them that say sty^^^e that the work of the
sacraments in it self (not referrynge it to stere up the faith of the
promyses ^nnexed to them) does iustefye* and affirm that bodily pain for
the pain it self (not referrynge it either to the love of the law of God or
of their neighbor) does please God? How dark, da^pnable and deuelyshe is
the doctrine of them which not only think lucre to be the service of God,
but also are so far past al shame that they affirm they be the holy church
and can not err, and all that they decre, must be an article of our faith, and
that it is da^pnable once to doubt or search the scripture whether their
doctrine will thereto agree or no but say their decres must be believed as they
sound, how contrary so ever the scripture be, and the scripture must be
expounded and made agree to the^. They need not to regard the scripture, but to
do and say as their holy ghost moves them, and if the scripture be contrary,
the^ make it a nose of wax and wrest it this way and that way till it agree.

Faith in works is darkness.
Faith of works was the darkness of the false prophets / out of the which the
true could not draw them. Faith of works was the blyndenesse of the
pharysyes / out of the which nether Johan Baptist nor Christ could bring
them And though Johan Baptist pyped to the^ with reasons of the scripture
inuyncible and Christ thereto added miracles, yet the pharesyes would not
dance. For John Baptist (as they thought) was to mad to live so strayte a
life, and to refuse to be iustefyed thereby. And as for Christ and his dyscyples
/ the pharysyes were much holyer them selves, fasted oftener, prayed thycker,
and uttered much mo words in their prayer then they. Faith of works is that
belefe of the turks and Jews which dryueth them ever away form Christ.
Faith of works has been that light of darckenesse in which a great part of
us Chryste^ have walked ^^er se^ce Pelagius and Faustus, well above.xii.C.
years, and ever mo and mo, and i^ which al out ^^l^gyons have walked al and
more to this four or five hundred year, and in which the prestes also have
walked a long season, ye lord bring them out again.

Finally how dark is the darkness when a pharesye and a very Pelagyan
stands up, Darkness.
and preaches against the pharesyes and the Pel^gians and is allowed of all
the audyence? And in conclusyon when the world ever sense it began has and
does of natural blyndenes believe in their own works / then if the scripture
be perverted to co^fyrme that error how sore are their hearts hardened and
how deep is that darkness.

No man can sarue two masters, for he shall either hate the one and love the
other, or cleave to the one, and despyce the other, ye can sarue God and
Mammon.
Mammon what it is.
Ma^mon is reches or abundance of goods. and Christ concludes with a plain
symylitude, that as it is impossyble to serve two contrary masters, and as it
is impossyble to be retained unto two diverse lords which are enymyes one to
the other / so is it impossyble to sarue God and Mammon. Two masters of one
mind and one will might a man serve, for if one will, one mind and one accord
be in twenty then are they all but one master. And two masters where one is
under the other and a substytute, may a man serve. For the service of the
inferior is the commandment of the superior As to serve and obey father,
mother, husband master and lord is Gods commandment But and if the
inferyor be of a contrary will to the superyor, and command any contrary
thing, the^ may thou not obey. For now they be two contrary masters, Mammon
is a God.
so God and Ma^mon are two contrary masters* ye two contrary Gods, and of
contrary commandments.

God says. I thy lord God am but one, and me shall thou serve alone, yt is,
thou shall love me with all thy heart, or with thy whole heart / with all thy
soul and with all thy might. Thou shall nether serve, obey or love any thing
save the and that I bid the, and that is far and no farther then I bid the.

and Ma^man says the same. For Mammon wylbe a God also and served and loved
alone

God says, se thou love thy neighbor, that thou labor with thy hands to get
thy living and some what above to help him.

Ma^mon says, he is called thy neighbor because he is nigh the. Now who is so
nigh the as thy self. Ergo Proximus esto tibi, that is love thy self / and
make lewd and vile wretches to labor dylygentlye to get the as much as
thou may, and some scrappes above for them selves. Or wylt thou be perfect?
Then dysgyse thy self and put on a gray cote, Mammon make men dysgyse the^
selves.
a black or a pyed and give thy self to devotion? despyce the world and take
a covetous (I would say co^templatiue life) upon the. Tell ye people how hot
purgatory is, and what pains there must be suffered for small fautes. And the^
give mercy fully a thousa^de fold for one spiritual, for temporal, give heaven,
and take but house and land and folyshe temporal things.

God says, judge truly between thy brethren / and therefore take no gifts.
Mammon says, it is good manner and a point of curtesy to take that is offered.
And he that gives ye loves the better then such a churl that gives the
^^ught, ye and thou art more bound to favor his cause?

God says, sell and give almose. Ma^mon says lay up to have enough to mayntene
thyn estate and to defend the from thyn enemies and to serve the in thy age.

For as much then as God and Mammon be two so contrary masters, The
servants of. Mammon are not of Christ's church.
that who so ever will serve God must give up Mammon, The servant of Mammon is
no true preacher.
and all that will serve Mammon must forsake God, it follows that they which
are the sworn servants of Mammon, and have his holy spirit, and are his
faithful church, are not the true servants of God / nor have his spirit of
truth in them or can be his true church. More over seeing that God and Mammon
be so contrary that Gods word is death in Mammons ear^, and his doctrine
poison in Mammons mouth / it follows that if the ministers of Gods word do
favor Mammon, they will so fassyon their speech and so sound their words that
they may be plesaunt in the ears of Mammon. To be Ma^mons servant what it is.


Finally al only to have richesse is not to be the servant of Mammon, but to
love it and cleue to it in thine heart. For if thou have gooddes only to
maynteyne the office which God has put the in, and of the rest to help thy
neybours need, Mammon servant how is he known.
so art thou lord over thy Ma^mon and not his servant* Of them that be rich,
how shall thou know the master of Ma^mon from the servant? verily first by
the getting, seco^darely when his pore neybour complayneth if he be Mammons
servant, Ma^mon will I shute up his heart and make him without co^passyon,
Thyrdly the cross of Christ will try them the one from the other. For when
persecucyon aryseth for the word, then will the true servant of Christ bid
Mammon a dew. And the faithful servant of Mammon will utter his ypocresy, etc.
not only renounce the doctrine of Christ / but also be a cruel and a sharp
persecuter thereof / to put away all surmyse, and that his fydelyte which he
has in his master Mammon, may openly appear.

Therefore I say unto you, care not for your lives what ye shall eat, or what
ye shall drink, nether for your bodies what ye shall put on. Is not the life
more then mete, and the body more then the raiment?
He that buyldeth a costely house even to the tylynge, will not leave there and
lose so great cost for so small a tryfle more. No more will he that gave the so
precious a soul and so beutyful a body, let either of them perish again
before the day, for so small a thing as fode or rayme^t. God never made mouth
but he made mete for it, nor body but he made reyme^t also. How be it Ma^mon
blyndeth our eyes, so that we can nether se nor judge a right.

Behold the fowls of the air, how they sow not, nether reap nor gather into
store howses, and yet your heavenly father feadeth them, And are not ye far
better then they? Which of you with taking thought, is able to put one
cubette unto his statute.
Birds and bestesteche us to put away care.
He that cares for the lest of his creatures will much more care for the
greattest. The byrddes of the air and beasts preach all to us that we should
leave caringe and put our trust in our father. But Mammon has made us so dull
and so clean with out capacyte that no exsample or argument be if never so
vehement / can enter the wits of us / to make us see or judge a right.
Fynallye what a madness is it to take so great thought for fode or raymente /
when the welthe, health, life of thy body and al to gether is out of the
pour. If all the world were thine thou couldeste not make thy self one ynche
longer nor that thy stomach shall dysgest the meat that thou put into it.
No thou art not sure that which thou putteste in to thy mouth shall go thorwoe
ye or whether it shall choke the. Thou can not make when thou lie or syttest
down that thou shall arise again, or when thou sleapest that thou shall awake
again or that thou should live one hour longer. So that he which cared for
the when thou could not care, must care for the still or else thou should
peryshe. And he will not care for the to thy souls profit / if thou mystrust
hi^ and care for thy self.

And for reymente why take ye thought. Behold the lylyes of the field, how
they grow, they labor not, nether spyn. And yet I say to you that even
Sa^om^n in all his glory was not apparailed like one of the^. Wherefore if the
gras which is to day in the feldes and to morrow shall be cast into the
furnace, God so clothe, how much more shall he do the same unto you, O ye of
little faith.
Not only foul and beast, but also tree, erbe, Care.
and all the flowers of the earth do cry unto us to trust God to cast away all
care that is coupled with covetousness of more then suffycyent to bear the
charges which we have in our hands by the reason of the state we be in the
world, and al care that is anexed with mystrust yt God should not mynister
enough to bear al our charges, if we endeuer our selves to keep his
commandments and to do every man his craft or office he is in truly / and
(when God to prove us, sofferyth us to have need of our neyboures) we first
compain to God, and desire him to prepare the hearts of our neighbors
against we come to desyer their help.

But Ma^mon pypeth another song, Nammon.
saying if thou shuldeste make no another manner of labor for a benefyce, then
as if thou careddest not whether thou had it or had it not (...) would
be long yet thou gattest one, al would be take out of thine hand? I answer,
as the labor was to get it, such shall be thy behauor in it, as thou
flatteredest to have it, so shall thou in it. And as thou boughtest and
soldeste to get it, so shalt thou fell in it to be favor and to be set by in
the world. If thy pryncypal entend that thou sekeste a benefyce for, be lucre
/ then take heed to the ensample of thy fore father Simon magus / Acts. 8.
Let thy care therefore be to do thy office that God puts the in truly, and
the blessing that he coupleth thereto yt take with thanks, and nether care nor
covet farther.

Take no thought therefore saying, What shall we eat or what shall we drink,
or what shall we put on? al these things the hethen seek. ye and your heavenly
father knows that ye need al these things. But seek first the kyngedome of
God and the ryghtwysnesse thereof and all these things shall be mynystred unto
you.
Be not like the hethen which have no trust in God not his word / nor believe
any life to come / let them vex them selves and each be a deuell to another
for worldly things: But comfort thou thy self with the hope of a better
life in an other world, Covenant keep covenant with God and he shall keep
promise with the.
ever assured that thou lhalt have here suffycient, only if thou keep
covenant with the lord thy God / and seek his kyngedome and the
ryghtwysenesse thereof above all things. The kyngedome of God, is the gospel
and doctrine of Christ. And the ryghtwysnes thereof, is to believe Christ's
blood for the remyssyon of sins. Out of which ryghtwysenesse springs love
to God and thy neyboure for his sake, Kingdom of heaven what.
which is also ryghtwysnesse as I have said before, so far as it is perfycte,
and that which lacks is supplied by faith in Gods word, in that he has
promised to accept that, till more come Then follows the outward
ryghtwysnesse of works by the which and dyligent recording of Gods word
together, Ryghtwysnes of the kingdom of heaven what it is.
we grow and wax perfect and keep our selves from going back and losing
the spite again.

And these have our spiritualty with their corrupt doctrine myngled to gether
that is to say, the ryghtwysnes of the kyngedome of God, which is faith in
Christ's blood, and the outward ryghtwysnes of the me^bres that we ascrybe to
ye one that perteyneth to the other.

Seek the kyngedome of heaven therefore and the ryghtwysnesse of the same, and be
sure thou shalt ever have sufficient, and these things shall be mynystred unto
the, that is to say, shall come of their own accord by the promise of God, ye
Christ promyseth the an hunderfolde even in this life, of all that thou leuest
for his sake. If that were true would some say / who would not rather serve him
tha^ Mammon? yet it is true. For first if thou be servant of Mammon, thou must
keep thy God, and thy God not the. And every man that is stronger then thou
will take thy God from the. Moreover God will take either the from thy Mammon,
or thy Ma^mon from the, ye^ thou would, to adue^ge him self of thy blind
unkindness, that when he has made the and given the all, thou forsakest him and
seruest his mortal enemy. But if thou follow Christ, all the world (and let
them take all the deuelles in hell to them) shall not be able to disapoynte the
of a sufficient living. And though they persecute the from house to house a
thousa^de times, yet shall god provide the of another with all things
sufficient to live by. Now compare the surety of his with the incertayntie of
the other, and then the blessed end of this (that heaven is promised the also)
with the miserable departing from the other so sore against thy will, then the
desperacion that thy hurt feleth yt thou art already in hell. And the^ may not
this be well called a thousand fold more then ye other?

Care not then for the day following, but let the day following care for it
self. For the day that is present, has ever enough of his own trouble.
If thou look well on the covenant that is between the and thy lord God, Care.
on the one side and the temptacions of the world, the flesh and Satan on the
other / thou shalt sone perceive that the day present has ever enough to be
cared for / and for which thou must cry instantlye to God for help also /
though thou do thy best. Now then seeing the day present is over charged with
her own care / what madness is it to lade upon her also the care of the day
following, ye the care of a year, ye of.xx. year, or as though thou never
entendest to dye and to torment and vex the soul through mystrust and
unbelief, and to make thy life sour and bitter and as vnquyete as the life of
the deuelles in hell. /

Therefore care day by day / and hour by hour ernestlye to keep the covenant
of the lord thy God an to record therein day and night and to do thy part
unto the uttermost of thy power. And as for Gods part let him care for it
him self, and believe thou his words steadfastly and be sure that heaven and
earth shall sooner peryshe the^ one ^ote bide behind of that he has promised.
And for thine own part also, care not of that manner / as though thou should
do all alone. Nay. God has first promised to help the. Secondarely to
accept thine heart, and that little that thou art able to do, be it never so
imperfecte. Thyrdly though wind, wether and the stream carry the clean
contrary to thy purpose, yet because thou by dest still in thy professyon /
ready to turn the right course as soon as the tempeste is a little over blown,
God promises to forgive that, and not the less to fulfill his promyses of one
jot.

Tempte. why God lets his children be tempted with aduersite.
Does Christ so defend his, that they never come in danger of trouble? yes
they come in to such straytes often that no wit nor reason can se any way out
/ save faith only is sure that God has and will make a way through. But that
te^ptacion is but for an hour to teache them / and to make them feel the
goodness of their father / and the passions of their bretkren and of their
master Christ also, It is but as a louyngge mother / to make her child to
perceive and feel her kyndenes (to love her again an be thankful) lets it
hunger in a morning. And when it calls for his breakfast makes as she herd
not, till for pain and impacience it begins to cry a good. And then she
stylleth it and gives it all that it asks and more to / to please it. And
when it is peased and begins to eat, and reioyseth and is glade and feign /
she asks, who gave the that / thy mother? and yt says ye. Than says she. Am
not I a good mother that give the all things? and it answers / ye. And she
asks. wylt thou love thy mother. etc. And yt says ye, and so comes it to
the knowledge of his mothers kyndenesse / and is thankful, Such is the
temptacion of Christ's elect, and other wise not, /

Here is not forboden all manner of care, what care is forboden.
but that worldly and deuelshe care that springs of an inordinat love to
worldly things, and of mistrust in god. As for an ensample. I covet
inordinatly more then sufficient, or but even that I have need of. And it
(because I mystrust God and have no hope in him, and therefore pray not to him)
comes not. Then I mourn / sorrow and pyne away / and am whole unquiet in mine
heart. Or whether I have much or but sufficient, and love it inordinatly, then
I care for the keeping. And because I mistrust god and have no hope in him,
that he will help me therefore when I have locked doors, chambres and cofers. I
am never the nere at rest, but care still and cast a thousand parelles, of
which the most part were not in my might to aduoyde though I never sleep. And
where this care is, there can the word of God have no resting place, but is
choked up as soon as it is sown. /

There is a another care that spryngeth out of the love of God for every love
has here care and is a care to keep Gods commandments This care must
every man have. Care, what care every man ought to have.
For a man lyneth not by bread only / but much more by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God. Gods commandment is man's life.
The keeping of Gods commandment is the life of a man, as well in these world
as in the world to come. As child obey father and mother, that thou may
long live on the earth. And by father an mother is understand all rulers,
which if thou obey, thy blessing shall be long life, and contrary if thou
disobeye, short life, and shall either peryshe by the sword or by some other
plage, and that shortly, And even so shall the ruler, if he rule not as God
has commanded. Opresse thou a wedowe and fatherles children (says God) and
they shall cry to me, and I will here their voice and then will my wrath wax
whote / so that I will smite you with sword, Exodus 20.
and your wives shall be wydowes and your children fatherles.

why God soffereth tyrau^tes to prospere.
Some will say, I se none more prosper or longer continue then those that be
most cruel tyrauntes. what then? yet say I that God abides ever true. For
where he sets up a tyrant and contynueth him in prosperity, it is to be a
scourge to weked subjects that have forsaken the covenant of the lord their
god. And unto them his good promyses pertayn^ant, save his cursses only. But
if the subjects would turn and repent and follow the ways of God, he would
shortly deliver them. How be it yet where the superior corrupteh the inferior
which else is dysposed enough to goodness, God will not let them long
continue.

FINIS,
An exposition of the.vii. Chapter.
IVdge not, that ye be not judged. For as ye judge, so shall ye be judged. And
with what measure ye meat with the same shall it be mesured to you again. Why
lokest thou on the mote that is in thy brothers eye, and markest not the beam
that is in thine own eye? Or how can thou say to thy brother. Let me
plu^cke out the mote out of thine eye, and behold, there is a beam i^ thine
own eye? Thou ypocrite, pluck first the beam out of thine own eye, and then
thou shalt se clerlye to pluck the mote out of thy brothers eye.
Judging.
This is not meant of the temporal judgments, for Christ forbade not that,
but often did stablyshe it, as do Peter and Paul in their Epistles also. Nor
here is not forboden to judge those deeds which are manifest against the law of
God, for those ought every Christen man to persecute, what judging is rebuked.
yet must they do it after the order that Christ has set. But when he says.
Ypocrite, cast out first the beme that is in thine own eye, it is easy to
understand of what manner of judging he meanethe. The ypocrites will have
fastings, prayenges, knelynge, crouchyng* duckynge and a thousand ceremonies
of their own inue^cion. And who so ever do not as they do, they count him a
dampened soul by and by. To Christ they say. why fast not thy disciples, as the
Pharesyes do why pluck they the ears of corn and rub them in their hands
(though they did it compelled with pure hunger) and do that is not lawful on
the Saboth day? why break ye the tradicions of our elders / and wash not when
ye sit down to mete? ye and why do thou thy self heal the people upon the
holyday? why dyddest thou not only heal him that was bedred.xxxviii. years,
but also badest hi^ bear his beed away upon the saboth day? Be there not
workyng days ynowe to do good deeds to the praise of God, and proffyte of thy
neyboure, but that thou must break thy Sabothe day? He can not be but a
dampened person that breketh the holy day / and despyseth the ordinance of the
holy church.

He eats butter a frydayes with out a dispe^sacion of our holy father the
pope. ye and kake bread made with milk and eggs to / and white mete in lent,
he takes no holy water when he comes to the church, he hereth no mass from
sunday to sunday. And either he has no bedes at al, or else thou shall not
here a stone clynke in the hand of him, nor yet his lyppes wagge all the mass
and matens while. The beam-
etc. O ypocrite, cast out first the beme that is in thine own eye, and then
thou shall se better. Thou understand all Gods laws falsely / and therefore
thou kepest none of them truly / his laws require mercy and not sacrifice.
More over thou haste a false intent in all the works that thou do, and
therefore are they al dampnable in the sight of god, ypocrite cast out the beam
that is in thine own eye, learn to understand the law of God truly, and to
do thy works a right, and for the intent that God ordained them. And then thou
shall se whether thy brother have a mote in his eye or not / Ceremonies, he
that breaks unite for zele of ceremonies understands not Gods law.
and if he have how to pluck it out / and else not. For he that knows the
intent of the law and of works though he observe a thousand ceremonies for
his own exercise, he shall never co^dempne his brother or break unite with
him in those things which Christ never commanded, but left indifferent. Or
if he se a mote in his brothers eye, that he observes not with his brothren
same certain ordinance made for a good purpose because he knows not the
intent, Ceremonies.
he will pluck it out fair and softely and enstructe him louyngely, and make
him well content, which thing if our spiritual would do, men would not so abhore
to obey their tyranny. But they be ypocrites and do and command all their
works for a false purpose / and therefore judge, slay and shede their brethrens
blood mercylesslye. God is the father of all mercy, and therefore gave not
ypocrites such absolute power to compelle their brethren to obey what they
list or to slay the^ with out pytye, showing either no cause of their
commandments at al, but so will we have it / or else assignynge an intent
dampnable and contrary to all scripture, Paul. To. xiiii. says to the^ that
observed ceremonies, that they should not judge them that did not, for he that
observes and knows not the intent judges at once, and to them that observed
not that they should not despise them that observed, he that observes not,
ought not to despise ye weknes or ignorance of his brother, till he perceive
that he is obstinate and will not learn. More over such measure as thou
geuest, Measure.
thou shalt receive again, that is, if thou judge thy neyboure. God shall
judge the, for if thou judge thy neyboure in such things / thou know not
the law of god, nor the intent of works / and art therefore condemned of god.

Give not that holy thing unto dogs, nether cast your perles before the
swyne, lest they tread the^ under their fete, and the other turn again and
to tear you.
The dogs are those obstinate and indurate, Dogs.
which for the blind zele of their leven / wherewith they have sowred both the
doctrine and also ye works, maliciously resyst the truth and persecute the
mynystres thereof, and are those wolves among which Christ sends his sheep,
warnyng them / not only to be syngle and pure in their doctrine, but also wise
and circumspecte and to beware of men. For they should bring them before
judges and kings and slay them / thinking to do God service therein, that is
as Paul to the Romans testifyeth of ye Jews, for blind zele to their own
false and feigned ryghtwysnesse / persecute the ryghtwysnesse of God. /

The swyne are they which for all they have receaueth the pure Gospel of
Christ, will yet continue still in sin, Swyne.
and roll them selves in the podel and myer of their old filthy
co^uersacion, and both befose the ignorant and also the weak, use the
uttermost of their liberty, enterpretynge it after the largest fassyon / and
must favor of the flesh, as it were the popes pardon, and therewith make the
truth evil spoken of / that thousands which else might have been easily
won. will now not once here thereof, and stere up cruel persecucion, which
else would be much easyer. ye and sometime none at al. And yet will those swyne.
when it comes to the point abide no persecucion at all. But offer them selves
willing even at the first chope for to deny yet they be scasly apposed of
their doctrine. Therefore lay first the law of god before them, and call them
to repentance. And if thou se no hope of mendynge in them, sease there and go
no further, for they be swyne. But alas, it ever was and shall be that the
greater nombre receive the words for a newness and curiosite (as they say)
and to seem to be somewhat and that they have not gone to schole in vain, they
will forth with yer they have felt any change of living in them self, be
scholemasters and begin at liberty, an practice openly before their disciples.
And when the Phareseyes se their tradicions broken they rage and persecute
immediately. And then our new scholemasters be nether grounded in the doctrine
to defend their doings nor rooted in the profession of a new life to suffer
with Christ. etc. /

Axe and it shall be given you, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be
opened unto you. For all that axe receive, and he that seeks fyndeth, and to
him that knocks it shall be opened. For what man is it among you, if his son
axed him bread, that would proffre him a stone? Or if he asked him fysshe,
would he offer him a serpent If ye then which are evil know to give good
gifts to your children, how much more shall your father which is in heaven,
give good things to them yt ask him.
First note of these words, Prayer is a commandment.
that to pray is Gods commaundemen, as it is to believe in god, to love God or
to love thy neyboure, and so are almose and fasting also, Belefe. To believe in
God, what.
Nether is it possible to believe in God, to love him or to love thy neyboure.
But that prayer will spring out there hence immediately. For to believe in God, is
to be sure that all thou have is of him and all thou nedest must come of him.
which if thou do thou can not hut continually thank him for his benefits
which thou continually without ceasynge receauest of his hand / and thereto
ever cry for help, for thou art ever in need, and can no whence else
beholden. And thy neyboure is in such necessite also. wherefore if thou love
him, yt will compelle the to pity him, and to cry to God for him continually,
and to thank as well for him as thy self.

Secondarely, this heapynge of so many words to gether, axe, seek and knock,
signify that the prayer must be continual, and so does the parahle of the
wedowe that sued to the weked judge, Luke. 18.
and the cause is, that we are ever in continual necessite (as I said) and all
our life but even a war fare and a perpetual battle In which we prevail as
long as we pray, and be overcome assonc as we cease prayenge / Prayer. By
prayer we win the vyctorye only, and therefore is it of all things most
necessary.
as Israel overcame the Amalechites. Exodus 1.xvi^. as long as Moses held up
his hands in prayer, and as soon as he had let down his hands for werynesse,
the Amalechites prevailed and had the better. Christ warned his disciples at
his last souper to have peace in him, affirmyng that they should have none in
the world. The false prophets shall ever impugn the faith in Christ's
blood, and enforce to quench the true understanding of the law, and the
ryg^^ meaning and intent of all the works commanded by god, which fight as a
fight above all fyghtes. First they shall be in such no^hre that Christ's true
dyscyples shall be but a small flock in respect of them. False prophets what
their wekednes is.
They shall have works like Christ's, so that fasting, prayer, poverty,
obedience and chastity shall be the names of their profession. For as Paul says
to the Corinthians, the angels or messengers of Satan shall change the^
selves in to angels or messengers of light and truth. Marc. xiii.
They shall come in Christ's name, and that with signs and miracles, and have
the upper hand also / even to deceive ye very elect if it were possible, Mat,
24.
Ye and beynde all this, if thou get the victory of the false prophets, and
pluck a multitude out of their hands, there shall immediately rise of the same
and set up a new false sect against the. And against al these Amalechites, the
only remeady is to lift up the hands of thy heart to God in continual prayer.
which hands, if thou for werynes once let fall / thou go to the worsse
immediately. Then beside the fight and co^flyct^ of the sottle sophistry, false
miracles desguysed and ypocretishe works of these false prophets, comes the
dogs and wolves of their disciples with the servants of Ma^mon and the
swyne of thine own scolers, against which al thou have no another shyld or
defense but prayer. Then ye syn and lust of thine own flesh, Satan and a
thousand temptacions unto ^ell in the world, will either drive the to ye
castle and refuge of prayer or take the prisoner ondoutedly. Last of all thy
neyboures necessite and thine own will co^pel the to cry Father which art in
heaven give us our daily bread, though thou were as rich as king Solomon. The
rich must pray for daily bread.
For Christ commands the rich as well as the pore, to cry to God continually
for their daily bread. And if they have no such need, then is Christ a
deceauer and a mocker. what need I to pray the to give orlende me, that is in
mine own possession already? Is not ye first commandment, that there is but
one God / and that thou put thy whole trust in him, which if it were written in
thine heart thou should easily perceive, and though thou had as many
thousands as David left behind him and Solomon heaped mo to them, that thou
had no more then the poor beggar that goes from door to door, ye and that
ye beggar (if that commandment be written in his heart) is sure, yt he is as
rich as thou. For first thou must knowledge that thou have received that great
treasure of the hand of God, wherefore when thou fettest an halfepeny thereof
thou ought to give God thanks in thine heart for the gift thereof. Thou
must confess also that God only has kept it and the that same night, and
ever before, or else be an ydolater and put thy trust in some other thing the^,
God And thou must confess that god only must keep it and the, the day and
night following and so continually after, and not thine own wit or power, or
the wit or power of any other creature or creatures. For if God kept it the
not, it would be thine own destruction and they that help the to keep it /
would cut thy throat for it. There is no king in Christendom so well beloved,
but he has ynowe of his own evil subjects (if god kept them not down with
fear) that would at one hour rise up on him and slay him to make hauoke of al
he has who is so well-beloved through out al England but that there be ynow in
the same parysshe or nigh about that would, for his good wish him to hell if
they could, and would with their hands destroy him, if god kept him not and
did cast fear on the other, Now then if god must ever keep it the and thou
must daily receive it of his hand (as a poor man does receive his almose of a
no there man) thou art in no more suretye of thy daily bread, no though thou
were a cardinal, then the porest is. wherefore how so ever rich thou be, yet
must thou ever cry to God for thy daily bread, So now it is a commandment
to pray and that continually / short, thycke and often as the psalms be and
all the prayers of the Bible.

Finally the third is that we be commanded to pray with faith and trust and
that we beleue^ in the lord our God, Faith must be joined to our prayers.
and doubt not in his promyses, unto which Christ enduceth us with an apt
similitude saying. If ye being ever can yet give good things unto your
children / how much more shall God fulfill his promises of mercy unto his
children if they cry unto him? he is better and more mercyful then al men,
wherefore seeing God commands the to pray, and for as much as thou have so
great necessite so to do, and because he is mercy full and has promised and is
true and can not deny his own words, Therefore pray, and when thou prayest,
look not on thine unworthiness but on his commandment, mercy and goodness,
and on his truth and faythfulnesse / and believe steadfastly in him. Moreover
what so ever thou have done / yet if thou repent and wylt amend, he promyseth
that he will not think on thy sins. And though he differ ye, think it not
long nor faint in thy faith or be slack in thy prayer. For he will surely
come and give the more then thou desyrest / though he defer for thy proffyte
/ or change t^y request in to a better thing. / /

All things therefore what so ever ye would men should do to you so do ye to
them. This is verelye the law and the prophets.
This is a short sermon, that no man need to complain that be can not for ye
length bear it away. It is so nigh the / that thou nedest not to send over
see for ir. Doutes how to soil doutes.
It is with in the, that thou nedest not to be importune upon master doctor
saying / sir I pray you / what say ye to this case and to that / and is not
this lawful / and may I not so do and so well enough? Axe thine own consience
what thou may or ought to do, would thou men did so with the, then do it,
would thou not be so dealte with, then do it not. Thou would not that men
should do to the wrong or oppress the. Thou would not thet men should do
the shame and rebuke / lie on the, kill the / hyre thine house from the, or
tyce thy servant away / or take against thy will ought that is thine, Thou
would not that men should sell the false ware when thou put them in trust
to make it ready or lay it out for them / Nota.
nor thou would not that men should deceuue the with great oaths sweryng
that to be good which in deed is very naught. Thou would not also that men
should sell the ware that is naught and to dear / to undo the / do such
things then to thy neyboure. But as loathe as thou would be to bye false ware
or to dear / for undoing thy self / so loathe be thou to sell false ware or
to dear for undoing thy neyboure. And in all thy needs how glade thou
would be to be helped / so glade be to help thy neyboure. And so in all
other cases examyne thy conscience and axe her what is to be done in all doubts
between thy neyboure and the, and she will teach the, except thou be more
fylthy then a swene and all to gether beastlye, / /

He says here, Nota.
this is the law and the prophets. And Math. xxii. he says. Thou shalt love
thy lord God with all thine heart, with all thy soul and al thy mind, Law,
what the fulfyllynge thereof is.
And as Mark adds, / with all thy might, and thy neyboure as thy self. In
the two commandments hangs the whole law and the prophets. And Paul.
Roma. xii. and Gala. v. says that love is the fulfyllyng of the law, And it
is written that Christ is the fulfyllynge or the end of the law. To make all
this agree, this thou must understand, that to love God purely is the final
and uttermost end of all the law and the prophets. To love thy neyboure is
the end of all laws that is between man and man / as are, kyl not, steal
not, bear no false witness commytte none adulterye, covet not tby neyboures
wife, his house, ox, ass, maid, man servant nor ought that is his. etc.
Christ is the fulfyllynge of the law for us / where we be imperfecte. And
when we break and repent / his fulfyllynge is imputed unto us. And this text,
this is the law and the prophets, may thou understand, as when Paul
says, Love is the fulfyllynge of the law. That is, to do as thou would be
done to, is all the law that is between the and thy neyboure, and that
acordynde to the true understanding and interpretynge of all true prophets.

Enter in at the strayte gate, for wide is the gate and broad is the way that
ledeth to distruccion, and many they be, that go in thereat. But strayte is the
gate, and narowe is the way that leads unto life, and few they be that
find it.
Strayte gate,
The strayte gate is the true knowledge and understanding of the law and of the
true intent of works, which who so ever understands, the same shall be driven
to Christ to fetch of his fulness and to take him for his ryghtwysnes and
fulfyllynge of the law, al to gether at the beginning and as often as we fall
afterward, and for more then the thousand part of our fulfyllynge of the
law and ryghtwysnesse of our best works al our life long. For except the
ryghtwysnesse of Christ be knytte to the best deed we do, it will be to short
to reach to heaven. / /

And the narowe way is to live after this knowledge* The narowe way.
He that will enter in at this gate must be made a new, his heed will else be
to great, he must be untaught all that he has learned, to be made less for to
enter in, and disused in all things to which he has been accustomed to be made
less to walk through the narowe way, where he shall find such an heap of
temptacions and so continual, that it shall be impossible to endure or to
stand, but by prayer of strong faith. /

And note a another, Few find the narowe way and why.
that few find the way why? for their own wisdom, their own power and the
reasons of their own sophistrye blind them utterly. That is to say, the light
of their own doctrine which is in them, is so extreme darcknesse that they can
not se. Should god let his church err (say they) Should our elders have gone out
of the way? Should God have let ye deuel do these myraclas and so forth. And
when Christ says / few shall find the gate, ye say they / in respect of the
turks and saresyns which are the greater multitude. Ye but yet here a little /
the Scrybes and Phareseys which had all the auctorite over the people and
taught out of the scripture, and the saduces with all other false prophets
that were wha^ Christ came, were no Turckes nor Saresyns, nether had God any
other church than was among them. Peter.
And saint Peter prophesyeth yt it shall be so among us, and that we shall be
drawn with false sects of covetousness, to deny Christ, as we now do, and
believe no more in him, And Paul and Christ confirm the same, Paul. Christ.
that the elect should be deceived, if it were possible. Moreover if it were
enough to say. I will believe and do as mine elders have done, as though they
could not err, then was Christ to blame for to say, that except thou forsake
father, mother and thine elders, thou could not be his disciple, Christ
must be thy master, and thou must be taught of God, and therefore ought thou
to examine the doctrine of thine elders by the word of God, For the great
multitude that Christ meneth are the false prophets and them yt follow the^, as
it shall better apere here after.

Beware of false prophets which come to you in shepes clothing, but are
within rauenynge wolves By their fruits ye shall know them do men gather grapes
of thorns? either figs of briars? even so every good tree brings for the
good fruit. But a corrupt tree, brings forth euel fruit. A good tree can not
bring forth euel fruit, nor a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit Every tree
that brings not forth good fruit is to be hewn down and to be cast in to
the fire, wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them.
Here Christ warns the, The false prophets who.
and describes unto the, those capitayns that should so blind the great
multitede (that they should not find the strayte gate) and lead them the
broad way to perdicion. Note first that though they be false, yet he calls
them prophets, which word in the new testament is taken for an expounder
and an interpreter of scripture. And he says they shall come to you my
disciples, then they must be our preachers and our doctors. Ye verily they
must be those our false prechers which Peter prophesyed should be among us and
bring in da^pnable sects, for to fulfill and satisfy their covetousness, and
follow the way and steps of their father Balam. And they shall come thereto in
shepes clothing. Ergo they be nether the turks nor yet saresins. For they
come clothed in iron and stele, and will thereto suffer us to keep our faith /
if we will submytte our selves to them / as the greeks do* And as for the Iues
they be an hundred times fewer then we, and are every where in bondage, ye and
for the great part captives unto us. They also be not clothed in shepes
skynnes / but mayntene openly their faith clean contrary to ours. /

Shepes clothing what.
But what are these shepes clothynges, truly the very name of Christ, For says
Christ Mat. xxiiii. There shall come many in my name and deceive many. And
besides that, they shall do miracles in Christ's name, as it follows in the
text, that they shall call Christ Master, Master, and begin their sermon
saying. Our master Christ says in such a chapter. what so ever ye bind
upon earth, shall be bound in heaven. Se friends these be not our words, but
our master Christ's, And they shall do miracles in Christ's name thereto, to
confyrme the false doctrine which they preach in his name. O fearful and
terryble judgment of almighty God and sentence of extremery gorousnesse upon
all that love not the truth (when it is preached them) that God to aduenge him
self of their unkindness, shall send them so strong delusions that doctrine
should be preached unto them in the name of Christ, and made seem to follow out
of his words and be confyrmed with miracles done in calling upon the name of
Christ, 2. The. 2.
to harden their hearts in the faith of lies according to the prophesye of
Paul to the Thessalonia^s in the second pistle.

Shepes clothing.
Another of their shepes coutes is, that they shall in every sermon preche
myghtely against the Scrybes and Phareseyes, against Faustus and Pelagian with
such like heretykes, which yet never preached other doctrine then they the^
selves do. And more of their clothing is they shall preach that Christ
preached almose prayer and fasting, and profess obedience poverty and
chastity, works that our savior Christ both preached and did, Finally they
be the holy church and can not err.

But they be within rauenynge wolves, Raueninge wolves.
They preach to other, steal not yet they them selves rob God of his
honor, and take from him the praise and proffite of all their doctrine and of
all their works. They rob the law of God of her mighty power wherewith she
dryueth all men to Christ, and make her so weyke, that the feeble frewyll of
man is not able to wrestle with her, without calling to Christ for help, /

They have robbed Chiste of all his merytes and clothed them selves therewith.
They have robbed the soul of man of the bread of her life, the faith and
trust in Christ's blood and have feed her with the shales and coddes of the
hope in their merytes, and confydence in their good works

They have robbed the works commanded by God of the intent and purpose that
they were ordained for. And with their obedience they have drawn them selves
from under the obedience of all princes and temporal laws with their poverty,
they have robbed all nations and kyngedomes, and so with their wylful poverty
have enryched them selves, and have made the comens poor / with their chastity
/ they have filled all the world full of whores and sodomites, The obedience
pouertye and wylful chastity of our spiritualtye.
thynking to please God more hylye with keeping of an whore then an honest
chaste wife, If they say it is not truth then all the world knows they lie,
for if a pressed mary an honest wife, they punyshe him immediately and say he is
an haynouse heretyke as though matrimonye were abominable. But if he keep a
whore, the^ is he a good chaste child of their holy father the pope whose
ensample they follow, an I warrant him sing mass on ye next day after as well
as he did before, without either persecucion or excommunicacion / such are the
laws of their unchaste I would say their own chaste father. /

If thou profess obedience, why ronnest thou from father, mother, master and
ruler (which God byddeth the to obey) to be a friar / if thou obey, why
obeyest thou not the king and his law, by whom God defends the both the
in life and goods / and al thy great possessions? / /

Pouertye.
If thou profess pouertye, what do thou with the lands of gentylmen,
squyer^, knights, barons, earls and dukes? what should a lords brother be a
beggars servant? or what should a beggar ride with three or four score horses
waiting on him. Is it mete that a man of noble birth, and the right heir of
the lands which thou possessest should be thine horse keeper thou being a
beggar.

If ye profess chastity, why desyer ye above al other men the company of
women? Chastity.
what do ye with whores openly in many contreyes, and with secret dispensacions
to keep concubines? why corrupt ye so much other men's wives? and why be
there so many Sodomites among you? / /

Your charity is mercylesse to the rest of the world to whom ye may give
naught again and only lyberall to your selves (as is the charity of thieves)
xxx. Charity.
or fourtye of you to gether in one den, among which yet are not many that
love three of his neyboures hertelye.

Your fasting makes you as full and as fat as your hydes can hold /
Fasting.
besye that ye have a dispensacion of your holy father for your fasting. / /

Your prayer is but patterynge without all affection. Prayer,
Your singing is but ro^ynge to stretche out our mawes (as do your other
gestures and rysynge at mydnyght) to make the meat sing to the botome of the
stomach yt ye may have perfect dygestion, and be ready to devour a fresh
against the next refeccion.

Ye shall know them by their fruits. Thorns bear no fygges.
First thorns bear no grages nor briars fygges. Also if thou se goodly
blossoms in them and thynkest there to have fygges, grapes, or any fruit for
the sustenaunce or confort of man, go to them in time of need, and thou shall
find naught at all. Thou shalt find, for southe I have no goods nor any
thing proper, or that is mine own, It is the couentes. I were a thief if I
gave it my father what so ever need he had. It is saint Edmondes patrimony.
Saint Albons patrimonye, Saint Edwardes patrymonye the goods of holy church.
It may not be mynysshed nor occupied upon lay and profane uses. The king of
the realm for all that he defends them above all other, yet gets he naught
what need soever he have save the^ only when he must spend on their causes all
that they give withal that he can get beside of his pore come^s. If the king
will attempt to take ought from the^ by ye auctorite of his office for the
defense of the realm. Or if any man will enter at them otherwise then they
lust them selves, by what law or right it be, they turn to thorns and
briars, and wax at once rougher then a hedgehogge, and will sprynkle them with
the holy water of their maledictions as thycke as hayle, and brethe out the
lightening of excommunicacion upon them, and so consume them to pouldre, /

A corruptetre bears no good fruit.
More over a corrupt tree can bear no good fruit That is where they have fruit
that seems to be good, go to and prove it, and thou shall find it rotten / or
the carnell eaten out / and that it is but as a holowe nutte. For faith in
Christ (that we and al our works done within the compase of the law of God,
Faith is the kernel of all our good fruits.
be accepted to God for his sake) is the kernel, the swetnes and the pleasant
bewty of al our works in the sight of God. As it is written Johan, vi, This is
the work of god, that ye believe i^ him whom he has sent. This faith is a
work which God not only works in us, but also has therein pleasure and
delectacyon, and in all other for that faythes sake.

Faith is the life of man, as it is written. Iustus ex fide viuit, out of
which life the pleasantness of all his works spring. As for an ensample,
thou art a shoumaker which is a work within the laws of God, Faith makes
the work good and ecceptable
and say in thine heart. Lo God, here I make a shue as truly as I would for
my self / to do my neyboure service / and to get my living in truth with the
labor of mine hands as thou commaundest, and thank the that thou have given
me this craft and make it luckye that I get my living therewith / and am
surely persuaded that both I and my work please the, O father, for thy son
Jesus sake. Lo now this faith has made this simple work pleasant in the
sight of God. /

Another ensample, thou take a wife and say, O father, thou not only
permyttest this but also commaundest all that burn and have their minds
vnquyeted / to mary for fear of fornicacion and so forth. And father I
promise the to love this woman truly and to care for her, and govern her
after thy laws, and to be true to her, and to stand by her in all aduersites
and to take in worth as well the evil as the good and to bring up the fruit
that thou shalt give me of her / in thy fear / and teach it to know the. /
/

Moreover as concernyg the act of Matrimony, as wha^ thou wylt eat, thou
blessed god and receauest thy daily fode of his hand according to the fourth
peticion of thy pater noster, and knowlegest that it is his gift, and thankest
him, beleuyng his word, that he has created it for the to receive it with
thanks by the which word and prayer of thanks thy meat and drink is
sanctified. 1. Timot. iiii. Even so thou say, Father this I do, not only at
thy permission which is enough to please the with all, but also at thy
commandment, and have bound my self here unto to keep my soul from
synnynge against the, and to help my neyboure that she sin not also, and
promise the to keep this profession truly / and to noryshe the fruit that thou
shall give me i^ the fear of the and in the faith of thy son Jesus, and so
thankest the lord for his gifts. How is thy work through this faith and
thanks pleasant and acceptable in the sight of God. And so was the
genderynnge of Jacob in faith / and of Samuel, and many other. And ye geuyng
suck was a good work, and so was the dressyng of them by the fire. And when
our lady conceived Christ's through faith, was not that a good work? what if
God when she doubted and asked (by what manner she should conceive him) had
commanded her to conceive him of Joseph or of some other man, had not that
work done in obedience and faith / ben as good a work?

The will that Abraham had to slaye Isaac, and all that he did till he came at
the very point to slaye him / were good works / and so had been the slayenge
also. And Abraham was sure that he pleased God hylye / and as well as in any
other work, and had as depely sinned if he had been disobedient therein, as
though he had done any other cruel deed forboden by God, ye but shomakynge is
not commanded by God, yes and has the promise of God annexed thereto. For God
has commanded me for the avoiding of syne to do my brethren service / and to
live thereby / Handy crafts are the commandment of God.
and to chose one estate or other (for if thou would receive only of thy
brethren and do naught again thou were a thief and an extorcioner and a
tyrant) And I chose shomakynge, or receive it at the obedience of mine elders.
Now have I gods commandment to work therein truly, and his promise
annexed thereto, that he will bless mine occupacion and make it lucky and
frutful to bring me an honest living. work I not now at gods
commandment and have his promise that it pleases him?

Note these also, First my craft is gods commandment. Seco^darely I believe
and am sure that my work pleases god for Christ's sake Thyrdlye my work is
proffytable unto my neyboure, and helps his necessite. Fourthlye I receive my
reward of the hand of God with thanks, and work surely certefyed that I
please God in my work through Christ and that god will give me my daily bread
thereby

But if thou examyne their doctrine / thou shall find that this faith is away
in all their fruits, and therefore are they worm eaten and shales without
kernelles,

Nota.
Note again, the turks and jews give almose as well as we and as much, and
yet abominable for lack of faith and knowledge of the true intent. what says
the text, he that receaueth a prophet in ye name of a prophet shall have the
reward of a prophet. That is, because thou aydest him in preaching of
Christ's word, thou shall be partaker with him and have the same reward, And
he that receaueth a disciple in the name of a disciple, shall have etc. And he
yt gives one of these little ons but a cup of cold water for my name sake
shall have his reward. If a king minister his kyngedome i^ the faith of this
name, because his subjects be his brethren and the price of Christ's blood,
he pleases God hyghly, and if this faith be not there / it pleases him not.
And if I sow a shue truly in the faith of his name, to do my brother service /
because he is the price of Christ's blood / as pleases God. Thus is faith the
goodness of all works.

Finally when God gives, and I receive with thanks, is not God as well
pleased / as when I give for his sake and he receaueth? A true friend is as
glad to do his friend a good turn, as to receive a good turn, when the father
gives his son a new cote and says. Am not I a good father / and will not
thou love me again and do what I bydde the, And the boy receives it with
thanks and says ye, and is glade and proud thereof, does not the father
rejoice as much now in the lade, as a another time when the lade does what so
ever it be at his fathers commandment? But the false prophets do well to
paynte God after the likeness of their own visenomye, glad when he receives*
ye when they receive in his name. But sour grudgynge and evil content when he
gives again. But thou pleases god, wha^ thou ask i^ faith, and when thou
receauest with thanks, and when thou reioysest in his gifts and love him
again, to keep his commandments and the apoyntema^t and covenant made
between him and the. /

And for a conclusion besides, that they expel feyth which is the goodness of
al works they set up works of their own making to distroye the works of
God, and to be holyer then gods works, to the depisyng of gods work, and
to make Gods works vile. with their chastity they distroye the chastity that
god ordained and only requires with their obedience, they destroy the obedience
that God ordained in this world, and desires no another, with their pouertye
they destroy the poverty of the spirit which Christ taugh only which is,
only not to love worldely goods with their fast, they destroy the fast
which God commands that is a perpetual sobrenesse to tame the flesh, with
their patterynge prayer, they destroy ye prayer taught by god which is either
thanks or desirynge help with faith and trust that God hears me.

The holiness of ypocrites wherein it is.
Their holiness is to forbid that God ordained to be received with thanks
gyuynge, as mete and matrimonye. And their own works they maintain and let
Gods decay. Break theirs and they persecute to the death But break Gods,
and they either look through the fingers or else give the a flappe with a fox
tail for a little monye. There is none order among the^ that is so perfect,
but that they have a prison more cruel then any ^ayle of thieves and
murderers. And if one of their brethren commytte fornycacion or adulterye in
the world, he fynissheth his penance therein in three wekes or a month, and
then is sent to a another place of the same religion. But if he attempt to put
of ye holy habit, Axe the Austen friars why they murdered one of their
fellows at London.
he comes never out, and is so straytlye dyoted thereto, that it is meruel if
he live a year, beside other cruel murder that has been found among them,
and yet is this shameful dyotynge of theyrs, murder cruel enough,

Be not deceived with vysures, nor yet with miracles. But go to and judge their
works, for the spiritual judges al things says Paul i. Cor. 11, who is
that spiritual? not such as we now call men of holy church, who is the
spiritual.
But all that have the true interpretacion of the law written in their hearts.
The right faith of Christ and the true intent of works, which God byddeth us
work, he is spiritual and judges al things, and is judged of no man.

Not all that say to me, lord lord shall enter in to the kingdom of heaven,
but he that fulfylleth the will of my father which is in heaven. Many will say
unto me at that day, lord lord did we not prophelye in thy name? and in thy
name cast out deuelles? and did we not in thy name many miracles? Then will I
confess unto them. I never knew you, depart from me ye workers of iniquite.
This doubling of lord has vehemensy and betokens that they which shall be
excluded are such as think them selves better and perfitter then other men,
and to deserve heaven with their holy works, not for them selves only but also
for other. And by that they prophesyed, by which thou may understand the
enterpretynge of scripture, and by that they cast out deuelles / and did
miracles in Christ's name (and for all that they are yet workers of wykednesse,
and do not the will of the father which is i^ heaven) it is plain that they be
false prophets, and even the same of which Christ warned before. / / /

Ignorance excuses not, if we will not se.
And now for as much as Christ and his apostles warn us that such shall
come, and descrybe us the fassio^s of their vysures (Christ's name, holy
church, holy fathers and fyftene hundred years, with scripture and miracles)
and command us to turn our eyes from their visures, and consider their
fruits, and cut them up and look within whether they be sound in the core^ and
kernel or no, and give us a rule to try them by, is it excuse good enough to
say. God will not let so great a multitude err. I will follow the most part
and believe as my fathers did / and as the preachers teach / and will not busy
my self / chose them / the fault is theirs and not ours / God shall not lay
it to our charge if we err. / /

False prophets, how to know where they be.
where such words be / there are the false prophets all ready / for where no
love to the truth is, there are the false prophets / and where such words
be, there to be no love to the truth is plain, Ergo where such words be,
there be the false prophets in their full swing by Paul's rule.2. Thessa. 2.
Another conclusion where no love to the truth is, the be false prophets. The
greatest of ye world have least love to the truth. Ergo the false prophets be
the chapelanes of the greatest which may with the sword compel the rest. As
the kings of Israel compelled to worshype the golden calves. And by false
prophets under stand false teachers, as Peter calls them and wicked
expounders of the scripture.

Who so ever hereth these words of me and does them, I will lyken him unto a
wise man that buylte his house upon a rock, and there fell a rain, and the
floudes came, and the wyndes blew, and beat upon that house, but it fell not,
for it was grounded upon a rock. And all that hear of me these words, and do
them not, shall be lykened unto a folyshe man that buylt his house upon the
sand, and there fell a rain and the floudes came, and the wyndes blewe, and
dasshed upon that house, and it fell, and the fall thereof was great.
Christ has two fortes of hearers, Beleuers without works, and workers
without faith are buylt on sand.
of which nether another do there after. The one will be saved by faith of
their own making without works. The other with works of their own making
without faith. The first are those volupteouse which have yield them selves
unto sin saying, tushe God is merciful / and Christ dyed for us, that must
save us only, for we can not but sin without resistance. The second are the
ypocrites which will deserve al with their own ymagyned works only. And of
faith they have no another experience, save that it is a little meritoriouse
where it is paynfull to be believed, As that Christ was borne of a virgyne, and
that he came not out the way that other children do / fie no / that ware a
great inconvenience but above under her arm and yet made no hole / though he
had a very natural body as other men have / and that there is no bread in
the sacrament nor wine, though the five wits say all ye, And the
merytoriouse pain of this belefe is so heavy to them, that except they had
feigned them a thousand wise similitudes and lowsye lykenesses / and as many
mad reasons to steye them with all / and to help to captiuate their
understanding, they were like to cast all of their backs. And the only
refuge of a great many to keep in that faith, is to cast out of their minds
and not to think upon it. As though they forgive not, yet if they put the
displeasure out of their minds and think not of it till a good occasion be
given to aduenge it, they think they love their neyboure well enough all the
while, and be in good charity.

And the faith of the best of them is, but like their faith in other worldly
stories. But the faith which ls trust and co^fydence to be saved and to have
their sins forgeuen by Christ which was so borne, have they not at all That
faith have they in their own works only. But the true hearers understand
the law, as Christ interprets it here / and feel therbye their ryghtwyse
dampnacion / and run to Christ for succoure / and for remyssyon of all their
sins that are past / and for all the sin which chance through infirmite /
shall compel them to do, and for remysson of that the law is to strong for
their weak nature. And upon that they consent to the law, love it and
profess it, to fulfill it to the uttermost of their power, and then go to and
work. Faith.
Faith or confidence in Christ blood without help and before the works of
the law brings al manner of remission of sins and satisfaccion. Faith is
mother of love. Faith acco^payneth love in all her works to fulfill as much
as there lacks in our doing the law of that perfayte love, which Christ
had to his father and us in his fulfyllynge of the law for us. Now when we be
reconcyled / than is love and faith to gether our ryghtwysnesse / Love.
our keeping the law, our contynuynge / our proceadynge forward in the grace
which we stand in / and our bringing to the everlasting saving and
everlasting life. And the works be estymed of God according to the love of
the heart. If the works be great and love little and cold, then the works be
regarded thereafter of God. If the works be small and love much and fervent,
the works be taken frr great of God.

And it came to pass, that when Jesus had ended these sayenges, the people
were astonished at his doctrine. For he taught them as one having power, and not
as ye scribes.
The Scribes and Phariseyes had thrust up the sword of the word of god into a
scabarde or shethe of gloses, and therein had knytte it fast / that it could
nether stycke nor cut, teaching deed works without faith and love which are
the life and ye hole goodness of al works and the only thing why they please
God. And therefore their audience abode ever carnal and fleshly mind without
faith to god and love to their neyboures. Christ's words were spirit and
life. Io. vi. That is to say, they ministered spirit and life, and entered into
the heart and grated on the conscience and through preaching the law, made
the herars perceive their duties, even what love they ought to God, and whAt to
man, and the right da^pnacion of al them that had not the love of God and man
written i^ their hearts, and through preaching of faith, made al yt consented to
the law of god, ^ele the mercy of God is Christ, and certefyed the^ of their
salvation. ^or ye word of god is a two edged sword that perceth and deuydeth
the spirit and soul of man a sonder. Hebre, 4. A man before the preaching of
Gods word is but one man, all flesh, the soul consentyng unto the lusts
of the flesh, to follow them, but the sword of the word of God where it
takes effect, divides a man in two, and sets him ^t variaunce against his
own self. The flesh ^alynge one way, and the spirit drawing a ^other, ye
flesh ragyng to follow lusts, and the ^pirite calling back again, to follow
the ^awe and will of God. A man all the while he ^o^senteth to the flesh and
before he be borne ^gayne in Christ, is called soul or carnal. But when he is
renewed in Christ through ye word of life, and has the love of God and of his
neyboure, and the faith of Christ written in his heart, he is called spirit
or spiritual. The lord of all mercy send us preachers with power, that is
to say, true expounders of the word of god and spekers to the heart of man and
deliver us from Scribes, Phareseyes, ypocrites, and all false prophets.

Amen. / / w. T.

The table which shall send you to all things contained in this book.
The table.
ALmose, prayer and fasting are inseparable. Folio. lxxvii. s. ii. Anointe the
heed what it is. fo. 76. s. i Almose, prayer and fasting, how necessary. Fo.
lxxvii. s. ii. Aduoutrye. / / fo. xxxix. s. ii Angrye. How a man may be angrye
and sin not. Folio. xxv. s. ii. Absolucion. Gods covenant is a sure
absolucion. Fo. lxxi. s. ii.
Baptyme. Folio. lxxiiii. s ii. Bread, daily bread. Fo. lxv. s. ii. Baptyme,
the right baptyme what. fo. ix. s. i. Beam. Fo. xciii. s. i. Belefe, To believe
in God what it is. fo. xcv. s. i Beleuers without works, and workers without
faith are buylt on sand. fo. C.vii. s ii.
Ceremonies must be salted. Fo. xxv. s, ii. Covetousness, what a pestilence it
is. fo. 81. s. i, Care. Folio. xc. s. i. Covenant, keep covenant with God and
he shall keep promise with the. fo. lxxxix. s. i Covetousness causes darkness.
Fo. 84. s. i. Cursed, most accursed who. Fo xxiii s. ii. Care. Fo. lxxxviii. s,
i. Covetousness makes a false prophet. Folio. lxxxiii. s. i. Covetousness
makes the salt of gods word unsavory. Fo. lxxxiii. s. i. Church of Christ
what. Fo. ix. s. i. Clothing, shepes clothing what. fo. C. s. ii Ceremonies.
Folio. xciii. s. ii. Ceremonies. He that breaks unite for zele of ceremonies,
understands not the law Folio. xciii. s. i. Covetousness can not but err.
fo. lxxxi. s. ii Care, what care every man ought to have. Folio. xci. s. i.
Care, what care is forboden. fo. xci. s. i Church, what. fo. 31, s. i.
Chamber. To shut thy chamber door, what it means. fo. lxiii. s. ii.
Covenant, Gods covenant is a sure absolucion. Folio. lxxi. s. ii.
Covenant. fo. 71. s. ii, Covetousness. Fo. lvi.. s. ii, Cheke. To turn the
other cheke what it means. Fo. lxvii. s. ii. Covetousness. By covetousness is a
false prophet known. fo. xiii. s. i. Covetousness is contrary to the word of
god and to the ministres of the law. Fo, 13. s, i
Darckenes, all knowledge is darkness till the knowledge of Christ's passion be
in the heart. Fo. xxvi. s. ii. Doctrine. False doctrine is cause of evil
works. fo. xxix. s. ii. Doctrine. True doctrine is cause of good works. fo.
29. s. ii. Dogs. / / fo. xciiii. s. i. Darckenes. Fo. lxxxiii. s. i. fo. 84.
s ii. Dogs love not the law. fo. viii. s. i. Darckenes. Faith in works is
darckenes. fo. lxxxiiii. s, ii. Darckenes. Fo. 85. s. i. Doutes. How to
assoyle doutes. fo. xcvii. s. ii
Faith, The office of faith. Fol. x. s, ii Faith. fo. C, xiiii. s. i. fo.
lxxvi, s. ii Faith, is our victory. fo. xiiii. s ii Faith, the difference of
faythes, and how it is to be understand, faith justifies. fo. viii. s. ii
Faith, Fo. lxxiiii. s. ii Faith of swyne what. fo. viii, s. ii Faith makes the
work good and acceptable. fo. C.iii. s. i Faith, love and hope are inseparable
in this life. fo. v, s. ii Faith justifies what it meaneh. fo. lxxiii. s. ii
Faith in works is darckenes. fo. lxxxiiii. s. ii Faith and the law be of
contrary operacio^s. folio. 3. s. i. Faith is the kernel of all our good
works. folio. C.iii. s. i. Faith, hope and charity are i^seperable. fo, x. s.
i Faith, true faith is coupled with love to the law. fol. 8. s. i. False
prophets what their wickedness is. folio. xcvi. s. i. False prophets, how to
know where they be. fo. C.vi. s. ii. / Fasting is not in eating and
drinking only. fol, lxxvii. s. ii. Fast, how the Jews did fast. fo. lxxx.
s. i Fasting the true intent is away in the popes fast* / / fo. lxxx. s. i.
Ferthynge the last ferthynge. fo. xxxviii. s. ii
Glory, he that seeks his own glory teaches his own doctrine and not his
masters. Folio. 31, s. ii, fo, 32. s. i. Glory, he that seeks his own glory
alters his masters message. Folio. xxxii. s. i.
Hate, when a man may hate his neyboure. Folio. xxxvii. s. ii Henry the
second. fo. xiiii. s. ii Herted, Impure herted who. fo. 20. s. i. Hope, the
office of hope^ fo. xii. s. i. Honor, to honor the name of God what. Folio.
lxvii. s. ii Hundred fold. fo. xvi. s. i. Handy crafts are Gods
commandment. Folio. C.iiii^ s. i Holiness of ypocrites. fo. C.v. s. ii.
Iustifye. Faith iustifyeth what it means. Folio^ lxxiii. s. ii. Impure
herted who. fo. xx. s. i Judging, what Judging is rebuked. Folio. xcii. s.
ii. Ignorance excuses not. fo. C.vi. s. ii
Keye what it is^ Folio. 2. s^ ii. Kings ought to be learned. fo. xxvii. s. ii
Kyngedome of heaven what. fo. lxxxix. s. ii King Johan. fo. xiiii. s. ii
Kingdom of heaven what it is. fo. ii. s. i.
Law. Folio^ xlv. s. ii. Law the law is restored. fo. xxxv s. i Law what
her office is. fo. 2. s. ii Law what follows the breaking thereof. Folio. / /
xlii. s. i. Law is that dryueth to Christ. Fo. 2. s. ii. Law. / / fo. xlv. s.
ii. Law, what is the fulfyllynge thereof. Fol. xcviii. s. i. / / Law, To go to
law. Fol. lii. s. i. Law, by keeping the law, we continue in grace. fo. v.
s. i. Law, he that professes not the law has no part in the promise. fo.
4. s. ii Law. Christ is a gift given only to them that love the law. Fo.
4. s. ii. Law, they that love not the law can not understand the scripture
to salvation. fo. v. s. ii Law and faith be of contrary operacio^s. fo. 3. s. i
Law, what follows the keeping of the law Folio. xli, s. ii. / Law, they that
have not the law written in their hearts, can not understand the passion of
Christ to salvation. fo. ix. s. ii. Law, exetpt a man love the law he can not
understand the doctrine of Christ. fo. 31. s. i Leaven. / Fo. lxxii, s. i.
Love, to love is to help at need. fo. 37. s. ii Lift hand, Fol. lx. s. i
Love. Fol. C.viii. s. i. Fol. lxxiii. s. i Love is the keeping of the law. fo.
36. s. i Love, the office of love. Fol. x. s. ii. Love is the fulfyllynge of
the law. fo. 39. s, i Love prays. Folio. xxxiii. s. i Love is ryghtwysnes.
Fol. lxxx. s. ii Lay ought to have the gospel. fo. xxvii. s. i
Mammons servant how he is known. Folio, lxxxvi. s. ii. / / Mammon. / / Fo.
lxxxviii. s. i. Mammon, the true servant of Mammon is no true preacher. fol.
lxxxvi. s. ii. Mammon what it is. fo. lxxxv. s. ii Mammon is a God. fo. lxxxvi.
s. ii Mammon, the servants of Mammon are not of Christ's church. fo. lxxxvi.
s. i Mammon, to be Mammons servant what. Folio. lxxxvi. s. ii. Mammon makes
men to disguyse themselves Folio. lxxxvi. s. i. Mekenes possesses the earth.
Fo. xv. s. ii. Mekenes. fo. xlvii. s. ii. Measure. fo. xciii. s. ii. Merciful,
to be merciful what. fo. xvii. s. ii Monks Fo. xviii. s. i. Monks made the
pope a God for his dispensacions. fo. lxxx. s. ii. Monks rob the whole
world with their prayers, Folio. xxxii. s. ii. Monks why they ron to
closture. fo. 25. s. i Monks why they ron to religion. fo. 17. s. i Monks be
accursed. Fo. xvii. s. i. Mourning, godly mourning. fo. xiii. s. ii. Morners
for ryghtwysnes are saved, wha^ god takes ve^geau^ce on the vnryghtwyse. fo.
15. s. i More. Sir Thomas More. K. fo. lxxxii. s. i. Moses face. Fo. 2. s. ii.
Narowe way, few find it. Fo. xcix. s. i
Obedience. The obedience, poverty / and wylful chastity of our spiritualty.
fo. C.i. s. ii. Oil, holy oil must be adue^ged. fo. 18. s. i. Oath, to
perform an evil oath is double sin. Fo. xlvi. s. i. Offering what they
meant. fo. xxxviii. s. i. Obedience of the spiritualtye Fo. C.i. s. i.
Obedience. fo. C, i. s. i.
Pater noster is expounded. fo. lxvii. s. ii. Pardons, A surer way then
pardons. fo. lxix. s. i. Pain, no bodly pain can be a satisfaccion to God,
save Christ's passion. fo, 22. s. i Pain. How God delyteth in our pain
taking. fo. lxxix. s. ii. Peace, the peace of Christ is a peace of conscience.
/ / fo. xxi. s. ii. Peace making what. fo. 20. s, i. Perfect, to be perfect
what. fo. lviii, s. i. Persecucion, what the most cruel persecucion is. Fo.
22. s. ii. Phareses, what their wyckednes was. Folio. xxxiii. s. ii. Pharases
what they were. fo. xxxiii. s. i Phareses, The phareses might better have
proved them selves the true church then our spiritualtye. Fo. 33. s. ii.
Prayer. Fo. lxxvii. s. i. fo, lxiii. s. ii. Polling? How to aduoyde it. fo.
xlvii. s. ii Pouertye in spirit, fo. xii. s. i. Prayer what it is. fo. lxiiii.
s. i Prayer is a commandment. fo. xcv. s. i. Prayer, by prayer we wyn ye
victory. f. xcv. s. ii. Prayer, Gods commandment and promise should move us
to pray. fo. lxv. s. i. Prayer, false prayer is payneful. fo lxvi. s. i.
Preacher, the order how every man may be a preacher. Fo. xxviii. s. i.
Preacher, why the true preacher is accused of treason and heresye. fo. 34. s,
i. Preacher, the office of a preacher. fo. xli. s. ii. Preacher of the Gospel
may use no violence. Folio. liiii. s. i. Princes what they ought to do yer they
make war. fo. 20. s. i Princes whether they may be resisted or put down of
their subjects. fo. lii. s. ii. Promise, he that professes not a new life
has no promise of mercy in Christ. fo. lxiii^ s. i. Promyses, The promyses are
made upon the profession of the law of God, so that the church will not keep
the law, has no promise that he can not err. Fo, 33. s, ii. Pureness of heart
what. fo, xix. s, i. Pouertye. Fo. C.i, s. ii
Rauenynge wolves. Fo. C.i. s. i. Regime^tes, an ensample to understand the
difference of the two regimentes. fo. 50. s. i. Regiment, the tenporal
regiment. fo. xlix. s, i. Regimentes, every man is under both the regimentes,
fo. liiii. s. ii. Regimentes, two manner states or regimentes. Folio. xlviii. s.
i. Rich in spirit. / / fo. xii. s. ii. Ryghtwysnes. fo. xvi. s. ii.
Ryghtwysnes of the kyngedome of heaven what. Fo. lxxxix. s. i. Ryghtwysnes of
Phareses. Fo. xxxi. s. ii. Rich must pray for daily bread. fo. xcvi. s. i.
Right eye. fo. xli. s. i Right hand. fo. xli. s. i. Rulers why they were
ordained fo. vi. s. i Rulers be ordained for them that can note rule them
selves. fo. lxxviii. s. i
Salt, who is mete to salt Fo. 24. s. ii Sacrifice what they meant. fo.
xxxviii. s. i. Scripture how it is locked up. fo. 3. s. i Scourge, why god
scourges his. fo. vi. s. ii Scribes and Phareses what they were. fo. 23. s. i
Sin, to sin under grace, and to sin under the law what. Folio. vii. s.
ii. Sinners, he that helps not to amend sinners must suffer with them wha^
they be punysshed. folo. / / xxxvi. s. ii. Spiritual, who they be. fo. C.vi.
s. i. Shepes clothing what fo. C. s. ii Spiritualtye why they be despised. fo.
25. s. ii Spiritualtye an admonicion to the spiritualty Folo. / / / xliii. s.
i. Spiritualtye, Every man is of the spiritualty. Fol. xlviii. s. ii, Strayte
gate.. / fo. xcviii. s. ii Swyne. Fo. viii. s. i, Fo. xciiii. s. i Swyne have
no faith. folio. viii. s. i Swear. Fo. xliiii. s. ii
Tempte, why God lets his be tempted with aduersite. Fo. xc. s. ii.
Temporal regiment. Fo. iiii. s. i. Temporaltye Every man is of the
temporaltye. Folio. xlviii. s. ii. Tyrau^tes, why god gives us up i^ to the
hand of tyrau^tes and in to all misery. fo. xlii. s. ii. Tyrau^tes, why god
suffers them. fo. xci. s. ii
Vengaunce pertayneth to God. Fo. xx. s, ii Venge, the private person may not
aduenge, but the officer must. Fol. xvi. s. ii. Violence, not to resyst
violence. fo. xlix. s. ii
wife, how good a thing she is. Fol. xl. s. ii war, how to be awarry our.
fo. li. s. i way, few find the narowe way. fo. xcix. s. i wolves, Rauenynge
wolves. fo. C.i, s, i works iustifye not, fo. lx. s. ii. fo, 4. s. ii works
make ypocrites, if the true intent be away. Folio. lxxviii. s, i works must
be seasoned with gods word Folio. / / lxiii. s. ii works what they do. fol.
lxii. s, ii, works are sacraments. fo. lxxiiii. s, i. word, Gods word
altered, is not his word. Folio, xxx, s, ii.
Ypocresye, it is ieopardous to salt it. Folio, / / xxiiii. s, ii. Ypocrites,
the holiness of ypocrites wherein it is. Folio, C, v, s, ii.
Zele of ryghtwysnes, what it is. Fo. 18. s. ii.
Cum priuilegio regali.


