Lord, be merciful.

O God, forgive him.

Forsak^ me not, O Lord.

(...)

O Lord (...)*

^

Lord, be merciful



The penitent Sons Tears, for his murdered Mother.
HE that has taught ten thousand tongues to speak
That horrid sin, that his sad heart does break,
Now scarce can speak himself; for Woe denies
A begging Voice, and gives me begging Eyes.
Me thinks the Shadow of this real thing
That wretched Me into this World did bring,
Stands poynting now, (my guilty Soul to shake)
To the bloody wound, this bloody hand did make,
That wound's a Mouth; her dead dry blood, a Tongue,
That says, amongst all, the most-forsaken throng,
That have their lives branded with blood and shame,
J stand the foremost; have the foulest name.
Me thinks, I hear her tell me, those pale Hands
Have gently lapt me in my swathing bands;
Have dandled me; and, when I learned to go,
Have propt me, weak, till I too-strong did grow.
Me thinks I see Her point upon her breast,
And tell me, there, I have bin used to feast;
Thence often have fetched my living; from her blood,
By Heaven converted to my wholesome food.
And last, me thinks, She points upon that place,
Where all my parts had their due form and grace,
With these sad words; Behold the unhappy womb,
Which I could wish, Heaven once had made thy Tomb.
A heavy wish; yet such a wish indeed,
As I my self now, (with a Heart does bleed)
Could sadly breathe; 'cause that untimely birth
Brought not a Man, but Monster to the Earth.
From that deep Dungeon, where, in bands I lie,
And from a depth, more deep, I call and cry:
The depth of anguish; which thy sight most pure;
Can only look on; and thy mercies, cure.
O cure my soul; it is that great work, I know,
For which (so High) thou did descend so low:
Then, great Phisician, Help me; Heal my wound;
Great Shepherd, Seek me; Let my Soul be found.
That heavenly inuitation, made to those,
Whose many sins load them with many woes,
Is made to me: For only sin does griue me,
And not my death; Then (blessed Lord) relieve me.
Lord, let my tears be, to my leprous sin
As Jordan was, to Naamans leprous skin;
And wash it clean: But, o! so great a good
Never came by Water, it is a work of Blood.
A work of Blood: the blood of that pure Lamb,
That to purge sin, and save poor sinners came;
That precious Blood: O Lord, that Blood of thine,
Apply to me, to purge this blood of mine.
So, as of GOD I beg, I beg of Men,
Their zealous prayers t'assist me: And again,
To quit that Goodness, this Reward I Will give,
I Will pray, my Death may teach all them to Live.
FINIS.
By Nathaniel Tyndale, sick both in soul and body: a prisoner now in Newgate.
The much-afflicted Mothers Tears, for her drowned Daughter.
COme, tender Mothers, see a Mothers fears;
Sins Palsy, shake me; and my Flood of tears:
Come hear my sighs, and penitential prayers;
Deaths shade's my Mansion; my Companion, Cares.
O! how much worse than any savage Bear,
She-Wolfe, or Tygresse, must I now appear?
Since they, their young, with such respect do cherish;
And mine, by Me, does thus untimely perish.
For, wretched J, (when fruitless cares took place;
And cloudy passion, hid the light of gr ce)
More fell than these are, my poor Child forgot,
And childbed pangs, (the Mothers painful lot)
Forgot thou were my Flesh; Forgot how often
I kissed thee; blessed thee; and, to slumbers soft,
Within these arms have lulled thee: And again,
How often my pitties have bemon'd thy pain.
Forgot how often upon my tender breast
Thou have bin fed; how often taine thy rest;
Forgot a Mothers nine years cares and cost;
All which, with thee, are in thy murder, lost.
All these forgot. When we our GOD forget,
Then Satan comes, and in our Eye does set
His poisoned baits; which, 'cause I not withstood,
Mine Eye drops Water; But, my Heart drops Blood.
For Death (alas) I care not: Could I sum
As many lives, as I have hours to come;
I Would spend them all; And, with a smiling Face,
Meet all those Deaths, to give thy sweet life, place.
But wishes (dear CLEMENTIA) are but vain;
I drowned thee (little Angel;) And again
Should drown thy Body, (were before my fears,)
In this New River, of mine own warm Tears.
These Tears, that ever from mine Eyes shall flow;
This lavish Flood of penitential woe;
This Wine of Angels, so the Fathers call
Those drops Repentance lets so freely fall.
With Paul, with Peter* David; and that son,
The maze of Riot, and hot lust did run;
And with the Woman, washed her Saviors feet,
Let my poor Soul that balm of mercy meet.
Thou' came not (Lord) the just and pure to call,
But impure sinners; Nor do joy their fall,
But their conversion: And, when Grace does bring
One soul to thee, all the blessed Angels sing.
I know, it is late (O Lord) yet know thy power;
Know that is as much, in man's departing hour,
As in a rathe beginning; for my grief
Has learnt the Lesson of that penitent Thief.
Like his, let mine, thy Mercies-Seat ascend,
And purchase there, against this sad life shall end:
That life, to death, shall never more give way;
So, while I weep, help my poor Soul to pray.
FINIS.
Anne Musket, the woeful MOTHER* for her lost Daughter.
Printed at London for John Trundle.


