A COMMENTARY UPON THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMY:

Wherein are contained; first, the method and order of every Chapter laid open
in several Tables; then, a literal interpretation of the text out of the
Hebrew, with a Paraphrasticall exposition of the sense thereof: Afterward, a
collection of diverse doctrines, gathered sometimes out of a whole verse in
general, or from the coherence of the text; and sometimes out of the
particular words of the same; with examples, now and then, showing how the same
doctrines have bin verified in experience; Moreover, the reason or proof of
every doctrine; and lastly, the particular uses, that are to be made of them,
for the edification of the Church of God.

Ierem. 13. 22. And if thou say in thine heart, wherefore come these things
upon me? for the multitude of thine iniquities, are thy skirts discovered, and
thy heels made bare. AT LONDON, Printed by the Widow Orwin, for Thomas Man,
dwelling in Pater Noster row, at the sign of the Talbot. 1593.

To the Christian Reader, grace, mercy, and peace from God the father, and
from our Lord Jesus Christ.
IT is, and has been long time a question more enquired into upon occasion,
the^ soundly weyed for the good of Gods Church, whether there be any more ways
of right handling the Scriptures then one? and if there be, which is the best
thereof? The solution whereunto (as appears by the infinite variety of
preaching among us Englishmen more then in all the Churches of God besides)
has been, that there are indeed diverse manners of preaching, which may all be
profitably used for the edification of the body of Christ. But if the practice
of many be well weyed, it will easily appear (supposing that there be diverse)
that we have been very careless to enquire after the best and to use it. For,
whilst some give themselves, upon the least occasion, to enter into a common
place of Divinity, and to handle it most largely (which is the right way in
Catechizing and laying the foundations of Religion) and others labor to show
themselves learned in the tongues, and human Arts, or of great reading in
divine and heathen writers, we see that the people is brought either into such
amazedness, as they think that any thing may be made of the Scriptures, or to
such an unsettledness in judgment, as they rather hunt after variety of
teachers for their strange manner of preaching, then for sound instruction for
their own edification. How this sore may be cured, I will not take upon me
precisely to say, for it is easier rightly to epsy a fault, then to show the
way to amend it, and it may be that there is not one, but diverse causes of this
enormitie, some whereof are grown to such ulcers, as may not without danger be
touched. Only I will be bold to say some thing to the question propounded
before, not so much striving whether there be diverse kinds of teaching, as
laboring to show such away as must needs be the best and most profitable.
First therefore we are to know that the end wherefore Christ Jesus when he
ascended into heaven, and leading captivity captive gave gifts unto men, was
for the edification of the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 12. that is, to build up
Gods people in the true knowledge of his holy word, and so to confirm them in
the faith, and reform them in their lives. Now to the end that this may be
done, I suppose every one will confess first, that the workman whom God has
fitted to this great work, must be that scribe taught unto the kingdom of
heaven, which is like unto the householder that brings out of his treasury
things both old and new, Matthew 13. 52. that is, furnished with all kinds of
knowledge meet to express Gods will to his people in most effectual manner:
Then it cannot be denied that, seeing it is only the word of God that can
persuade the conscience, the first thing that is to be done in the right
teaching of the same to Gods people, must needs be, the clear and evident
deliverance of the sense of the text in hand; that out of the same, as from a
fountain that runs clearly, all that he is further to deliver may be seen
to be derived. Secondly, seeing what soever was written aforetime was written
for our learning, Romans 15. 4. it must needs be that every sentence of the holy
Scripture contains in it (at least) one general doctrine; and therefore the
sense being once understood, the next thing that is to be considered, is, the
collecting of the same out of the text, in such plain and manifest manner, as
must needs be acknowledged in the conscience of the hearers to be so; which
being enlarged by the examples and testimonies of the Scriptures, and
manifested by the force of reason grounded upon the same, must needs take such
root in the consciences of the hearers, as they shall either be thoroughly
persuaded of the truth of it (if it be rightly and effectually handled) or
leave such a print therein as shall convince the same. Thirdly, seeing the
general doctrine is like unto goodly meat set upon the table before young
children, which needs to be carved unto them, that every one may have his
portion in due season, Mat. 24. 45. Therefore is the right use to be propounded
unto them of the same doctrine, that it may appear how it is profitable,
either for all Christians in general, or for certain special ones in
particular. This is that which the Apostle means when he says, that the
whole scripture is profitable to teach, (that is, to learn doctrine out of it,
and not only so, but also) to improve, (that is, to confute all errors
contrary to wholesome doctrine) to correct, (that is, to reprove the
mishehauiours of them that walk disorderedly) To instruct in righteousness,
(that is, to direct Gods people in all the ways of godliness) 2. Tim. 3. 16.
yea and to arm us with patience and comfort in all kinds of trouble, Romans 15.
4. This course being taken by the Preacher shall not only free him from the
slander of running out of his text, but also be so profitable for the hearer,
as experience shall prove this kind of teaching to be such as is not justly
to be excepted against. But is not this (will some say) a great injury offered
unto others that preach after another fashton, and a straightning of the gifts
of Gods spirit which are diverse, to some thus, and to others thus, and yet by
the same spirit wrought to the edification of the Church of Christ? I answer,
first, as concerning men, let them be assured that they have awarrant out of
the word, and aperswasion in their hearts, that the care of Gods glory and
desire of edifiyng his people did lead them to their manner that they use, and
then is all this nothing against the^, but directly for them. Secondly, the
comme^ding of one kind of teaching as most profitable, does no way bound the
spirit of God further then it has pleased the Lord to limite himself by the
rules of his own word. I confess that God gives unto diverse men diverse
measures, and to some to excel in one thing, and to some in others, for one
has an excellent dexterity in interpreting the text; another can in special
manner gather doctrines; another exceeds in application, but let it be
considered that all these are branches of that method hitherto commended unto
us: so that, whosoever is endued with special ability and facility in one of
these, must labor also to perform the other aright, and not to account it a
course different from his own, further then that one does his duty in
greater measure, and in a higher degree then another. Yet would I not so be
understood, as though I did affirm it of necessity to gather every doctrine
at all times that the text may afforde, or out of every doctrine to derive both
matter of reproof, correction, instruction, patience, and comfort. For albe it
I do not doubt but that the word of God, being, as God himself is, infinitely
rich even in every sentence for every branch of edification: yet seeing the
dividing of the word of God aright, is the wisdom of the wise steward to
dispense the same in due season, it belongs to the teacher to see what is
most meet and expedient that way, who shall often discern apparent necessity
to stand upon one, when there is as evident reason to omit, or, at least, not
to urge or enlarge the other: and therefore as it is a sure ground for the
hearer to learn to discern of and choose his teacher by his ability and
dexterity in expounding the text, and gathering the doctrines out of the same;
so is it hardly within his power to judge either of his choice of doctrines or
of the use and application that he makes (so that he use none but that which
is found and agreeable to the text) saving so far as concerns his own
edification in particular. This I am sure of (for I have seen it in continual
experience) that the want of this way in the teacher is the cause that he often
thinks his text so barren, as he is glad to run into bywayes to fill up
his time, and so makes his labor as water spilt upon a stone that never
profits any, and the want of power to see who handle the word of God aright,
and grace to use their ministry ordinarily, is the cause, not only of the
gadding of the multitude (where they may easily come to variety of teachers)
but also of the rents and distractions that so many fall usually into; for if
they had been seasoned with that heavenly teaching which the ordinary
ministry of him that deuideth the word of GOD aright, does afforde, not only
their judgments would have been better informed to discern the spirit of
error when it is tendered unto them, but also this wandering and confused kind
of teaching that many do use, would have seemed unsavory unto them.

But my purpose is not, either to set down any directions for the preacher, or
to prescribe a course for the hearer, save only to show, and that briefly,
such a way as is proved by experience to be most comfortable for the minister,
seeing his labor thereby to be blessed, and not to be in vain, and most
profitable to the hearer, who shall thereby attain to the greatest measure of
knowledge and soundnes of judgment. Now (because examples are the most easy
way of teaching) I with the comfortable assistance of another brother, (who
when this book comes to his hands may see his share in the travail thereof)
having occasion to go thorough the two first chapters of these Lamentations,
and the most part of the third, perceived that the method and matter might be
not altogether unprofitable unto others: and therefore I reuiewed the chief
notes that we had collected from the larger discourse thereof, and adding
thereunto the other two chapters have set the whole down in such manner as
thou see. The particulars, I confess, as they be set down, are far more
brief then when they were spoken, and more short then is meet to be used many
public ministry, or expected by any indifferent auditorie (for why should I
trouble the Reader with large discourses in that which may as well be expressed
in short sentences?) seeing I have labored to abridge rather then to enlarge
any thing, which will be as profitable to the Reader of any tolerable
understanding, as if every thing were amplified to the uttermost. For as to a
Musician that has so much skill as to know the concords and rules of descant,
it is as good a direction to have the ground, as if he had every several point
pricked out unto him, seeing he is inured with the manner of division upon
every point according as it falls out in the ground: so to him that is any
thing well qualified either with the gift of teaching, being a minister, or of
hearing with judgment and discretion being a private person, this short
handling of these chapters may be as plain a direction unto him as if every
point were amply enlarged.

To conclude, that thou may the better perceive and reap profit by this
present exposition, understand that in all things I have labored for brevity:
and therefore it may peradventure seem somewhat obscure, especially seeing how
the doctrines are gathered out of the text is seldom set down; yet for the
better direction therein I have expressed in another character the words, or at
least some part thereof with etc. out of which it does arise. I am somewhat more
plentiful in the two first chapters, then in the rest; partly because the same
things did often occur, and that now and then in the self same words; and
partly that it may appear what variety and abundance of matter is contained
in the holy scriptures; and yet where the greatest plenty is expressed, I have
not set down all the doctrines that my self could have collected, much less
that which the text in it self contained: for who can draw that fountain dry,
which is bottomless? this I do therefore say, that every man, who either has
the calling to teach the word of God unto his people, or prepares himself to
be furnished thereunto, when the Lord of the vineyarde shall set him on work
may be provoked and allured to take pains, and to pray for a blessing upon his
labors that way, which he may have good hope (using the means) to attain
unto, seeing so great riches be there to be obtained, by the hands of all
those that rightly dig therein. The Lord make us able and willing to travail
with all carefulnes in that heavenly labor of searching out the unspeakable
treasures of knowledge and wisdom that lie hidden in his blessed word, and
vouchsafe so to bless us therein, as may be most to his glory, the good of his
poor Church, and the endless comfort of our own souls.

The Lamentations of Jeremie in a Table.
The first chapter contains the evils of the church and common weal in 11.
verses discoursed in eight verses by question in foureverses how these miseries
came upon the City in general altered made solitary. tributarie.
was populus. famous.

how affected with it, the thing mourns. is not comforted.
cause her friends forsake her. are against her.


people in particular their outward estate, the thing flight. finding no rest.
cause at home affliction. servitude.
abroad, their foes prevail. take them at the vantage.


the overthrow of religion in regard of the place, that is desolate, for that
none come. the gates are shut up.
parties special priests. virgins.
general all professors.



answer in 4. verses their sins effecting externallie in regard of the
adversaries, the thing they rule over them. enjoy it quietly.
cause Gods correction. their sins.

themselves generally go into captivity. lose their beauty.
particularly her princes wanting food. strength.


internally in themselves remembering their grief. loss of pleasant things.
people.

God rejecting them. working in others to despise them. the^mselues, grief and
sorrow.




prayed for to be amended in 3. verses containing a confession of the cause,
their sin not acknowledged. their misery, in falling so suddenly. wanting
comforters.

petition what, that God would regard. consider.
why, the Church is spoiled. people famished. made vile.




co^testation in 11. verses see * * Contestation or calling of her estate unto
the consideration of other nations in 8. verses, showing that her punishment is
not of them in 4. verses by general consideration of her sorrow, being greater
then of any other, 12. verses. from God.
particular by diverse allegories in the 13. 14. 15. verses, showing the work
of Gods own hand, what it is, a fire in her bones, 13. verse. snare to her
feet.
effects generally, overthrow. particularly in her desolation. heaviness.


Gods instruments whence their strength is; from God, remembering her sins,
14. verse. taking her strength from her.
what they do generally, keep her under. particularly, in plain terms
tread her under, 15. verse. break her strength.
borrowed speech, tread the press, etc




ought to bepitied of them in 4. verses containing her miseries in general
expressed want comforts, 16. verse. have desolate children.
aggrauated by that which is done of them seeking and not finding help, 17.
verse. God making all men their foes.
is they are separated, as, etc. verse. 18. God has done it justly.


particular in respect of sex, the captivity of virgins. young men.
condition friends called upon, 19. verse. deceived her.
Church gouerners who Priests. Elders.
what they do, seek food. die in the City.





God in 3. verses, a Confession of their misery, 20. verse. adversaries
cruelty.
petition to be delivered, 21. 22. verses. punish the adversaries.





The second Chapter contains an expostulation in 10. verses for their
miseries, general upon the whole kingdom, in 7. verses, propounded in the 1.
verse. thing, she is darkened, 1. verse. thrown down.
causes, Gods anger. forgetting of her.

declared in respect of the overthrow of the Common weal in 4. verses,
removing her glory in building, 2. verse. rulers.
strength, 3. verse.
laying on them his angry hand, 4. verse. destruction, 5. verse.

religion in 2. verses, Circumstances, 6. verse. place. time.
thing Altar, 7. verse. Sanctuary.



particular upon the city, in 3. verses. thing walls, 8. verse. gates, 9.
verse.
effect decay of laws. prophecy.
sorrow in old, 10. verse. young.



instruction in 12. verses containing the entrance in 2. verses. the sorrow of
the Prophet, 11. verse. cause in general, the misery that befalls the
people. particular, the infants overthrow in the streets. manner how calling
to their mothers for food, 12. verse. dying in their laps.



thing see b the aggravating of the evils in 5. verses. that no evil is like
this, 13. verse. there is no help for it on earth from themselves. from
others: for their foes reproach by gestures, 15. 16. verses. words.

from God: for he performs his threatenings, 17. verse. strengthens the
enemy.


counsel of the Prophet, how to come to God, by showing the blasphemy of the
adversaries, 18. verse. their own repentance, in weeping. crying for help,
19. verse.

to pray to him expostulating with God an entreaty to consider what he does,
20. verse. a question, moving him to pity.
declaring their misery in the decay of all estates, 21. verse. increasing of
their grief, 22. verse.







The third Chapter, co^taining a complaint in verses 41 consisting of an
expostulatio^ to verse 19. and shows Gods heavy hand upon them in 13.
verses. the effect of it in the foes verse 14. them, in borrowed terms 15. 16.
verses. plain terms 17. 18. verses.


report of the spiritual battle, the strife from the 19. to 22. verses.
victore the thing from 22. to 40. verses, respecting Gods people Particularly
these, by experience, to 25. verse. generally all that be lowly, to 31. verse.
God himself, his nature and love to his, to 37. verse. power to 40. verse.

use of it to examine our selves turn to God verse 40. 41.




prayer containing a Confession of their innes in the 42 verse. the iugments
felt for them to verse 55. Gods doings toward them from 43. to 46. being far
from hearing them from 43. to 45. making them odious verse 46.
effect of it particularly the foes speak evil 46. they fear 47. weep
continually from 48. to 51.

generally they are grieved 51. the foes, what they do seek occasions 52. use
al extremity 53.
cause them (as it were) to despair 54.




petition for deliverance to the godly their faith and his former mercies verse
55. to 59. the perverseness of the foes 59.
overthrow to the wicked causes, to 64. thing, to the end of the Chapter.





The fourth Chapter contains A discourse of the evils that were upon the
Jews in 20. verses, by question, expostulating the overthrow of al things in
10. verse. in general in the 1. and 2. verses the Temple destroyed verse 1.
rulers despised 2. verse.
particular from the 3. to 11. verse expressed from 3. to 9. verse, in it self
from 3. to 6. verse, their estate in particular, in 3 and 4. verses, the
mothers cruelty in 3. verse. infants hungry in 4. verse.
general, abundance turned into penury, 5. verse.
by exemplification in 6. 7. 8. verses, by comparison, the punishment of
Sodom, 6. verse instance of the Nazarites 7. 8. verses, who were most pure 7.
verse. are black 7 8.


aggrauated in 9. and 10. verses by comparing death by the sword to be less
then by famine 9. verse. considering how the mothers did eat their children,
10. verse.


answer in 10. verses, showing the cause efficient God in the 11. and 12.
verses, who being angry, 11. verse. did that which man would not have
believed, 12. verse.
moving, their sins from 13. to 21. verse, past from 13. to 17. verse, set
down in the 13. and 14. verses. condemned and revenged by their adversaries in
15. and 16. verses.
present their obstinacy from 17. to 21. continuing in that vain confidence
of resting upon men in 17. verse. not being driven to seek to God, from 18. to
21. by their foes in 18. 19. prevailing, 18. verse. being expert, 19. verse.
their king overthrown, 20. verse.




The end of all these evils in 2. verses, the ouertthrow of the wicked in the
21. verse. deliverance of the godly in the 22. verse.



The fifth Chapter contains a patheticall expostulation in 16. verses,
expostulating their miseries in general from 1. to the 11. verse, propounded
to God to consider of in 1. verse. exemplified from 2. to 11. verse, in respect
of their Country in 2. 3. and 4. verses. possessed by strangers, 2. verse.
being unprofitable to the^ in 3. and 4. verse. for protection, 3. verse.
maintenance, 4. verse.

adversaries from 5. to 11. verse, what they do expressed 5. and 6. verses.
weary them with persecution, 5. verse. cause them to beg, 6. verse.
amplified in 7. and 8. verses, by lessening their fathers punishments, 7.
verse. (...) the greatness of their slavery, 8. verse.

cause them to do, make them live in continual danger of death, 9. verse.
appear ugly and loathsome, in 10. verse.



particular from 11. to 18. verse, upon whom, women, maids, Princes, Elders,
young men and children, from 11. to 15. verse. what is wrought by the same in
15 and 16. verse, decay of joy and gladness, 15* verse. prosperity, 16. verse.


prayer in 7. verses, containing a confession in 16. 17. and 18. verses, of
sin, 16. verse. punishment for sin, in 17. and 18. verses. calamities upon
their outward estate, 17. verse. desolation of the Church, 18. verse.

petition from 19. to the end to be freed in the 19. and 20. verses, of whom it
is desired, of God, 19. verse. what it is, 20. verse.
restored whereunto, 21. verse. why, 22. verse.





The occasion and argument of the Lamentations.
WHether this excellent book was made upon occasion of the death of Josiah,
being (as it were) the beginning of Gods heavy hand upon the Jews for their
contempt and abuse of his word so long foretold by the Prophets, which caused
this servant of God so exceedingly to lament as is mentioned, 2. Chron. 35. 25,
etc. Or rather upon the overthrow of the City Jerusalem, and burning of the
temple therein; it needs not greatly to be inquired, seeing it is evident
that it was indighted by the spirit of God, and penned by the Prophet Jeremy,
to draw the Church of God into a serious consideration of their sins that
caused the same, and to true and unfeigned repentance, earnestly praying unto
the Lord to remove his angry countenance from them, and to turn his gracious
favor as in former time unto them.

The first Chapter.
THis Prophet purposing to express in most patheticall manner, the marucilous
change that GOD had wrought in the estate of his people, by turning their
famous prosperity into most woeful calamity, does undertake the person of
one astonished at a most lamentable and sudden spectackle. For God having
said of Jerusalem, This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have a
delight therein, Psalm. 132. 14. And yet notwithstanding the City was rased
from the foundation and utterly destroyed, the Temple spoiled by the heathen
and consumed with fire, the King carried away captive, his children first killed
before his face, the Nobles murdered and the people scattered hither and
thither, being the scumme of the world, and a derision to all Nations,
wherethey did become; it gave such cause of amazedness and astonishment, that
the Prophet begins and proceeds his speech in such manner as follows.

[How] that is, in what wonderful manner, and by what strange means [doth the
citie] i. Jerusalem that famous place, Verse. 1.
being the praise of the whole earth, and terror to all Nations, being by Gods
own commandment begun and perfected by those famous Kings so much feared and
obeyed David and Solomon [remaine solitarie] that is, her walls are cast
down, her houses decayed, her streets grow(...)uer with grass, none coming
thither or going thence [That was full of people] that is, heretofore every
house was inhabited, every street replenished with comers and goers, great
concourse and access of all kind of people was there to be seen, from al
Nations both far and near [she that is as a widdow] that is, she is as a
woman having lost her husband not sought unto by any, but mourning in a
desolate corner [she that was great among the Nations] that is, not only of
mighty power and authority, but also of great account and estimation, by
reason of her famous victories against her foes, and that renowned Temple so
sumptuously builded to the praise and service of God [and Princes among the
Prouinces] that is, having many Nations subject unto her, and paying yearly
tribute; which was especially in the time of David and Solomon. 1. Chron. 18.
6, etc. 2. Chron. 8. 7. [is made tributarie] that is, is constrained to become
a slave to other Nations, and to pay them tribute, in token ofsubiection to
them, read 2. Kings 24 and 25. Chap. and 2. Chron. 36.

The doctrines that are to be learned out of this verse.

Doctrine. Generally out of the whole verse. God often alters the outward
estate of his Church in this 1
world. The truth of this doctrine appears, not only by the examples of the
scripture, especially in the Israelites and the Apostles; but also the stories
of latter times and even by daily experience. The causes moving him thereunto
are; first, that he might daily declare himself the disposer and governor of
all things: secondly, to take from us (that do naturally settle our
affections in the earth) all occasion of promising our selves any certainty
here. The use of this doctrine is; first, to prepare our selves to all
conditions, whether prosperity or adversity, sickness or health. etc.
according to the example of the Apostle Phil. 4. 11. 12. for else it is
certain that affliction coming upon us, will be most grievous and
intolerable. Secondly, to teach us to settle our affections upon heaven and
the things that lead thereunto, which is a most certain anchor-holde, and
will never fail us, as this world will do, even in the most excellent things
thereof.

Doctrine. [How] the manner of the speech teaches this 2
doctrine. It is our duty to strive with our selves to be affected with the
miseries of Gods people. 2. Chron. 11. 28. 29. The reason hereof is; for that
we are fellow members of one body whereof Christ is the head. 1. Cor. 12. 25.
26 etc. The use of this doctrine is; first, to reprove them that seek only
for their own good, not respecting the state of their brethren. Secondly, to
teach us to put on tender compassion and labor (according to our callings) to
profit the whole church of God and every member thereof: else cannot we assure
our selves to be lively members of that body.

Doctrine. [was] God gives sometimes unto his church 3
an outward estate that flourishes both in wealth and peace. This appears in
the example of this people, especially in the time of Solomon and other kings
after him. The reasons hereof are; First, that he might give his people a
taste, even of all kind of earthly blessings. Deuteronomy. 28. 2. etc. Psalm. 84. 11.
Secondly, that they might have all opportunity to serve him, and every kind of
encouragement thereunto. The use hereof is; first, to reprove the folly of
Friars and Jesuits that undertake a continual voluntary poverty, and
afflicting of their own bodies, seeing every member is to be partaker of the
common blessings that God bestows upon his church. Secondly, it confuteth the
opinion of them that think the Church of God to be always under the cross
outwardly. Thirdly, it techeth us to praise the Lord that uses all kind of
means to manifest his love unto his servants, which praise must be doubled by
us if we enioie any share of this outward prosperity.

Doctrine. [remaine solitary that was, etc.] The outward 4
flourishing estate of Gods Church lasts not always, but is often changed
into affliction and adversity. This appears by the whole course of the
scriptures: for the reason and causes hereof see the first doctrine. The use
is; to teach us, to make the time of our peace most profitable unto us, to
further us in the ways of godliness; else, in adversity we either fall
away, or at least the burden will seem intolerable unto us as we see it is
to such as promise to themselves continual prosperity.

Doctrine, [solitarie, full, etc.] God often changes the condition 5
of his servants in this life, from one extreme to another: examples hereof;
Joseph, from imprisonment to the estate of a Prince. Job, from great riches and
honor to extreme poverty and reproach; the Israelites from intolerable
servitude in Egypt, to the most renoumed amongst the Nations. The reasons of
it are, First, that his mighty power might appear to all the world,
especially to his Church* Secondly, that we may learn to ascribe all unto
his Majesty, and nothing to our selves or any other. The use is, to teach us
not to build upon any thing in this life, seeing it is so subject to change;
but in all things to fear and serve him that so we may have comfort whether
in wealth or want.

Doctrine. [Was full of people] It is a great blessing of God for a Nation to
be populous Gene. 12. 2. The use is, to reprove 6
them that murmur at the multitude of people in this land; and to teach us to
acknowledge it among the rest of Gods blessings bestowed upon this land at this
instant.

Doctrine. [Princesse among, etc.] God often makes his people in their
prosperity most admired of all people in the 7
world; this was verefied in the Israelites often; and is seen usually in
experience: the reason, First, that God may show himself to love his servants:
secondly, that the godly may know that godliness is not without reward,
even in this life: thirdly, that the wicked may have all excuse taken from
them, in that they are not allured to religion by such notable spectacles of
Gods love to them that fear him. The use is, to teach us whenever the Lord
does so, either for our selves or others, to break out into the praise of his
holy name, and to grow in strength and courage to perform every good duty
of our calling.

Doctrine. [is made tributarie] God often humbles his 8
servants under all his foes and their adversaries; this was notably verefied
by this people in Egypt, and in this place. The reason is; their disobedience
to his word. Deuteronomy. 28. 36. 37. The use is; first, to show unto us how great
Gods anger is for sin, that does punish it so severely, even in his dearest
children* secondly, to teach us not to measure the favor of God toward our
selves or others by the blessings or adversities of this life seeing the wicked
do often flourish when the godly are in great misery, Psalm. 73. 4, etc. and
on the other side, the godly do prosper when the wicked are in great
distress, Joshua, 5. 1. etc.

[She] that is, Jerusalem [weepeth] that is, for grief of her Verse 2.
prosperity lost, and crosses upon her, she breaks out into tears
[continuallie] that is not for a moment but without intermission [in the night]
that is, her grief is so great that it constrains her to weep when she
should sleep and refresh her weariness with rest [her tears run down her
cheekes] that is, her weeping is in such abundance, as it causes rivers of
tears to distill from her eyes [among all her louers] that is, her neighbor
Nations in league with her, the strangers that sought to her from far, and
merchants that resorted to her [she has none to comfort her] that is, they do
utterly withdraw themselves from her, denying her all kind of succor [all
her friends] i. such as were most inward with her, and beholding to her [haue
dealt treacherously with her] i. she trusting to them for help, they have
hindered her [and are her enemies] i. become her foes and do her as much harm
as they are able to do.

Doctrine. [weepeth] according to the measure of Gods 1
correcting hand upon us must our grief be. The reason, first, because God is
sure to be (at the least) so angry as his rods are heavy. Secondly, our
sins do cause him to afflict us, which we must repent of according to the
measure of Gods anger against them appearing by his smiting of us. The use is,
first, to reprove them that remain unrepentant, when the correcting hand of
God is upon them: secondly, to teach us to increase in sorrow and lamentation,
seeing the troubles of the Church in general, and our own crosses in
particular be daily increased.

Doctrine. [weepeth] weeping for sin and the punishments 2
thereof is such a sign of true repentance, as we must labor to show forth,
especially in the times of our calamity common with the rest of Gods Church.
The reason, first, because the heart appears then to be truly affected when
it breaks out into tears. Secondly, the godly have always (especially in
the days of their humiliation by fasting and prayer) been brought thereunto,
Joel 2. 12. The use is, to reprove our corruption, that can easily be brought
to weep for a worldly loss, but hardly for our sins, and the punishment
thereof; which hardness of heart we must labor against with all diligence,
carefully using all the means that God has appointed thereunto.

Doctrine. [none to comfort her] It is a grievous plague to lack comforts in
affliction; the contrary whereof is an exceeding 3
blessing. The reason, because, first, the comfortable words and deeds of
others will mitigate the sense of the misery. Secondly, it adds unto the
grief to be left alone in it. The use is, first, to show unto us, that Gods
people, whom he loves, may be left destitute of all worldly friends, and yet
remain in his favor, as this people were: secondly, to teach us to magnify
the name of God, and to esteem our affliction very light unto us, seeing we
have so many friends so willing and ready to do any thing for us.

Doctrine. [dealt treacherously] It is an intolerable grief to have friends
become soes. The reason, because, first, we put 4
great trust in our friends and promise to ourselves much assistance by them.
Secondly, they having been most inward with us, may do us more harm then
those that we have always esteemed enemies. The use is, to teach us, first, to
take heed with what men we make freindship. Secondly, not to be dismayed though
our friends become our foes, seeing it has been often the lot of the godly,
but to seek to God the more earnestly for his assistance.

Doctrine, [none] God often leaves his people destitute of all outward help
and comfort. The reasons hereof see 5
verse. 1. Doctr. 5. The use is, to teach us to rest upon him alone, at whose
disposition all things are, and not upon any outward thing, seem it never so
glorious to our outward eyes.

[Iudah] i. the inhabitants of the kingdom [goeth away] Verse 3.
i. willingly leave their country, goods and dwelling, [because of affliction]
i. extremity of troubles [and great seruitude] i. extremity of slavery that
they are in [she dwells among the heathen] i. is constrained to live among
the Idolatrous and godless people [and finds no rest] i. no courteous
entertainment or kindness, which naturally is showed to strangers [all her
persecutors took her in the straits] i. whosoever set themselves against her,
took her at the most advantage to hurt her.

Doctrine. [goeth away] the outward things of this life 1
are the soonest lost (and those that are furthest from the mind, the soonest
of all) and being enjoyed, they are the most uncertain. The reasons are,
because, first, they are most subject to all kind of enemies. Secondly, God
knows that we may best want them. The use is, first, that we learn to make
least account of them, as things without which we may be perfectly happy:
Secondly, to endeavor most of all to obtain the true knowledge and fear of
God, which is the treasure laid up in heaven, which the thief cannot steal,
Matthew. 6. 19. 20.

Doctrine. [goeth away, etc.] It is natural for a man to seek to better his
outward estate, and his duty to seek far 2
and near for the freedom and rest of conscience, 2. Chro. 11. 13. to 17. The
use to teach us, first, that they are without natural affection, that regard
not, or will take no pains to better their outward estate, (and if they have a
family) worse then Infidels if they provide not for them, 1. Timothy 5. 8.
etc. Secondly, to show us, that if we cannot enjoy the benefit of Gods word
and sacraments in peace where we are, we ought to remove our dwellings, and
neither make our selves matter of continual trouble, by holding our dwellings
with allother inconveniences, nor content our selves with those corruptions or
wants that usually are at home where we dwell.

Doctrine. [among the heathen, etc.] It is better to live 3
any where then in our own country where our governors seek to oppress us.
The reason is, for that their hatred being assisted with their might, will
never let us live in any tolerable peace. The use is, to teach us to give place
unto violence, if by no other means the rulers will be appeased with us.

Doctrine. Of two evils (if neither be sinful) we may and ought to choose the
less, to avoid the greater. The reason 4
is, because we must ease our own burden as much as may be. The use is to
teach us, to pray to God for wisdom, that we may be able to discern of things
as they are, and for power to do accordingly.

Doctrine. [norest] It is grievous and dangerous to dwell among the ungodly.
The reason is, because, first, they can 5
administer no matter of true comfort unto us, whereas all their ways be full
of offense. Secondly, they are strong to draw us to evil, and we weak to
shun their ill example. The use is to teach us, first, never to take any
delight in their company, but to mourn if we be constrained to dwell with
them. Psalm. 120. 5. etc. Secondly, to avoid their company to the uttermost of
our power, and where we cannot, to suspect even their friendship.

Doctrine. [findeth no rest] When God means to punish 6
he stirs up means, but when he means it not, the means shall not
prosper: the reason is, because all things are at his disposition, and can
bring nothing to pass further then he gives power thereunto. The use is, to
teach us always to seek unto the Lord for any thing that we would have, or
would be ryd of, and not rest upon the outward means as is the manner of
natural men.

Doctrine. [no rest] There is no place or means to escape 7
Gods hand, when he means to punish. The reason is, because he is every
where, and cannot be fled from. Psalm* 139. 7. etc. The use is, to teach us to
endeavor to walk vprightlie as in his presence, always remembering that he
sees us, and we cannot flee from him.

Doctrine. [all her persequutors, etc.] There is no kind of 8
people so generally and so evil entreated in their adversity, as the
godly. The reason is, because, first, the world which ever hates them, has
then opportunity to satisfy their raging malice upon them: secondly, God then
means to try them thoroughly. The use is to teach us, to prepare our selves
to bear all extremities in this life, and not to think it strange when we are
evil entreated, seeing it has ever been the Lot of the godly; as both the
examples of scriptures, and the latter times do witness.

Doctrine. [tooke her] This people seems to be utterly overthrown for ever,
and yet they returned into their land, 9
and became a common wealth again: so is it often with the Church of God,
Psalm. 139. 1. etc. The reason is, for that they be often brought unto so
exceeding misery in outward appearance. The use is, to teach us, first, never
to despair, though our calamities be never so many and grievous: secondly,
that there is no assured safety, but in the true fear of God, but if we have
it, we are sure to overcome

[The ways of Sion] i. the paths that lead to the temple Verse. 4.
built upon mount Sion [Lament] i. look not so beated as heretofore, but are
green with grass and out of their kindly order; a figurative speech [because
no man commeth] i. there is no such recourse [to the solemn feastes] i. the
special times that were appointed for sacrifices, Psalm. 42. 4. [all her gates
are desolate] i. no coming in and going out at the gates, as heretofore [her
priests sigh] i. the sons of Aaron that were appointed to the ministry of
the word and sacrifices do lament, for that none come to the sacrifices as in
former times [her virgins are discomfited] i. those that are least subject to
sorrow are greatly grieved [shee is in heauinesse] i the whole nation of all
estates and ages are filled with sorrow and lamentation.

Doctrine. [waies of Sion] The overthrow of the common 1
wealth brings with it the overthrow of the Churches outward peace. The
reason is, because, first, the peace of the Church arises from the peace of
the common wealth. Ierem. 29. 7. etc. The members of the Church being also
members of the common wealth, must needs have a share in the common calamity
thereof. I he use is, to teach us, first, to seek the peace of the common
wealth, that we may obtain peace unto the Church, and not to rebel against or
revile the governors thereof. Secondly, to learn to mourn when we see
justice perverted in the common wealth, being assured that it will tend to the
overthrow of religion if God stay it not in time.

Doctrine [Lament because, etc.] When the things that 2
God has given us here are not applied to the appointed use, we have just
cause to mourn, seeing our sins have caused the let thereof, Deuteronomy. 28. 15.
etc. to the end, Isaiah 13. 19, etc. The use is, first, to give us cause of
mourning that have heretofore enjoyed many good things, and are now shut up
from the use of them, and they lie waste not profitable for our selves or any
other. Secondly, to teach us, not to hoard or any ways to abuse any of Gods
blessings, least they be made utterly unprofitable unto us or our posterity.

Doctrine. [waies of Sion] The earth and earthly things do often admonish men
of their sins, either by denying that 3
comfort which naturally they bring with them, Leuit. 18. 25. or bringing
grief or punishment with them. Mich. 2. 10. The reason is, because, first, God
has made all his creatures as written books, wherein man may read his
sins: secondly, that man may have no show of excuse left him at that great
day of account. The use is to teach us, first, how odious and ugly a thing
sin is, that peruerteth the course of nature in Gods creatures; and therefore
must seem much more vile unto us, that are the committers thereof: secondly,
that there is no way to escape intolerable punishment for sin, but by
unfeigned repentance, seeing all Gods creatures are able to witness against us.

Doctrine. [Lament, etc.] All Gods creatures mourn 4
when God is disobeyed, and rejoice when he is obeyed by his people. The reason
is, because all things were created to obey him in their kind, and for the use
of man, being also obedient, which end is perverted by the sin of man. The
use is to teach us, first, that man by sin is made the worst of Gods
creatures: secondly, that we must always labor to loath and forsake sin,
that makes us so detestable before God and all his works.

Doctrine. [no man commeth] The service of God is not tied 5
to any place, but upon condition of their obedience that dwell therein. Ierem.
26. 4. etc. The reason is, because God himself is not tied to any people, nor
respects any persons but such as fear him, Acts 10. 34 35. The use is,
first, to reprove the vain boasting of the papists in their pretensed chair
of Peter, like the wicked Priests among the Jews, Ierem. 7. 4. which was most
vain, though that place had glorious promises, Psalm. 87. 1. 2. whereas Rome
has utterly none: Secondly, to teach us not to put any confidence in any
earthly privileges to shelter us in our sins, but to turn unto the Lord
with all our hearts.

Doctrine. [The Priests mourne] It is a great grief to Gods 6
ministers to be deprived of their ministry, or to see it unprofitable to the
Church, Joel. 2. 12. Jeremy 15. 10. The reason is, because, first, God is
greatly dishonored thereby: secondly, it gives occasion of interrupting all
good things among the people, and matter of all kinds of sin, as we see by
experience. The use is, first, to reprove them (as far from this feeling)
that do so easily displace or set themselves against Gods ministers;
secondly, to teach both that minister who is thus dealt with, and that people
to whom his ministry belonged, to mourn when such a cross is laid upon
them; seeing it is an action that God usually causes to be done for the
sin of contempt or abuse of his holy word.

Doctrine. [Priests] The ministers must be guides to the 7
people, to lead them to mourning (when there is cause) as also to all other
duties: the reason is, because God has not only appointed them to teach the
people, but also to be a pattern unto them of all goodness. Tit. 2. 7. The
use is, first, to bewail the woeful estate of the Church, with us that is so
pestered with ignorant, idle, and ungodly ones, in stead of Gods ministers:
secondly, to stir up all those that God has enabled unto this high calling,
to grow more and more in the performance of all good duties, to the good
example of their flocks.

Doctrine. [virgins] They that seem most exempt from it 8
must mourn at the decay of religion: the reason is, for that it concerns
Gods glory, and every man's salvation. The use is, first, to reprove them that
lay not to heart the distresses of Gods people for the truth, thinking it
sufficient, that themselves live in safety. Secondly, to teach us to strive to
be grieved when we hear of the decay of the religion in any place, though
it be safe where we are.

Doctrine. [in heaviness, etc.] The greatest loss that can 9
befall Gods people, is the loss of the exercise of the word and Sacraments.
The reason is, because God has appointed them to be the means of begetting,
and confirming faith in us. The use is, first, to reprove them that think
they may be without the same well enough: secondly to teach us to care for it
above all things; esteeming it the field for the buying whereof we will sell
all that we have Matthew. 13 44,

[Her aduersaries] i. those that oppress her, and desire her destruction [are
the chief* i. have rule over her, Deuteronomy. 28 13. Verse 5.
[her enemies prosper] i. they that hate her do easily prevail and do what
they list [for the Lord has afflicted her for the multitude of her
tra^sgressio^s] i. God being angry with her sins and purposing to punish them
in her, has given strength to the enemy to prevail against her [her
children] i. even those that for their tender years should have been spared if
there had been any compassion in them [are gone into captiuity] are carried
away into a far country, to be made slaves [before the enemie] i. they in
triumph and hatred driving them before them as Cattle.

Doctrine. [her aduersaries] The cause apparent of all the 1
miseries of Gods people is the prospering and prevailing of their enemies.
This appears manifestly by the examples of all ages and even by daily
experience. The reason is, because, the enemy seeks to please himself in
sin, and to suppress all goodness, as being a hinderance thereunto: but the
godly is of a contrary disposition. The use is, to teach us to mourn when
the Lord gives the enemies of the truth the upper hand against the godly.

Doctrine. [aduersaries chief etc.] It oftentimes comes to 2
pass that the wicked prosper in all things of this life, and the godly
contrary. Psalm. 73. 4. etc. Job. 21. 7. The reason is, because, first, God will
by giving them prosperity make the wicked without excuse. Secondly, the godly
being assured of Gods favor and yet pinched, they may the more earnestly bend
their affections to the enheritance which is prepared for them. The use is, to
teach us, first, not to admire too much the success of wordlings: secondly, to
assure us that, that estate cannot last long, and therefore to teach us
patience, Psalm. 73. 18. 24.

Doctrine. [aduersaries enemies] the hebrew words signify properly,
oppressors and haters: teaching us, that it is the 3
natural disposition of the wicked toward the godly, to oppress them in
action and hate them in affection: this has appeared true in all ages. The
reason is, because of the unappeasable malice of Satan and the wicked his
instruments against the godly. The use is, to teach us, first, how to esteem
of all that are enemies to religion, though they carry never so fair a show of
friendship to us: secondly, to be careful that we walk wisely toward them,
never provoking them, and yet never giving any advantage to them against us.

Doctrine. [for the Lord etc] The wicked never prevail against the godly,
further then the Lord gives strength unto 4
them, Job. 1. 11. 12. 1. King. 22. 22. Math. 8. 31. 32. The reason is,
because, all power is of God, and every one of his creatures have their bounds
given them of him, which they cannot pass. The use is to teach us, first, not
to fear man but God, from whom his power comes: secondly, to labor to be
at one with the Lord, and then shall all creatures work to our good. Romans 8.
28. Psalm. 91. 1.

Doctrine. [the Lord has etc] In all our afflictions we must 5
not look to the instruments but to the Lord that smites by them. The godly
have ever done so. Ioh 1, 21. 2. Sam. 16. 10. Acts. 4. 28. The reason is,
because, they have no power against us, except it be given them from above,
John. 19. 11. The use is to teach us, first, to be more patient toward the
instruments, and not to be as the dog that snatcheth at the stone cast at him,
not regarding the thrower. Secondly, to seek the cause of our afflictions in
our selves; for else the just Judge of the world would not correct us.

Doctrine. [afflicted her etc] All our afflictions come from 6
the Lord, who is the chief worker thereof. The reason is, because, all power
is in his hand. The use is to teach us, in sickness, heaviness, etc. not to
seek unto the Physician, Music or such like; but first unto the Lord by true
repentance, and then to these as second causes.

Doctrine. [for the etc] It is the sin of the godly that causes 7
the Lord to lay all their troubles upon them; so has the Church ever
confessed. Dan. 9. 5. Nehem. 1. 6. Psalm. 78. The use is to teach us, first, how
horrible sin is in Gods sight, that causes him to correct so severely those
that he loves so dearly: and therefore we must hate it with a perfect hatred.
Secondly, whenever we are afflicted to examine our selves, and finding out
our sins, repent thereof and leave them; until which time (if God love us) he
will never leave smiting of us.

Doctrine. [multitude] when God withdraws his strength 8
from his servants they fall into many grievous sins, one in the neck of
another: so did David, from adultery to making of Vriah drunk, after to
murder him: and Peter, first to deny his master: then to forswear him: after
to curse himself if ever he knew him. The reason is, because we have no
custody of our selves. The use is, to teach us, to labor to keep a good
conscience in every thing, lest we fall from sin to sin, and at length make
conscience of nothing.

Doctrine. [her children] when God means to punish 9
man, he will not spare to deprive him of that which is most dear unto him.
The reason is, because, the Lord means to humble him sufficiently. The use
is, to teach us, that whenever the Lord deals so with us, it is because of
the hardness of our hearts that otherwise will not be thoroughly softened; and
therefore to take it patiently.

Doctrine. [are gone etc] The wicked bear such malice 10
unto the truth, that when they get advantage, they spare neither age, nor sex,
thinking to root out the godly from under heaven. The reason is, as Doctr. 3.
The use is, not to think our selves forsaken of God, though we should fall
into the hands of such spoilers, seeing it has been the lot of his dearest
children heretofore.

[And from the daughter of Sion] i. the people of Jerusalem Verse 6.
[all her beauty is departed] i. she has lost al her glory as the temple and
the service of God in it [her princes] i. her rulers. [are become like hartes]
i. pyned away and having lost al courage [that find no pasture] i. being
utterly impouerished [and they are gone without strength before the pur suer]
i. carried into captivity without power or courage to make any resistance.

Doctrine. [her beautie] The Church of God does esteem 1
the exercises of religion the most excellent and glorious thing that can be
had in this life. The reason is, because, first, they are notable signs of
Gods favor and presence. Secondly, there is more true comfort in them, then in
the whole world besides. The use is, to teach us to esteem them accordingly
(if we will prove our selves lively members of the Church of God) and to be
more grieved with the loss thereof (if they be taken from us) then of all
worldly blessings whatsoever.

Doctrine. [her Princes] the weakening of the Rulers is the 2
height of misery upon the rest of the members of that body. The reason is,
for that without the strength and authority of the governors, the rest are
exposed to the violence of all their enemies, and contrary. The use is to teach
us, to pray heartely for them, and to maintain their strength and countenance
to the uttermost, that under their wings we may find shelter against the
injuries of our enemies, that otherwise will spoil us.

Doctrine. That people has a heavy judgment upon 3
them, whose guides are destitute, and deprived of necessary courage. The
reason is, because their authority and example lead the rest (as we see in
Magistrates and ministers) which otherwise are easily quailed in any good
thing. The use is, to teach us to pray unto God that our magistrates and
ministers may never want courage to do as they should, and to bewail the want
of it wheresoever it appears.

Doctrine. [are become, etc.] They that have the greatest outward privilege
do often come the soonest into 4
distress when God punishes for sin, Amos 6. 7. The reason is, because,
first, they have taken more liberty to sin as not being subject to
controlment. Secondly, they should have been guides and examples of all
goodness to their inferiors, but prove (often) clean contrary. The use is
to teach us, first, how vain a thing it is for a man of authority or wealth,
to promise to himself any immunity of punishment because thereof. Secondly,
that the more we are adorned with outward privileges, the more carefully we
ought to take heed to our ways, lest our judgment prove heavier then it
should have been if we had been of meaner condition.

[Ierusalem] i. the people dwelling in Jerusalem [remembred] i. carefully
called to mind [in the days of her affliction and mourning] i. when
distresses and great sorrow was upon her [all her pleasant things that she
had in times past] i. those blessings which in great abundance she had enjoyed
[when her people fell into the hand of the enemie] i. their adversaries had
rule over them [and none did help her] i. all being against her, and none
succouring her [the adversary saw her] i. gazed upon her as at a monster [did
mock at her Sabbaoths] derided the exercises of religion, that she had used.

Doctrine. [in the dayes] In the time of affliction we do better consider of
the blessings that our prosperity yielded 1
unto us, then when we enjoyed them The reason is; because prosperity makes
us secure, but adversity makes us to know our selves, and what we have lost.
The use is, to show us our natural corruption in abusing prosperity, which
we must strive against in the time of our peace or it will be the more
intolerable unto us when God affliceth us.

Doctrine. [remembred] the time of adversity is fit, wherein we may best
recount the prosperity that in former times 2
we have enjoyed. The reason is; because, first, our judgments are the more
sound: secondly, we shall the better be affected with our present cross, and
the loss of former blessings, which is our duty. The use is to teach us, that
affliction is necessary for us, which we must strive to take patiently and to
learn to profit by it.

Doctrine. [none did, etc.] God often makes all men adversaries to his
children. The reason is, that they may learn 3
to rest on God alone; and not in the help of any man. The use is to teach us,
so to use the means that may be found lawful to further us, as yet we seek
to God alone for his blessing upon them, and to rest upon him though they be
against us.

Doctrine. [sawe her and did mock her] The enemies of religion 4
do enquire into the decay of Gods Church, and rejoice at it. The reason is;
because, they hate the truth and desire the destruction of the professors of
it. The use is, to teach us to mourn whenever it falls so out, seeing our
sins do procure the same.

Doctrine. [did mocke] It is a certain note of an enemy to religion, to mock
and deride the exercises of the same: the 5
reason is, because, their inward disposition is manifested by their outward
behavior. The use is, to teach us, first, to measure our love to the truth,
by our reverence that we yield to the exercises thereof: secondly, to know
them for enemies to the truth, that scorn the same, and to shun them:
thirdly, to learn to mourn when we see the mouth of the enemy opened to
reproach the truth and professors thereof. Nehem. 1. 2. etc.

[Ierusalem] i. the people dwelling in Jerusalem [hath grievously sinned] i.
multiplied their sins in greatness and Verse 8.
number [therefore she is driven away] hebr. in commotion. i. removed from
certain to uncertain condition [all that honored her] i. did reverently
esteem of her, when her ways pleased the Lord [despise her] i. do contemn
and disdain her [because they have seen her filthinesse] i. her nakedness,
being spoiled of her ornaments, and made filthy by her sins [yea she sigheth]
i. utters the grief of her heart by sighing [and is turned backward] i.
driven from her privileges, and so from the signs of being near unto God.

Doctrine. [hath sinned] their sins the cause of their afflictions, being
again mentioned unto them, teaches this 1
doctrine. It is necessary whenever we are afflicted to recount often, our
sins to have procured the same to fall upon us: the reason is, because,
first, we are naturally unwilling to blame our selves for any thing, and ready
to impute the cause of any evil to others. Examples, Adam and Heuah, Genesis 3.
12. 13. etc. Secondly, if we rightly charge our selves and our sins, we
shall be the better prepared thereby to true repentance, and right humiliation.
The use, first, to reprove them that being afflicted are hardened, or rage
against the instruments that God uses to correct them: secondly, to teach us
to use all good means to draw us to be rightly humbled when we feel any of
Gods rods upon us.

Doctrine. [therefore] it is peculiar to the godly to impute the cause of all
their miseries unto their own sins; whereas 2
the wicked do either lay the cause upon other things, or extenuate their
fault, blaming God of rigor; or else break out into raging impatience or
blasphemy. The reason is, because, the godly have Gods spirit to teach them
to judge rightly of themselves; the wicked are led by Satan's direction, and
judge according to their own sensual and brutish conceits. The use is, to
teach us, earnestly to pray unto the Lord always to guide us by the light of
his spirit, else shall we be sure to mistake every thing to our own
destruction.

Doctrine. [driuen away] it is our sin that depriueth us of 3
any good thing that we have heretofore enjoyed. The reason is, because,
first, God created us (as al other his creatures) exceeding good, and placed us
in a certain and happy estate in all things; which we first lost by sin and
so do continually: secondly, any kind of grief is the peculiar fruit of
sin. The use is, to teach us, to acknowledge this in every particular; as when
we are deprived of inward comfort, outward peace, health, wealth, liberty, or
any other good thing appertaining either to the soul or the body.

Doctrine. [honored her] when we truly fear and serve the Lord, he honoreth
us in the sight of men. 1. Sa. 2. 30. Examples, 4
Abraham, Joseph, David etc. we see the same also in often experience. The
reason, first, that it may appear, that godliness is not without her reward
even in this life: secondly, to give a taste unto the godly here, of that honor
which they shall once enjoy without measure or end. The use is, to teach us, to
praise GOD highly when such a blessing is bestowed upon our selves or any of
our brethren, and not to be proud of it, as the wicked are of those good things
that they do enjoy.

Doctrine. [despise her] it is our sin that makes us odious and contemptible
amongst men. Examples, Israel often, 5
Judges. 2. 13. 14. 15. Manass. 2. Chron. 33. 11. etc. The use is, to teach us,
to be so careful to leave our sins and walk in the ways of the Lord, as we
are desirous of estimation, and to avoid contempt among men.

Doctrine. [honored her, despise her] the estimation that 6
the godly have among wordlings, is only whilst they are in outward
prosperity. The reason is, because they do not esteem them for those
spiritual graces that are in them, (which they have no taste of) but that
outward applause that goes withthem, which being gone, the cause why they
liked them is gone also. The use is to teach us, not to make any account of the
favor or friendship of earthly minded men, seeing there is no certeintie in
it.

Doctrine. [they have seen etc.] the wicked that have no 7
knowledge or conscience of their own faults, can see the offenses of the
godly, and vpbraid them with them. The reason is, because, Satan blinds
them in their own estate, lest they should see it and repent: and imployeth
their minds wholly in prying into, and carping at the faults of others. The
use is, first, to teach us, that it is not possible to hide our sins from the
Lord, seeing that not only our own consciences, but Satan and wicked men
can find them out, and accuse us of them. Secondly, to make us very wary how
we walk in the sight of the ungodly, seeing they are so cunning in finding
out our faults, and so wide-mouthed in blazing of them to the dishonor of our
holy profession.

Drctrine. [filthinesse] heb: nakedness. There is nothing that makes man so
filthilie naked as sin. The reason, because, 8
first, it depriueth him of all those graces that did adorn him in the sight
of God and men: secondly, it makes him as if he wallowed in the most stinking
and filthy mire that may be found out. The use is to teach us, to hate it in
all men, but especially in our selves with a perfect hatred, even more then
the Devil of hell himself.

Doctrine. [sigheth] the godly do take to heart with earnest affection the
crosses that the Lord lays upon them. The 9
reason is, because, first, they esteem them to come from the Lords hand, and
therefore may not regard them lightly. Secondly, they judge their sins to
have angered his majesty and procured him to smite them, which must needs
greatly grieve them. The use is, first, to reprove them that in the hardness
of their hearts, pass over their afflictions lighlie. Secondly, to teach us,
to labor to be seriously affected with our afflictions, else shall we never
profit by them.

Doctrine. [backward] the godly are sometimes brought 10
into so hard estate, as that they are in man's judgment utterly deprived of all
the signs of Gods favor. The reason is, because, first of their sins
against the Lord that have deserved the same: secondly, that they may learn to
know their misery, if they be left to themselves: thirdly, to try their faith,
constancy, and patience, etc. The use is; to teach us, first, to look for many
great and grievous extremities, and not to wonder at them as unwonted things,
seeing the godly have felt them before us: secondly, not to despair, though in
reason al hope of recovery be past, seeing God uses to bring light out of
darkness, and to help his when they seem to be utterly forlorn.

[Her filthinesse] i. her uncleanness by her sins [is in Verse 9.
her skirtes] i. manifestly to be seen [she remembered not her last end] i.
went on carelessly not considering that she must be called to account
[therefore she came down wonderfullie] i. therefore she growing worse and
worse was punished with plagues every one more grievous then other, and that in
a sudden and strange manner [shee had no comforter] i. not so much as one of
her former friends did any way assist her [O Lord behold mine affliction] I
beseech thee look favorably upon my most grievous estate [for the enemy
aduanceth himselfe] i. those that persecute and do insolentlie boast, because
they prevail against me.

Doctrine. [her filthiness, etc.] In that a confession of sins is set before
petition of favor, we learn this doctrine; 1
whenever we beg release from sin or the punishments thereof at the hands
of God, it is necessary to begin with confession of our sins. So did the
godly usually, Psalm 32. 5. Nehem. 1. 7. Dan. 9. 5. etc. The reason is; first,
that by recounting our sins, our hearts may be the better stirred up to pray
fervently. Secondly, that our own confession may justify the Lord in
punishing us: Thirdly, that it may appear that we are rightly humbled and
truly penitent; which if we be not, we will be more ashamed to confess our
sins then to commit them. The use is; first, to reprove them, that either
Pharisaically stand upon their own righteousness, or hide their sins,
thinking the confession thereof needless: secondly, it shows that those that
be ignorant of Gods word (which only teaches the right confession of sins)
cannot pray aright. Thirdly, it teaches us always before we pray (if we look
to be heard) to enter into a serious consideration of our sins, that we may
the more thoughly acknowledge them.

Doctrine. [skirtes] this being their estate, and yet they remaining 2
the true visible Church of God, teaches us this doctrine: foul spots and
gross sins may be in the face of a true visible Church. The reason is,
because, first, the foundation may remain though much corruption, both in
doctrine and life be builded thereupon; as was in the Churches of the Jews,
Corinth, and Gallatia: and secondly, because the life and being of a Church is
the faith in the covenant of grace through Christ Jesus, which may remain
entire though there be many wants and corruptions; even as a man may, and ought
to be esteemed a man so long as he has life in him, though he be both lame,
deformed, and want a leg or an arm, etc. The use is, first, to confute their
opinion which be called Brownists, who judge the Churches of England no
churches of God, because they want some things they should have, and have
diverse corruptions still retained in them. Secondly, to teach us, that it is
not sufficient to be of the visible Church, except we labor to be partakers of
the graces of God bestowed thereupon, lest we be found such rotten members as
(when the day of trial comes) shall be cut off and cast into the fire.

Doctrine. [filthinesse. She remembered not etc.] In that they 3
were thus wicked, and yet were a true visible Church and had the daily use of
the outward exercises of religion; we learn this doctrine: To be within the
visible Church of God, and to be partakers of all the outward exercises of
religion, is not surficient to lead us to a godly disposition, without the
inward grace of gods spirit, nor to prove us true Christians without faith and
sanctification. The reason is, because, first, these outward means are but the
instruments which God blesses to whom he will; else are they of no force, 1.
Cor. 3. 5. etc. Secondly, many are in the Church as chafe in the barn floor,
and Cockle in the field, that are not of the Church: and therefore shall be
gathered out, bound in a bundle, and thrown into the fire. The use is, to
teach us that it is a vain thing for us to say, I am a professor, we have a
famous Church, etc. and in the mean while live a profane and wicked life.
Secondly, to make us careful to hear, learn and profess the truth with an
earnest care, and hearty prayer to God that we may believe it and live
according to it.

Doctrine. [in her skirts] They that believe not Gods ministers, exhorting them
to repentance (which was the 4
case of these Jews, 2. Chron. 36.) grow into the most shamelessness of sin
of all others. The reason is; because, first, the word is either the savor of
life to amend, or of death to make worse all that hear it, 2. Corinthians. 2. 15.
etc. Secondly, God in his righteous judgment gives over those that regard
not the truth into a reprobate mind, and to commit all wickedness with
greediness, Romans 1. 28. 2. Thessalo. 2. 10. The use is, first, to show unto us
that the horrible profaneness that is in many that profess the truth, is
not because of the profession (as wicked ones do blaspheme) but because they
neglect the profession, saving to make it a cloak for their wickedness.
Secondly, to teach us with trembling and fear to labor to walk worthy our
calling, else shall it be easier for Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of account,
then for us.

Doctrine, [remembred not her last end] They that be hardened in sin by
despising instruction, do grow to forget 5
those things which continual experience, and the light of reason do daily
call to remembrance. The reason is, because, first, the daily custom of things
without grace to esteem them aright, breeds contempt of them in our corrupt
nature. Secondly, Satan blinds the children of disobedience, lest they
should rightly regard good things and profit by them. The use is, to teach us,
first, in what fearful estate they be, that grow full with, and are weary of
good things, such as are the hearing of the word of GOD, prayer to God, daily
meditation in the law of the Lord etc. Secondly, to labor with our selves to
have these and all other Gods ordinances and work, every day in more high
reverence then other, and not to neglect the due consideration of them if they
be ordinary.

Doctrine. [remembred not] The forgetfulness of the reward of sin throws
men headlong into iniquity, but 6
the remembrance of it stays us from many evils, Amos 6. 3. Psalm. 16. 8. The
reason is, because, the affections have no who, when nothing is respected but
the satisfying of them, whereas the waying of the desire by the event of it,
makes upright judgment the ruler of the action. The use is, to teach us in all
things that we purpose to take in hand, ever to remember that we must be called
to account for it, before that most righteous Judge, which will judge of us by
the rules of his most holy word.

Doctrine. [therefore she came downe] It is our sin that 7
procures all those evils to fall upon us, which we can any way be partakers
of: for the reasons and uses of this, see verse. 5. Doctr. 7.

Doctrine. [wonderfully] according to the manner and measure 8
of sin, so is the punishment from the Lord for the same, when he visits
the committers thereof for it. The reason is, that Gods anger against sin,
and his Justice in punishing it, might the better appear. The use is, to teach
us to look for Gods heavy hand upon us (except we repent) whenever we give
our selves to delight in sin, or to wax cold in goodness.

Doctrine. [none to comfort her] see verse 2. doct. 3. and verse 8. doct. 7.

Doctrine. [O Lord behold mine affliction] the only refuge in 9
distress, is to fly to the Lord by faithful and fervent prayer: the reason
is, because, first, he it is that smites, and none else can heal. Job 5. 18.
etc. Secondly, he has promised to hear and deliver us, calling upon him in
the day of our troubles, Psalm. 50. 15. The use is, first, to reprove them that
repyne against God, wax impatient, or use unlawful means to wind themselves
out of their troubles. Secondly, to teach us, in all our distresses to labor
our own hearts, that we may pray unto the Lord for his grace to deliver us,
and in the mean while for strength to support us.

Doctrine. This prayer being made by the Prophet in the 10.
name of the people, teaches us this doctrine. It is a great blessing of God
to that people that has a minister, who is both able and willing, not only to
teach them the truth, but also to be their mouth in prayer to direct them. The
reason is, because, first, very few of the people (though otherwise well
affected) are able to conceive prayer, and utter the same rightly: secondly,
the ministry is Gods ordinance, not only to teach his will to us, but also
to offer our supplications unto him; which he has promised to regard in
special manner. The use is, first, to reprove them that make no account of the
ministry, or in the pride of their heart, think themselves as able to these
duties as the minister is. Secondly, to teach us to praise God for it, as for
an exceeding treasure, if we have such a minister set over us; if he be
removed to use all good means to have him restored, or if that cannot be, to
seek out such another, by whose labors we may be builded up in those good
things that the former has begun in us.

Doctrine. [beholde mine affliction] God so pittieth his people, that the view
of their miseries moves him to help them, 11
even when all men are against them; the reason is, because, first, he loves
them with an everlasting love: secondly, he will not suffer them to be trodden
down of their enemies for ever. The use is to teach us, first, to magnify the
great and unspeakable mercies of the Lord our God. Secondly, never to despair
though our estate be most miserable, but always to be assured that his mercy
shall prevail against al our afflictions, to ad an end unto them, and to give
us everlasting peace.

Doctrine. [enemie is proude] Prosperity causes the wicked to forget God, and
to insult against his people, the reason 12
is; because, first, they judge only by the things present; and therefore
think that themselves shall never be moved, nor the estate of the godly
bettered. Secondly, Satan makes them to abuse all Gods blessings to their
greater damnation. The use is to teach us, first, to be careful if riches
increase, not to set our hearts upon them, Psalm. 62. 11. Secondly, to be
contented with adversity, if God lay it upon us, seeing (thorough our
corruption) there is less danger in it, then in prosperity.

Doctrine. [the enemy is proude] the enemies pride alleged 13
as a reason to move the Lord to hear his people in distress, teaches this
doctrine; The pride of the wicked, is a forcible reason to move the Lord to
cast them down, and to deliver the oppressed out of their hands, Isay 10. 12.
The reason is; because, first, the Lord uses the wicked as a rod to scourge
his people, and not as a tormenter to tyrannize over them. Secondly, God does
ever resist the proud, 1. Peter 5. 5. Luke 1. 51. Psalm. 18. 27. The use is to
teach us, first, in all our prayers against the enemies of the truth, to
allege their pride unto the Lord, as a reason to move him to hear us; for so
did the godly ever use to do. Isay 37. 17. etc. Secondly, to assure our
selves, that when the enemy grows to the height of pride his fall cannot be
far off. Proverbs 16. 15. and therefore with patience to wait upon the Lord.

[The enemie] i. those that hate the truth and the professors thereof [hath
stretched out his hand] i. expressed his greatest Verse. 10.
force and violence [vpon all her pleasant things] i. those blessings of God
which she took most pleasure in, that were consecrated unto the service of
God in the temple [for she has seen the heathen] i. with her eyes, she
beheld the uncircumcised nations [enter into her Sanctuarie] i. violently
break into the temple that thou had dedicated to thy holy service in the
midst of her [whom thou did command] i. concerning whom thou did give
commandment unto thy people [that they should not enter into thy Church] i.
should not be received into reckoning among thy people.

Doctrine. [stretched out] the wicked are usually merciless 1
toward the godly, spoiling them and theirs in most cruel manner, if the Lord
restreine them not. Psalm. 53. 4. and 137. 7. The reason is, because of their
unmeasurable malice against them, and their exceeding desire to extinguish
their memory from being a people, Psalm. 83. 4. The use is to teach us, first,
not to trust the wicked, nor be familiar with them though they speak never so
kindly to us. Secondly, to be careful to walk warily before them, left the
get advantage against us: thirdly, to pray daily and earnestly to the Lord to
deliver us from them.

Doctrine. [vpon all her etc.] the outward things of this world are uncertain
and made subject to the violence of the wicked (yea even appearing members of
the Church, Mich. 2. 8. 9.) the reason is, because, first, earthly things are
given by the Lord indifferently to the godly and the wicked; which makes them
uncertain unto any Secondly, outward things are not within the compass of
those blessings that God has assured his people to enjoy. Thirdly, God has
given to Satan great power in this world; who sets his servants on work,
to spoil all that are not of his Kingdom. The use is, first, not to desire
the things of this lise too much. So did Christ teach us, Matthew. 6. 33. 34.
Luke. 12. 33. etc. Secondly, to learn when God gives them unto us, to employ
them aright, so shall we have comfort with them and without them.

Doctrine. [p^leasant things] the outward things and means of Gods service are
often made a pray to the enemy; especially 3
upon our abusing of them. Ier. 7. 13. Luke 19. 44. The reason is, because,
first, God will show himself the punisher of man even in the things that he
abuses: secondly, that it may appear that God regards more the punishment
of evil, then the preservation of his word, blessings, and ordinances. The use
is, to teach us, first, that holiness stands not in any outward thing that
man can take away, for true godliness cannot be shaken by men nor angels.
Secondly, that GOD can save his people without means when it pleases him to
deny them the means.

Doctrine. [she has seene] the injuries that the wicked do 4
unto the godly in their sight, are more grievous unto them then those that
they do only hear of. The reason is, because, that which the sight (being the
quickest of the senses) brings to the mind, has deepest impressio^ therein
of al others. The use is, to teach us (seeing it was the case of this people)
to take patiently whatsoever outward extremity, the Lord gives the wicked
power to lay upon us; yea though it be death it self.

Doctrine. [enter etc.] the wicked make havoc of, and 5
do scorn all the exercises of religion. Psalm. 79. 1. etc. 1. Cor. 1. 18.
etc. hence it is, that silencing and imprisoning of preachers, yea utter
overthrow of the profession of religion, is made a matter of nothing. The
reason is; because, first, they are set on work by Satan, that with greatest
violence seeks the overthrow of all good things: secondly, they be carnally
minded and cannot favor any spiritual things. 1. Cor. 2. 14. The use is, to
teach us, first, to discern in those that take such courses, the wickedness of
man's nature and the horrible profanation that Satan brings the children of
disobedience into. Secondly, to learn to esteem and handle all holy things
most reverently; else shall we not differ from these wicked ones.

Doctrine. [her Sanctuarie] the outward ordinances of God are of reverent
account to them that fear his name, 6
Psalm. 27. 4. and 84. 1. etc. Nehem. 1. 4. The reason is, because, first, they
proceed from him whose actions in all things they esteem most holy: secondly,
they are the means that the Lord vouchsafes to make most comfortable to his
servants. The use is, to teach us, first, to know them to be of no religion,
that do not holilie use these means. Secondly, to try our selves what measure
of Gods fear and his true religion is in us, by examining our selves what
measure of love and obedience we yield to his ordinances appointed to that use.

Doctrine. [whom thou etc.] those that be open wicked 7
ones are not (without their open repentance) to be admitted to the holy
exercises of religion: but if they be without the Church they are so to
remain; and if they be in the Church, they are to be cast out. The reason,
because, first, it is Gods ordinance so to do, Math. 7. 6. and 1. Cor. 5. 3.
etc. 11. 13. etc. Secondly, it makes much for the preservation of the Church
in sound doctrine and innocence of conversation; both which will decay if this
be neglected. The use is, first, to reprove them that think there should be no
separation, but that all indifferently should be received into the communion
of the faithful. Secondly, to declare unto us how far the professed wicked
ones are from having (without repentance) any portion of that heavenly
Jerusalem that may not be retained within the Church in earth, wherein yet
many remain that shall never be saved Math. 20. 16. etc. Thirdly, to teach
us, so careful as we are, to have Gods Church in general, and the members
thereof in particular preserved in good estate, to be so diligent (yet keeping
within the compass of our callings) to labor the amendment, or the casting
out of all heretics and irreligious persons.

[All her people] i. the people of Judah and Jerusalem of all Verse 11.
estates and degrees [sigh and seek their bread] i. are heavy hearted, and
seek here and there for necessary sustenance. [they have given their pleasant
things for meat to refresh their soule] i. willingly parted with that which was
dearest unto them, to get food to preserve their lives [heare O Lord and
consider] i. O Lord hearken to my petitions, and regard my miserable estate
[for I am become vile] i. I am esteemed the basest and most contemptible of all
Nations that live under heaven.

Doctrine. [sigh and seek, etc.] It is lawful for the godly to be grieved
with, and to take to heart their worldly losses. 1
The reason is, because, first, the things of this life are Gods blessings:
secondly, they are necessary to support us here, and (being well used) to make
us the fitter to serve him. The use is, first, to reprove the Stoicklike
opinion of them, that think we should not be moved with the loss of outward
things. Secondly, to teach us, as in the abundance of earthly things, to
acknowledge Gods large mercies, so in the loss or want of them to confess our
sins and Gods displeasure upon us for the same, and therefore to lament.

Doctrine. [giuen her pleasant things] for the preservation 2
of the life, we must be willing to forgo the dearest of these outward
blessings. The reason is, because, first, it is the most precious of all
earthly things, they being given for the use of it, and not it for them.
Secondly, God has given greater charge to preserve it then them. The use is to
teach us, to use all lawful means for the preservation of our life, that we
may employ it to Gods glory and the good of his Church.

Doctrine. [see O Lord and, etc.] Their example teaches 3
us, that in all our miseries we must seek relief only at Gods hands. The
reason is, because, first, he has so commanded, Psalm 50. 15. etc. Secondly,
all power to help is in his hands alone. 2. Chron. 20. 6. without whose
blessing all means do utterly fail. The use is, first, to reprove them that
seek to be relieved by Saints, Angels, or any other in Heaven then God alone.
Also them that seeming to seek only to the true God, do use unlawful means
to have his help, as by Coniurers, Witches, or such like. Secondly, to teach us
in all our distresses to seek only to the Lord, and that alone by such
lawful means, as he has warranted in his word.

Doctrine. [see for, etc,] they were in miserable estate, yet 4
pray they to God; whose example teaches us this doctrine. No extremity can
drive the godly from trusting in God, Job. 13. 15. and praying unto him, Psalm.
44. 17. The reason is, because, first, that faith which they have in him, is
that which overcomes the world, 1. John 5. 4. etc. Secondly, they are assured
that there can be no help but in him. The use is, first, to show, that those
who fall from God because of afflictions, had never any sound foundation in
him, Matthew. 13. 20. 21. John 13. 1. etc. Secondly, to teach us not only to
trust unto the Lord, and fly unto him in time of peace; but especially when
we are in greatest trouble, for then have we most need of help.

Doctrine. [I am become vile] the contempt that the people 5
of God be of in the eyes of the wicked, being alleged in prayer unto the
Lord, is a forcible reason to move him to hear and relieve them. The reason
is, because, first, the Lord pittieth the miseries of his servants. Secondly,
the wicked reproach them commonly for their professions sake, which the Lord
will have to be preserved from ignominy and contempt. The use is to teach us,
first, to allege it in our prayers when we desire to be freed from such
miseries: Secondly, with patience to wait the Lords leisure, being assured
that he will rescue his servants in his good time, from all the wrongs that
they suffer at the hands of wicked men for well doing.

[Not unto you] (for so is the hebrew, word for word) [O all ye that pass by
the way] i. it was not by the power of any Verse 12.
of you that I am in this misery, seeing you are but as passers by, that
neither had power to hurt me, nor compassion to moan my case, but only were
the rods of Gods wrath to scourge me [beholde and see] i. Look well upon it
and consider [if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrowe] i. whether any man
or all men be able to inflict so grievous pains upon any [which is done unto
me] i. which I do sustain [wherewith the Lord has afflicted me] i. which
has come in wonderful and terrible manner from the hand of the highest [in the
day of his fierce wrath] i. when he was so highly displeased with me for my
sins that he declared his anger by punishing me.

Doctrine. The godly in all their afflictions must look unto 1
the Lord the striker, and not respect the rod wherewith he smites. The
reasons, and uses hereof, are set down, verse 5. Doct. 5.

Doctrine. [beholde and see] corrections laid upon others 2
ought not to be neglected, but duly considered of, as the rest of Gods
works. The reason is, because, first, God often smites some to instruct
others thereby: secondly, we being of one moulde should take to heart the
condition one of another. The use is, first, that we may learn to know and
consider of Gods exceeding justice and mercy in general: secondly, to be
induced thereby to fear and love him the more, who makes us only the
beholders of his punishments laid upon others, which our sins deserved to
have been laid upon our selves.

Doctrine. [not unto you] Man is not to be proud though 3
God do many things by him, and for him, that seem both strange and
commendable. The reason is; because he is but the instrument, or matter wrought
upon, and God only the worker, Isay 10. 15. Romans 11. 18. etc. 1. Cor. 47. Job.
31. 27. The use is to teach us, first, to give all glory to God for all things
done in this world, whosoever be the instruments. Secondly, the more that God
does by us, to labor to be the more humble, least we prove the instruments of
his glory to our own destruction.

Doctrine. [not unto you] The wicked have no cause to rejoice when they
prevail against the godly, though they 4
do it usually. The reason is, because, they are but the Lords rods, who
(without repentance) shall be cast into the fire, Isay. 10. 5. and 14. 25. etc.
Secondly, they do not as they imagine, overthrow the godly and establish
themselves, but clean contrary. The use is, to teach us, first, to
acknowledge our sins always to be the cause that they at any time prevail
against us. Secondly, to call to God for grace to repent, that so their power
may be weakened. Thirdly, to bear with patience those rods that God lays upon
us by the wicked, being assured that God in his good time will release us and
punish them.

Doctrine. [if there be any sorrow like, etc.] The godly endure more trouble in
this world, both inwardly and outwardly, 5
then any other: Examples hereof, Job, David, Joseph, Jeremy, Christ, his
Apostles, etc. it is also manifest in daily experience. The reason is, because,
first, God loves us, and would weane us from delighting in this world, to long
after heaven and heavenly things: secondly, our nature is so perverse as it
will not be framed to any spiritual things, without many and grievous
corrections. Thirdly, Satan and the world do hate us, and labor continually
to seek our destruction. The use is to teach us, first, not to be offended at
the great afflictions that we hear of, or see to befall such as fear God:
secondly, never to promise our selves worldly peace and prosperity, but to
prepare our selves to look for one rod to succeed another whilst we live
here.

Doctrine. [any sorrow like, etc.] It is a usual thing with us, 6
to think our own troubles more heavy and intolerable then any others do
suffer. The reason is, because, first, we feel all the smart of our own, and
do only a far off behold that which others do bear. Secondly, we are more
discontented with our own crosses then we should, which makes us bear them
the more impatiently, and think them the more intolerable. The use is to teach
us, first, by the due survey of our manifold sins, to acknowledge we have
deserved the most grievous punishments that can be. Secondly, in the
consideration of our afflictions, to call to mind rather how many and grievous
rods we are freed of, that we might by Gods just judgment sustain, then to
think of the grieuousnesse of that we bear, which others feel not.

Doctrine. [sorrow] The afflictions that God lays upon 7
his servants, are, and ought to be grievous unto them for the present time,
Heb. 12. 11. The reason is, because, first, we justly have deserved them
through our sins. Secondly, we must be lead by them to repentance, or we
abuse them. The use is, first, to reprove the stoicall blockishnesse of those
that are not affected with afflictions. Secondly, it teaches us to sorrow when
we are afflicted, but so as we be not swallowed up in it.

Doctrine. [the Lord has, etc.] Though our sins do always deserve it and
our foes do daily desire, yet can no 8
punishment befall the godly till God see it meet to lay it upon them Job. 1.
12. etc. for the reasons hereof see verse. 5. Doctr. 5. The use is, first, to
teach us to take all corrections patiently, seeing we cannot shun them, and
seeing God lays them upon us in love for our good. Secondly, to learn to
seek unto the Lord especially, for release from our troubles, and not to be
wholly employed about worldly means, as they do that be worldly minded.

Doctrine. [wrath] The anger of God is hot against sin, 9
even in his dearest servants. The reason is, because, first, he is most
righteous, and cannot bear with any evil. Secondly, it tends to his great
dishonor. The use is to teach us, first, if he cannot bear it in those whom
he loves, how much less will he suffer it unpunished in the wicked?
Secondly, to make us abhor sin in all men, but especially in our selves,
even as much as we desire to have the Lord to love us and be pleased with us.

Doctrine. [day] God does not always afflict his servants, 10
but at such special times as he sees it meetest for them, Psalm. 103. 9. The
reason is, first, that by punishing sometimes he might declare his displeasure
against sin. Secondly, by sparing them often, he might show his great love
unto them. The use is to teach us, first, to acknowledge his wisdom, justice,
and mercy in dealing so with us. Secondly, to take afflictions patiently when
he lays them upon us, seeing we have them not always, but many good things
in stead of them: this use did Job make of this doctrine, 2. 10.

[From aboue] i. from heaven [hath he sent fire into my Verse 13.
bones] i. the Lord has sent most painful and destroying grief (for that is
meant by fire) into my inward and strongest parts, this is meant by bones,
Psalm. 6. 3. 4. Isai. 38. 13. [which he ruleth] thus are the hebrew words to be
translated, the meaning is; which the Lord, and not any power of man directs,
that it may torment and overthrow me, as it seems good to him [he has spread
a net for my feet] i. has so taken me in his snare, that I cannot escape from
him [and turned me backe] i. quite overthrown me and all my purposes [he has
made me desolate] i. he has deprived me of all help and means of rescue [and
daily in heauinesse] i. my grief is continual without intermission, because
Gods hand is upon me without ceasing.

Doctrine. [from above has he sent] this often mentioning 1
of Gods hand, teaches this doctrine. When God punishes us by the hands of
the wicked, we are hardly brought to ascribe it to him alone; and they from
thinking that their own haed and power has done it. The reason is, because,
first, our understanding takes deeper impression of that which we see with our
eyes, then that which our spiritual knowledge teaches. Secondly, the wicked
can see no further then their own hand reaches. The use is to teach us,
first, not to marvel though the ungodly offend in that which we are hardly
reformed in: Secondly, in all our afflictions to look unto the Lord whose hand
has done it; and not be like the dog, that snarleth at the stone which is
thrown at him, never regarding him that did cast it: see verse. 5. Doct. 5.

Doctrine. [bones] when God lays afflictions upon us, 2
they ransack the most secret parts that are in us The reason is, because, God
has ordained afflictions to be the means to try us. The use is to teach us,
first, that afflictions are necessary for us, seeing we should else think still
better of our selves then (in deed) we are: secondly, not to be amazed though
the soul and body be fraught with miseries, seeing it has been ever the
means that God has put in practice, to humble his servants withal under his
hands.

Doctrine. [fire into my bones] God often brings his servants 3
to the greatest misery that can be sustained by man, see verse 12. Doctr. 5.

Doctrine. [which he ruleth] God does govern, and that 4
in special manner, the particular course of all those afflictions which he
lays upon his people. This appears, not only in the wonderful beginnings,
process, and ending of the afflctions of Joseph, David, Job, Christ etc. but
also in the daily experience of the godly, that live under the cross. The
reason is, first, that the Lord might in special manner declare himself to
provide for his servants in all extremities, as the event does always make
manifest: secondly, that Satan and the world might daily see, how they cannot
go beyond their tedder that God has measured unto them. The use is, first, to
confute them that think all things to be guided by fortune, or at the least,
that God rules not the particulars but only the general course of the world:
secondly, to teach us to observe Gods wonderful power, and merciful
providence, in all our several troubles, whereby we cannot but be constrained
at the length to say, it is good for me that I have bin in trouble, Psalm. 1 19.
71. Seeing it has fallen out for the best, Romans 8. 28.

Doctrine. [weake] we can no more wind our selves out 5
of those afflictions that God lays upon us, then the entangled foul can
escape the net that compasses him. The reason is, because, first, we have no
strength against him that deals with us: secondly, all our devises (in such a
case) make against us, eue^ as the fluttering of the snared bird holds her
faster than before. The use is to teach us, first, to take patiently whatsoever
the Lord does lay upon us: secondly, to seek unto him alone for release, who
only can deliver us.

Doctrine. [turned me backe] Nothing can go forward or 6
come to any good issue, but that only which the Lord furthereth. The reason
is, because, all power is in his hand, so as whatsoever man purposes, yet it
is he alone that disposes. The use is, first, to reprove them that take any
thing in hand as grounded upon their own strength: secondly, to teach us never
to attempt any unlawful things, seeing Gods hand can never help us in them,
except it be in his anger to punish us: thirdly, to teach us in all things that
we take in hand according to Gods will, to seek his assistance and help, by
hearty and faithful prayer.

Doctrine. [desolate] It is God that gives friends, wealth, 7
etc. and takes all away at his pleasure, Job. 1. 21. The reason is, because,
all things more or less, are disposed by his providence. The use is, first, to
reprove them that say mine own hand and power has done this or that:
secondly, in general to acknowledge all things to be done of the Lord, in
particular for our sins if he afflict us, by taking our wealth, friends,
liberty, or any good thing else from us, and from his mere mercy, if any of
these, or any such be continued, or restored unto us.

Doctrine. [daily in heauinesse] according to the measure 8
and continuance of Gods afflicting hand upon us, so must the measure and
continuance of our sorrows be. The reason is, because, first, heavy and long
troubles are a sign of Gods heavy and sore displeasure against us: secondly,
the continuance of afflictions argue that we are not sufficiently humbled, do
not unfeignedly repent for our sins, nor call upon the Lord so effectually as
we should. The use is, first, to reprove them that by continuance under the
cross do grow hard hearted, which condition is a fearful sign of Gods
rejecting of them. Secondly, to teach us the heavier and longer that troubles
are upon us, the more earnestly to labor with our selves to grow in
repentance, zeal, and feruencie of prayer.

Doctrine. These parcicular calamities coming one in 9
the neck of another do teach us this doctrine. When God means to punish
his servants, he will increase the means that may further the same, and
utterly disappoint al contrary endeavors. The reason is; because, first,
nothing can stand against him to hinder the execution of his will. Secondly,
all things in heaven and in earth are at his appointment, to accomplish his
pleasure. The use is to teach us, first, that there is no counsel or strength
against the Lord: secondly, to take patiently whatsoever it shall please his
majesty to lay upon us.

[The yoke of my transgressions] i. the heavy burden of my Verse 14.
manifold sins, [is bound upon his hand] i. the Lord carries them in his
continual remembrance [they are wrapped] i. all knitt up in one bundell [and
come up upon my necke] i. laid all upon me at once [he has made my strength
to fall] i. he has caused my power to stumble (for so the word signifies) and
to fall without recovery [the Lord has delivered me into their handes] i. God
has given me to be subject to the power and will of the enemies [neither am I
able to rise] i. all power and hope (in the judgment of flesh and blood) is
utterly taken from me.

Doctrine. [yoke] the sins of Gods people are the heauiest 1
burden that they can possibly bear in this life. The reason is; because,
first, they (without his great mercy) make a separation between God and them.
Secondly, they give Satan matter to tirannize over them. Thirdly, they (being
thorowlie taken to heart) do after a sort, possess the soul with the very
torments of hell. The use is to teach us, first, to suffer any torments in this
life, rather then be drawn to commit sin against God: secondly, to labor
above all things to be reconciled unto God, through Christ, and so endeavoring
the keeping of a good conscience, no trouble or torment of body shall be
grievous, but very tolerable, yea joyful unto us.

Doctrine. [vpon his hand] when God means to punish 2
us for our sins, he calls them all to remembrance. The reason is, first,
that his justice might find just matter why to smite us. Secondly, that he may
lay his corrections upon us according as he shall see meet, by viewing the
quality of our sins, and obstinacy therein, or pronenesse to repentance.
The use is to teach us, first, not to commit any thing that is evil, and so
think that it shall be forgotten in time; for God sees all things past, as
though they were present: secondly, not to continue in sin or put off
repentance from day to day, for in so doing we multiply and heap up matter
against our selves for the day of our punishment.

Doctrine. [wrapped and come vp] when God means to 3
correct, he will so do it as it cannot be escaped. The reasons, and use here
of are set down verse. 13. doct. 5.

Doctrine. [he has made my strength to fall] God gives strength and courage
to men, and takes it away at his pleasure. 4
Deuteronomy. 28. 7. 25. The reason is; because, all power is his own; and is to be
bestowed as shall seem good unto him. The use is; first, to reprove their
vanity that ascribe strength or courage to one Nation more then another:
secondly, to teach us, not to stand upon any power that is in our selves, but
to seek to be reconciled to GOD, and rest upon his strength alone.

Doctrine. [deliuered me] the issue of battle is in the hand 5
of God alone. Psalm. 44. 3. etc. The reasons, and use thereof are, verse. 13.
doct. 7.

Doctrine. [into their hands] God often delivers his servants 6
into the hands of the ungodly. Examples, Job, Sampson, Jeremy. The reason is,
first, to exercise them, and bring them to repentance; or to perfect his power
in their weakness. Secondly, to give the wicked occasion to show forth their
cruel disposition. The use is, first, to reprove them that justify or condemn
a man according to his prevailing or being overcome in this world: secondly, to
teach us, to take it patiently when it falls to our share; seeing it is the
lot of the godly in this life.

Doctrine [neither am I able to rise vp] God sometimes afflicts 7
his people so grievously, that their state seems desperate and irrecouerable
in the judgment of flesh and blood: Examples, Joseph, David, Job, yea Christ
himself. The reason is, first, that he might show his mighty power in
restoring them. Secondly, that all means being taken away, they might learn
to look up to heaven and rest upon him only. The use is, first, to reprove
them that judge the case of Gods people desperate when all worldly means be
against them. Secondly, to teach us, never to despair whatsoever extremity
do befall us in this life.

[The Lord has trodden under foot all my valiant men] i. he has brought down
to the greatest contempt those that Verse 15.
were strongest, in whom I put my greatest confidence [in the midst of me]
i. not so much in the face of the enemy as even in the streets of Jerusalem
[he has called an assembly against me to destroy my young men] i. he has
stirred up many enemies to overthrow the flower of my people [the Lord has
trodden the wine presse] i. he has crushed and broken in pieces as the grapes
are in the press [vpon the virgin the daughter of Iudah] i. those tender and
dainty ones that seemed unfit to bear any affliction.

Doctrine. [valiant men] when God means to afflict us, 1
he will spoil us of all our helps, wherein we may have any confidence. Isay.
3. 1. 2. etc. The reason is; because, he would have us see how little help we
can have of any thing without him. The use is to teach us, whenever he
deals so with us, to humble our selves under his hand, and fly to him alone
for succor and help.

Doctrine. [midst] GOD can as easily destroy in a fensed City, as in a
battle. The reason is, because, first, his power is 2
present every where. Secondly, there is no Counsel nor strength against the
Lord. The use is to teach us, never to repose our affiance, or think our
selves safe in any thing whatsoever, but only in dwelling under the protection
of the almighty, Plalme. 91. 1.

Doctrine. [he has called an assemblie] it is God that rules 3
even the wicked, and sets them on work against his servants; else can
they never prevail against them. The reason is, because, all power to do any
thing is from him alone. The use is to teach us, in all our distresses to rest
upon God, and seek to him above for help and deliverance.

Doctrine. [troden] man can no more escape Gods hand 4
in punishing them, then the grapes can fly from the treader of the wine
press. The reason is, because, there is no place to fly from his presence,
Psalm. 139. 7. The use is to teach us, first, to take patiently whatsoever he
lays upon us: Secondly, to labor above all things to obtain his favor and
to abide in it, so shall we be safe from the fear of evil.

Doctrine. [virgins] the niceness of those that have lived 5
daintely, is no reason to free them, but rather a provocation to bring
afflictions upon them. The reason is, because, first, the pampering of our
selves is none of the ends, for which God bestows his blessings upon us.
Secondly, such coy niceness as many be of, is seldom without special sins
that are incident to that condition; which God will not let pass unpunished.
The use is to teach us, first, to take heed that we bestow not Gods blessings
given us (to further us in his service) to make us the unfitter to bear his
rods. Secondly, never to promise our selves freedom from punishment, what
privileges soever we can allege, especially if we walk not most vrightly,
and bestow not his blessings most faithfully.

Doctrine. [daughter of Iudah] except the children for sake 6
their sins, they shall not be spared for the godliness of their parents.
The reason is, because, first, God deals with every one according to that
which is in himself: Secondly, the promise [I will be thy God and the God of
thy seede] is only profitable to such children, as walk in the faithful steps
of their godly parents. The use is, first, to reprove them that rest upon
their forefathers faithfulness, they themselves being unfaithful: secondly, to
teach us to seek that in our selves and not in others, which may be an
argument to prove us in the favor of the Lord.

[For these things I weepe] i. I mourn and lament, because Verse. 16.
of these my grievous sins that I have brought upon me, so many, and so
heavy punishments [from mine eye (even) from mine eye, descends water] i.
the tears do come out of mine eyes, in such abundance, as they flow down
my cheeks [because the comforter that should refresh my soul is far from
mee] i. I am deprived not only of the help of friends that should relieve my
misery, but even the Lord has withdrawn the brightness of his countenance from
me [my children are desolate] i. all my people are in a forelorne case [because
the enemy preuailed] i. because all things are at the disposition of those that
hate me.

Doctrine. [for these things] note (besides the same with verse. 2. Doctr. 1.)
this doctrine. It is not only lawful, but also 1
necessary for the godly to be so greatly grieved when God punishes them for
their sins, as may draw them into extreme weeping. The reason is, because,
first, Gods heavy hand is as the roaring of a lion, whereat all the beasts of
the forest do tremble, Amos 3. 8. and. 2. Sin against God, and the
punishment thereof, ought to grieve us above all things that can be fall us in
this world. The use is, first, to reprove them that think it a fault to be
passionate in such cases: Secondly, to teach us to labor our hard hearts, that
we may be most lively affected with sorrow, and mourn in exceeding manner
when the Lord does lay his grievous crosses upon us.

Doctrine. [mine eye descendeth] no adversity has warrant 2
to grieve us so much as the punishment of God upon us for our sins, Luke 23.
28. etc. The reason is, because, first, they declare unto us that God is
displeased, whose anger who can endure? Secondly, nothing must be more odious
unto us, then sin, which (we having committed) must cause us to lament
exceedingly. The use is, first, to reprove them, as being far out of frame,
that can easily weep at the loss of goods, friends, children, etc. being
taken from them by the ordinary hand of God; but can hardly be moved with
those spiritual losses that do more nearly concern the salvation or
damnation of the soul and body eternally: secondly, to teach us above all
things to be humbled with the consideration of our sins, and Gods displeasure
for them, and not so much for the loss whatsoever it be.

Doctrine. [descendeth water] they were naturally a hard hearted people as the
scripture testifies often; yet are they 3
now constrained to weep, whereby we learn this doctrine; There is none so
stout, or hard hearted, but afflictions will bring him down. The reason is,
because, first, God is stronger then any, and will prevail in all that which
he purposes: secondly, God will constrain man at one time or other, to give
glory unto him, by acknowledging his power. The use is to teach us, that we
never set our selves against Gods hand in punishing us, but willingly submit
our selves unto him in all things.

Doctrine. [comfort] It is a grievous plague to be deprived of comforters in
afflictions, the contrary whereof is an exceeding 4
blessing: for the reasons and use hereof see verse 2. Doctrine 3.

Doctrine. [should refresh] It is the duty of every one, to comfort and
relieve others that be in distress. The reason is, 5
because, first, God has so commanded, Galat. 6. 2. etc. Secondly, we are
members one of another, 1. Cor. 12. 27. etc. Thirdly, we may have the like need
our selves another time. The use is, first, to reprove them, as being no
feeling members, that regard no further then their own good, not caring to
relieve those that need with such blessings as they have: secondly, to teach
us to labor more and more with our selves, that we may be affected with the
condition of others, mourning with them that are afflicted, and helping them to
the uttermost of our power.

Doctrine. [my children] the church, as also the commonwealth, 6
is to declare her self a kind mother unto every one that is trained up
therein; and to have compassion of their miseries, helping them to the
uttermost. This duty is especially to be performed by the ministers in the
one, and the magistrates in the other. The reason is, because, first, they are
especially honored by the whole body, that every member might receive
especial good by them: secondly, they are, or should be, of greatest knowledge
and conscience, and therefore should declare the same by the most excellent
fruits, whereof this is not the least. The use is, first, to declare unto us
in what miserable case that Church or common wealth is, whose ministers or
magistrates be persecutors and tormentors of the best members thereof:
secondly, to teach us to praise God when our governors are good, and to pray
for their preservation and continuance, or if they be evil to pray for their
amendment, and in the mean while mourn for the miseries that are upon us by
their ungodly demeanors.

Doctrine. [are desolate because the enemy etc.] It is the property 7
of carnal friends, to be friendly only whilst prosperity is upon us; but
if our adversaries prevail against us, and bring us to adversity, they are
gone. The reason and use hereof is the same with that in verse. 8. Doctr. 6.

[Sion stretches out her hands, and there is none to comfort her] i. Jerusalem
earnestly desires and laboreth for help, but Verse. 17.
none yields her any relief [the Lord has commanded the enemies of Iaacob
round about him] i. God has given power unto them that hate the Israelites, to
compass them in on every side [Ierusalem is as a menstruous woman in the
midst of them] i. she is rejected of all her adversaries, and esteemed most
vile and filthy, not worthy to be approached unto by any.

Doctrine. [stretoheth] It is a necessary duty in Gods 1
people, to seek out all good means of their release from troubles. The
reason is, because, first, they know that God ordinarily works every thing by
means: secondly, they know not by what means, nor when God will deliver them,
therefore must they use al, and continue therein, committing the success unto
the Lord. The use is, first, to reprove them that are slothful in using the
means, wickedly saying, God will bring to pass his own purpose and no more,
though we do nothing: secondly, to teach us always to put all good means in
practice, and yet never to rest upon them, but to depend upon the Lord alone,
in whose hands the issues of all things are.

Doctrine. [there is none] God often frustrateth the lawful endeavors of his
Children of that good issue which is expected, 2
and yet likes well that they should use means to bring the same to pass:
examples here of is, Abraham's praying for Sodom, Genesis 18. The reason is,
because he would have us follow the means that be before our eyes, and yet is
not himself tied thereunto, but prospers them as he will, and when he will.
The use is to teach us, first, not to despair, though the means that we have
used prevail not: secondly, to continue still in using good means, though
they have not that success which we look for, seeing we know not when God
has appointed to bless our means.

Doctrine. [commaunded] the wicked have no power against Gods people, but that
which is given them from the 3
Lord, John 19. 1. The reasons and use hereof are set down verse. 5. Doct. 5.
and verse. 13. Doct. 1.

Doctrine. [as a menstruous] Gods people are more grievously afflicted, and
reproached in the world, then any else, 4
and the godliest the most of all. The reason is, because Satan and the wicked
have greatest malice against them. The use is to teach us, not to promise our
selves the applause of men in this life, but to know that to be evil
entreated and esteemed most vile, is our share, if we will live godly in Christ
Jesus.

[The Lord is righteous] i. in all these things GOD has Verse 18.
dealt most justly with me [for I have rebelled against his commandementes] i.
I have most heynously sinned and wilfully transgressed the words that came
out of the Lords own mouth by the ministry of his Prophets [heare, I pray
you all people and behold my sorrow] i. I desire that all men would mark Gods
fearful judgments upon me. Objection how agrees this with that 2. Sam. 1.
20. Tell it not in Gathe. Answer. The meaning of David's speech there is, that
it should not be reported as the hand of the Philistines but of GOD. [my
virgins and my young men] i. the most tender of all my people and hope of the
age that is to come [are gone into captiuitie] i. are carried out of this land,
the sign of his favor, and of heaven it self.

Doctrine. [is righteous] Gods people do acknowledge 1
his justice in all his works, yea even in his punishments laid upon them.
Examples hereof are, Job, David, Daniel, etc. The reason is; because, first,
his word and spirit has reformed their judgments, teaching them how to think
of his holy majesty in all things. Secondly, the conscience of their own
sins causes them to justify the Lord, and to accuse themselves. The use
is, first, to reprove in our selves, or others, all repyning against God, and
accusing of him, as things far differing from the disposition of the godly,
rightly reformed. Secondly, to teach us to grow in the fear, and worship of
GOD, praying always for his grace to assist us, who is so righteous in all his
works. Thirdly, to teach us patience to bear, and contentednes to undergo,
what condition soever the Lord, that is so righteous, does lay upon us.

Doctrine. [for I etc.] it is the duty of Gods children to seek the cause of
all their evils in themselves. The reason is, 2
because, first, GOD is righteous, and lays nothing upon them but that which
they justly deserve. Secondly, they know their own manifold sins, and their
exceeding weakness in weldoing, which they cannot so see in any others. This
doctrine is hardly learned, because of our natural blind selfeloue, and
pronenesse to accuse others. The use is, first, to justify God, when he is
judged. Secondly, to teach us, to betruelie humbled under the Lords hand, when
he lays his rods upon us. Thirdly, to give us direction how to seek the
right way of release from those crosses that are upon us.

Doctrine. [rebelled] though God punish us often for other 3
causes, yet the matter that he works upon is our sins. The reason is,
because the righteous GOD cannot punish without desert. The use is to teach us,
to labor to find out and forsake our sins so often as we are punished.

Doctrine. [rebellion] being an high degree of transgression teaches us this
doctrine. We must not lessen our sins, but 4
account them most heinous in our own eyes. The reason is, because, first,
they are so in the sight of God. Secondly, they keep so many good things from
us, and bring so many miseries upon us. Thirdly, it is a special note of a
reformed heart; and the lessening or hyding of our sins, is a mark of the
contrary. The use is, first, to teach us thereby the better to be prepared
unto true repentance: secondly, to comfort us with assurance that we are out of
love with our sins.

Doctrine. [his commandement] [heb. his mouth] it is our duty (especially in
religion) neither to go further, nor to 5
come shorter, then Gods revealed will; but to attend unto it, as the servants
eye does unto his masters hand: Psalm 123. 2. The reason is, because, first, we
are so commanded, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and 12. 32. Proverbs. 30. 6. Revel. 22. 18. etc.
Secondly, we can do nothing well* but by the direction thereof, seeing we are
naturally blind in judgment, and corrupt in affection. The use is, first, to
reprove the^ that think it imperfect, and therefore ad traditions unto it, as
the Papists. Secondly, to teach us, that the written word of God is the persect
rule of all righteousness. Thirdly, we must carefully learn to know this
rule, or else how can we be directed by it.

Doctrine. [rebelled] it is rebellion against the Lord himself, 6
to be disobedient unto the voice of his ministers, teaching his truth. Luke.
10. 16. The reason is, because first, they speak nothing in their own names,
but from the Lord. Secondly, the disobedience is not to the minister, but to
that he utters which is the Lords. The use is, first, to reprove their error
that think they may hate the instructions of the minister and yet love God.
Secondly, to teach all ministers to take heed what they teach in the name of
the Lord, lest they profane his blessed majesty, abuse his holy ordinance of
the ministry, and seduce his people.

Doctrine. [his commandement] now their acknowledging 7
that to be Gods mouth, which in their prosperity they contemned, teaches us
this doctrine. We are constrained in our adversity to acknowledge Gods hand in
those things, which in our prosperity we neglected. The reason, because,
first, adversity reformeth the judgment, and causes a more serious
consideration of matters then before. Secondly, GOD will have his judgments
justified by those whom he punishes; this is verified even in the wicked, as
in Pharaoh Exodus 9. 27. Nabuchadnezzar Dan. 4 31. Achab. 1. Kin. 21. 27. and c
The use is to teach us, to acknowledge the voice and hand of God in all things,
when the first occasion is offered us: so shall we have profit and comfort by
it, else shall we be constrained to acknowledge it in the end, to the doubling
of our sorrow.

Doctrine. [heare etc. all people] when Gods people are punished, 8
they are not ashamed, but willing to tell all men of it, and to declare their
sins to be the cause of it. The reason is, because, first, above all things
they desire to have the Lord justified in all men's judgments. Secondly, they
desire that their own example might teach others to scrue God better. The use
is, first, to reprove them, as being far from a godly disposition, who
either accuse God when they are punished; or labor to hide from the eyes of
all men the affliction that is upon them: secondly, to teach us, that it is a
right sign of unfeigned repentance, to be free in consessing our sins, and
Gods just hand on us for them, and that without shame or blushing saving for
the sins only.

Doctrine. [all people] the manifesting of our punishments 9
unto the world as from Gods hand because of our sins, can neither dishonor
the Lord, nor harden others in their wickedness, but is a just occasion of the
contrary. The reason is, because, first, it is matter of great honor to God,
to let no sins escape without punishment, when he offends: secondly, it
gives others just cause to think, that except they repent, they shall all
likewise be punished. The use is, first, to reprove them that would not have
it known to the world how severely the Lord afflicts his servants in this
life: secondly, to teach us to desire to let others know how little the Lord
likes of sin, seeing he punishes it in his dearest children.

Doctrine. [my virgins, etc.] in that they were in such woeful condition every
way, we learn this doctrine. It may fall 10
out to be the lot of the Church of God, to be deprived for a time of all
worldly comfort, and of the ministry of the word and sacraments also. The
reason is, because it was the condition of this people, who yet were the only
true visible Church, that was then under the sun. The use is, first, to
reprove the vanity of the Papists, who esteem the Church to be always a
famous visible Monarchy, and of worldlings, who think it should be free from
all molestations and troubles: secondly, to teach us not to be dismayed nor to
forsake the truth, notwithstanding the innumerable troubles that do befall
the Church that professes the same.

[I called for my louers] i. I desired to be relieved by those Verse 19.
that loved me dearly [but they deceived me] i. mine expectation was utterly
frustrated in them. [my Priests and mine Elders] i. the governors of the
Church and of the common wealth [perished] i. were so far from helping me,
that they were in misery themselves [in the Citie] i. they dyed within the
walls of the City, without the sword of the enemies, [while they sought
their meate] i. even in their careful travail to find out some food [to
refresh their soules] i. to cheer their lives and strengthen their hearts
withal.

Doctrine. [I called unto, etc.] It is an increase of sorrow, to 1
be disappointed of their help, by whom we looked to be delivered out of our
troubles. The reason is, because the hope of help by those means does often
promise speedy deliverance, and in the mean while administreth patience;
which being frustrated, the heart is suddenly fraught with many griefs that
it looked not for. The use is, first, to reprove them as guilty of a great
sin, who give the distressed any hope of succor, and yet disappoynte them
when they might have helped them. Secondly, to teach us, especially to rest
upon God in our troubles, and not to rely upon the outward means, least they
deceive us, and so our sorrow be increased thereby.

Doctrine. [louers deceiued] God often makes our friends 2
that love us unfeignedly, utterly unable to do us any good in our distress.
The reason is, to show us that it is a vain thing to trust in man. The use is
to teach us, to put our whole affiance in the Lord alone.

Doctrine. [my Priests and mine Elders perished] the misery of that people must
needs be great, whose rulers can neither 3
help themselves nor others. The reason is, because, the governors are the
staff of the peoples strength, which being broken, there is no help left. The
use is, first, to show us in what excellent steed our rulers do stand us, and
therefore to teach us to obey them, honor them, and pray for them: secondly,
to teach us not to despair, though they be made utterly unable to help us,
seeing it was so with this people, and yet God found out a means to deliver
them.

Doctrine. [perished] Gods plagues do often overtake the great ones, as well as
others. The reason is, because, first, they 4
usually sin as greatly as others, if not above the measure of others:
secondly, be they never so great amongst men, yet are they nothing when God
takes them in hand. The use is to teach us, not to sin by virtue of any
privilege that we have in this life, seeing it cannot free us from those
punishments which our sins do deserve.

Doctrine. [while they sought] Gods people may come to 5
the extremest beggary that can be in this life (though it falls out very
seldom.) The reason is, because, first, outward things are no part of their
felicity, which is purchased for them by Christ Jesus: secondly, God will now
and then, show himself the preserver of his people, when all means do fail.
The use is, to teach us, not to rest upon any thing in this life, for that were
to build upon the sand which will fail in the tempest. Matthew. 7. 26. 27.

[Behold O Lord, for trouble is upon me] i. O Lord regard Verse 20.
me with thy mercies, for I am in great straightness, and extremities do
press me, and oppress me, [my bowels are bemudded] i. all my intrals are
disordered and mingled together as the troubled water is with the mudde (for
the hebrew word is borrowed from the waters that are in such a case after or
in a tempest) [mine heart turns it self within me] i. for very grief and
anguish, my heart does (as it were) remove and roll within me [because I have
greatly rebelled] i. the cause of all this misery is, my grievous
transgressions against the Lord my God [the sword spoyleth abroad] i.
wheresoever my people are employed in wars for my defense, there the enemies
sword does kill and destroy them [as death at home] i. The famine is so great
at home, that nothing but death appears in every street and house, where our
profit and our pleasure has been unto us in great measure.

Doctrine. [behold O Lord] in that they prayed verse. 9. and verse 11. and in
this place, and often after, we learn this doctrine. 1
We must not give over, but continue in prayer, though we be not heard in that
we entreat for. The reason is, God has commanded to pray without ceasing,
and set no time when we shall be heard. The use is, to teach us, that God by
deferring to hear us, first tries our faith and patience: secondly, shows
his exceeding anger against our sins: thirdly, gives us occasion to increase
in repentance and feruencie of prayer: Examples hereof are the Israelites in
Egypt, and in the Captivity. Job, David, etc.

Doctrine. [behold, etc.] God sees all things: but their example in laying
open their miseries before the Lord, teaches 2
this doctrine. We must with lamentation, lay open our miseries before the
Lord, if we look to be relieved. The reason is, because, first, mercy is
denied to them that hide their sins, Proverbs 28. 13. secondly, forgiveness is
granted upon a free confession, Psalm* 32. 5. The use is, first, to reprove
them, as having no spark of right repentance, that coldly, or not at all, do
acknowledge their particular sins unto the Lord: secondly, to teach us to
ransack our own ways, that in the days of our repentance we may be able
thoroughly to lay open our transgressions unto the Lord.

Doctrine [for trouble is upon me] we then pray most earnestly, 3
when we feel most sensibly the burden of that we would be rid of, and the
want of that we would have. The reason is, because, first, else we are
continually secure: secondly, we earnestly desire the contentment of our own
hearts: which cannot be whilst we have that we would not, and want that we
would have. The use is, to teach us, first, the necessity of affliction,
seeing it is evident we are then (only) touched effectually: secondly, to
strive that we be not cold, but more and more affected with the sense of our
sins, to loath them, and with a longing after righteousness, to walk therein.

Doctrine. [be mudded: heart turned] There is no rest nor 4
quietness within us, when God presses us with the weight of our own sins.
The reason is, because, first, they are so many and so grievous. Secondly, he
can, and does urge them more forciblie, then that we can sustain his heavy
hand. The use is, to teach us, first, to pity those that are afflicted in
conscience for sin, above all others that are any ways distressed. Secondly,
to esteem of, and be thankful for the peace of conscience, as the greatest
treasure that we can enjoy in this life. Thirdly, to avoid sin always, as
that which will procure us the greatest hurt both in this life, and in the life
to come.

Doctrine. [greatly rebelled] The godly do always in the 5
due consideration of their sins, aggrauate them against themselves in
greatest measure. The reason is, because, first, they see best into their own
offenses. Secondly, they measure them by the heavy anger of God deserved by
the same, as did the Publican, Luke 18. 13. The use is, to teach us, first, to
try our selves how we stand affected this way, seeing it is a special note of
true repentance, and the contrariety of impenitencie. Secondly, to labor more
and more to aggrauate our sins in our own eyes, that we may be humbled the
more effectually thereby.

Doctrine. [(...), death, etc.] The things that are ordained 6
for our greatest good in this life, do turn to our greatest harm when our
sins provoke Gods anger to break forth against us. The reason is, because,
first, all creatures are at his commandment to execute his will. Secondly,
they are no further unto us as blessings, then so far as he gives them in
his love and favor. The use is, to teach us, first, in the rebellion of any of
Gods creatures against us to acknowledge our sins against God to be the
cause. Secondly, to labor first of all to be reconciled to GOD in Christ
Jesus, and to walk in obedience unto his laws: so shall all his creatures
serve to our good, else do they increase our condemnation.

[They have heard] i. it has come to the ears and knowledge Verse 21.
of the enemies [that I do mourne] i. that I am in great heaviness and
lamentation [and there is none to comfort me] i. neither one nor other showed
any pity upon me [all mine enemies have heard of my trouble] i. the knowledge
of my misery is come to the ears of mine enemies of all estates and
conditions [and are glad that thou have done it] i. they rejoice that thou have
laid so heavy things upon me [those have brought the day that thou have
pronounced] i. the destruction which thou have prophesied by the mouth of the
Prophets against the Nations will as surely come upon them, as if it were
already come to pass: for the hebrew verb, being in the time past, is meant
of that which is to come, according to the manner of the speeches of the
Prophets, for the more assurance of the accomplishment thereof [and they shall
be like unto me] i. their misery in this world shall be as grievous to see to,
as mine is now: for otherwise their estate shall be most contrary, when all
tears are wiped from the eyes of the godly, and all calamities powered upon the
heads of the wicked.

Doctrine. see verse. 2. doct. 3. and verse, 8, doct. 7. 1


Doctrine. [none to comfort me etc.] it is the duty of all 2
men to comfort the afflicted, and not to add to their miseries, Math. 25. 40.
James. 1. 27. 1. Cor. 12. 26. Heb. 13. 3. The reason is, because, first, we owe
this duty (among others) one to another. Secondly, no misery can befall
another, but when God will, it may light upon our selves, seeing we daily
deserve the same. The use is, first, to reprove them that do not take any man's
misery to heart but their own. Secondly, to teach us, to labor our hearts to
be like affected with others; even to mourn with them that weep etc. seeing
it is a sign of a lively member: as the want thereof argues, either that we
are cut off, or were never ingrafted into that body whereof Christ Jesus is
the head.

Doctrine. [are glad] it is the property of the wicked to rejoice 3
at the miseries of the godly, with whom they should mourn. Psalm. 69. 12. and
137. 3. Judges. 16. 25. The reason is, because, first, they are affected as
their father the Devil, who rejoices in nothing but the calamity of mankind.
Secondly, their hatred that they bear to the righteous, makes them be glad
when any evil lights on them. The use is, to teach us, first, to be far
from that wicked disposition, but rather to mourn when our enemies are in
distress. Psalm. 35. 13. 14. etc. Secondly not to be dismayed though the world
triumph over us in our miseries, seeing it has been the condition of Gods
people in all ages.

Doctrine [thou have done it] in that they could not in prosperity 4
rightly understand the word of God which concerned themselves but now can both
apply it rightly to themselves, and others also; we learn this doctrine.
We are the fit scholars to learn Gods word, and make right use of it,
when afflictions are upon us. The reason is, because, first, in prosperity we
forget God and our selves also. Secondly; we are in our corrupt nature, as
naughty children, that will not learn except they be well whipped. Thirdly, in
afflictions we can more easily consider of our estate both present, past, and
to come. The use is, to teach us, how necessary afflictions are, to frame us to
be of a right disposition: secondly, to humble us, seeing we are of so untoward
a disposition. Thirdly, to provoke us as at all times, so especially in
afflictions, to pray that we may be directed by Gods spirit to lead our lives
according to his will, seeing we are of nature so perverse.

Doctrine. [bring etc. that thou have pronounced] every title 6
of Gods word shall be accomplished in due season. Mat. 5. 18. The reason is,
because, it came from him that is truth it self, and cannotlye. The use is, to
teach us, first, of what singular excellency Gods word is, seeing there is no
fault or untruth at all in it. Secondly, to renounce our own reason, and to
rely upon the word, assuring our selves that it shall be performed, though it
be against the judgment of flesh and blood. Thirdly, to raise us from all
security of sinning, seeing all his judgments denounced against our offenses
shall (without our true repentance) assuredly fall upon us.

Doctrine. [shall be like] though the troubles of the righteous 7
be many; yet are not the elect to be discerned from the reprobate by
affliction. The reason is, because, they are both partakers thereof in this
life, and that often in most heavy manner. The use is, to teach us, not to
measure the love or displeasure of God unto any by their outward estate in this
life, seeing no man can know his own estate thereby. Eccle. 3. 21.

Doctrine. [thou wilt etc.] it greatly eases the godly in their afflictions,
to consider that their foes shall be destroyed. 8
Revel. 18. 20. The reason is, because, that always the overthrow of the
wicked, is the deliverance of the godly. The use is, to teach us, with
patience to bear the afflictions that are laid upon us by the hands of the
ungodly; seeing we shall not be always under their hands, but they shall
one day bear a far more grievous punishment.

Doctrine. [they shall be etc.] the punishments that Gods people sustain in
this life, are sure tokens that the wicked 9
shall be plagued, howsoever they escape for a time. The reason is, because.
God in justice cannot spare the wicked, seeing his judgments begin at his own
house. 1. Peter. 4. 17. etc. Romans 11. 21. The use is to teach us, by our own
afflictions to gather assurance that God will one day more thoroughlie visit
the sins of those that continue in their wickedness.

[Let all their wickedness come before thee] i. call thou to Verse 22.
thy remembrance all their sins, that their judgment may be accordingly [doe
unto them as thou have done unto me for all my transgressions] i. be thou (O
Lord) a tighteous Judge, and let not them escape unpunished, seeing thou have
plagued me for my sins, [for my sighs are many and my heart is heauie] I am
exeedingly affected with grief, and wonderfully cast down, and humbled.

Doctrine. [let all their etc.] it is lawful for the godly to 1
pray for the overthrow of the wicked. Psalm. 83. 9, etc. The reason is,
because, by their destruction God is glorified, and the Church preserved.
Objection. we are commanded to love our enemies. Answ. it is true, when their
enimitie concerns our selves in private; but when it is against the truth
and professors thereof, the love of Gods glory, and his truth compels us
to pray for their overthrow. The use is, to teach us, that the glory of God,
and preservation of his Church, ought to be dearer unto us, then our nearest
friends, Mat. 10. 37. yea then our own lives.

Doctrine. [for my sighes] the sufficient humiliation and deep mourning of
Gods children are forcible means to 2
move the Lord to pity them, and to relieve them, Isay. 66. 2. and 2. Cor. 7.
10. The reason is, because, first, God is full of compassion, and is much moved
with the miseries of his servants. Secondly, he smites us, that we may be
humbled thereby: which being wrought in us, he will withdraw his hand. The use
is, to teach us, first, to be humbled by our afflictions which we bear from
time to time. Secondly, to allege it unto the Lord as a reason to hear us,
which he will not reject but much regard if we be humbled aright.

The second Chapter.
HOw, etc.] i. in what wonderful manner and by what strange means, [hath the
Lord darkned] i. covered with blackness of all calamities, [the daughter of
Sion] i. his people whom he had established as mount Sion [in his wrath] i. in
his anger against them, for their sins [and has cast down from heauen] i.
overthrown from the highest degree of excellency [vnto the earth] i. to the
basest estate of misery [the beauty of Israel] i. the glorious estate wherein
he had planted his people Israel [and remembered not] i. had no regard nor
respect [vnto his footestoole] i. his temple and the exercises of religion
therein, which his own hand had appointed: the same phrase is used to the same
purpose, Psalm. 99. 5. and Psalm. 132. 7.

Doctrine. [How] it is our duties to strive with our selves 1
to be affected with the miseries of Gods people; for the reasons and use
hereof, see Chap. 1. verse. 1. doct. 2.

Doctrine. [how] the question shows, that the chastisementes and corrections
that God lays upon his Church, are 2
most wonderful, the causes whereof are past finding out of his wisest
children: this made the Prophet David to judge amiss hereof, Psalm. 73. 13.
14. and Habacuc to reason with the Lord Chap. 1. 13. The reason is, because,
first, the Lord will in his own servants, declare his anger against sin:
secondly, he sees afflictions the best means to frame them to his obedience:
thirdly, his ways are beyond the reach of flesh and blood. The use is, first,
to teach us to learn by the consideration hereof (as David did Psalm. 73. 16.
17) to reform our judgments, and not to justify and condemn any by that
befalls them in this life: Secondly, in greatest plagues to acknowledge the
righteousness of God, by reason of our sins deserving the same: Thirdly, not
to set our affections upon this life, fraught with so many miseries, but to
long for a better, and to rejoice in afflictions which do frame us thereunto.

Doctrine. [darkned the daughter of Sion, etc. and cast 3
down, etc.] God spares not to sinite his dearest children, when they sin
against him: the whole story of Israel in general and David in particular
gives example hereof. The reason is, first, that the Lord might declare
himself an adversary to sin in all men without partiality: Secondly, that
he might reduce his servants from running on headlong to hell with the wicked.
The use is to teach us, first, to magnify the righteousness of God, as in all
his works generally, so in the afflictions of his Church particularly:
secondly, not to persuade our selves to look for any earthly peace (seeing the
promises of this life are conditional) though we be the children of Abraham by
faith, but to prepare our selves for continual calamities one in the neck of
another.

Doctrine. [from heaven unto the earth] the higher that 4
God aduaunceth any, the greater is their punishment in the day of their
visitation for their sins, Deuteronomy. 28. thoroughout. The reason is, because,
first, to whom much is given of them must much be required: secondly,
according to the privileges abused, so is the sins of those that have them
greater and more in number. The use is to teach us, not to think our selves to
have any freedom to sin, because we be greater then others, but that our
punishments shall be the more intolerable, if our obedience answer not to our
prerogatives that we have above others.

Doctrine. [footestoole] the most beautiful thing in this world is base in
respect of the Majesty and glory of the 5
Lord. The reason is, because, he is infinitely glorious, and all things here
are most subject to corruption, and baseness. The use is to teach us, not to
rest on any thing that here we can enjoy; but to use them (according to Gods
commandment) as means to increase us in the fear, and direct us in the true
worship of his glorious majesty.

Doctrine. [footestoole] Gods anger against sin, moves 6
him to destroy the things that he commanded (for his own service) when they
are abused by men. The reason is, because, he cannot endure the dishonor of
his name thereby. The use is, to teach us, first, that sin (especially of
such as profess Gods name) is most odious and ougly in his sight: secondly, to
take heed that we use the outward means of Gods service with all reverence,
and profit rightly by them to the increase of all godliness in us, else shall
they be taken from us.

[The Lord has destroyed] i with his mighty hand from heaven he has
overthrown [and has not spared] i. showed Verse. 2.
no favor or mercy in it [all the habitations of Iaacob] i. all those goodly
dwellings that he had seated them in [he has thrown down in his wrath] i. in
his anger for sin he has laid even with the ground [all the strong holds
of the daughter of Iudah] i. all those towers, bulwarks and castles that the
people of the Jews had prepared for their defense [hee has cast them down to
the ground] i. not shaken them a little and so left them standing, but utterly
defaced and wasted them [he has polluted the kingdom and the princes thereof]
i. he has taken al privileges from them, and given the whole people of all
degrees into the hands of the wicked Nations to be profanely used at their
pleasure.

Doctrine. [the Lord has, etc.] It is the hand of God that takes away the
flourishing estate of a kingdom, Dan. 4. 29 1
The reason is, because, the power to do so great a thing is in his hands
alone. The cause that moves the Lord thereunto is, the sin of the Princes
and people thereof. Examples, Egypt, Achabs house, Iehu his race, whole Israel
and Judah; so is it in the flourishing of particular persons. The use is,
first, to declare unto us the omnipotent power of God, that we may tremble at
it, so did Daniel teach Nabuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 22. etc. Secondly, to teach us
the righteousness of God, that deals not like a tyrant but uprightly, that
we may honor him in all things; so did Job: 1. 21. etc. Thirdly, to let us see
the odiousness of sin, that causes God to ouerturne the most glorious
things in the world, and therefore that we must detest it, and war against it
all the days of our life.

Doctrine. [not spared] as God is full of mercy in his long 2
suffering, so is his anger unappeasable when it breaks out against the
sons of men for their sins, Ierem. 4. 4. Examples hereof, the old world,
Sodom and Gomorrah, Israel, and the seven Churches mentioned in the
Revelation. The reason is, because he uses not to execute his judgments till
no means of his mercy will prevail. The use is to teach us, that we despise
not his judgments, nor abuse his mercies, but tremble at the one, and be
drawn to well doing by the other.

Doctrine. [habitations] God depriueth us of a great blessing, 3
when he takes from us our dwelling places. The reason is, because of the
great commodities and contentment that come unto us thereby, when we enjoy them
peaceably; as every man's experience can teach him in particular. The use is to
teach us, first, to be humbled when God takes such a blessing from us:
Secondly, whilst we peaceably enjoy the same, to use it to the furtherance
of Gods glory, and to praise God daily for the comfortable use thereof.

Doctrine. [not spared] there is no assurance of worldly possessions 4
and peace, but in the favor of God. The reason is, because, first, he rules
and disposes al things at his pleasure: secondly, in his anger he uses to
overthrow these things. The use is, first, to reprove the vain and godless
opinion of them that think the greatest worldly safety to be, in being
furthest from zeal in religion: secondly, to teach us, first, to seek the
kingdom of God and his righteousness, so shall all other things go well with
us, Matthew. 6. 33.

Doctrine. [strong holds] God overthrows the greatest strength that man can
erect, even at his pleasure. The reason 5
is, because there is no strength but of him and from him. The use is to teach
us, never to trust in our own valor, but so to use all good means of our
defense, as still we rely upon the Lord for strength and success thereby.

Doctrine. [in his wrath] it is a mark of Gods wrath to be deprived of
strength, courage, or any other necessary gift, 6
when we stand in need of them. The reason is, because, it is a sign that his
hand is not with us to give us that blessing by them, which we looked for, or
heretofore have had in them. The use is, to teach us, in all things that we
take in hand to beg of God, both the thing it self, and also the means of
accomplishing the same.

Doctrine. [of the daughter of Iudah] It is the sin of the Church, that
causes the Lord to spoil the same of any 7
blessing that she has heretofore enjoyed. The reason is, because, in her
obedience he has promised to bless her, Deuteronomy. 28. 2. and in her disobedience,
to take his blessings from her, Deuteronomy. 28. 15. The use is to teach us, when we
are deprived of any blessing, not to fret against the wicked (Gods rods) that
are the instruments thereof: but to acknowledge our own sins, that caused
the Lord to set them on work to spoil us, and by repentance to seek
reconciliation with him, so shall we enjoy his blessings again, or otherwise
contentment.

Doctrine. [strong holdes] these being taken away in Gods anger teaches us
this doctrine. It is the good blessing of 8
God, to have a kingdom to have strong holds, munitions, etc. for a defense
against their enemies. The reason is, because they be the means that usually
he blesses to procure outward safety. The use is, to teach us, carefully to
prepare them against the time of trouble, yet never to rest in them, but to
depend upon Gods blessing alone.

Doctrine. [polluted] the more that God honors us 9
with his blessings, the greater shall be our dishonor, if we abuse them, when
he enters into judgment with us for the same: for the reasons, and use
hereof, see verse, 1. Doctr. 4.

[He has cut off in his fierce wrath] i. he has utterly taken Verse. 3.
away in his exceeding displeasure [all the horn of Israel] i. all the
strength and beauty of his people [he has drawn back his right hand] i. he
has withdrawn his power and assistance [from before the enemie] i. from
standing by us (as in former times) against our adversaries [and he burns in
Iaacob like a flame of fire] i. he does declare his displeasure among his
people, as clearly as a flame of fire that is easily discerned [he deuoureth
round about] i. in all places and corners his consuming hand appears.

Doctrine. [horne] Strength and honor are in the Lords 1
disposition, to be given, continued or taken away at his pleasure. The reason
is, because he is the author of all things. The use is, to teach us, whilst
we enjoy any part thereof, to acknowledge it to come from him, to honor him
therewithal, and to take patiently the remoouing thereof from us when it shall
please him.

Doctrine. [drawne backe] when Gods favor is toward us, it is our shield
against our enemies; but when he means 2
to punish us, he leaves us unto our selves: so dealt he often with Israel,
Judges 2. 14. The reason is, because, none can hurt us, whilst he that is the
strongest is on our sides; but when he is against us, we are of nostrength.
The use is, to teach us, above all things to pray continually, that above all
other crosses, he would never take his loving countenance from us.

Doctrine. [flame of fire, etc. round about] though Gods justice be severe
against sin in all men, yet is it most manifest 3
in his Church, having sinned against him. The reason is, because, first, all
men's eyes are most upon Gods Church. Secondly, God does declare himself more
in, and for his Church then all the world besides.

[He has bent his bow like an enemie] i. he has prepared Verse 4.
his armor as enemies do, that mean to destroy [hee is appointed with his
right hand as an enemie] i. he is ready with his power and strength as one that
professes enimity [and has slain all that was pleasant to the eye] i. he
has destroyed the young men, and all the flower of the people [in the
tabernacle of the daughter of Sion] i. in the midst of his people [he has
powered out his wrath like fire] i. he has abundantly and most vehemently
declared his heavy displeasure.

Doctrine. [he has etc.] Where God is angry, there is nothing 1
to be looked for but destruction, and ill success in all things. The reason
is, because, first, his power is no way to be matched. Secondly, his will is
made hot by the sin of the parties that anger him. The use is, to teach us,
first, always to walk in reverent obedience unto him, least we procure his
displeasure against us. Secondly, when any part of his anger breaks forth
against us, to seek to appease him by true repentance.

Doctrine. [his bow like] God punishes sin in his children in this world as
severely as if they were reprobates: 2
Examples hereof, Job, David, yea and whole Israel. The reason is, first, to
declare that he is not partial, but hates sin in those whom he most of all
loves. Secondly, that it may appear what great wrath remains for the
ungodly, 1. Pet. 4. 17. The use is, to teach us, first, to admire and praise
Gods righteousness. Secondly, to accept willingly his punishments laid upon
us, knowing it to be the lot of Gods people at all times.

Doctrine. [like an enemie] yet not one indeed. Doctrine. Though God show al
outward signs of enimitie against his 3
Church, yet is his love everlasting thereunto. The reason is, because he is no
chaungeling, but loves unto the end, John 13. 1. The use is, first, to declare
unto us Gods exceeding love to his Church. Secondly, to give us comfort in our
distresses; which is attained unto by recounting Gods former favors showed
unto us.

Doctrine. [and shew] Gods anger is neuerin vain, but effects punishment
upon them with whom he is angry. 4
The reason is, because all things serve to accomplish his will, and nothing can
resist it. The use is, to teach us, to take heed that we do not offend him,
seeing we cannot escape his punishing hand.

Doctrine. [pleasant] God regards not the most precious things that are
amongst the sons of men, in respect of declaring 5
his justice against sin. The reason is, because all things serve to his
glory, and to the clearing of his equity among his creatures. The use is, to
teach us, to regard well doing, and to shun the transgression of his laws
above al earthly things.

[The Lord was as an enemie] i. in all respects he declared Verse 5.
himself to deal extremely as enemies do [he has devoured Israel] i. he
has utterly made havoc of the Nation of his people [he has devoured all his
palaces] i. he has thrown down all those goodly buildings and dwelling places
that were throughout al Judea [he has destroyed his strong holds] i. he has
rased down al those bulwarks and fortresses that he had builded for defense
[and has increased in the daughter of Judah sorrow and heauinesse] i. he has
given his people just cause to increase in all kind of griefs, even adding
sorrow unto sorrow: for both the Hebrew words come from one root, and
signify one thing.

Doctrine. This often repeating of one thing in diverse 1
terms, teaches us this doctrine: It is a hard thing to persuade Gods people
rightly to judge of, and be affected with the afflictions that are upon them.
The reason is, because, first, the ways of God are high beyond the reach of
the sons of men. Secondly, we are naturally of a blind and dull disposition,
with much ado brought unto any good thing. The use is, to teach us, to labor
against our own perverseness, using all the means that God has appointed to
make us rightly affected with his plagues upon us, or upon others our brethren.

Doctrine. [deuoured Israel] God has no need of any 2
people, but all have need of him. The reason is, because, all are his, Psalm.
50. 12. and he is able of stones to raise up children unto Abraham, Math. 3. 9.
The use is, to teach us, never to flatter our selves as the Jews did, with,
the Law shall not depart from the Priest: for it is a vain confidence, and can
do us no good, but much harm.

Doctrine. [increased] God will increase his plagues upon 3
his children, where sin without repentance is increased.

The reason is, because, he punishes to the end to bring the^ to repentance,
whereunto if more easy stripes bring them not, he will lay on his stripes the
more heavily. The use is, to teach us, never to think our selves safe from
afflictions (when God begins to correct us) until we be soundly converted
from our sinful ways.

Doctrine. [sorrow] God gives many causes of sorrow when he punishes his
people. The reason is because, first, 4
he gives a token that he is displeased, which is cause of greatest grief
unto Gods children. Secondly, his punishments do usually cross our affections
in the things that they are most set upon. The use is, to teach us, first, to
labor with our selves, that we may be affected with the crosses that are
upon us. Secondly, to seek to him alone for succor in the time of our sorrow.

[For he has taken away the hedge thereof, as of a garden] i. he has laid it
open unto the spoil, by removing his protection Verse 6.
from it, so as it cannot but be spoiled as a garden that has no hedge [he
has destroyed the place of his assemblie] i. he has thrown down those
places, where his people were wont to meet for the exercises of religion, the
Temple and the Synagogues [The Lord utterly forgets the feasts and Sabbaths
in Sion] i. he seems to think upon no such thing, as to cause his people to
celebrate the appointed times dedicated to his service [and has despised in
the indignation of his wrath] i in his heavy displeasure he has declared
himself not to regard [the King and the Priest] i. the governors of the
Common wealth and teachers of the Church, which were not only a sign of his
favor, but also the means of bodily and spiritual comfort unto all the
people.

Doctrine. [hedge thereof] It is the Lord alone that gives safety unto his
church, or lays his people open to spoylers, 1
Isay. 5. 5, 6. Psalm. 80. 12, 13. The reason is, because, all power is in his
hands, to save or destroy at his pleasure, Dan. 5. 18, 19 The use is, to teach
us, to depend wholly upon him, seeking always when he shakes his rod over us,
reconciliation with him, by true and unfeigned repentance.

Doctrine. [place of his assemblies] The Temple being the 2
most holy place in the world and yet destroyed, teaches this doctrine; No
place on earth has any holiness in it, or promise of continuance, farther
then it is holily used. The reason is, because God regards no place further
then to serve to that holy use, whereunto he has appointed it. The use is, to
teach us, first, that the place makes not men holy or profane, but men the
place: this confuteth Iudaisme in tying holiness to the temple, and popery
thinking great holiness to be in this and that place. Secondly that when we
come to the places of Gods worship, there is nothing that can profit us
without the right use of them.

Doctrine. [place of, etc.] God is angry with his own ordinances, 3
and lays a curse upon them for the sins of those that abuse them, Psalm.
74. 5. 6. 7. and 78. 95. 60. 61. Isay 1. 13. and 6. 10. The reason is, because
God ordained these things to bring us to holiness, which if they do not, they
increase our wickedness, 2. Cor. 2. 15. 16. The use is, to teach us, first,
how monstrous sin is, that peruerteth so holy things from their proper use:
Secondly, to be careful above all things to use the exercises of religion
aright, and to take them in hand with trembling and fear.

Doctrine. [destroyed the place, etc. feasts and Sabbaoths] 4
The Church of God on earth, is not always visible and apparent to the eyes of
men, Revel. 12. 14. The reason is, because the exercises of Religion and places
thereof (which are the visible notes of a Church) are often overthrown, and
the Church dispersed. The use is, to teach us, first, that the Papists err in
making perpetual visibilitie a note of Gods true Church: secondly, not to
renounce the truth, though the Church be overthrown; for God will in his
good time restore her again, as ever he has done.

Doctrine. [despised] when God will afflict a people, he 5
will spoil them of the means of their peace and comfort, Isay ^. 1. to the
5. The reason is, because, usually we rest too much in the outward means. The
use is, to teach us, first, not to trust to any outward means but in God
alone, who blesses them to those that use them aright: Secondly, to be assured
that when he depriueth us of them, his decree is gone out against us to punish
us: thirdly, to labor by repentance to prevent the plagues threatened to come
upon us.

Doctrine. [King] It is a grievous plague of God for a people 6
to be spoiled of their rulers (especially being good ones) Judges 2. 7. 11.
and 19. 1. 2. and to enjoy them is a great blessing, Isay 49. 23. The reason
is, because, all desolation comes with the loss of them, Isay 3. 5. The use
is, to teach us, first, to praise God for his blessings that we have enjoyed
that way. Secondly, to pray daily for our Prince and rulers, that under them we
may lead a religious and peaceable life, 1. Tim. 2. 2.

Doctrine. [Priest] It is the heauiest judgment that Gods Church can have
falling upon her in this life, to be deprived 7
of that holy ministry which should build her in true religion, Psalm. 74. 9.
Mich. 2. 6. The reason is, because, the enjoying thereof brings such comfort,
as makes all other afflictions easy to be borne, Psalm. 84. 10. The use is,
to teach us, first, when we enjoy it, to rejoice therein especially, and praise
God for it. Secondly, if we want it, to seek it where it is to be had, 2.
Chron. 11. 16. etc. Thirdly, where we have it in corruption, to seek the
reformation thereof, every man in his place, keeping within the bounds of his
calling.

[The Lord has for saken his altar] he has rejected the Verse 7.
place of their daily sacrifices [he has abhorred his sanctuary] i. he cannot
endure the place where heretofore he was especially worshipped [he has given
the walls and her palaces into the hands of the enemie] i. he has given both
the strong and the delightful places over to them that hate his people, [they
have made a noyse] i. with great triumph they have showted and cried [in the
house of God] i in the place that was consecrated to Gods service, and
appointed only for Gods people to come into [as in the day of solemnitie] i.
even as in the solemn feasts when the people sounded out Gods praises.

Doctrine. [the Lord hath] This often repetition teaches 1
this doctrine. It is the duty of Gods people to labor their affections, that
they may be rightly touched with the loss of the cutward exercises of
religion. The reason is, because, first, naturally we are not moved with it,
thinking it a small matter. Secondly, it should be our greatest desire to enjoy
the same, Psalm. 27. 4. and 84. 10. and 132. 5. The use is, to teach us, first,
the corruption of our nature that makes so small account of so incomparable a
blessing. Secondly, to try our selves what measure of religion we have in us,
by the measure of desire we have to enjoy, and sorrow when we lose the
exercises of religion.

Doctrine. [abhorred his] When GOD is angry with his people, he will take from
them the outward signs of his favor. 2
The reason is, because he would use all means to humble them, and bring them
to repentance. The use is, to teach us, to acknowledge his hand against us for
our sins, whenever he takes any of his blessings from us, and to learn
thereby more true and sound repentance.

Doctrine. [he has giuen] When Gods people grow obstinate 3
in their sins, he spoyleth them of all those things wherein they trust. The
reason is, because he would take away all means of impenitencie. The us is, to
teach us, the more blessings that God takes from us, to assure our selves, that
we are the further from that we should be, and therefore to increase in true
repentance.

Doctrine. [sanctuary, etc. walles] When the Church is 4
spoiled, the Commonwealth cannot go free. The reason is, because the members
of the Church are always part of the Commonwealth. Secondly, the
Commonwealth has no promise from GOD to be well, but by the promise made to
the Church. The use is, to teach us, so careful as we are to have the Common
wealth flourish, to be as diligent to seek the prosperity of the Church.

Doctrine. [he has giuen] The wicked could never prevail 5
against the godly but that God gives them into their hands; for the reasons
and use hereof, see chap. 1. verse 5. doctr. 4.

Doctrine. [make a noyse] God gives the wicked (for the 6
sins of his people) occasion to blaspheme his name, and to deride his holy
ordinances. The reason is, that he may thereby provoke his servants unto a
detestation of their own sins, which gave occasion thereof. The use is, to
teach us, to be humbled and grieved, when we see or hear the rage of the
wicked, not only for that Gods name is dishououred, and his laws violated:
but also for that our disobedience has been a cause of their sins.

[The Lord has determined] i. decreed and appointed [to destroy the wall of
the daughter of Sion] i. to overthrow the Verse 8.
defense of Jerusalem [he stretched out a line] i. laid out in particular the
manner and certainty of her overthrow: so 2. Kin. 21. 13. Isay. 24. 11. [he
has not withdrawn his hand from destroying] i. he continues until he have
made a final destruction [he causes the rampart and the wall to mourne] i.
gives cause of mourning to the sencelesie creatures: a figurative speech [they
were destroyed together] i. by a sudden vehement destruction.

Doctrine. [generally] In that Jerusalem is destroyed as well as other places,
we learn this doctrine: No privilege 1
can free the impenitent sinners from the plagues that God means to bring
upon them, though they persuade themselves otherwise, Ierem. 7. 4. The reason
is, because he is righteous, and judges without respect of persons, Romans 2.
9. 11. 12. The use is, to teach us, never to stand upon our birth, friends,
riches, multitude, strength, or any other privilege whatsoever, to excuse or
defend us in our sins withal; for none of them shall shield us against Gods
mighty hand.

Doctrine. [determined] The ruins of kingdoms and strong cities come to pasle
only by the immutable decree of 2
God; and not by fortune, man's power, policy, or any other thing, Dan. 4. 22.
1. Sam. 15. 26. 28. The reason is, because, there is no power in any of his
creatures, but so far as he gives it thereunto. The use is, to teach us,
first, not to think our selves able to do any thing, but to crave the Lords
assistance, whether we be employed in the defense of our country, or in a
lawful quarrel against any foreign nation.

Doctrine [His Line] the Lord does both decree his judgments, and also
determine the measure of them, Dan. 4 29. 3
The reason is, because he deals justly in all things. The use is, to teach
us, patiently to endure those afflictions that God shall lay upon us at any
time, being assured of this, that he in wisdom disposes them, and will not
suffer them to grow in greatness or continuance beyond that which he sees
meet.

Doctrine. [wall to mourne] the dumb and senseless creatures do mourn
according to their kind, when we are punished 4
in them for our sins, Romans 8. 22. The reason is, because, they suffer things
contrary to their kind, by reason of our sins. The use is, to teach us, that
if we mourn not when we feel Gods hand upon us for our sins, we are more
blockish then the senseless creatures.

Doctrine. [rampart, etc.] the sin of men brings strongest 5
things to nothing, when God calls them to an account. Example hereof Babel,
Isay 13. 19. 20. The reason is, because nothing can withstand Gods justice,
which is set on work by sin, to destroy us. The use is, to teach us, first,
how horrible a thing sin is, that brings such confusion into the world:
Secondly, not to trust in any outward things be they never so strong.

Doctrine. [together] Gods hand prevails as easily against 6
the strongest and most, as the weakest and fewest. The reason is, because, all
human strength is nothing to him. The use is, to teach us, to tremble at his
mighty power, and to magnify him in the consideration thereof.

[Her gates are sunk to the ground] those strong gates that Verse 9.
should have kept out the enemy, are fallen down, or sunk into the bowels of
the earth, and thereby free passage into the City is given unto the
adversaries [he has destroyed and broken her barres] i. he has taken all
strength from the gates, that should have fortified them being shaken [her
Kings and her Princes are among the gentiles] i. the chief of her people are
constrained to live among the heathen that are enemies to religion [the law is
no more] they have no ordinary exercises of religion among them [neither do her
Prophets receive any vision from the Lord] they have no more extraordinary
reuclations, to tell them the will of God.

Doctrine. [gates barres] when God punishes his people, he will especially
destroy those things wherein they put most 1
confidence. The reason is, because, such confidence does usually keep us from
true humiliation and repentance. The use is, to teach us, to take heed of
growing secure, by trusting too much unto outward things: for if we do, God
will utterly deprive us of them.

Doctrine. [Kings] when God means thoroughly to afflict a people, he will
spoil them of the means of their peace 2
and comfort: for the reasons and use hereof, see verse 6. Doctrine 5.

Doctrine. [are among the gentiles] when God by punishments shows his anger
against a people, he specially plagueth 3
their Princes and Rulers. The reason is, because, usually their hands are
deepest in the sin; either in not ruling them aright, or neglecting to see
them well instructed; or else in giving them ill example. The use is, to teach
us, that God is righteous in his judgments, and spares not any in respect of
their persons.

Doctrine. [among the Gentiles] It is a grievous punishment 4
unto the godly to live with, or to serve them that are wicked, Psalm. 120. 4.
5. The reason is, because they shall see and hear many things that be just
cause of grief unto them. Secondly, they may not freely speak to the praise
of God without rebukes or skornes. The use is, to teach us, being free from
this plague, to praise God for it, or being afflicted with it, to cry to God
for the amendment of it.

Doctrine. [Law no more] It is a fearful judgment to have the ministry of
the word that heretofore we enjoyed, 5
taken away from us, Psalm. 74. 9. Mark* 6. 10. 11. The reason is, because, it
is the greatest means of comfort, and the want of it, the readiest way to the
decay of all religion in us. The use is, to teach us, above all things in this
life, to labor that we may have the continual benefit of it, whatsoever else
we have with it.

[The Elders of the daughter of Sion] i. the wisest and Verse 10.
grauest of the people [sit upon the ground and keep silence] i. are thrown
down to grow in sorrow thereby and utterly destitute of all counsel [they
have cast up dust upon their heads] i. they show the greatest signs of
amazedness and sorrow that can be devised [they have girded themselves with
sackecloth] i. they show by their attire how they are confounded and ashamed
[the virgins of Ierusalem] i. the daintiest and nicest of all the people, the
maidens [hang down their heads to the ground] i. they which usually look up
and do make much of their beauty, do now look down as though they were
ashamed of themselves.

Doctrine. [the Elders] the wisest of Gods servants are at their wits end, or
fall into despair if they be deprived of 1
their hope, in the promise of Gods assistance, Psalm. 119. 92. The reason is,
because, first, man's wisdom is not able to support us in troubles: Secondly,
if God be not with us in our distresses to comfort us, he is against us to
punish us, and then he being the strongest, must prevail. The use is, to teach
us, first, what an exceeding blessing it is, to have the Lords comfortable
presence with us in our troubles: Secondly, to show us our own weakness, if
he leave us to ourselves, that by the consideration thereof, we may be humbled.

Doctrine. [sit on the ground] bodily exercises do profit 2
to further lamentations in the day of heaviness, but are no part of Gods
service in themselves. The reason is, first, because God is a spirit, and his
worship must be spiritual, John 4. 24. etc. Secondly, God by his spirit
affirms such things not to profit in that kind, 1. Tim. 4. 8. The use is, to
teach us, by all outward actions to be led on to spiritual worship, else we
abuse them.

Doctrine. [keepe silence] the extremity of Gods judgments 3
do for the time ouer-whelme Gods dearest children, in the greatest measure of
grief that can be in this life, Psalm. 6. ^. and 22. 1. The reason is, because,
first, they are used to feel great comfort. Secondly, they cannot bear the
weight of Gods heavy hand, because of their weakness. The use is, to teach
us, first, not to condemn them that seem to be in a desperate case. Secondly,
never to despair, though we our selves fall into the heauiest condition that
may be.

Doctrine. [Virgins] The most dainty ones are made to 4
stoop when Gods hand is heavy upon them for their sins. The reason is,
because their daintiness cannot shield them from the cross, but rather makes
them the more unable to bear it, when it comes. The use is, to teach us, not
to delight too much in the profits or pleasures of this world when we enjoy
them, seeing they cannot help us in the day of trouble.

[Mine eyes do fail with teares] i. I weep in such abundance, that mine eyes
are consumed therewith [my bowels Verse 11.
are bemudded] i. see Chap. 1. verse. 20. [my liver is powered upon the earth] i.
mine inward parts are molten and fall from me, [for the destruction of the
daughter of my people] i. at the consideration of those miseries, of breakings
in pieces (for so the Hebrew word signifies) which the Church of God (my
brethren) do suffer [because the infants and the sucklings] i. all degrees
even to the tender babes [are overwhelmed in the streetes] i. are covered with
calamities in the sight of all men.

Doctrine. [mine eyes] The true Ministers of God do take 1
the miseries of the Church to heart, in the greatest measure: Examples hereof
are, Moses, the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles. The reason is, because,
first, God has given them charge over them, and made them shepherds to see to
them. Secondly, they know, or should know, best Gods anger for sin, and the
transgressions of the Church. Thirdly, they must give account for them that are
committed to their charge. Fourthly, they know how dear the Church is unto
God. The use is, to teach us, first, that good Ministers are an exceeding
blessing unto the Church, and ill ones the greatest curse that can be.
Secondly, the Ministers should have great knowledge in the Scriptures. Thirdly,
they should be most godly and religious above all others. Fourthly, the misery
of our age is great, which has so many in the places of Ministers, that either
know not their duty to their flocks, or regard nothing but the fleese to
feed their own bellies.

Doctrine. [faile with teares] in the Prophecy 9. 1. he was 2
amazed to foresee this, but could not weep, because the plague was not then
come: which teaches us this doctrine, The judgments of God do never
thoroughly affect us, till we feel them. The reason is, because, till it come,
we hope it may be altogether kept away. The use is, to teach us, first, how
hard our hearts be, that we may labor the more with them. Secondly, that
sharp afflictions are necessary for us, to make us the more pliable to Gods
will.

Doctrine. [faile] with continual lamentation, because 3
the plague was continual, teaching us this doctrine. Our sorrow,
humiliation, earnest prayer, and all other means of extraordinary calling
upon God, must increase in us, so long as Gods heavy hand is upon us. The
reason is, because God does it, first, to humble us thoroughly. Secondly, to
try our patience and hope in him. The use is, first, to reprove them that
think once or a little calling upon God sufficient. Secondly, to teach us not
to be weary of such exercises, (which fault by Satan's subtlety and our own
corruption does easily creep in upon us in such cases) but to continue
calling upon him, howsoever it go with us, Job. 13. 15. Luke 18. 1. etc.

Doctrine. [bowels bemudded] hearty sorrow for spiritual 4
miseries distempereth the whole body: so was it with David, Job, and Christ
himself. The reason is, because the body is (or should be) servant to the
soul. The use is, to teach us, that in our sorrows in affliction for sin,
we are far short from that we should be, until we come to this measure.

Doctrine. [liuer powered out] The sorrows of the soul (if 5
they be extreme) will easily consume the body. The reason is, because the
body receives his cheerfulness or heaviness from the disposition of the
soul. The use is, to teach us, so to labor against the hardness of heart, as
we be not overcome with the contrary, for Satan will use all his sleightes, to
have us in the one extremity or the other.

Doctrine. [for the destruction] a lively member is grieved 6
with the hurt of the body, or any member thereof. The reason is, because of
that fellow-feeling which the spirit of God unites his people one to another
withal. The use is, first, to reprove them that regard no more so that they
and theirs be safe, as being far from lively members: Secondly, to teach us,
to enquire after the estate of others, and mourn with them that are in misery,
so did that good Courtier Nehemiah. 1. 2. 4.

Doctrine. [daughter of my] the ministers of God should have a tender affection
to the members of the Church, as a 7
man has to his daughter. The reason is, because they are (or should be) their
spiritual fathers, begetting them (or at the least) nourishing them with the
word of truth in Christ Jesus, 1. Cor. 4. 15. 1. Pet. 1. 3. 4. The use is,
first, to reprove them (as being far from ministers fitted to that work) who
in a proud manner do disdain to use kindly the sheep of Christ Jesus.
Secondly, to teach all that be ministers to labor more and more with
themselves to be thus lovingly affected, which will appear by their diligence
in public teaching, and private persuasion unto knowledge and obedience.

Doctrine. [infants, etc. ouerwhelmed] there is no outward thing so much cause
of sorrow, as the miseries laid upon 8
our children in our sight. The reason is, because naturally we pity young
children more then others. The use is, to teach us, first, whenever any such
afflictions are upon us, to consider how detestable a thing sin is, which
causes the Lord to punish it in our tender young infants: Secondly, so
desirous as we are to seek the good of our Children in this life, to be so
careful to shun sin, and to walk in the obedience to Gods commandments,
Ier. 32. 39.

Doctrine. [in the streets] the punishments that God lays upon his children
are usually in the sight of others. The 9
reason is, because he will show his glory in all his works, John 9. 3. Luke
13. 3. 1. Cor. 10. 11. The use is to teach us, first, to profit by all the
punishments that we read of here, or see to be laid upon others. Secondly,
to persuade others to make profit of those afflictions which we our selves do
feel.

[They have said] i. the young children asked [to their mother] i. of their
mothers that should feed them [where is wheat Verse. 12.
and wine] i. our necessary food to refresh us [when they were ouerwhelmed]
i. thrown down with miseries [as the slain in the Citie] i. even as those
that by the sword have their life taken from them [while their soul powered out
it selfe] i. whilst their breath went out of their bodies, that the cause of
their death might be the more manifest [into their mothers bosome] i. as it
were giving them their lives again, seeing they yield them no food to
preserve them alive.

Doctrine. [where is] It is the greatest grief that can be, 1
to have them whom we would gladly pleasure, seek that at our hands which we
cannot help them unto. The reason is, because it crosses both our affections,
and theirs, who are dear unto us. The use is, to humble us, when it is our
share; because God shows us, that he is angry with us, in denying us power
to do that good which we would gladly do.

Doctrine. [when they were] when GOD would have us 2
profit by any work of his, he will let us see the true cause of it. The reason
is, because, else we are so dull and blind, that we cannot discern it
rightly. The use is, first, to mourn when we perceive our selves unable or un
willing to search out the works of the Lord: secondly, to ascribe all
punishments to his justice for sin, and all blessings to his mere mercy; so
shall we be sure to judge rightly in the general.

Doctrine. [mothers bosome] the grief that is seen with 3
the eye, is the heauiest unto us of all other things that fall upon our
friends. The reason is, because, the sight is the sharpest of the senses, and
carries things with deepest impression into the heart. The use is, to teach us,
when we behold the miseries of others, to be especially grieved therewithal.

Doctrine. When God means to humble us, he will use most effectual means to
bring it to pass. The reason is, because 4
he knows that our dullness and hardness of heart is not else mollified. The
use is, to declare unto us his exceeding love to us, that uses all the means
that he may, to do us good.

[What thing shall I take to witness for thee] i. what example Verse. 13.
may I set before thine eyes [what thing shall I compare to thee] i. where unto
shall I liken thee in this thy misery [O virgin daughter Sion] i. O people of
God most dear unto me, whose case I highly tender [that I may comfort thee]
i. that I may do thee good [for thy breach is great as the sea] i. thy
miseries are large, deep, and violent, for so is the breach, that the sea
makes into the banks thereof [who can heal thee] i. what means in the world
can do thee good? As if he should say, in all likelihood thou art in a
desperate case, past alhelp, being such a mirror of Gods heavy judgment, as
never was before thee.

Doctrine. [what thing] It is the greatest grief that can 1
be, to fall into a trouble that has not been laid upon others before. The
reason is, because it eases grief, to think that others have been in the
like case, whereas by the contrary it is aggrauated. The use is, to teach us,
first, in all our troubles to search out whether the godly have felt the like,
and to be comforted by it; this is usual in the scriptures: Secondly, though
we cannot find an example like ours; yet is it no cause of despair, seeing it
was the case of Gods people in this place.

Doctrine. [shall I] Gods ministers must be studious in the word, to find out
every thing that may fit the Churches 2
present condition, Isay. 504. Mat. 13. 52. The reason is, because the need of
the Church in general, and of each member in particular, is such, now for
doctrine, then for reprofe, otherwhile for instruction, and after that for
comfort, as (oftentimes) if the ministers lips do not preserve knowledge
presently to fit that turn, the opertunitie passes, and great harm comes
thereby. The use is, to teach us, first, that all ministers must be learned,
wise, and godly, else they cannot do this duty in any tolerable measure:
secondly, it is a duty of great weight and care to be a minister: and
therefore they that make insufficient ones, and those that accept of the
calling being not qualified thereunto, do commit a great sin against God,
and against his Church, and against their own souls.

Doctrine. [that I may comfort thee] and yet it was as heavy 3
a speech as could be uttered: whereby we learn two doctrines. First, hardest
speeches from the mouth of the minister, be often most profitable, yea even to
the afflicted, if they be not sufficiently humbled. The reason is, because, our
sins are like a festred sore, that needs sharp corrosiues, or like a
disease sticking fast in the parts of the body, that needs a strong
purgation. The use is, to teach us, that it is a necessary part of a ministers
office, to rake in the consciences and launch the depth of the hearts of his
hearers.

Doctrine. [that I may comfort thee] the second doctrine. 4
That minister loves us best, that deals most plainly with us. The reason
is, because plain reproof does us more good, (if we have grace to take it
aright) then smooth speeches can do. The use is, to teach us, to be contented
with such a ministry, yea to desire it, if we would be sound Christians.

Doctrine. [as the seoe] the visible estate of the Church of 5
God may come to be of a desperate condition, every way vexed more and more.
The reason is, because God uses to show his mighty power in delivering it from
such a straight. The use is, to teach us, not to be dismayed when it does come
to such an exigencie, but to learn to be humbled by it.

Doctrine. [who can heal thee] as if he should say, there is 6
no help for thee, but from God alone: doctrine, God often afflicts his
people, until they be brought to see evidently that there is no help for them,
but in him alone. The reason is, because else we ascribe some part of our
deliverance to the second causes. The use is to teach us, in any extremity,
never to rest upon men (howsoever we may use them as instruments) but upon God
alone.

Doctrine. [O virgin, etc.] In all our reprofes we must labor 7
to let it appear, that they proceed from a love in us, and a care of their
good, whom we do reprove. The reason is, because else shall we have no comfort
in it, if they hate us for it, nor they profit by it, though they take it well,
seeing they will judge it to come from malice. The use is, to teach us, before
we reprove, to examine our hearts, and to find them upright, or else to lay
our hands upon our mouths.

[Thy Prophets] i. those that profess to be thy guides and Verse 14.
instructours, upon whom thou have relied [haue looked out vain and unsavory
things for thee] i. things that have neither substance nor taste of goodness
in them: as for example, peace, and plenty, when God threatened them the
contrary, Ierem. 28. 2. [and they have not discovered thine iniquitie] i. they
have not plainly told thee of thy sins, and convinced thee of them [to turn
away thy captiuitie] i. to bring thee to repentance, that thou might have
prevented Gods judgments [but have looked out for thee] i. have solemnly (as
in the name of the Lord) taught thee [heauie prophecies of vain things] i.
matters hard for thee to bear, and yet such as shall do thee no good; such
was their persuasion to war against the Chaldeans to the uttermost [and
causes of banishment] i. the obedience whereunto was the readiest way to bring
you out of your land, and from all the blessings which you did there enjoy.

Doctrine. [Prophets] False teachers are as grievous a plague, as can be laid
upon a people. The reason is, because 1
they bring with them inevitable destruction, Matthew. 15. 14. in which respect
God commanded that they should dye the death, Deuteronomy. 13. 5. and 18. 20. they
are discerned by teaching things contrary to the revealed will of God, Matthew.
24. 11. 24. and 2. Pet. 2. 1. The use is, to teach us, first, that that people
is in a fearful case, which have such thrust upon them, and true Pastors
taken from them. Secondly, to try the spirits, 1. John 4. 1. which we cannot
do, except we be skillful in the word of God, which is the touchstone of this
trial. Thirdly, it is not sufficient that our teacher be a learned man, for he
may also be a false Prophet.

Doctrine. [thy] they that refuse to receive the true ministers, 2
God will give them over to be seduced by false teachers and to believe lies,
2. Chron. 36. 15. Pro. 1. 24. etc. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. 11. 12. The reason is,
because, it is Gods righteous judgment to punish disobedience, with that which
is embraced instead of his commandment, Romans 1. 28. The use is, to teach us,
first, that the great contempt of Gods word and true ministers in this land
(without exceeding repentance) must needs be punished with all kind of
illusions, as Popery, etc. which judgment we see to have gotten a great hand
already: Secondly, if we look to be freed from his judgment, that we yield
to the whole truth (so far as it is revealed unto us) both in judgment and
practice. Thirdly, that true teachers of Gods word being disgraced, are not to
be dismayed, though hyrelings and time-seruers be received in their steades,
seeing it was the lot of the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles.

Doctrine. [vaine and vnsauorie] It is a certain note of a false Prophet, to
speak such things in the name of the Lord, 3
as are untrue, or misalleadged to please the carnal desires of the people,
Iere. 14. 13. 14. 15. 23. throughout. The reason is, because whom God sends,
them he furnishes with the word of truth: but Satan puts a lying spirit in
the mouth of them that he stirs up to be seducers. The use is, to teach us,
to take heed we be not seduced by such: they are discerned by these and such
like speeches. All is well, we are the most reformed Church that was since the
Apostles times; many are too precise; me^ may take liberty of pastimes on the
Lords Sabbath; it is a small fault or none to swear by faith, etc. all men
that will profess in name to be Christians, are to be received unto the
Sacraments, and such like.

Doctrine. [not discouered] It is not sufficient for a true minister, not to
flatter, etc. but he must also discover the peoples 4
sins unto them, by particular ripping up of sin, and applying it to the
consciences of his hearers, so did the true teachers ever, Ezech. 13. 4. and 1.
Kings 18. 18. Matthew. 3. 7. Luke 3. 8. etc. Matthew. 14. 4. The reason is,
because, if the doctrine be only general, men will misapplie it, and always
turn it upon others, saying, he touched such a man, and such a man to day,
etc. The use is, first, to reprove those teachers that do not deal sharply,
either for fear of displeasure, or because themselves are some way infamously
guilty. Secondly, to reprove those hearers, as men not led by the spirit of
God, that cannot endure particular reproof, but will set themselves against
the reproouers, vexing them by all means.

Doctrine. [to turn away] the only way to avoid Gods 5
plagues, is gladly to suffer our selves bitterly to be reproved by Gods
ministers. The reason is, because it is the means that God has appointed to
bring us to the sight of our sins, and so to true repentance. The use is, to
teach us, first, that they who cannot endure this course, can look for nothing
but Gods heavy hand, to be every way stretched out against them: Secondly, if
we look for Gods favor, to use all means that we may have such teachers.

Doctrine. [causes of banishment] the falsehood that is 6
taught by false Prophets, and believed by a seduced people, is the cause of
all Gods punishments that light upon them. The reason is, because the teaching
and believing of error, is the fountain of all those sins, for which God
usually punishes the sons of men. The use is, first, to reprove the false
opinion of the wicked, that charge true ministers and their doctrine to be
cause hereof, 1. King. 18. 17. etc. Secondly, to teach us, so desirous as we
are to escape Gods judgments, to be so careful to teach, believe, and live
according to the truth of God.

[All that pass by the way] i. all sorts of infidels and enemies Verse 15.
[clap their hands at thee] i. make a wonderment to behold thee [they hiss and
wagge the head upon the daughter of Ierusalem] i. they scorn and deride the
people of God, 1. Kings 9. 8. and 2. Kings 19. 21. [saying, is this the City
that men call the perfection of beautie] i. is this, whose walls are broken
down, whose houses are burned, whose people are slain and famished, that
City that was said to want nothing that might increase her renown [and the joy
of the whole earth] i. where nothing was wanting that might delight any man.

Doctrine. [all that pass by] God is wont to whippe his 1
children for their sins, by the multitude of unbelievers that hate the
truth, I say 10. 5. 6. Iere. 25. 9. Exodus 1. 13. 14. Examples hereof are many
in all ages. The reason is, because, first, they will not do that work of God
negligently, and so shall we be the more affected with it, and the better
humbled: Secondly, God will thereby keep his people from familiarity with the
wicked: Thirdly, that his love to us may appear, in burning the rod upon our
repentance. The use is, to teach us, first, that it is the lot of the godly to
be punished by the wicked: so was Christ, so were the Prophets, and Apostles,
the^ let vs'look for it, and not murmur at it, nor shrink from the truth for
it: secondly, that sin is a most ougly thing in Gods sight, that causes him to
deal so severely with his dearest children: thirdly, that we take heed of
being in league with the wicked, for they are our enemies and must scourge us.

Doctrine. [clappe their hands] it is a property of a wicked heart, to insult
over the distressed, whom we should pity 2
and relieuc, Psalm. 35. 15. etc. and 79. 4. so did Nabal, 1. Sam. 25. 10. 11.
so did Shemi 2. Sam 16. 7. 8. so dealt they with Christ, Matthew. 27. 39. etc.
The reason is, because they do not think that ever the like can fall upon
themselves. The use is, to teach us, first, the vileness of our nature, that
has no more remorse in it toward them in misery: Secondly, to look for no
better from the hands of profane persons: thirdly, to praise God that gives a
pitiful heart unto his servants, even toward their enemies, Psalm. 35. 13. 14.

Doctrine. [they hiss and wagge, etc. saying] the wicked seeing 3
the godly afflicted, take occasion thereby to blaspheme God and his truth,
Psalm. 74. 10. 18. and 2. Kings 18. 30. 35. and 19. 1. 2. etc. The reason is,
because they think, first, that they shall never flourish again: secondly,
that they are the greatest sinners, because they are most punished. The use is,
to teach us, first, not to condemn men, or their religion, because of their
afflictions. Secondly, that seeing the wicked do usually revile the Lord and
his truth, when they abuse us, therefore let us patiently bear it, knowing
that he, whose cause it is, will revenge it.

Doctrine. [perfection of beauty and ioy] there only is true joy and
excellency, where Gods truth is rightly preached, 4
and his name called upon, Psalm. 50. 2. Isay. 23. Ezech. 47. 8. 9. 12. The
reason is, because they are the usual signs of Gods favorable presence. The
use is, to teach us, first, to take heed that we be not drawn from the use of
these things for love of peace, riches, liberty, or life it self; seeing they
be the chief, and all other nothing without them. Secondly, to bewail the
loss thereof whenever we be deprived of them, above the loss of any other
thing in this life.

[All thine enemies] i. all sorts of people that hate thee, [doe open their
mouth against thee] i. speak largely and freely Verse 16.
to thy dishonhur [they hiss and gnash their teeth] i. they mock and disdain
thee [saying, we have devoured it] i. we have now made the Jews past ever
being a Nation again, [certainely, this is the day we looked for] i. we have
long hoped and labored to see this day [we have found and seen it] i. we have
now at the length attained unto it.

Doctrine. [all thine enemies] the wicked will join together 1
to vex the godly, though otherwise they be enemies one to another, Psalm. 2.
2. Examples hereof Luke 23. 12. The reason is, because they hate nothing,
neither any persons so much, as the truth and the professors thereof. The use
is, to teach us, first, that the greatest part of men shall always be against
the godly, and therefore let us not be carried with the multitude: Secondly,
not to trust the friendship of the wicked.

Doctrine. [opened their mouth] it is a special property of the wicked, to
rail at the godly, Matthew. 5. 11. 12. 2
The reason is alleged by our Savior Christ, Matthew. 12. 34. The use is, to
teach us, how to discern of a wicked man, and to take his reuilings patiently:
Secondly, to take heed that we be not tainted with so vile a fault, as God
has made a mark of a wicked man.

Doctrine. [we have devoured, etc.] the wicked be often 3
so inflamed with malice against the godly, as nothing will satisfy them but
their blood, Pro. 1. 11. 16. etc. Psalm. 79. 2. 3. The reason is, because they
think to have rest when they are dead, which they cannot have whilst they see
them live, Esth. 3. 5. etc. The use is, to teach us, first, that bloody
cruelty being the property of the wicked, we must labor to be far from that
disposition: Secondly, to look for all mischief from the wicked that they can
accomplish against us.

Doctrine. [this is the day] in that once they did bear 4
great show of friendship to them, and now so cruelly deal with them, we
learn this doctrine. Though the wicked do always hate the godly, yet they
will often dissemble friendship, and show forth their malice only, when they
have opportunity thereunto, Psalm. 5. 9. Amos. 1. 9. The reason is, because
they are wise in their own generation, and can wait their best advantage. The
use is, to teach us, first, never to trust the fair show of a profane man,
but so to behave our selves, as we be still aware of him: Secondly, that it is
necessary the godly should now and then fall into troubles, that their
dissembling friends may be discovered.

[The Lord has done that which he had purposed] i. the Verse 17.
Lord has brought to pass all that he had decreed to do unto thee [hee has
fulfilled his worde] i. accomplished his threatenings [that he had commanded of
old time] i. which he had commanded his Prophets to teach, and his whole
Church to make use of, as namely, Leuit. 26. 24. [hee has thrown down and
not spared] i. every where overthrown and showed no favor in it [he has
caused thine enemy to rejoice over thee] i. satisfied their desire upon thee to
the full, [and set up the horn of thine aduersaries] i. given them that hate
thee great strength and might.

Doctrine. [the Lord has done] i. It is the hand of GOD 1
that works all the afflictions which fall upon his Church. This doctrine we
had often before, the books of Joshua, Judges and Kings are full of examples
of it. The reason is, because, first, he is almighty, and does all things.
Secondly, he loves his people, and lets nothing betide them, but that which
seems good unto him. Thirdly, he has the commandment of all creatures. The
use is, to teach us, first, to learn to fear, and obey him especially, in
whose favor nothing can hurt us. Secondly, that in all afflictions we look
unto him that strikes, and examine our selves what cause we have given him.
Thirdly, to seek reconciliation with him by true repentance, so shall the
means that are against us, be employed for us.

Doctrine. [that he purposed] Every thing that the Lord 2
determines shall stand, and come to pass, whosoever be against it. The
reason is, because he is so powerful and constant, that nothing can alter him,
or dissuade him. Objection: How is he then said so often to repent? Answer,
that is not in his purposes, but in the performance of his promises, and his
threatenings, which are always uttered with condition. The use is, to teach us,
first, that his promises and his favorable assistance (we believing therein)
shall always stand by us, to assist us in all distresses. Secondly, that the
judgments threatened in the word against the impenitent, shall certainly light
upon them.

Doctrine. [fulfilled his word] i. Gods purposes (so far as they are for us
to know) are revealed in the word, and no 3
where else to be sought. The reason is, because it is called his will,
according whereunto if any man speak not, it is because there is no truth in
him. The use is, first, to reprove them that say, who can tell Gods will?
Secondly, to teach us, with all diligence to search the Scriptures, and to rest
only thereupon, seeing it is the certain will of God.

Doctrine. [his word] So much of Gods purposes as men may take knowledge of, or
enquire after, is revealed in the 4
written word of GOD. The reason is, because the secret things belong unto the
Lord (as the says by Moses, Deuteronomy.) and those that be revealed to us and our
children. The use is, first, to reprove the Anabaptists that look for
revelations besides the word. Secondly, to teach us, that we never purpose
well, but when we have our warrant from the word.

Doctrine. [commaunded] God sets nothing down in 5
his word, but that he will have taught by his Ministers, and learned by his
people. The reason is, because, whatsoever is written, is written for our
learning, Romans 15. 4. The use is, to teach us, that no part of the Scripture is
needless to be known, or a story only and no more to be made of it, but
of necessary and profitable use to every particular Christian.

Doctrine. [of oldtime] GOD often deferreth the performance 6
of his promises, and threatenings, till they seem either to be forgotten, or
in reason never like to come to pass, and yet they are accomplished in their
time. The reason is, because, first, he will thereby try the constancy and
patience of his children. Secondly, that he might suffer with long patience the
vessels ordained to destruction, Romans 9. 22. The use is, to teach us, neither
to despair of the promises, nor think the threatenings shall never be
accomplished, but to make as certain account of them, as if they were present,
seeing nothing thereof shall fall to the ground.

Doctrine. [throwne down and not spared] as God is full of 7
mercy in his long suffering: so is his anger unappeasable, when it breaks
out against the sons of men for their sins: for the reasons and use hereof,
see verse. 2. Doct. 2.

Doctrine. [he has caused the enemie] The adversaries of 8
Gods children can do nothing against them, till God arm them thereunto: for
the reasons and use hereof, see Chap. 1. verse. 5. Doct. 4.

Doctrine. [reioyce] It is the property of the wicked, to 9
triumph exceedingly, when they have any hand against the godly: for the
reasons and use hereof, see verse. 15. Doct. 2.

Doctrine. [set vp] GOD often suppresseth the godly in 10
this life, and aduaunceth the wicked: for the reasons and use hereof, see
Chap. 1. verse 5. doct. 2.

[Their heart cries against the Lorde] i. they set their Verse 18.
whole power to devise blasphemy against God; for so it must be translated,
and interpreted, referring it to the adversaries, and making it a reason to
cause the Church to pray, in hope to be heard: see the Anyticall table [O wall]
i. O all people within the wall; a figurative speech [of the daughter of Sion]
i. the Children of Gods Church [Let tears run down like ariuer day and
night] i. weep continually, in great abundance [take thee no rest] i. give not
over [neither let the apple of thine eye cease] i. Let thine eyes never stay
from sending out tears.

Doctrine. [against the Lord] whatsoever the wicked do 1
against the godly, it is done indeed against the Lord himself, Matthew. 25. 40.
Acts 9. 4. The reason is, because, first, God esteems them as the apple of
his eye, Zacha. 2. 8. being one with him in Christ, John 17. 20. Secondly, the
wicked do all of hatred to our religion, and not for our sins. Thirdly, they
are set on work in desire to satisfy their own affections, to the exceeding
breach of Gods laws. The use is, to teach us, first, that they shall be sure
not to prosper: so it was said and done in the like case, 2. Kings 19. 32. well
it may be that they shall prevail, till our sins be thoroughly punished, but
no longer: Secondly, to pray fervently for patience, and to hope for
deliverance in Gods good time.

Doctrine. [O wall] in speaking to the wall when he means to speak to them,
we learn this doctrine. The senseless 2
creatures are often more moved, when God shows his anger, then we are. The
reason is, because, first, there is no corruption in them, but by our sins:
secondly, we are made by sin more blockish then any creature besides. The
use is, to teach us, first, to be ashamed, and humbled, that are so untoward:
secondly, to assure our selves that no excuse will serve, seeing the dumb and
senseless creatures shall bear witness against us, Isay 1. 2. Deuteronomy. 32. 1.
Mich. 6. 1. 2. etc. Thirdly, to take great pains with our selves, to labor
our affections to goodness; otherwise we shall profit but a little.

Doctrine. [wall] when the adversaries impugn the truth, all the members of
the Church ought to cry unto God earnestly. 3
The reason is, because, Gods glory ought to be dear unto all: Secondly, it
concerns all that look for any portion in the truth: Thirdly, the Spirit
that gives sympathy to every member of the body, and to all between them
and the head, persuades and directs thereunto. The use is, to teach us, to
take to heart the case of the whole Church more, then our own, and Gods glory
most of all, so did Moses Exodus 32. 32. and Paul Romans 9. 3. etc.

Doctrine. [let teares] grievous affliction ought to bring 4
us to exceeding sorrow for sin. The reason is, because grievous punishments
do argue the heynousnes of our offenses. The use is, to teach us, the more we
are punished, the more earnestly to labor with our own hearts to increase
lamentation in them.

Doctrine. [no rest] we must not be weary of using the 5
means of continual repentance. The reason is, because we do sin
continually. The use is, to teach us, that true repentance stands not in a
fit of sorrow or prayer, and so an end: but in a continual performance of
those duties, every day in better manner then other.

Doctrine. [neither let] he that will do his duty in Gods 6
service aright, must not give place to his own affections. The reason is,
because they must be subdued in spiritual exercises, else they either taint,
or wholly defile all that is taken in hand. The use is, to teach us, to try
our selves how much we have profited in godliness, by examining what rule we
have over our affections.

[Arise, cry in the night] i. when others sleep, declare and Verse 19.
show forth thy lamentations [in the beginning of the watches] i. in the quiet
of the night, when men are in a deep sleep, that so thou may have the less
disturbance [power out thine heart like water before the face of the Lord] i.
utter unto the Lord thine whole heart in greatest abundance [lift up thine
hands toward him] i. declare by all signs thy desire to be heard [for the
life of thy young children] i. to see if he will spare thy tender babes [that
are overwhelmed with hunger in the corners of all thy streetes] i. that are
starued and so dye in every place of the City.

Doctrine. [night etc. watches] we must use all the means we may, to fit us to
prayer, and to help us to continue in it 1
without disturbance. The reason is, because else we perform it very
untowardly, such is the difficulty of it, and our corruption. The use is, to
teach us, not to enter rashly upon so high an action, but with all
circumspection and watchfulness over our own corruptions, and Satan's
sleights.

Doctrine. [heart] Our prayers must be fervent, or they will not be regarded.
The reason is, because, God is of such 2
majesty, as he looks for all earnestness in our petitions. The use is,
first, to reprove the common manner of praying with lip labor only, as a
matter highly offensive in the sight of the Lord. Secondly, it teaches us
never to undertake that great action, but with all careful preparation and
diligent attention unto it.

Doctrine. [young children] in that one of the miseries, 3
which is most patheticall, is named, we learn this doctrine. Gods Ministers
must use the most forcible reasons that can be devised, to persuade unto
godliness. The reason is, because all the means that can be used, are scarce
sufficient to persuade us, such is our dullness. The use is, to teach us, that
Ministers ought to be men of great skill, and dexterity in persuading, else
they shall do little good.

[Behold O Lord and consider to whom thou have done this] Verse 20.
i. O Lord regard thoroughly our great miseries, and weigh with thy self that
thou have not done thus to the heathen that know not thy name, but to thine
own people [shall the women] i. shall the most compassionate, and the most
quezie stomached [eate their fruite] i. feed upon their own children
[children of a span long] i. being most tender and little, [shall the Priest
and the Prophet] i. the ordinary Ministers, and those that are
extraordinarily raised up by thine own hand [be slain in the Sanctuary of
the Lord] i. be killed in that place dedicated to holy uses, where they do
dispense thine own ordinances?

Doctrine. [O Lord] they were in a desperate case, and yet pray for help,
whereby we learn this doctrine. The only 1
way of remedy in our greatest miseries, is to call upon GOD in fervent
prayer. The reason is, because, first, it declares that we are humbled, and
our pride broken, in confessing no power to be in our selves, and seeking
help else where. Secondly, he is of greatest power, and none else can help us.
Thirdly, he will have all the glory of our deliverance, Psalm. 50. 15. The use
is, first, to reprove many sorts of offenders, as Atheists, that do not
acknowledge Gods hand in their miseries; Idolaters, that seek help of others,
then God himself; Infidels, that seek to Sorcerers or Witches; those that
rely so much upon men, and those that pray coldly or carelessly. Secondly,
that we must not give over prayer, though our caseseemeth most desperate, but
be the more earnest therein.

Doctrine. [behold and consider] by this vehement kind of speech we learn
this doctrine: In right prayer unto God, 2
the frame of our words must be according to our affection. The reason is,
because, the heart chiefly does pray, and sends out words according to the
abundance of it, else is there hypocrisy. The use is, to teach us, first, that
vehement words in ordinary prayer is vain, and not in due time. Secondly, that
dullness of affection in ordinary prayer or lip labor at any time, is a great
fault, seeing the words must be according to the heart. Thirdly, to labor our
affections before we begin, and in the action of prayer, that the mouth may
speak from the abundance of the heart, and therefore to take heed of using a
set prayer too much, lest it grow to a mere liplabour.

Doctrine. [to whom] The chiefest reason to move the Lord 3
to pity us, is the remembrance of his covenant of mercy in Christ Jesus. The
reason is, because it is the ground of our faith, without the benefit whereof
we are enemies to God, and he to us. The use is, to teach us, to labor to
approve our selves the children of God, (by professing Christ aright, believing
steadfastly in him, and living as becomes the members of his body) else are
our prayers abominable in his sight.

Doctrine. [shall the women eate] Gods wrath ouerturneth 4
the course of nature in the^ against whom it is bent. The reason is, because
it brings his curse which ouerturneth all, as it did man, woman, earth,
serpent, etc. Genesis 3. The use is, to teach us, first, the horror of sin, and
fearfulness of Gods wrath upon it: Secondly, to pray to God never to give us
over to our hearts lusts, which is the heauiest judgment that can befall us.

Doctrine. [children] there is sufficient cause and matter 5
in all the infants of Gods people, why God should in his justice destroy them.
The reason is, because they are conceived and borne in sin, Psalm 51. 5. The
use is, to teach us, first, what cause we have to be humbled, that are
infinitely more sinful then infants: Secondly, to magnify Gods exceeding
mercy that (notwithstanding our manifold sins) does not destroy us.

Doctrine. [shall the Priest, etc.] Cruelty exercised by the 6
hands of the wicked upon children and ministers, is a special means to move
God to hear us, when we pray for them. The reason is, because he has promised
special protection unto them, and threatened severely to revenge their wrongs.
The use is, to teach us, especially to take heed that we do them no harm, but
do them what good we can.

Doctrine. [in the sanctuarie] there is no Privilege of place 7
that can free us from punishment, when we sin against the Lord. The reason
is, because, no place has freedom to sin in it: Secondly, no place had ever
any privileges promised to it, but upon condition of obedience. The use is,
first, to reprove the Papists, that think Gods promises tied unto Rome,
notwithstanding the disobedience and rebellion of them that dwell therein:
secondly, to teach us, never to cover our sins under the pretense of any
privilege; for it will not serve to keep us from Gods hand, in the day of his
anger.

[The young and the old lay on the ground in the streetes] i. Verse. 21.
all, of all conditions, lay slain in the open places [my virgins and my young
men are fallen by the sworde] i. those that men are most loath to kill, and
those that are strongest to defend themselves, are cruelly killed [thou have
slain in the day of thy wrath] i. thou have set thy self to destroy, in
exceeding measure when thou wast angry [thou have killed and not spared] i.
thou have made havoc of thy people, and showed no manner of pity.

Doctrine. [young and olde] when God punisherh a people 1
for sin, he spares neither age nor sex. The reason is, because, first,
usually they are first incorrigible, as was this people the Jews, 2. Chron.
36. 16. 17. etc. Secondly, God respects no persons, Romans 2. 11. 12. Job. 34.
19. The use is, to teach us, that seeing no excuse, either of ignorance, youth,
age, birth, or any such privilege will serve our turn, therefore we should
seriously and without delay turn unto the Lord.

Doctrine. [in the streetes] it is a sign of Gods anger upon 2
a people, when they want decent burial, Psalm. 79. 3. The reason is, because
it is a good blessing of God to have it, and the godly have carefully sought
it. Gen 23. 4. and 49. 29. Objection. How is it a blessing, seeing the godly
often want it, as Revel. 11. 8. 9 etc. Answer. It is a temporal blessing,
which God in his anger for sin denying to his people, counteruaileth with a
spiritual blessing of greater value.

Doctrine. [my virgins] the wicked will do most barbarous 3
things, when God bridleth them not. The reason is, because Satan does often
bring them to be past natural affection, Romans 1. 30. The use is, to teach us,
if we desire not to be annoyed by the ungodly, to pray unto the Lord that he
would restrain their rage.

Doctrine. [not spared] as God is full of mercy in his long 4
suffering, so is his anger unappeasable when it breaks out against the
sons of men: for the reason, and use hereof, see verse. 2. Doct. 2.

[Thou have called as in a solemn feast] i. Thou have from Verse 22.
all places, in great abundance (as people are called to some great assembly)
called together at once against me [my terrors round about me] i. my griefs
and fears are on every side [so that in the day of the Lords wrath none
escaped nor remained] i. when God showed his anger upon me, all were destroyed
[those that I have nourished and brought vp] i. my tender children that I have
cared for, from the womb [hath mine enemy consumed] i. are cruelly destroyed
by such as hate me, and therefore showed no pity upon them.

Doctrine. [thou have called] God raises up the wickedest, and imployeth them
to punish his own servants, when they 1
sin, Isay 5. 26. 8. 7. The reason is, because they are the rods that God*
usually corrects his children withal. Objection. Does God then raise up
their malice? Answer. not as it is wicked, but as it is an earnest affection,
which is good as it is from God, but most evil in them. The use is, to teach
us, to fear the Lord, and walk carefully in his ways, least he raise the
wicked against us to consume us.

Doctrine. [none escaped] none can escape Gods punishments, 2
whom he means to punish. The reason is, because his power and mighty hand
is eueiy where, Psalm. 139. 7. etc. The use is, to teach us, with all reverence
and fear to walk humbly before him, that we may have his favorable
protection to shield us.

Doctrine. [those that have, etc.] the children of impenitent sinners, are
often taken away, and prosper not to their 2
comfort. The reason is, because in Gods displeasure all things are accursed
unto us, Deuteronomy. 28. 15. etc. The use is, to teach us, in all things that we take
in hand, and wherein we desire to have comfort, to pray always unto the Lord
to bless them unto us.

The third Chapter.
I Am the man] i. I the Church of GOD being one body, am like unto a man; for
here the Verse. 1.
Prophet changes, from the person of a woman (as before) to the person of a
man; and speaks not of himself alone, but of the whole Church under the
person of one man [that has seen affliction] i. that has had experience of
all sorts of troubles [in the rod of his indignation] i. whilst he (to wit
the Lord) corrected me with his rod, that his exceeding anger against me for
my sins, caused him to lay upon me.

Doctrine. [the man] the Church and children of God, are 1
the most subject unto affliction of all other people. Examples hereof are the
Israelites in general, Iaacob, Moses, Job, David: Christ himself in
particular. The reason is, because, first, God will not have them in love with
this world: Secondly, Satan and the wicked bear an unappeasable malice
against them: Thirdly, they are thereby made fittest to serve God and obey his
laws, Psalm. 119. 67. The use is, to teach us, first, not to look for any
other condition, if we desire soundly to continue in the service of God, Luke
14. 27. else afflictions when they come, prove either intolerable unto us, or
cause us to fall away: Secondly, to esteem afflictions not a note of infamy,
but rather a special mark of Gods favor in his Children.

Doctrine. [I have seen, etc.] the whole people speaking as one man, teaches
us this doctrine. Every member of the 2
Church of God, has his portion in afflictions, one way or other, 2. Tim. 3.
12. for either he shall be crossed in his wife, children, kindred, or outward
estate; or else in his mind, by grievous temptations; experience of all
estates and ages does show it to be so. The reason is, because, first, every
one has need thereof: Secondly, it makes them conformable unto their head
Christ Jesus, Phil. 3. 4. 5. The use is, first, to confute their opinion that
persuade themselves, though others suffer, yet they may escape. Secondly, to
teach us, that we can no way escape afflictions, except we renounce the true
profession of religion.

Doctrine. [in the rod of his] the godly (when their 3
judgment is upright) do always acknowleege Gods hand the principal agent
in their punishment. The reason is, because they know him to have all power in
his hand. The use is, to teach us, first, in all things to glorify the Lord,
so did Job. 1. 21. etc. Secondly, to take our troubles patiently, seeing they
proceed from him that is Almighty, and loves us.

Doctrine. [indignation] God does not use to afflict his people, but when
their sins give just matter for his anger 4
to work upon. The reason is, because he is just and punishes none unjustly.
The use is, to teach us, first, in all our afflictions, to acknowledge our
sins to be the cause thereof. Secondly, to labor the reformation of our
sins, if we look to be rid of our troubles.

[He has let me] i. he has by his power drawn me [and Verse 2.
caused me to goe] i. enforced me to enter [into darkenesse] into great and
grievous troubles, which is a condition subject to error, if God support us
not especially [and not into light] i. not into prosperity or flourishing
estate which heretofore I have enjoyed.

Doctrine. [Led and caused me, etc.] Afflictions are against the natural
desires of the godly. The reason is, because they 1
are bitter to flesh and blood; whereas naturally we desire the things that
delight flesh and blood. The use is, to teach us, first, the cause why
afflictions are so grievous unto us, because they cross our affections:
Secondly, God does it, least we should be too much in love with the world.

Doctrine. [darkenesse] afflictions are both grievous and 2
dangerous unto the godly, except the Lord do specially assist them. The
reason is, because, first, they remove worldly delights from us: Secondly,
they bring many sorrows upon us: Thirdly, we are quickly very weary therewith:
Fourthly, we are most weak in them, and utterly unable to stand under them.
The use is, to teach us, first, that we are not to be stoicall, or unaffected
with troubles when they are upon us: Secondly, to be most careful to seek to
God, and use all good means that we may be able to stand firm in the day of
trial.

Doctrine. [not into light] the consideration of those blessings 3
which we have lost, is a special mean to affect us with the cross, when it
is upon us. The reason is, because we esteem more highly of them when they are
gone, and we feel the contrary, then when we had them. The use is, to teach
us, first, to be the more sorry for our sins that caused such an alteration:
Secondly, to be the more earnest to desire and to pray to be restored into our
former good estate again.

[Onely he is turned against me] i. he sets all his power Verse 3.
against me, and none else [he turns his hand all the day] i. he sets his
strokes to light upon me continually.

Doctrine. [Onely] God punishes (in comparison) none 1
in this life, save his servants only. The reason is, because, first, he
loves them, and will not let them go on in sin: Secondly, eternal
punishments are prepared for the wicked, therefore are they the less punished
here. The use is, to teach us, first, in the multitude and the greatness of
afflictions, to acknowledge Gods great mercy, and to labor to take them
patiently, and contentedly: Secondly, to esteem their case fearful that are
without afflictions, seeing it is a sign that they are bastards and not
children, Hebr. 12. 8.

Doctrine. [turned] as God declares all his mercy to us in his favor, so are
all his arrows against us in his displeasure; 2
the Israelites are a manifest example hereof. The reason is, because, first,
their sins be greatest that have had the most means to keep them in
obedience: Secondly, Gods justice must punish according to the quality of the
offense. The use is, first, to show us the cause why God punishes his servants
more then others in this world: Secondly, to teach us, the greater blessings
we have received to be the more careful that we prove not thanklesse,
least we receive the greater judgments.

Doctrine. [against mee] God is never indeed against his, 3
but it seemed so in their present feeling, this is the doctrine. Gods people
seem often in their own persuasion to be cast off of God, and pursued as his
enemies: Job and David are notable examples hereof. The reason is, because we
judge according to our present feeling, which is a greatfaulte. The use is,
first, to show how it is in our nature to be in extremes; either too secure or
too much cast down: Secondly, to teach us to be staide in a patient
expectation of his mercy, and not to despair though our estate seem never so
miserable.

Doctrine. [all the day] as God is long or he punish, so is he long or he
cease punishing of his children. The reason 4
is, first, that in his justice, correction might insome measure recompense the
abuse of his patience: secondly, that he might frame us aright, which is hard
to do, and long first, because of our untowardness. The use is to teach us,
first, not to look for present riddance from any cross: secondly, not to
despair though we have suffered long, and prayed long, and yet are not
relieved, but to abide it patiently and pray more earnestly.

[My flesh and my skin has he caused to wax old] i. the marks Verse 4.
of his heavy hand against me for my sin, appears in the wearing away of
my flesh, and withering of my skin [hee has broken my bones] i. taken away
all my strength, as Psalm. 6. 3. 4, Isay 38. 13. see chap. 1. verse. 13. and that
with greatest torments, for such is the breaking of the bones.

Doctrine. [caused to wax olde] Gods punishments for 1
sin do often appear even in the body of man. The reason is, because,
first, sin is committed in the body: secondly, the body being the more
sensible part, might affect us the more when we feel Gods punishments in it:
thirdly, that others may have the more clear example in beholding our bodies
punished. The use is, to teach us, when we are punished in our bodies, first,
to acknowledge Gods justice in it for our sin, which worldlings will not do,
but do account thereof only as an ordinary thing: secondly, to ascribe it to
his mercy that corrects us in this life, to learn amendment by it.

Doctrine. [my flesh and my skin] the wasting and withering of the body is to
be acknowledged a punishment from 2
God; and the flourishing of the same to be a special blessing. The reason is,
because we were created in a flourishing condition: the contrary coming upon
us for sin. The use is, to teach us, to praise God for the health and
flourishing of the body, more then we do (for that it is ordinary) and to
confess our sins the causes of the other.

Doctrine. [broken my bones] there is no torment so grievous, 3
but the godly feel it, when Gods hand is upon them for their sins. The
reason is, because first, his anger is most grievous and intolerable:
secondly, he would have us thoroughlie affected and humbled. The use is, to
teach us, patiently to endure any extremity that the Lord lays upon us, and
not despair under the weight of it.

[He has builded against me] i. he has every way enclosed Verse 5.
me with bulwarks and ramparts, that I cannot escape nor withstand his hand
[he has compassed me about with gall and wearisomnesse] i. he has filled me
with bitterness and most tedious wearisomenesse.

Doctrine. [builded] the punishments that God lays upon us, are invincible,
and no way to be escaped. The reason is, 1
because, first, of his greatness and the infiniteness of his displeasure
when it shows forth it self: secondly, our weakness which then especially
we feel. The use is, to teach us, first, to take heed that we do not by our
disobedience incur his heavy displeasure: secondly, to humble our selves
under his mighty hand when he smites.

Doctrine. [Gall] the afflictions of the godly are oftentimes the most grievous
things that can be felt: Examples, 2
Israel in Egypt, Job in his agony, and many others. The reason is, because God
would have them feel a taste of his anger, and of the desert of their own
sins. The use is, first, to teach us, how just cause we have to be humbled:
secondly, to let us see the great mercy of God to us, that might punish us
most extremely and eternally in the torments of hell.

Doctrine. [weariesomenesse] the godly are often brought in this life to feel
nothing but grief and sorrow. The reason 3
is, because, God would thereby bring them to a thorough hatred of this world,
and longing after heaven. The use is, to teach us, first, how hardly we are
sufficiently humbled, that need to be so sharply dealt withal: Secondly,
that grievous and continual afflictions are mostnecessarie for us.

[He has set me in dark places] i. he has brought me into Verse 6.
great and grievous troubles, etc. see verse. 2. [as they that be dead long
agone] i. like to them that are long since dead, and both past remembrance, and
hope of reviving into their former worldly estate.

Doctrine. [darke place] afflictions are both grievous and 1
dangerous unto the godly, except the Lord do specially assist them therein.
For the reason and use hereof, see verse. 2. Doctr. 2.

Doctrine. [dead long agone] God often brings his people 2
to be of a desperate estate in their outward condition: examples hereof are,
the Israelites at the red sea, Job, David, and many others. The reason is,
because, first, God will declare his power the more evidently in their
deliverance: Secondly, that it may appear that there is no help in man. The
use is, to teach us, first, not to think it strange when God deals so with
us: secondly, never to despair though we fall into such extremities; but
still to rest upon the Lord, and to hope for his outstretched arm to deliver
us.

[He has hedged me about] i. he has compassed me Verse 7.
round about with troubles as an hedge [that I cannot get out] i. that by no
means I can escape and be delivered [hee has made my chains heauie] i. he
has made my calamities that I am hedged in withal, most heavy and burthenous
unto me.

Doctrine. [he has hedged etc.] As the afflictions of the godly are many, so
are they not able to be escaped by the 1
strength of flesh and blood, Psalm. 22. 12. 16. and 44. 22. The reason is, as
in the verse. 5. Doct. 1. The use is, to teach us, first, to fear God above
all, seeing we cannot avoid his stroke. Secondly, to be humbled by our
several troubles, seeing we cannot by stoutnesse or impatiencie be delivered.

Doctrine. [chaines heauie] Our afflictions in Gods anger are often made most
heavy, yea intolerable unto us. The reason 2
is, because, first, of the greatness of his anger. Secondly, of the obstinacy
of our nature not else subdued, Psalm. 38. 3. etc. 69. 1. etc. 107. 10. and 105.
18. etc. The use is, to teach us, to take heed of striving or murmuring against
God, seeing he is strongest and must prevail.

[Also when I cry and shoute] i. When I pray, and for earnestness Uerse 8
do lift up my voice aloude [he shuts out my prayer] i. he grants not
any requests, but seems utterly to reject them.

Doctrine. [when I crye] Afflictions do make the dullest 1
and most froward of Gods children to cry for help, Leuit. 26. 41. Psalm. 107.
6. 19. 28. The reason is, because, troubles do first break the untamed heart
of man: secondly, take away blind pride, and make us see our selves. The use
is, to teach us, first, to see the corruption of our nature, that needs such
means, or else will not rightly be framed. Secondly, that afflictions are no
signs of reprobation, seeing the godly feel them, and wax the better by
them. Thirdly, to give our selves (especially in affliction) to fasting and
prayer, seeing the godly have done so, and got much comfort thereby.

Doctrine. [also] The heauiest plague that man can endure 2
in this life, is to have God to refuse to hear his prayer when he calls
upon him in distress, Prouer 1. 28. lere. 14. 11, 12. The reason is, because,
we can look for no help in our miseries but from him. The use is, first, to
show the exceeding folly of the presumptuous, that do defer to repent,
thinking to be heard at any time. Secondly, to teach us not to put off
amendment from day to day, seeing God refuses to hear, when his anger is gone
out against sin.

Doctrine. [shutteth out my prayer] God often deferreth to hear the prayer of
his children, when yet he purposes in 3
due time to grant their requests, Psalm. 22. 1. etc. 77. 8. etc. Objection,
why then are they commanded to pray always? Answer, because he has promised
to hear their prayers, though he has limited no time thereunto. The reason
why he does so, is first, to try their patience, and exercise their faith:
secondly, to move them to continue and to grow in feruencie. The use is, to
teach us, that (howsoever our natural affection persuades otherwise) it is
for our good to be deferred now and then, in the obtaining of those petitions,
which we ask of God according to his will.

[He has stopped up my waies] i. utterly deprived me of any Verse 9.
means to escape [with hewn stone] i. most strongly and closely [he has
turned away my paths] i. disappoynted me of all my devises, that I have taken
in hand for my liberty. This verse is in effect the same with the 5. and 7.
verses.

Doctrine. [he has stopped] This being in effect the same that often has
hetherunto been said, teaches us this doctrine. 1
The often repetition of the greatness of our afflictions is profitable for
us. The reason is, because, it works us the better to true sorrow for it,
which is the end of it. The use is, to teach us, first, that we are very dull
and hard to learn how greatly God is offended with us. Secondly, that we must
be truly humbled before we can thoroughly repent.

Doctrine. [stopped] when God minds to continue our 2
afflictions, he will frustrate all the means used to bring us out of them.
The reason is, because, no means can prevail contrary to his purpose. The
use is, to teach us, whenever we are crossed in our devises, not to fret at
the instruments thereof, but to acknowledge it to be the work of God.

Doctrine. [my waies] No counsels of me^ ca^ prevail except God do bless
the^, Psalm. 127. 1. etc. The reason is, because all 3
power to perform any thing is from him alone. The use is to teach us, first,
to be sure to have warrant in the word for all our enterprises. Secondly, to
pray always to God for his assistance in every thing that we take in hand.

Doctrine. [turned away my pathes] God scatters all the devises of his
people, so long as he is angry with them, Isay. 29. 15. 16. 4
The reason is, because that he would thereby let them see that it is he that
does all things. The use is to teach us, above all other things to seek
reconciliation with the Lord, so shall our ways be prospered with his hand.

[He was unto me a Bear lying in wayte] i. his heavy hand was to me as a Bear
which teareth and comes on the Uers. 10.
sudden, having waited secretly for opportunity to annoy me [a lion in secret
places] i. he was most strong and yet hid his power till he came upon me
unawares.

Doctrine. [a Bear etc.] God often lays upon his people such rods, as be
not only sharp and severe, but also 1
violent and invincible, so as those that feel them can no ways avoid them,
Hos. 13. 7, 8. Psalm 50. 22. The reason is, because, first, his anger is heavy
of it self, seeing he is infinite. Secondly, our sins are great and
grievous, deserving severe punishment. Thirdly, our strength is most weak when
we have to do with the Lord. The use is, to teach us, first, to reverence and
fear him above all, that can cast both body and soul into hell fire, and to
take heed of sin that makes him angry with us; but we often do clean
contrary: for we fear men so much, as to avoid their displeasure, we let not
to sin against the Lord. Secondly, to be humbled under Gods mighty hand,
whenever he lays any afflictions upon us.

Doctrine. [a Lion lying in secret] Gods dearest children 2
are not able to stand under the weight of Gods plagues, when he visits them
according to their sins, Psalm. 2. 12. and 38. 3, 4. Job. 3. 11. etc. The same
appears by Christ's agony, when he did feel Gods anger against our sins,
which he did bear, Luke 23. 30. Math. 26. 38. and 27. 46. The reason is,
because his anger is heavy, our sins are grievous, and we weak: as in the
last Doctrine. The use is, first, to confute the error of satisfaction, seeing
we cannot answer to God one for a thousand, Job. 9. 2, 3, etc. Secondly, to
teach us, how hardly our great corruption is done away. Thirdly, that we may
see how needful it is for us now and then to feel Gods anger against us, that
we may thereby learn to know our selves, and have our stubborn hearts
broken.

[He has ouerturned my waies] i. he has turned my actions Uers. 11.
clean to another end then I meant them [and pulled me in pieces] i. he has
scattered and dispersed both Church and Common wealth [he has made me
desolate] i. he has deprived me of friends, wealth, and all other means to
do me good.

Doctrine. [ouerturned] GOD often turns the ways ofmen to another end then
they aimed at, in going about the 1
same: Examples hereof, Joseph's brethren selling him into Egypt; The Jews
putting Christ to death, etc. The reason is, because man purposes many things
peruerslie, which God disposes to his glory, Prouer. 16. 1. 33. The use is,
to teach us, first, to magnify the mighty power and wisdom of God in all
things. Secondly, to acknowledge (as the truth is, and often appears to us
by experience) that when he alters our purposes and actions to another end,
it is the only wisest and best way for us that could be.

Doctrine. [pulled in pieces] God often brings a people, 2
yea and one man, unto a most desperate condition, that seems unrecoverable
in the judgment of flesh and blood. The reason is, because he will show his
mighty power in bringing to the gates of hell, and restoring thence again.
The use is, to teach us, never to despair, but still to trust in the Lord
whatsoever extremities we fall into.

Doctrine. [desolate] God often leaves his people destitute 3
of all outward help and comfort: for the reason and use hereof, see Chap. 1.
verse. 2. Doct. 5.

[He has bent his bowe] i. he has prepared his power, and showed his purpose
to deal severely with me [and made Verse 12.
me a mark for the arrowes] i. he has performed that his purpose in directing
all his strokes, so as they light only upon me.

Doctrine.] God strikes not his servants so suddenly, but he gives them
warning before hand, though they do not always 1
take knowledge of it, Amos 3. 7, 8. Examples hereof, 2. Chron. 36. 15. The
reason is, because, he is slow to anger, and desires rather our repentance,
Psalm. 81. 13. The use is, to teach us, first, to acknowledge Gods great mercy
toward us, in that he gives us warning by the preaching of his word.
Secondly, to take heed that we neglect not his mercy offered us by his word,
lest in steed thereof we feel his heavy judgment.

Doctrine. [a mark for his arrowes] The afflictions of the godly in this life
be above the afflictions of al other people: 2
for the reason and use hereof, see Chap. 1. verse. 12. Doct. 5.

[He caused the arrows of his quiuer] i. he has made the Verse 13.
strokes that he has laid upon me [to enter into my reynes] i. to pearse my
most inward and secret parts, to wit both of body and soul.

Doctrine. The plagues that God lays upon his people 3
do not only touch their bodies, but also they enter in most grievous manner
into their hearts and souls, Psalm. 14. 2. 3. The reason is, because, first,
else were they not afflicted as Christ their head was, Heb. 5. 7. etc.
Secondly, the soul first and chiefly sins. The use is to teach us, first,
not to despair though we be afflicted both in soul and body. Secondly, to
labor the more in the word and prayer, according as our afflictions are
greater and more grievous upon us.

[I was a derision] i. I seemed as a just matter of mockery [to all my people]
i. to all those that had been friends to me, Verse 14.
and familiar with me; especially my brethren that are fallen away in these
troubles [their song all the day long] i. they made themselves sport to
recount in reproachful manner my misery.

Doctrine. [derision] The godly are usually more subject to reproaches, then any
other people. Examples hereof 1
be in all ages, as, Habel, Isaac, Israel often, David, the Prophets, Christ,
and his Apostles. The reason is, first, because godliness seems mere
foolishnes to them that are naturally minded. Secondly, they show (as they
think) their own wisdom in disdainful contemning of the godly. The use is to
teach us, first, that reproaches and scoffs are notes of the godly. Secondly,
to prepare our selves to be subject unto the same condition, if we look to
be of the number of those that walk in true godliness.

Doctrine. This following upon the mentioning of their 2
afflictions, teaches this doctrine. Then are the godly most derided by the
wicked, when the hand of God is heauiest vponthem, to afflict them. Examples
hereof are, David, Job, Jeremy, Christ, etc. The reason is, because, first, man
judges after the outward appearance: Secondly, the godly seem then to be in a
desperate condition. The use is, to teach us, first, to know the disposition
of the wicked, who (whatsoever they seem to be to us in our prosperity) will
show their malice against us in our afflictions: Secondly, to look for
reproach in every time of trouble, for else it is nothing.

Doctrine. [to all] all sorts of people (though diverse one 3
from another) do deride the godly in their adversity. This is verified in
the Examples of all ages. The reason is, because, whatsoever a wicked man
loves, he will be sure to hate the truth, and consequently the professors
thereof. The use is to teach us, not to expect the advancement of the truth
from worldlings; for wisdom is justified of her own children, Mat. 11. 19.

Doctrine. [my people] Those that are nearest unto the 4
godly, and not fearing God, will be crosses unto them in the time of trouble:
Examples, Jobs wife, 2. 9. and his friends, 4. 6. etc. and many others. The
reason is, because the bond of their love is earthly, and can administer no
help to the inner man. The use is, to teach us, not to be dismayed when
Parents, kinsfolk, etc. forsake us: for so it has been often with the godly.
Secondly, That religion is not to be professed, neither is it supported by any
worldly reasons, or means; but by the spirit, and for the hope of life by it.

Doctrine. [their song] the wicked do greatly delight 5
themselves in mocking the godly. This appears by the example of the foes of
Isaac, Job, David, Christ, and others. The reason is, because, first, thereby
they think to suppress and disgrace the truth for ever. Secondly, they think
their own folly by that means well justified and advanced. The use is, to
declare unto us what enmity the ungodly do bear to the truth. Secondly, to
teach us to walk wisely least we give them matter of triumphing.

Doctrine. [all the day] The wicked are never satisfied, but do still continue
their hatred against the godly. The reason 6
is, first, because they do greatly delight therein. Secondly, they are afraid
that they have never done enough to defame them. The use is, to teach us, to
look for continuance in afflictions, when we are in them, and to use all good
means to enable us to bear it patiently.

[Hee has filled mee] i. he has every way, and in every Verse 15.
part of my soul and body fraught me [with greatest bitternesse] i. with the
greatest number and measure of anguish and sorrow; for the hebrew word is the
plural number, and imports so much [hee has made me drunken with
wormewood] i. he has with the abundance of sorrows, even taken my senses
away from me, and made me as one bereaved of understanding.

Doctrine. [he hath] This sorrow did arise especially from the derision they
were in by their adversaries, and yet it being 1
ascribed unto the Lord, teaches us this doctrine. In all our afflictions we
must look unto the Lord that siniteth, and not unto the instruments thereof.
For the reason and use hereof, see chap. 1. verse. 5 doct. 5.

Doctrine. [filled me] This great grief spoken of upon the 2
derision that they were in, teaches this doctrine. There is no outward
trouble more grievous to the godly, then to be reproched by their adversaries
in the time of their affliction. The reason is, because, first, we are much
comforted in the hope that our sufferings shall advance the truth, which
professed derision hinders. Secondly, such reproaches are accompanied with
much blasphemy and wickedness. Thirdly, such dealing carries many weak
professors from the affecting of our cause and sufferings. The use is, to teach
us; to take to heart the reproaches that we suffer for the truth, even more
then our other afflictions. Secondly, not to be dismayed as though God were not
with us, albeit these things seem heavy unto us.

Doctr. [bitternesse] The godly have often upon them al and the greatest
griefs that can be devised. The reason is, first, 3
that which is the reason of the first doct. of the first ver. of this chap.
Secondly, that God might show his detestation of sin eue^ in punishing his own
so severely. Thirdly, that they may be truly humbled, and sufficiently, which
the stoninesse of our nature will hardly yield unto. The use is, to teach us,
first, to look for such extremities, and not to promise our selves security
in worldly peace. Secondly, to esteem those heavy crosses good for us,
howsoever they be heavy unto the outward man.

Doctrine. [he has filled] It is the Lord above that frames our hearts to be
affected with our afflictions, else they 4
remain stony and astonished. The reason is, because, first, we are naturally
hard hearted. Secondly, none can deal with the heart but God alone. The use is
to teach us, first, to acknowledge the exceeding hardness of our hearts
naturally: which every one that rightly discerns of his own estate has
experience of. Secondly, to pray earnestly unto the Lord to mollify our hard
hearts, and to make them supple and pliable to his holy will.

Doctrine. The godly may not be as Stoickes, but must be 5
most passionate in their afflictions. The reason is, because, first, their
sins procure them their troubles, which ought to grieve them most of all,
that God is offended with them. Secondly, God afflicts that we should repent,
which we cannot do without great remorse. The use is, to teach us, in our
afflictions to labor our affections hereunto; which is done, first, by
meditation of our estate, how corrupt by nature and how miserable by sin it
is. Secondly, by earnest and continual prayer to God to frame us unto his
liking. Thirdly, by watching over our own ways and shunning the occasions of
sin.

Doctr. [drunken] The godly are often so laden with miseries, 6
that they are exceedingly distracted there withal, both in body and mind. The
reason is, because they furmount their reach and natural strength. The use is
to teach us, not to despair, though we neither seem able to bear the burden
God lays upon us, nor see any issue or means to be rid out of it.

[He has broken my teeth with a stone] i: he has made Verse 16.
my pain most sensible and intolerable, for such is the breaking of teeth [he
has thrown me down under the ashes] i. he has brought me to the lowest
estate, and made me the most abject of all others.

Doctrine. [he has broken] The expressing of the same thing in so many terms
and sentences, teaches us this 1
doctrine. We must labor in our meditations to exemplify, and enlarge unto
our own understanding the miseries that we do suffer in the time of our
afflictions. The reason is, because, first, else we use to pass them over with
a sigh. Secondly, we shall the more equally judge of them. The use is, to teach
us thereby, to make our hearts the fitter to power out our suplications unto
the Lord, for the feruencie of our prayer is according to the seriousnes of our
meditations. Secondly, that the Lord may see the carfulness of our spirits to
ponder rightly our ways, which is a notable motive to cause him to hear us.

Doctrine. [with a stone] The Lord may bring his children 2
for their sins, into the greatest worldly pain, and yet love them; Examples
hereof, are many in the scriptures, and in experience: for the reason, and use
hereof, see chap. 1. ver. 12. doct. 5.

Doctrine. [vnder the ashes] It is not for the godly to stand 3
upon any worldly credit to clear their cause withal, but only upon the
testimony of a good conscience, and the uprightness of their ways. The
reason is, because God often takes all outward blessings from his servants.
The use is, to teach us, to contemn (in comparison of a good conscience) all that flesh and blood admireth, seeing it is so transitory, and labor above all
to be sound in the fear and service of God.

[Thus thou remouest my soul from peace] i. by this means Verse 17.
thou utterly take all quietness from my heart and soul [I forgate
prosperity] i. I have been so long inured unto troubles, that prosperity is
unto me, as if I had never known it.

Doctrine. [my soule] The outward troubles of the body 1
do often procure affliction to the soul. The reason is, because, first of
the sympathy betwixt the one and the other. Secondly, the soul is carried in
the body, and must consider the accidents thereof. Thirdly, the soul is chief
in the sin that procures affliction unto the body. The use is, to teach us to
labor the soul unto repentance whenever the body has any trouble.

Doctrine. [my soul far from peace] It is the heauiest of 2
all crosses that we can feel in this life, to want the peace of the soul.
The reason is, because, first, it is the chief and most sensible part of man.
Secondly, it respects God and his mercy or justice: but the body has regard
unto things that are below. The use is to teach us, first, to pity them that
are afflicted in mind especially, and to pray for them most earnestly.
Secondly, to pray to God in our outward affliction to keep us in the peace of
the soul, so shall al outward troubles be light unto us.

Doctrine. [I forgate] God often brings his children so far from
prosperity that they are out of use with it, and 3
think not of it. The reason is, because, first, they are so much accustomed
there withal. Secondly, they see so little hope of peace and worldly success.
The use is to teach us, first, that afflictions are ordinary and continual
exercises for the godly. Secondly, God gives great patience and contentment to
those that make right use of their troubles.

[And I said] i. upon the consideration hereof I thought this in mine heart,
and uttered it with my mouth [my stength Uers. 18.
and my hope] i. my ability to bear these miseries, and hope to be freed of
them; which graces I once had a lively feeling of [is perished from the Lord]
i. the Lord has utterly brought them to naught, as if they had never been.

Doctrine. This verse generally teaches this doctrine: The godly are often
brought to such extremity, as they find 1
no way out of it. This appears verified in many examples in the scriptures,
and by daily experience. The reason of it is, because, first, God will show
thereby our want of power to help our selves. Secondly, it makes the foes more
insolent, to hasten thereby their overthrow. Thirdly, Gods power is made more
manifest in our deliverance. The use is to teach us, first, not to esteem it a
condition which the godly are not subject unto, to be so low brought. Secondly,
when it is our case to learn thereby, first, reverence of Gods mighty power
and wisdom: secondly, humility: thirdly, patience: fourthly, feruencie in
prayer, fifthly, longing after the fruition of the joys of heaven, where all
miseries have an end.

Doctrine. [strength and hope] according to our strength, 2
generally of knowledge and particularly of feeling, so do we hope. The reason
is, because hope is grounded upon faith, and faith upon knowledge, without
which there is no hope at all, Heb. 11. 1. The use is, first, to confute their
vanity, that say they have hope when they neither have any knowledge or care
to have it: Secondly, to teach us to be as careful to grow in knowledge, as
we are to have an assured hope.

Doctrine. [my strength and my hope] the godly in their afflictions 3
do recount what blessings they have lost. So did David. The reason is,
because, first, of the love and delight that they had therein, which is most
remembered when it is lost: Secondly, that their hearts may be made the more
affected with grief for the loss thereof, and with desire to be restored
thereunto again. The use is, to teach us, first, to take the same course when
we are deprived of any blessing, if we desire to be thoroughly affected there
withal. Secondly, to apply it to our selves, as a remedy against despair:
for the consideration of Gods former mercy, gives hope that he will be
favorable again; seeing he is no changeling; and whom he loves once, to the
end he loves them, Ioh. 13. 1.

Doctrine. [is perished] the godly do not always feel the comfort of Gods
favor in the like measure; this is verified, 4
not only in the examples of Job, David, Jeremy, etc. but also in the
continual experience of Gods most excellent servants. The reason is, because,
first, God will make it the more delightful unto them by intermission:
Secondly, that they may see what they are, if God should leave them unto
themselves: Thirdly, that they may be the more careful to use all good means
to keep it whilst they have it. The use is, to teach us, first, not to be
dismayed though now and then God hide the favor of his countenance from us,
seeing he uses to do so with his dearest children: Secondly, to make the best
of our comforts whilst we do enjoy them, that the recounting thereof may
support us in the time of distress.

Doctrine. [perished] the godly are often so grievously afflicted, 5
as they grow to a great measure of desperation: Examples hereof, are Job,
David, Jeremy, and many other in all ages. The reason is, because, first, of
their great weakness when God that is strong, tries them. Secondly, they
judge according to their present feeling. Thirdly, of the conscience of their
deserts for sin. Fourthly, the abundance of natural infidelity, which
always being in us, does then appear to have the greatest power. The use is,
to teach us, first, when distrust grows strongest in us, not to think any
other, but that God both may, and will raise us up again: so must we also
judge of others in the like case. Secondly, never to yield our hearts to be
ruled by despair (howsoever it do long and mightily assail us) but to use
all good means to stay us: as, first, reading and hearing the word: Secondly,
daily and earnest prayer: Thirdly, the meditation of our former comforts:
Fourthly, the consideration of favor restored to other in the like case:
Fifthly, and last of all, to be resolved, as Job was, Chap. 13. 15. to trust
still in the Lord, though he should kill us.

[Remembring mine affliction and my weeping] i. when I call to mind my
grievous miseries, and the sorrow wrought in Verse 19.
me thereby [the wormwood and the gall] i. the bitterness that was in it.

Doctrine. [Remembring] the deep waying of Gods punishments for sin felt in
times past, does (often) most effectually 1
move the heart unto great lamentation. The reason is, because, first, it
calls to mind Gods anger for sin, which is more heavy to the godly to
think upon, then any thing in the world. Secondly, it does bring again (as it
were) the feeling of pains endured, which recalleth the same (or greater)
fear. Thirdly, it administreth doubt whether Gods anger be appeased or no. The
use is, to teach us, that it is necessary for us to be afflicted, because it
makes us more rightly to consider of our estate. Secondly, when we desire to
be humbled, and increase in feeling, we must meditate of our sins, and the
punishments for them, which heretofore we have felt.

Doctrine. [affliction, and weeping] though grief and sorrow 2
be naturally the effects of affliction, yet in the godly it must be, because
of the sin committed, and not for the penalty sustained. The reason is,
because, first, it is sin that causes affliction. Secondly, God afflicts
us to bring us to repentance. The use is, to teach us, first, in every
affliction to search out our sins the cause thereof. Secondly, to labor our
hearts to true repentance, which is the cause why we must be humbled.

Doctrine. [the wormwood and the gall] i. in recounting any 3
former thing, we must take only so much thereof as may serve our turn. The
reason is, because, first, it may affect us the more. Secondly, that our minds
be not employed about any other matter. The use is, to teach us, carefully to
use means to keep our affections to the thing in hand, and to shun the
means of the contrary: that is especially to be put in practice, when we go
about the exercise of the word or prayer, for Satan will labor to steal our
minds from them.

[My soul thoroughly remembers them] i. I do often and Verse 20.
effectually think of them: for the dubbling of the Hebrew verb must be so
expounded [and museth within me] i. does thoroughly ponder and consider of them.

Doctrine. [throughly remembreth] There is no meditation that is available to
further in godliness, but that which is 1
earnest and effectual. The reason is, because, first, else it moves not the
heart. Secondly, nothing else prevails with the affections. The use is, to
teach us, to use all good means to make our reading, hearing, praying, etc.
most effectual unto us.

Doctrine. [my soule] The heart must be thoroughly touched, 2
before we can profit by any action of religion that we take in hand. The
reason is, because, first, every point of religion concerns principally the
heart. Secondly, God accepts nothing, but that which proceeds from the
heart. The use is, to teach us, not to content our selves with any outward
action, but to labor that it may proceed from the sincere affection of our
souls.

Doctrine. [museth in me] When we are thoroughly affected with any part of Gods
word, or his works, then do we 3
much consider of it, and cannot easily forget it. The reason is, because,
first, it has taken root in the heart, which is the fountain of all serious
meditations. Secondly, it sets the affections on work, to digest it, unto
the end whereunto the heart desires to bring it. The use is, to teach us, to
labor that all such serious cogitations may lead us to grow in true
godliness: for else they are dangerous, and draw unto destruction, or some
other evil extremity.

[I consider this in mine heart] i. I do and will labor (for the verb is the
future tense) to lay these things unto mine Uers. 21.
heart [therefore will I hope] i. by these things well wayed, I will gather
unto my self matter whereupon I may ground my persuasion that God will be good
unto me.

Doctrine. [I consider] It is a special stay to the troubled 1
heart, to consider how it has striuen to be at peace. The reason is, because,
first, it calls to mind the strife betwixt the flesh and the spirit, which
argues that God has a portion there. Secondly, it shows our desire of
weldoing, which must needs be the work of grace. Thirdly, it daunteth Satan
our adversary, depriving him of hope to prevail. Fourthly, it administreth us
hope that we shall stand even in the strongest temptations. The use is, to
teach us, first, that in all afflictions we examine our hearts for the time
past, how upright and careful of weldoing they have been, so shall we be the
stronger in the day of trial. Thirdly, to bear with patience the present
cross with hope of comfortable issue, though all means in man's judgment be
clean taken away.

Doctrine. [this etc. therefore] The right and thorough meditation 8
of Gods punishments upon us for sin, and our striving to profit thereby,
has always hope for the issue. The reason is, because, first, it takes away
all those refuges which naturally we flee unto, as, friends, wit, riches,
strength, etc. and forces us to fly unto God. Secondly, the Lord respects,
and is ready to help the broken and contrite hearted, Isay. 66. 2. The use
is, to teach us, first, to lay to heart whatsoever we have done or left
undone, wherewith God is oftended. Secondly, that we be not dismayed, though
grief for it do seem to swallow us up: for God will make the end joyful, as
he did to Job.

Doctrine. [haue hope] Al our care in peace and in affliction 3
must be how to gather to our selves a certain hope that God will be
merciful unto us. The reason is, because, first, we have more need of it then
of all things else. Secondly, Satan will labor more to deprive us of it, then
of any thing else. The means to attain unto it, be, first, to search in Gods
word the way to attain unto it. Secondly, to learn the marks of those that
have it, as they be there expressed; and to try our selves whether we have
them or no. Thirdly, to pray unto God earnestly to give us not only to have
those marks in us, but also to be assured of them, and comforted daily by
them. The use is, to teach us, that if we have the inward peace of the heart,
and comfort of the soul in Christ Jesus, every thing is full of joy unto us,
though our life seem most bitter, else are all the joys of the world mere
misery unto us.

Doctrine. [will I hope] It is our duty to hope for Gods 4
favorable hand to rid us out of any trouble that we are in, though it
continue and increase upon us, and no means of redress do appear. The
reason is, because, first, God afflicts us not to cast us off, but to amend
us, and try us. Secondly, he uses so to deliver his servants. The use is, to
teach us, contentedly to take, and patiently to endure the afflictions laid
upon us.

Doctrine. [therefore will I hope] i. The consideration of Gods heavy rods
upon us in this life, gives us hope to find 5
favor for the life to come. The reason is, because, first, God chastises
those whom he receives, Heb. 12. 6. etc. Secondly, it is a token of bastardie
to be without correction. Thirdly, the whole life of the godly has been
continual affliction: Examples hereof, are Iaacob, Joseph, David, Jeremy,
Israel, etc. The use is, to teach us, first, never to promise our selves
worldly peace, if we look to be in Gods favor, seeing it is our lot not only
to believe in Christ, but also to suffer for his name, Phil. 1. 29. etc.
Secondly, to labor to suffer willingly, seeing it is a note of the godly, and
administreth hope. Thirdly, (which is the use of affliction, Heb. 12. 12.) to
grow more resolute in good things, and more obedient to the truth thereby.

[It is the Lords mercie] i. it arises from the abundance of Verse 22.
his favor [that we are not consumed] i. that we are not utterly wasted out
of this life, and thrown into the bottomless pit [because his compassions
fail not] i. because his great mercies are infinite, for measure, and
continuance: As if the Prophet in the name of the whole people of GOD should
have said; such is the greatness of our sins, and the bitterness of our
punishment, as if he should deal rigorously with us, we miserable wretches
had been ten thousand times utterly undone; but we are saved from our sins,
and preserved in the midst of our distresses. Therefore it is not by our own
power and strength, but by Gods infinite mercy, that we are preserved, Isay
1. 9.

Doctrine. [the Lords mercies] The godly neither can, neither look to escape
destruction by any other means, then 1
only by the mercies of the Lord, in pardoning their sins. The reason is,
because, first, in many things we offend all; the least whereof deserves
everlasting hell fire. Secondly, sin provoke Gods anger which is infinite
as himself, and can not be satisfied by any that is no more then a creature.
Thirdly. The Scripture makes Gods mercy the first part of our righteousness,
Psalm. 32. 1. The use is, first, to confute them, that think they have it in
their own free will to be saved; and them that look to obtain heaven by
their merits. Secondly, to teach us to fear and tremble, that we fall not
into Gods vengeance, and to seek especially for his mercy, esteeming it above
our lives, or any earthly thing that we can desire. Thirdly, to acknowledge it
to be of his mere mercy that we live, etc. and to praise him daily for it.

Doctrine. [Gods mercy that etc.] The mercies of the Lord 2
are sufficient to redeem all his people from all their sins, and to deliver
them from all the punishments that they can fall into. The reason is, because,
first, they are infinite as his majesty is. Secondly, else none should be
saved, seeing there is none other means of salvation. The use is, first, to
confute Popery, that rests upon works for deliverance (at least) from the
punishment of sin: which must needs be a gross error, seeing the punishment
deserved is as infinite, as he that is offended Secondly, to confirm us
against despair, seeing the Lords mercy is an anchor hold, so sure and
steadfast.

Doctrine. [that we are not consumed] The chiefest of the 3
godly when they are at the best, do deserve Gods displeasure and vengeance.
The reason is, because, first, in many things we sin all, James 3. 2. and
he that fails in one is guilty in all, James 2. 10. Secondly, our
regeneration is but in part, as experience teaches. Thirdly, the
righteousness of the best is mingled with sin. The use is, first, to confute
the Cathari, the Family of love, and the Papists, that think themselves able
in this life to fulfill the law of God. Secondly, it teaches us to abandon all
pride and security from us, ascribing it unto God alone that we have any power
to do well. Thirdly, to acknowledge Gods justice in all our greatest plagues
that ever he has laid, or does lay upon any, seeing their sins do deserve
the same.

Doctrine. [compassions fail not] Not one of Gods elect 4
can finally fall, or possibly perish for ever. The reason is, because, first,
Gods gifts are without repentance. Secondly, his mercies, whereby they stand,
fail not. The use is, first, to confute Popery, that teaches salvation or
damnation to be in our own power. Secondly, to teach us, that if once we have
a sure sign of Gods love toward us, we are to be assured of it to stand by us
for ever, in all temptations and trials.

[They are renewed every morning] i. every day; and in Uerse 23.
due time we have new experiments of thy loving kindness toward us [great is
thy faythfulnesse] i. most certain and manifest is thy truth, in performing
largely all thy promises.

Doctrine. [euery morning] God never suffers his people to be tempted above
their strength, though he punish 1
them now and then for their sins. The reason is, because, first, he knows
their weakness, and respects it in favor. Secondly, else should none be
saved. The use is to teach us, first, to magnify Gods great mercy and love to
us. Secondly, to be comforted in afflictions, and armed against all extremities
that can befall us.

Doctrine. [great is thy faythfulnesse] There is no part of Gods promises but
it shall surely be accomplished in due 2
time. The reason is, because God is truth, and all his promises are yea and
amen: so that if ought seem to fail, it is either for that we do not
understand it, or else because we believe it not, as those do that either
despair, or are secure. The use is to teach us, first by the love of these his
promises to search them out, and to believe them. Secondly, to hope therein
without wavering, whatsoever extremities do befall us.

[The Lord is my portion] i. he is the maintenance of my Uers. 24.
spiritual and earthly estate, even absolutely sufficient for me* [saith my
soule] i. as my heart is fully persuaded and causes my tongue to speak
[therefore will I hope in him] i. upon which ground I do rest persuaded to
receive all good things from him, and shall want nothing.

Doctrine. [the Lord is my portion] Every one of Gods people has the Lord for
his portion, and enjoys him for 1
his need, so far as is best for his comfort here, and his eternal
salvation hereafter: as, for their ignorance they have his knowledge: for their
infidelity, his faithfulness: for their foolishnes, his wisdom: for their
sinfulnes, his holiness, etc. The reason is, because, first, GOD in his eternal
decree did choose all his to be vessels of honor. Secondly, else could none be
saved because of our natural misery. Thirdly, he has given his son Christ
Jesus to every one of his servants, and so with him all things, Romans 8. 32. The
use is, first, to confute the opinion of works foreseen, seeing we could have
nothing foreseen in us but that which he had appointed to give us. Secondly,
to overthrow their pride that swel in that they have: for what have they that
they have not received? 1. Cor. 4. 6. 7. etc. Thirdly, to teach us to be
humbled with the view of our own nakedness and poverty. Fourthly, to make it
our whole care to have the Lord for our portion, and to account al things but
doung in respect of him. Fifthly, to give all glory to God for all things,
using them wisely to his honor. Sixthly, to give us matter of comfort in all
temptations and troubles; seeing he that is strongest, is ours: so that
whatsoever we have lost, or shall loose, it is nothing, seeing he is all in all.

Doctrine. [sayth my soule] The open profession of the 2
truth is vain, except the heart in feeling apprehend the same within. The
reason is, because, first, diverse reprobat can profess Godliness, Mat. 15. 7.
8. Isay 1. 13. Mich. 6. 6. 7. etc. Secondly, God gives the soul as a
principal part of man, and will especially be served with it. Thirdly, God is
a spirit, and will be served in spirit, John 4. 22. and 4. 6. faith (without
which it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6.) is in the heart or not at
all, Romans 10. 9. 10. The use is, to teach us, first, not to trust in the
outward service of God prescribed in his word, seeing it is abominable before
God, without the pure affection of the heart. Secondly, not to esteem others
by their outward profession only, except we see such fruits as must needs
come from the heart. Thirdly, that all shows of religious devotion, without
warrant of the word, be sin. This confuteth all the devises of Popery, that
men have invented and do make so much of.

Doctrine. [therefore will I hope in him] It is the duty of 3
Gods children so to rely upon the Lord for all good things, as that they may
satisfy themselves with the certain persuasion thereof. The reason is,
because, first, God is all sufficient, Genesis 17. 1. etc. Secondly, God will have
none of his glory given to any other. Thirdly, none can do any thing for us,
or against us, without his power assisting them. The use is to teach us, first,
that none can persevere unto the end, with patience in hope of salvation,
unless he rest in God alone: and therefore neither Infidels that believe not
Gods word, nor Papists that rely so much upon Saints, nor ignorant ones that
are without knowledge, and so without faith, nor impatient persons that tarry
not Gods leisure, but use unlawful means, can by any means have part of this
perseverance. Secondly, to use with prayer and careful diligence al lawful
means to confirm us herein, and to shun the contrary.

[The Lord is good unto them that trust in him] i. God shows himself most
bountiful and favorable to all them that Verse 25.
in a true says rest upon him, and have their affiance in him hoping for his
favor [to the soul that seeks him] i to him that from his heart labors
in the means that God has appointed to come unto the knowledge and faith in
him,

Doctrine. [the Lord is good] Gods goodness shows it 1
self daily and bountifully to his people. This is verified in the examples of
the whole scriptures, and in daily experience, to their bodies and their
souls in matters peculiar to them, and common with the wicked: for this life,
to provide for the body and comfort the soul: for the life to come, to deliver
from hell and bring to heaven. The only reason hereof, is, because his good
pleasure is such. The efficient cause, is his love: the material cause is, the
obedience of his son: the end is, his glory, and our salvation. The means
whereby he conueigheth it unto us, is, his word and his spirit. This has been
manifested in all ages, as the book of God and daily experience does witness.
The use is, first, to teach us to magnify his exceeding love unto his
children, whom he might have created the vilest of his creatures, and after
have cast them into hell fire with the devil and his angels. Secondly, to allure
us to serve him in all fear and obedience; or else to leave us the more clearly
without excuse, at the day of account.

Doctrine. [trust in him] i. The godly do rest upon Gods 2
promises by faith, and patiently wait for the performance of them by hope.
The reason is, because, first, they believe them to be undoubtedly true.
Secondly, they are assured in their hearts to be partakers thereof, because
they find the notes of the godly in themselves. Thirdly, they are assured of
his love to them, his power to do what he list, and wisdom to bestow and
perform when he sees meet, that which may tend to his glory and their good.
The use is to teach us, first, to try our selves; if we can find our selves
so affected, to rejoice and go on: if not, to repent of it and amend.
Secondly, to strengthen our patience in every trial, which is the exercise of
our faith.

Doctrine. [to the soul that seeks him] The greatest care 3
that Gods servants should have in this life, is to seek the Lord (how he may
be known and feared aright) by those means that he has appointed thereunto.
The reason is, because, they can find no peace in any other thing without the
same; if they do, their case is fearful. Secondly, they know that the
treasure of all good things must needs be in the true knowledge and worship of
him that made and governs the whole world, and all that is therein. Thirdly,
they have heretofore found much comfort therein, which encouraged them
thereunto every day more and more. The use is, to try our selves how careful
we are herein; inwardly by the excusing or accusing of our hearts: and
outwardly by our care and diligence in hearing, reading, meditation and prayer.
Secondly, to reprove them, as giving fearful tokens of being without God in
this world, who make no care to seek him according to his word.

[It is good, both to him that trusteth] i. it is a happy thing Verse 26.
for him that is grounded upon the Lord, as his rock [and to him that wayteth
for the salvation of the Lord] i. to him that is silent at (for so the hebrew
word signifies) the salvation of the Lord, as resting satisfied therewith, and
waiting for the performance of it.

Doctrine. [It is good, both, etc.] The trusting in God, and 1
patient waiting for his salvation, is full of comfort, and quietness even in
this life. The reason is, because, first, it sets the heart at rest, which
makes all outward troubles easy to be borne. Secondly, it sharpeneth the
affections in all spiritual exercises, especially in the longing for heaven.
The use is to teach us, to use all good means to attain unto it, and to
account all things vile in respect of it.

Doctrine. [to trust] we must trust in the Lord, though the things that we
desire appear not. The reason is, because, 2
first, God often hides his countenance from his servants, to try them.
Secondly, we know God will be as good as his promise, being never yet justly
charged to be short of his word. Thirdly, it is the nature of faith to trust to
obtain that which appears not, Romans S. 24. 25. Heb. 11. thoroughout. The use
is, to teach us, first, that we may not always look to have the present
enjoying of that comfort, which God has promised, and we desire; seeing it
shall sometimes be ecclipsed unto us. Secondly, to hope certainly for
whatsoever God has promised, though we feel it not, and not be discouraged.

Doctrine. [waiteth for, etc.] They that do truly trust in God, are satisfied
therewith, and do wait with patience for 3
the perfourmance of the hoped salvation. The reason is, because, first, they
know that fullness of joy is prepared for them. Secondly, it swalloweth up
all troubles, as being nothing in comparison thereof. The use is, to teach us,
first, to labor above all things to attain unto this confidence, seeing it
has such excellent contentment in it. Secondly, to try our hope by our
patience, and to increase our patience by the due meditation of our hope.

[It is good for that man] i. it is an happy thing for him that is to be
framed to those qualities mentioned in the former Verse. 27.
verses [that he has borne the yoke] i. that he has suffered afflictions,
which tame and keep under our corrupt nature [in his youth] i. in the
beginning of his time, before sin grow strong and headie in him.

Doctrine. [It is good, etc.] the cross is a most necessary 1
means to bring a man unto true godliness. The reason is, because, first, our
nature is otherwise untameable, and will not receive instruction, Psalm 119. 67.
etc. Secondly, it brings us to the consideration of our selves, and (if God
bless it) hinders many sins that in prosperity we run into. The use is,
to teach us, first, to esteem afflictions most necessary for us. Secondly, to
know that when God afflicts us, it is to frame us to his will, and to learn
to profit thereby.

Doctrine. [yoke] afflictions are heavy and unsavory to 2
flesh and blood. The reason is, because, first, they cross the natural
desires thereof. Secondly, they draw us to that, which naturally we have no
will unto. The use is, first, to show us the perverseness of our nature, that
does so greatly mislike that which is so good for us. Secondly, not to be cast
down, though we feel the weight of afflictions very heavy unto us: but to
bear them willingly and patiently, seeing we have benefit by them.

Doctrine. [in his youth] The sooner that we be exercised 3
with afflictions, the better it is for us. The reason is, because, first,
younger years are more pliable to any instruction: as we see in the learning
of human arts or tongues; yea in the taming of any wild beast. Secondly,
longer custom thereunto, makes it more easy and more profitable unto us. The
use is to teach us, first, the cause why the godly have (almost) with the
profession of religion, entered into persecutions. Secondly, that though our
afflictions begin and end with our life; yet are we not to be cast down or
grieved but to rejoice in it, seeing it is good for us.

[He sits alone and is silent] i. in quiet manner he undertakes Verse. 28.
the affliction, and meditateth secretly of it [because he has laid it upon
him] i. seeing the Lord Almighty, that loves him, has laid his rod upon him.

Doctrine. [sitteth alone, etc.] Afflictions do frame Gods 1
people to patience, and humility. The reason is, because, first, their
unbridled stomach is broken thereby. Secondly, their sins and desert
thereof be laid before their eyes by them. Thirdly, Gods inevitable hand is
seen in them.

Fourthly, they obtain much profit in godliness by them. The use is, first,
to teach us, that they are necessary for us. Secondly, to try our selves by
our increase in patience and humility, how much we have profited by such
afflictions as we have suffered.

Doctrine. [alone and is silent] Afflictions do give us just occasion of
meditation for the examination of our selves, 2
what is amiss in us. The reason is, because, first, God (being just) will not
punish us without our desert thereof. Secondly, he will not withdraw his rod to
our comfort, without our amendment. Thirdly, we cannot thoroughly amend without
serious meditation. Fourthly, the heart is much eased with a thorough
examination of ourselves, and calling upon God for the amendment of that is
amiss. The use is, to teach us, that when we be afflicted, we must enter into
such an account with our selves, if we look for any profit by the same.

Doctrine. [he has laid it] The godly are contented to 3
bear whatsoever the Lord lays upon them. The reason is, because, they have
deserved much more at his hands. The use is to teach us, first, to try our
selves whether we be so affected, or no. Secondly, to labor more and more to
be contented with whatsoever condition it shall please the Lord to lay upon us.

[He gives his mouth to the dust] i. he humbly throws down himself before
GOD, acknowledging al to be just Verse 29.
that is upon him, and says in his heart [it may be there is hope] i. though
I see no reason of remedy, al means failing me, and Gods hand being so heavy
upon me; yet will I wait, for peradventure he will show mercy unto me: with
this kind of speech the scripture teaches how diffidence and distrust is
driven away, as John 14. 12.

Doctrine. [he putteth] The godly, having rightly profited by their
afflictions, do reverence Gods power in punishing them, and do humble
themselves under his hand. The reason is, because, first, they are assured of
his power, wisdom, and love. Secondly, they will not be driven from him by any
extremity, knowing that out of his favor there is nothing but horror. The use
is to teach us, first, not to judge of the cross according to our own carnal
reason, but according to Gods justice and righteousness. Secondly, to strive
to accept patiently whatsoever he lays upon us, be it never so extreme and
grievous.

Doctrine. [it may be there is hope] we must trust in God, 2
and wait for the performance of his promises, though there be no hope in the
judgment of flesh and blood. The reason is, because, first, he is both able
and willing to be as good as his word, though he have reserved the time
when, in his own power. Secondly, he has always in greatest extremities
delivered his people. Thirdly, he brings us into straights to try us.
Fourthly, it is the nature of faith not to be quailed, 1. John 8. 4. The use is
to teach us, first, that faith is a thing that reason or man's strength cannot
attain unto: and therefore we must beg it of God, and use the means that he
has appointed in his word to attain unto it, and to grow in it. Secondly, to
try our selves how strong in faith we be, by our resolution and persuasion
of a joyful issue, though we be in the greatest straights that any of Gods
children have fallen in to.

[He gives his cheek to him that smites him] i. he takes Verse 30.
willingly and patiently the stripes that men do injuriously lay upon him [he
is filled with reproach] i. he sustayneth all kinds of vexations from the
hands of al kinds of ungodly ones.

Doctrine. [he gives, etc.] The Godly do patiently bear the injuries that
men do lay upon them. The reason is, because, 1
first, they know it cannot be done by them without the Lord. Secondly, they
are assured that it is for their good. The use is, first, to reprove the
impatiencie and revenge that naturally we are addicted unto. Secondly, to teach
us to try our selves how much we have profited by affliction, by the measure
of patience (being iniuried) that we have attained unto.

Doctrine. [filled, etc.] The godly are subject to all kind of 2
vexation by the hands of all sorts of men. The reason is, because, first,
whatsoever the wicked do love, they are haters of the truth, and the
professors thereof. Secondly, the godly are not of this world, but chosen out
of it, Ioh. 15. 19. etc. Thirdly, they do not run to the same excess of
riot with the wicked, 1 Pet. 4. 4. The use is to teach us, first, to look for
many and diverse molestations from the wicked in this world. Secondly, to learn
to take them patiently, and so profit in godliness by them.

[For the Lord will not reject for euer] i. howsoever it please the Lord for a
time to hide his loving countenance from his Verse 23.
servants, yet does not he put them far from him (for the hebrew word
signifies) without restoring them to the feeling of his favor again.

Doctrine. [for] An assured hope of deliverance grounded upon Gods promises, is
the only cause of the patience 1
and humility of Gods children in their troubles. The reason is, because,
first, the corruption of man's nature being of it self wayward, cannot take
afflictions patiently, without supernatural help: therefore we say without
hope the heart would break. Secondly, where there is no hope, there is no
faith: where there is no faith, there is no comfort to give patience. Thirdly,
else the damned might have patience which they have not, as appears by their
gnashing of teeth. The use is, to teach us to be careful to use the means of
obtaining hope, and growing in it, praising GOD for such means as we have, and
mourning for that we want.

Doctrine. [forsake] The godly in the extremities of their afflictions, do
sometime imagine that GOD has forsaken 2
them. The reason is, because, first, their guilty conscience acknowledges al
damnation due unto them. Secondly, the weight of Gods anger that darkeneth
their faith for the time. Thirdly, God does thereby make them know what they
are without him, and causes them to make more precious account of his favor,
when it is renewed unto them. The use is to teach us, first, not to cast off all
hope either of our selves, or others, though we be brought to the pit of
despairation in our own judgments. Secondly, to distrust our own strength
and know the weakness thereof, that we may grow more and more in knowledge and
in the fruits of the same.

Doctrine. [for euer] It is impossible that God should forsake 3
for ever, any one of his children. The reason is, because, first, whom once
he loves, to the end he loves them, John 13. 1. seeing his gifts are
without repentance, Romans 11. 29 etc. else none could have hope in their
troubles but all must needs despair. The use is to teach us, first, how to
understand the speech in the scripture that says, God repented. Secondly, that
it is spoken according to man's capacity, for that it seems so to us when he
stays his threatened judgments. Thirdly, upon what ground to condemn their
doctrine that think any of the elect ca^ perish, or any of the reprobates be
saved. Fourthly, to be comforted in our temptations, seeing we once felt
comfort, and God is no changeling.

[But if he afflict] i. Notwithstanding he does usually lay many and heavy
afflictions upon his people [yet he has Uers. 32.
compassion] i. yet he does in pity, and even in his wrath, remember mercy,
Habac. 3. 2. [according to the multitude of his mercies] i. even because he is
infinite in mercy, and has always used to show favor.

Doctrine. [if he afflict] God does necessarily afflict one 1
way or other, every one of his children. The reason is, because, first, every
one angreth him by those sins which he daily commits. Secondly, correction
is a seal of Gods love toward them, Heb. 12. 4. etc. Thirdly, it is
profitable for them, if it be rightly taken, and use made of it. The use is,
first, to reprove their judgments as most foolish, that think them the
greatest sinners, that have the most grievous punishments in this life.
Secondly, to teach us not to pray for a freedom from afflictions in this life,
for that were against faith and Gods love to us. Thirdly, to rejoice in
troubles, enduring them patiently though they be most bitter to our nature, and
to praise God for them, seeing we have (or may have) so many benefits with
them.

Doctrine. [yet he has compassion] God suffers none of his children in
afflictions to be tempted above their strength; 2
but always makes his love known unto them by delivering them in due time.
The reason is, because, first, else none could stand, seeing the weakness of
man's nature would yield unto the least temptation. Secondly, it is an
inseparable property of God to show mercy, whenever it is expedient for
any of his servants, Isay 54. 7, 8. Psalm. 89. 33. 34 Hab. 3. 2. The use is, to
teach us, first, not to repine or accuse God in the greatest of our
afflictions. Secondly, to be comforted in all our troubles, waiting with
patience and prayer for the manifestation of Gods compassions and mercies to us.

Doctrine. [according to the etc.] The love and mercy of God is the only
fountain, and cause of all the favor showed 3
to his people. The reason is, because, first, all men are sinners, deserving
Gods curse, which cannot be removed by any Saints or Angels. Secondly, man is
not able of himself to think a good thought, 2. Cor. 3. 5. al his
righteousness being as a filthy cloute, Isay 64. 6. The use is, to teach us,
first, to be humbled in the consideration of our own miserable estate without
Gods mercy. Secondly, to seek only to God for all good things, using the
means approved by his word for the obtaining of the same, and avoiding all
other. Thirdly, to praise God only for all the good things that we do or
shall enjoy, and not the means, but as second causes and instruments of the
same.

Doctrine. [multitude of his mercies] No sins in any of Gods children can be
unto death, be they never so many and 4
grievous. The reason is, because, first, Gods mercy is over all his works,
and rejoices against judgment. Secondly, his mercy is infinite as his
majesty, and cannot be overcome of sin. The use is, first, to confute the
Popish distinction of venial and mortal sins: for the greatest are venial
if God forgive them, and the least mortal if he show not mercy. Secondly, to
teach us, to admire Gods great mercies toward us, and not to take liberty to
sin thereby, but to use the same as a notable provocation to fear, love and
obey him, seeing he is so merciful unto us.

[For he does not punish from his heart] i. it arises not from Verse 33.
Gods voluntary desire, but from the sin of man that God punishes [and
makes sorrowful the children of men] i. gives them cause by afflicting them
to be vexed and grieved.

Doctrine. [for etc.] sin constrains the Lord to afflict 1
his dearest children: for the reasons hereof, see verse. 27. Doct. 1 The use
is, to teach us, first, to abhor sin above all things whatsoever. Secondly,
to accuse our selves alone, as the cause of all our afflictions.

Doctrine. [not punish from his heart] GOD takes no delight in afflicting his
children, Psalm. 81. 13. Isay 1. 24. The use 2
is, to teach us, first, to abhor their profaneness that say, God sporteth
himself himself in punishing man. Secondly, by his example, to censure others
with all remorse and pity, not delighting to disgrace them.

Doctrine. [maketh sorrowfull] The godly may not be as 3
Stoykes, but must be most passionate in their afflictions: for the reason and
use hereof, see verse. 15. Doct. 5.

[To stamp under foote] i. to spoil without regard [all the Verse 34.
prisoners of the earth] i. all those that are in misery and cast in bonds in
this world by the power of men.

[To wrest the right of a man] i. by false witness and corrupt Verse 35.
means, to take from the just that which is his own [before the face of the
Superiour] i. in solemn judgment under color of law, and that in the sight
and presence of those in authority.

[To ouerbeare a man in his cause] i. by strength, authority, Uers. 36.
or cunning, to cause a man to have sentence against him [the Lord sees not]
i. God does not approve any such thing, as Deuteronomy. 12. 13. for seeing is here to
be understood as knowing is, Psalm. 1. 6. Matthew. 7. 33. it being manifest that
God seeeth and knows all things, though he approve and allow only that
which is good.

Doctrine. (generally out of these three verses) Though 1
the wicked be raised up by Gods hand to afflict his people for their sins,
yet shall they not thereby be excused, but (without repentance) condemned for
it. The reason is, because, first, it is here said that GOD allows of no such
thing. Secondly, to condemn the innocent and justify the ungodly, are both an
abomination unto the Lord, Pro. 17. 15. etc. Thirdly, though God work their
action, yet is he far from the evil of their affection therein: for he has
one purpose in it, which is most holy, and they another which is 'most wicked,
I say 10. 5. 12 etc. Fourthly, they shall not be held excused, seeing Gods
purpose therein is not only to fear his children from offending, but also to
make the damnation of the wicked the more just, Matthew. 23. 33. etc. Fifthly, God
has such love to his children, that he has given special charge for their
defense, Psalm. 105. 15. and threatened severe punishments to fall upon their
oppressors, Genesis 15. 14. The use is, to teach us, first, what cause the wicked
have to be afraid of, showing violence to any of Gods children. Secondly, to
do no wrong unto others by any pretense, nor any way lay the blame upon God
for any thing, seeing that were to aggruate our own offenses. Thirdly, to
learn patience, and to be stayed from revenging our selves upon our
adversaries, seeing God uses them for our good, and will severely punish the
injuries done unto us.

Doctrine. [to stamp, etc] It is the lot of the godly to be 2
oppressed and abused by the wicked in this world. The reason is, because,
first, they think it a special means to make them fall from the truth, and
terrify others from believing it, seeing them so numbered among the wicked, and
seeing bondage crosses our natural affection Secondly, God sees afflictions
profitable to his people, to bridle their natural desires, and to make them
have the pleasures of this life in less account. The use is, first, to reprove
the corrupt judgment of them that account all that are in affliction as most
wicked and miserable, seeing it was ever the condition of the best: Examples
hereof, Iaacob, Joseph, Jeremy, David, Christ, etc. Secondly, to teach us to
take afflictions patiently, seeing we have therein a portion with the
righteous: and seeing we shall have the greater crown of glory, if we
continue unto the end. Thirdly, not to yield unto unlawful conditions to be
freed from the troubles we fall into.

Doctrine. [all the prisoners] Though magistrates have 3
power from God over the subjects bodies, yet will he punish al wrongs, and
want of protection, that they vex them withal. The reason is, because, first,
their power is not absolute, but limited to the rule of Gods word. Secondly,
there is no respect of persons with God, Psalm. 82. 7. Acts 10. 34. The use is,
first, to teach all superiors to take heed, lest they go beyond the power
that GOD has given them, seeing the mischiefs are infinite that flow from
misgouernment. Secondly, to teach us rather to suffer then to be a means of
evil, though the magistrate should judge us to it.

Doctrine. [to wrest, etc.] It is the lot of Gods children to be oppressed
before magistrates by false accusers and lying 4
witnesses: Examples hereof, are Naboth, Christ, Steven, etc. The reason is,
because, first, the tongue is most easily abused. Secondly, the truth is
thereby most disgraced, seeing it carries a show of being done justly. Thirdly,
we are thereby made the more like to Christ our head. The use is, first, to
teach us, not to be too much dismayed with such dealings against us, seeing it
is the lot of the righteous. Secondly, to teach magistrates to search out such
false accusers, and witnesses, and to punish them with that they sought to lay
upon the innocent: for so should it be by the law of God: the want of practice
whereof makes both Church and common weal to flow with false accusers.

Doctrine. [to ouer-beare, etc.] It is the lot of the godly to be ouer-borne by
the wicked in every controversy. The reason 5
is, because, the wicked will, first, flatter rulers: secondly, lie and suborne
all unlawful means that may be devised. The use is, to teach us, first, to
avoid all occasions of having controversy with the wicked, as much as may be.
Secondly, not therefore only to esteem a man faulty because he is condemned
before the magistrates: for he may be ouerborne in his righteous cause.

Doctrine. [the Lord sees it not] The Lord does not like of, but will be sure
to be revenged of all the injuries done to the 6
innocent, whether it be by magistrates, accusers, witnesses, or any others.
The reason is, because, God is not only just in all his own ways, but also a
severe revenger of the unrighteousness of men. The use is, to teach us, of what
condition soever we be, to take heed that we do not wrong any man, either
covertly or openly, seeing GOD will call all men to account, and judge of every
one according to his deeds.

[Who is he then] i. what man, or what creature in heaven Verse 37.
or earth is there? [that says it comes to passe] i. that is able to say
such a thing shall be, and to cause it to be indeed [and the Lord commanded it
not] i. except the Lord give his consent that it shall be, and his power to
bring it to pass?

Doctrine. [who is he then] No man can bring any thing to pass, except the
Lord give power thereunto, Isay 43. 13 1
Dan. 3. 16. Mat. 10. 29. Prouer. 20. 24. The reason is, because, God is
Almighty; that is, all might and power coming only from him: therefore is he
said to make the earth swallow up his foes, Exodus 15. 12. Numb. 16. 31. to
remove mountains, Job 9. 5. to measure the winds and waters, Job 28. 25. to
turn man's heart, and send plagues, Psalm. 104. 25. etc. to say to the North,
give, Isay 43. 6. and to the deeps, be dry, Isay 44. 27. to divide the roaring
sea, Isay 51. 15. and to be are rule over the kingdoms of the earth, Dan. 4.
29. The use is to teach us, first, how brutish they be that think to do
any thing as of themselves, or (as it were) not regarding, or, in despite of
the Lord: to such he gives notable foyles even in this world; as, to Pharaoh,
Exodus 5. 2. Senacherib, Isay 38. etc. Secondly, to acknowledge his mighty power,
and in all things that we take in hand, to be sure we have the warrnt of his
word, craving his strength to assist us therein.

Doctrine. [commaunded it] Nothing is done in the world, 2
but the Lord is the principal doer of it, Prou. 16. 33. The reason is,
because (as in the former doctrine) all power is of God: so as, man has no
power but from him, and yet is he not the author of sin, seeing he does all
things to an holy end, and with a most pure affection: whereas man doing the
self same action, has a sinister purpose in it, and does it with a sinful
affection, which makes it a sinful action in him: this is evident in the
selling of Joseph into Egypt: in the spoiling of Job: and crucifying of Christ:
all which actions he did to an holy end, with a most pure affection: but man
did them to an evil intent, with a corrupt affection. The use is, to reprove
them that think the Lord does only suffer many things to be done, and yet the
scripture terms him a doer (and not only a sufferer) of such kind of
actions, Exodus 7. 3. he hardened Pharohs heart, Exodus 21. 13. God has offered,
etc. Genesis 45. 8. God sent me hither, Acts. 4. 28. to do what thy counsel and
hand, etc. James 4. 15. if the Lord will, etc.

[Out of the mouth of the highest] i. From the decree and Verse 38.
secret appointment of GOD [commeth not every evil and good thing] i.
proceeds both prosperity and adversity, and all actions that tend to either
of them.

Doctrine. Both prosperity and affliction that do befall any in this life,
come from the decree and hand of the Lord, Amos 3. 6. Isay 45. 7. Job 2. 10.
The reason is, because (as in the former doctrine) he is the principal doer of
all things. The use is, first, to confute the vain opinion of Fortune,
whereunto the Philosophers and carnal ignorant people use to ascribe the thing
whereof they see not an apparent cause. Secondly, to teach us to acknowledge
him the author of our good, and praise him for it: and not to stay upon the
means as naturally we do: and to take patie^tly afflictions as from him, not
fretting at the instruments, which could do nothing without him, but finding
the cause in our own sins: as the next verse teaches.

[Why should living man turmoyle himselfe] i. what folly is Uers. 39.
it that any man should vex his soul in misiudging of his estate, and seeking
by-pathes to wind himself out [man for his sinnes] i. man I say that
suffers justly the punishment of his sins: for the hebrew word is used both
for sin, the sacrifice for sin, and the punishment of sin.

Doctrine. [Wherefore, etc.] It is the property of a natural man to be most
impatient and wayward in his afflictions. 1
The reason is, because, first they cross his affections which he desires to
satisfy. Secondly, he wants Gods spirit which is the worker of patience,
and comfort in distresses. The use is, first, to declare unto us in what
miserable condition we are by nature, if God should leave us therein. Secondly,
to teach us to try our selves in all afflictions, what measure of godliness
we have by the power that patience has in us to rule our natural affections.

Doctrine. [turmoyle himselfe] Man is naturally diligent 2
to wind out of afflictions, and inuenteth many means, but never finds out
the right; Examples hereof are, Pharaoh and Saul. The reason is, because,
first, afflictions do naturally discontent us. Secondly, we have a natural
inclination to labor for our own good. Thirdly, our nature is so corrupted,
that of it self it can do no good thing. Fourthly, Satan labors to keep
us in error. Fifthly, God only directs to weldoing, which naturally we are
far from. The use is, to teach us, not to trust in any thing that we can
invent of our selves, but to be sure to have a warrant out of Gods word for
all things that we take in hand, and to pray him to bless our endeavors
therein.

Doctrine. [man for his sinnes] Whatsoever man suffers, he is to esteem it
justly deserved by his sins, that he has 3
committed. The reason is, because, first, GOD is just, and cannot do any
wrong. Secondly, all men commit many sins, the least whereof deserve all that
can be laid upon us. The use is to teach us, first, in all our afflictions to
acknowledge our sins to be the cause thereof, and to learn to profit thereby
to amendment. Secondly, to learn to justify God (which is the drift of this
place) and patiently to bear it, seeking to amend, as follows.

[Let us search] i. Let us take a survey of [and trie] i. and Uers. 40.
prove by the touch stone of Gods word [our waies] i. the thoughts, words, and
deeds that we have conceived, spoken and done; and what they have deserved, if
God deal in justice with us [and turn again unto the Lord] i. be heartily
sorrowful for that which is amiss, crave pardon for it, with certain belief
to obtain it, and frame the rest of our lives according to his will.

Doctrine. [let us* etc.] Those that will soundly turn unto God, must
diligently examine their former life. The reason 1
is, because, first, none can repent him of that which he does not seriously
think of. Secondly, repentance is not sound if any known sin be not
particularly repented of. Thirdly, it will lay the multitude of his sins
before him at once, which will grieve him and humble him the more. The use is to
teach us, first, that they are far from repentance, which go on sleepily in
a carnal course, not recounting what they have been. Secondly, that if we will
prove to our selves that we do truly repent, we must heedfully begin with
this searching of our selves.

Doctrine. [trie] In examining our selves (which is the 2
beginning of true conversion) we must try our former behavior, how agreeable
it has been to Gods will. The reason is, because, else we cannot loath and
leave that is amiss, and go on in that which is well. The use is to teach us,
first, that they are far from conversion that are ignorant of Gods word, the
touch stone in this trial. Secondly, that we must be careful to obtain the
knowledge of Gods will, and to examine our selves continually by it.

Doctrine. [turne] It is nothing that we look to our ways and see what is
amiss therein, except we repent of it, ask 3
God forgiveness, believing to obtain remission, and lead a new life. The
reason is, because, first, the knowledge of our sins (if we go no further)
shall do us no good, but make our condemnation more just, even in our own
judgment. Secondly, we arh to try, and search our ways, to the end that we
may turn unto the Lord. The use is, to teach us, first, that they are never
the nearer to God, that can talk much of their own sins, and Gods mercies,
if they have no reformation in their lives. Secondly, to be careful (if we
will prove our selves rightly to fear God) that we reform our selves, in
whatsoever Gods word condemns, and walk in that which is prescribed by it.

[Let us lift up our hearts] i. by hearty prayer send up our Verse 41.
petitions [with our hands] i. and lift up our hands; that by that outward
gesture, our affections may be more stirred up unto prayer [vnto God] i. unto
the creator and governor of the whole world, that only is able and willing to
forgive us our sins [in the heauens] i. above all earthly things: and
therefore our faith must look upward.

Doctrine. [let us lift up etc.] True repentance works in us most earnest and
hearty prayer. The reason is, because, 1
first, in it, we see our misery in our selves, and what need we have to seek
to God for help. Secondly, it assures us of Gods love to us, and readiness
to hear us. Thirdly, it encourages us to call upon the Lord, who in our
conversion has given us experience of his unspeakable mercies. The use is, to
teach us, first, to be as diligent in performing this prayer aright, as we are
desirous to prove to our own hearts that our repentance is unfeigned.

Doctrine. [our hearts] Prayer to GOD consists not in words, but in the
fervent and faithful lifting up of the heart. 2
The reason is, because, first, God is a spirit, John 4. 24. and respects not
the outward action in his worship. Secondly, diverse have prayed aright, that
have uttered no words, Genesis 24. 63. Exodus 14. 15. The use is, first, to
reprove them that think prayer stands in saying over certain sentences;
which is the disposition of all men naturally; but the Papists exceed in it; of
whom the saying of the Prophet is verified, Isay 29. 23. etc. Secondly, to
teach us, to take heed that in prayer our hearts be set upon that we pray for,
and neither be carried away with any other by-thoughts, nor contented with an
ordinary affection therein.

Doctrine. [our hands] We may use all outward means 3
(that have warrant in the word) to stir up our affections, to be more
seruent in prayer. The reason is, because, first, we are naturally dull in it.
Secondly, our hearts are often moved with the things that our out ward senses
do apprehend. The use is to teach us, first, to what end kneeling, lifting up
of the eyes, and hands, etc. are commended unto us, in the holy scriptures; to
wit, not as parts of Gods service, but as means to further us in it.
Secondly, to take heed that we rest not in any of these outward things, but be
provoked to the in ward duty by them.

Doctrine. [vnto God] All our prayers are to be made unto 4
God alone, Psalm. 50. 15. Romans 10. 14. The reason is, because, first, it is he
only that can grant our requests. Secondly, we are not commanded in the
scriptures to call upon any other: and therefore if we do, it is not of faith;
and consequently it is sin. The use is, first, to reprove the dotage of the
heathen, that prayed to the sun, moon, and stars: and of the Papists, that
pray to Angels, and Saints. Secondly, to teach us to make all our prayers unto
the Lord alone, in the name of his son Christ, for such things as he has
promised in his word, and in such manner as he has prescribed.

Doctrine. [in the heauens] The prayer of the faithful 5
must never rest upon anything in this world, but look unto the mighty God,
the author of all things. The reason is, because faith reaches above reason,
or things that are seen. The use is to teach us, not to measure our hope when
we pray, by our own worthiness or understanding, but by the promise of God,
grounded upon his power and truth.

[We have sinned] The hebrew word signifies, a failing, or coming short of
our duty: the meaning is, we have Verse 42.
left undone that which we should have done [and have rebelled] i. done that
which we are forbidden [thou have not spared] i. thou have laid thy judgments
largely upon us.

The three first doctrines are gathered generally out of this large confession
following.

Doctrine. The time of affliction requires a special kind 1
of showing our repentence, both more fervent, and with longer continuance then
ordinary. The reason is, because, first, God therefore afflicts us, that we
might be brought to a more thorough repentance, Luke 5. 35. etc. Secondly, Gods
anger against us for our sins, is manifested unto us by afflictions: which
must be turned away by our unfeigned repentance, or we shall be consumed.
Thirdly, God has usually brought his people to such special declaration of
repentance, and blessed them therein, 1. Sam. 7. 5. 6. Nehem. 1. 2. and c.
Hester. 4. 16. The use is, first, to reprove the Papists, that have set times
offasting every year, whether they have cause to mourn or to rejoice.
Secondly, to reprove earn all professors that think fasting, etc. to pertain
to the old Church only, and not to us; seeing Christ said, it should be also
sometimes under the Gospel, Luke 5. 35. etc. Thirdly, it techeth us, that we
must perform especial duties, both private and public, when the punishing
hand of God is upon us in particular, or the Church in general. Fourthly, it
shows that affliction is most profitable for us, seeing it increases our
repentance, and whetteth the feruencie of ouraffectio^ in prayer.

Doctrine, It is necessary for Gods people to begin their prayers to God with a
free confession of their sins, Psalm. 32. 5. 2
Daniel. 9. 5. Nehem. 1. 6. The reason is, because, first, else we obtain no
forgiueuesie. Secondly, else we have no assurance that we have repented,
seeing confession does always accompany repentance. Thirdly, otherwise we
cannot rightly and thoroughly condemn our selves, and clear the Lord for
punishing us. Fourthly, by the confession of our sins, we are the more
humbled, and pepared the better to prayer. The use is, first, to reprove all
them that justify themselves like the proud Pharisie, and offer up their own
works for satisfaction unto God, as the Papists do. Secondly to reprove them
that will not gladly bear sharp reproof for their sins, nor be contented to
be censured by those means that God has prescribed in his word for the same
purpose. Thirdly, it teaches us for to love them that admonish us often, and
reprove us sharply, when we have offended, esteeming them our dearest friends,
and avoiding such as flatter, as Leuitic. 19. 17. Math. 18. 18. seeing it is
the means to bring us to this confession, which is so necessary.

Doctrine. It furthereth to through repentance that Gods 3
people do in their prayers adioyne to their confession of sins, a recital
of the judgments that are upon them for the same. The reason is, because,
first, they may thereby (if they will learn them by no other means) know and
think upon the multitude, and heynousnes of their offenses. Secondly, thereby
they are made to feel what need they stand in of Gods mercy, that they may
the more earnestly seek to him in fear and trembling. Thirdly, Gods mercy is
readiest for them that most freely acknowledge his justice in punishing them.
Fourthly, to teach us to recount Gods judgments upon our selves, and others,
generally or particularly, that we may be the better humbled and fitted thereby
to prayer.

Doctrine. [sinned: heb. failed] Every child of GOD is 4
justly punished that fails in any duty whatsoever it be, that God has
commanded him in his word. The reason is, because, first, all are his
creatures, and are to be obedient wholly to his commandments. Secondly, he
made us able in our creation to fulfill his whole law. Thirdly, the least
failing in our duty, is sin that provoke Gods anger, and brings a curse,
seem it never so trifling a matter in our corrupt judgment, The use is,
first, to reprove the Papists, that turn many of Gods commandments into
counsels, and so make them not enjoined under pain of Gods curse: also
accounting many sins venial in themselves. Secondly, to reprove them that
think themselves wronged, if they be punished, and have not fallen into
notorious gross sins; never remembering that duties must be done, as well as
vices avoided. Thirdly, to teach us, to acknowledge God to be holy, just and
righteous, whatsoever he lay upon us here: also uot to content our selves with
a civil life, seeing we are enjoined to do whatsoever God has commanded.

Doctrine. [rebelled] It is rebellion against the Lord, to despise 5
any of his laws, though all human laws should approve us therein. The
reason is, because, first, God is king of kings, and will be served without
exception. Secondly, else God should yield unto men. Thirdly, we are to obey
men (only) in the Lord, and no further. The use is, first, to reprove rulers
that require obedience of their subjects to all their own decrees, not
regarding whether God be disobeyed thereby or no. Secondly, to reprove them
that pretend man's law to defend themselves in their sins; as in the breach
of the Sabbath, contentedness with the dumb Ministry, putting of money to
usury, etc. Secondly, it teaches us always to hold this both in judgment
and practice, It is better to obey God then men, Acts 5. 29.

Doctrine [not spared] No excuse nor privilege can shield 6
any man from Gods plagues for sin. The reason is, because, first, God cannot
hold the wicked innocent. Secondly, God must necessarily in love correct his
children, that they may know their sins, and the desert thereof, and be
reformed thereby. The use is, to teach us, first, to gather the heinousness of
our sins by the grieuousnes of our punishments. Secondly, to shun all excuses
by privilege of birth, wealth, authority, etc. (for no excuse will serve) but
to acknowledge Gods justice and mercy in punishing us. Thirdly, so often as we
are any way afflicted, to labor to amend our lives, if we look to be cased.

[Thou have covered us with wrath] i. Thou have overwhelmed us with the
multitude of thy judgments, that flow Verse 43.
from thine anger against us for our sins [and persecuted vs] i. followed us
with all kinds of thy judgments, to every place that we have fled unto, and
met with every excuse that we could pretend [thou have slaine] i. destroyed us
in great abundance [and not spared] i. showed no compassion to any age or sex.

Doctrine. [thou have covered, etc.] The godly endure more trouble in this
world both inwardly and outwardly, 1
then anyother: for the reason and use hereof, see chapt. 1. verse. 12. doctr. 5.

Doctrine. [persecuted] There is neither place to hide our 2
selves in, nor excuse that will defend us, when God purposes to punish us for
our sins: for the reason, and use hereof, see verse. 5. doctr. 1.

Doctrine. [thou hast] and yet it was the enemies that did 3
it, teaching us this doctrine. In our afflictions we must not look to the
instruments, but to the Lord that smites: for the reason, and use hereof, see
chapt. 1. verse. 5. doctr. 5.

Doctrine. [slaiue and not spared] As God is full of mercy 4
in his long suffering, so is his anger unappeasable, when it breaks out
against the sons of men: for the reason, and use hereof, see chap. 2. verse.
2. doct. 2.

Doctrine. [not spared] Men feel not Gods hand sufficiently 5
to be humbled thereby, except the Lord smite them most severely. The reason
is, because, first, of our natural blindness and blockishnesse to follow that
which is righteous in Gods sight. Secondly, such is our hypocrisy, that else
we would seek shifts. Thirdly, our course in sinning is naturally so strong,
that it will not otherwise be stayed. The use is to teach us, first, what
monsters we are by nature. Secondly, to renounce our selves and all that we can
do, acknowledging Gods justice howsoever he punish us, and ascribing it to
his mere mercy, that there is any good thing in us.

[Thou have covered thy self with a cloud] i. thou do (as Verse 44.
it were) hide thy self and set a bar betwixt thee and us [that prayers
should not pass thorough] i. to the end that our supplications should not come
up in thy sight.

Doctrine. [couered thy self, etc.] The sins of Gods people do often
separate betwixt God and them, that his 1
mercies might be kept from them, Isay 59. 2. Jeremy 5. 25. The reason is,
because, first, our sins provoke his wrath till it be appeased. Secondly, else
we would not much fear Gods anger: such is our corruption. The use is, first,
to reprove them that blame God or his word, ministers or Gods means that he
uses when any plague is upon them. Secondly* to teach us to blame our sins
for every judgment that is upon us. Thirdly, to labor our hearts carefully to
repentance and to obey the Lord, seeing it is the nature of every sin, to
separate betwixt God and us, choosing death (if the will of God be such) rather
then life by sinful means.

Doctrine. [prayer should not] God often deferreth to hear 2
the prayer of his children when yet he purposes in due time to grant their
requests: for the reason, and use hereof, see verse. 8. doctr. 3.

[Thou have appoynted] i. By thy hand that disposes all Verse 45.
things, thou have given us the condition of [the sweepings and refuse] i such
as are abhorred and loathed [in the midst] i. by the greatest in number and
accoumpt [of the people] i. those nations that have occasion to think of us.

Doctrine. [the sweepings] When God means thoroughly to humble his people, he
makes them odious in the eyes 1
of all men, 1. Cor. 4. 13. The reason is, because, first, he would take all
matter of worldly ostentation from them, which whilst they have, they are
hardly pulled down. Secondly, that the enemies in the error of their judgment
might have a persuasion of well-doing in molesting them. Thirdly, that they may
know by experience, the uncertainty and vanity of worldly confidence: and so
(being out of love therewith) long for heaven, and delight in heavenly things.
The use is to teach us, first, the perverseness of our disposition, that
needs so sharp means to do us good. Secondly, whenever we fall into
disgrace with the world, to better our ways, by leaving our sins and being
more zealous in godliness.

Doctrine. [thou have. etc.] It is the Lord that lays disgrace 2
upon his people in this life, or else it could not fall upon them. The reason
is, because he is Almighty, and does all things, as verse. 37. doct. 1. The use
is, first, to reprove them that ascribe such things to fortune, and them that
respect chiefly the instruments of their disgrace. Secondly, to teach us
whenever any such thing befalls us, to acknowledge it to be the hand of God
upon us for our sins, and to learn amendment by it.

Doctrine. [in the middest] That which tends to the disgrace of the godly, is
more generally received, then any other 3
tidings whatsoever. The reason is, because, first, God will have it a matter
to humble them, and a stumbling block to the wicked. Secondly, it is the
longing desire of the wicked to fasten any thing upon the godly that may
disgrace them. The use is to teach us, first, not to judge of any by the
report of the world. Secondly, not to be amazed when it is our case, but to
profit by it to amendment.

[All our enemies] i. all that are against us, of all nations, Verse 46.
and degrees [haue opened their mouth] i. have freely and largely spoken
[against vs] i. whatsoever might defame us.

Doctrine. In that this follows upon Gods giving them over into reproach, we
learn this doctrine. God must give 1
his people over into reproach before that the wicked can revile them. The
reason is, for that the tongues as well as the actions, of all men are directed
by the Lord, and stopped at his pleasure. The use is, to teach us, to be
humbled by it when we fall into the reproach of men, acknowledging it the hand
of GOD: so did David, 2. Samuel 16. 10. etc.

Doctrine. [all our enemies have opened, etc] It is a special 2
property of the wicked to rail at the godly, and revile them: for the
reason, and use hereof, see chapt. 2. verse 16. doctr. 2.

[Feare and the pit] i. great terror, and no way to escape, Uers. 47.
but being as they that stick fast in a ditch, when their enemies pursue them
[is come upon vs] i. is our present condition, by reason of the insolency of
the enemy [desolation] i. utter overthrow [and destruction] i. an
irrecouerable renting of us in sunder.

Doctrine. [Feare, etc.] when the wicked insult against the 1
godly, then are they in greater vexation then under any other cross that can
befall them. The reason is, because, first, religion it self is thereby
disgraced, which ought to be dearer unto them then their lives. Secondly, they
have cause to fear that GOD will wholly deliver them and their religion to be
trodden under foot of spoylers. The use is to teach us, first, to try our
selves how zealous we are of Gods glory, by the measure of our grief, when the
enemies do blaspheme. Secondly, to strive to take to heart more and more the
dishonor of the truth by the reuilings of men.

Doctrine. [the pitte] Gods people are sometimes brought 2
to such extremities, as they cannot possibly see any way to escape. The
reason is, because, first, God will let them see that their help is not in
themselves, but in him. Secondly, thereby we know what grievous things our
sins do deserve to bring us into. Thirdly, God shows us thereby the hatred
of the enemy, that we may learn to shun him. The use is to teach us,
first, not to judge of our selves or others by the outward estate of his life.
Secondly, to look for such a condition, and to prepare our selves to bear it.

Doctrine. [desolation] when the wicked do prevail 3
most, then is the misery of the godly greatest. The reason is, because, they
cannot both flourish together. The use is, to teach us, to pray heartily unto
GOD for the suppression of the ungodly, and protection of his people from the
fury of the wicked.

Doctrine. [destruction] when God brings his people into 4
straights, it is an easy thing for the wicked to make havoc of the^. The
reason is, because, first, the Lords strength that was for them, is then turned
against the^. Secondly, the godly hold it lawful to use good means only,
whereas the wicked devise any, whether good or evil to serve their turn. The
use is, to teach us, not to wonder at the sudden grouth of the wicked, but to
acknowledge our sins that do give God such cause to stir them against us.

Doctrine. [destruction] In the desolation of the Church of God, there do fall
out great distraction, and rents among 5
the members thereof. The reason is, because, first, Gods presence, the bond of
their unity, is removed from them. Secondly, they follow their own devises,
which are all diverse one from another. Thirdly, they are ready (in the
corruption of their nature) each to lay the blame upon others, and none upon
themselves. The use is to teach us, first, to try thereby who do fear God
soundly, 1. Corinthians. 11. 19. etc. Secondly, to take heed that we be no
occasion of schism among brethren whatsoever extremity befall us.

[Mine eye] i. mine eyes: the singular number for the Uers. 48.
plural [descendeth] i falls (as it were) wholly away [in rivers of water]
i. such abundance of tears come from them, as though they were wholly
dissolved into water [for the destuction] i. for the ruin and overthrow [of
the daughter of my people] i. my brethren, so tender and dear unto me.

Doctrine. [mine eye, etc.] The godly ought more by outward 1
signs to declare their sorrow for the overthrow of the Church of God, then
for any other calamity that they can have share of in this life. The reason
is, because, first, Gods glory is thereby defaced. This caused Moses, Exodus 32.
32. and Paul Romans 9. 3. to be so earnest, as to neglect their own felicity in
respect thereof. Secondly, the faith of every one in particular is much shaken
thereby, the means of sustaining it being overthrown. Thirdly, those that are
linked with us in the nearest bond, are in danger of falling away. Fourthly,
the adversaries mouth is opened to blaspheme, The use is, to teach us, when we
hear or see this desolation, to labor with our selves that we may be affected
with it, and not pass it over carelessly, though it go well with us in
particular: thus did Nehemiah, 2. 3.

Doctrine. [riuers of water] When tears are shed for the 2
overthrow of religion, they are undoubted signs of the true fear of GOD. The
reason is, because, first, they declare that Gods spirit dwells in that
heart, whereby religion (which naturally we regard not) is made dear unto
it. Secondly, it argues a fellow-feeling betwixt the body hurt, and the
party weeping; and consequently an unfeigned in grafting into Christ Jesus. The
use is, to teach us, to try our selves, what measure of this sorrow is in us,
for the desolations that the Church of God has every where.

[Mine eye droppeth] i. flows from me in tears [and Verse 49.
staieth not] i. continues without ceasing [because of no intermission] i.
because there is no stay, or breathing time of the misery that is upon the
daughter of my people.

Doctrine. [and staieth not] when God smites his people without intermission,
then ought they to mourn without 1
ceasing. The reason is, because, he smites to bring them to through
repentance; whereunto when they attain, he will stay his hand. The use is,
first, to reprove them that take not their afflictions to heart for amendment,
and those that think mourning for a day sufficient, Isay 58. 5. etc. Secondly,
to teach us, to labor our selves, and increase in mourning so long as the
Lords hand continues heavy upon his Church in general, or our selves in
particular.

[Till the Lord look downe] i. till God declare by his favorable Verse 50.
hand, that he looks upon us; for he always looks upon all things [and
behold from heauen] i. send us the light of his favorable countenance, by a
mighty deliverance.

Doctrine. [till, etc.] When the Lords correcting hand is 1
upon his people, he seems to neglect them, and not to look upon them. The
reason is, because, first, he withdraws the feeling of his loving favor in
many respects. Secondly, they judge (especially in their agony) according to
their present feeling. The use is, to teach us to use all good means to
continue the Lords loving countenance; and if he frown, not to think our
selves forsaken.

Doctrine. [till the Lord, etc.] The godly in affliction do never give over
mourning and humbling themselves before 2
God, till the rod be removed. The reason is, because, first, it is the
nature of faith, not to be overcome in affliction. Secondly, they know they
must be afflicted till they be sufficiently humbled, and therefore they labor
to grow in it. The reason is, first, to reprove them that cast off the
profession of godliness, because afflictions go with it, and embrace this
present world with Demas. Secondly, to teach us, not to be so much weary of
the rod, as of our sins that continue it upon us, because they are not repented
of.

[Mine eye] i. the misery that I see with mine eye [grieueth Verse 51.
mine heart] i. gives great cause of lamentation unto my heart [aboue all the
daughters of my citie] i. more then the most passionate women use to be vexed,
with that which does most nearly touch them.

Doctrine. [mine eye] The eye in seeing the outward miseries that God lays
upon us, is a special mean to make us 1
the more sorrowful in heart for it. The reason is, because, first, the sight
is the quickest of the senses. Secondly, things seen are most surely and amply
known and understood, seeing a report may deceive us, but not the sight; for
that it vieweth all the circumstances, as Deuteronomy. 28. 31. etc. Ier. 52. 10 The
use is, first, to administer comfort unto those that want their sight, seeing
they cannot behold the things that are lamentable, as those that have it.
Secondly, to teach us to use our eyes to the beholding of lawful things only,
lest GOD cause us to see that which shall make a most deep impression of
grief into our hearts.

Doctrine. [aboue all] Natural affection of the most passionate 2
woman can bring no such grief of heart, as the misery of the Church of God
does often work in the godly. The reason is, because, first, they mourn for
things temporal, these for spiritual. Secondly, they have nothing but
natural affection to set them on work; these have Gods spirit also that
helps them herein, and works a greater affection to Gods truth, then any
affection of nature can work in a mother to the child of her womb. The use
is, to reprove them that would have men become void of passions, as the
Stoikes; and those that call this sorrow melancholy, and fantastical motions;
deriding those that do thus mourn. Secondly, to teach us to learn by the
affection of natural women, how to lament for the decay of religion, and the
afflictions of Gods people.

[Mine enemies] i. those strangers, and unkind folks that Verse 52.
set themselves against me [chased me] i. pursued after me to destroy me [sore]
i. in most eger and extreme manner [as a bird] i. as a fowler pursues the
bird, with desire to take it [without cause] i. I having given them no occasion
hereof by any harm that I have intended or done against them.

Doctrine. [mine enemies] The true Church and faithful people of God do never
want enemies whilst they live 1
here, who do most egerly pursue them, by all means seeking to overthrow
them. The reason is, because, first, many walk in the broad way, who being of
contrary quality to the godly, do therefore hate them, 2. Cor. 6. 14, 15.
etc. Psalm. 124. 6, 7. and 129. 1. 3. and 56. 1 etc. Secondly, Gods providence
has disposed that it should be so, for the more just condemnation of the
wicked, and the greater good of his servants. The use is, first, to reprove the
Papists, that make multitude, and a visible Monarchy a note of the true
Church. Secondly, to teach us, to take heed of familiarity with the wicked,
lest we be either smitten by them, or drawn to join with them in smiting the
innocent. Thirdly, to look always for such hatred, if we desire to walk
soundly in the ways of the Lord.

Doctrine. [as a bird] The godly of themselves are so simple 2
and weak, that they can neither prevent, nor withstand the policies or
strength of their adversaries. The reason is, because, first, GOD usually
chooses those that be naturally simple, 1. Cor. 1. 27. etc. therefore are
they termed doves, Psalm. 74. 19. Cantic. 2. 14. sheep, John 10. 27. Matthew. 10.
16. etc. Secondly, the godly are but few, weak, and making conscience to tie
themselves only to lawful means. The use is, first, to reprove the Popish
error of commending men for their pompous worldly wisdom: also the Jews,
carnal men, and politiques, that condemn the mean estate of Christ's people
and look only to the worldly means that me^ do admire. Secondly, to teach us
to look for both subtle, crafty, and open violent enemies, if we will serve
God aright.

Doctrine. [without cause] The wicked are moved by the 3
malice of their own hearts, to persecute the godly, not having any cause
given by them, to move them thereunto, Pro. 1. 11. 17. The reason is, because,
first, the godly are fewer, weaker, simpler, and withdraw themselves from them.
Secondly, nothing can be just cause to make one bitter against another but
sin, which the wicked hate not. Thirdly, God in his providence has appointed
it to be so, to show his righteousness in delivering his, and overthrowing the
other. The use is to teach us, to take patiently the wrongs offered us by the
wicked, seeing they hate us not for our sins, but for the best things in us,
assuring our selves that the righteous God will take our cause into his own
hand.

[They] i. the enemies mentioned in the former verse Verse 53.
[haue shut up my life in the dungeon] i. have not only imprisoned me but also
used cruel means to take my life from me [and cast a stone upon me] i. set an
hinderance against me to deprive me of all means of recovery: this was
especially true in Jeremy his own person, Ierem. 37. 16.

Doctrine. [shut up my life] The wicked be often so enflamed with malice
against the godly, as nothing will satisfy 1
them but their blood, for the reason and use hereof, see Chap. 2. verse. 16.
doctr. 3.

Doctrine. [and cast a stone upon me] The wicked do not content themselves
with ordinary means to seek the life 2
of the godly, but also practice often more then naturally seems needful,
Mat. 27. 66. The reason is, because, first, they bear a deadly hatred to the
truth and professors thereof, Romans 3. 13. etc. Secondly, the sting of their
evil conscience, that makes them always fear they shall not prevail, Dan.
6. 16. 17. The use is, to teach us, first, that they that bend themselves
against the Church of GOD, shall be mad as Woolues, and foolish in their
practices, whose hope GOD will bring to confusion. Secondly, that we may not
despair, though all means be against us. Thirdly, to give all praise for the
Churches deliverance unto God alone, seeing he does so miraculously work for
it.

[Waters have slowed over mine head] i. many and great Verse 54.
miseries, and troubles have overwhelmed and oppressed me both in soul and
body [I said I am destroyed] i. I persuaded my self, and uttered it with my
words, that I was utterly overthrown, seeing no means to the contrary, and
all occasions that might be, to make me think so.

Doctrine. [waters, etc.] many, grievous, and inevitable 1
are the troubles and miseries which Gods faithful people suffer in this life,
Acts 14. 22. Psalm. 34. 19. and 69. 1. 2. 15. 16. etc. 2. Tim. 3. 12. The
reason is, because, first, Satan and the wicked do continually pursue them
with deadly hatred, seeking to destroy them. Secondly, God scourges every
son that he receives, Heb. 12. 6. to bring them to repentance, to conform
them to Christ their head, to make them out of love with this life, and to
inflame their thirst after that which is to come. The use is, to reprove all
profane and fearful men that mislike them that suffer, or dare not suffer
for the truth, thinking them best that suffer least. Secondly, to teach us to
prepare ourselves to suffer extremities whilst we be here, seeing our lot is
to suffer for Christ, if we rightly believe in his name.

Doctrine. [I sayd] The godly oppressed with miseries, are often brought both
to doubt and to despair for the time, 2
Job 3. 1. Psalm. 22. 1. and 77. 1. to the 11. Ierem. 15. 18. and 20. 14. etc.
The reason is, because, first, they judge according to their present feeling.
Secondly, man's infirmity is naturally prone to infidelity. Thirdly, God in
his wisdom withdraws the feeling of his grace for a time, to let them see
themselves, and to make them seek to him the more earnestly. Fourthly, to make
them more thankful for his grace when they feel it, and more careful to
continue in it. The use is to teach us, first, that we are most miserable by
nature, if God leave us to our selves. Secondly, to look for heavy temptations
in the time of afflictions. Thirdly, not to cast off all hope of recovering,
though we seem to be in a most desperate condition, but carefully to use the
means thereof, as first, the meditation of our former feeling: secondly,
prayer: thirdly, the use of the exercises of religion: fourthly, company and
conference with the godly only.

[I called upon thy name] i. I prayed heartely unto thee [O Lord] i. O thou
that rulest the whole world [out of the low Uers. 55.
dungeon] i. from the place and condition of greatest extremity, when no
means of deliverance appeared.

Doctrine. [I called] The godly do pray unto the Lord for 1
his grace and favor, even when they are in such great extremity that al
hope, in reason, is past: Examples hereof, Moses at the red sea, Israel often,
Jonah in the whales belly, etc. The reason is, because, first, their faith can
never be quayled, seeing it is that which overcomes the world, 1. Ioh. 5. 4.
etc. Secondly, they rest upon Gods truth, that fails not, and power that
rules all things. The use is to teach us, first, to strive against that
temptation which persuades to surcease praying when our case seems
desperate. Secondly, that their profession was but temporary when troubles do
quail. Thirdly, to call still upon God in the day of our troubles, yea, to
increase in feruencie, according to the increase of danger and continuance
therein.

Doctrine. [lowe dungeon] There is no condition so miserable 2
in this life, but the godly may and do fall into it: Examples, Abraham for
uncertain dwelling, David for many enemies, Job for inward and outward
miseries of all sorts. The reason is, because, first, GOD will show his anger
against sin in this life, even upon his own servants. Secondly, that by
afflictions they might be weaned from the delight in this world, and made in
love with heaven. The use is, to teach us, first, to reprove them that judge
according to the outward estate of any, what favor they are in with the Lord.
Secondly, to teach us, not to promise our selves any worldly success, but to
look always for the contrary.

[Thou have heard my voyce] i. heretofore when I have prayed thou have granted
my petitions [stop not thine ear Verse* 56.
from my sigh and my crye] i. do not now refuse to regard mine earnest and
hearty prayer: for the hebrew word that is translated sigh, signifies the
enlarging or lifting up of the spirit, which must needs arise from the touch
of the heart: and the last word expresses the feruencie of the heart, which
enforces the voice unto vehemency.

Doctrine. [thou have etc.] The experience of Gods former favor, is a notable
provocation to cause us still to trust in 1
him again in our necessities, Psalm. 4. 1. The reason is, because, first, it
argues that we are ingrafted into Christ, and therefore shall be loved unto
the end, seeing God changes not. Secondly, GOD is always ready to show
mercy, and to forgive; and therefore he will do it one time, as well as
another. The use is, to teach us, first, to use this as a special comfort to
the afflicted heart, being void of present comfort, and to beat back that
temptation which says, God has cast thee off. Secondly, to recount Gods
former mercies, taking comfort therein, and stirring up our selves thereby unto
prayer, with assurance to be heard.

Doctrine. [sigh and crye] The prayer of the godly ought to come from the
heart, and to be with greatest feruency that 2
may be. The reason is, because, first, God will not be dallied withal, but
looks to the inward affection. Secondly, we must groan under the burden of
that we would be rid of, and long for that we desire, before God will hear
us. The use is, first, to reprove the lip-labor of the Papists, and of the
ignorant profane people that think, prayer stands in an ordinary saying of
certain words. Secondly, to teach us to take heed, that in our prayer we be
not carried away into by-thoughts. Thirdly, to labor a forehand by the
meditation of the things we pray for, to affect our hearts therwithal.

[Thou drewest neere] i. by taking away my miseries, and bestowing thy graces
upon me, thou that did seem to be Verse 57.
far off, shewedst thy self to be at hand [in the day that I called upon
thee] i. even when I did pray unto thee [thou saidest] i. thou did as
clearly manifest this unto me, as if I had heard thy voice speak unto me
[feare not] i. cast thy care upon me, and be not afraid what man can do unto
thee; for I am with thee, and will preserve thee.

Doctrine [thou drewest] when the godly do rightly pray 1
unto the Lord, they have most notable experience of his favor toward them.
The reason is, because, first, God performs his promise unto them, Call upon
me etc. Psalm 50. 15. Come unto me etc. Matthew. 11. 28 etc. Secondly, their
affections are carried into heaven, where is the fullness of joy, from earthly
things that are full of vexation. The use is, first, to reprove them that
either account fervent prayer needles, or are negligent in it. Secondly, to
teach us, that we therefore are not heard when we pray, because we call not
aright. Thirdly, to teach us to labor with our selves, that we may increase
in fervent and often prayer.

Doctrine. [saidest fear not] The Lord does give most notable 2
encouragements and comforts, unto those that rightly worship him: Examples
hereof, are many in the Scriptures, and in daily experience. The reason is,
because, first, the Lord does thereby manifest his love unto his servants.
Secondly, he will daunt the enemies by their wonderful patience, constancy,
comfort, and courage. Thirdly, others may be allured by their example to trust
in him. The use is, first, to reprove them that account the patience of the
godly, sottishness; their courage, desperatnesse; and their constancy,
obstinacy. Secondly, to teach us, that in walking uprightly, and calling upon
God for his assistance, we shall be assured that he will be with us, and
deliver us, howsoever he seem for a time to neglect us.

[O Lord thou have maintained the cause of my soule] i. thou Lord have defended
me whenever my life has been in Uers. 58.
question [thou have redeemed my life] i. thou have delivered me from the hands
of those that sought to destroy me.

Doctrine [thou have etc.] The Lord defends the cause of his servants,
whenever any injury is offered them by 1
the sons of men, Matthew. 28. 20. Deuteronomy. 28 7 etc. The reason is, because,
first, he accounts the wrongs that they sustain, to be done unto himself,
Acts 9. 4. seeing they are molested for his truth Secondly, he is the righteous
judge of the world, that has promised to relieve the oppressed, Psalm. 146. 7.
etc. The use is, to teach us, first, in what fearful case all persecutors
are, seeing they have the Lord against them. Secondly, to be encouraged in
weldoing, seeing God is with us, and in our righteous cause will never leave us.

Doctrine. [soule, life] It is the soul of the godly, that the wicked do
always hunt after, howsoever they do not always 2
profess so to do: for the reason and use hereof, see verse. 53. doct. 1. of
this Chapter.

Doctrine. [redeemed] Whatsoever extremities the godly do endure in this life,
yet are they in the end delivered by 3
the hand of the Lord from al their troubles: Examples hereof, are Job, David,
Israel, etc. The reason is, because, first, he fights for them, that is the
strongest. Secondly, the enemies of the righteous must needs be overthrown.
The use is, to teach us, with patience to bear whatsoever the Lord shall lay
upon us, knowing that the issue thereof shall surely be joyful, Psalm. 126. 5.
etc.

[O Lord thou have seen all my wrongs] i. thou have looked upon, and
considered the manifold wrongs that they have Verse 59.
done unto me [iudge thou my cause] i. take thou my cause O Lord into thine
hands, and judge me according to mine uprightness (not toward thee but)
toward them.

Doctrine. [thou have seen etc.] It is a notable encouragement to pray to God
for help against our enemies, when our 1
conscience assures us our cause is righteous. The reason is, because, first,
the righteous God will assuredly defend every man in his righteous cause.
Secondly, our conscience being clear, gives peace to our hearts, strength to
our faith, and feruencie to our prayers. The use is, to teach us, first, the
cause why in bad matters men seek to any other for help, rather then to God,
and in good causes rest on God only, even for that the conscience accuses in
the evil, and excuses in the good. Secondly, that in all our controversies
with men, we labor to be upright both in matter and manner, so shall we have
comfort in the strife.

Doctrine. [iudge thou etc.] The conscience of a good cause, makes us desirous
to come to trial before God or men. The 2
reason is, because, first, we look for such an end as we judge our cause to
be Secondly, we know that all judgments are, or should be equal. The use is,
to teach us, first, the cause why many men refuse to come to trial in their
controversies; even for that they know it is naught and will not justify it
self. Secondly, never to stand in the defense of any cause, but such as we are
willing to be judged in, both by God and all indifferent men.

[Thou have seene] i. thou have beholden and considered Verse 60.
[all their vengeance] i. all their extreme and spiteful reuenges and
cruelties [and all their thoughts against me] i. all their mischiefs that
their hearts conceived to vex me with all.

Doctrine. [vengeance] It is a property of the wicked to show all hard and
cruel behavior toward the godly. The 1
reason is, because, first, they are led by the malice of Satan, which rules
the children of disobedience. Secondly, the course of the godly tends to the
pulling down of sin, which the wicked do most delight in. The use is, to
teach us, first, to take heed of dealing cruelly with any, lest we show our
selves branded with the mark of the ungodly. Secondly, to look for all
extremities at the hands of the wicked, and to learn to take it patiently,
seeing it is the lot of the righteous.

Doctrine. [thoughts] The thoughts and imaginations of 2
man, are clearly known unto the Lord. The reason is, because, he made the
heart, as well as other parts, and knows the depth of the bottom thereof,
Psalm. 94. 11. Acts 1. 24. The use is, first, to reprove their blindness that
think themselves safe, if men see not their actions; and them that think
their thoughts to be free. Secondly, to teach us, if we desire to please God
indeed, to be as careful that our thoughts be upright, as that our ways be
unreprovable.

[Thou have heard their reproach] i. their spiteful speeches and taunting
terms have come unto thine ears [O Lord] Verse 61.
i. O thou that gouernest all things [all their thoughts against me] i. their
manifold devises how to do me harm.

Doctrine [reproach] It is a special property of the wicked, to rail at, and
revile the godly: for the reason and use 1
hereof, see Chap. 2. verse. 16. Doct. 2.

Doctrine. [thoughts] as in the same word of the last 2
verse.

[The lips of those that rise against me] i. the words of such Verse 62.
as set themselves to be mine enemies [and their whispering against me
continually] i. their meditations which their heart deuiseth, and their tongue
utters in secret one to another, and that not once, or now and then, but
every day without ceasing.

Doctrine. [lips etc.] It is a token of an enemy and not of a friend, to use
to speak against the godly. The reason is, because, 1
first, out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, Matthew. 12. 34.
etc. Secondly, love rather covers the faults of brethren, then blazeth them,
1. Pet. 4. 8. for he that is with us, says Christ, can hardly speak evil of
us. The use is, first, to reprove them that delight in reporting things to the
disgrace of others. Secondly, to teach us, so careful as we are to approve our
selves lovers of the truth, to be so diligent in stopping our mouths, that
they do not blaze the faults of the professors of the truth.

Doctrine. [all the day] The wicked are never satisfied, but do still continue
their hatred and devises against the godly: 2
for the reason and use hereof, see verse. 14. Doct. 16. of this Chapter.

[Behold their sitting down and their rising vp] i. thou that know all
things (for that is the meaning of sitting and rising, Verse 63.
as Psalm. 139. 2.) look upon their doings, and call them to account for the
same [I am their song] i. they make themselves merry with my miseries.

Doctrine. [sitting etc.] The Lord sees, and will call to a straight
reckoning, all the thoughts, words, and deeds of the 7
sons of men. The reason is, because, first, he made althings, and therefore
must needs know them. Secondly, he is the Judge of the whole world, and
therefore he must needs judge righteously, Genesis 18. 25. The use is, to teach us,
first, with patience to bear the injuries offered us by the wicked, seeing
they shall be called to account for them. Secondly, to walk in fear and
trembling, seeing God beholds, and will judge all things.

Doctrine. [their song] The wicked do greatly delight 2
themselves in mocking the godly; for the reason and use hereof, see verse. 14.
Doct. 8 of this Chapter.

[Giue them a recompense O Lord] i. O Lord do thou call them to account, and
requite them [according to the work of Verse 64.
their hands] i. even as they have deserved, and show no favor unto them: so
Psalm. 28. 4. etc. Objection. How agrees this with that; pray for them that
persecute you? Answer, That is understood of the affection that should be in
us to the good of our enemies; and this is understood of them that be
maliciously wicked, and has rather reference to Gods justice and glory, then
the persons of the adversaries.

Doctrine. [Giue them etc.] It is lawful for the godly (so 1
that it be without affection of revenge, and of a pure zeal to Gods glory) to
pray for the confusion and speedy overthrow of the enemies to the truth. The
reason is, because, first, they have warrant in the Scriptures so to do.
Secondly, they must pray for the advancement of every branch of Gods glory,
one whereof is the destruction of the wicked. The use is, first, to reprove
them that think this place and such like to be peculiar examples, in no sort
to be imitated. Secondly, to teach us, that Gods glory must be dearer to us,
then the good of those that nature binds us nearest unto: yea, then the
salvation of our own souls, Exodus 32. 32. Romans 9. 3.

Doctrine. [according to the works etc.] We cannot wish a 2
greater evil to light upon our selves, or others, then to be dealt with at
Gods hands according to our works. The reason is, because, by the works of
the law none can be justified, Romans 3. 20. seeing no flesh is righteous in his
sight, and he that offends in one is guilty of all, James 2. 10. Objection.
How then does the Scripture say, God will reward every one according to his
works? Answer. It is truly said, for all men shall either receive the reward
of their own works, which is damnation: or of the perfect obedience of
Christ, believing in him, which are theirs by imputation. The use is, first, to
confute the Papists, and all others, that say they look to be saved by their
works, understanding thereby their own deeds. Secondly, to teach us to
renounce (in respect of looking to be saved by them) all our own works,
esteeming them (as they are) as a filthy cloute in the sight of God, Isay 64.
6. and to rely upon the obedience of Jesus Christ alone, for our salvation,
hoping to be justified freely by faith, without the works of the law, Roman.
3. 28.

[Giue them faintness of heart] i. Do thou make their heart to be full of
weakness, so as they shall do us no harm; or Verse 65.
give them the covering of the heart; that is, such a mist and dullness as
shall deprive them of all strength and courage [thy curse unto them] i. let
thine anger show it self every way against them.

Doctrine. [faintnesse] God gives strength or weakness unto the heart of man,
according to that he will have them 1
able to do, or unable to perform. The reason is, because, he has appointed
the heart to be the fonntaine, from whence both the willingness, and power
to perform every action should flow and proceed. The use is, to teach us,
when we would have any good thing done, to pray to God to prepare and stir
up the hearts of those thereunto that are to do it: and when we would have
evil stayed, to desire the Lord to abate the strength and courage of their
hearts, that are inclined unto mischief.

Doctrine. [thy curse] It is the curse of GOD that scatters all the practices
that the wicked imagine against the 2
godly. The reason is, because nothing can prosper which God sets himself
against. The use is, to teach us, first, to be careful that all our actions be
taken in hand and continued according to his will; so shall we be assured that
Gods blessing, and not his curse shall be with us in them. Secondly, that the
practices of un godliness must needs have an evil end, seeing they (not
being warranted by Gods word) are the deeds that God will curse.

[Persecute in thine anger] i. let thine anger proceed against Uers. 66.
them without ceasing [and destroy them from under the heavens of the Lord] i.
bring them to confusion wheresoever they shield themselves, seeing they are
under the heavens, where the Lords seat is, and in the compass and
circumference whereof he reigns, and rules all.

Doctrine. [thine anger, and destroy] Those against whom 1
the Lord shows forth his anger, must needs be destroyed and come to
confusion. The reason is, because, first, he is the greatest and must needs
prevail in whatsoever he takes in hand. Secondly, he cannot be angry with
any of his creatures, but for their disobedience, which is the just desert of
al confusion and desolation. The use is, to teach us, first, that the wicked
must needs be destroyed, seeing they do still bend themselves to provoke his
anger: and therefore we should take their prevailing against us (which is but
for a short time) most patiently. Secondly, so careful as we are not to have
Gods anger persecute us to our destruction, to be so diligent to walk in the
fear of his name, and obedience to his laws.

Doctrine. [from under, etc.] There is no place in the 2
world to keep man from destruction, when Gods anger persecuteth him. The
reason is, because his power preuayleth every where. The use is, to teach us,
that there is no suertie for us, neither in this life, nor in the time to come,
but only in the favor and love of GOD, which we must labor to attain unto
above all things.

The fourth Chapter.
HOw] i. in what wonderful manner, and by what strange means [is the gold
Verse 1.
darkened] i. that glorious Temple, that shined with gold, wherewith it was
adorned, is now made most base in appearance [the most fine gold is changed] i.
that part of the Temple which was most beautiful, being covered with the
finest gold, is clean altered inform, and seems most abject to look unto
[the stones of holinesse] the stones dedicated to holy uses [are scattered]
are here and there dispersed [in the head of every street] i. in the corners
and by-places as things of no value.

Doctrine. [golde darkened] There is nothing so glorious 1
in this life, but it will be made vile when Gods angry countenance is upon
it, for the sins of men. The reason is, because, nothing has excellency in
it, but at his appointment and pleasure. The use is, first, to reprove them
that think they may flourish, though they never meddle with religion, which
teaches the way to attain the favor of God. Secondly, to teach us, so
careful as we are to enjoy the things of this life in their kind, to our
comfort, to be so diligent to grow in the fear of God, and avoiding of sin,
which displeases him.

Doctrine. [stones of holiness are scattered] When GOD gives power into the
hands of the wicked over his people, 2
they make havoc of those things that be most precious. The reason is,
because, first, the power of GOD, which none can resist, is then with them to
the same purpose. Secondly, the hatred of the wicked against the godly,
reaches even to all those things that they have any use of. The use is, to
teach us, to be humbled, whenever it falls out so with us, seeing it cannot
be but upon Gods displeasure for our sins.

Doctrine. [scattered] Those things that are most precious in the eyes of the
godly, are rejected as worth nothing by 3
the wicked. The reason is, because, first, they are of a contrary disposition;
the one loving goodness, and the means to attain unto it; and the other
hating whatsoever is not evil, or tending thereunto. Secondly, all matters of
religion are mere foolishness to a natural man, because they are spiritually
discerned, 1. Cor. 2. 14. The use is, to teach us, to learn to discern of men
whether they be religiously disposed or no, by their love or dislike of the
means that tend to the right worship and service of God.

[The noble sons of Sion] i. the great men and renowned [which were
comparable to the most fine gold] i. which were Verse. 2.
every way most worthy to be honored [how are they esteemed as earthen
pitchers] i. what a merueilous change are they come unto? being no more
regarded then the earthen vessels [the work of the hands of the Potter] i.
which the potter breaks as things of none account, and alters them at his
pleasure, Jeremy 18. 2. or makes them good for nothing, Jeremy 19. 11.

Doctrine. Generally out of the whole verse. The greatest 1
reputation that man can attain unto in this life, is an uncertain estate,
and easily taken away, Psalm. 49. 12. The reason is, because, first, there is no
certainty in any thing under the Sun, Ecclesiast. 1. 2. etc. Secondly, God
sets up, and puts down at his pleasure, Dan. 4. 29. etc. Thirdly, he
that uses his prosperous estate best, deserves continually to have it taken
from him. The use is, to teach us, not to admire the glorious estate of man
that is in honor, seeing it is most fickle, nor to set our hearts upon any
thing we enjoy in this world, but to use the things thereof, as if we used
them not, 1. Cor. 7. 31.

Doctrine. [noble] The hebrew word signifies precious, 2
or of especial estimation; teaching this doctrine. Those who^ God has
advanced in authority above others, are to be reverenced and honored above
others. The reason is, because, first, they do represent the person of God
himself; for which cause they are called Gods, Psalm. 82. 1. etc. Secondly,
they have that power and authority, which should work a reverent fear and
awe of them in the hearts of others, Romans 13. 1. etc. The use is, first, to
reprove them that do contemn those that are in authority, because of their
mean private estate, or faults as they be men, seeing they are to be regarded
according to the person they sustain, and not their own estate. Secondly, to
teach us, for conscience sake to give honor and obedience unto our governors,
as unto the Lord himself, whose person they do represent unto us.

Doctrine. [comparable] It is a worthy thing in great men, to be adorned with
good qualities, so far exceeding others 3
as their calling is above them. The reason is, because, first, they shall be
the more able to carry themselves aright in their place. Secondly, they shall
procure the greater reverence unto their place thereby. The use is, to teach
those that have it in their power to choose Magistrates, to look that they
make choice of those that are best qualified; according to the counsel of
Iethro, Exodus 18. 21. etc. Secondly, to teach all those that either look for
authority, or are in it, to labor to be adorned with those qualities that
may best sit them, and make them able to discharge the same.

Doctrine. [how are they etc.] It is merueilous in the judgment of flesh and
blood, to see a man of highest estimation, 4
come to be of the basest account. The reason is, because, we still dream of a
greater certainty to be in the things of this life, then indeed is: so thought
the Prophet David in his prosperity. The use is, to teach us, never to put our
confidence in the greatest of the sons of men, seeing they are often made so
unable to help us, as they cannot help themselves.

Doctrine. [earthen pitchers] When God gives his people into the hand of the
destroyers, the precious and the vile are 5
all of one reckoning with them. The reason is, because, first, God sets
them on work, who regards not the outward appearance of men, 1. Sam. 16. 7.
etc. Secondly, they seek to satisfy their revenging mind, especially upon
the greatest. The use is, to teach us, never to promise our selves freedom
from Gods rods, for any outward privilege; but only for the mercy of God in
Christ Jesus, which we must especially labor to have our affiance in.

[Euen the Seales] i. The very Sea-dogges: for albeit the Verse 3.
hebrew word do signify generally al monsters, whether on land or water; yet
here it must needs be understood of this kind of beast, seeing no kind of
earthly creature that creeps has any paps [giue the breast, they give their
young one: sucke] i. they have a willingness and a place convenient to feed
their young [the daughter of my people is like the owl in the desert] i. but
the mothers are so deprived of place to feed their infants, and the children
so persecuted of all hands, that the whole people is howled at as the owl is
among the other birds in the wilderness [for the cruell] i. by reason of the
bloody enemy that persecuteth them.

Doctrine. generally out of the whole verse. Gods people are now and then
deprived of those outward means of their 1
comfort, which none other of his creatures do want. The reason is, because,
first, the Lord does thereby declare his detestation of sin, that punishes
it so severely in his own dear children. Secondly, they may more clearly see
that they are unworthy the least of his blessings, and so may the more
thoroughly be humbled. The use is, not to think the outward miseries that may
befall us, signs of Gods casting us off; but means that he sees meet to
draw us nearer unto him and therefore to profit by them.

Doctrine. [like the owle] The godly are often made a gazing 2
stock, and a wonderment unto men, as the owl is to the other birds, 1. Cor.
4. 9. The reason is, because, the course of godliness is most strange and
foolish in their eyes. The use is, to teach us, not to forsake any duty of
godliness, for the wonderment of men, lest we prove our selves to be of the
number of those that refuse the cross of Christ, and so are not worthy of
him, Matthew. 10. 38.

Doctrine [the desert] As all birds, though hating one another, 3
do wonder at the owl; so all the wicked, being enemies amongst themselves,
do set their several powers against the godly: for the reason and use hereof,
see Chapt. 2. verse. 16. Doct. 1.

Doctrine. [by the cruell] It is the cruelty of the wicked that causes the
godly to fall into many grievous distresses. 4
The reason is, because, first, they are the rods and instruments of Gods
anger. Secondly, they bear an unappeasable hatred against the godly. Thirdly,
they are of greatest power and strength in this life, seeing they are directed
by the God of this world. The use is, to teach us, so to see and confess Gods
hand to be the chief in all our troubles, as we look diligently into the
cruelty of the instruments, that we may learn to take heed of them.

[The tongue of the suckling cleaves to the roof of his Verse 4.
mouth by thirst] i. The young infants are so dry, wanting suck, that there
is no moisture in their mouths, but thirst causes the roof of their mouth
and their tongue to cleave together [the little ones ask bread etc.] i. they
being hungry, do call for food [none divides it unto them] i. The famine is
so great, that there is none that can undertake to give to each one that is
meet for it.

Doctrine. [suckling] When God means to punish his people thoroughly for
their sins, they shall see a branch 1
of his rod reach unto all that belong unto them, yea to the very infants, the
fruit of their body. The reason is, because, the disobedience, which causes
that punishment, does ofter show it self in the abuse thereof. The use is, to
teach us, so careful as we are to see our children prosper and do well, to be
so diligent to take heed that we do no way set our affections upon them, nor
any other way make wantons of them; but in all things to acknowledge them Gods
good blessings bestowed upon us, which we must employ to his glory.

Doctrine. [cleaueth etc] There is sufficient cause and matter in all the
infants of Gods people, why he should in his justice 2
destroy them: for the reason and use hereof, see Chap. 2. verse. 20. Doct. 5.

Doctrine. [none diuideth] God often leaves his people 3
destitute of all means to help them: for the reason and use hereof, see
Chap. 1. verse. 1. Doct. 5. and verse. 2. Doct. 5.

Doctrine. [aske bread, none etc.] Gods people may come 4
to this case in this life, to beg necessary food, and yet have none to give
it them, Luke 16. 21. and 15. 16. 17 The reason is, because, neither life,
health, nor any thing that belongs thereunto are the marks of Gods favor,
seeing he bestows them upon the just and the unjust. The use is, to teach us,
first, not to promise our selves any worldly blessings ever the more, because
we fear the Lord. Secondly, not to account poverty, in it self, a note of
unhappiness, seeing they whom God has loved most dearly have fallen into it.

[They that did feed delicately] i. such as have been most dainty toothed,
and fared deliciously [are desolated] i. are left Verse 5.
destitute of friends, and succor [in the streetes] i. in the public view,
where all might see them [they that were nourished in scarlet] i. those that
were used to be wrapped in the finest garments, and clothed in the most costly
attire [doe embrace the dunghils] i. are glad to stretch their bodies upon the
filthiest places, to seek rest and case.

Doctrine. generally out of the whole verse. It is often the 1
lot of Gods people, to spend the former part of their life in much worldly
pleasure, and the latter in great misery. The reason is, because, first, many
have their share in the world, till they be called to the knowledge of Christ,
which is often at the ninth or last hour. Secondly, God sees it meet to let
many of his children have experience of good and evil, Eccles 2. 1. etc.
Thirdly, it is the nature of our corruptions to lead us to abuse prosperity,
which God will punish in his children in this life. The use is, to teach us to
take heed that we abuse not the one, nor despair in the other; but in all
things to seek to glorify the Lord; so did Job. 1. 21, 22.

Doctrine. [feede delicately, are desolated] Many are most delicately brought
up, that afterward come to great want 2
and extremity. The reason is, because, first, their parents make fondlings of
them, and do not use them to any lawful travail in their youth, and so they
prove unfit for any in their age. Secondly, God will punish both the folly of
the parents, and the vanity of the children, for the example of others.
Thirdly, disordered education increases the number and height of sin, which
must needs pull in the punishments for sin after it. The use is, first, to
reprove that fond and irreligious affection in parents, that are so dainty of
their children, as they may neither be broken from their own desires, nor set
to do any thing more then pleases themselves. Secondly, to teach us, of what
wealth soever we be, to bring up our children unto hardness, and in some good
calling; not knowing what may befall them when we are gone.

Doctrine. [feede etc.] In a general calamity, they are most subject to ruin
that in time of prosperity are freest 3
from it by their abundance of worldly things. The reason is, because, first,
they are likest to have committed the greatest sins in the abuse of Gods
blessings. Secondly, they have least exercised themselves in the ways to
escape danger; persuading themselves to escape if any do. Thirdly, the riches
of the wealthiest are the things that spoylers set their eyes most upon: for
which they will be most extreme with the owners thereof. The use is, to teach
us, never to promise our selves freedom for any worldly privilege; but truly
to fear and worship the Lord, which is the only shield in all dangers, and
stay in all distresses.

[And the punishment of the daughter of my people] i. the plagues which for
their sin are laid upon my brethren and Verse 6.
countrymen: for the word here translated punishment, properly signifies
sin, but is also used for the punishment which sin deserves, and so is the
next word often: as namely, Chapt. 3. 39. [is greater] i. every way more heavy
[then the punishment of Sodome] i. then that which GOD did lay upon the filthy
city Sodom, Genesis 19. [which being overthrown, as in a moment the armies
remained not in her] i. for it was quickly begun to be punished, and quickly
destroyed; so as there was no cause for any power to continue the further
vexing of it.

Doctrine. generally out of the whole verse. The godly do 1
usually sustain more grievous punishments in this life, then any other people
whatsoever: for the reason and use hereof, see Chap. 1. verse 12. Doct. 5.

Doctrine. [punishment] Man never sustaineth any punishment 2
in this life, but such as he justly deserves by his own sins. The reason
is, because, first, sin is the cause of all punishments. Secondly, the
righteous Judge of the world cannot but do all things righteously, Genesis 18.
29. The use is, first, to reprove them that impute the cause of one man's
plagues to another man's offenses, Ezech 18. 20. etc. Secondly, to teach us, in
all those afflictions that are upon us, to acknowledge our own sins to
deserve the same, and to learn thereby to amend them.

Doctrine. [which being etc.] That is the greatest punishment 3
which man can suffer in this life, which is of longest continuance, though it
be not the seuerest in it self. The reason is, because, first, a short
punishment, though heavier, does not kill the heart so much as that which is of
longer continuance, though lighter. Secondly, Satan can work many things in
time, which of the sudden he cannot. Thirdly, the consideration of the length
of time, gives matter of strong temptations to despair or revolt from the
truth. The use is, first, to know the malice and skill of those enemies to
be great, that vex Gods people with easier and lingering torments. Secondly,
to teach us, when we fall into such a kind of affliction, to pray earnestly,
and watch carefully over our selves: for it is harder to stand constant in such
times, then in the days of hottest persecutions.

[Her Nazarites] i. those of her people that had separated Uers. 7.
themselves to a more strickt and pure course of serving God then the rest,
Numb. 6. etc. [were purer then the snow] i. of a clear complexion without
mixture [they were whiter then milke] i. they were fair, and without spots
[they were redder in body then the Carbuncle] i. they were so pure and white,
as yet a most comely ruddinesse appeared in them [their polishing was as the
Saphire] i. The whole constitution and disposition of their bodies, was most
decent, and amiable to behold: for all these several allegories are
hyperbolicall comparisons, expressing the good blessing of God that appeared in
their bodies, as did in the face of the three children, Dan. 1 15.
notwithstanding their abstinence and spare diet, when Gods favor showed it
self among his people, whereof they were the most strickt.

Doctrine. generally out of the whole verse. When a man's ways please the Lord,
very mean things do maintain him 1
in this life, in as good case, as can be desired. The reason is, because, it
is not the quantity, nor quality of any thing in this world, that sustaineth
man's life, but the blessing of God upon that we enjoy; which is especially
upon those that rightly fear him. The use is, to teach us, not to repose our
affiance in the multitude of riches, nor to think our strength to stand in the
large measure of food (though these be Gods good blessings to be received with
thanks giving) but only in the grace and blessing of the Almighty, that
gives profit unto man by these things, or denies it at his pleasure.

Doctrine. [purer then] It is lawful to express the extremity of anything
with hyperbolicall speeches, John 21. 25. 2
The reason is, because, first, the holy Ghost uses so to do. Secondly, our
dullness is not else sufficiently affected, or our knowledge informed aright.
The use is, to teach us, first, that it is necessary for every teacher to
excel in this kind of persuasion. Secondly, to understand those things in the
Scriptures that seem to import things beyond sense, to be used by the holy
Ghost to affect us the more thoroughly, and therefore to acknowledge our own
dullness that needs such means to stir us up.

Doctrine. [their polishing] When God manifests his favor 3
to his people, there appears a special grace, even in all their iesture,
words and deeds. The reason is, because, first, he guides them by wisdom
and vnerstanding to all convenient courses. Secondly, he will have his foes,
now and then, admire his people, to leave them the more without excuse. The use
is, to teach us, whenever any good thing is done by us, or appears to
others to be in us, to acknowledge the special grace and hand of God upon us,
and to glorify him the more therein.

[Their visage is more darkened then blacknesse] i. their countenance is now as
black as may be [they are not known in Uers. 8.
the streetes] i. they are so changed, that in the open streets if you meet
them, you cannot know them to be the men they were before [their skin
cleaves to their bones] i. all the fatnes and flesh of their bodies is gone
[it is withered] i. all moisture is gone out of it, and it is dried up [it is
like to wood] i. it is become as hard as if it were a piece of wood.

Doctrine. Generally out of the whole verse. The greater 1
that Gods blessings are unto a people, the heavier is his punishing hand upon
them, when they fall away from him, Math. 11. 23. The reason is, because,
first, to whom much is given, of him must much be required. Secondly, he is
judged accordingly. The use is, to teach us, the more that we enjoy of Gods
blessings, to be the more careful to serve him aright therewithal, lest we
receive the greater condemnation.

[They that be slain with the sword, are better then they that are killed
with hunger] i. they that die with the sword, Verse 9.
do suffer less pain in dying, then they that die with hunger [for these fade
away] i. they feel their torments a long time dying by little and little
[being stricken thorough] i. wounded at the heart [for the fruits of the earth]
i. for want of such food as the earth ordinarily does yield unto the sons
of men.

Doctrine. [are better, etc.] he dies the most paynfull 1
death whose deadly wounds do longest (though not so violently) pinch them: for
the reasons, and use hereof, see verse 6. doctr. 3. of this chapter.

Doctrine. [striken thorough] Hunger pearceth the heart of man with as sensible
pain, as does a sharp sword. The 2
reason is, because, it does directly fight against the life of man. The use is
to teach us, first, whenever God pincheth us therewithal, to acknowledge
that he threatens the taking of our lives from us. Secondly, to confess Gods
great mercy to us, when he gives us plenty of food, and to praise him for it.

Doctrine. [fruits of the earth] Man can have no increase 3
of the earth, nor benefit by it, without the Lord see it meet, and give a
blessing thereunto. The reason is, because, the earth is the Lords, and the
fullness thereof, Psalm. 24. 1. who makes it barren or fruitful at his
pleasure. The use is, first, to reprove them that think their own industry
sufficient to make them rich, and procure them food, not considering that
without the Lords assistance all our early rising is in vain; Psalm. 127. 2,
etc. Secondly, to teach us, still to use all good means, and yet therein to
beg of Gods hand, our daily bread.

[The hands of the pitiful women] i. The hands of those women Verse 10.
which were naturally full of tender compassion [haue boiled their own
children] i. have been employed in dressing and seething the fruit of their
own bodies [they were meat unto them] i. those same children were the food
that those compassionate mothers did eat [in the destruction of the daughter
of my people] i. in that time when Jerusalem was destroyed.

Doctrine. Generally out of the whole verse, The good nature that is in
mankind, is not able to direct the same unto 1
any good course, if the Lord do give it over unto it self. The reason is,
because, first, nature is so corrupt, that it can do no good thing of it
self. Secondly, GOD is the only dooer of all good things, and he alone
enableth what instruments he will to perform the same, 2. Cor. 3. 5. The use
is, first, to reprove them that think GOD can be served in acceptable manner
by our mere natural things, as they use to speak. Secondly, to teach us not
to rest upon any thing that is in our selves, be it never so glorious, but to
seek to God alone for grace to do whatsoever we desire should be accepted in
his sight.

Doctrine. [they were meate] There is nothing so dear unto man but (if GOD
stay him not) he will destroy it, for 2
the preservation of his life. This did Satan know and allege, Job 2. 4. The
reason is, because, naturally life is the dearest unto us, to the preservation
and good whereof all things are used by mankind. The use is, first, to
reprove them, as being far from the course of nature, that for some grief
conceived do go about to kill them selves, and so to take away that life,
which in nature should be dear unto them. Secondly, to teach us, so to make
all things serve for the maintenance of this life, as that we still crave the
direction of the Lord therein, else shall we make an Idol of life, and commit
many sins to preserve it.

[The Lord has accomplished his indignation] i. he has left nothing undone
that might add unto the declaration of his Verse 11.
anger: for the hebrew word signifies to make perfect, so as nothing be
wanting he has powered out the fierceness of his anger] i. he has abundantly
declared the extremity of his displeasure [he has kindled a fire in Sion
which has devoured the foundations thereof] i. he has sent a consuming flame
into Jerusalem, which does not only burn the tops of houses, but even utterly
wastes the foundations, leaving no marks of it, nor any hope of restoring it.

Doctrine. Generally out of the whole verse. Wherein the 1
expressing of the same thing by so many kinds of several speeches, teaches
us this doctrine. Though Gods punishing hand be heavy upon us, yet are we
hardly brought to a thorough acknowledgment of our sins that deserve the
same. The reason is, because, first, we are most blind to discern our own
corruptions. Secondly, we are naturally addicted to blame others rather then
our selves, Genesis 3. 12. etc. The use is, to teach us, whenever we are in any
affliction, to labor our own hearts to confess the cause thereof to be our
own sins, and to learn to amend them.

Doctrine. [accomplished] The Church of God endures more trouble in this life,
then any other people: for the reason 2
and use hereof, see Chap. 1 verse. 12. Doct. 5.

Doctrine. [accomplished etc. fierceness etc.] When Gods 3
punishing hand is upon us, we think our selves to sufter so great pain as
God can lay upon any. The reason is, because, first, we measure Gods infinite
displeasure by our own feeling and capacity. Secondly, we are so intentive
upon that we feel, as we regard not with due consideration any other torment.
The use is, first, to let us see our natural corruption, that teaches us to
judge of all things by our present feeling. Secondly, to teach us, if we will
with patience bear our present trouble, to consider duly of that which we
might yet suffer above this, if God should deal with us after our own
deseruings.

Doctrine. [foundations] God often brings his Church 4
into such outward misery, as it seems to be in a desperate estate, not
possibly able to be recovered: Examples hereof are, the Israelites at the red
Sea; and in the book of Judges often, etc. The reason is, because, first, he
would not have his people to rest upon any worldly or outward strength.
Secondly, that he might more clearly be seen to be the deliverer of his
servants. The use is, first, to reprove them, as not being rooted in the
truth, who fall away in the time of trouble. Secondly, to teach us never to
despair whatsoever calamity we fall into, seeing GOD brings his people as
low as may be, and yet restores them again.

[The Kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of the habitable world would
not have beleeued] i. no natural man, whether Verse 12.
King or other would ever have believed if it had been told him aforehand [that
the adversary and enemie] i. that those that were against the Jews, and hated
them [should have entered into the gates of Ierusalem] i. could ever have been
able to have prevailed against that famous city, which was not only in it
self so strong, but also had been so wonderfully protected from above, that
all the world admired it.

Doctrine. [could not] God does now and then so humble his people, as their
very adversaries could not imagine it 1
should ever have been so. The reason is, because, first, they judge only
according to natural reason. Secondly, he will show his wonderful power in
all things, especially in the guiding of his Church. The use is, to teach us,
not to regard the judgment of natural men, but to look unto the Lord, and to
magnify his wisdom in his wonderful ways.

Doctrine. [should have entred] There is no place so strong, 2
but the enemy thereof shall prevail against it, when God sees it meet. The
reason is, because, first, one people cannot fortify themselves so strongly,
but they may be assailed by others as strong as they. Secondly, they are
always strongest whom the Lord does assist. The use is, to teach us, never to
think our selves safe, be our walls so strong as may be, except the Lord be
with us: and therefore to seek especially to be protected under his wings; so
shall no adversaries prevail against us.

[For the sins of her Prophets, and iniquities of her Priests] i. The cause
that moved the Lord to deal thus with Jerusalem Verse 13.
was, the height of sin in the whole people, yea even in the teachers, that
should have guided them to all good things: for he does not exempt the other
people, but conuinceth the sins of all, by the instance of the Prophets and
Priests [that have shed the blood of the just, in the midst of her] i. that
have grown to such an height of sin, as to shed the blood of such as walking
more uprightly then they did, reproved their disobedience.

Doctrine. Generally out of the whole verse. When the 1
teachers of the people are wicked, it is a sign that the general number of
the whole people is grown far from the right way. The reason is, because,
first, very shame keeps teachers from many sins, until they be grown
into custom among the people. Secondly, such teachers are usually sent of God
among a people, as a special punishment for their grievous sins against the
Lord: see Chapt. 2. verse. 14. Doct. 2. The use is, to teach us, to mourn
exceedingly for the estate of that people which has such teachers, and for our
selves if it fall to our lot.

Doctrine. [Prophets, Priests, etc.] These were of that calling 2
and Church to whom God gave greatest privileges, and yet prove ringleaders
to all evil; teaching us this doctrine. The promise of Gods presence, was
never tied to any Church or order of Ministry, further then as they walked in
his obedience. The reason is, because, first, it was none otherwise tied unto
Jerusalem. Secondly, else should God be bound to retain often a den of
thieves in his favor. The use is, first, to reprove the dotage of the Papists,
that imagine grace to be tied to Rome, and the successors of Peter there, (who
yet shall never prove that ever he was there) though they can neither convince
it by the likelihood of doctrine that Peter taught, nor life that Peter led;
but are evidently most contrary to him in both. Secondly, to teach us, not to
rest upon the bare title of the Church, or ministry of the Gospel: for even
the builders thereof may prove the captains to the greatest mischief, Psalm.
118. 22.

Doctrine. [iniquitie of etc.] Foul spots and gross sins 3
may be in the face and principal members of a true visible Church; for the
reason and use hereof, see Chap. 1. verse. 9. doct. 2.

Doctrine. [shed the bloud] When the corruptions of a 4
Church do grow so far, that the maintainers thereof proceed to shed the
blood of them that withstand the same, there can nothing be looked for, but
desolation and ruin. The reason is, because, first, that is the highest of
sin which God uses always to punish. Secondly, God did still deal so with
the Israelites, who were a pattern of the visible Church for ever. The use is,
to teach us, first, that it is a heinous sin to go about the shedding of the
blood of brethren. Secondly, that that Church is in a dangerous case, whose
governors persecute those that reprove and stand against their corruptions.

[They have wandered as blind men in the streetes] i. They Verse 14.
have walked up and down as though they saw nothing [they were polluted in
bloud] i. and they regarded not the uncleanness which they should have shunned
[because they could not but touch their garments] i. the pollution was so
general that they could not avoid it: the sense, in short is, that the Jews
were so blind in knowledge, that every example of sin led them to evil:
which for want of grace they could not refrain from.

Doctrine. [wandred blind] Those that are not rightly instructed in the true
knowledge of God, are as blind in matters 1
of religion, as the blind man in seeing what is before him in the way. The
reason is, because, first, the natural man perceives not the things of the
spirit of God, such as religion is, 1. Cor. 2. 14. etc. Secondly, they do err
that know not the Scriptures, Matthew. 24. 29. The use is, to teach us, first,
that we are naturally far (be we never so witty) from religion, seeing we
are blind therein. Secondly, so careful as we are to discern of the right way
to heaven, to be so diligent to grow in the knowledge of the word of God.

Doctrine. In that this follows upon the wickedness of 2
the Prophets and Priests, we learn this doctrine. An unconscionable
Ministry begets ignorance, and all ungodliness in the people. The reason
is, because, first, such are usually sent in Gods judgment to lead them to
believe lies, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. etc. Secondly, the people are naturally inclined
easily to follow that teacher which leads unto evil. The use is, first, to
reprove them that think an ignorant, or a profane Ministry any way
tolerable in Gods Church. Secondly, to teach us to pray to God, and use all
good means that we may have such a Ministry, as may both teach us the ways
of godliness, and go before us in the practice of the same.

Doctrine. [were polluted] In that this follows upon their blind ignorance,
we learn this doctrine. The ignorance of 3
the true knowledge of God, is the ready way to all iniquity. The reason is,
because, first, we cannot know what is sin, but by the knowledge of the
law of God, Romans 7. 7. Secondly, where there is no knowledge, there is no
conscience of sin; for conscience is nothing else, but the understanding of
Gods will, whereunto the heart does consent. The use is, first, to reprove the
Papists that make ignorance the mother of devotion; and carnal people that
make no care to attain to the knowledge of God. Secondly, to teach us, so
careful as we are to approve our selves truly to fear the Lord, to be so
diligent not only in using all good means our selves to grow in the knowledge
of Gods will, but also to draw others unto the same.

Doctrine. [could not etc.] They that are ignorant of Gods 4
word, and live among an ungodly people, cannot but be defiled with their
sins. The reason is, because, first, the godly that have the greatest
knowledge and most grace, can hardly avoid the infection of evil example.
Secondly, we are naturally proane to follow the ill presidents one of another.
The use is, to teach us, first, the cause why people generally be so profane;
even because they easily learn evil one of another. Secondly, to avoid to the
uttermost of our power the familiarity with the ungodly; seeing he that
treads upon coals must needs be burned, Prouer. 6. 28.

[Depart ye (every one that is) polluted] i. get you gone you wicked and
sinful people [doe they cry unto them] i. the Verse 15.
enemies in a mockery do say thus aloude unto them [depart ye, depart ye] i.
be gone in all the haste [touch not] i. meddle not with any thing of ours [for
they did flee and wandered] i. they made haste, and knew not which way to go
[they said among the heathen] i. they usually having no ground for it, spoke
thus to the people, when they came [they shall not add to remain as
strangers] i. The Jews shall abide no longer amongst the Nations.

Doctrine. [polluted] The professors of the truth, when God gives them over
unto themselves, do become so odiously 1
sinful, as their enemies shall cry out of them for it. The reason is,
because, first, they have no power to refrain from evil, but only from the
Lord. Secondly, God gives the wicked to see and exclaim against the sins of
professors, though they be blind in their own. The use is, to teach us,
carefully to walk according to our profession, lest we become odious both to
God and men.

Doctrine. [wandered] When we regard not to walk in the truth, God will give
us over to do we know not what, 2
and wander we cannot tell whither. The reason is, because, first, it is a
branch of his judgment threatened to fall upon men in that case, Romans 1. 28.
etc. Secondly, he will let them see in their own experience, what a miserable
way they walk in, that have not him for their guide. The use is, to teach us,
not only to labor to increase in the knowledge of Gods will, but also in a
sincere practice of the same, seeing he only shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven, that does the will of the father which is in heaven, Mat. 7. 21.

Doctrine. [shall not add, etc.] We are easily brought to 3
flatter our selves, and to promise our selves much felicity. The reason is,
because, first, we do not rightly weygh the weight of Gods anger, and the
desert of our sins. Secondly, our affections labor to be persuaded of that
they desire to enjoy. The use is, to teach us, first, to reprove such vanity
both in our selves and others. Secondly, to look rather for more and more
heavy things: so shall our present miseries be patiently borne, and greater, if
they come, daunt us the less.

Doctrine. [they sayd] It is a great fault for him that professes to make
conscience of his word, to report that which 4
he has no ground for. The reason is, because, first, it is a mark of a busy
body, to employ himself where there is no need. Secondly, it argues the
heart to be most light and vain, that sets the tongue on work with such
uncertain things. Thirdly, it is cause that many untruths be reported, and
consequently of many sins. The use is, to teach us, as in all things to be
slow in speaking, so especially in uncertain reports, lest we make our
selves, and so our profession for our sakes, subject to the mock and reproach
of men.

[The angry countenance of the Lord has scattered them] Verse 16.
i. and yet the Lord has made havoc of them and dispersed them into all
Nations [and will not add to regard them] i. he will have no more respect
unto them as he had in former times [they have not accepted the face of the
priests] i. their enemies have not regarded the teachers of the law among them
[they have not showed favor unto the ancients] i. they had no respect to pity
the old people, that for their age should have been reverenced. The meaning
is, the Jews have little reason to flatter themselves, seeing they are so
greatly dispersed, and their foes be so cruel unto them, as that they neither
forbear age nor sex.

Doctrine. Generally out of the whole verse, being a reason to show their
vanity expressed in the former. Man often 1
flattereth himself, and is secure when he has no reason thereunto, but
clean contrary. The reason is, because, first, the corruption of our nature
is prone thereunto. Secondly, GOD often gives us over into that disposition,
as a just recompense and punishment of some former sin. The use is, to teach
us, diligently to look into our selves, and the manner of Gods dealing with us,
that we may learn to walk warily, and not carelessly as many do.

Doctrine. [scattered them] It is an argument of Gods anger 2
against his people for their sins, when he scatters them so, as they
cannot assemble to praise and worship him as in former time. The reason is,
because, first, the contrary is called his presence, and his face, in the
scriptures, Psalm 42. 2, etc. Secondly, it is the means to draw us to all
evil, as the contrary is to all good things. The use is, first, to reprove
them as most senseless of their own estate, who being in this case make no
reckoning of it. Secondly, to teach us, when it falls out to be our lot, not
only to acknowledge our sins to have caused it, and therefore to learn
amendment thereby, but also to thirst after the recovery of the exercises of
religion again, with the greatest longing that may be, Psalm. 42. 1, etc. 84.
2, etc.

Doctrine. [not accepted] It is a sign that Gods anger is 3
hot against his people, when the adversaries have no pity upon any sort of
them. The reason is, because according to the measnre of his anger, is the
fury of the foes. The use is, to teach us, to be humbled when we see our
adversaries strong and malicious, seeing it argues Gods anger to be
exceedingly provoked against us for our sins.

[Yet we, our eyes are consumed for our vain ayde] i notwithstanding all
these miseries, we do exceedingly gaze after Verse 17.
such help as is never able to succor us [in our looking we looked to a
nation that could not save vs] i. we thoroughly set our eyes upon a people that
had no power to deliver us, meaning the Egyptians.

Doctrine. Generally out of the whole verse. It is a grievous 1
sin (when we are smitten with Gods hand for our sins) to seek after man's
help, and not especially unto the Lord. The reason is, because, first, it
spoyleth GOD of his right (in saving the oppressed) as much as is in them.
Secondly, it argues an exceeding measure of Infidelity that is not driven
away by such sharp corrections. Thirdly, it stands against Gods purpose who
in smiting seeks to have us look unto him for help. The use is, to teach
us, in all our afflictions to seek unto the Lord that smites, and not to rest
upon the instruments, who can do nothing but according to his appointment.

Doctrine. [vaine helpe] It is a vain thing for a man in his 2
distress, to seek unto worldly help, except he principally seek unto the
Lord. The reason is, because, man can do us no further good, then God enableth
him unto, which shall be nothing (to our comfort) if by seeking to them we
neglect him. The use is, first, to reprove the vanity of man that thinks
himself safe if great and strong outward means be for him, and so goes no
further. Secondly, to teach us, whe^soeuerwe look to have these worldly means
blessed unto us, to seek first unto the Lord for his aid, in whose favor
they shall do us good; else not.

Doctrine. [are consumed] Man is far more attentive 3
and diligent in an unlawful course, then in that way which is good. The
reason is, because, his whole natural force assisteth him in that which is
evil, but is against him in that which is good. Hence it is that false
Prophets, and Idolaters have showed more vehemency in their falshoode, then
Gods servants in the truth. The use is, to teach us, to be provoked to all
forwardness in well-doing by the vehemency that we see in them that walk in
evil ways.

[They hunt our steps, that we cannot go in our streetes] i. Verse 18.
we are so far from having the freedom of our country, that being besieged
we dare not go in the streets of the city, such is the diligence of the
enemy to do us harm [our end approacheth] i. These extremities are an
apparent sign that we shall shortly be consumed [our days are fulfilled, for
our end is come] i. we have continued our time appointed, for now we are
overthrown for ever.

Doctrine. [they hunt] The adversaries of the truth are 1
most diligent and skillful in seeking the harm of Gods Church. The reason is,
because, first, Satan their schoolmaster is of great malice and experience.
Secondly, they themselves do set their minds wholly thereunto. The use is, to
teach us, first, never to be secure, seeing the adversary still seeks our
harm. Secondly, to beware of him even then when he pretends greatest
friendship unto us.

Doctrine. [our end, etc.] When God gives the adversaries 2
power every way to vex us, it is a sign that desolation is at hand. The
reason is, because, Gods favor or anger is discerned by the overthrow or
strengthening of our enemies. The use is, to teach us, whenever we fall into
the enemies hands that deal cruelly with us, to assure our selves that either
we must by unfeigned repentance prevent it, or our utter desolation approaches.

[Our persecutors are lighter then the Eagles of the heauens] i. those that
pursue us, are swifter then the Egles that fly in Verse 19.
the air [they pursued us upon the mountaines] i. they followed and ouertooke
us in the mountains [and laid wait for us in the desarts] i. they did
secretly lay ambushes in the wilderness. The meaning is, that whether they
fled to the mountains, or hide themselves in the woods, the enemies had still
means to overtake them and to find them out.

Doctrine. [lighter] When GOD sets the wicked on work to afflict his
servants, they do it with great dexterity 1
and readiness. The reason is, because, first, he that is the author of all
power and skill, assisteth them. Secondly, they have power given them to do
that which naturally they do thirst after. The use is, to teach us, when it
falls out so with us, to look unto God who gives them ability to vex us,
and not unto them, who can do nothing without him.

Doctrine. [the pursued us etc.] When the hand of God is 2
against us, it is in vain for us to seek unto, or rest upon any outward
helps or means of refuge. The reason is, because, first, all places and
means are within his reach. Secondly, all second causes serve to perform his
pleasure. The use is, to teach us, to seek first to have his favor and
assistance, so shall the outward means be profitable unto us.

[The breath of our nostrils] i. the means under which we Verse 20.
breathed, and lived [the anointed of the Lord] i* the King appointed of God to
be a figure of the Messiah: for so were all the Kings of the Jews, especially
the posterity of David, Psalm. 84. 10. and 1. Sam. 2. 10. [is taken in their
pits] i is apprehended in the grinnes of the adversaries, Ierem. 52. 8, 9. [of
whom we sayd] i. by whom we promised our selves thus much good [in his shadow]
i. being refreshed with his air, as with a shadow in the heat of our
extremities [we shall live among the Gentiles] i. we shall not be utterly
destroyed, though we be scattered into diverse Nations.

Doctrine. [the breath etc.] The office of the King, and so of every Magistrate
is, to protect and preserve the people in 1
safety and peace, even as the breath that we draw in at our nostrils,
gives life and health unto the body. The reason is, because, first, God has
given them power for the good, and not the harm of the subjects. Secondly,
they are Gods Lieutenants, who is the preservation and safety of all his
creatures; in which respect they are called Gods, Psalm. 82. 1. etc. Thirdly,
else are the people subiecto to fall into all evils, Judges 17. 6. Prouer. 29.
12. The use is, to teach all Kings and Magistrates to know, that God has not
given them their authority to tyrannize, or wrong the people; neither to
maintain them in idleness and vanity; but to do justice to all, protecting
every one from wrong, else shall their account be heavy. Secondly, to teach us
that be subjects, not only to be obedient for conscience sake, unto all the
lawful ordinances of Princes, seeing they are appointed og God over us for our
good; but also to pray for them, that under them we may live a quiet and
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty, 1. Tim. 2. 2.

Doctrine. [taken etc.] Kings and Princes when they sin against the Lord, are
subject to his punishing hand as well as 2
meaner people. The reason is, because, first, God is no accepter of persons.
Secondly, they have no more privilege promised them then others; but
destruction is threatened to the^ being disobedient with others, 1. Sam. 12. 25.
The use is, first, to reprove them that, to flatter Princes, do persuade them
that they are persons exempted from punishments; and therefore do deny those
means which God has appointed for the good of all his servants in general,
to belong unto them. Which kind of people giving liberty unto Princes to do
what they list, are the greatest enemies that Princes can have. Secondly, to
teach Princes to look for Gods hand against them, whenever they walk in
evil ways: for so was it with all the posterity of David, that followed not
the laws of the Lord, but did evil in his sight.

Doctrine. [of whom we said] It is the nature of man to promise 3
himself al assurance, when the outward means seem strong for him. The
reason is, because, first, carnal reason does regard nothing but the outward
means. Secondly, Satan labors to make us secure thereupon, and not to look
any further. The use is, to teach us, never to think any outward means so
sure, but GOD can (and in his displeasure will) defeat them: and therefore to
seek principally to him.

Doctrine. [sayd we shall liue] When Gods people set their 4
hearts too much upon outward things, he uses utterly to take them away from
them. The reason is, because, first, else they will forget to rely upon him, as
they should. Secondly, he loves them, and will enforce them from all affiance,
saving himself: this is the cause that he often takes from his children their
strength, health, dearest friends, infants that they love most, etc. The use
is, to teach us, so to love and delight in these things, as we put our
principal affiance in the Lord, and not be drawn from any duty of
godliness, but rather provoked thereunto by them; else (if the Lord love us) he
will either take them from us, or make them grievous crosses unto us.

[Reioyce and be glad] i. take your pleasure upon us while Uers. 21.
God gives you power over us [O daughter Edom, that dwell in the land of
Vz] i. O all ye our enemies, and especially you Edomites that do dwell so
near us, and have been so cruel against us, Psalm. 137. 7. [the cup also shall
pass through unto thee] i. the rod of Gods afflicting hand (for that is meant
by cup) shall not be all powered out for me, but thou shall have thy share in
it [thou shall be drunken] i. such abundance of Gods punishments shall light on
thee, as shall utterly overthrow thee [and shall show thy nakednesse] i. thy
filthiness shall appear unto all men.

Doctrine. [Reioyce] The godly must take it patiently that the wicked do
triumph and rejoice over them, when God 1
does humble them by afflictions. The reason is, because, first, they know it
to be the Lords doing. Secondly, they know that the wicked do but according
to their nature. Thirdly, they are assured that God will look upon it in his
due time, to deliver them, and punish their enemies. The use is, to teach us,
with patience to bear the reproaches of the wicked, praying to the Lord to
look upon it, and redress it.

Doctrine. [Edom that dwell etc.] Of all the adversaries that Gods people
have, those are the cruellest, that in outward 2
respects are the nearest unto them. The reason is, because, first, they know
best their corruptions for which they are afflicted, and the ways to do them
most harm. Secondly, that God might make the rod the heavier, that they may
the more earnestly seek unto him. The use is, to teach us, if we truly fear
God, to look for enemies even of those that are of our own household, Matthew.
10. 36. for by them shall we learn the greatest measure of patience, seeing
they will exercise us most often.

Doctrine. [the cup also etc.] Whatsoever afflictions the Lord lays upon his
people in this life, the wicked shall be 3
punished therewith, in their time. The reason is, because, first, Gods justice
cannot let them escape unpunished, seeing they continue therein without
repentance. Secondly, judgment does begin at the house of God, 1. Pet. 4. 17.
therefore it must end with the ungodly. The use is, to teach us, patiently to
be are afflictions, seeing God will shortly cause the cup to pass from us to
our adversaries.

Doctrine. [drunken] Though the Lord spare his enemies 4
til he have corrected his servants, yet will he overthrow them with a large
measure of his judgments in his due time. The reason, and use hereof is, the
same with the last doctrine.

Doctrine. [shew thy nakednesse] The wicked when God 5
lays his punishing hand upon them, do most notoriously manifest the
heynousnesse of their sins. The reason is, because, first, they have no grace
to take it patiently, but do rage at it. Secondly, Gods hand is never upon
them for their comfort, but to crush and confound them. The use is, to teach
us, if we will show our selves to be unlike the wicked to take afflictions
patiently, which they cannot do.

[Thy punishment is accomplished] i. the punishment of thy Verse 22.
sins (as verse. 6. for the word properly signifies sin) shall as certainly
have an end, as if it were finished already [o daughter Sion] i. O people
tender and dear unto me [he will not add to cause thee to go into
captiuitie] i. he will not still continue and increase thy punishment [hee has
visited thine iniquity O daughter Edom] i. he will as certainly power out his
vengeance upon thee, as if it were done already (for the Prophets use the time
past when they foretell things to come, to declare the certainty thereof) O
Edom most choice and dayntie at this present [hee has carried thee away for
thy sinnes] i. he will surely drive thee out of thine own land for thy great
wickedness.

Doctrine. [accomplished] Though the punishments that God lays upon his
people be never so many and heavy, 1
yet shall they come to an end in due time. The reason is, because, first, God
cannot be angry with his people for ever. Secondly, they suffer only in this
life, which is but short. The use is, to teach us, first, with patience to
bear whatsoever he lays upon us, seeing it shall continue but for a time.
Secondly, not to despair under the weight of afflictions, seeing GOD will one
day wipe all tears from our eyes.

Doctrine. [he has visited thine, etc.] Whatsoever afflictions 2
the Lord lays upon his children in this life, the wicked shall be punished
therewithal in their time, for the reason, and use hereof, see verse 21.
doctr. 3. of this chapter.

The fifth Chapter.
REmember O Lord what is come upon vs] i. O thou that rulest al things, call to
mind Verse 1.
what grievous things we do suffer [beholde and look upon our reproach] i.
see with consideration, how we, whom thou have chosen for thy peculiar people
to have thy own name called upon by us, are become the scorn of all men.

Doctrine. Generally out of the whole verse. The principal desire of the godly
is, that the Lord would weigh their estate. The reason is, because, first, they
know him to be a righteous Judge, ever dealing favorably with his people.
Secondly, their consciences do tell them, that notwithstanding they are
grievous sinners against the Lord, yet the enemies abuse them for the truth
sake. The use is, to teach us, in all our distresses to repent unfeignedly for
our sins against the Lord, so may we with good consciences come unto him
with our complaints in our miseries.

Out of this verse may also be gathered the 3. 4. and 5. doctrines of chap. 1.
verse. 11.

[Our possession is turned unto strangers] i. Our lands are Uers. 2.
taken from us, and given to others [our houses unto forrenners] i. our
habitations are enjoyed by those that have no manner of right unto them.

Doctrine. Generally out of the whole verse. God sometimes brings his people
to so low an ebb in the things of this life, as he neither leaves them
possessions, nor houses wherein to shroud themselves. The reason is, because,
first, the things of this life are no part of that promise which he has made
peculiarly to them. Secondly, he will let them see that they have no cause to
put confidence in worldly things. The use is, to teach us, first, never to
promise our selves any assurance of the things of this life. Secondly, to
learn whenever the Lord takes them from us, to make less account of them,
and to repose our affiance more wholly in him.

[We are orphans, and have no fathers] i. our fathers are Verse 3.
either killed with the sword, or dead with the pestilence; and so many of us
are left without succor or protection [our mothers are as widowes] i. not
only we are fatherless, but also our mothers are as desolate widows,
deprived of their husbands, the stay and comfort of their life.

Doctrine. Generally out of the whole verse. It is a grievous punishment of
God, and much to be lamented, when God makes many children fatherless, and
wives widows in any Nation. The reason is, because, first, a special
strength of the whole common wealth is taken away, when householders are cut
off. Secondly, it is a mean to fill the Church with all disorders, when
fathers of families that should rule every one his household, be taken away. The
use is, to teach us, whenever we see God to deal so with our country or our
selves in particular, to acknowledge it his heavy hand upon us for our sins,
and to learn amendment by it.

[We drink our waters for money] i. even water, that is usually Verse 4.
common, we are constrained to give money for, yea, though it were of that
which was our own [our wood comes to us by a price] i. we are glad to buy
again that wood, which they have taken by violence from us.

Doctrine. Generally out of the whole verse. Gods people are often constrained
to buy the benefit and use of that which is their own. The reason is,
because, first, God will make hereby the world more hard unto them, that they
may learn to look unto him the more carefully. Secondly, that the wicked,
when God gives them power over the godly, may show the cruelty of their
disposition more manifestly. The use is, to teach us, to take it patiently, as
the lot that God has appointed us, when such extremities do fall upon us.

[Those upon our necks, persecute vs] i. those that sit over Verse 5.
us and press us down, do follow all extremities against us [we are wearted
and it is not suffered us to rest] i. we are greatly toyled with miseries on
every side, and yet have we no time of breathing or refreshing.

Doctrine. [vpon our neckes] In that they were stiff-necked and refused to
bear the Lords yoke, and thereupon are 1
given over to bear this heavy condition, we learn this doctrine. When Gods
people do begin to refuse his yoke which is light and easy, he will lay a
more grievous burden upon them. The reason is, because, first, he will let
them see by experience, that to serve him is the sweetest life. Secondly he
loves them, and therefore does correct them with the rods of men. The use is,
to teach us, in all our afflictions to acknowledge the heavy hand of God to be
most justly provoked against us by our own sins.

Doctrine. [not suffered us to rest] The wicked are never satisfied, but do
still continue their hatred against the godly: 2
for the reason and use hereof, see Chap. 3. verse. 14 doct. 6.

We have given our hand to Egypt] i. we have stretched out our begging hand to
the people of Egypt [to Ashur to be satisfied Verse 6.
with bread] i. yea to the Aslyrians, our greatest enemies, have we sought for
necessary relief; such is our misery.

Doctrine. [we have giuen] It is lawful for our necessary help in the things
of this life, to use the assistance of those 1
that be our enemies. The reason is, because, first, the matters of this life
are given of God to the just and unjust, to be used of all the sons of Adam,
for the relief of every particular. Secondly, the godly are the proper owners
of all things in the world, and to seek them when they need them, of
whomsoever God makes the treasurers thereof. The use is, first, to reprove
them that think it not lawful to buy and sell with, or to be any way
beholden unto the wicked. Secondly, to teach us, to use them when other means
are denied us, lest we tempt God in despising the means.

Doctrine. [to be satisfied with etc.] Gods people may 2
come to that want in this life, as to beg their bodily food: for the reason
and use hereof, see Chap. 4. verse. 4. doct. 4.

[Our faethers have sinned, and are not] i. our ancestors did Verse 7.
transgress Gods commandments, and yet they are out of the miseries of this
life [we bear their sinnes] i. we being the sinful seed of that sinful
generation, do bear the punishment of their sins, and of our own,
according to that Exodus 20. 5. Iere. 32. 18. not that the sons are punished
for their fathers sins: for this is always true, the soul that sins
shall dye, Ezech. 18. 20. neither shall the father dye for the sin of the
son, nor the son for the sin of the father: but the meaning is, that
forafmuch as they are not only guilty of their own sins, but also of their
fathers, in that they did succeed them in their iniquities: therefore had their
fathers less punishment, and the heavier burden lies upon them.

Doctrine. Generally out of the whole verse. When diverse generations continue
in one sin, the Lord uses to punish the latter more severely then the
former. The reason is, because, first, the son should fear to do the like,
when he sees his fathers sin, Ezech. 18. 14. else is his sin more heinous.
Secondly, the longer Gods patience is abused, the greater heap of vengeance is
deserved. The use is, to teach us, not to stand upon this; we will do as our
forefathers have done: for if we sin as they did, we must be punished more
severely then they were.

[Seruants do rule over vs] i. we are not only vassals to the Princes, and
great men that are our enemies; but even Verse 8.
every abject, and base fellow uses us at his pleasure [none rescueth us from
their hands] i. though every man do us wrong, and vile fellows abuse us, yet
no body has any care to help us, or to do us any justice.

Doctrine [seruants, etc.] When the wicked that are in 1
authority do set themselves to vex the godly, every servant and vile fellow
will be ready to add to their miseries. The reason is, because, first, all the
wicked are of one disposition, whether they be high or low. Secondly, ungodly
ones will flatter the rulers, and be ready to do that which will like them,
especially if they be evil. The use is, first, to teach magistrates to take
heed what they do, seeing the people be ready to follow them in all evil,
for which (as well as their own) they shall answer at the day of account.
Secondly, to teach us, when rulers set themselves against us for well-doing, to
look for the enmity of their servants, and of the multitude also.

Doctrine. [none rescueth] God often lays great miseries upon his people, and
denies them al means of deliverance: 2
for the reason and, use hereof, see chapt. 1. verse. 7. doctr. 3.

[In our liues] i. with the toule of our souls, or with the Verse 9.
danger of our lives [we have brought our bread] i. we have procured unto our
selves food [before the dryness of the wildernesse] i. by reason of the
barren, and dangerous places, where we were constrained to live.

Doctrine. Generally out of the whole verse. The godly do often get ncessarie
food, with the greatest danger and difficulty that can be. The reason is,
because, first, the world, and all the favorers thereof are against them.
Secondly, God would make them thoroughly weary of this world. The use is, to
teach us, not to wonder, or be amazed, when every worldly thing goes against
us, but to look for it, as our share allotted us in this life.

[Our skin was black as an ouen] i. Our bodies waxed Verse 10.
black, even as does an oven, being continually beaten upon with the flame of
the fire, that is within it [with the storms of famine] i. with that exceeding
sharp and continual hunger that makes us, as it were weather-beaten with
continual storms.

Doctrine. Generally out of the whole verse. The afflictions of Gods people
do often work a great alteration in their bodies. The reason is, because,
first, they are exceeding vehement. Secondly, God will often have them seen
(as it were) in their countenance, for the example of others. The use is, to
teach us, to look for afflictions from the Lord, both upon our bodies and
souls; and when we see them upon others, to profit by them, as the good
child does, when he sees his brother beaten.

[The women were defiled in Sion] i. The honest and sober Verse 11.
matrons did the enemy force and abuse to satisfy their filthy lust, even in
the holy place, dedicated to Gods especial service [the virgins in the cities
of Iudah] i. yea and the maidens also in every place where they came, and in
the cities that they did overcome.

Doctr. Generally out of the whole verse. There is no act so filthy, or
odious, which the wicked will not do, to accomplish their own desires. The
reason is, because, first, God gives them over to work al wickedness with
greediness. Secondly, Satan rules them, who is shameless himself, and so
makes he all those that are wholly guided by him. The use is, to show us, unto
what horrible condition man comes, when God leaves him unto himself.
Secondly, to teach us, not to trust such as we see given over unto sin, no
not in those things that shame and civil honesty forbids them to abuse
themselves in.

[The princes are hanged up by their hands] i. they make no more reckoning of
the honorable men among us, but do even Verse 12.
hang them up like dogs [the faces of the aged are not honored] i. the reverend
old men and ancient matrons have no kind of duty done them, but are utterly
defpised, as the rest of the people.

Doctrine. Generally out of the whole verse. When God stirs up the wicked to
be his scourge to punish his people, they have no respect to favor one degree
or sex more then another. The reason is, because, first, he that is no
accepter of persons does set them on work. Secondly, they are generally sinful
in great measure before such a rod comes upon them. Thirdly, the wicked seek
to satisfy their desires upon all, over whom God gives them power. The use
is, first, to reprove their vanity that flatter themselves in their sins,
thinking they shall not be punished among other sinners, because they are great
ones, rich, or aged. Secondly, to teach us, of what condition soever we be, to
prevent the Lords punishing hand by repentance, or else we shall be sure to
feel it extremely, when our sins are at their height.

[They took the young men to grinde] i. they made our goodly and strong young
men to grind in the mill, a work Uers. 13.
that Asses were usually put unto, being most painful, and most abject work
[the boys fell under the wood] i. they caused the young youths to bear such
burdens of wood, as the very weight thereof crushed them down, because they
were not able to stand under it.

Doctrine. Generally out of the whole verse. When the wicked do tyrannize over
the godly, they seek to serve their own turns with them, with greater
cruelty then they do with the bruit beasts. The reason is, because, they
bear a hatred unto them; so as, even their mercies are cruel. The use is, to
teach us, to pray unto God, that he would never give us over into their
hands, or if he do, to give us especial strength and patience, seeing they
use to deal so cruelly.

[The old men have ceased from the gate] i. the grave and ancient men do no
more sit in the gate, according to the Verse 14.
ancient manner, Genesis 34. 20. to judge between party and party, and to
execute justice to all men [the young men from their song] i. and the youth
also of the people have no joy, neither do they use any of their honest
recreations, which they were wont to use.

Doctr. [ceased from, etc.[ It is a grievous plague unto a people, when the
seat of justice is ouerthrown from among the^. 1
The reason is, because, first, it brings in all confusion and disorder.
Secondly, no man can enjoy any thing as his own. Thirdly, every one lies open
to the violence of spoylers, and has no succor nor redress, being wronged.
The use is, to teach us, first, that it is better to have tyrants govern us,
then to be void of all government. Secondly, to pray unto GOD for the
government under which we live, that in the prosperity thereof we may have
peace. Thirdly, to acknowledge all lawful magistrates to be the special
ordinances of God, appointed for our good, and therefore to yield obedience,
and reverence thereunto for conscience sake.

Doctrine. [young men from] The overthrow of magistracy 2
among a people, takes all occasions of rejoicing from all sorts of people.
The reason is, because, first, many great blessings are lost, and many
greeuances come upon them which will make the heart heavy. Secondly, they have
no safety, but have cause every one to fear another, and to stand upon his
own guard, as though he were in the midst of his enemies. The use is, to teach
us, to pray unto GOD that he would never leave us without those heads, and
governors that may take care to protect us in peace; for if he do, our life
will be more bitter then death it self.

Doctrine. [their song] Honest recreations and delights are to be esteemed
among the good blessings that God gives 3
his people in this life. The reason is, because, first, it is here accounted
by the holy Ghost a grievous thing that they are deprived of them. Secondly,
neither body nor mind can continue able and apt to their duties without some
intermission, but it is never lawful to be idle. The use is, first, to reprove
the^ that are so Stoical, as they think no recreatio^ to be allowed by the word
of God. Secondly, to teachvs, that it is lawful for us to use those exercises
that may recreate either our body wearied with travail, or our minds
oppressed with studies, meditations, cares of this life, or troubles: so that
these cautions be always obeserued, first, no part of Gods worship may be
abused in it, and therefore swearing, lottes, etc. must not be there. Secondly,
the hinderance of our neighbors profit may not be sought in it, and therefore
we may neither desire their company that should be about their worldly
business; nor seek to profit, or gain by the loss of any Thirdly, it must
be used to make us fitter for the more weighty duties of our calling; and
therefore we may not spend whole days, or half days therein: for else we
make not a recreation but an occupation of it.

[The joy of our hearts does cease] i. we have no matter of Verse 15.
rejoicing left us at all [our dance is turned into mourning] i. whereas we
have had much cause to be merry, we have now nothing but matter of mourning.

Doctrine. Generally out of the whole verse. Gods people are sometimes in such
case, as they have no cause of gladness, being on every side beset with
crosses and calamities. The reason is, because, first, God will let them see
the desert of their sinues. Secondly, the Lord will bring them to a thorough
mislike of this world, and a longing after heaven. The use is, to teach us,
first, not to condemn any, or to think our selves to be forsaken of God,
because of the multitude and greatness of afflictions. Secondly, to learn by
afflictions to set our affections more fervently upon heaven and heavenly
things.

[Our crown is fallen from our head] i. all our glory both of Church and
common wealth, yea and whatsoever thing Uers. 16
any private man had where with he was honored or any way graced [woe is now
to us, because we have sinned] i. cause of great sorrow and lamentation is
upon us, for that we have transgressed the righteous laws of the just God,
and not yielded obedience unto him.

Doctrine. Generally out of the whole verse. It is the sin of the godly that
causes all their afflictions which they do suffer; which also in their
greatest agonies they do confess: see Chapt. 1. verse. 5. doct. 7. and verse.
8. doct. 2. and verse. 12. doct. 1. and 2.

[For this our heart is faint] i. this grievous estate of our Verse 17.
sins does touch us with the greatest grief [because of these things] i. for
these great miseries which our sins have procured us [our eyes are darkned]
i. our senses are made dull, as usually they are with grief and sorrow.

Doctrine. [for this etc.] The godly when they are thoroughly touched are more
grieved for their sins, then for 1
all the plagues that the Lord lays upon them in this life. The reason is,
because, first, sin in it self separateth betwixt God and man, which no kind
of afflictions can do. Secondly, sin is the cause of afflictions, without
which no sorrow could come unto us. The use is, to teach us, to labor with
our selves always to be more displeased with our selves for our offenses, then
for those punishments which they bring upon us in this life.

Doctrine. [because of these things] The sirength of man's 2
body is more wasted with sorrow and grief then with any toil that can
befall it in this life. The reason is, because, grief rises from the heart,
the fountain of strength, and spreads into every part of the body. The use
is, to show the cause why many are overwhelmed in some troubles, which (and
greater also) some are not moved withal; even because the one lays them, as
grievous things, to the heart; the other casts them, as trifles behind his
heels. Secondly, to teach us, so to sorrow when afflictions are upon us, as
yet we never exceed the mean, lest we make our selves unable to perform the
duties of our callings, and so increase our sins by that means.

[Because of mount Sion, which is desolate] i. This especially grieueth my
heart, that the place where Gods service was Verse 18.
wont to bevsed with great glory to his name, and joy to his people, should be
made as a forsaken wilderness [foxes run in it] i. such as, with craft and
bloody affection do spoil the flock, do raunge therein at their pleasure.

Doctrine. [because of mount Sion] The desolation of the Church of God, is the
greatest grief that can be fall Gods 1
people in this life. The reason is, because, first, it brings dishonor to
God, which is more to be grieved at then the loss of life it self, Exodus 32.
32. Romans 9. 3. etc. Secondly, they delight more in the prosperity thereof,
then in their other greatest joy, Psalm. 137. 6. The use is, to teach us, to
labor with our selves that we never think we have attained to any tolerable
measure of religion, until Gods glory be the dearest thing unto us of all
other.

Doctrine. [foxes] The troubles of Gods Church be at the 2
height of her afflictions, when they that hate her, and spoil her, have power
over her. The reason is, because, first, no part of Gods honor can be
advanced for them. Secondly, every true member of the Church is vexed by them.
The use is, to teach us (as this people did) when such a condition befalls
the Church of God, to mourn for it, bearing patiently our shares in the
miseries of it, and praying heartily to God for the amendment of it.

[Thou O Lord remainest for euer] i. howsoever there is oftentimes a change
and alteration in this world, and that in Verse 19.
thy Church; yet thou abidest the same for ever [thy seat to generation and
generation] i. the throne, on which thou sit (for he speaks after the
manner of men) to rule all things is firm, so as thy Church depending upon the
assurance of thy power and promise, cannot but continue, howsoever several
generations be punished and cut off for their sins.

Doctrine. Generally out of the whole verse. The Lord has from the beginning,
and will to the end, and after all generations, rule the world, and all that
dwell therein. The reason is, because, all power is of him, and is to be
referred unto him. The use is, to teach us, that howsoever we for our sins
do vanish away, yet Gods Church shall remain, though floods of afflictions
seem to drown every member thereof; seeing it is founded upon his promise
that cannot lie, and his power which is able to do all things. This doctrine,
and the same use thereof, is expressed, Psalm. 102. 24. to the end.

[Why have thou forgotten us for euer] i. O Lord seeing we Verse 20.
are thy people, and thou our God, why is thy heavy hand so upon us, as though
thou had no care of us, and did forget us? [why have thou left us to the
length of daies] i. why do thou so carry thy self toward us, as if thou
had forsaken us for ever.

Doctrine. [why etc.] When the godly are most pinched with afflictions, then
are their prayers most fervent unto the Lord. The reason is, because, first,
afflictions drive away drowsinesse and security. Secondly, the present
vexation that troubles do bring, does make us pray as earnestly against them,
as we are desirous to be rid of them. The use is, to teach us, to know that
howsoever no affliction is for the time joyous, but grievous; yet they are
profitable to all that are rightly exercised in them, Heb. 12. 11.

[Restore us O Lord to thee, that we may be returned] i. O Verse 21.
Lord, it is thou alone that must bring us into our former estate of peace and
felicity, if ever we shall be brought unto it: for he speaks not here of the
work of repentance, but of their outward flourishing estate, such as they had
under David and Solomon [renew our days as of old] i. let it please thee to
alter our estate from this misery wherein it is, to that happiness that it
has been in, in former times.

Doctrine. Generally out of the whole verse. It is in the 1
hand of God alone to alter and dispose of the outward estate of all men in
this life. The reason is, because all power over al things is in his hand
alone. The use is, first, to reprove them that ascribe any thing (when they
prosper) unto their own power or wisdom. Secondly, to teach us to seek unto
God alone for success unto our travails, whether we labor for the good of
the body, or the soul, and to acknowledge his hand that gives both
prosperity and adversity therein.

Doctrine. [as of old] The experience of Gods former favor, 2
is a notable provocation to cause us still to trust in him, and to call upon
him in all our necessities: for the reason and use hereof, see Chap. 3. verse.
56. doct. 1.

[For should thou altogether contemn vs] i. Lord how Uers. 22.
can it agree with thy promise and former mercies, now to make no reckoning of
us [shouldest thou be exceedingly angry with vs] i. can thou show thy wrath
against us above the strength thou have given us to bear it, and so consume us
which are thine inheritance?

Doctrine. Generally out of the whole verse. The consideration of Gods love to
his people, and merciful disposition to do them good, is an assurance unto
the godly in their afflictions, that the end shall be joyful. The reason is,
because, first, they know he has ever showed pity to his people, and
delivered them out of all their distresses. Secondly, they believe that God
will do so with them; seeing, neither his arm is shortened, nor his kindness
any way abated, there being no change in him. The use is, to teach us, in all
our troubles not to measure the event of them by our own sins, or our power
to escape them (for then shall we be confounded in our selves) but by the due
meditation of Gods power and mercy, which he has promised to employ for ever
to the good of his Church, Matthew. 28. 20. who will be true of his word, though
all men be liars, Romans 3. 4.

The end of the Lamentations of Jeremy.

