AMENDMENT of life: THREE SERMONS, UPON ACTS 2. VERSES 37. 38. CONTAINING the
true effect of the word of God, in the conversion of the godly: and the manner
how it changes their hearts, and reformeth their lives, which is the true
work of regeneration.

By JOHN VDALL, Preacher of the word of God, at Kingstone upon Thames.

JOHN. 3. 3. Except a man be borne again, he can not see the kingdom of God.

AT LONDON, Imprinted for Thomas Man, W. B. and N. L. 1584.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE CHARLES, LORD HOWARD, BARON OF EFFINGAM, Lord
Chamberlain of the Queens Majesty's most honorable household, Of the most
noble Order of the Garter Knight, and one of her Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Counsel: JOHN VDALL wishes continual increase in all virtue and
godliness.
AS there is no field, be it never so well tilled, and be the seed never so
good that is sown in the same, but weeds will of their own accord spring
therein, and without the diligent care of the husbandman, choke the good
seed, and deceive the owner of the expected fruit of his former labor: so
there has never since the world began (right honorable) been any church so
pure without corruption, that has not had many blemishes in the same: the
which without the great mercy of God, and provident care of the governors
thereof, both has, and does, and to the end of the world will, so grow and
increase, that they will never stay, until they have brought to pass the
utter subversion and overthrow of religion there professed: for if we begin
with the Church of the Jews, not only the first visible, and established
church, but also the image and picture of the Church of God for ever: and
consider what corruptions have crept into the same, how they have increased
from time to time, and often prevailed against the sincere worship of God, to
the utter overthrow of true religion, and strengthening of idolatry: it is so
manifest in the books of Moses, Kings, and the Prophets, that either we must
refer the consideration thereof, to those places, or else (which is needeles)
make a whole volume of the discourse of the same. We see the same practice in
the Primitive Church, even in the time of the Apostles, that both corruption of
doctrine, and also loosenes in conversation, did greatly infect that age. The
which is evident in the times following, and even until this day: that the
true doctrine of the Gospel has been most blasphemously perverted, and
godlesnesse in life so rooted into the heart of man, that the number of true
Christians has ever been a small, poor, and contemned flock. And in truth,
we need go no further than to these present times, wherein we live: in which
(because thorough the great mercy of our good and gracious God, the seeds of
Popish tares can take no such root, as Satan wishes) we may behold, and (to
the great grief of Christian hearts) too plainly see, how greatly Atheism
and ungodliness prevails, that it is a hard matter, even in this bright sun
shine of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, to find many of them, that together with
purity of religion, do study to keep a sincere and upright conscience, in
their life. For religion (now adays) is made a cloak, to hide sin: a mist,
to bleere the eyes of the world: a den, for transgressors: and a cage, for all
unclean birds in the world. All which springs hence, that Satan can persuade
men, that if they profess themselves to be Gospellers, and make show of
religion, it is not only sufficient, (because no man shall be saved by his
works) but also it shall bring them into more credit and estimation in the
world, thereby to grow greater: which brings forth these three most
pernicious and dangerous evils among men: first, that the Papists, (who
measure all things by the outward show) are not only kept from listening to
the truth, but also more hardened in their blind superstition. Secondly, that
the glory of the high and mighty God, which should shine in our lives, by
the Gospel, is trampled under feet. Lastly, that their own souls and bodies
are in a most dangerous estate, (being driven by the provocation of the devil)
headlong into the pit of condemnation, whereinto so many, as with out
repentance, run on to the end, must needs fall at length, feeling the
torments increased unto them: that (for laying stumbling blocks in the way to
overthrow others, and defacing the glory of the great God, and proceeding in
satisfieng their own appetite with sin) they have most justly deserved. The
consideration of which mischief, moved certain godly, and well disposed
persons, (who were by the providence of God, ear witnesses of a discourse,
that it pleased the Lord to stre^gthen me, to utter in my ordinary course, upon
the Acts of the Apostles) earnestly to entreat me, that I would pen the
same, for their further comfort: which good and godly motion of theirs, for
that it proceeded (I doubt not) from an earnest desire in them, of spiritual
edification, I condiscended unto. And because it has pleased God, to make me,
by special duty, bound unto your Honor: I therefore have made especial
choice of the same: whereunto, these my simple and small labors might be
dedicated, most humbly beseeching your honor, that, as it is the sum and
substance of all the religion, taught, and professed in this poor Town of
Kingston, so it would please your L. to accept thereof, not according to the
quantity (that is but small) nor expecting the enticing words of man's
wisdom, (which is most unfit for the Gospel of Christ) but according to the
substance of the thing, and the mind of the poor labourer. So shall your Honor
bind me, (which notwithstanding is my duty) with the rest of them, that fear
God, among us, to pray continually unto the father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
for you: that it would please him, so to direct, guide, and bless all your
enterprises, as may best tend to the glory of his most blessed name, the
benefit of his Church, and this common weal, and the eternal and everlasting
comfort of your own soul.

Your Honors most humble to command in the Lord Jesus Christ. JOHN VDALL.

Three Sermons of the amendment of life.
Acts. 2. verse. 37. 38. Now, when they heard it, they were pricked in their
hearts, and said unto Peter and the other Apostles: men and brethren what shall
we do? Then Peter said unto them: Amend your lives.
WHen our Savior Jesus John. 15. 26. Acts. 1, 4. Luke. 24, 49.
Christ (according to his promise) has sent dawn y^ holy ghost into the hearts
of his discipls, which was so effectual in them, that they who were unlearned
spoke with diverse languages, the Jews and strangers of diverse countries
gathered together to see that strange wonder, and some admired it as the
wonderful work of God, others mocked them, affirming them to be droncke:
whereupon Peter stood up making an Apology for himself and the rest: first
delivering them from that lying slander of dronkennes, and then proved it to
be the work of Jesus Christ, whom though they had crucified, yet God the
father had raised, and had exalted him to be Lord and King over all things
both in heaven and earth. The which being proved unto them that: he was the
very Messia^, whom they had so wickedly crucified, they perceived themselves to
be in danger of the heavy vengeance of God for it, and their fear it wrong
in them, as is set) down in the former of these verses. In which (together
with the latter) for our better remembrance, we have to note these three
things: First, the effect that Peter's Sermon wrought in the hearts of these
Jews: Secondly their care to be resolved what to do: and lastly* Peter's
counsel unto them.

When they heard it: that is, who he was whom they had so abused, and what
danger they were in for it: it wounded them even at the very heart, and struck
them in a marvelous fear of Gods sudden vengeance to be powered down upon
them for their so heinous a fact, and so horrible murder, as to kill the Lord
Acts. 3. 15. 5.
of life, from whom all they that ever shall be saved, do receive their life
and salvation. Which declares unto us their wonderful blockishnes, and
palpable blindness, y^ they reading the prophesies (concerning the Savior to
come) every Saboth day and daily looking for him, yet when he comes do thus
behave Acts. 13. 27.
themselves toward him. The cause wherereof was for that they dreamed of a
worldly King full of pomp and glory, and Christ being so base and poor, they
were offended at him: much like ye carnal christians of our time, who are
ashamed of ye baseness of the gospel and simplicity of religion, and therefore
think that it is too mean a thing for me^ of great estat and honor: but we
see ye contrary in Gods word: that there is no joy without Christ, but sorrow:
no, honor, but ignominy: no blessedness, but curssednesse, howsoever it
seems otherwise to carnal people, that judge fleshly and according to
natural reason: and therefore we read that the greatest dishonor that ever
came to the Kings of Judah and Jerusalem, was their 2. Kings, 10, 31. 21, 20,
18, 3. 22, 2.
negligence in religion, and their greatest praise is their care to establish
it in sincerity: and therefore, how base, poor and contemptible so ever
Christ seem to flesh and blood, there is no glory, riches, nor honor that
profits, except it be governed by him, and directed to his glory. We learn
further by these Jews, that there is no way in the world that can serve to
convert man unto God, until the appointed time do come: For they heard Christ
often, and yet his word was to them as water powered upon a stone, until this
hour wherein God had determined their conversion. Which doctrine ministers a
double use unto us: first to y^ magistrate that he compel all, (yea even the
obstinate) to the outward exercises of religion: for by y^ means it may please
God to work their conversion. Secondly for every private person that is
already called, (yea and the minister of the word especially to bear with
patience the unregenerate, and not to determine or judge rashly of their
reprobation: But still to hope for the time of their conversion. Moreover in
that it is said here that they were pricked in their hearts when they heard
it, we learn how needful it is for us to have the word of God continually
sounding in our ears, whereby we may be rouzed out of the sleep of sin.
For we are naturally prone to evil, and slothful in the service of Gods
word, very dull to goodness, needing the goade of Gods threatninges to prick
us in the sides, and to make us proceed in the fear of the Lord: else we
freese in our sins, and if any good motions come in our minds now and then,
they are choked: and so we wax worse and worse. The consideration hereof
made David a King to meditate in the word of God day and night, and made it
his Psalm. 1, ^, 119, 24.
counselor, a good example for all great estates to look unto and follow.

Pricked in their hearts. How comes this to pass, that Peter speaking
only to the outward ears, they are said to be pricked in their hearts,
even by the wonderful power and Majesty that God has printed in his word,
that it should sound the bottomless deapthe of man's most secret
thoughts, and enter between the soul and the spirit. And this effect it
has in all, though it have a contrary fruit: for the wicked take occasion
hereby, to be more severe against the Children of GOD. As we may see Exodus 5.
6. 1. Kings. 13. 4. Math. 26. 3.
in Pharaoh, Achab, Jeroboam, and the Pharisees. But the children of God use
means as soon as they be touched 2. Sam. 12 13. 2. King* 22. 11.
to amend their lives as did David, and Josias, and these Jews* Whereby we
may take good occasion to examine our selves, whether we be the Children of
God or no: for if the contempt or neglecte of amendment of our lives argues
(as yet) no grace to be in us, then the care to amend, and the endeavor
thereunto indeed, is a special motion of the spirit, which we must be
careful to cherrish, least it be quenched, and so our estate wax miserable.

And said unto Peter. This is the second general part containing their care
to seek the right way, to be delivered from the gulf of perdition that
hanged over their heads: which is a Note of a true Child of God, for it is
the nature of every man to say, when his sin is reproved, that the Preacher
says true, and that we should amend, but they never set one foot
forward to put it in practice, only the Godly have that care, that when
any thing is found by the word of God to be amiss in them, they can never
be at quiet until they find out means, wherey it may be redressed. Let us
observe further in them a wonderful change: They had mocked Christ and his
doctrine, and never were at rest, till they had killed him: they not long
before this time did esteem the Apostles no better then. Dronckardes, and yet
the Lord in this short time so alters their minds, that they come to them
lovingly, terming them Men and Brethren: which will be so far from a wicked
man untouched with Gods spirit, that he will rather with Matthew, 27, 5. 2.
Sam. 17, 23.
Judas and Achitophel hang himself, then seem (forsoothe) to be so much
beholdinge to the godly, whom he takes to be his enemies. But if once Gods
word take deep and sound root in any man, it will alter and change him quite
from his former wicked mind: Whereof we have notable examples in the
Scriptures: Saul went to Naioth, 1. Sam. 19, 23.
entending to persecute David, but God changed his mind, that he Acts. 9, 20.
prophesied: Paul went toward Damascus with intent to make hauecke of the
Saints of God: But when he came there he preached Christ unto them. The
Soldiers went out from the Pharisees to take Christ, but the Majesty of his
word struck them down to the ground, and made John, 7, ^6.
them return this answer: that they never heard man speak as he spoke.
They in this place came to mock, and you see how God turns their mockinges
into earnest entreating the Apostles to give them good counsel. Whereby we
learn the truth of the Pro. 21, 1, 20, 24
saying of Solomon, that the hearts even of Kings are in the hands of the
Lord, as a boat in the Rivers of water: and therefore it is not in man to
direct his own ways: which teaches us to pray unto the Lord continually,
that it would please his majesty so to govern us, as may best tend to his
glory, and the comfort of our own souls. It teaches us moreover, that seeing
God turns, at his pleasure, evil intentes to good purposes, that we must
wish, and desire, and daily exhort al men (of what mind soever they be)
that they have a care to hear Gods word: for in that they come, though their
intent be not to learn, but to carp and cauell, they be welcome: God may
cast the net of his mercy so far on them, that contrary to their purpose,
they may be won into the sheepefolde of Christ Jesus, to their endless
comfort.

What shall we do. Being grieved with the sight of their sins, they seek
what to do to be eased, showing unto us an example of the heart truly
touched, to seek the way to amend, and not as is the manner of hipocriticall
repenters, to abide in the same sin, and continue without amendment: for such
(as yet) did never know what it is to be pricked in heart with the true sight
of sin.

Then Peter said. The third general part of the text, which contains the
counsel that Peter gave unto them: the which (before we come to handle) we
must observe two profitable lessons, for our comfort, and instruction.

The first is an experience of the truth of the promise of our Savior Christ:
for they that seek shall find, and to those Math. 7. 7,
that knock it shall be opened, and that God is near at hand to all them
that Psalm. 145. 18.
call upon him faithfully: For our good and gracious God, being full of mercy
and tender kindness, does open the treasures thereof unto his Children, when
they seek it by repentance from the bottom of their hearts, and in the
anguishe of their souls acknowledge their woeful estate, and wretched
condition if he should leave them to themselves. So he dealte with the
Israelites in their slighte before Pharaoh Exodus 14. 15.
and his hoaste. So with David being wounded with the sight of his Psalm. 6. 9.
own sins. So with Paul, being Acts. 9. 11.
cast down and blinded in body, to teach him the blindness of his soul.
And thus he deals with his dearest beloved Children: to wit gives them a
sight of their own sins, and his Judgments deserved for the same: that
they may learn to go out of themselves, where is nothing but confusion, and
so to seek unto him with an unfeigned desire of comfort. The use of which
Doctrine (being rightly applied) is most sweet and comfortable: For it is
the lotte of Gods Children to be often grieved in their soul and afflicted in
conscience, through the view of their own sins: whereby Satan would make
them believe, y^ it is for that God has cast them of, and given them over into
hardness of heart: thereby laboring to drive them to despair. But we must
strive to be persuaded of the clean contrary: for to be given over of God, is
to wallowe in all sin without remorse, to heap transgression upon
transgression, without sight of the danger thereof, and so to make a sport of
iniquity: but to be grieved with sin, to feel the burden thereof with
desire to be eased (though we feale no present comfort) is the undoubted work
of the holy ghost, and shall (by Gods grace) in time convenient (when he has
sufficiently humbled and trie^d us) bring forth the quiet fruit of
righteousness unto all them that be Heb, 12, 11.
thereby exercised. And therefore when the Lord lays any trial upon us, that
we seem to be ready to be swallowed up of many dangers that are imminent,
though it be the property of flesh and blood to be grieved at it, yet we must
strive to fly up farther, to wit, to learn this lesson, that if we be the
children of God, when greatest dangers assail, we must assure our selves
that the Lord has an especial work to bring to pass by us, whereby he will
not only have his own glory to shine out more brightly, but also that we may
perceive his love unto us more evidently. The second thing y^ we have to note,
is Peter's readiness to salve that soar that he had made, and to heal the
wound that they were pained with all: which shows in him two qualities, that
be required to be in all the Ministers of Gods words: to wit a ready and
willing mind to help, and power to perform the same. The first we see was in
him, and was the mark that he shot at, in reproving them so sharply, even
their conversion: which as it should be the care that all the Ministers of Gods
word should have, to do the work of the Lord willingly, to seek souls
unto Christ, and bring them out of darkness, into light: so it shows unto
the people, that when the Minister reproves sin sharply, and galleth them
to the quick, he neither does it of malice nor choler, neither yet of hatred,
but of mere love unto them, to do them good, to bring them to see themselves,
and so to seek to God. And therefore (howsoever flesh and blood judges
otherwise) they are the greatest fooes to man's soul that do* tickle the ears
with painted eloquence, studying rather for pleasing speeches, to delight the
senses, then the power of the spirit to cast down man's pride, that he may be
humbled to God: these be they whom the Prophet speaks of, that sow Cushions
Ezekiel. 13. 18.
under men's elbows, to lull them a sleep in their sins: these be fit
Preachers for such as cry out: preach to us pleasant things. But Saint
Peter was not in the number of them, and yet did love this people most dearly.
The second quality that we note in Peter is his ability, in that he was
able presently to tell them what they should do: For if (when by the
threatninges of Gods judgments he had wounded them) he had not been able to
help their bruised hearts and comfort their sorrowing souls, he had been no
better then a tormentor: But in that he was able, and ready to do both, his
example commends unto us a pattern of a right Minister of the word, who
must be able to bring out of his treasury both Math. 13. 52. 2. Tim. 3. 16.
17. Tit. 1. 9.
old and new: he must be able to teach, to resist the gainesaier, to
instruct, to reprove, and comfort. But (alas) the world is come now to that
pass, that if he can read (and that barely) that is laid before him, he is
accoumpted and accepted for sufficient: and yet the Scripture calls such
Idell sheepeheardes, dumb Esaias. 56. 10. Math. 5. 13.
Dogs, that cannot bark. Salt with out saltness not good for the Dunghill,
and yet this church of England (a grievous thing to be considered) Reave. 9.
3.
is even pestered with such, and they swarm like Locustes let out of the
lake. The Lord for his mercy sake either convert them to better uses, or in his
good time send an east wind to blow them into the bottom of the sea, and
place seeing watchmen, and painful laborers in his vineyarde, that will
Exodus, 10, 19.
dress it and not fast themselves therein.

Amend your lives. This is the counsel of Peter's a sentence very short in
words, but long in matter, containing the very substance of all religion, and
the whole (...) of Christianity: The definition of Repentance.
the original word signifies to recou^^ with grief, it is commonly
translat^^ repent, and the m^^ter called repentance, which is a turning of our
lives unto God, proceeding from a true fear of his judgments for sin,
embracing God his promises in Jesus Christ, and reforming the life according to
the prescript rule of Gods word: the which (that we may the more orderly
proceed) consists of these three principal parts 1. A sorrow for sin. 2
Faith in Christ, and 3. Godliness of conversation: which last in truth is
rather a fruit of faith, (as in a place convenient shall be proved) then any
part of the whole: all which things in some measure more or less are to be
found in all them that are Gods children and have received any Sorrow for sin
what it is.
taste of his grace.

The first, Sorrow for sin may be thus defined: it is a grief of the soul
for sin, wrought by the judgments of God, laid out in his word, whereby
the party convicted is truly humbled. I call it a grief of the soul, because
it brings man even into the gulf of condemnation, and sets before his
eyes the heavy wrath of God and hell torments, that his own conscience
tells him he has justly deserved. This was wrought 2 Samuel 12. 13. 2 King.
22. 11.
in David, when his own mouth condemned him to be the child of death. It was
in Josias when his heart melted at the hearing of the Law expounded unto him.
It was in Marie that washed our Luke 7. 38.
Savior Christ Jesus his feet with her tears: it was in these that cried out
in the anguishe of their hearts: men and brethren what shall we do: it is in
all them among us, that have any working of Gods spirit in them, when they
consider God to be a just God, a revenger of iniquitye, and themselves to be
most horrible and wretched sinners. Whereby we may take good occasion to
examine our selves, whether we be of God or no: which we shall do thus: If I do
not tremble at Gods judgments: if my sins grieve me not, surely I am hardened:
but if they make me sigh and groan unto the Lord under the weight thereof: if I
loath them both in my self and others, then I have a mark of Gods grace in me,
that he works my salvation, and seals it unto me. This sorrow may after a
sort be in a man, and yet not the true sorrow: for many are grieved because
they they are not better: for that through their naughtiness, they forgette
preferment, or credit, that else they should have: and therefore it is said
that this must be wroughte by the judgments of God, laid out in his word:
that is, when by Gods Law I perceive the straighte line that is enjoined to
me, and the curse of God that hang over my head for my disobedience, that
brings with it condemnation of body and soul: this is the thing wherefore I
should be grieved. And if we wey the matter well, it carries with it just
cause of sorrow: for though I inioye all the delights and pleasures that be
in the world, I shall have them a very short time, and the reward of sin
is eternal woe, without ease or intermission, which all men have justly
deserved, and from which none shall be delivered, that is not brought to
sorrow for sin and to seek to Jesus Christ, the life of them that
rightelye seek him. This (being the first step to God, and entrance into
his favor) is mightily gainesaid by the subtle enemy Satan, that would have
us make a sport of sin. Secondly by the world that blereth our eyes with the
poisoned baits of vanities, and 3. by our own flesh y^ lusts after those
things that bring perdition: and therefore the Lord (who has a care that his
chosen should not be deceived by all these or any of them) has in his The word
of God affords many reasons to move us to sorrow for sin.
word set down many most strong reasons, and forcible persuasions, to induce
us to this sorrow for sin, as first, his severe judgments executed upon
others. Idolators were given over into The 1. reason.
the hands of spoilers. Blasphemers consumed Judge. 214 Esaias. 37. 10. 36. 2.
Sam. 6. 7.
by the Angel of God. Corrupters of Gods sincere worship presently struck
down dead. Disobedient rebels swallowed up quick into the Numb. 15. 32.
Judge. 8. 19 1 King 2. 31. Genesis 7. 17. 19. 24.
earth, Murderers requited with murder. Generally, the whole world (except
eight persons) drowned for sin. Sodom and Gomorrah burned with fire and
brimstone from heaven, because of Ezekiel. 16. 49.
pride, riotte, idleness, and contempt of y^ poor. Four sins, that now (I
am persuaded) are as rife, as ever they were in those Cities: and al these, as
they received sudden punishment in this world: so (to us) no other is
known, but that eternal condemnation followed. Now how must these things
bring us to sorrow for sins? Thus we have committed the same sins (in some
point) that they did, and therefore being guilty of the same condemnation,
there is no way for us to escape it, but to flee to the Lord with penitent
hearts, and sorrowing souls. Saint Paul teaches 1. Cor. 10. 6.
us this doctrine, and the same use of it, saiing: these are written as exampls
for us, that we sin not as they did, least we receive the same condemation.
Whereby we learn that the scriptures of God are not written to us as histories
to read Romans 15. 4.
and hear for pleasure, but for our learning and instruction, that we may
learn by the example of the wicked there mentioned, to leave sin: and of the
godly The 2 reason.
to be stirred up unto godliness. Again, when we consider how merciful God
has been unto us: that whereas in his just judgment be might have not only
cut us of, and cast us into eternal condemnation, when first we began to
conceive any inclination unto sin: but even before we were borne, have
drowned us in original guilte, and never sufferd us to come to any knowledge
of good or evil, has so long a time (we committing so many and infinite
sins against his majesty) yet spared us, and not dealt rigorously with us:
this should make us very sorry that we have so long provoked so merciful a God
unto anger: Romans 2. 4.
which use S. Paul sets down, saying that the mercy of God leads to
repentance. But (alas) we take occasion to sin by the same, and so are
careless to amend, ever having this in our mouths, God is merciful, and so we
incur the danger of the severe denunciation following in the same place,
where it said: that such heap up wrath against the day of wrath. For we must
know that as God is merciful to all penitent sinners, so is he just to all
careless and loose people that withhold the truth of God in unrighteousness:
Romans 1. 18.
and therefore let us not be so abused by Satan, to think y^ God has mercy in
store for him that goes on still in his wickedness. But let us try our selves
by ye touch stone The 3 reason.
of Gods word, how the consideration of Gods great mercy works in us. Besides
this we see that when or wheresoever the word of God has been preached it
has wrought either to their conversion and comfort, or hardening and
condemnation: it was to Noe a safeguard, because he believed: to ye worlds
overthrow, for y^ they harkned not: to the Israelites deliverance, Genesis 7. 7.
17. Exodus 14. 22.
to the Egiptians destruction: to the apostles salvation, to the Scribes and
Phareseis condemnato^. The due consideration of this must bring us to sorrow for
sin: for thus we must reason with our selves we have the word preached, out of
which yt judgments of God are threatened to fall on the wicked: and
contrariwise his promises to be performed to the godly: of which sort am I? if
of the godly, then the word preached has moved me to ame^dment, and continual
grief of heart y^ I can amend no better: if I be not thus moved thereby,
surely the^ I am of the worst sort 1 Cor 1. 18. 2 Cor. 2. 16.
to whom the gospel is folishnes, and in whom it sauoureth to death. The^ I may
not abide in sin thus, but by sorrow for the same, I must conceive a loathing of
al iniquity. And to the end that this remorse The 4 reason.
may take deeper hold in me, I must enter into a view of my former
conversation, and that by the candle of Gods law, whereby I cannot choose but
see the ugly deformities of mine own heart, the corrupt desires of my mind,
the fruitelesse (if not blasphemous) speeches of my tongue, the god less
actions of my conversation: all which heretofore, every one of us have taken
pleasure in, and esteemed them as our great felicity: and this being truly
viewed, and withal the reward thereof in his own nature considered, must (if
any spark of grace be in us) not only pinch us at the very heart, but also
make us say with the Apostle, 1 Pet 4, 3. The 5 reason.
that it is sufficient that we have spente the time past after the will of the
flesh. And so much the rather, for that our time is very short, and a great
part thereof already mispense, and therefore we may not differ any longer to
begin the service of our God, in gloryffyng his holy name in these our
mortal bodies. Neither may this be a remiss or slack sorrow which is
ordinarily (almost) in all men: for if y^ would serve, then should al, or the
greatest number be saved: and yet we see both by the course of Gods word, and
also evident sentences of the same, that the least number are accepted of God:
for where eight were saved, thousands were drowned: Where The 6 reason. 1 Pet.
3. 20. Genesis 17, 2. Deu. 7. 6. Acts. 1. 15. 5. 1. Mat. 13. 4. 7. 14
Abraham and his family were, there was the Church: the Israelites were the
peculiar people of God: a small handful in respect of the world: so it was
in the time of Christ and his Apostles, and yet even of them that were
outwardly of the number many were hipocrites, and dissemblers. So true is that
saying uttered by the month of Christ Jesus our Savior. Straighte is the gate
and narrow is the way, that leads unto life, and few there be that find it.
And wide is the gate and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and
many go that way. And therefore this same usual and 2 Cor. 7. 10. Other three
reasons.
ordinary saying. I am sorry, and it grieueth me, when yet they amend not,
cannot be the sorrow to repentance, which is not to be sorrowed for: seeing
besides that the pangs of death shall try whether we have sorrowed unfeignedly
or no. Jesus Christ, who sees the darkest corner of our hearts shall be the
Judge, and will give sentence of every one as they are, and and not as they
seem to the world to be. And lastly eternal torments are provided both for
hipocrites, and hard hearted persons. Let us not deceive our selves with an
outward show of religion: let us not (like glowormes) make boast of that we
are not. But all pleasures and vanities set a side, let us begin to rippe up
our own hearts, return to the Lord our God with earnest and hearty sorrow for
our former transgressions with full purpose of taking a better course then yet
we have done. I know that as this is the entrance unto God, and so the first
slip that we give unto Satan, so he The motions of Satan. in man's heart to
keep him in sin
lacks not his persuasions and glorious baits to trump in our way, whereby
our eyes may be turned, and our hearts alienated from this course. For says
he: do thou believe y^ there be so many torments provided for them, that
take their pleasure in y^ things of this world? will God be so severe as so?
will he mark so diligently what is done amiss. Is there such knowledge in
the most highest? No no, it is but the choleric railing of these precise and
wayward preachers, that love to be always chiding. God is merciful, he
knows man cannot keep his Laws in all points, and therefore he will bear
with him. Do thou not see and behold great men, yea and learned men, they
believe no such matter, and they be wiser then thou art, being a simple man:
for they take all the delighte and pleasure that can be. Thou haste taken
great delighte in sinnne and wickedness thus long, and if thou should do
as they say, it were even to make a metamorphosis of thy self, and thou
had better be out of the world, then to leave thy former companions, thy
delectable pasttimes and merrimentes. Thus oulde thou art: and thus many years
thou have lived at thy pleasure and what has happened unto thee for it? if it
were such a grievous thing in the sight of God, thou should never have
enjoyed it so long without punishment, for behold there be no men under the
Sun more void of calamities then they be y^ are not so precise, but follow
their own desires. And though it did offend the Almighty (which is to be
doubted) yet thou may return unto him many years hence* he will receive
thee at any time, yea if thou do but cry, Lord have mercy upon me, when thou
lie sick and see no other way but death, it will serve. Were it not great
pity, that thou being a gallant, young, and comely person, should be
abandoned from the pleasures that thine estate both require? Yes doubtless.
These with infinite such like motions does Satan put into the heads and
hearts of natural men, which are so fit to their nature and so agreeable to
their complexion, that they quickly assente and follow the steps prescribed
by him. Where upon it comes (as daily experience declares too manifestly)
that infinite numbers, yea almost the whole worlds, is drowned in sin and
iniquity: For either they be Papists, blind with superstition: or carnal
gospellers, contented with bare profession, or Athiests addicted to no
religion: thinking it the safest way Acts. 18. 15.
to meddle no whitte that way: and all these agree in one conclusion, to
delight in sin and iniquity: so that, to find one that makes a conscience of
sin, that strives for sincere reformation, and wrestleth against his own
corruption, to please God, is very hard, even among a great number: and he
whom God has enlightened to take that course: What is he? a precision, a
puritan, one that takes himself to be without sin, a wayward body, and
busy controller, a medler, and what not? Which is the cause that sin every
where so reigns, and truth and godliness so generaly decays, that (unless
a general and speedy repentance prevent it) the wrath of God must needs fall
upon this land, and utterly root out this most devilish generation. Therefore
let them that have any spark of Gods grace, mourn, houle, and lament for the
desolations of Jacob, and the transgressions of Israel, that at least they may
escape the rod of Gods visitation. Thus we see both the reasons that the
holy Ghost uses to move us to sorrow for sin, and the temptations
wherewithal Satan seeks to keep us back, and stay us in the delight of
the flesh, Let every one of us examine himself which prevails most with him.
Whereby we may see our selves in what state we stand, before the Lord our
God. The end of thie sorrow for sin is, not to deserve thereby the favor
of God, or y^ the force thereof should merit justification: for the debtor
that did fall down Math 18. 26.
at his masters feet, deserved not thereby to have his debte forgiven him.
And therefore the true end of this sorrow for sin is twofold. First, it is to
show our humility to the Lord: for by nature we be proud and high minded, not
bending one whit (notwithstanding our huge mass and heap of sin) but walk
with stiff necks: and therefore it is needful y^ the Lord should lay open
before our eyes the miserable estate and condition that we stand in: to the
end that we seeing his majesty both great and terrible, and his justice bent
upon us, to pronounce our condemnation, may have our proud looks abated, our
peacockes feathers pulled, and our hauty stomachs quailed, to behold Gods
wrathful countenance bente upon us: tha: we may be cast down before his
throne, with unfeigned humility, abasing our selves, whom we have well
thought of, and ascribing all glory and power to him, whom we have little
regarded. Secondly it is to make way for the grace of GOD to come near unto
us, and his great mercy in Christ Jesus our Lord and Savior, to dwell in our
hearts: for as it is impossible for fire and water to agree together, for
Heaven and Earth to meet in their natural motions, for Light and Darkness
to be matched as yokefellowes: so impossible is it, to lincke the natural Man
and Christ in one, or to find any abode for the spirit of God in the heart
of that man or woman who has not been touched with the grief of conscience for
his sins, nor the terrors of Gods judgments for the same: which to be true
our Savior himself has affirmed, when he said that he came not to call the
righteous (meaning such as deemed themselves righteous) but sinners Math. 9. 13.
to repentance: for says he, the poor, that is, such as are naked in their
own eyes, receive the glad tidings of the Gospel: and those shall be blessed
that are poor in Mat. 11. 5. 5. 3. Luke. 18, 10.
heart, which also is manifest by the Pharesey, who leaned upon his own
works, and the Publicane that fell down, and prostrated himself before the
Lord, showing nothing to be in himself but sin, and therefore sued unto the
Lord for his mercy and pardon. Therefore the doctrine of mercy in Christ Jesus
appertains not to them that boast in their own strength, and are
meritmongers, neither yet unto the stony and hard hearted, who have no touch of
conscience, no sorrow for sin: but a continual delight and pleasure in the
sweetness thereof, striving to fulfill the deeds of the flesh, and to offend,
even with gredinesse. But unto the broken hearted, the wounded soul, the
grieved heart, and sorrowing spirit, that feels it self (by desert) in the
gulf of condemnation, that be cast down and truly humbled by the sight of his
own offenses: to such, when they ask, the Lord gives: when they seek, he
is found: when they cry, he hears: and when they moan their case, he (with
his mercy) does comfort them. Let then every one of us enter into
consideration of his own estate, and try what effect the judgments of God
for sin, works in him, assuring our selves that unless it beat us down in
humility, we are no vessels for Christ to dwell in, neither does the doctrine of
faith (now following) in any respect appertainie unto us.

Let us pray
The Second Sermon of amendment of life.
THE second branch of this amendment does now follow: which is faith in Jesus
Christ, whereby they in whom the former doctrine works terror for their
sins, are erected and comforted: of the which, before I speak, it shall not
be amiss to declare Faith in Scripture has 4 significations.
the diverse uses of the word faith, in the scriptures, least we should take
that for faith in Christ which is not: it is taken especially in three
significatio^s. First, it is used for believing the word of God to be true,
called commonly, a historical faith, whereby man is persuaded that the things
done and recorded in the scriptures are not feigned, going no further: this
faith is most properly in devils, for they know and believe that all the things
there spoken shall be performed, but because they have no comfort therein, they
tremble at the consideration thereof. which thing we see also uttered by the
devils James. 2. 19* Mat. 5. 29.
through the mouth of the possessed, saying: art thou come to torment us before
our time? whereby they acknowledge that they looked for torments, but they would
have the time prolonged, so long as they could: this faith is hardly to be
found in mankind, for Satan can teach them that be wicked a lesson that he
could Satan's scholars more cunning then their master.
never learn him self, namely that the word of God is not true: that it is but
a fable. And therefore you shall see, and hear them being reproved by the
ministry of the word, either to be as blocks not moving abit, or sung a
sleep with the voice of the minister: or else openly blaspheme and mock the
word. These be notable Scholars, that have learned more then their master the
Devil. It must needs be therefore, that they be as near condempnation as he.
Secondly, it is taken for the working of miracles, in which sense it is used
where it is said: if ye had Luke 17. 6.
but faith as a grain of mustard seed, and should say unto this mulbery tree,
pluck thy self up by the roots, and plant thy self in the sea, it should
even obey you. This kind of faith was very rife in the Mark. 16. 20.
primitive church, when the gospel was to be planted in the whole world: for
God gave unto the Apostles power to confirm their doctrine with signs and
wonders. But afterward it ceased, only the ordinary confirmation by the
preaching of the word remains now among us. This faith has been and may be
in Math. 7, 22.
a man that is a reprobate and cast away: Read Peter Marters commen places.
Book, 1. cap. 8 Reave. 13. 13. 2, These. 2, 9.
for some shall say in the latter day, Lord have not we cast out devils in thy
name? to whom it shallbe answered I know ye not, depart from me ye workers of
iniquity. The strength of Antechrist was foreshewed to be with signs and
great Math. 24. 24.
wonders. And it is also said by our Savior himself, speaking of the last
and dangerous times: that there shall arise false Christ's and false Prophets,
that shall show great signs and wonders, so y^, if it were possible, they
should deceive even the very elect: which we have seen and daily do see by
experience, especially in the confirmation of Antechristes kingdom. Thirdly,
faith is taken in the scriptures, for that faith whereby we apprehende the
mercy of God to salvation, commonly called Iustifiing faith, which so believes
the word of God to be true, that it applies the whole, as profitable to
himself, the threatenings to fear him from sin, and the promises of God in
Jesus Christ, unto his own comfort and consolation: and then both to draw him
on to godliness: in these three senses is faith most commonly used in the
word of God. The last is that which appertains to our purpose, whereof we
are to speak yet more at large. It may be thus The definition of Faith.
desyned. Faith is a certain knowledge, and sure persuasion of the free favor
of God in Jesus Christ, grounded upon the promises of God in his holy word,
and sealed in our hearts by the holy Ghost. This definition, containing in it
ye whole substance and sum of our faith, is to be enlarged further, to the
end that every part and parcel thereof may the more plainly be known.

Certain knowledge. This is the beginning and (as it were) the cause of faith:
for Heb. 11, 6.
(as the appostle says) he that comes to God, must believe that there is a
God: so he that believes, must first know what to believe, and learn the
doctrine of salvation out of the word: and therefore our Savior Christ in that
heavenly prayer that he made a little before his passion John. 17. 3.
has these words. This is life eternal that they know thee to be the only
very God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. The which place (though it
contain in it faith also) yet it is forcible to prove, that knowledge must
go before faith, for it is the nature of faith to believe that it certainly
knows: and therefore where there is no knowledge, there can be no faith. Then
let all men judge what doctrine that was, which taught ignorance to be the
mother of devotion: and forbid the people the knowledge of the word of God, it
was even to blindfolde our eyes that we might fall into the pit of perdition
before we beware, it was to hide the keys of the kingdom of heaven, so that
they neither entered them selves, neither suffered others to Luke. 1* ^2.
enter. But blessed be God, who of his great and infinite mercy, has eased us
of that burden, and granted unto us his holy word. The which albeit many
among us do little esteem, because their consciences are seared with a hot
iron, that they cannot see the necessity of it. 1 Timothy 4. 2.
And therefore do loath the hearing of the same preached: yet we know that
faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. And albeit, it was
to the Jews a stumbling block, and the Grecians Rom 10. 17.
foolishness: and is now to the supersticious Papist, Heresy: and to the
conceited wise man of the world needelesse, or too base for him to meddle
withal: yet it then was, and now is, and ever shall be, to them that believe,
the power of God to salvation, and that by preaching 1 Cor, 1. 23,
the which must make us (if we have any love to our own souls health or
desire of faith) to meditate in the word of God day and night: and to love and
like it above Psalm. 1. 2. 19. 10
any profit or pleasure, this knowledge must be certain, for knowledge being
the ground work of faith, if it be unstable, the building cannot stand sure:
which certeinty stands in these two points: first to be persuaded of the
undoubted truth of Gods word: and secondly of the absolute sufficiency
thereof, not to need any traditions of men to make it perfect, for so much as
it is every way perfect it self. These two things are duly to be considered,
and so much the rather, for that Satan fights to shake them both, laying the
truth of the word upon the approbation and allowance of men: and foysting
dreams, and fancies of idle brayned persons into it, to consu^mate the
perfection of the same.

Sure persuasion. This is the substance and nature of faith, which does arise
(by the working of Gods spirit with the word) out of the knowledge of the
same: that hereby we are not only persuaded of the truth of his word, but also
believe undoubtedly without wavering, to be partakers of the mercies of God in
Jesus Christ. The names that the holy Ghost ascribes unto this faith, in the
doctrine of the apostles, be notable to prove the same not to be wavering, but
sure and certain: it is called a ground or foundation: a steadfast faith: and
assurance of faith without wavering: a full assurance: Heb. 11. 1. Collo. 2. 5.
Heb. 10. 22. Rom 4. 21 Heb. 6. 19.
an anchor of our soul both sure and steadfast: which comparison is notable,
for as the anchor, though the ship be tossed and moved with the waves and
tempests, yet it is still safe and holds fast: even so faith, what troubles
or trials so ever befall unto the godly in this world, does never let go his
hold that it has in Jesus Christ but cleaves unto him and depends upon his
mercy in all extremities, and so the Children of God feeling the comfort of
Gods grace, and having a sure hope of the performance of Gods promises unto
them are certain and sure to be saved. The which doctrine, Satan has ever
labored, and does greatly at this day labor to darken and extinguish:
affirming it pride and presumption to dare be so bold, as to be assured of
salvation. Which thing is true, if the certainty thereof stood any way in man
himself, who is naturally filled with all sin and incredulity, but while they
take their marks amiss, they greatly dishonor God. For mark this well: God
promises in his word eternal life to all that believe: thou say thou
beleuest, and I say so too: thou art not sure to be saved: and I say that I am.
Which of us twain does offend most? the cause why thou canste not be sure, is
for that thou art sinful. And therefore God may cast thee off. Contrariwise
the cause why I am sure is the truth and the power of God: his truth, because I
do not doubt, but that he will be as good as his promise: his power, because
all things are possible to him. This is the ground and foundation of the
certainty of my hope, least I should mistrust God, or extenuate his power. For
in this I look not upon mine own worthynes (for then must I needs doubt) but
upon him that promised: and that I do well in so doing, I prove by the
testimony of Rom, 4, 19. 20.
the scripture concerning Abraham, whose faith I am to follow: of whom it is
said that he neither did consider his own body being now dead (which was
almost a hundred years old) neither the deadness of Saraas womb: neither
did he doubt of the promise of God through unbelief (mark, here doubtinge
termed unbelief) but was strengthened in the faith, and gave glory to God
(then wavering dishonors God) being fully assured that he which had
promised, was also able to perform it. This being my warrante I am assured
that whosoever doubt of their salvation, have no faith at all. The reasons that
the adversaries Four objections against the certainty of sal uation. The 1
objection.
of this doctrine do allege (because they seem to carry some color of
truth in them) are to be considered: first (say they) there is in all men
naturally a fear: but where is fear, there is doubting, and therefore all men
must needs doubt. Whereunto I answer confessinge the whole, and yet it
makes nothing against me: for the fear that is in all men is natural, and is
the work of the flesh, and (indeed) does strive against faith, as the
regenerate man does against the unregenerate, or the outward man against the
inward: but as the Children of God are through Jesus Christ more then
conquerers through him that loves them: so true faith ouercometh, yea
expels fear and makes us to approach with confident boldness unto the
throne of his grace. Further they obiecte, that we are commanded, The second
objection. Phil. 2. 12.
by Saint Paul to work our salvation with fear and trembling, the which we
needed not to do, if we were sure to be saved. I answer that we must so, but
we do not work faith in our selves, and therefore the apostle speaks there
of the continual conversation of Christians, which in regard of the majesty
of God, always beholdinge them, and the quick eyes of the wicked narrowly
espying into them, must be marvelous careful that they do not displease so
great and good a God, and wary that they give the adversary no advantage.
Whereby he may take occasion to dishonor God, and to speak ill of the
Gospel. A meditation never to pass out of our minds: and yet makes nothing
against the assurance of our faith. They obiecte yet further, and say, no man
is sure that he shall stand: for David, Lot, The 3 objection
and Peter, with many more that were godlier then we, have fallen. I answer, I
am not sure to stand in sincerity of conversation: for it may please God to
suffer me to fall into that sin, whereunto I am naturally prone, to the end
to show me my own weakness, and his great mercy: but I am sure I shall never
fall finally, because he that has begone a good work in me will perform it
until the day of Jesus Christ: for whom God Phil. 1. 6. John. 13. 1.
loueh he loves unto the end. so that I or whosoever else does feel himself
comforted with an unfeigned persuasion of Gods love, may thererby assure
himself of Gods favor for ever. A notable example whereof we have in the
servant of God David, who by the consideration of the help that he had against
the Lion 1. Dan. 17. 34.
and the Bear, in the wilderness, is strengthened to go against Goliath,
saying, that God that delivered me out of the hands of them, shall also save me
from uncircumcised philistine: so y^ our assurance stands in the mercy of god
and not in our obedience, which staggereth daily. Lastly they say, certainty of
salvation stands in Gods eternal election, and who knows The 4 objection
whether he is elected or no? answer, the foundation (indeed) stands in
election, and is the root of our assurance, but to say ye none knows whether
he be elected or Romans 8. 30.
no, is to say that none be called: for he y^ is called is elected, because
whom god electeth him he calls: so that whosoever can prove to me by
infallible marks out of y^ How to try whether we be elected.
word, that he is called with the inward calling, to him I can prove his own
particular election: and therefore when they say y^ none knows whether he be
elected, they show plainly that themselves be not called, and then no
marvel if they doubt of their salvation when they know not whether they be
within the compass of Gods grace in calling or no. Therefore let him (whosoever
he be) whether papist pelagian, libertine, familia^ or atheist (for all these
shake hands in this point) labor diligently by hearing and reading of the
word, and prayer, to find out what ye will of God is, and to try himself
whether, it does work in him or no: and not condemn ye truth of God to be
false, because his carnal wit cannot attain unto it: but let him rather
condemn himself, because he finds not in himself the marks that the word
of God painteth them out with all, that are the children of God

Of the free favor of God. This is the thing which we must know, and whereof
we must be undoubtedly persuaded: that is that God of his mere mercy in Jesus
Christ has vouchsafed to adopt us to be his children, not regarding any thing
in us that is ill to hinder: nor any good to further the same. Which doctrine
is in many places of scripture set down to us, Math. 16. 17.
as in that confession of Peter, our Savior says, flesh and blood has not
revealed this unto thee but my father which is in heaven. And in another place:
No John. 6. 44. 15. 5. 2 Cor. 3. 5. Phillip. 2. 13.
man comes unto me, unless my father draws him: without Christ we can
do nothing for we are not able of our selves to think a good thought, seeing
that it is he that works in us both to will, and to perform. And yet
notwithstanding all these express sentences of the holy scripture we see how
man labors by maine and might, to establish merit, and to maintain free
will in man: to be good if he list. But we have learned out of Gods word that
all the imaginations of the heart of man are altogether evil, Genesis 6. 5. Romans
7. 18.
and that there is in our selves no good thing: and therefore our faith leans
upon the sole and only mercy of God for our salvation, and in regard of our
own unworthiness does in true humility cast down our minds to be ruled,
and guided by his blessed word.

In Jesus Christ. Because we find in the word of God that God is just and
that we be sinners, and therefore in his justice though he would he cannot
pardon us: our faith finds out a mean whereby the justice of God is
satisfied to the full and also his mercy purchased for us, which is Jesus
Christ both God and man* to overcome (as he is God) all the enemies of our
salvation, Satan, sin, and death, and to suffer (as he is man) all y^ pains
and torments that we had deserved both in body and soul, and so presents us
in his own righteousness and merits, blameless before the face of God, and
makes us heirs of his eternal glory. This being set down in few words, is
the substance of the gospel: he tells us by his own mouth John 14. 6. 2.
Cor. 1, 20.
that no man comes to the father but by him and S. Paul says that in him
are all the promises of God, yea, and amen: because he is the way whereby all the mercyes of God are conveyed unto Math. 3. 17
us, the father being we pleased in him. The use of which doctrine (being
rightly applied) is very comfortable: for first it brings unto us a comfort,
that the severe wrath of God is appeased against us. Secondly it teaches, that
in all our needs and necessities, in all our prayers and thanksgiving and in
the whole course of our conversation, we are to beg the Lords assistance: in
and through his son our Savior Jesus Christ, in whom he is pleased, and
without whose mediation, our prayers are abominable, our praises stinck in the
nostrells of the father, and we our selves are the abiecte and refuse of the
world.

Grounded upon the promises of God. etc. This is set down to show whereupon
faith takes hold, to wit the promises of God: for when we hear out of the
word of God, what mercy God promises unto them that believe in him: it is the
office of a true faith to apply the same particularly unto our selves: whereby
we see that same yet further veryfied that was spoken before, that faith
respects not our selves, nor nothing that is in us, but the promises which
God offers unto us in his blessed word: and therefore our faith is not to
respect the decrees of man, nor to lean upon any thing, saving ye word of God
only, which is the thing whereby faith is wrought, strengthened and established
in our hearts.

Sealed in our hearts by the holy Ghost. The promises of God are general
offered indifferently to al men both good and bad, without exception, in the
ministry of the word, and yet effectual only to a few: and therefore here
may arise a question, how I may assure mine own soul and conscience that they
be particularly applied unto me. Which is answered thus by doctrine, though
every man feels best by his own experience when the word is preached to
many, we see that it is effectual only to few, because in the most it
knocks only in their outward ears, and moves them nothing at al: but to
those few unto whom it is effectual, God opens their hearts that they attend
unto the word: and as by Act. 16. 14.
the same he speaks, through the ministry of man, unto the outward ears, so
inwardly he preaches unto the soul by his holy spirit, whereby those words
are ingraffed into their hearts, and they unfeignedly persuaded of them in their
souls: which spirit does keep continual residence Romans 8. 16.
in their hearts afterward, assuring them of his mercy. This S. Paul sets
down, saying we have not received ye spirit of bondage to fear again, but the
spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba father: ye same spirit witnesses we
ours, that we are the children of God: and in an other place: it is God which
stablisheth us with you in Christ, and has anointed 2. Cor. ^. 21
us, who has also sealed us, and has given the earnest of his spirit into
our hearts, hereby we know that we dwell in him and he in us, because he has
given.John 4. 13.
us of his spirit. This being evident by the word, that whomsoever God calls
he seals with his holy spirit, it rests y^ every one of us examine himself
how he feels himself affected in this point: whether we can feel this
spirit comfort us at all times and seasons or no. The which trial that it may
be the better, I will set down three effects of this spirit in them that have
it, Three effects of the holy ghost in them in who^ it dwells. John. 8. 47
1. John. 4. 6.
whereby thou may examine thy self. The first is this, whereas we by nature
cannot away with, or care not for the word of God, because it is to our reason
mere folishnes, the holy ghost works in us alone of the same, to take
delight and comfort in hearing and reading of it and therefore they are said to
be of God y^ hear his word. Which sentence Saint John applies to the hearing
of of the ministers of God, preaching the the same word. The second is the
fruit that flows out of this, which is comfort by the word, and increase of
faith, with feeling of the working of the same in our hearts: for many hear
the word, and that with some joy, who yet have little comfort by it, for that
they cannot apply it to themselves for their particular use and profit.
Therefore this is the effect of the holy ghost, to be unfeignedly persuaded,
that all the mercies of God in Jesus Christ promised in his word are as
effectual to me, as if they were set down only to me by name. The 3. is a
loathing of sin, and a thirsting after godliness: whereby we endeavor to leave
sin, and to live in all obedience of conversation. This Saint Paul sets
Romans 8. 9.
down in express words, saying, if any man have not the spirit of Christ the
same is none of his: and if Christ be in you the body is dead because of sin:
but the spirit is life for righteousness sake: so then these three, Love to
the word, Persuasion of Gods mercyes, and Reformation of life, are in all them
that have the holy ghost. Thus we see briefly the particular points of of
faith set down out of the word of God.

Let us pray.
The third Sermon of amendment of Life.
NOw remains to speak of the fruits and effects of the same faith, which
are wrought by it in the hearts of all them that Fruits of faith of two sorts.
have it, which be of two sorts, inward in the soul, and outward in the
conversation, inward be 1, Remission of sins. 2. The love of the Father. 3,
Promise to be heard in our prayers, All which proceed one out of another:
Outward is godliness in life and conversation. For the first which is remission
of sins, to be the fruit of faith, is proved by many places of scripture:
our Savior Jesus Christ having a man sick of the palsy brought unto him,
seeing their faith, said, be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee.
Where we have to consider, that not their Math. 9. 2.
faith, but his own, applied remission of sins unto him. S. Paul in a long
discourse in that heavenly Epistle written Romans 3. 28
to the Romans, concludes with these words: We conclude that a man is
justified by faith, without the works Haba. 2. 4
of the law. The prophet also says* that a just man lives by his faith. The
reasons that the Apostle uses to prove this are many: I will only set down
three of them which are most apparent, and evident: The first is this: by the
testimony of the old testament it is proved, 3 reasons out of S. Paul proving
iustifica tion only by faith. Psalm 14. 1. James. 2. 10. Gal. 3. 10.
that al men have erred and done amiss, there is none that does good, no not
one: so that al having sinned, and be that has sinned in one is guilty in
all: it must needs follow, that none can be saved by their works, and
therefore, either by faith or not at all. The second is by the sentence and
promise of the Law. This do and thou shall live: but curssed is he that
abides not in all these commandementes to do them: but none is able to do
so, for then Christ dyed in vain, and his death had been to no purpose: and
therefore al men being, by nature, under the curse, and not able to redeem
themselves: it follows that he who was Rom* 4. 12.
without sin (Jesus Christ) must be their redemption, and applied unto them by
faith. Thirdly by the nature of the promise made to our father Abraham, thus:
The same way that Abraham was justified and acquitted from sin, the same way
are all his children justified: but he was justified by faith, for he believed
God, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness: and therefore must all the
godly for ever be justified by faith: so that this must stand for an undoubted
truth, that he which seeks any other way to have his sins put away (whether
it be by pardons, merits, or any way else) then only by faith apprehending the
merits of Christ, cannot be comforted in his soul by certain persuasion, but
must needs stagger and waver continually.

The second inward fruit of faith is the love of God the father, which comes
unto us when our sins are forgiven: for as man is separated from God by
reason of sin and iniquity, so the same being removed and taken away, God
and Man are made one, and be reconciled together again, by which
reconciliation the love of God is precured by the reconciler Jesus Christ, to
have his full course and passage unto man. The which our Savior meant, when he
said: the father loves you, because ye have loved me and believed in me:
which thing S. John also meant, when he said, that ye effect of the Gospel is
that we might John. 16. 27.
have fellowshippe with the father and with his son Jesus Christ: Of which
John, 1. 3.
thing whosoever is truly persuaded, he shall have in his soul and conscience
an unspeakable comfort: for as there is nothing more grievous unto man (if he
consider it well) then to have the heavy hand of God upon him, and his severe
countenance against him, so nothing can be more sweet and comfortable, then
to be persuaded of his favor, and fatherlye love toward him. Out of which
arises to the godly that peace of conscience, and joy in soul, that passes
all understanding: which thing our Savior meant John. 14. 27.
when he said to his disciples: peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto
you: not as the world give, give I unto you. Let not your hearts be troubled,
nor fear: Romans 5. 1. Gal. 5. 22.
which also S. Paul meant when he said: being justified by faith we have peace
toward God: and in another place, peace is reckened up among the fruits of the
spirit. Examples whereof we have in Acts. 8. 39.
the scriptures: the Eunuch of Ethiopia, being instructed in the faith, and
baptized by Phillip the Evangelist, it is said that he went on his way
rejoicing. The same is reported of the Iayler that was converted by the
preaching of Paul, that he rejoiced because that he with all his household
believed in God: Marie likewise ieioyced (not so much in that she was the
mother of Christ) but in God her Savior. So that this being by the word of
Luke. 1. 47.
God proved to be one of the fruits of a true faith, it rests that every one
of us do wey our selves, examining our hearts how great we find this joy in
us, the which although (I doubt not) it is found in great measure in the
hearts of some, yet I fear in the most it is very little or nothing at all.
For if we Math 7, 16
may judge the tree by the fruits, some have so so great pleasure and delighte
in scraping worldly pelf together: other in banqueting and drunkenness: and
many in chambering and wantonness: y^ it is hard to find that man or woman,
that shows forth unto the world, the signs: of joy in the holy ghost which
argues us to be carnal and fleshly minded, not sauouring of the spirit of God.

The third inward fruit is a promise that God has made unto us, that he will
hear our prayers, and grant our requests: which thing is promised by: the
John. 16. ^3.
mouth of Christ Jesus unto al believers, saying, verily verily I say unto you,
whatsoever ye ask the father in my Ma^h. 8. 13 9. 13
name he will give it you, which thing we see veryfied unto the Centurion, to
whom it was said: as thou haste believed so be it unto thee, and his servant
was made hole the same hour. And likewise to the two blind men, who cried,
son of David have mercy upon us: to whom he answered, according to your
faith be it unto you. Which doctrine must needs be unto the faithful an
exceading comfort: for we see the manifold dangers whereunto we be subject,
the diverse temptations wherewithal Satan laboreth to overthrow our souls and
the manifold tribulations that do daily befall to the body, as the slanders
and injuries done unto us by the wicked, the sickness, poverty and need that
lay hold upon us: against all which we have no shield nor defense, but only to
fly unto the Lord by humble and hearty prayer. the which if he should not
regard, our state were miserable and we of all other most wretched, if we
should not be heard of him, for whose sake we hazard all our liberties in the
world, and oppose our selves against his soes: then could we look for nothing
but utter confusion both of body and soul: but in that he has promised, that
if we call upon him in y^ day of our trouble he will Psalm. 50. 15
hear and deliver us: we gather thereby an undoubted comfort against al
afflictions, that either the Lord will remove them from us, or else grant us
such strength and patience, that we shall not only sustain and bear them,
but also triumph over them, to his great glory, and our own exceading
comfort. where upon we resting (as upon an anchor both sound and steadfast) do
most willinglye lay down our necks under the yoke of Gods correction, being
certainly persuaded, that all things shall fall out for the best unto us, if
we do unfeignedly fear him. Yet this doctrine gives no warrant to the carnal
and fleshly prayers of natural Romans 8. 28.
men, who when they hear that God will grant whatsoever is asked in his
sons name, do by and by ask riches, honor, promotions, and worldely Iam. 4.
3.
dignities: but for such wishes S. James tells us that we ask and receive
not, because we ask amiss, that we might bestow it upon our own lusts.
Therefore What it is to ask in the name of Christ.
to ask in the name of Christ, is to ask according to his will, that is, to
pray for the gifts of the spirit, for the strengthening of the soul absolutely,
and for the things of this life, with condition, that is, if it be his will:
and if we thus pray against any inward weakness, or outward extremity: and
yet are not heard, we must think our prayers have not been sufficiently
faithful and fervent, or God sees it better for us, to keep us under the rod,
to school us: and having learned this lesson, we should have great comfort in
our prayers, though they be not granted: and joy in the cross, even when it is
most grievous, for when we are weakest in our selves then be we strongest in
the Lord. This fruit of faith brings forth many other, as first Hope, which
2. Cor. 12. 10. The definition of Hope.
is a looking for the performance of that which is promised, with a trust to
obtain it. For when I see that God has not only promised eternal life, but
all things also necessary for this present life unto al them that with a hearty
and true faith ask them at his hands, I believing the Lord that he will
perform it, do daily expect and look for the performance thereof, and in the
mean while do feed my desire with a continual expectation for the same to be
revealed: waiting for the Lords leisure, until it be his good pleasure to
accomplish the same unto me And this is a notable virtue, being steadfast: for
we see both by the Scriptures, and our own experience, how the Lord promises,
and then seems to withdraw Genesis 3. 19.
his hand, he promised the land of Canaan to the Israelites, and yet kept them
400 years without it. He promised deliverance from Captivity, and yet kept
them seventy years in it. He promised Jesus Christ the Savior of the world,
the seed of the woman to bruise the head of the Serpent, almost four thousand
years before he came in the flesh, and so he deals with us: which thing
because it is not presently performed, the wicked distrust, and take their ^b.
12. 16.
present pleasure of those things that be here, following their great
graundfather Esau. in selling the birthrighte of the kingdom of Heaven for a
mess of pottage of pleasure, in this world choosing rather to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season, and so perish afterward eternaly, the^ to
suffer heaviness for a night, and want for a moment that they might enjoy the
kingdom of heaven. But contrariwise, the godly believing God, and trusting to
his promises, do with patience abide, with earnest prayer beg, and with hope
look for the manifestation of all Gods promises to their great and endless
comfort: and of one of these sorts is every one of us: and therefore let us
examine our own consciences. The second virtue is Patience y^ daughter
Patience.
of Hope: for as it is in things of this world, a man that has been long
exercised in any labor, though it be at the first never so grievous unto him,
because he sees it cannot be avoided, he is contented to undergo the pain
thereof, and with patience he proceeds: even so it is in the looking for the
promises of God, the troubles that we endure here for Christ's sake, at the
first they be very grievous, and the want of the accomplishment of them does
bring great lamentation and grief: but when we see that God has ordaind that
it must be so, that his must be fed with hope, and tried with adueruties: it
makes us (if we be Gods children) as meek as lambs, and mild as Moses, and as
patient (as we say) as Job. So that you see, how those things that be bitter
to the flesh, turn to the great honor, and glory of God, and our own good:
in that it increases virtue and godliness in us. The Contentation
third and last virtue that this hope brings forth is Contentation: a
singular and heavenly virtue, the rarest flower that the garden of man's soul
brings forth: which is this, when I see by the eyes of faith, the narrow way
that God has appointed for his children, and that every extremity brings
forth a happy success to them that fear God, therefore do hope that the
Lord being pleased with me in his son my savior Jesus Christ: it breeds
this in me and must do the same in all Gods children, to be very willing, and
contented with that cross which he has lotted out unto me, and be so far
from murmuring and grudging, that God has left me under the cross: that I
must greatly rejoice therein. Which thing we do not only see practiced by y^
holy apostls of our Savior Jesus Christ, who did rejoice y^ they were counted
worthy to suffer for Acts 5. 41. 2 Timothy 3. 12. Acts. 14. 22. James. t. ^*
his name, but also prescribed unto all Gods children, that because all that
will live godly in Jesus Christ must suffer persecution, and enter into the
knigdom of God by many tribulations and afflicons: that therefore we must
account it exceading joy, when we fall into diverse temptations, knowing that
the trial of our faith brings forth patience, and patience, having her
perfect work, brings forth perfection. The outward fruit of which
Contentation is also co^tentatyon with our estate and calling, wherein the Lord
has set us: that, so it be never so poor, base, contemptible, or laborious:
seeing that God in who^ we repose all confidence, of whose love we be persuaded,
has set us therein, we must think it the most convenient standing for us: and
be well contented therewithal, laboring to do our duty therein, with all
sincerity and care to deal justly and truly: which lesson (a pitiful thing
to think) is scarce learned of any: for we see how ye poor acount rich in
good estate: the rich deemeth the poor to live most at ease: subjects admire
the happiness of princes: and princes wish to themselves the secure condition
of their inferiors, Whereupon it comes, that every one (almost) setting his
eyes upon the glory and outward show of an other man, starteth aside from
his standing and is careless in his calling: as magistrates become careless:
mean men (looking aloft) wax covetous, seeking to grow great by extortion and
vsery: artificers to enrich themselves unlawfully, by facing and lying,
swearing and forswearing: so that the head is sick and the whole heart heavy,
from the top to the toe, there is nothing whole Esaias. 1. 4. 5.
therein, but wounds and swelling, and soars full of corruption, And in this
general apostasy (I quake to think it) and my tou^g faltereth in my mouth to
speak it: they that should be lanternes of light to others, they from whose
mouths should come the sweet word of eternal life, and in whose lives should
shine the Image of Christ Jesus most clearly (alas) are so clogged and cloyed
with promotions and dignities of this world, that they clean forget what
calling they have, what charge is laid upon them, and what a heavy reckoning
they have to make: in so much, y^ some falling from their first love, do now
persecute that which heretofore they have preached: others, because they thirst
after gains and vain glory, forsake Christ 2. Tim, 4. 10.
with Demas, and embrace this world, using all lawful and unlawful ways to
win the woll, not regarding what become of those pilled sheep, the flock.
Where from springs a mystery more grievous then all these: that the people of
God, for whom Christ Jesus did shed his most precious blood, are so hardened in
Atheism. and godlesnesse: that a man bad as good speak to a stone, as to y^
most, concerning any matter of religion. And all these with infinite mo
abominations spring hence, ye men are so careless to keep their standing: to
be contented to abide the heat of the day, and discharge that duty with an
upright conscience that God has laid upon them I would to God that the due
consideration of these enormities were settled in the heads and hearts, not
only of every particular person, whose fault it is, but especially into
theirs, unto who^ God has enjoined to see these things redressed: that
thereby we might be compelled not to trifle with God, and his service, as we
do, and extol a bare shadow so long, until the Lord remove from us the
substance (which God forbid) but that we might all be compelled to labor in
the vineyard of the Lord, for the instruction and comfort of his people, or
else cast out as stones that make men stumble, and salt that being unsavory is
good for nothing. That every man (if of himself he will not) may be
constrained to obey the Lord according to his word, and to serve him for the
furtherance of his glory in a lawful and holy calling, warranted by the word of
God: until which time it is impossible that the Gospel should flourish
effectually in this land, because God will bless nothing but his own
institution and ordinance: for the chafe and corn cannot agree together,
neither is it lawful for the Gentiles to be suffered to join with the Jews
in the building of the temple, though they seem never so glosingly to offer
their helping hand thereunto. Least it should afterward be said that the
Jews were not able to do it, without the help of their foes, and so it
should be a dishonor to their God. The Lord give us eyes that we may see, and
hearts that we may perceive what is his will, and how he will be served.

The outward fruit of faith is godliness of conversation, which in the
beginning was made one branch of ame^dment of life: and you see now how it
proceeds from faith and flows out of it, as the fruit from the tree, and
water out of the fountain. The which may be thus defined: it is an earnest,
and careful The definition of Obedience.
endeavor to obey and fulfill the law of God, growing out of faith, and
directed to those which God has appointed: that is, to his glory, the comfort
of our consciences, and the benefit of our brethren. In that it is said, that
obedience is an earnest and careful endeavor: the meaning is, that we must not
only think Math, 7, 21,
it our duty to serve God according to his will, and to obey his commandementes
(which all godless persons will confess) but also study and earnestly care
to do the same in deed. For every one that says Lord, Lord, shall not enter
into the kingdom of heaven: But he that does the will of my heavenly father
Romans 2. 13. James. 1. 23.
(says Christ) which is in heaven: Not the hearers of the law are righteous
before God, but the doers of the law shall be justified: for if any (says S.
Iam) hear the word and do it not, he is like unto a man that beholds his
natural face in a glass, but when he has considerd himself, he goes away,
and forgets imediately what manner of one he was. But who so looks into the
perfect law of liberty, and continues therein, he not being a forgetful
hearer, but a doer of the work, shall be blessed in his deed. All which
sentences are spoken by the holy Ghost to this end, that we should know, that
it is needful for us (nay faith will bring it forth, if it be in us) to live
in godliness to reform our affection inwardly, and our conversation outwardly
according to the prescript rule of Gods word. Wherein how careless y^ world
is, and how little reckoning is made hereof, all men that will try the truth by
the touchstone of Gods word shall easily see. For every man now a days, if he
can put on the name of a protestant if he can make any show at all, by and by
he takes himself, and is also taken of others, to be of a true and sound
religion: yea though his life and conversation do swear the contrary, being
fraughted with all sin and iniquity. These are they that turn the grace of
God into wantonness: that sin because they are not under the law but under
grace* that will make sin abound that grace may superabound, that will do
evil, that good may come thereof: whose damnation is just. But we have not so
learned Christ, and notwithstanding the worldlinges be careless of godly
conversation, yet we have unto us many reasons set down in the word of The
Scripture exhorts us to godly life by many reasons. The 1 reason. Leuit* 11.
44. Math 5. 48. 1 These 43.
God to bring us thereunto: First the commandment of God in the Law reiterated
by the mouth of our savior Jesus Christ: be ye perfect, even as your heavenly
father is perfect: and S. Paul meaning to set down the same thing, says
this is the will of God, even your sanctification. Now it being the
commandment, and will of God, who is ye God of power, a revenger of sin, and
punisher of iniquity, it should be even as a thousand whippes to drive us, and
ten thousand cartropes to hale us unto the Psalm. 5. 4.
same: for he is not a God that loves wickedness, neither shall evil dwell
with him: and we know that we shall al come before his throne and seat of
judgment, where he will give sentence weout partiality, and judge all men, not
according to their outward confession, but acording to their deeds, where he
will say: depart from me ye workers of iniiquitie: so that this should
marvelously Math 7. 2^
inawe us, to consider with our selves, that if we carelessly go on, and heap
sin upon sin, never a whit or little regarding whether we live godly or no,
surely we can assure our selves of no other sentence at the day of judgment,
but go ye cursed. Secondly, the consideration of Gods manifold blessings
bestowed Math. 25. 41 The 2 reason.
upon us in his son Jesus Christ should make us to live godly: The which was
notably figured to us in ye worldly blessings that God bestowed upon y^ Jews:
unto whom the Lord (meaning to set before them as in a glass their estate by
nature, and whereunto he had Ezech. 16. 3. Deu. 32. 10. 11.
brought them) says, thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite. I
found thee in the wast and roaring wilderness: and led thee about, and taught
thee, and kept thee as the apple of mine eye, As the Eagle stirs up her
neast, flootereth over her birds, stretches out her wings, takes them and
bears them on her wings: so I alone led thee (says the Lord) All which
being set down in earthly terms unto them, as was his manner, for their
instruction are more plainly exhibited unto us: which are in effect thus much.
We are Psalm. 51. 5,
conceived and borne in sin, by nature the children of wrath, the bondslaues
of Satan, and hejres of Hell: which state of ours, the merciful father of
heaven pittiyng, rather then we should perish, has sent his dear and only son
Jesus to take on him our nature, to suffer ye pain that we have deserved, and
thereby not only has freed us from condemnation, but purchased for us eternal
salvation in the kingdom of heaven: whereby in the mean while, all that we
do (which of it self is stinking in the nostrills of the Lord) is accepted,
being in any measure good: and his creatures, which before were accursed, unto
us and for us are blessed, sanctified to our comfort. The which (so often as we
consider it) must make us very careful to show our selves thanckefull unto our
good and merciful God: and carefullye to glorify him with that obedience that
he has prescribed unto us in his holy and blessed word. Unto which the holy
ghost does often times take occasion to exhort us: I beseech you brethren, by
the mercyes of God, that you give up your bodies a lively sacrifice, holy and
acceptable unto God, and fashion not Rom, 12, 1.
your selves like unto this world, but be you changed in your shape, by the
renewing of your minds. And in an other place: I pray you that ye walk worthy
Ephe, 4, 1. 5. 8
of that vocation where unto ye are called, for ye were darkness but now ye
are 1 Pet, 3, ^
light in the Lord, walk as it becomes the children of light, being a
chosen generation, a royal priesthood, Luke, 1, 7* ^
an holy nation, a veculiar people, that ye should show forth the virtue of
him that has called you, out of darkness, into his marvelous light:
considering that for this end we are delivered from the hands of our enemies
that we might serve him without fear, all the days of our life, in holiness
and righteousness before him: contrariwise if we have not this care, and do not
thus endeavor to serve him, what do we? surely no better then did the
Phariseis, that persecuted Christ, and Judas that betrayed him, and the
soldiers that nailed him on the cross: for we crucify him again, and make
a mock of him. The which thing I would to God y^ all they would Heb. 6. 6.
consider that have no care, but how to excel in sin: no study, but how so
defraud: no delight, but how to become the most singular and notorious sinners,
as extortioners, usurers, ruffians, blasphemers, and such like: whose whole joy
is in this, that their most mischeuous practices may take place, for the
satisfiing of their own most devilish desires without either respect of God or
the Devil: yea and all they likewise, that seem to be of a better stamp,
serving the Lord with the fancies of their own brain: and caruing out for
him so much as they think good, without any regard or eye unto his will and
commandment: whose gold will prove copper, and their silver will be tried to be
dross, when they shall be fined in the furnace of Gods judgments. Thirdly, the
consideration The 3 reason
of our calling is also in y^ word of God set down, as a reason to induce us
to godliness. And what is it? Truly if we be of the number of Gods children we
are citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God: and we know ye
Ephe. 2. 19.
whosoever will not obey y^ will of a governor of a house in this world, he
turns him out at ye doors, as an unfit person to abide in ye society of
servants: and dare we profess to be the household servants of God, and disobey
him? not scaring that he will cast us out of his family? We are not called to
uncleanness, but to holiness so, if our life be vnpure we deny our 1 These. 4. 7.
calling: and shut our selves from among Gods children: we are said to be
temples for God to dwell in, and will God dwell with sinfullnesse? can he abide to
be in an unclean 1 Cor. 6. 19.
and unholy habitation? no God is light, and in him is no darkness: God is
pure, and cannot match with the polluted heart. And therefore let us assure our
selves y^ without reformation of life; we have not y^ spirit of Christ.
Whosoever has not the spirit of Christ is none of his, but is a reprobate and
cast away, 1, John, 1, 5*
ready to be thrown into the fire of condemnation. Fourthly, our baptism must
move us to godliness, for by it we brag our selves to be Christians: but all
that Rom, 8, 9*
are baptized with the outward baptism have not put on Christ, but they only
The 4 Reason,
ye are baptized with him into his death: that as he died and rose again unto
righteousness, so should we dye unto sin, and rise again unto newness of
life. For if we he graffed with him into the similitude Rom, 6, 4,
of his death* even so shall we be to the similitude of his resurrection:
knowing this that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin may
be destroyed, that hence forth we should not serve sin. Read the whole sixte
to the Romans, and consider of it: and if you find not the same work in you
(at the least in some measure, that is there set down, assure your selves, you
have not yet learned Christ aright, neither do express the fruit of your
baptism in your conversation, but rather have gotten an outward show of
godliness, and 2. Tim. 3. 5.
deny the power thereof, from which all true Christians are commanded to turn
The 5. reason.
away. Lastly the Lord (who in justice might compel us, and give us nothing,
has set down unto them that live godly, a reward: that whatsoever we do in
his name (that is in a true faith, with care to obey him, and set forth his
praise) though it be worth nothing in it self to deserve any thing, yet we
shall have our reward: which is increase and augmentation of our joys in the
kingdom of heaven: and therefore the Lord says by the mouth of the Prophet,
that they which be wise shall shine as the Dan. 12. 3.
brightness of the firmament, but they that turn many unto righteousness,
shall shine as the stars. A doctrine very needful to be urged, because of
the lazines of Christians in practice, of their profession. And as this is true
in the godly, that the greater obedience they show, the greater shall be their
glory. So on the other side in the wicked, the more heinous their sins be,
the more intolerable shall their torments be, which is to be laid very often
before their eyes: for it is the common speech of godless persons: if I be
damned then what makes it the matter what I do, I may give over my self to
fulfill my lust in all points. But let them know this, that as it was said to
the pharyseis that they should receive the greater damnation, Luke. 20. 47.
so shall it be unto thee: thy offenses shall be punished, according to the
quantity thereof. And therefore though thou art no otherwise persuaded but y^
thou shall come into condemation, yet fear to have it multiplied unto thee,
for the least torment will be more then thou shall be able to bear. Thus we
see, that the holy ghost in the scripture exhorts us (by weighing the
commandment of God, by considering the manifold blessings of God offered to
us in Christ, by the looking into the nature of our calling, by calling to mind
the end of our baptism, and lastly by viewing the reward that God has laid
up to bestow upon them that serve him, to live godly in this present world:
now let us lay them unto our own hearts and consciences, and see whether we
have not just cause to bid battle to Satan, to strive against our own
lusts, and corrupt affections: and let us be more careful the^ heretofore we
have been. Let us not delight in any thing that may displease so loving and
merciful a father. But let us make an end of our salvation, with Philip. 2.
12.
fear and trembling. Thus much for the first part of the definition of
Obedience (that it is an earnest endeavor to obey the Laws of God) this is the
thing we must endeavor to do, which we are always to have an eye unto. These
laws are set down briefly, in the first and second table. The sum whereof
stands in these two points, first that we seek to set forth the glory of
God, according as he prescribes in the first table: a thing commonly known to
all men, but practiced of very few: for we think, if we do any thing that may
seem to tend never so little toward Gods glory that we have done a glorious
work. But mark this well: the Lord requires not only of thee, to seek his
glory in thy self by worshipping him in spirit and truth, by sanctifiing his
holy name, and thy self to the observation of his Saboath, but also to thy
power, to seek it (according to thy calling) in others. The magistrate to
establish and defend true religion, and maintain it by holy discipline
warranted by the word. The minister to teach, instruct, and exhort, the private
man also in his calling, to use all lawful means for the advancement of the
same. The second table contains the outward godliness that we must show
forth in the world for the benefit one of another. Which we see very little
practiced: for it is evident unto the sight of all men (to the great grief of
them that fear God) how some be altogether set upon treacherous rebellion, and
conspiracies: others on malicious murder, and enyuing hate: others on
fornication, and uncleanness, with all allurementes to the same: as pride,
banqueting, surfeiting and drunkenness, with all lewd and unchaste gestures
that can be: others, bent to extort, and wring out of men's hands their own
proper possessions, and goods, by forging, by extremity of law, by deceyuing,
and by that foul canker usury, and what not? I cease to speak of the
particular petty sins, wherewith men do so swarm, and so customably live
in, that they esteem them to be no sins, the least whereof deserves
eternal condemnation, both in body and soul: and yet all these be Christians,
and say they have faith, but I say of them, and that by the warrant of Gods
own word, that if they had the least spark of faith in the world, these
things would be reformed: for it is impossible for a man to have faith, but
therewithal is the spirit of God. But where the spirit is, there can be no
delight in sin, no such carelessness to reformation, as appears: and
therefore examine thy self and be not deceived, presume not of the mercy of
God, and still abide in sin: for then be sure thou shall find no place to
repentance, though thou seek it with tears. Then seek Heb* 12. 17.
the Lord while he may be found: put not of from day to day: for suddenly
comes the wrath of the Lord: and in his anger he will consume thee. Then let
us without prolonging amend.

And fulfill. That is, a strife must be in us, against all lets that may hinder
us to be in all points perfect: and that in such a perfection as by the word
of God is not to be found fault withal: and though it be true that we cannot
attain thereunto in this life, yet we must not faint, nor be weary: but go on
still: forget that which is behind, and look at that which is before: never
casting our eyes aside upon any bait of sin in this world: but ever go on
in striving for this perfection, all the days of our life. In which course
(least we should be discouraged) we are to know, that we are never able to
attain to that perfection in this life, because of our wretched and sinful
nature: because of the clogges of sin that do so hang on us, and the
remnantes of old Adam that stick so in the flesh, that it can never be wholly
clear thereof. The which Romans 7. 23.
we find to be in the Apostle S. Paul, who had a law in his members,
striving against the law of the spirit, leading him captive unto the law of
sin. Whereby it comes to pass, as our fauiour Luke 17. 1^.
says, y^ when we have done all that ever we ca^, we are unprofitable servants,
and therefore we are taught to say daily: forgive us our sins: which doctrine
shows forth diverse most necessary uses: as first it shows the works of
supererogation, imagined by y^ papists, to be a mere doctrine of an idle
brain: flat contrary to the truth of God, and blasphemous against Christ's
passion. Secondly, displayeth the devilish error, of that pestiferous sect,
the family of love, who hold, that a man may live without sin, and therefore
accounts it a note of imperfection to pray: so that none may be of the
number of their illuminated Elders, until they be of that perfection: and yet
we read that the Apostles Act. 4. 24.
prayed not only when they were weakelings (as they fondly affirm) but after
2. Cor. 12. 8.
Christ's aseension, and the descending of the holy Ghost. And therefore (for
the 1. John. 1. 8. 9. 10.
censuring of their heresy, and our own persuasion) let us say with S. John,
if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in
us, for we make God a liar. But if we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful
and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all vnrighteonsnes.
Thirdly it is an exceeding comfort to the weak, that find themselves willing,
and yet imperfect in the service of God: for God does accept of us according to
that we are, and not according to that we are not. The least sparks of
obedience (insomuch as they be his own work) are accepted in his sight, so
that it be with earnest endeavor to increase: and therefore this gives no
liberty to licentious looseness, (which notwithstanding we see to presume
hereupon: for, (say the Atheistes) who can keep Gods commandments? is any man
without sin? and so forth. Which in deed is true, but they, by occasion
thereof, have no regard nor care of any reformation, but run on from sin to
sin, and that with greedines. But let such know, that they can not please
the devil better with any thing in the world, because hereby, they be as like
him, as if they were spitted out of his mouth: for he knows that no man can
absolutely obey Gods laws: and therefore he prowleth to mock them in every
The agreement of Satan with the wicked.
point, to break them: and thou say thou can not obey him perfectly, and
therefore art careless to do any good at all. Wherein do thou now differ
from him? But let us have a care to win ground of our adversary, to obtain
more and more strength against sin, and make it weaker in us every day than
other, by continual meditation in the word of God, and prayer for his grace,
to fructify therein, and then we shall show our selves valiant soldiers, and
not dastards in the quarrel of our Lord and Captain Jesus Christ.

Now follow the end that we are to aim at, in this fight against our selves:
to live godly, which is duly to be considered: for Satan has gone thus far
with a number, either to persuade them (without al doubting of the matter) that
they shall merit heaven, and deserve to be Gods children by their works, or
else that they need to do none at all: and we see even the greatest number put
the one of these in practice: for either they be obstinate and blind Papists,
forgetting Christ Jesus, and hoping to come to heaven by their works: or else
they be Atheists, affirming plainly, that if they deserve nothing for them,
they will do no good works. From which fountain flows this general
security, where with all the world is so rocked on sleep, that every man
seeks for him self, never thinking that he is any way bound to benefit his
poor and needye brother. Satan urges the one extremity in every thing.
Whereby (as in many other things) we may behold the usual practice of Satan,
either to make us lie wallowing in all carelesnes, or else to drive us too far
into the con trary extremity. Which thing we are to have a great care of, even
in every thing that we do, that we may keep within the bounds of that mean
prescribed by the Lord in his word, from which it is not lawful to decline,
neither to the right hand, nor to the left, least Satan overtake us, and work
our confusion.

The ends whereunto (by the word of God) we are to have regard, and respect,
be in number three. First Gods glory. 2. Our own comfort. 3. The good of our
brethren among whom we live.

The glory of God, which is the first The end of godliness in respect of God.
end, is to be sought in our good and godly conversation: for it is evident,
that we are by nature unfit to do any good thing, but rather prone and bent to
sin, but when it pleases God so to alter and reform our hearts, that the
fruit thereof shines in our conversation, this shows the great glory of God,
in that he (of servants unto sin and uncleanness) makes us to serve him in
godliness. The which thing our Savior Christ meant, when he said: let your light
so shine before Matthew. 5. 16.
men, that they may see your good works* and glorify your heavenly father,
which is in heaven. Where unto also the Apostle S. Peter had especial regard,
when he said: Dearly beloved, I 1. Pet. 2, 11.
beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which
fight against the soul: and have your conversation honest among the Gentiles,
that they which speak evil of you, as evil doers, may by your good works
which they shall see, glorify God in the day of visitation. Unto which end
S. Paul had respect also: when he exhorting the Thessalonians to godliness,
says: that y^ name 2 Thessalonians. 1. 12.
of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you. The which point is duly to
be observed, for our instruction: because that now a days, all men will say
they do love God, and honor him, but their bare words must not go for
proof: for we see the holy ghost sets down, that the glorifieng of God by
us, consists in godly conversation: for if thou say never so much, thou
love God, and do honor him, unless it shine in thy conversation, it is a
lie in thee, and a thing not to be believed of others. For our Savior says:
If any love me, he will keep John. 14. 15.
my sayings, so that the trial stands in this: look how careful thou art
to reform thy life, according to the word of God: and look how much thou
have subdued the heat of thine own affections: and so much thou do
glorify God, and no further. Nay if thou be slack herein, and careless to
do that in deed, whereof thou make profession, thou do, even as much as
lies in thee, dishonor God: and therefore says S. Paul, thou that gloriest
in the law, thorough breaking of the law, dishonorest God. I would to God Romans
2. 23.
that the carnal professors, and enemies to sincerity (of these our days)
both in them selves, and others, could consider of this, with a single eye. For
those that be enemies to reformation, be commonly loose in life, as we see in
our own experience. If it were so, I doubt not, but their conversation would
be found even of the^ selves, most vile, and filthy, not worthy once to be
named among them that profess the gospel of Jesus Christ.

The second end, which we are to The end of godliness in respect of our selves.
look unto, is, for the establishment and comfort of our own souls and
consciences. For we see that all men are contented to make a show of religion,
and to take upon them y^ profession of Christ, which can not be sufficient: for
then should all, or at least, the greatest number, be saved: and yet we know
the words Matthew 7. 13.
of our Savior Christ: that narrow is the way that leads to life, and few
do walk therein. Then what shall we do to examine our selves unfeignedly, to
see whether we are of the number of them, or no? S. Peter shall tell us most
notably, 2. Pet. 1. 4. 5. 6. etc.
what we must do. Fly (says he) the corruption which is in ye world through
lust. Therefore give even all diligence thereunto: join moreover virtue with
your faith, and with virtue, knowledge, Let us try our selves by this.
and with knowledge, temperance, and with temperance, patience, and with
patience, godliness, and with godliness, brotherly kindness, and with brotherly
kindness, love: for if these things be among you, and do abound, they will make
you that ye neither shall be idle, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ. But he that has not these things, is blind, and can not see a
far off, and has forgotten that he was purged from his old sins.
Wherefore Brethren, give rather diligence, to make your calling and election
sure. By which words we see, that the fruit of the gospel, in holiness of
life, does make our calling and election sure, (not to God, for it was sure in
him before the foundation of ye world) but to our selves, approving thereby
unto our own souls and consciences, that we be the elect of God, because we
feel the working of his grace in our hearts, and show forth the fruits
thereof in our conversation. The end of godliness in respect of others.


The third end of our good works, has relation unto our brethren, which is
diverse ways. First thus: there be many that be weak in the faith, and newly
converted unto the Gospel: who have great need to be supported, and holden up:
the which (as we may do many ways) so chiefly it is to be declared in our
conversation: for when he beholds our godly and upright behavior, great
occasion is offered unto him, not only to glorify God in us, but also to
consider of his own imperfection and weakness, how far he is behind, and
thereupon is moved to strive more strongly against his own infirmity, to
grow stronger, and more established. Contrariwise, if he should behold us
greater professors, or of longer continuance in the profession of the Gospel,
than he, do those things that swerve fowly from our show, we make it not
only an offense, whereby his weak conscience is wounded, but (as much as in
us lies) a stumbling block for him to fall from his profession withal. A
lesson of all men to be learned: for we see many, that in show, (and to their
own thinking) be forward in religion, who, (when they be reproved, or by
meekenes exhorted) to leave some abuses, that they commit, because they agree
not with their profession, and are offensive to y^ consciences of many weak
ones. Tush (say they) if they be offended with these things, let them: what
have they to do with me? they are not to meddle with my dealing, for I have not
to do with them: and such like speeches. In the mean while, they have clean
forgotten, not only the care that we ought Romans 14. 15.
to have one over another, but also the 1. Cor. 8. 13.
example of S. Paul, who would never eat flesh when he lived, rather then he
would offend his brother: (which of it self was a thing lawful, and to be
received with thanks giving.) And therefore, we are not only to be careful,
that we give none offense: (for woe be unto Matthew. 18. 7.
him, by whom offenses do come,) but even to depart from those things that we
may use, if they be any occasion of offense to the weak: for many things are
lawful, that are not expedient. This end is yet further to be considered
another way, and that is in respect of them that are without, who be so
obstinate, that they will not only oppugn the profession of religion, but
even refuse to hear Psalm. 58. 5.
the voice of the charmer, charm he never so wisely: not once frequenting the
public meetings of Christians, with whom yet we have some dealings in the
world. Whereby it may please God to bring them to some consideration of our
profession, by our conversation. The which thing S. Peter setting down in one
particular calling, is also to be applied as a general doctrine: the words are
these: Let the wives be subject to their husbands, 1. Pet. 3. 1.
that even they that obey not the word, may be won without the word, while
they behold your pure conversation, which is with fear: and surely, as the
unblameable conversation is very forcible to move the adversary, to consider
of the profession it self: so we often see, both by example of the word of
God, Exodus 9. 21.
as in Moses, whom Pharao accounted godly, and himself wicked: and David,
whom Saul accounted upright: and also by our own experience, that it cools
the courage of the enemy, and stops his mouth. And therefore it is our
duty, (and I pray God we may rightly consider of it) to be marvelous
circumspect and careful, that we live so obedient to the decrees of our God,
and be so careful to give none occasion to any, to see us faulty in our
dealing: that thereby our good and gracious God may be glorified, our hearts and
consciences comforted, and all men by us may either be encouraged unto
godliness, or convicted in their own consciences of ungodliness. Which God for
his mercies sake grant.

AMEN.
Let us pray, etc.

