A PLAIN Discovery of ten English Lepers, very noisome and hurtful to the
Church and common wealth: Setting before our eyes the iniquity of these latter
days, and inducing us to a due consideration of our selves.

Published by THOMAS TIMME Minister.

LONDON Printed by Peter Short, dwelling upon Bredstreet hill, near the end of
old Fishstreet at the sign of the Star. 1592.

To the right honorable his singular good Lord Sir William Brook knight,
Baron of Cobham, Lord warden of the cinque ports, knight of the Garter, and one
of her Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel, Thomas Timme his humble
servant, wishes long life, and eternal felicity in Christ Jesus.
THe woondring Queen of Sheba (right Honorable) presented the most wise
Solomon with the gold of Ophyr, and richest gifts of the land. The Samnites
brought with them a great mass of treasure for the noble Roman Marcus
Crassus. How preposterous then may I seem, which presume to bring into your
honorable presence Lernam malorum, as it were a lazary of Leapers? Pardon
(right Honorable) my rudeness herein, and take it well in worth, though it
may of some be reputed Calabrihospitis munus, a trifling gift. Things which
have a base and rude form, not bombasted to please the fantasy, sometimes
afford more profit then is expected. Happily this home-spunne web may be
profitable to many, and therein acceptable to your Honor, a principal pillar
of common wealth. For as the soul is much more excellent then the body, so
whatsoever tends to the good thereof, is far more precious then gold, and
to be preferred, before all bodily and earthly treasure. But a secret and
hidden malady, such as is sin, the sickness of the soul, the decay of
men, the overthrow of Nations, and the ruin of the whole world, can never be
well cured and reformed, except first discovered. For which cause, ten capital
sins are in this Catalogue detected, being as forcible to bring this noble
Realm of England to thraule, as Joseph's ten brethren were to sell him into the
captivity of Egypt: in the which men in this age are gone backward from God,
ten degrees further then the shadow of Ahaz dial out of course: 2. Sam. 20.3.
so as if they do not spedily repent, and sequester these ten, as David did
his ten polluted concubines, they will be unto us as ten women, Leui. 26.26
that shall bake our bread in the oven of scarcity, and deliver the same to us
by weight: And at the last God will say unto us, Number. 14.22.
as he said to the Israelites. This people that have tempted me with these ten
temptations, shall not see the land of promise. Therefore (right Honorable) as
Aesculapius temple in the city Epidaurium in Greece, was to all manner diseased
persons which resorted thither a mean to recover desired health, (such
medicines as would cure their maladics being there revealed unto them:) so the
general good which I wish all to find in the discovery of these ten so common
evils, (that not so few as ten righteous persons, for the which God would
hauespared Sodom and Gomorrah, might be found among us) has moved me, though
after a plain and rude sort, to publish the same. For as of ten tribes one
remained still to the house of David: and of ten Lepers one became a faithful
convert: and of ten virgins, five were wise, and waited for the coming of
Christ: so in this evil generation, God will (I doubt not) reserve to him self
a remnant which shall keep themselves and their garments unspotted of the
world. Further, your honorable virtues shadowed with no clouds of vice, and
of your wisdom correspondent to your place, has moved me to present this to
your Lordships hands: yet, not without fear to adventure so base a gift to so
worthy a personage. But the late experience of your honorable courtesy, has
imboldened me to make it a messenger of my duty and unfeigned love toward you.
May it please your honor to accept it, I cannot but reverently acknowledge
that it proceeds more of your noble mind, then of the worthiness of the
gift: and in regard thereof, hold my self so much the more bound in all
Christian duty to your honor during life. Thus beseeching almighty God to
bless your Honor, I wish to the world, the love of God the father, an vniuer
sall peace at the last to his militant Church, confusion of all hypocrites, and
to all his chosen people everlasting life in the kingdom of heaven. Amen.

Your Honors most humble servant Thomas Timme.

The Contents of this Book.
THe first Leper, is the Schismatique. The second Leper, is the Churchrobber.
The third Leper is the Simoniac. The fourth Leper, is the Hypocrite. The fifth
Leper, is the proud man. The sixth Leper, is the Glutton. The seventh Leper, is
the Adulterer or Fornicator. The eight Leper, is the Covetous man. The ninth
Leper, is the Murderer. The tenth Leper, is the Murmurer.
The first Leper, is the Schismatique.
ELephantiasis, or Leprosy, is a disease venomous and full of poison,
proceeding of Melancholy and corrupt blood, inuading all the inward and
outward parts of ye whole body, making it foul and filthy, insomuch that the
breath of the Leper is very contagious and infectious: for the which cause it
has ever enforced a separation of such from all company: Even so the Leprosy
of sin, wherein we are borne and conceived, cleaves so fast to our bones,
and is so fixed in our heart, infecting all our powers and spirits, that our
understanding cannot comprehend those things which belong to the spirit of God,
our will abhors divine and heavenly things, and finally the whole man is set
on fire with unclean desires, and most filthy cogitations. And this contagion
is so vehement throughout the whole life of man, and does in such wise show
forth it self in all actions (though they seem to be honest) that as they
offend the majesty of God, so they give occasion of sinning to others, and one
infecteth another by their evil example: in so much as were it not for the
unspeakable mercy and great goodness of God (which is our support and stay)
we must needs be excluded from his presence and Church, and so perish for ever.

And because a Leprosy is not as every light disease, but a fearful
loathsome, contagious and separatiue malady (as is said) it may aptly at this
time represent, not only all sinners generally, but also certain capital and
notorious sinners, whom I have termed English Lepers, for that they have
infected many thousands in this Christian Church and common wealth of England,
and will in time (if the greater care be not had of the danger that may ensue)
utterly destroy the whole body of the same.

In the first place therefore, as one of the most noisome, I have set the
Schismatique and sedicious, whose malecontent humor, first of all brought the
corporal leprosy upon the Jews, as is to be seen, Number. 12. Now because al
actions are commonly known by their objects, that is to say by the matter
wherein they are employed (as the sight is known because it apprehends the
light, and discerns colors, and the hearing likewise, in that it admits
soundes and voices) let us see what the effect of Schism and sedition is. It
may truly be said to effect and bring in privation and expulsion of two most
excellent things, that is to say, of Order, and of Unity.

Order (according to Saint Augustines opinion) is that by which, all things,
and all persons, high or low, equal or unequal, are disposed and set in
their proper places. All things in the world are not equal, and of like
valor: but then they seem to be ordered, when they are well disposed and set
in convenient places: and humane actions have then an order, when things are
framed according to their condition and worthiness. Upon the which matter
Chrysostom has notably written in his Homilye 23. upon Saint Paul his Epistle
to the Romans, where he says, that because equality of honor and
condition, causes oftentimes many dissensions, God has ordained
principalities, and many subiections, as that of the man and his wife: of the
father and the son: of the old man and the young: of the bond and the free:
of the master and the servant: of the teacher and the disciple: and of the king
and the subject. And no marvel if God has appointed this order among men,
when as he has made the like in our bodies, as the head in the highest part,
and therein the eyes as windows: under them he has placed the mouth to take in
sustenance and provision for strength: then the breast, to contain the vital
parts: the stomach to concoct the meats: then the loins, legs, and feet
for supporters of the whole. The which being thus ordered within our view, do
show forth the great wisdom of the workemaister. But if the said parts be
confounded, transposed, and out of order, they make not a man, but a monster.
The like is to be seen among beasts, as in Bees, in Cranes, in flocks of
sheep, and among wild beasts. The Sea is not without this discipline, where
also innumerable sculles of fishes, are defended and guarded, under one
principal leader. If God, in the creation of all living things, has
established such an order among the beasts deuoide of reason, how much more
necessary is it, that there be order for the good government of men his most
excellent creatures, to whom he has made subject all other things, that in God
his most excellent common wealth there may be a superiority also and a
subjection, a principality and an obedience among men according to their
several orders and degrees, without the which there can be no government, but
a confusion? Anarchia, (or government of states, without a king) is of all
regiments the worst. For where there wants a chief head, there the people
are as sheep ready for the butcher. God gave Israel in his wrath the choice
of four things, namely whether they would have Rehoboam, a fool, to be their
king: the Storke to rule over them: Assure, to be their king: or whether still
they would be at this stay, Nullus Rex est nobis, quia non timuimus Iehouam.
That is, We are destitute of a king, because we have not feared the Lord. To
have Rehoboam is ill: to have Jeroboam is worse: to have the king of Asstria,
is worsse in the third degree: but Nullus Rex, No king, is woorst of all. When
there is no king, every man does what likes him best, Judge. 17. Where there
is no king men be like fishes, the great devour the small. Though it be ill to
have a Lion, or a Woolfe to be our king; yet it is better to have one then
many, to fear one then many. A prince is called the breath of our nostrels,
Iere. 20. And Daniel likeneth him to a great shadowing tree. But if God send us
in stead of his good Angel an evil Angel: in stead of a tree to keep us
from the heat of the Sun, a Juniper tree, which will suffer no plant to
prosper near it: in stead of light a stinking snuff: it is I confess a
great curse: but if he take both the one and the other from us, all his heavy
displeasure is fallen upon us. When Jacob had blessed his sons with all good
things, in the end, as if he had yielded nothing without a ruler, he beseeches
God to give them a faithful Ruler like Joseph. This order, and this
government therefore God has given unto his people from time to time, in his
great love and favor for a blessing, as the Prophet David acknowledges in the
Psalm, 77. Where he says, Thou leddest thy people like sheep, by the hands
of Moses and Aaron. God him self is the General, and principal leader, (for
the whole world is his) Moses and Aaron are but Gods hands, Gods lieutenants
here in earth, the one with the word, the other with the sword. They be both
Gods hands, Gods guides, and Gods pastors. They both together may be compared
to the two Cherubims, with their wings spread to defend and cover the Arc. It
is most true, that Natura non abundat in rebus superfluis nec deficit in
necessarys, Nature does not abound in superfluous things, nor fail in
necessary things. It is a maimed body where either hand Moses or Aaron do
want. The conjunction of both which, makes a happy government. For the which
cause Moses was glad of Aarons company; He will be glad (said God to Aron)
when he sees thee. 2. Sam. 24. verse. 18.
So David had his seeing Gad to be his watchman: he would not trust his own
sight only. If Gad the Prophet, David's Seer, had seen no better then David at
one time, he and all his had been lost. The good that comes by this
conjunction, made king Iehosaphat, not to undertake his wars, until he had
asked counsel of the Priest. The which Joshua neglecting, made a covenant
with the Gibeonites, Joshua 9.
which he afterward too late repented. Aaron Gods high Priest, is, pro Rege,
Lege, and Greece. That is, He commands the king to be honored, the law to
be kept, and the people to be loved. The people are of great power being a
multitude, whom Moses cannot govern well without Aarons hand. When Alexander
came into India, and saw there the great Behemoth the Elephant, and Porus his
little son riding on his back, and ruling him as he list, he wondered greatly
and said, Sivires suas noscet, non reciperet sessorem. If he knew his great
strength, he would not so easily be backed. So may it be said of the multitude,
that if they be not politiquely and wisely governed, as well by the one as the
other, they will not be easily commanded. In simplicity the people are like
sheep, they live by example. And the people have this property of sheep,
that if one leap into the ditch, all will follow that one. Therefore they must
be led and governed by lenity and fair means, not drawn by violence. If
(says Jacob) I ouerdriue the cattle, they will all die. Nimri was a sore
driuer: so was Rehoboam, but he lost ten parts of his flock therefore. As
the people are like sheep in simplicity, so are they like the Chamelion in
inconstancy. They grudge that Aaron should be high Priest, Exodus 17. Number. 20.
though the Lord make his rod to bud, for a manifest token that he is rightly
called to that dignity. And within a while after, he being dead, they mourn
thirty days for him. One while they say to Moses and Aaron, that whatsoever
they command they will do: but within a while after they are ready to stone
them. One while they repent of their wickedness, in provoking the Lord: another
while they choose new captains to carry them back again into Egypt.
Whereby we see that great care, policy and discretion, is necessarily required
to be both in the Civil and Ecclesiastical magistrate, for the ruling and
governing of the multitude. As in the old Testament, so also in the new, our
Savior Christ himself, and by the wisdom of his spirit in his Apostles and
their successors after his ascension into heaven, made a difference of persons,
and established an order for Civil, and also for Ecclesiastical government.
Concerning civil magistracy, more shall be said hereafter, upon other
occasion. As touching Order, which Christ has appointed among his Ministers
and Priests, we know that first he chose twelve, which afterward were called
Apostles. After these he called seventy mo disciples, which were not so famous
as ye first twelve. Beside these, he ordained some to be Evangelists, and some
Doctors, etc. Afterward the Apostles elected certain worthy men for the
government of the Church: as Timothy to be Bishop of Ephesus: and Titus to be
Archbishop of that noble Island Creta. In regard of which difference, Saint Paul
says that some are worthy of double honor: therefore there were some which
had but single honor. Again, the same Apostle says, God has not sent me to
baptize, but to preach: whereby it appears that some were to baptize, the
which the Apostle accounts not so great an honor as preaching. This
spiritual order and regement in all degrees, (as in Apostles, Evangelists,
Bishops, Doctors, and Ministers) was instituted (as is already showed) by
Christ, and shall be protected and propagated by the holy Ghost unto the end
of the world. To these the Apostle speaks thus. Take heed to your selves,
Act 20.
and to the whole flock, wherein the holy Ghost has placed you to rule the
Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood. Also of these
Bishops and Ecclesiastical governors, the author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews speaks thus. Obey your Prelates, Heb. 13.
and be subject to them, for they watch as being to give an account of your
souls. And that ancient father Irenaeus says, Opertet ordinationem sequi
traditionis quam tradiderunt patris ijs, quibus committebant ecclesias. etc.
Irenae. lib 3. Chap. 4.
We must follow the order of traditions, which the fathers did leave unto them,
unto whom they did leave the cure of Christ's people: unto the which
ordinances, the very heathen coming unto Christ's flock, did obey.
Notwithstanding these things, some rash heads being Conchae, before they be
Canales, that is to say, Spoutes, before they have filled their Cesterne, and
pretending a reformation in Religion, have sought to overthrow all good order
of Church-gouernment, bearing ignorant men in hand, that they have sufficient
warrantize out of Gods word. But as in the primative time of the Church, no
heresy was so bad, but that it would rely upon one Scripture or other, as
Arrius, who abused the 28. verse, of the 14. Chapter of Saint John's Gospel for
defense of his heresy. Montanus the 16. verse of the same Chapter for his
heresy. Manicheus the seventh verse of the second Chapter to the Philippians
for his heresy. The late Bishop of Rome the 18. verse of the 16. Chapter of
Saint Matthew for their error. The Familists the 21 verse of the 17. Chapter of
Saint Luke: Even so, the sedicious and Schismatiques of this our age, have
chosen for their purpose the 25. verse of the 22. Chapter of Saint Luke; Matt.
4.
the which they use as the Devil used Scripture, who spoke Gods word, but not
out of Gods mouth. And as the old prophet in like case at Bethel, spoke Gods
word, but not out of Gods mouth, therefore it helps them nothing at all. 3.
King. 13.
And yet for all that so great is their envy at other men's prosperity, that
so as they may bring down the temple with this twine thread; they care not
though it fall upon their own heads, as it did upon Samson. Whose envy
grows hereof, because by no means they can abide to be commanded to observe
order.

As they do herein greatly offend, seeking through malice to overthrow and
confound all good order: Unity.
so also by their bitter contention hereabout, they break the Unity which
ought to be among brethren: then the which unity nothing ought to be more
dear to the Church and common wealth. Whereupon Saint Luke in the Acts of the
Apostles commending the society of Christians, says: They were all of one
mind, and of one heart. Also the Apostle Saint Paul persuades us in many
places to observe order and unity, especially in his Epistle to the
Corinthians, saying: I beseech you brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, 1. Cor. 1.
that ye all speak one-thing, and that there be no Schisms or dissentions
among you: but be ye knit together in one mind, and in one judgment. Whereby
he requires among the faithful a consent in thought, word, and deed, so
near as might be. As touching the consent in action and deed, he speaks
more plainly in the Epistle to the Philippians, Phil. 2.
where he says: Be ye like minded, having the same love, being of one
accord, and of one judgment, that nothing be done through contention, or of
vaineglorie. By which exhortation of the Apostle, we may plainly gather,
that there are four causes of sedition at this day in the Church and common
wealth. The first, a readiness to contend for every trifle: the second,
vainglory: the third, a desire of preferment: the fourth, the diversity of
faith. Whosoever shall contend, moved by any of these, he will show
himself quickly a Schismatique, a false prophet, and a badde Pastor. But it
is no wonder to hear of false prophets, seeing there be false Gods: no
marvel if there be false Apostles, seeing there has start up false
Christ's. A man may boldly say, the Devil gave orders, when those men came
into the number of Prophets. These men came not in deed, but as Jeremy says,
currebant, they ran before they were sent. And albeit they run, yet when
they come to the sheepe-folde, they play as the Woolfe does, who comes
simply and humbly, with his tail clapped close between his legs, howling
like a dog, and coming softly against the wind, least the sheep might
smell him. They behave themselves also like the envious man that sowed tares,
who comes when men slept: in the night, least seen: softly, least heard:
into corners, least found: with a mask, least known: Clam dicens, preaching
in parlours; an ancient mark of a false prophet.

These followers at the first are very popular, they have goodly blessings,
and many fair words in their mouths: their lips are very fair and
clean burnished: and as Cyprian says, Habent hypocritae decoratissimas
orationes: Hypocrites can speak pleasant things: they will not for any thing
speak that which may displease the people. The Phariseis dare not acknowledge
John to be a Prophet for offending the people: who always have this in
request, Loquere nobis placentia, and frange nobu iuga. Speak unto us pleasant
things, and shake off the yoke from our necks. He must wink at their vices:
he must proclaim a public fast; use long prayer; and have a very narrow
strayner for Gnattes. And thus under a sheep skin, they conueigh into the
sheepefolde a Woolfe most ravenous. For poison is not mingled with Woormewood,
but with sweet wine, and put into a cup of gold.

The Diuill came disguised to Adam; and like an old man to Saul. Alas (say
they to the ignorant people) your cause is good: (this was Absaloms sheep
skin:) but there was none to do justice: herein they play the Woolues. This
hypocrisy and dissembling of some, has caused many weakelings to misslike
and loath the profession of the Gospel. But to such Saint Augustine speaks
thus, Non debent oues odisse vestes suas, quaeas induunt lupi: the sheep must
like their garments never the worse, though Wolves wear them. Let them rather
grow to that perfection of knowledge, that they may be able to separate the
wheat from the chafe. Sit electio, sit and reiectio, sed vtramque praecedat
discretio. Let there be an election, and reiection, but before either let there
go discretion. Albeit the Ass be in a Lions skin, yet a man may take him by
the cares, and say, At hae non sunt aures Leonicae: these are no Lions ears.
Some one thing or other will ever bewray a false prophet.

If we judge of a sheep by the outskin only: If we choose our cloth by the
list: or deem a Pharisei to be good by his long fringe or his broad
philacterie, we may so be easily deceived. For Christianity is Rei, and not
Speciei, a matter of substance, and not of form. The Oistrich has very
gallant feathers, yet he cannot fly. Therefore if ye will try and discern
between a false and a true prophet, ye shall do it by these two means,
wherewith Isaac tried his two sons Jacob, and Esau. And how is that? By
voice, and hands. By the voice, in these three fruits ye shall know a false
prophet. What prophets confession soever has either no fruit in it; or noisome
fruit: or uncircumcised fruit, he is no true prophet. To hear, to pray, and to
embrace we know not what, is a Religion without fruit, a verbal religion,
such as the papists embrace, who worship God in an unknown tongue. Whosoever
delivers such is a false prophet. Secondly if it be noisome fruit, it is as
the fruit of thorns and of briers, it is ever pricking, scratching, and
tends to renting the unity, and common peace of brethren, makes men to
forsake mutual love and friendly society: and with Manasses to build up a
temple in Gerezim against ye of Jerusalem, which is great impiety. For as
Saint Augustine says, Ducentis error, duplex esterror, The error of the guide
or leader, is a double error, though he have but two followers: but if he have
a hundred followers, then (says he) it is centuplex, an hundred fold: If one
thousand, then it is milleplex, a thousand fold Of such leaders, Saint
Augustine speaks also thus, Petro manenti dixit Christus, pasce oues meas:
but, Schismatico vel heretice exeunti dicit Deus, Pasce haedos tuos: that is,
To perseuering Peter Christ says, Feed my sheep: but to the Schismatique or
Heretic which goes out, God says, Feed thy goats. Thirdly, if it be
uncircumcised fruit, such as gives the glory of God to the creature: to our
election, Operapraeuisae, Works foreseen of God: to our vocation, free will:
and to our justification, merit, and so by circumstance do make the death of
Christ of none effect, they that deliver it be false prophets. As the voice is
thus to be discerned, so are the hands also to be felt, for they are not
empty, but are replenished with fruit. For our confession and prophesying is
not all that is looked for at our hands. For to them that said, Have we not
prophesied in thy name, etc. It is answered by Christ, I know ye not. The
especial fruits of the spirit that should be in us, are sincerity of the
heart, humility of the mind, and love to the brethren. Humility is not the
fruit of the thorn or brier: but Scismatiques are proud and selfe-conceyted.
There is nothing but they mislike which themselves do not. They are like unto
rhose Monks which Saint Bernard found fault withal Qui nusquam putant lucere
solemn neci in cella sua: which think that the sun shines no where but in
their cel. They think them selves so godly, wise, sincere, pure, perfect and
so Christian that none is comparable to them: as if they alone, had an
impropriation of Gods spirit. The malcontent humor of the Ephraits troubles
them, and disdainingly causes them to demand, Why called ye us not with you?
Hinc ille lachrime. Herehence come the braule. Herehence it comes that the
sheepheards of Gerar, and the sheepheards of Isaac cannot agree. Now not an
Egyptian and an Israelite, but two Israelites may be seen, not to fight
only, but as it were to kill one another. These quarrellers, are much
encouraged by the common people to maintain these braules, insomuch that it
cannot be said of them, Vt Sacerdos, sic populus, but the contrary: Vtpopulus,
sic sacerdos, As the people is, so is the Priest. Whereas, neither the Eunuchs
flattery, Sit quaeso sermo tuns. Let thy speech, I pray thee, be like the
rest of the prophets: nor yet the peoples stones, should overrule the
Ministers of Christ, but should rather hearken and follow Saint Augustines
rule, Gaudeo quia facitis, sed non faceo, quia facitis. I am glad that ye do
well, but I do not well, because ye do so: for then if ye do ill, I must do so
to: but I do well (says he) because it is good for me to do so. It is a thing
most preposterous, and out of course for the sheep to govern and direct the
shepherd; for the scholar to teach his master; the young student to set the
grave doctor to school, and to reprove the ancients of error and ignorance.
But such is our time now, wherein men are rather talkers then doers of Gods
word: and having tickeling tongues and wits, itching ears, and delighting in
curious and contentious disputes, they are not content to be taught plain and
simple faith, but seek every day after new teachers, and new things. And this
comes through their leuity and inconstancy. At the first when Manna is
strange, they like it wonderfully, but soon after, Nauseat anima nostra, they
loath it. They use a months diligence, or at the most they have but six months
liking. They will soon find one cavil or other to mislike, and will take
exceptions against the best. Isay is too long, and Obudia too short, Peter
keeps company with them of the circumcision, Christ with publicans and
sinners. Thus they like none, nor will long be content with any. To this
inconstancy they join also such presumption, as that with Peter they would
be makers of tabernacles, wherein they have no skill, being not thereunto
called. Every Cobbler and base artificer will be busy with Church-gouernment,
not fearing this threatening, Number. 1.
The stranger that comes nere the tabernacle shall be slain. Exodus 19. 1. Sam.
6.
And again, Whosoever touches the mount shall surely die. See what vengeance
befell the men of Bethshames, because they presumed to look into the Ark of the Lord. Beware of presumption, and follow the counsel of the wise man,
saying: Search not out the things rashly that are too hard for thee. Peter's
pardon for being in hand with the building of the Tabernacles was, He wist not
what he said. And his fault is the less, in that he leaves it to be
determined by Christ: but these rude and barbarous sort, will not with any
reason be answered, of whom this sentence of Saint Hierom is verified:
Facilius eos vinci posse quam persuaderi. They may more easily be overcome then
persuaded. Cum disputare nesciant, litigare tamen non desinunt. Although they
know not to dispute, yet they leave not of to wrangle. They are like unto
Samsons. Foxes, knit all together in the tails, that is to say, united in
evil, but in the head, that is in virtue and godliness, disceuerered and
divided. As Samson by his foxes destroyed the corn of his enemies: so the
devil by his foxes, does wonderfully hinder the Lords harvest. God open their
eyes (if it be his will) that at the last they may see their wickedness, that
living in unity, they may yield obedience to their superiors, and reverently
behave themselves toward the Lords Ministers, a matter of great importance.
Then would they say to the Lords Iehoshua, All that thou have commanded us we
will do, and whither thou sendest us we will go. Josh. 1.
A Roman soldier having gotten his enemy down, and ready to thrust him
through, the retreat then sounding, spared him, and came speedily to his
fellows. Being asked why he did let the enemy escape, he answered, I had
rather obey, then conquer an enemy. O that al were of this mind, to yield
obedience to magistrates, especially to Christian magistrates, such as God has
at this day set over us. If there be any thing out of frame in ye church that
offends you, withdraw not your obedience, but suffer. There was never any
church here in earth so pure, wherein some blemish could not be found: neither
has there been any religion or service of god so perfect, as ye same has bin
free from al imperfections. That pasouer which was the best of al other, which
has this commendation. 2. Reg. 23.22.
There was not the like since the days of Samuel, had 4. notable imperfections
in it. 2. Chro. 35.
Let us know, that in religion there is both a center and a space. Although it
be best to be in ye center, yet if we be not out of the space we be well. Out
of the space is too bad, like as it is to be out of the But. What madness is it
then in those men, who because they cannot be in the prick, will not be in ye
but neither. This was at one time Peter's extremity, Lord (says he) thou shals
never wash my feet: and incontinent he desires Christ to wash both feet, head,
hands, and al. We must learn to keep a mean, John. 13.
and sometime to tolerate imperfections. Abram in ye matter of spoils,
permitted that to Eschol, and to Mamre, which he would not do himself. So Job
tolerated the feasting of his sons. So did Paul in the matter of receiving
stipend permit that to others, which himself would not do. Let us therefore say
with a grave father, Si quid secus sit, If things be not as they should be,
Corrigi cupis. I desire that they may be amended: if not amended, I desire they
may be taken away: if they be not taken away, tollero and gemo, I suffer, and
sigh. Contention in this case helps not, but rather hurts, and offends
both God and good men. And therefore Paul gives this caveat, Galat. 5.
If ye bite and devour one another, take heed ye be not devoured one of
another. Upon the which Saint Chrysostom says, that contention is like unto a
moath, which never leaves a piece of cloth until he has consumed it. Not
without cause therefore the Apostle wishes that they might be cut off which
trouble the Church. Therefore, my brethren, be warned in time, though the
magistrate uses not such severity, as this fault of yours deserves, yet
know that God will not leave you unpunished: who the more he suffers, the
greater will the vengeance be when he strikes.

The second Leper, is the Church-robber.
Sacrilege, is a purloining and incroching, either by violence or by subtletie
to private use, holy things which are dedicated unto God, or which are due
unto him, either in respect of a vow, or of a separation. This definition of
Sacrilege, plainly shows, that temporal goods and lands may be separated
from lay fee (so termed) to the maintenance of Bishops, preachers, and
ministers of Gods holy word and sacraments, that these may both be able to live
with necessary maintenance, according to their several orders and degrees,
and also may have sufficient to keep hospitality, and to relieve the poor,
according to Gods will, to whom in respect hereof such goods are here said to
be dedicated, and to be due as his portion. And further it may appear, that
all they which shall couerously usurp such lands, goods or tithes so
separated, and employ them to their own private uses, and spend them
prodigally and vainly upon their pleasures, shall rob God of his right, and so
be guilty of that damnable sin of Sacrilege. It is therefore a matter more
dangerous then worldlings make account of, to meddle with separated and
consecrated things, which belong to him and his Priests. For this was the cause
that Vzziah was stricken with leprosy. 2. Chro. 26.


If God has allowed, required, and blessed such gifts, and the giuers, (as in
his word plainly appears that he has,) then must it needs follow, that it
is lawful for his Prelates and Ministers to possess such goods and livings,
as have been given of devotion to the Church: and not to be like the begging
Friars. That it is lawful for Prelates and Ministers of Gods word to possess
temporal goods and lands given to maintenance of divine service, the
Scriptures do plainly prove. In the old testament God commanded the children
of Israel to give unto the Levites, Number. 35.
of the inheritance of their possession, Cities to dwell in, and the suburbs of
the city round about them, for their beasts and cattle. Of the which cities,
there were in all appointed forty and eight. And these fields of the Levites,
were by express commandment forbidden by God to be alienated, that they
might remain unto them for a perpetual possession, as appears in these
words: Leui. 25.34 Leui. 27.28.
Nothing separate from common use, that a man does separate unto the Lord of
all that he has (whether it be man or beast, or land of his inheritance) may
be sold nor redeemed. For every thing separate from common use is most holy
unto the lord. And this is not repugnant with that which is written in the 18.
Chapter of the book of Numbers, where the Priests and Leuits are denied to
have any part of inheritance with the other tribes, but their portion in
tithes and oblations only. For although in that first division of the land of
Israel, the Priests of that time, had no possession of fields, yet afterward
they had lands and possessions, by the vows of the faithful for a perpetual
inheritance. Therefore in the last Chapter of Leuit. where mention is made of
lands and fields dedicated to the Lord, it is said, that such lands and fields
so vowed and dedicated, shall be holy unto the Lord, and separate from common
use, the possession whereof shall be ye Priests for ever. Furthermore in that
second partition of land in Judah (whereof mention is made in Ezechiels last
chapter) which should be after the captivity, there was one great part assigned
to the priests, an other lesser part to the Levites: and another to the
princes: Moreover, Iere. 1.
the Prophet Jeremy, who was of the tribe of Leuy, and the son of Hilkaih, one
of the Priests of Anathoth, bought a field of Hanameel his uncles son, Iere. 32.
because the title by kindred appertained unto him to buy it. By these
testimonies it is apparent, that it was lawful for the Priests and Leuits not
withstanding the negative commandment in the book of Numb. to purchase and
possess fields and lands, Number. 18.
dedicated to the lord.

In the new testament also, it is said in a common proverb, The labourer is
worthy of his reward. Matthew. 10.
Which proverb being true, Christ and his Appostles made use of the same. The
Apostle Paul also says, that they which sow spiritual things, should reap
temporal things. The which exchange is like unto that of Diomedes and
Glaucus, who for his golden armor, took of Diomedes a brazen harness. 1. Cor.
9.
Of this matter the Apostle speaks at large in the first Epistle to the
Corinthians: where he demands this question: Who goes a warrefare at his
own charges? Further, he alleges out of the law, Thou shall not moosell the
mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn. Then, if meat must be
plentifully given unto the cattle which labor for our living, why shall not
things necessary for the maintenance of Pastors and teachers, which labor day
and night for the salvation of souls, be given unto them? Sheepheards have
fruit and living of their flock. Are not husbandmen and planters of vines
maintained by their labors and fruits? Even so the Ministers of Christ, when
they feed the children of God, and husband them as the spiritual husbandry
have a right to be nourished and sustained thereby. Chrysostom to the people
of his time, which used to say, that the bishops and ministers lived on their
costs, answers thus: No, (says he) in the time of the law we lived on the
Altar. Before they gave it, it was theirs, but after it was Gods, and he gave
it to his priests: So in the Gospel (says he) ye are not commanded to give us
men, but to God, Reddite Deo quae sunt Dei: Give unto God the things that are
Gods: and he again gives it unto us his Ministers. And S. Augustine to this
effect has a notable saying, O homo meus est and mea sunt omnia quae habes,
etc. O man, thy self art mine, and all that thou possessest. The earth which
thou tillest is mine: the seed which thou sowest is mine: the cattle which thou
weariest with labor are mine: the Sun is mine: and the showers of the early
and latter rain are mine: Tu quia manum admonisti, etc. Thou, because thou
have lent me thy hand to hold the plough, take thou one part for thy labor.
If God (says he) should say thus unto us, it were more then he ought us, or
then we could require. But take thee nine parts (says he) O man, only give
me the tenth. The Apostle Paul also says, that the Elders are worthy of
double honor, 1. Tim. 5.
especially they that labor in the word and doctrine. For those fathers and
ancients which have worn and spent themselves, so that they cannot labor in ye
word as before time, by reason of age and diseases, ought to be excused, and yet
nevertheless cherished and honored, as if they labored. For as Saint
Augustine says. Nihil est in hac vita difficilius, laboriosus, and
periculosius episcopi, aut presbiteri officio. There is nothing in this life
more hard, more painful, and more perilous, then the office of a Bishop or
priest. But for their encouragement to undergo the great burden thereof, it
has pleased God to give unto them in this world, more then common honor, that
is to say, double honor. Also S. Bernard says, Honores and dignitates
ecclesiasticas non ignoro deberi his, qui eas digne secundum Deum, administrare
and velint, and possint. I am not ignorant that Ecclesiastical honors and
dignities are due unto them, which both can and will use them well and godly.
For according to the Proverb, Honos alit arts: Honor cherishes lerning. These
things considered, it may appear how greatly they sin against God, which in
these days seek all they can to dishonor them, whom God and his word does
honor: As do not only the Anabaptists, but also many others which would be
counted zealous professors of the gospel, and yet defend and maintain such as
write, preach, and speak against godly Bishops and Prelates. The sin of such
undoubtedly, is no less then Sacrilege, in that they rob God of his honor.
For as they that honor Gods Ministers, honor God: so they that seek to take
from them their due honor, do dishonor God. In the Arc of old time there
were three famous things, Manna, Aarons rod, and the two Tables. Our Arc had
these sometime, but some greedy Cormorants have pried into our Arc, have taken
away a great part of our Manna, and to get the remainder, they snatch at Aarons
rod, that is at Church-gouernment and discipline, and by their good wills,
would leave nothing but the two Tables, that is, scholars books to live by.
But if Samuel be not vir honoratus, a man of honor among the people, never
look for a good government. If the crib be empty, ye shall get no Oxen: ye
must be content to have Asses to do your work. If the carkas be gone, ye may
perhaps with a little chafe get Bussards, 2. Chro. 12.
but Eagles will not come. If Sisac spoil the temple, then Salomons golden
shields, shall be turned into Rehoboams brazen shields, and yet ye must be
contented with it, and with much more evil the^ these, which the pretended
reformation will bring upon you, and your posterity. Whatsoever reformation is
pretented, the gold of the Temple is intended. They are of Dionysius religion,
who coming into the temple, and seeing Jupiters coat to be rich of beaten
gold and precious stones, took it away, saying, that it was too cold for
winter, and too heavy and hot for summer: and in stead thereof, gave him a
coat of Linsey-woolsey. And beholding also Aesculapius the son of Apollo,
with a golden beard, he took it from him, saying, It was a shame the son
should have a beard, since the father had none. Thus we see that these kind of
men will always have a cloak to cover their insaciable covetousness. With these
men, whatsoever is bestowed upon learning and deuinitie, is (Vt quid predicio
haec) misspent and lost. There is some controversy among doctors whether
Dioclesians, or Iulianus persecution were the greater. Iulianus occidit
presbiterium, Julian killed the preisthood, he rifeled their livings, imbeseled
the patrimony of the Church. But Dioclesian occidit presbetoros, killed the
preistes and cut of their heads. And the said Doctors conclude, that Iulianus
was far worse, for (say they) by Dioclesians persecution men died, but the
church flourished: and by Iulianus persecution nomen ipsum Christianismi pene
perijt, there was scarce any remembrance of christiansme left. In like case it
is to be feared that the hazard of Religion which may come by this secret
invasion will be greater then that which shall be by open persecution. Because
living and mainteinance, (which is the reward of learning) being taken away,
barbarism must needs ensue, and so at the last no Religion. Saul is well
content his men should do good service in following the enemy, but he
grudgeth them to eat of the honey, that should clear their eyes, and
comfort their heart. But as church-maintenance is of some grudged, and of other
some couetously and iniustly sought, so the same ought not to be alienated from
the right use, but ought to be kept, and as unwillingly yielded, as was Naboths
vineyard. For Saint Ambrose would not deliver the substance of the church unto
Valence the Emperor, when he required the same, but bestowed it on the poor.
I deny not, but that kings and Princes are to command all both ye bodies and
goods of all their subjects within their dominions, to serve their turns in
time of need. Yet, with out great and extreme necessity in deed, thereunto
enforcing, the goods and lyuings of the Church ought to be kept and preserved,
and are not rashly to be employed. It is reported of a certain noble man, who
lived at Carthage, that franckly and of his own accord, he gave to the
Church of Hippo (whereof Saint Augustine had the charge) a possession by
writings under seal: which writings he delivered to Saint Augustine, and to
his Clergy men, reserving only unto himself the profit of the land during
his life: but afterward repenting him of his liberality and former grant, he
required his land again, offering in lue thereof, five pounds to be given
unto the poor. Augustine seeing this, lamented and sorrowed, not for the
possessions demanded again, but for the inconstancy of men: and being a man
of a very gentle and mild nature, yielded it back again, which he might
have kept in the right of the Church. And hereof grows a question, whether
Augustine could of himself, without a general consent of the Church, alienate
that land, wherewith that same was once rightly endewed. But whether Augustine
offended herein or no, I will leave that to others to be decided: this I am
sure cannot be denied, but that the inconstancy of the giver deserved blame.
Yet this man had more reason to require that again which he once gave, then
those church-robbers have at this day, who with Athalia think they never have
enough, till they rush into the Lords treasury, and rob his Sanctuary,
notwithstanding that neither their ancetors brought so much as one brick to
the foundation, nor themselves a tile to cover the roof thereof. If the law of
God confirm the law of nations, by which every man inioyeth his right, why
should not the law of nations confirm the law of God. God in Malachie calls
the detaining of his tithes, a spoiling of him. And in ye Gospel he calls it
a deceyuing of the holy Ghost to Ananias and Saphira his wife. What vengeance
thereof ensued the story shows. Saint Augustine says, Si in ignem mittitur,
qui non dedit rem propriam, vbi putas mittendus est qui inuasit alienam? If he
be cast into the fire, which has not given of his own substance, what
think thou shall become of him, who has taken the spoil of that which
belonged to others? Beside the danger of damnation (whereof Saint Austine
speaks) he and his posterity, may daily expect and fear that vengeance,
which befell an Eagle, which upon a time being hungry, and seeking for her
pray, happened to fly over an altar whereupon there was flesh to be sacrificed to
an idol god. With this flesh the Eagle gorged her self, and took of it also
to carry to her nest to feed her young ones. With the same she fortuned to
carry a cole of fire unawares, which cleaued thereunto, wherewithal both her
self, her nest, and her young, were utterly burnt and destroyed. The like may
befall those Cormorants, which having Caninum appetitum, a Doglike appetite,
eating till they vomit, through an insaciable desire of spoil, neither
foreseeing the danger, nor fearing what may ensue, ceaze upon all whatsoever
comes within their reach: wherewithal they carry the heavy vengeance of
God, which will not only fire them and their nests, which through rapine,
oppression, and deceit, they have builded on hie in this world, but also
without great repentance casts them down headlong into hell fire which
burns for ever. For God will not suffer Sacrilege to escape unpunished. When
Balthazar with his Queen and Lords, drank in the silver and golden vessels,
which his father Nabuchadnezar had taken out of the temple of Jerusalem. In
the same very hour there appeared fingers, as if they had been of a man's
hand, writing right over the candlestick upon the plain wall in the kings
palace: and the king saw the palm of the hand that wrote, the effect of that
which was so written was, God has numbered this kingdom, and brought it to an
end: thou art weighed in a balance, and art found too light: thy kingdom is
dealt in parts, and given to the Medes and Perses. The very self same night
was Balthazar the king of the Chaldes slain, and Darius succeeded in the
kingdom of the Medes. Whereby it plainly appears, that as those things which
are dedicated to the Church, do belong unto God, so the spoylers and profane
spenders of his portion, can have no security, but a fearful expectation of
vengeance from heaven. Whereas contrariwise they that do give liberally to
the upholding and maintenance of the woorshippe and service of almighty God,
and which (if they have not to give) do yet at the least in heart, wish well
unto the same, do procure unto themselves and to their posterity a singular
blessing and favor from God. Malac. 3.
Bring ye (says the Lord) all the tithes into the store house, that there may
be meat in my house; and prove me now herewithall says the Lord of hosts, if
I will not open the windows of heaven unto you, and pour you out a blessing
without measure. And I will rebuke the deuourer for your sake, and he shall not
destroy the fruit of your ground, neither shall your vine be barren in the
field, says the Lord of hosts, And all nations shall call you blessed: for
ye shall be a pleasant land says the lord of hosts. A great blessing in
deed, wherein the lord promises not only abundance of fruit, but also to
give a blessed and holy name among all nations, which he will undoubtedly give
to al those which will prove him herein, whether he will be just a rewarder and
recompenser or no. Prove the Lord then for he is most faithful and just in all
his promises. He is not as a man that lies, nor as the sons of men that does
repent them after their promise and vows. He speaks not the thing, but he
does it. Heaven and earth shall sooner pass, then he will fail in a jot of
his promises. If wordly minded men, could be persuaded herein (as they would
very redilie in deed if they had faith) they would not offer unto the Lord,
the hault and the blind, and the lamest of the flocks: but would with Abel
bring the best unto him, Gene. 4.
who was therefore blessed of God. Who afterward gave the same in commandment
saing, Number. 18.
ye shall separate unto the Lords treasury, things that be chief, and most
principal. The Lord loves a cherefull and liberal giver, such a one was king
David, who said, I have given all things with a glad heart, 1. Chro. 29.
even a good will, and now have I had joy to see thy people which here are
present, offer with a free will unto thee. And Solomon his son, so long as
he bent him self to the building of Gods house, so long he had peace. Let
therefore (my brethren) the wrath of God on the one side, which will send
speedy vengeance, upon all those that commit Sacrilege: and his blessings on
the other side promised to all those which love him and seek the honor of his
name move you to beware of that damnable sin.

The third Leper, is the Simoniac.
SJmony, is a selling of the gifts of the spirit, or of any such thing,
through a covetous desire: the buier having an ambicious intent to prefer
himself thereby, and to make his purchase serve his corrupt mind. Whereby it
appears, that both the seller and the buier of spiritual things are
Simoniacks, and infected with the leprosy of Gehesi, who took of Naaman the
Syrian for his cleansing, that which his master Elizeus refused. 4. King. 5.
Concerning Simonie, the old Schoolmen and Papists have disputed at large:
who could best speak herein, not only by speculation, but also by practice.
For whereas this is the only mark of all the old and new Testament, that
the blood of Jesus Christ, shed upon the tree of the Cross, is the
satisfaction for the sins of all those that believe in him: the Pope and his
has a long time borne the world in hand, that he is the treasurer of this
great ransom paid for our sins, and that to be partaker thereof, men must
come unto him, and he will distribute this benefit to whom he thinks good.
And thereupon every man began to buie salvation of him, which the only blood
of Jesus Christ had purchased for us, and which no other thing besides could
purchase. If thou had committed all the faults in the world, thou might
have had recourse to the Popes pardons and indulgences. All offenses, even to
murders, incestests, Sodomitries, were taxed and set at a certain sum of
money, and paying that the Pope would give thee full remission thereof. This
pardon was ratified and delivered to him that would give most: and the book of
taxes does confirm it, which was imprinted by their own consent, before the
light of the Gospel was made clear again in these last ages. These
Indulgences they sold first to certain persons, and after to families, and
then to towns, and so in time to common wealths, and whole kingdoms, without
exception of any persons, yea for the term of four thousand years of true
pardon. The doctrine of Christ was: He that shall believe in me shall have
remission of sins: That of the Popes: He that shall give me money, there
shall be no hell for him. If you desired Paradise, he commanded the Angels to
carry you thither, and all your parents and friends, as appears by the Bull
of Clement the fifth. For the knights of the order of Saint John at Jerusalem.
If any feared Purgatory, having committed all the mischiefs in the world,
yea having line with the virgin Marie, (as the preachers of the pardons in
Germany say) so soon as he has cast silver into the Basin, their souls
were by and by set at liberty therefrom. And to this end they have sold
Trentals of Masses and Diriges, for souls departed. Whereby they have set to
sale for money Christ himself, valuing his most precious body at a lower
price then ever Judas did. This was Simonie in the highest degree most
abominable. Christ sometime thrust buiers and sellers out of the Temple. But
the Pope has received in buiers and sellers, and thrust out Christ, and so
have turned the house of God into a den of thieves. And thereof came this
Proverb, Curia Romana, non captat ouem sine lana. The Court of Rome will not
take the sheep without the fleece. Which also verefieth these words of Mantuan.

venalia nobis:
Templa secerdotes, altaria, sacra, coronae,
ignis, thura, preces, coelum est venale Deusque.
That is, Amongst us in Rome, churches, priests, altars, masses, crowns, fire,
incense, prayer, and heaven are set to sale, yea God himself among us may be
had for money. Of this Thomas Becket our countri-man, made woeful complaint, at
what time for his wilful disobedience and treason committed against the king,
he had fled for aid and succor to Rome, and saw that nothing would be wrought
there without money, and enforced with sorrow for the same, he wrote thus to
the Bishop of Menze, Matter Roma facta est meretrix, and prostituta est pro
mercede. Rome our mother is become a harlot, and for money and meed lays
herself to sale. The detestable Simonie practiced in the Church of Rome, in
the days of Pope Gregory ye ninth, was the cause why the Greek church
utterly brake from the Romans. I would to God, it might make a perfect
separation for ever between them and us, until such time as it shall please
God to make them see their abomination, and so repent them and convert. In the
mean time, beware of those scorpions and locusts which are come out of the
bottomless smoking pit, Apoc. 9.
who although they have ye faces of men, and wander up and down secretly in
this realm in a disguised manner like ruffians, with feathers, and all
ornaments of light colored apparel, like to the fashion of courtiers, or
otherwise as they think best for their security and safety: yet I say again,
take heed of them: because they have stings in their tails. For though they
have a glorious name of pretended holiness, calling themselves Jesuits, yet do
they intise all manner of persons with who^ they dare adventure to speak, not
only to be reconciled to the Pope and church of Rome, but also to induce the^
by vows and oaths to renounce their obedience to ye Q. majesty, to deny her
to be their sovereign, and themselves to be discharged of their allegiance:
and to repute al magistrates under her, to be unlawful, and in conscience not to
be obeyed. And where they get footing and entrance there they deliver their
consecrated tokens and relics, as Agnus deis, grana benedicta, medellas,
crosses, beads, and such like trash: and proceed further, bearing ye ignorant
people in hand ye for money by ye Popes indulge^ce, they shall have pardon for all
their sins past. By which exchange, they draw unto themselves no small
advantage. But of such ignorant and foolish buiers, this may be verified. Quid
dedit, auru^ fuit, quod perdidit anima fuit. That which he gave was gold: but
ye which he lost was his soul. And to the bad marcha^ts which sell such
deceitful trash: it may as truly be said, Quod accepit aurum fuit; quod dedit,
lepra fuit, That which he took was gold; but that which he gave was a
leprosy. Therefore in shunning of these men, or rather monsters, men shall not
only shun a leprosy, but also deliver themselves from those ugly and
unclean spirits (whereof Saint John speaks) which are come out of the mouth
of the Dragon, Apo. 16.13
and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet.
For they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, to go unto the kings of
the earth, and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle. Such is
their affected malice to attempt, and their infected means to obtain their
conquest, and our fall.

There are also another sort of Simonia call lepers, such as be patrones of
benefices, who having power to appoint a godly, learned, and discreet pastor,
to the congregation and Church, whereof they ought in deed to be patrons, that
is to say, careful and provident fathers: yet nevertheless seeking after their
own private gain, rather then the gaining of men's souls, do (contrary to
the law of God and man) sell their benefices and donations for money. And so
refusing to admit those which be worthy, but preferring those which be
unworthy, they call to the inheritance of Gods sanctuary, Schismatiques,
seditious persons, Atheists, ignorant and unlearned Asses, flatterers, and
sometime their own kinsmen, and familiars, how unmeet soever. They esteem
the person of a man, and receive gifts. And thus, so much is in them, they make
the house of God a house of merchandise, and a den of thieves. So that as he
who being in Rome, did seek for Rome: even so may we among these kind of men,
which such patrons bring in, seek long enough, and not find a good pastor: but
rather those thieves, whereof our Savior Christ speaks, John. 10.
which come not in by ye door, but at the window. There have been the more of
these petty thieves, by the means of these great thieves. For our usual
proverb is not so common as true, that if there were no receivers, there would
be no thieves. Socrates being asked on a time, why he laughed, answering he
said, I see great thieves lead small thieves to the gallows, which are more
worthy to be hanged themselves then them: for (says he) the small robberies
are punished, but the great are carried in triumphs. Even so those great
thieves, which rob the purse of a poor minister, for that which should freely
be given unto him: which rob the Church also of a learned and good pastor for
filthy lucre, and which is woorst of all, which rob God of his honor and
service, by bringing into the sheepefolde sometimes a Woolfe and a thief:
those are the thieves would be more nearly looked unto, then commonly they be.
For as Chrisostom says, He that is not ashamed to say, Quid mihi dabis, vt
tibi iustitiam faciam, What will thou give me to do thee justice? Is it not all
one as if he should say, Quid vis mihi dare, vt deum vendam? What will thou
give me to sell God unto thee? If these men do not wash and cleanse their hands
in time from this leprosy by true repentance and amendment, it will not only
make a fearful separation between God and them, but will also in this world
bring at the last a consumption of their whole substance. For albeit (as S.
Ambrose in his pastoral says) that evil beginnings have a preposterous end:
as Jacob by supplantation attained to a blessing: the corn sowed with a
leprous hand, is reaped clean: a fair child may be begotten and borne between
two adulterers: and the money gotten by Simonie may have a good issue, when it
is bestowed upon the good of the poor: yet says he, this is no defense for
Simoniacks. God will not be pleased with such a sacrifice as is gotten by
robbery and deceit. As this concerns the Patron, so let the Minister take
heed, that seeks to come in at the window like a thief, that he be not
defiled with this leprosy; But let them remember this sentence of Saint
Augustine, Diligendus est pastor: tollerandus est Mercenarius: cauendus est
latro. A good shepherd is to be loved: a hireling is to be tolerated: but a
thief of all other is to be shunned.

The fourth Leper, is the Hypocrite.
THis man's Lerposie is a bad color in the outskinne: of the which the Lord
speaks thus to Moses and Aaron. Leuit. 13.
The man that shall have in the skin of his flesh a swelling, or a scabbe, or a
white spot, so that in the skin of his flesh it be like the plague of
leprosy, then he shall be brought to Aaronthe Priest, etc. Hypocrites have a
diversity of color in the skin, because through a proud singularity they
endeavor to differ from other men, both in manners, and in conversation.
Nevertheless, they have another color under the skin in the flesh,
pretending one thing outwardly, and being otherwise within: having one thing in
the mouth, and another thing in the heart: outwardly a false show of godliness,
and within full of all iniquity. Such as were they of whom Saint Luke
speaks thus, The Priests and Scribes watched him, and sent forth spies, which
should feign themselves just men, Luke. 20.
to take him in his talk, etc. Of this Hypocrisy, Saint Augustine writing
upon the Psalm. 63, says thus, Simulata sanctitas, non est iniquitas, sed
duplex iniquitas: quia iniquitas est and simulatio. Feigned holiness is not
simply iniquity, but double iniquity: because it is both iniquity, and
dissimulation. For this cause our Savior Christ says, Except your
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Phariseis, Math. 5.
ye cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. The righteousness of the Scribes
and Phariseis was vain, and full of ostentation, by which they sought to be
praised of men. They fasted, they prayed, they gave alms, etc. that they might
be seen of men. Their righteousness was in word, but not in deed, as Christ
himself testifies of them. They say (says he) and do not. For they bind
heavy burdens, and grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders, but
they themselves will not move them with one of their fingers. To teach, and
not to do, condemns the teacher. And therefore of Christ the true Doctor, it
is said, That he began to do and to teach. Of such Doctors, which teach and
do not, Acts. 1.
Saint Gregory writes thus. Vult hypocrita scire diuina eloquia, nec tamen
facere: vult docte loqui, nec tamen viuere. The hypocrite desires to know the
word of God, but not to practice it: to speak learnedly, but not to live
thereafter. And if it fortune that these do any thing that seems good, yet
the intention of the same is not good, but rather they do it to an
hypocritical end. And therefore Saint Chrysostom of this pharisaicall
righteousness speaks thus, Phariseorum iustitia erat in ostentatione, and
non in rectitudine intentionis, in locutione, non in opere: in corporis
afflictione, non in mandatorum obseruatione, etc. The righteousness of the
Phariseis was in the ostentation of the work, not in the uprightness, and
sincerity of the intention: in speaking, not in doing: in the affliction of
the body, not in the keeping of the commandments: and in the lesser
observations, leaving the more weighty things of the law. These hypocrites
which seem to be religious worshippers of God, and are not, are politic
Machiuilians, which make a show to love the gospel, but it is either to gain
credit thereby, or to get gain and promotion, or else to compass their subtle
devises. But detestable and devilish is their hypocrisy, who to attain to any
dignity, either ecclesiastical or civil: or else to make their false
doctrine the more easily received and embraced, do feign to have that
holiness, which they have not, nor yet regard. Such hypocrites may fitly be
compared unto falling stars which men call Assub, which in the night time,
seem to be in the Firmament, and to be true stars in deed, and yet are not
so, but certain fat exhalations only lifted up from the earth, which being
elevated through the upper region of the air, are kindled by the heat and
force of the uppermost Element, which is fire: and so being kindled, do fall
again: euenso these hypocrites, unto men that look not into them, seem to be
sperituall light inflamed of God, and are thought in mind to be conversant in
heaven, when as in truth they are nothing less. Job. 20.
As therefore the light of such supposed stars, is momentany and vanishing,
even so is the joy of hypocrites. For what is the joy and hope of al hypocrites
in their works and actions? surely nothing but ye reverence of honor, the
glory of praise, to be feared of better men then them selves, and of all men to
be called holy. This is their joy, and therefore their only portion and
reward. They are like unto image-caruers, who have a care only to polish,
paint and beautify the outward form to please the beholders, not caring for
the back parts, or for that which is in ward: and when they have done all
that they can, yet can give no life unto it. So the hypocrite seems to be
holy in the sight of men, and therefore behaueth him self accordingly, painting
his actions with a show of righteousness, whereas nevertheless within, both his
inward parts, which are always, in the sight of God, and also his back
parts, that is to say, the end of his life, and the judgment of God are
neglected. Therefore an hypocrite is but as a picture or shadow of a righteous
man, and without truth and life. There is as great defference between the
working of hypocrisy and the working of grace, as between the working of art,
and the operation of nature. Art works only outwardly, as may appear by the
art of grauing, caruing, and painting, and such like. But nature works first
inwardely, as is manifestly to be seen in the generation of living creatures,
in whom the heart, and other vital members, are first formed. For grace
works first inwardly, and reformeth the mind, through the love of God and the
love of our neighbor: Afterward it reformeth men's tongues, their manners and
their whole life: of the which the Apostle writes thus, Ephesians. 4.
Be ye renewed in the spirit of your mind, and put on the new man, which after
God is created in righteousness, and true holiness. But against hypocrisy
and dissimulation which is in the outward man, Christ pronounces this curse;
Woe unto you Scribes and Phariseis, ye are like unto painted sepulchers, which
appear beautiful outward, but within are full of dead men's bones, and all
filthiness. Matt. 23.
Woe unto you Scribes and Phariseis hypocrites: for ye make clean the utter
side of the cup, and of the platter; but within ye are full of briberie and
excess. The righteousness of the Scribes and Phariseis, was severe and
cruel: for they urged the law of Retaliation, and required an eye for an eye,
and a tooth for a tooth. This kind has five notes to know them to be
hypocrites by. 1 First, their care is not on themselves, but on others: and
therefore enquire they after other men's actions, Quid autemiste? What shall he
here do? 2 They are ever Obseruatores; narrow lookers upon other men's faults. 3
They are ready to control and to condemn, whereas others more fit, are
not so forward. 4 They make choice of a brother that has a moate in his eye:
can they find none that has a beam? They will not perchance meddle with them,
for that they be of their own kind. These Phariseis let Herod's and Pilats
beams alone uncontrolled, but the moate of the Disciples for gathering a few
ears of corn on the Sabbath, much complained of and condemned. 5 They are
full of all cruelty, under the color of simplicity and innocence. And
herein they are like unto Woolues in sheep clothing, ever in show void of
harmefulnesse, whereas indeed if they be uncased, they are full of all
mischief and cruelty. Beware of these men, that you be not deceived by them:
and as one says: Nunquam te fallant animi sub vulpe latentes.
Impia sub dulci melle venena latent.


That is:

Let not the subtle sleights of Fox thee undermine:
For poison lies hid, in sweet and honied wine.
And herewithall agrees the saying of Saint Bernard, Creed mihi sub habitu
religionis, reperies cor peruersum. Believe me, under the form of Religion,
thou shall find a perverse heart. A Woolfe in a sheep skin shows a dead
sheep: but that the Woolfe is alive, it will appear by his works. A Nero
within, and a Cato without, is a monster like unto that Poetical fixion,
Chimera. is a three headed. monster having part of the shape of a Lion and part
of a Dragon. Joshua 9.
Leo pars prima, Dracho media ipsa Chimera. Aeneas never hurt the Trojans his
enemies more, then when he put on armor like unto theirs, and so rushed in
among his enemies as one of their side. Such hypocrites are the Papistical
lesuites, who play the dissembling Gibeonites, pretending that they come from a
very far country for the name of the Lord our God. These under a show of
love and great care to build up Hierusalems Temple with Nehemia, seek nothing
else but the destruction thereof. They play the fox with Herod, who pretending
a worshipping of Christ, 2. Sam. 15.
practiced nothing else but to kill him. They have made Absaloms vow, under
the color of Religion, conspiring against the king and state. And therefore the
holy ghost speaks thus unto them, I know the blasphemy of them that say they
are Jews, Apoc. 2.
and are not, but are the Sinagogue of satan. Finally, the righteousness of
the Phariseis was full of presumption, arrogancy and contempt. For they stood
in their own conceyte, and had a great ouerweening of themselves, contemning
all others: as appears by that vain boasting of that proud Pharisei, who
making his prayer in the temple said thus, O God I thank thee, that I am not
as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or as this publican: I fast
twice in the week, I give tithe of all that ever I possess. This hypocrite is
like unto an Ape, which being no man, but a beast, yet he imitateth most of
those things which he sees men do: Even so this hypocrite counterfeiteth the
good works of Saints, he prays, he fasteth, he gives alms, he pays tithe
of all things: but yet like an Ape. For as the Ape does he knows not what,
neither does profit himself by that which he does: even so these kind of
burnished and smooth fellows do they know not what, because they work not in
faith, being destitute of the true love of God, and of their neighbor.
Whereupon Chrysostom says, Omnes species iusticia, quas habent serui dei in
veritate, habere possunt serui diaboli in simulatione. The children of the
devil may have in hypocrisy all those tokens of righteousness, which the
servants of God have in verity. These hypocrites are like unto glo-wormes,
which although they shine in the night, yet in the day they are unclean and
vile worms. For although hypocrites shine in the night of this world through
a false show of virtue, yet in the world to come they shall be found foul
and abominable. In the said hypocritical Pharisei then, we see a certain
fantastical vision, showing that in form which it has not in truth.
Demosthenes being asked what was most effectual in speaking, answered,
Hypocrisy. Being asked again the second and third time, he answered still
hypocrisy: meaning thereby, that the whole grace thereof was in speaking, and
not in doing. We have too to many Rhetoritians in these days, who can talk
and speak well, but do not. They have their tongues tipped with Religion, as
earthen pots are tipped with silver and gold. These have the cloak whereof
Peter speaks, and the visor whereof Paul makes mention. They are the very
same of whom Christ in the Gospel speaks, This people draws near unto me
with their mouths, and honors me with their lips, but their hearts are
from me. And against whom also Christ in regard of the abomination of such
hypocisie in his sight, pronounces woe against the same seven times in one
Chapter, which is not to be found in all the Gospel against any other besides.
Hearken therefore to the counsel of the wise. Be not an hypocrite in the sight
of men. Eccle. 1. Job. 13.
For the hypocrite shall not come bofore God. God has not placed men in his
vineyard, to bring forth green leaves only, but fruit also. The fig tree
which had nothing but leaves, was accursed, and withered away by the roots:
the earth which drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, and bears
nothing but thorns and briers, is cursed of God, Heb. 6.
whose end is to be burned.

The fifth Leper, is the proud man.
PRide is a great love and liking of our own excellency, and in comparison of
our selves, a despising of others. This leprosy of pride does sundry ways
lay hold upon men, according to the opinion of Saint Bernard, Semptempliciter
occapuit nos leprasuperbia, etc. We are (says he) tainted with the leprosy
of pride seven manner of ways: that is to say: in the propriety of
possessions; in the glory of apparel; and in the pleasure of our bodies: Two
ways also in our mouth: and two ways in our heart. In our mouth murmuring in
adversity; and arrogantly commending our selves in prosperity. In our heart;
desiring to have our own will; and following our own counsel. Pride
(according to her disposition) disdaineth to go alone, vnwaited upon, and
therefore she is accompanied with many sins. And because she seldom uses to
go on foot, she has prepared for her self a chariot or coach: for she is
delicate, and tender, and so much the more, because she is unclean and
leprous. Her coach is drawn with four horses. The forehorse is Ambition: the
next to him Vaineglorie: the third, Contempt: and the fourth, disobedience. The
four wheels, are Boasting; Arrogancy; Verbositie, and Leuitie. The coachman
that drives and guides, is the spirit of pride. They that accompany lady
Pride in the coach, are such among all estates and degrees, as are proud and
vain in apparel. The horses before mentioned are unbridled, the wheels most
swift and flying: the driuer and coachman selfe-willed and perverseness, and
therefore the end must needs be destruction. To handle all these in
particular, would make a larger treatise, then at this time I purpose:
therefore I will but touch three parts: to wit, the beginning, the midst, and
the end. The beginning, Ambition the midst is pride and her company: the
end is destruction whereinto these do wilfully run. Ambition is an overmuch
desire of honor: which honor is that reverence yielded to any man for a
testimonial of his excelencie in good gifts. And a testimony is given unto
him of right: for it is meet that we recompense them with honor, which help
to preserve and maintain us, being furnished with the gifts and graces of God.
But they which are honored must especially take heed, that they repose not
themselves upon honor, as upon the chief end, For whatsoever they do, must be
done of love, of conscience and for Gods sake: and specially that honor which
is given unto them to govern well: that thereby both them selves may know and
also may teach others to glorify God, and not men in their works.
Furthermore they must take heed that they be not so inflamed with ye desire of
honor, as that they seek to attain ye same by unlawful means. Concerning the
which matter, Salust speaks rhus, toe good and the evil does both alike,
desire to get, honor, glory, and rule; the one by good means: the other
wanting good arts, strives to compass the same, by fraud and guile. For, it
falls out many times in this world, that men of mean and base parentage,
attain to greater dignities, possessions and riches, then their deserts and
virtues require deserueing rather blame then any preferment, Like herein to
Abimilech who purposed to himself a kingly power, without any purpose to
govern rightly: and therefore endeavored to attain thernnto by deceits and
guiles, and not by lawful and just means: seeming to be of Euripides
judgment, that even right it self, is to be violated for dominions sake. And
for this cause the ambitious man is ever fearful, ever wary and circumspect,
least he should speak that which might displease, he couterfeiteth humility,
feineth honesty, shows forth affability, uses all courtesy, honors all
men, boweth, stoopeth, and makes obeisance to every man: he haunteth open
assemblies, visits noble men, he rises up, he imbraceth, he praises and
flattereth, and is more then diligent, verefying this poetical saying, Etsi
nullus erit puluis, puluerem tamen excute nullum: that is, Mend a fault, where
none is. The ambicious man will whine and weep with Esau, to see any thing to
escape his fingers, or any man preferred before him. He may rightly be compared
to luie, which cease not to climb to the top of the tree, though it be the
basest plant. He is like unto the Spider which will be in the kings house,
Judge. 9.
and in the very top of the temple, though he be full of poison. And albeit he
is but a furs bush, yet he will marry his son to the Cedar of Libanus.
And good wife Zebede, though she be but a fishers wife, must have her two
sons to sit in Christ's kingdom (which she deemed to be of this world) the
one on his right hand, and the other on his left. Like unto her grandmother
Eve, who being Queen of the whole world, and lady of Paradise, yet must
needs be Goddess Eve. Balaam thinks his Ass never goes fast enough, when
he rides for preferment. And when the ambicious man is preferred and exalted,
he is also therewithal puffed up in pride, and begins to boast, he cares
not to profit, but reioiceth that he is preferred: he presumes that he is the
better, because he sees himself superior: he disdaineth his old friends,
and knows not his acquaintance: he fawneth upon strangers, and contemns his
familiars: he talks of great matters, and meditateth of high things: he cannot
any longer abide to be subject, 2. Sam. 16.
but seeks to rule, and with Absalom is male content for a kingdom. In the
end he is a burden to subjects that are under him, an enemy to all men: he is
rash, troublesome, grievous, and importune: Thus pride (as says Abacuc)
proves a madness, and as Paul terms it, a frenzy. Yea so mad are ambicious
men many times, and so furious, that they commit murder without respect of any
kindred. Caine being afraid least his brother should have greater favor and
grace then he, slew him. Romulus in like case killed Remus. Domitian lay in
wait for Titus. Antonius Caracalla slew his brother Geta Athalia killed all
the kings seed. Abimilech slew seventy brethren upon one stone. And Hazael
stifled his master Benhadad. Our English Chronicles have many such like
examples, which I ouerpasse. But the end and downfall of such has ever been
most miserable and woeful. Paulatim ascendisti (says Gregory) sed non
paulatim descendes. Thou did ascend by little and little, but thou shall
not so come down. For as the Crow, when she cannot crack a Nut, flies a
loft, that so by the greater fall it may be broken: even so God many times,
suffers proud men to be placed in high degree in this world, that their
downfall may be the greater. Who so says Regnabo, I will reign, (with the
proud bremble) or, Non mouebor, I shall not be removed: or, Quis ascendet
super me? Who shall ascend above me? Nay though he say nothing, but in his
heart receives the applause of the people, as did Herod: Deycietur ad imum: He
shall be cast down to the ground. Therefore the Lord says, The pride of thy
heart has deceived thee: Ierem. 49.
though thou should make thy neast as high as the Eagle, I will bring thee
down from thence.

A heathen man being asked, what God did in heaven, answered, he did nothing
but tumble down proud men, and set up humble men. For as Solomon says, Pro.
18.
Before destruction goes pride, and before glory goes lowliness. If men
were not like unto children in understanding, they would not so greedily as
they do seek after worldly honor and promotion. It is the fashion of
children to esteem more of a painted trifle, then of a rich Jewel: and such
is the painted dignity of this world, gotten with much labor, mainteyned
with great expenses, and soon lost again with heart-breake and sorrow. Let a
man recount with himself, if there be any state of dignity which he could
wish to himself, which many men have not had long since. Let him remember how
they mounted up, and how they descended down again: and then he may imagine
with himself, which was greater, either the joy in getting, or the sorrow in
forgoing that wherein they so much delighted. Where are now all those
Emperors, those kings, those princes, and prelates, which reioiced so much
once at their own advancement? Where are they now, I say, who thinks or
talks of them? Are they not forgotten and cast into the grave long ago? And
do not men boldly walk over their heads now, whose faces might not be looked
on wihout fear in this world? What then have their dignities done them good?
Honor then is like a man's own shadow, which the more he runs after, the
more it flies: and when he flies from it, it follows him again, and the
only way to catch it, is to fall down upon the ground upon it. So we see that
those men which desired honor in this world, are now forgotten: and those
which fled from it, and cast themselves lowest of all men by humility, are now
most of all honored: honored, I say, most by the world it self, whose
enemies they were while they lived. For who is honored more now, who is more
commended, then the Apostles of Christ, who so much despised worldly honor in
this life. Most vain then is the pursuit of this worldly honor and promotion,
seeing it neither contenteth the mind, nor continues with the possessor, nor
is void of great dangers, both in this life, and in the life to come.

But now to speak of the bravery of pride, Pride.
and of her vain company. Ye shall understand that Pride (as is said before)
is never alone, but accompanied with many vices, being the root of all evil,
and the Queen of all wickedness: and to speak plainly, she is the beginning,
the end, and the cause of all sins. When Pride has gotten the upper hand
and rule of any man or woman, she will not easily forsake her vassal, but
will hold and keep them, even as kings do those castles which they have once
conquered and woonne. Eccle. 10. Isai. 51.
But why is earth and ashes proud? Let the proud man look to the rock out
of the which he was cut, and to the pit whence he was dug. If proud
persons would consider their beginning and their end, and if they would
continually have the same before there eyes, they should not so exceedingly
sin in pride, as they do at this day. Was there ever any age from the first
beginning of the world, so far ouergrowne in pride, as this our age? I am well
assured no. Is there any nation at this day upon the face of the earth,
comparable to us in this abominable sin of pride? Our excess in apparel
will say no, wherein both men and women of all estates and degrees, from the
hiest to the lowest, even from the Courtier to the Carter, do monstrously
offend. Servants are in their apparel more costly then many masters and
dames: yeomen, and yeomens sons are herein equal with gentlemen of good
worship: poor and mean Gentlemen, compare with Lords: Lords with Kings; and
Ladies with Queens. What will become hereof at the last? Where is now that
moderation in apparel which was used in king William Rufus days! who (as
Chronicles record) being exceeding sumptuous in his apparel, and having a
pair of breeches in a morning brought unto him by his chamberlain, he
demanded what they cost. The chamberlain answered, that they cost three
shillings. Wherewith the king being wroth said: Away beggar that thou art,
bring me a pair that cost a Mark. Then the chamberlain brought unto the King
a pair which cost much less then a Mark, making the King notwithstanding
believe that they were of such price as he desired: wherewith the king was well
pleased. But such is the pride of men in these days, that every base serving
man, will disdain that now, which king William in his excess then, was highly
pleased to wear. A wonderful alteration in a few generations. Pride in a
king, is a great offense in the sight of God: but in a poor man, it is one of
the three things which God most extreemly hates. Si vix tolleretur, dives
superbus (says Saint Augustine) pauperem superbum quis ferat? If a proud rich
man be scarely tolerable, who can endure a poor man proud? do we not see
that many things of great price, as velvet, satin, gold and silver lace, fine
cambricke, and such like costly things are now worn of very mean persons,
against the law of God and man, against al common wealth, and contrary to all
good example of our forefathers, which things rather belong to princes and to
peers of the land, then to mean subjects. As men and women exceed in the
substance of apparel, so also in the form they daily show forth their
abominable pride in their inconstancy. For no color, form or fashion long
contenteth them. We one while imitate the Spaniard, another while the French:
one while the Italian another while the Dutch. Every nation is a several
pattern for us. We are like unto Camlepardus, who being but one beast,
represents the figure and shape of many. And to ye Chamelion. which changes
into every color laid before him. Let these proud peacocks remember to what
end apparel was appointed by God at the first, verily for a covering to hide
our shame. Genesis 2.
Whosoever then is proud of apparel given to this end, is as if a thief should
be proud of his halter which ye prince gives him to wear in rememberance of
his pardon. Diogenes seeing a man to have a great pride in his clothes, said
unto him, be not so proud man, a sheep wore that cote before thee. What
vanity is it then for us to be so curious in apparel, and to take such pride
therein as we do. We rob and spoil all creatures almost of the world to cover
our backs, and to adorn our bodies withal. From some we take their wool:
from many their skins: from diverse their furs: from sundry, their very
excrements as the silk, which is nothing else, but the very excrement of the
worms. Not content with this; we come to fishes, and do beg of them certain
pearls to hang about us: we go down into the ground for gold and silver, and
turn up the sands of the sea for precious stones. And having borrowed all this
of other creatures, we iet up and down, provoking men to look upon us, as if
all this now were our own. When the stone shines upon our finger, we will
seem forsooth thereby to shine. When the silver and silks do glister on our
backs, we look big, as if all that beauty came from us. It is reported of
that holy father Athanasius, that when he saw a woman apparelling and
decking of herself in proud attire, with gorgeous array, he wept: and being
demanded of the cause why he did so, because (says he) all this preparation
is for her own destruction. And one Pambus in the like action, made the same
answer at an other time: as appears in the 8. book and second chapt. of the
tripertite history. But our nice and mincing dames in England, whose whole
life is spent for the most part in study, in care, and in practice, to deck,
paint, and beautisie themselves, will hardly be persuaded by Pambus, or by
Athanasius, that they bestow this great cost upon themselves, to their own
destruction. And though the Lord himself has said in his word. The woman
shall not wear man's apparel, Deuteronomy. 22.
neither shall a man put on woman's raiment: for all that do so are an
abomination to the Lord: Yet for all this prohibition, many woman in these
days wear doublets, and breeches (though peradventure by them otherwise
termed) garments for the fashion appertaining to men. Saint Cyprian in his
book de Velandis virginibus, says, that the devil himself was the first
inuenter of such painting, frizling, and gorgeous decking. Tertullian, having
written of woman's attire, condemns the vanity which they use in attiring of
themselves, affirming that through their pride herein, they tempt men, and open
a way to lust, which should be shut. Beside this, they do seek to control and
amend the workmanship of God in their creation, by adding unto their bodies
and faces a form and fashion, which he has not given unto them. A Painter
having made an artificial piece of work after his best skill, if an other man
come after him, and do trace the same with other colors and lineaments, will
take it to be done to control his workmanship, whereat he much disdaineth:
Even so, seeing God has fashioned our bodies after his own mind, he
detesteth and cannot abide counterfeiting and strange colors: as in stead of
black or brown hair which he has naturally given unto thee, to wear the
hair of another body, which they call periwigs, or to die thine own with
Saffron, or such like color: for in so doing thou take upon thee to control
and correct Gods skill and wisdom in thy creation: the which to do must needs
be abominable in his sight. On which wickedness the Lord threatens by the
mouth of the prophet to take vengeance after this manner, The end of Pride.
saying, Because the daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched
out necks, and with wandering eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and making a
tinckling with their feet, therefore shall the Lord make the heads of the
daughters of Zion bauld, and the Lord shall discover their secret parts. Isai.
3.
In that day shall the Lord take away the ornament of the Pantofles or
Slippers, and the Cauls, and the round tiers, the sweet Pomanders, and the
Bracelets, and the Bonets, the tiers of the head, and the sloppes, the
headbands, and the Tablets, and the Earrings, the Rings and the Mufflers, the
costly apparel and the vailes, and the wimples, and the crisping pinnes, and
the glasses, and the fine linen, and the hoods, and the lawnes. And in stead
of sweet savor, there shall be stink; and in stead of a girdle a rent; and in
stead of dressing the hair, baldness; and in stead of a stomacher a girding
of sackcloth, and burning in stead of beauty. This vengeance of God in this
manner threatened, shows what shall be the end of pride. Forsake then this
vanity with speed, and embrace humility. For though thou be as rich as
Naball, as beautiful as Abshalom, or fair Susanna: and for brave apparel, as
gallant as those of whom Isai makes mention, yet if thou be not humble thou
art no body. This one sentence, He casts down the proud, and exalts the
humble and meek, is repeated twelve times in the old testament, and seven
times in the new, to teach us how detestable a thing pride is, and how
acceptable a thing humility is in gods sight. God spared Herod when he
persecuted his Saints, when he slew John Baptist: but he stroke him with a
mortal plague when he was proud: to show, that God hates a proud man, more
then any other. Humility, although blemished with many sins in the
Publican, yet is it allowed of God. But pride, accompanied with many virtues
in the Pharisei, is rejected and abhorred. Pride overthrew the lofty tower of
Babell, confounded the language, prostrated Goliath, hung up Haman, killed
Antiochus, drowned Pharach, and slew Senacherib. Yea pride, has caused God to
overthrow the seats of proud captains, to dry up the roots of proud nations.
To conclude, Pride casts down headlong, from the highest heavens unto the
bottomless deep: and Humility lifts up on high. The one cast down an Angel
from heaven to hell: and the other exalts a man from earth to heaven.

The sixth Leper, is the Glutton.
A Glutton is he, whose belly is his God: as if he lived to no other end then
to eat and drink. Wherein the miserable man deceives himself. For in deed
God has given to no man life, to eat, but permits him to eat, that he may
live unto God. Meats are ordained for the belly, and the belly for meats, 1.
Cor. 6.
but God shall destroy both it and them. This Gluttony was the spiritual
leprosy of those four lepers, 2. Kin. 7.
which abode by the gate of Samaria, and went to the enemies camp to eat and
to drink. For as those men came to the tents of the enemies, in desperate
manner to fill themselves; even so all they which serving not God but their
belly, being also careless of eternal life, seem to say, Let us eat and
drink, to morrow we shall die. The Glutton to maintain his belly cheer, is
bold to allege for himself, the saying of the Apostle, That to the clean all
things are clean: and that the good creatures of God are not to be refused,
but to be received with giving of thanks. True it is, that al ye creatures of
god are good in their kind, so as they be taken in convenient time, and in
measure, but glutto^s which observe neither measure, nor time, in spending and
spoiling the good creatures of God, are through their beastly appetite,
unclean. For as Gregory says, non cibus, sed appetitus in vitio est. Not the
meat but the appetite is in fault. Esau was reprehended for a mess of
pottage, whereas Elias did eat flesh without reprehension: Adam was not
condemned for eating flesh but an apple: and Abraham gave flesh to angels, and
it was accepted. Therefore not that which goes into the man defiles the man.
Matt. 15.
And Tertullian says Ciborum libertas concessa est sed non luxuriandi. The
liberty of meats is granted, but not of surfeiting, and Gurmandize. No
creature is pure, but they abuse thereof may cause it to turn to our
destruction. For although he which gathered the least quantity of Manna, had
no lack, yet some kept more then was appointed by God, whereupon it
corrupted, stunke, and was full of worms. Exodus 16.


There may be alleged many reasons to persuade us to temperance in meats and
drinks. First, because a temperate diet does continue us in health, whereas
gluttony and surfeiting fills the body with many diseases. For nature is
uniform in her operation, and is then hindered in her digestion when she is
surcharged with sundery meats and drinks, the which, as they be of several
qualities, so some of the^, are sooner co^cocted the^ othersome, which brings
corruption to the stomach hereupon the wise man gives us this counsel, as an
expert physician, saying, Be not greedy in all delights and be not too hasty
in all meats. Eccle. 37.
For excess of meats brings sickness, and gluttony turns into Choleric
diseases. By surfeit have many perished but he that dieteth him self,
prolongeth his life. A poor man (as we see by daily experience) which lives
with a temperate and spaire diet, has more assured health, and lives longer
the^ he that uses to feed of many dishes at one time. Man's nature is more
easily satisfied, the^ his appetite, which is insatiable. One wood will
contain many elephants: but man is scarcely content with the whole earth and
sea. The beginning of man's sustenance was bread and water: but now gluttons are
not content, having the fruits of the trees, all manner of grain, all roots of
herbs, all the fishes of the sea, all the beasts of the earth, and all the
fowls of the air: but they seek for colors to please their eyes, for
odoriferous, and aromaticall savors and smells: they bring up by hand crammed
and franked fowls and beasts: and that which cannot be fatted by hand they
enterlarde. The cooks make experiments and try their skill: one beats and
compoundeth, another confecteth and confounds, converting the substance into
accidents, and changing nature into at: that fullness may be turned into
hunger, that the appetite may be whetted to gluttony, not to sustain nature,
not to serve necessity, but to fulfill insaciable gurmandize. And albeit the
stomach shows it self to be filled by often belchings, yet curiosity is
not satisfied, but while the eye delights in colors, and the palate takes
pleasure in taste, the woeful stomach which discerns no colors, nor judges
of the relish or taste, being constrained to receive all that is thrust into
it, is rather oppressed and overwhelmed, then refreshed. The heathen were wont
to build Temples for their gods, to build altars, to ordain Ministers to
serve, to sacrifice beasts, to burn incense, and to make a melodious noise in
that time of service: even so the Epicures of out time, have their kitchen in
stead of a Temple: for their God, their belly: their table is the altar:
their Ministers are the Cooks: their beasts for sacrifice, are their boiled,
roasted, and baked meats: their incense are their sweet perfumes: and their
melody is the noise of viols, Recorders, Cornets, and whatsoever else may
delight all their senses: without regard of God, or godliness.

2 Another reason why we ought to be temperate in our diet is, because
Gluttony brings forth another as evil as her self: that is to say,
Drunkenness, the daughter of Gluttony: whereof Christ gives us this caveat,
Take heed least at any time your hearts be overcome with surfeiting and
drunkenness: The which Seneca calls a voluntary madness. The heathen were
far more temperate then we which have the knowledge of the true God, and
profess our selves to be Christians. Cicero says, Recta mente vti non
possunt, multo vino and cibo repleti. They which are full of much wine and
meat, cannot have a right understanding: for it dulleth the mind, and
overthrows the wit.

3 And this is a third reason, may serve to make us loath Gluttony For wherein
does a man differ from a brute beast but in this, that he has reason, and
understanding, but being drunk, he is deuoyde of these for the time. For as
Basil says Ebriosus cum putat bibere, bibitur: The drunken man when he
thinks to drink, is drunken. So that they can see nothing rightly, but judge
all things peruersly. For as their external eyes are so dazeled, that every
single thing seems unto them double, and straight things crooked: even so
their mind is blinded, that they think good to be evil, and evil good. And
no marvel, because, as Saint Augustine says, Ebrietas est vile sepulcrum
rationis and furor mentis. Drunkenness is a vile sepulture of reason, and a
furor of the mind. Yet we see that common drunkards have a great delight
herein, yea so great pleasure joined with pride in this wickedness, that they
provoke others unto the same with chalenges to drink a carrous. And yet, when
these have drunk so much as they can, an Ass will drink more, and a barrel
will hold more then any man's belly. What singular thing then do they in
performing this: surely no more then an Ass can do, nor so much as an empty
caske contain. Nay rather how beasthke do they herein show themselves to be,
and much worse then beasts. The bruit beast cannot be compelled by any man to
drink when he has no thirst: but men are so intemperate, that when they are
repleate even to the mouth, yet they will take in more, Isai. 28.
until they have verified the saying of the Prophet, Your tables are full of
filthy vomitings, no place is clean. Herein they make their bellies worse
Idols then Bell, devouring without measure, that which might sustain many
poor men and women much better then themselves.

4 And this is a fourth reason, why men should abhor gluttony and be
temperate, even for the common good of the brethren. But so little care of
common wealth is had herein, that rich men do not care what they spend, upon
such things as please their appetite, though in a time forbidden, and of such
things as law restrayneth them. Now a days we see the appetites of some to be
so curious and nice, that they care not for the flesh of lambs, except, of the
tidiest that may be gotten: the like nice and wanton appetite they have to many
other things: whereas in the time of the law, God gave this commandment to
his people, Exodus 23.
Thou shall not seath a kid in his mothers milk: meaning thereby, that no
fruits should beetaken before their due time. Against this gluttonous appetite
which has more lust then hunger, the Lord by the mouth of his Prophet speaks
thus, They eat the lambs of the flocks, and the calves out of the stall,
etc. Amos. 6.
I speak not this to condemn the moderate use of Gods good creatures, given
for the comfort and sustenance of man, nor against the extraordinary provision
of feasts and banquets, wherein friends do solace and joy together in honest
and godly mirth. For before the law, we read, that there was a feast made at
Jacobs marriage: and another under the law at Samsons marriage. In the time of
grace, a feast was made in Cana of Galile, by occasion of a marriage whereat
Christ was present and a guest. Matthew at his conversion is said to make a
great feast, whereunto also Christ vouchsafed to come: therefore feasts are
lawful. Genesis 27.
The fatness of the earth serves not for Esau only, but it is Jacobs
blessing to. Quails appertain to Gods children. Bees make their honey (as the
heathen man says) Non stultis solum, not for fools only, but also for wise
men. This only I wish, that the wine and cates provided for feasts and
bankets, be not gotten by extortion, briberie and violence: secondly, that our
feasts be not appointed as snares, to catch and betray innocents: such as was
Herod's feast on his birthday, which cost John Baptist his head. Such feasts
begin with milk, and end with a nail. Such was the marriage feast that was
appointed in Paris for Henry the French king that now is, where some noble
men, many gentlemen, and good subjects were by the popish and cursed crew,
woefully betrayed, and most cruelly massacred. Thirdly, that there be great
care had, that in our bankets there be kept a Christian moderation without
excess. Otherwise they are very dangerous, being used in that superabundance
of delicates, and mirth full of al scurrilitie, as worldly men do use them. Such
feasting, and such mirth, with all the guests, John. 16.
Christ accurseth, saying, Woe be unto you which now do laugh, for ye shall
weep: woe be unto you that now live in fulness, for the time will come that ye
shall suffer hunger. In like manner Job speaking of Epicures and worldlings,
says, that they solace themselves with all kind of Music, Job. 21.
and pass over their days with pleasure, and in a moment do go down into
hell. A wise trauailer passing by his Inn, though he see pleasant meats
offered him, yet he forbeareth upon consideration of the price, and the
journey he has to make, and takes in nothing, but so much as he knows well
how to discharge the next morning, at his departure. But a fool lays hands
on every delicate bait set before him, and when it comes to the reckoning,
he wishes that he had lived with bread and drink only, rather then to be
so troubled about the payment. Even so the Scripture teaches us, that our
laughter shall be mingled with sorrow, and mourning shall ensue at the end
of mirth. The Devil that plays the host in this world, and that serves you
with what pleasure and delight ye desire, writes up all in his book, and at
the day of your departure out of this life, will he bring the whole reckoning,
and charge you with the total sum: and then shall follow that which God
threatens by Amos: Amos. 2.
Your mirth shall be turned to mourning and lamentation. Yea, and more then
this, if ye be not able to discharge the reckoning, you may perhaps hear that
other dreadful sentence of Christ in the Revelation: Apoc. 11.
Look how much he has been in his delights, so much torment do ye lay
upon him.

5 The last and maine reason of all other, why we should avoid gluttony and
excess, is, because by temperance we are more strong, to resist evil
temptations of the devil, to bridle sin, and every way more apt for the
service of God. For wise Salmon says truly, Qui delicate a puiritia nutrit
seruum suum, postea sentiet eum contumacem. He that does daintilie feed his
servant (that is to say, his body) from his childhoode, shall in time to come
find him stubburne. A pampered horse will cast his rider in the mire: and
pampered flesh will cast the soul into the sink of sin. Who so pampereth
his body, feeds his enemy. For the flesh lusts contrary to the spirit,
Gal. 5.
and the spirit contrary to the flesh. Gluttony is the gate by which the
Devil with his whole army enters. For as Saint Gregory says, Quanto corpus
impletur, tanto anima minoratur. By how much the body is filled, by so much is
the soul weakened. The Which Saint Ambrose notes excellently by a similitude
of the Crab, and the Oyster. The Crab (says he) loves to feed on the oister
fish, but because they are so strongly enclosed in their shells, that by his
strength he cannot get them out, he does craftily watch them until they open
themselves against the Sun: then takes he a small stone, and putting it into
the gaping Oister, that he cannot close up himself again, he easily
conueyeth in his clawe, and so feeds on the fish at his pleasure: Even so,
when men having filled their bellies, do give themselves to ease, and to
enlarge their minds to all pleasure, the devil comes and conueieth into them
al filthy cogitations, whereby he easily deuoureth and destroieth them. Belly
cheer and idleness, are the bellows of concupiscence, the which bellows have
kindled so great and so hot a fire, as it is to be feared, will not be
quenched, till all be consumed with the last fire. The only corporal remedy
and mean to quench this fire, Fasting.
is abstinence, to most men and women in these days unknown: except to the
poorer sort, who more by penury the^ of devotion are constrained to fast. This
liberty is come to pass two ways. First by the neglecting and not executing
of such laws and orders as are well devised for appointed fasts amongst us.
The which contempt, as it displeases god, so also it is a great hurt to the
common wealth, and will (without speedy remedy) be more felt hereafter.
Secondly, by the indiscreet dealing of some teachers, more hot and rash, then
wise, who in speaking against supersticious fasting, have not taught the people
to use any fast at all. And they on the other side, being ever ready to fall
into extremities, do not only neglect godly fasts, such as by law are
appointed, being ignorant of their right and true use, but do also condemn
them as superstitious and popish. Whereas if they once rightly understood the
benefit of such fasts truly used, redounding both to body and soul, they
would gladly use them more often then they do, especially such as have any
care to serve and please God. Fasting does greatly tame the rebellion of
fleshly lusts. For, Sine corere and Bacche, friget Venus: By spare diet lust is
quenched. Whereas otherwise, Venture mero astuans, spumat libidinem. The belly
boiling with wine, and dainty fair, fometh out lust, as Saint Hierome says.
The earth the fatter it is made with mucke and compost, the more weeds and
thistles it brings forth: even so the more our flesh is pampered with meats
and drinks, the more prone it is to sin and wickedness. Contrariwise
abstinence purges the mind, lightneth the senses, makes the flesh subject to
the spirit, disperseth the clouds of concupiscence, extinguisheth the heat
of lusts, and kindles the light of chastity. The Apostle Paul know how
necessary the use hereof was for a Christian man, 2. Cor. 11.
and therefore was oftentimes in fastings. The Prophet David also did put on
sackecloth, and humbled his soul with fasting, and therefore says that his
prayer returned into his bosom with fruit. Fasting is a coadiutor unto prayer,
making it more fervent, Psalm. 34. Psalm. 35.
as witnesses Saint Bernard, Ieiunium orationem roborat: oration sanctificat
ieiunium, and representat domino. Fasting makes prayer more strong: prayer
sanctifies fasting, and presents it before the Lord. The example of the
children of Israel, Judge. 20.
of whom a great number being slain by the Beniamits, fitting upon the ground
and fasting, weeping and praying unto the Lord, makes this more manifest.
Furthermore of so great force is fasting and prayer, that they both being
joined together are able to cast forth one sort of Devils. It appears both
in the old and new testament, that fasting was so much in use, that the
fathers and holy men then and long since, took no great matter in hand, but
first they withdrewe themselves, from all worldly impediments, fasting and
praying. When Gods law was delivered by Moses unto the people, he fasted
forty days and forty nights. Elias also at the restoration of the law, did
the like. And Saint Hierom writes, that the Evangelist saint John, would not
take the writing of the Evangelical story in hand, until the Church had
commended his purpose to God by a fast. Also Eusebius writes, that Peter
fasted, before he confounded Simon Magus. Our Savior Christ himself, entered
into a fast before he was baptized, and began to execute his office. Whose
example Paul and Barnabas following, commended to the Church the Elders which
they had ordained, Act. 14.
after they had prayed and fasted.

There was never more need of this Christian exercise then now, both in
respect of our own private necessities, and also in regard of the manifold
perils, wherein we all generally stand, our sins daily provoking the
wrath of God against us. It is high time therefore to hearken to the
proclamation which the Prophet Joel makes, saying, Turn you to the Lord with
all your hearts, with fasting weeping and mourning. Not in such counterfeit
fasting as we have a long time used, which may rather be called Permutatio
dapium terrestrium cum aquatilibus, then ieiunium. That is, a permutation of
earthly cates, for them of the water, then a fast. A right and well ordered
fast such as the holy fathers have used is, to abstain wholely from all meats
(so far forth as our nature may well endure) all that time of our godly and
holy purpose serving the Lord with that special service, which we shall take
in hand. And here withal we must join true repentance, making restitution of
former wrongs done to our brethren: and must also give alms to the poor and
needy: the which is one cause of our fasting. For as Saint Augustine says,
fasting without alms deeds, is as a lamp without oil. And Saint Gregory,
This fast pleases God, if thou give that to the poor, which thou sparest from
thy self. O that men would put this in practice more often then they do, so
should they not only fortify their souls against many temptations, but also
procure unto their bodies, desired health, and long life. For I am verily
persuaded, that among men, mo die of surfeits, then by any other disease
besides. If then ye have no care of your souls good, yet at the least, regard
the health of your bodies, for the which the rich and welthie do willingly give
large sums of money to the bodily physician, which well deserves it. Yea,
what is he, that for the health of his body, will not give all that he has
Regard then my counsel which I dare assure you, the greatest learned, and most
experienced Doctors of physic, which have lived in any age, do allow and
ratify: who with a general consent affirm, that moderate abstinence
consumes superfluous humors in the body, making the same of good and
beautiful color, and that it not only preuenteth sickness, but also where
sickness is entered, nothing helps sooner, if it be used in due season. It
prepares also a good appetite after a surfeit, and makes good disgestion,
helping Nature to disburden it self of repletion. Daniel and his companions
eating pulse, and drinking water (for a time) were in better liking, then all
the children that fared deliciously of the kings allowance. Valerius Maximus
makes mention of a certain prince, which never rose up from his meat with a
full stomach, but rather with a good appetite: which diet as the story
testifies, made him to live so long, as is scarce credible to be told. This
let us know from our Savior Christ the best Physician, That man lives not by
bread only, but by the word of God, by whose benediction the creatures give
nourishment. The abstinence whereof I have spoken, must be moderate. For when
the Apostle says he dorh chastise his body to bring it into subjection, he
teaches us, not to kill our bodies by too much straitness of life. There is a
difference between chastizing and killing. For through unmeasurable
abstinence, the moisture of the body is dried up, the body waxes lean,
natural heat will be too much inflamed and distempered, which speedily
brings Hecticam febrem, the fever Cathicke, or consumption. Wherefore
Hypocrates says, that too much abstinence is for the more part more
dangerous, then that which is more abundant. Excesses be equal. Too little is
as hurtful as too much. Timothy by not drinking wine, did hurt his body: and
Naball by too much did the same. Therefore a mean and a moderate abstinence is
that which I wish: to health a friend: to gluttony and surfeiting an enemy,
and most contrary. These great benefits which come to the body and soul by
abstinence considered, and the manifold grieuances which come to them both by
gluttony, well weighed, I doubt not but every one, which heretofore has had
but a mean care for either, will henceforth tend them in better sort, to their
own benefit, and to the good of the Church and common wealth wherein they
live. The which God grant.

The seventh Leper, is the Adulterer or Fornicator.
ONe of the greatest vanities of the world, wherein men and women take great
liking, is beauty and favor: whereof Solomon speaks thus, Prou. 31.
Favor is deceitful, and beauty is a vain thing. The which the Prophet
David well understood, when he said, Psalm. 118.
Turn away mine eyes O Lord, that they behold not vanity. Beauty is by holy
men, compared unto a painted snake, which is fair without, and full of deadly
poison within. If a man knew what foul dross lies under a fair skin, he
would little be in love therewith. If he would call to mind what destruction
has come by liking and lusting after the same, he would be ware of this vain
and fond vanity. The which may rightly be called fond, for that every
child may discern the deceyte and vanity thereof. For take the fairest face
in the world, wherein infinite foolish men fall in love upon the sight, and
raze it over but with a little scratch, and all the matter of love is gone. Let
there come but a fever, and all this goodly beauty is destroyed. Let the
soul depart but one half hour from the body, and this loving face is
griesly and unpleasant to look upon: let it lie but two days in the grave,
and those which were so hot in love with it before, will scarce abide to
behold it, or come near it. And if none of those things happen unto it: yet
quickly comes on old age, which wrinckleth the skin, draws in the eyes,
sets out the teeth, and so disguiseth and disfigureth the whole visage, as
it becomes more contemptible now, then it was beautiful and alluring
before. And what then can be more vanity then this? What more madness, then
either to be proud of it to see it in thy self, or to endanger thy soul for
it when thou see it in others, and look too narrowly upon it lusting after
it? For the occasion of the hearts lust is the eye: the which is called by the
schoolmen concupiscence: and the lust of the eye sensuality: of both which
Saint John writes in his Epistle, 1. John. 2.
calling the one the lust of the flesh, and the other the lust of the eyes. The
holy man Job knowing the danger that might come by the lust of the eye, says
thus, I have made a covenant with mine eyes, that I would not look on a
virgin. This sense of seeing, as it is most forcible to move, so it is most
forcible to move to sin. Wherefore a Rabbine says, The eye is the broker of
the heart to all sin. The beginning of which brokage is to be seen in
Genesis, Genesis 3.
in the talk betwixt the Serpent and the woman: she seeing the tree to be
fair and beautiful. Whereupon it is noted, that the eye effended, before the
apple went down her throat. The eye wrought first in Achab the coveting of
Naboths vineyard. It made David, and Sichem to sin. We have a common saying
amongst us, Let us go and see; to see is no harm. This is a great stratageme
of the devil, to persuade us, there is no danger in that, which may most
entangle us. For by this means the devil tempted Christ, to show him all the
kingdoms of the world. This then is the first thing in us that must be
mortified, to keep thee from the leprous and filthy sin of whordome, to
wit, If thine eye offend thee pluck it out, that is to say: Make a conscience
of thy looks. Otherwise we shall be tempters of our selves. Against the which
Saint Augustine speaks thus. Quid prodest a deo petere ne inducat in
tentationem, cum tu teipsum inducas. What does it profit thee to desire of
God not to lead thee into temptation, when as thou leadest thy self.

Concerning whordome. Saint Paul the chosen vessel of God writes thus to the
Corinthians. Fly from whordome. All the sins that a man does are without his
body: but who so commits whordome sins against his own body. And a
little before the Apostle expresses the understanding of this sentence, and
says, Know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ? Shall I then
take Christ's members, and make them the members of a harlot? God forbid. Saint
Paul then, when he spoke these words ( All the sin that a man does, etc. had
respect unto matrimony. For like as wedlock makes of two persons one body:
even so likewise the spiritual marriage, namely the receiving of Gods grace, in
that we are baptized into Christ, makes one body between Christ and us, in
such wise, that we be called, and are in deed, Christ his members. Now then
he that is married, if he take another beside his wife, does sin, not only
against his wife, but also against his own body, in committing woordome. For
he dishououreth the grace of Christ, and defiles the holy covenant made
betwixt Christ and him. For the Apostle adds this to that which is already
spoke, Know ye not that he which joins himself to a harlot is become one
body? But whosoever cleaves unto the lord is one spirit. Nevertheless through
wordome is the spirit banished and excluded. For thy spirit, heart, and mind
that ought to cleave unto the Lord, is joined to the harlot, with whom thou
art one, and incorporated. Therefore they that do commit wordom, do sin
against the covenant and spiritual marriage, whereby we must be joined into
Christ Furthermore it follows in the Apostle, Or know ye not that your bodies
are the Temple of the holy ghost which is in you, whom ye have of God, and
that ye are not your own? fot ye are dearly bought. Whereby it must needs
follow, that they which commit whordome, do dishonor their bodies, giving
over their members, and their heart and mind to uncleanness, Whereas Christ that
he might be honored in us, and to make us clean, has redeemed our bodies,
not with money, but with his most precious blood. O extreme filthiness of
lust, which does not only effeminate the mind, but does also weaken the body:
which does not only pollute the soul, but also defile the person: before the
which there goes always burning heat and wantonness, with it stink and
uncleanness, and ever following it grief and repentance. It is that fire
whereof holy Job speaks, Job. 31.
a fire that cease not till it has consumed quite and clean: not kindled by
God, but by the devil. For as a Smith when he cannot frame his iron to the
fashion he would have it, puts the same into the fire, and blows till it
be hot, and then brings it to the Anuile: even so the devil, when he cannot
bring a man to such sins as he desires, he makes him hot with the fire of
lust, that so he may make him pliant to the sin of whordome. These men whom
the devil thus works, are, as the Apostle testifies under the wrath and
vengeance of God: For he says, that our bodies are the temples of the holy
Ghost: 1. Cor. 3.
but (says he) if any man defile the temple of God, him will God destroy. Is
it not an horrible defiling of Gods temple for that vicious idol harlot Venus,
to be even in the place, where God should reign with his spirit, and for men
to be joined with her, and to do her service both with body and soul? Let
them now come forth that list to excuse single fornication, as if it were no
sin. Saint Paul the Apostle of Christ says, that whordome divides us from
God, breaks the covenant which we have with God, spoyleth and robs God of
that which is his, disordereth the members of God, makes of Christ's members,
the members of a harlot, defyleth and vnhalloweth the temple of God, for the
which God threatens destruction. If all this be to be esteemed but a small
thing, then do I confess, that whordom and fornication, is so small a sin, as
vicious and vain people do seek to make it. Romans 2. Corinthians. 5. Gal. 5. Ephe.
5.1. These. 4.
It is more then once that whoremongers are threatened to be shut out of the
kingdom of heaven, as plainly appears in Paul's Epistles. And the Athour to
the Hebrews says plainly, that God will judge whoremongers and adulterers.
The which judgment begins many times in this world to show forth it
self upon the offenders in this wickedness. This subverted the Cities of
Sodom and Gomorha, and the Country there about, and slew Sichem with his
people: This wounded the sons of Judah, stabbed the Jew, and the Madianitish
woman, even through the bodies of them both together: this destroyed the tribe
of Benjamin for the Levites wife: prostrated the sons of Hely the Priest in
the battle. This killed Vrias, slew Aman, and stoned many to death. This
cursed Ruben, seduced Samson, and perverted Solomon. This approves that to be
true which is written. Through the beauty of women many have perished. What
should I speak of the diseases which come through the filthiness of this
sin upon many men, yea upon all that fall into it, as Goutes, Palseis,
Pockes, Consumptions, and filthy loathsome leprocies, the just plagues of
almighty God for the same. The which makes Saint Herom to break forth into
this exclamation, O ignis infernalis luxuria, cuius materia gula, cuius flamma
superbia, cuius scintilla praua coloquia, cuius fumus infamia, cuius cinis
immundicia, cuius finis gehenna. O Lechery the infernal fire, the maker
whereof is gluttony, whose flame is pride, whose sparks are unclean words,
and filthy communication, whose smoke is infamy, whose ashes is uncleanness,
whose end is hell fire. And in another place, O how grievous are the fruits of
lechery, more bitter the^ gaul, and more wounding then a sword. Beside these
punishments which whormongers bring upon themselves, they also incur the
penalties, and correction of the Magistrate, who is appointed to punish the
same, and such like offenses. For whordome has ever been taken for an
abomination among all honest people in the whole world: insomuch that all
virtuous rulers, yea heathen Magistrates, has ever punished the same, yea even
with the pain of death. In the law of God it is written, Leuit. 20. Deuteronomy. 22.
Who so commits adultery with any man's wife, shall die the death, both the
man and the woman, because he has broken wedlock with his neighbors wife.
Neither was adultery so sore punished among the children of Israel only, but
also among the heathen. When any of the Lepreians were taken in adultery,
they were bound, and carried three days through the city, and afterward so long
as they lived they were despised, and with shame and confusion reputed as
persons destitute of all honesty. Among the Locrensians, Zaleucus forbad
adultery under the pain of a sore punishment: causing the transgressors to
have both their eyes put out. And when his own son was taken in adultery,
his people suing very earnestly for his pardon, he did put out one of his own
eyes, and an other of his sons: by that means leaving to his son the use
of his sight, and yet to the terror of his subjects, not suffering example to
be given of the breach of his law without just punishment. In old time the
Germans before they came to the Christian faith, gave the full power and
authority of punishing a woman yt brake wedlock, to her husband: who at the
least might strip her out of her clothes, thrust her out of his house, and beat
her openly with rods in the city or town before her friends: whereof
Cornelius Tacitus makes mention. Opilius Macronius Emperor of Rome (as Julius
Capitolinus records) used to punish adulterers with fire, causing them that
were taken in adultery to be bound, and to be burnt together quick. And
among the Romans there was a common law (called Lex Iulia) which appointed
execution to be done upon adulterers with the sword: the which law was received
by the christian Emperors. Much more may be said concercerning the
punishments ordained by magistrates (where there has been any good government)
of this detestable sin, which peradventure to some will seem very cruel
and rigorous. But if they would consider the matter aright, setting affection
and evil custom aside, and would ponder well what adultery were, how dangerous
and contagious a leprosy, they would not wonder so sore at the punishment. For
adultery is a dishonor done unto god by violating his holy ordinance, a
wickedness sprung from the devil, an idleness of the flesh, a shameful
unfaithfulness, a wilful trucebreaking and perjury. But wedlock is the holy
ordinance of God, in the which both the parties ought so to be knit the one to
the other that they be not divided. Now al married persons, when they enter
into matrimony, do make a perpetual covenant: and calling upon God, and
taking him to record before the whole congregation, they promise troth and
faith, with mouth and hand, the one to the other. If this then be but a small
trespass, to dissemble, to break, to destroy, and to tread under foot all this, to forswear troth given before God and the Church, and nothing to regard
honesty and faith: then must I needs confess that the punishment of
adultery, was very rigorous in old time. But if it be a just thing severely
to punish unfaithful perjury, ye despising of God and al honesty, then is also
the punishment of adultrie right equal and not to sore. Moreover if the loss
of a good thing, should be valued after the estimation of the owner, then (as
touching this life) there is no greater injury and damage, then a man to loose
his own body. And most sure it is, that the man and his wife are but one
body, and that the husband has no power of his own body but the wife,
neither has the wife power of her own body, but the husband, according to the
doctrine of the Apostle. Wherefore whosoever commits adultery, the same takes
away, steals and robs the other of his own body, even his principal and
best good. Or what honest person had not rather find a thief stealing his
treasure, and to suffer the loss of his goods, then to find an adulterer by
his married spouse, and to reap dishonor in her. Furthermore, it is to be
considered, that through adultery great inherita^ces are altered, and the
right heirs disinherited. For oftentimes it falls out that an adultresse
has children by an adulterer, which inherit al ye substance of their pretended
father as lawful children, which yet are unlawful: whereby the father loses
his honor, his kindred, his body, and his goods. His wife which is his own
body has the adulterer defiled, and the unlawful children take the goods
away. If this be not great wrong and wickedness, then am lignorant, what a man
may affirm to be vicious enough. Therefore though adultery be great
wickedness both in men and women, yet in women it is most hurtful and
detestable. For besides that the adulterers alters the inheritance (as I said
before) and with falsehood and shameful deceit, withdraws and steals it from
the right heirs, she ladeth first her honest poor husband with great shame,
great travel, labor, sorrow and pain, in that he is compelled to bring up those
adulterous children which are not his own. Moreover she dishonoreth her father,
her mother, her kindred, her children (even her lawful children, who in time to
come will be ashamed of her) and of whom doubt will be made in the world,
whether they be lawfully begotten or no. Therefore when they speak of their
mother, or hear her named, they are abashed and ashamed. Adultresses also make
their husbands to be despised and of no reputation, though they be honest and
virtuous men. These and such like innumerable confusions, shame, hurt,
hishonour, and filthiness, follow upon abominable adultery: besides the
poisonings, murders, treasons, manslaughters, and other mischiefs that ensue
by reason of the same, which I ouerpasse. This did the ancient and noble men of
old time weigh and consider, and therefore righteously and upon just occasion,
have they appointed the punishment of death as due for the abominable sin of
adultery. Yet adulterers allege for their defense, that this rigorous
punishment of death appointed by god, has not been executed, or put in
practice at any time upon the offenders. For David was an adulterer (say they)
and yet received no punishment therefore. Yea the Lord Christ himself, did
abrogate and dissolve the punishment of adultery, for so much as he commanded
not the woman taken in adultery, to be put to death, John. 8.
but bad her go her way and sin no more: and for because no man condemned
her, he also let her go. To this I answer. God has once already revealed his
will in his law, concerning the punishment due to this sin: now if men do
not execute the punishment, according to Gods commandment, yet remains the
law of God irreuocable and sure. Therefore this is a vain objection. And
albeit all sentences and judgments, that have been executed of old upon
adulterers, be not extant in holy Scripture, it is no marvel. For Gods book
is not so general a Register, that we must look to find in the same, the
acts and punishments of all unthrifts and brothels, and the execution of all
such malesactours. The story of Susanna tells how it was like to have gone
with her, which plainly shows that such execution was then in use. David also
committed adultery once in his life, which was the occasion of the horrible
murder also which he committed, so that he caused not only his faithful
servant Vriah, but other noble men in like manner to be slain. What came of it?
Truth it is; he was not stoned to death. But what changed unto him? Surely
even as he had dishonored another man's child, so saw he shame upon his own
children while he lived, and that with great wretchedness. For Amon defloured
Thamar his own natural sister: and they both were David's children. And
Abshalom did miserably slay Amon his brother for committing that wickedness
with his sister Thamar. Not long after did the same Abshalom, drive his own
natural father David out of his Realm, and unnaturally and shamefully lay
with his fathers wives. Whereupon there followed, an horrible great slaughter,
in the which Abshalom was slain, with many thousands mo of the common people.
Now let every man indifferently weigh with himself, whether it be not a less
thing, once to have execution and to die, then to abide the death of so many,
and that so long, with such misery and sorrow. Therefore was David more
grieuouslie punished, then if he had been but once stoned to death. Let every
man then learn here by this example, that none can escape the hand of God,
although the world lay no hand upon him. God nevertheless punishes, and that
with a more heavy judgment, when he does it not here, but deferreth it unto
another world. And whereas they make Christ a maintainer of adulterers, that
is too intolerable wickedness. Christ never gave liberty to sin: for he
says, I came not to break the law but to fulfill it. Saint Paul also says,
To the righteous there is no law given, but to the unrighteous and
disobedient, to wheremongers, to perjured, to liers, and blasphemers. And to
the Galathians he says, Walk ye in the spirit, so are ye not under the law.
Therefore, for so much as adulterers do walk in the flesh, and not in the
spirit, they are under the law, neither has the Lord taken the law and
punishment from them. Moreover, as touching the story in the 8. chapter of
Saint John, we must consider that the Lord said unto the adultresse, Woman,
has no man condemned thee? And when she had answered, No man, lord, He said,
Neither do I condemn thee. For with this answer laid he before her ye sentence
of the Judges, to strike her conscience, that she might feel and see what she
had deserved. But for so much as he was not come now to give sentence as a Judge
but to save, he would not condemn her, and therefore neither meddled with the
law, nor act. The Lord was now come to have mercy upon sinners, and to call to
repentance. Therefore said he also to this woman, Go thy way, and sin no
more. By which words the Lord does warn all such as are tang^^^ (...)
adultery, to cease from henceforth and to amend. In so doing God will have
mercy upon them, and take from them the same dishonor, pain, and punishment,
which they have greatly deserved. For God has no delight in the destruction of
a poor sinner, but will rather that they convert and live. But if they will
not turn, if they will needs be stiff necked, and set forth their shameless
foreheads: then verily does God watch over their wickedness, and says thus
unto them by the mouth of the Prophet Hieremie, In the desire of unclean lust,
they are become like unto stallandes, every one neieth after his neighbors
wife: should I not punish this? Wherefore all they that do persist in this
wickedness, may daily look for the heavy vengeance of God to fall upon them.
Therefore that thou may eschew the same, and the contagion of so foul a
leprosy, embrace these few lessons as special preservatives.

1 Eschew idleness, and ever be occupied in some honest labor. 2 Avoid all
occasions of evil, all suspect houses, and wanton company. 3 Beware of
filthy communication, wanton songs, and histories of bawderie. 4 Use sobriety
and temperance, in meat, drink, sleep and apparel. 5 Look not to narrowly
upon the beauty of a woman. 6 Be daily conversant with such persons, as are
both chaste, honest, virtuous and godly, 7 Remember often the passions of
Christ for sin. 8 Consider the certainty and suddenness of death, and of
the day of judgment. 9 Use daily, faithful and fervent prayer unto God, for
the gracious gift of chastity, and of cleanness of heart. So doing thou
shall be sure to reap the fruit, to thy continual comfort.
The eight Leper, is the Covetous man.
RIches are the gift of God, and are many times bestowed upon his children in
this world in great measure, as may appear by the examples of Abraham, David,
Job, Ezechias, and diverse other, who having the wisdom of Gods spirit, do
know how to use the^ for their comfort, for the relief of their needy
brethren, and to the glory of God: Contrariwise the ungodly do abuse their
riches to their own hurt, and also to the hurt of others. Ambr. in Lucum.
Discant diuites (says Saint Ambrose) non in facultatibus crimen haberi, sed
in his qui vti nescinnt. Nam diuitia vt impedimenta sunt improbis, ita bonis
sunt adiumenta vertutis. That is: Let rich men understand that there is no
fault in riches, but in them which know not how to use them. For as riches
are impediments to wicked men, so to good men they are the helps of virtue.
Therefore ungodly rich men may fitly be resembled to Naaman the Syrian, who
was very rich and mighty, 2. King. 4.
but yet an unclean Leper. Rich men may offend two ways: first in getting
their riches by evil means, as by deceyte, briberie, oppression, rapine, and
by usury: against the which, the Lord complains thus, In thee have they
taken gifts to shed blood: thou have taken usury and increase, and thou
have defrauded thy neighbors by extortion, Ezech. 22
and have forgotten me, says the Lord. This complaint the Lord made then of
one people only, the people of the Jews: but now these wickednesses through
insatiable covetousness, has made a general deluge, so that he may now say
to the whole world, as he spoke to one nation by the Prophet Amos, saying,
They sell the righteous for silver, Amos. 2.
and the poor for shoes. For covetousness has made the law, which should
be as a sanctuary for ye poor oppressed, to be a snare and a pit for their
destruction, whereas God in his law has given this commandment to all
magistrates, saying, Thou shall nor favor the person of the poor, nor honor
the person of the rich, Leuis. 19.
but shall judge thy neighbor justly. Again it is said, Wrest not the law,
nor respect any man's person, neither take reward. Deus. 16.
For rewards blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the just.
For this cause King Iehosaphat when he had appointed Judges to execute
justice, gave unto them this charge. Take heed what ye do, 2. Chro. 19.
for ye execute not the judgment of man, but of God. If these things were
printed in the minds of Magistrates and Judges generally: then should not the
poor have cause to complain, as they do at this day of the oppression which
they sustain at the hands of the mighty, by whom they are ouerborne, and
their cause many times not heard, according to equity and right. Then should
neither money, friendship, nor affection bear any sway: then should not
judgment be turned into gaul, Amos. ^.
nor the fruit of righteousness into Woormewood. So would they not devise
wicked things to keep men from their right: and so should they escape the woe
which the Prophet threatens. O that they would say with Aristotle, Isay. 10.
determining a cause between Plato and Socrates: Amicus Socrates (says he)
amicus Plato, sed magis amica veritas. Socrates is my friend, Plato is my
friend, but the truth is more my friend. And as another said, Nihil possum
contra veritatem, sed pro veritate, I can do nothing against the truth, but for
the truth. O that they would follow Catos example, who being required by
noblemens letters to be good to an offender, put them into his bosom answering
the bringer, I will first do my duty, and then read your letters. Such
vprightnes of mind without affection, ought to be in Judges and iusticers,
that they should answer unlawful suitors as Ulysses answered Andromache, making
earnest suit to him for his son Astianax: O Andromache (says he) thy tears
I confess do much move me, but the tears of my country and country men do
much more move me, who like enough might perish if thou should prevail. As
Judges ought to be of this vprightnes taking heed of covetousness and
corruption by bribes, so also all lawyers and pleaders of poor men's causes
must also take heed that covetousness does not retain them against the truth,
that they betray not ye cause of their poor client for any fee, and be silent
when they should speak. This was a fault imputed to Demosthenes: For on a time
certain Ambassadors, being sent into the place where Demosthenes should be
present, and fearing that he might hinder their suit, gave him a large fee to
hold his tongue. The day following, when they declared their embassage,
Demesthenes feigned himself to have the Quinsey, a disease in the throat
hindering speech: for the which cause against the appointed time he should be
in public place, he bound white wool about his neck to color the matter of
grief. But a merry fellow privy to the match cried out thus, Demosthenes non
anginam, sed argenti anginam patitur: that is, Demosthenes has no Quinsey, but
a swelling of pence in his throat. Men say that many lawiers in these days are
troubled in like sort, not with a swelling of pence, but of Angels in their
throat, whereby they set silence to sale. I am well assured that there are
diverse upright Judges, and Lawiers, that fear God, love truth, execute justice
to their power, and do pity the cause of the poor, the orphant, and the widow:
God increase the number: yet this shall be no unnecessary admonition for all
in general, Be ware of covetousness. For this is a perilous leprosy, and
has tainted all degrees and calling among men: the which has so long reigned
in the^, that it is not only a leprosy, but a leprous dropsy, the nature of
which disease is such, that the more a man is puffed up with that corrupt humor,
the more deadly thirst he has. Euenso it may be said of a covetous man, Auarus
non implebitur pecunia: A covetous man will never be satisfied with money. For
(to allude unto the words of Christ) he that drinks of this water shall
thirst again. Money to the covetous man is as salt water of the which, the more
a man drinks, the more he thirsts. And as fire by the laying on of more
wood is made more vehement, euenso the covetous man the more the furnace of his
mind is heat with the store of money, the more he desires the gain of
riches, of the which desire, there is no ho, until by death his insatiable fack
of covetousness does crack, and till his greedy and dropsy soul, does descend
into the restless flames of hell fire. The covetous man (says Saint Hierom)
does ever want, as well that which he has, as that which he has not: his
mind being more upon that which he has not, then upon that which he has.
Whereas (says Seneca) to a contented mind, Nunquam parum est, quod satis est:
It is never little, which is enough: But to the greedy, Nunquam multum, quod
satis non est: It is never much, which suffices not. He which is not content
with his estate, though he were Lord of all the land, yet is he miserable: but
he which is content was borne with great riches. Of all the plagues sent upon
Egypt, that of the flies was one of the most troublesome, for they never
suffered men to rest, but the more they were beaten off, the more they came
upon them. So of all the miseries and vexations that God lays upon covetous
men, this is not the least, to be tormented with the cares of that, which they
esteem their greatest felicity: and cannot beat them off by any means they
can devise. They rush upon them in the morning so soon as they wake, they
accompany them in the day, they forsake them not at night, they follow them to
bed, they let them from their sleep, afflict them in their dreams: and so
never leave them till they bring them to an extreme frenzy. For as they which
are out of their wits do not see the very things, but the fantasies of their
passion: even so the mind of a covetous man being once bound in the bands of
covetousness, believes that he has always gold and silver before his eyes,
and ever recounteth his gain and increase. But for whom has the covetous man
this exceeding care and vexation? Can he tell? It is like for his posterity,
for his children, and other of his blood. Be it so. And is not this also a
madness, for a man to gather together much substance for his heir, and to
spare from himself, as miserable men do at this day? Do we not see, that a
large inheritance, makes of a friend an enemy? For the more he receives, the
more he will rejoice at thy death. And yet it may so fall out, that he whom the
covetous man intends to make his heir, shall never inherit, or possess his
goods. Man purposes, but God appoints heirs. According to the saying of
the prophet David, Doubtless man walks in a vain shadow, Psalm. 39.
he heapeth up riches, and can not tell who shall gather them. If the covetous
usurer, would consider this uncertain reckoning, he would be more merciful
to the poor borrower, from whom he turns away his face in the time of
need, except he be assured of such biting interest as he requires. Whereas
God in his word commands to lend unto such as are in need freely,
looking for no increase. So usury may very fitly be compared to the
leprosy, because as the leprosy does feed of men's flesh, so does usury
consume poor men's goods And the money of the usurer which a poor man
borrows upon interest, is like unto the biting of a serpent. For he which is
secretly stung of a Serpent, goes quietly to sleep, nothing suspecting his
hurt, and in the pleasure of his sleep dies: because then the poison privily
inuadeth all the vital parts: Even so he which borrows upon usury, by the
delay of time thinks he has received a benefit: but usury like a privy
thief inuadeth all his substance, and conuerteth it into debt. This is a
monstrous kind of devouring poor men unawares. The Harpies, the Tygres, the
Canibals, are wonderful ravenous, but usurers are more devouring and cruel
then the Eagle that did eat up Tantalus heart. They have the skin of the
Hyena, which (as Pliny writes) will draw the hair from the skin of other
beasts to it: but the skins of usurers are more drawing, for they draw the
skins of the poor from the flesh, and flesh from the bones, even to the
dividing of the joints and the marrowe of the poor, Amos 3.
as it is written in the Prophet Amos. The Pike so long feeds on the small
fishes, that at the last he is eaten himself: even so the oppressing usurer,
so long makes a prey of poor men, that at the last the Devil (if he take not
heed in time) will make him his prey.

The very publicanes among the Jews were not more infamous and detestable,
then these kind of men have been a long time, and are also at this day
throughout the world: yea in some places so detested, that Christian buryall
has been denied them. As for example: One Pisistratus was so much abhorred
for his oppression by usury, that being once dead, his body was waighed
against the gold which he left behind him: which was found to be six
times heavier then his body. Which when the men of Athens saw, they gave his
corpse to the beasts, and to the fowls of the air: and suffered not his
children to enjoy that which he left, but divided it among the poor of
Athens, from whom they were persuaded that it had aforetime been gotten by
oppressing usury. I wish therefore all biting usurers to be admonished in time
to forsake their wickedness, condemned by all law of God and man, being
contrary to all Christian charity, assuring them of this, that as the gold
whch was gotten at Tolossa, was the destruction of them that got it, so their
gold and silver which they get by usury, will turn to the destruction both of
their souls and bodies. And as the Partrich gathers the young which she has
not hatched; so he that gets riches and not by right (says the Prophet)
shall leave them in the midst of his days. Iere 17.
And then what hope has the hypocrite, when he has heaped up riches, Job. 27.
if God take away his soul. As rich men do offend in getting their riches by
ungodly means, so also they do offend against God in keeping them too
greedily, and in hoording them up, making their money their god: for the which
cause S. Paul calls this kind of covetousness idolatry. The Gentiles sometime
worshipped this frame of heaven and earth, the Sun and Moon, and other
creatures of Gods making: but the covetous man adoreth and worshippeth that
which he has gotten with his own hands. And this he does, because he reposeth
all his trust in his riches. So that covetousness is the thirteenth article of
his belief. For that which God commands he does not: but that which
covetousness commands, he does with greedines. If then he be judged an
idolater, which laid but two grains of Incense upon the altar of Mercury,
why should not he be much more condemned for an Idolater, which gives the
whole service of his life unto money. Remember the sentence of Christ, Ye cannot
serve God and Mammon. The consideration of these things moved the Apostle Paul
to write unto Timothy, thus: Give commandment to the rich men of this world
not to be high minded, nor to trust in the uncertainty of their riches. The
reason of which speech is also expressed in another place, when the wise man
says, Prouer. 11. Eccle. 5.
Riches shall not profit a man in the day of vengeance. And in another place,
Some man is rich by his care and niggardship, and then says I have gotten
rest, and now will I eat continually of my goods: Eccle. 11. Lnke. 12.
yet he considers not that the time draws near that he must leave all
these things to other men, and die himself. Covetous rich men are like unto
doves, who still build their nests there, who both themselves, and their dammes
before them lost their birds: Euenso covetous men, lay up all their treasure
here in this world, where their forefathers (as they know) left all behind
them. But in the day of death and of judgment, they shall cry too late,
Wisdom. 5.
what has the pomp of our riches profited us? At what time it will appear
what a vain confidence they had in them, which now cannot help when they have
most need. Rich men have slept their sleep (says the Prophet) and have found
nothing in their hands: Ppsal. 75.
that is to say. Rich men have passed over this life, as men do pass over a
sleep, imagining an assurance to themselves by their great riches; but when
they awake at the day of their death, they find that they are utterly void of
all help. In respect whereof the Prophet Baruch asks this question: Baruc. 3.
What are they now which heaped up together gold and silver, and which made no
end of their scraping together. He answers himself: They are now rooted out,
and gone down into hell. Therefore we see how dangerous a thing it is for
wicked men to have the possession of riches, 2. Tim. 6.
because thereby they fall into many temptations and snares of the devil, and
into many unprofitable and hurtful desires, which drown men into destruction
and perdition, wherein they are so deep plunged, Math. 19.
that with great difficulty (as our Savior Christ testifies) they shall get
into the kindome of heaven. Let all rich men then learn this lesson of the
Prophet David, who played the part of a good steward, using that well, and
disposing that faithfully which was by God committed to his trust. He gives
this counsel, If riches increase set not thy heart upon them. Psalm. 61.
Whereunto also agrees the saying of S. Augustine: Diuitiaseculares si desunt,
non per mala opera querantur in mundo: si autem adsunt, per bona opera
seruentur in coelo. If thou have not worldly riches, seek not for them in the
world by evil means: and if thou have them, lay them up by good works in
heaven. For of the good and godly rich it is said, He has dispersed and given
to the poor. Psalm. 112.
Saint Ambrose says, that those things are not rightly called our goods, which
we cannot carry away with us, Sola misericordia est comes defunctorum, Dead men
carry nothing with them but mer-cie. Whatsoever thou have bestowed on ye poor,
make a sure account of that to be thine: but whatsoever thou have bestowed upon
the world, make thy reckoning that it is lost, and that thou have put it into a
bottomless purse. Discreet husbandmen do sow their grain in the most fertile
soil: In like manner we cannot sow our worldly substance in hope to have a
great and plentiful gain, better then in bestowing it on the poor. O that we
would afford God so much credit in heavenly things, as we do to our earthly
seed. If we want not faith, we will. Lay not up then for your selves treasures
in earth, which are subject to many casualties and perils, but lay up for your
selves treasure in heaven, which shall endure for ever and ever.

The ninth Leper, is the Murderer.
THE Murderer is pollured with that leprosy, with the which David cursed
Ioab, 2. Sam. 3.
saying, Let the blood fall upon the head of Ioab, and on all his fathers
house: that the house of Ioab be never without some that have running issues or
leprie, etc. This Ioab talking deceitfullie with Abner Captain of the host of
Israel, stabbed him under the short ribs, and killed him. In like manner he
had slain before Amasa, Captain of the army of Judah. For the which cause
David before his death, gave charge to king Solomon his son saying, Thou
know what Ioab the son of Zeruiah did to me, 1. King. 2.
and what he did to the two captains of Israel whom he slew and shed blood
of battle in peace. Do therefore according to thy wisdom, and let thou not
his hoare head, go down to the grave in peace. The which commandment
Solomon obeyed. For after the death of David his father, Solomon commanded
that Ioab should be slain, saying: His blood be upon his own head, for
he smote two men more righteous and better then he. Whereby it may plainly
appear that God will take vengeance upon all murderers, who through their
private grudge and hatred, shed any man's blood. As it is written, He that
sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. Genesis 9.
When wicked Caine had slain his innocent brother Abell, God said unto him,
What have thou done? the voice of thy brothers blood cries to me from the
earth, Genesis 4.
which has opened her mouth, and has received thy brothers blood from thy
hand. A vagabond and a runnagate shall thou be upon the earth. To the which
Caine answers, That the vengeance of God will follow him whethersoeuer he
goes, and that they which find him, will kill him. Abimelech who slew his
own brethren, Judge. 9.
had his brain pan shortly after broken with a Millstone cast upon him by a
woman, and presently was dispatched of the small remainder of his life by his
own page. Abner (of whom mention is made before) slew Azahell, and therefore
his blood, by the just judgment of God was shed in like manner by Ioab:
Iesabell was denoured of Dogs, 1. King. 21.
for shedding of innocent Naboths blood. Genesis 37.
Ruben abhorring bloodshed, said to his brethren which conspired Joseph's
death, Shed not blood. For he knew that God would take vengeance on the
same: and therefore afterward he put his brethren in mind of his wholesome
admonition, Genesis 41.
Warned I you not, saying, Sin not against the child: and ye would not
hear, and now his blood is required. God will never suffer murder and cruel
bloodshed of innocents to escape without vengeance, though for a time he
defer it. As may also appear by the extreme famine which came upon the
Jews in the time of king David: concerning the which, David asking counsel
of the Lord, received this answer, It is for Saul, and for his bloody house,
2. Sam. 21.
because he slew the Gibeonites.

Many mo examples might be brought of the Scriptures, and out of chronicles,
and stories, to prove and make manifest how the vengeance of God, falls
either first or last upon murderers. Exodus 20.
For almighty God has given a law which he will have remain inviolable,
namely, Thou shall not kill. The which is the second commandment of the second
table, and yet the first of the negative sort. By the which commandment the
killing of brute beasts is not restrained. Whose life or death God has
referred unto man's will, as appears in Genesis: but the killing of man is
utterly forbidden, that no man be so hardy as to kill himself or any other.
The reason is, because man, both as touching the body and the soul is the
most excellent creature of God. For albeit he made his body of the slime of
the earth, yet made he his soul of nothing after his own image, Genesis 2.
placing the same in the body, when he had breathed into his face the breath
of life. Moreover, for so much as man is immediately subject unto God, therefore
God reserueth unto himself the power of man's life or death: insomuch that it
is utterly unlawful for one man to kill another, and therefore Christ said unto
Peter, who had a purpose to kill, Matt. 26
Put up thy sword into thy sheath: for whosoever strikes with the sword, shall
perish with the sword. Notwithstanding they which in a just war, are
soldiers armed by their prince, to fight for the liberties of their country
against any foreign enemy, that shall come to invade the land, are not
murderers in shedding their blood, and in killing such enemies, 1. Sam. 18 1.
Sam. 25
but the Lords soldiers fightting the Lords war, and the Lords battles: as
may appear by many testimonies out of scripture. As when the Syrian king had
gathered his power against Iehosaphat, Iahaziel the Leuit being inspired with
the holy Ghost, came to Iehosaphat, after he had made his prayers, and gave
him this encouragement, saying; This is the war of God, and not of men. 2.
Chro. 20
They therefore which fight the Lords battails have this promise made unto the^
by God himself, Leuit. 26.
One of you shall chase a thousand: and ten, ten thousand. Because the Lord
himself (as the Prophet David speaks) will teach your hands to fight, Psalm.
144.
and frame your fingers to the battle. The soldier therefore in this action
which fights under the standard of a Christian prince, for the defense of
Gods true religion, against idolatrous Papists, and proud Spaniards, which
with fire and sword are ready to invade, need not to fear and stand in
doubt: their quarrel is Gods, and therefore undoubtedly good. Let such
therefore take unto them a good courage, and play the men. The more blood they
shed of such miscreants, the more holy are their hands consecrated unto the
Lord, Exodus 32.
and the greater blessing they shall receive from him. In like manner the
magistrate, which punishes malefactors by death, does not offend against
this commandment, but does kill according to the prescript rule of Gods law,
where he says, Thou shall not suffer a malefactor to live. The Judge himself
should sin against God, Deuteronomy. 18.
if he should suffer such evil persons notoriously known, and lawfully
conuented before him, to live. Saul lost his kingdom, and procured unto
himself the wrath and vengeance of god, 1. Sam. 15.
because he slew not those sinners the Amalechites. In like manner, when the
Lord had delivered into the hands of Achab, Benhadad the king of Assyria,
Achab entering into league with him, let Benhadad go. Then came to him one of
the Prophets in the word of the Lord, saying, 1. King. 20.
Because thou have delivered the man worthy of death out of thy hand, thy life
shall go for his, and thy people for his people. Which came accordingly to
pass. For within a while after he fighting with the Assyrians was slain.
Hereby it does evidently appear, that magistrates do highly displease the
majesty of God, which punish not murderers and such like malefactors, being
thereunto by God called and ordained. For what is the cause that many cruel and
horrible murders are committed, but the impunitie of such wickednesses. For
murderers many times find friends, which for money will procure a pardon. But
when through such facility of remission and pardon, a second murder by the
same malefactors is committed, what else are such friends to be accounted, but
buiers and sellers of blood? Whereas God to the contrary has said, Ye shall
take no recompense for the life of the murderer, Number. 35.
which is worthy to die, but he shall die the death. Therefore those magistrates
do highly please god, which administer justice against such bloody me^
according to the law of God and man. Thus much concerning the letter of the
commandment. Thoushalt not kill. By giving the which precept, the Lord is
not only careful to have obedience from our hands, but also from our hearts
and tongues: so that both thoughts and words, as well as actions, must come
under subjection unto him, that neither of them be infected with malice, which
the Lord so hates and abhors. For we must interpret the law according to
the nature of ye lawgiver. Man by reason that he only sees the deed, and
cannot discern of the heart, makes laws for the outward doings, and
punishes them alone without proceeding further. But the Lord, who searches
the very heart and reigns, makes laws for it, and punishes even the consent
of heart going against his law. For inasmuch as the Lord hates the evil it
self, he cannot but abhor it, wheresoever he shall find it, whether in hand,
heart, or tongue. Of the sin of adultery, Christ says, Who soever beholds
a woman and lusts after her, Matt. 5.
has already committed adultery in his heart. And Saint John says also,
Whosoever hates his brother, is a man-slecr. For as Saint Hierom says,
Quiodit fratrem suum, and qui occidit, pari poena digni sunt. He which
kills, and he which hates his brother, deserves one and the self same
punishment. Whereby we see, that not only gross evils, come into reckoning
before the Lord, but even hatred settled in the heart, although the hand has
never been stretched forth to execute the same. Neither comes it before
him, as some trifling thing, which does not greatly displease him, but
appears monstrous, having no other shape upon it, nor less account made of
it, then of murder. Thus must we think of hatred consented unto in the heart,
that it has a blouddie face in the sight of the Lord, and therefore is to be
abhorred and loathed as the cruelty of murder Saint Augustine says, that the
Jews no less killed Christ, then the Romans did, although the Jews laid no
violent hands upon him. Whereunto also accords Saint Hierom, writing upon
Isai. Thou (says he) have not killed with the sword, but thou have killed with
the will. And God in his law pronounces a curse against this secred murder,
saying: Cursed is he that smites his neighbor secretly. Therefore says the
Lord, Deuteronomy. 27.
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart. Hatred ouerruleth the mind of
him whom it possesses, suffering him not to eat or drink in rest, or to do
any good thing, and is always tempting him to slay the party whom it hates,
and always enuieth at his prosperity. It makes a man's soul to grow savage,
breeds wrath and war in his thoughts, sets his blood on fire, drives
him out of his wits, and suffers not reason to bear any sway. It
disfigureth the face, making men to look gastlie. Yea whatsoever an other man
does, that does the hateful mislike and abhor. If a man keep the law of
the Lord, he prayseth it not: if one fear the Lord and deal righteouslie,
him he loves not, but disprayseth the truth, enuieth him that orders his
ways aright, imbraceth backebiting, and loves scornefulnesse. And because
hatred has blinded his mind, he does to his neighbor all the mischief he
can devise. If a brother offend, by and by he blazeth him abroad, and is
hasty to have him condemned and punished for his offense. For as love covers
the multitude of sins; so hatred opens and discovers the most secret
things. For the spirit of hatred through cankred malice and frowardness of
heart, does work jointly with Satan in all things, even to the death and
destruction of men. Hatred is a false reporter, speaking continually against
the truth, making a great ado of small matters, ouershadowing the light with
darkness calling sweet sower, maintaining war, wrong, and abundance of all
mischief, and finally filling the heart with devilish poison. This is the
cause why the Lord forbidding hateful and malicious thoughts in his law,
would give it no other name then murder, teaching us that howsoever we do
nourish such thoughts, and make small account of them; yet his judgment is
plain, that they be no better then murder, the heart is settled in them. The
hatred of our brethren is so grievous in his sight that it staineth and
defiles whatsoever it touches, be it word or thought, and makes it so heavy
that the Lord can no longer bear it. And therefore Christ says: Whosoever
shall say fool to his brother, shall be worthy to be punished in hell: so much
does he detest words also proceeding from hatred. And because words bewray that
which lurketh in the heart, and do bring that to light that otherwise would not
so easily be espied, we must keep some good watch over them, that from thence
we may be led to the privy chamber of the heart, to see how all things go there.
For of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. So that there is no
outward thing that can bring us sooner to the sight and speech of the heart,
then can the tongue it self: which, if it be infected with hatred or disdain,
sure it is, that all things are not well at home in the heart. And therefore
every man must observe the inclination of the heart by the usage of the tongue,
that when it comes abroad casting forth hatred, wrath and debate, we may with
speed return to the fountain, that is the heart, to purge and to cleanse the
same: because we are sure that the tongue receives all poison. If we shall
prevail much in suppressing hatred, both in our heart, tongue and hand, yet is
not that all which is here commanded. For ye Lord in forbidding murder, meant
not to stay there, but in removing hatred, his purpose was to make way and
passage for merciful dealing, toward the life of others, doing the works of
mercy and love, and wishing well even to those that are our mortal enemies.
Prou. 24.
And this is wise Salomons counsel, Rejoice not thou at the fall of thine
enemy, and let not thy heart be glad when he stumbleth, least the Lord see it,
and it displease him. We are all bound to this common rule, Matt. 5.
Bless and curse not. Pray for them which persecute you. For, so far forth as
our enemy is a man, humanity it self requires, that we bewail his
calamity. And if this seem a hard matter for us to do, let us call to mind,
that we are the children of him who makes his sun to shine upon the good:
and upon the evil: and that we are his disciples, who answered his apostles,
when they required fire from heaven to burn the Samaritans: Ye know not of
whose spirit ye be: namely his, who came not to destroy but to save: his, who
healed them that railed upon him: his, who restored unto Marcus his ear,
notwithstanding that he was one of that wicked number which came to take him:
his, which both saluted the traitor Judas as a friend, and received him with a
kiss: Finally his, which forgave the wicked thief, and promised him eternal
felicity: which prayed for them that crucified him, and which of his own
accord died for his enemies. It shall nothing profit thee to recompense
injuries with injuries, and taunts with taunts. Thou ought rather to commit
the matter unto God who will be a just judge, and by no means can be led away
from justice. Furthermore, thou must know that it is not lawful for thee to
speak evil of any man, nor yet to curse any man. For if we may not do so to
our enemy, much less ought we to do it to others. Chrysostom the more
readily to persuade us to patience, rehearses the co^modidies which the
reproaches, and persecutions of adversaries, do commonly bring to the godly.
First (says he) they are a principal help for us to the obtaining of the
kingdom of heaven: for Christ says: Blessed are they which suffer persecution
for righteousness sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. And he adds,
Blessed are ye when men revile you, and persecute you, speaking all manner of
evil and lying against you for my sake. Be glad and rejoice, for your reward
is great in heaven. Beside this, they are an occasion or matter of most
excellent virtues. For as Paul teaches Tribulation works patience: patience,
experience; and experience, Romans 5.
hope. But where is the patience of the Saints, where is there experience,
where is their hope, if the wicked enterprises of our enemies against us be
taken away? Moreover the glory of God can be by no other means highly
advanced, then if we valiantly and courageously behave our selves, in those
things which are to be suffered for his names sake. For it is no hard matter to
cleave unto God, so long as all things go prosperously and quietly with us, and
according to our hearts desire. But when all manner of adversities happen, and
yet we constantly abide in his obedience, this doubtless comes of a stout
and invincible faith. And for this cause, I take it, that Saint James said,
James 1.
that patience has a perfect work: except peradventure a man will thus
understand it, that perfection is not in any work, unless we persevere in the
same. For when we faint or give over, we accomplish not the work, and so
without patience it is left imperfect. Beside all this, our enemies, by this our
consta^cie are so terrified, that they proceed no further in persecuting us.
For when they see that we are not moved with their injuries, they think that
they loose their labor: and therefore take not so great pleasure of the
reproaches, where with they have exercised us. But if they shall perceive us to
be vexed, and to take it in ill part, they will think that their injuries have
taken good success, and will be afterward more bold in their wicked
endeavor. This wisdom was in blessed Job: who more grievously wounded his
enemies, then they could him, by his speeches of patience, which he uttered to
the praise of God. For this cause Gregory says, Qui a statu patientiae ante
linguarum vulnera corruit: ipse sibi testis est, quod contra manifestae gladies
persecutionis non persisteret: That is, Who falls from patience by the wounds
of evil tongues, is a witness unto himself, that he would not stand
against the swoordes of manifest persecution. Whereas contrariwise he that
suffers patiently in a righteous cause has a promise from Christ, that he
shall inherit the kingdom of heaven.

The tenth Leper, is the Murmurer.
THe last leper is the Murmurer, such a one as was Simon the Leper, Matt. 26.
of whom mention is made in the 26. chapter of Saint Matthew: who murmured both
against Christ the patient, and the woman the agent, Luke 7.
which powered on his head the box of ointment, whch was most precious. By
which example we learn that there are two sorts of murmuring: one against God,
the other against man. Murmurers against God, are moved thereunto, either
through impaciencie, or else through pride, God is grievously offended with
this wickedness. For he can in no wise abide to be judged, and reprehended of
ignorant men for the government of his own kingdom and common wealth. And no
marvel, seeing nothing can be done more rightly and profitablie, then that
which proceeds from his most wise and best ordered disposition and handling.
A cunning and very skillful workman, holds great scorn that his
workmanship which he has handled and finished with art and great diligence,
should be controlled and reprehended by him which has no manner of skill in
that faculty. And thereupon comes this proverb, Ne suitor vltra crepidam.
Let no man meddle with that which is beyond his skill. We are utterly ignorant
of the regiment and disposing of the course of the world which God has
appointed. We are ignorant of that good which concerns our selves. But ye
Lord well understands what is most meet for us, and for his common wealth.
Let no man therefore presume to understand, Romans 12.
above that which is meet to understand as we are admonished by the Apostle:
and let no man take upon him to scan and sift Gods works, but rather let him
say with the Prophet David, I have not dealt with matters that are to high for
me. Let ignorant man stay and content him self with this, that whatsoever is
done by God, is done most excellently and justly, though mortal men see not
always the reason of al things that are don. It becomes us to obey gods
will, without curious searching and murmuring: knowing that he is a bad
soldier which follows his captain grudgingly. But wicked me^ take unto
themselves through impaciencie diverse occasions to murmur against God. Some do
murmur if they have not such te^perat seasons as they wish for: or if they want
any thing of those means which god has appointed for the sustentation of man's
life. Of whom the prophet speaks thus, The wicked, if they want meat, will
grudge. Psalm. 59.
This grudging for such wants comes of unbelief, as may appear by the
examples of the Israelites, of whom the Lord complains thus: Number. 14.
How long will it be before they beleeueme, for all the signs that I have
done? The which were so many, so great, and so wonderful, that if they had not
been too much troubled and distracted with a heathenish care, they would never
have said so many times as they did in the wilderness, What shall weeat, or what
shall we drink, Exodus 15. Exodus 16. Matt. 6.
but would have been much better persuaded of Gods fatherly providence for them
in their greatest need. Of this sort of murmurers, there are too many at this
day among us, who in the time of scarcity, (though in deed the same be a
plenty in comparison of that which our forefathers have felt) do more like
Pagans then Christians begin to murmur against God: bewraying thereby their
great unthankfulness. These murmurers by their grudging seek to make a trial
whether God be among them or no, tempting him, and calling for that, whereof
they have no great need. These are not content with Manna, but they fall to
lusting for Quails, Number. 11.
and by and by murmur if their appetite be not served. And because they will
fulfill the measure of their wickedness, they grudge almighty God his true
service, saying: We will burn Incense to the Queen of heaven, Iore. 44.
as our fathers, Kings and princes were wont to do. For then had we plenty of
vittailes, and were well: but since we left of so to do, we have had scarcity
of all things, and have been consumed with the sword and with pestilence.
These for their wicked murmuring are termed by the holy Ghost, Number. 20.
Rebels: and for their wicked rebellion against him his vengeance will fall
upon them, and he will suddenly sweep the^ away in their desired fulness, with
meat in their mouths. And he will utterly destroy them, and their Idols of
silver and gold, which they themselves have made, and will make them so ashamed
of their gross idolatry, that they themselves shall cast away their idols from
them into the holes of rocks, Isai. 2.
to hide them from the glory and majesty of the Lord. Take heed therefore of
this murmuring betimes, that ye grudge not against the Lord, 1. Cor. 10.
lest he shortly destroy you with ye destroier. Other some there are which
murmur against God, if they suffer any manner of affliction in this world,
persuading themselves that the cross which they bear is heavier then they
have deserved, and thereby grow very impacient, and some time despair of
release: and therefore seek all they can by unlawful and bad means to help
and release themselves. If these men were persuaded of the great good that
comes to the children of god by pacient suffering of the cross, they would
in no case murmur, but rather follow the counsel of S. James. 5.
James, writing in this manner, Be pacient brethren until the coming of the
Lord: behold the husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the earth, and
has long patience for it until he receive the former and the latter rain. Be
ye also patient therefore, and fettle your hearts, for the coming of the Lord
drawoth near. Take, my brethren, the prophets for an example of suffering
aduerfitie, and of long patience, which have spoken in the name of the Lord.
Behold we count them blessed which endure. Ye have heard of the patience of
Job, and have known what end the Lord wade. For the Lord is very pitiful and
merciful. And pacient Job himself teaches us the very same, saying. Blessed
is the man whom God corrects: therefore refuse not thou the chastizement of
the almighty. For he makes the wound, and binds it up: he smites, and his
hands make whole. He shall deliver thee in six troubles, and in the seventh
the evil shall not touch thee. Job. 5.


As some murmur against God only, so other some murmur both against god and
man also. Such are they who murmur against magistrates. And these are of
diverse sorts: as the Anabaptists, and Libertines, who persuade themselves and
others, that it is a disgrace for a Christian man to suffer a magistrate to
rule and reign over him. The Papists in like sort, who although they
acknowledge the power of magistrates and the obedience due unto them, yet as
concerning themselves they murmur at all civil power, exempting themselves
from the same, and challenge large immunities and privileges. But the blessed
Apostles Peter and Paul exempt no persons or degrees of men from the obedience
due to kings and princes, as plainly appears by their doctrine, namely, where
it is said: Let every soul be subject to the authority of the bier powers,
for there is no power but of God, and the powers that be are ordained of God:
whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, and
they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. For Princes are not to
be feared for good works, but for evil. Will thou then be without fear of
the power? Do well: so shall thou have praise of the same. For he is the
minister of God for thy wealth. But if thou do evil fear: for he bears
not the sword for naught, for he is the minister of God to take vengeance
upon him that does evil. Wherefore ye must be subject, not because of wrath
only, Romans 13.
but also for conscience sake. For, for this cause also pay you tribute: for
they are Gods ministers serning for the same purpose. And the Apostle Peter
(whose successor the Pope falsely vaunteth himself to be) teaches the very
same doctrine of obedience, saying: Submit your self to all manner ordinance
of man for the Lords sake: whether it be unto the King, as unto the chief
head, either unto Rulers, as unto them that are sent of him, for the
punishment of evil dooers, but for the cherishing of them that do well. For
so is the will of God, that with well doing, ye may stop the mouths of
ignorant and foolish men: 1. Pet. 2.
as free, and not having the liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but even
as the servants of God. Honor all men, love brotherly fellowship, fear God,
honor the King. By these places of holy Scriptures, it is most manifest, that
Kings, Queens and other princes, are ordained of God, are to be obeyed and
honored of all persons without exception of any: being (as Peter terms
them) chief heads, that is subject to no earthly potentate within their
dominions: and therefore Paul in most general terms requires every soul
to be subject, of what sex, calling, or degree soever he be, to the king,
which in earth next under God is the chief head. Thereby teaching us, that as
all manner of persons ought to be subject, so such subjects as are murmurers,
disobedient, or rebellious against their sovereign, do disobey God, and bring
upon themselves damnation: also that the government of Princes is a great
blessing of God given for the common wealth, especially of the good and godly:
for the comfort and cherishing of whom, God gives and sets up princes: and
on the contrary part, to the fear, and for the punishment of the evil and
wicked. Yea although they should be wicked and tyrannous, whom God has placed
over us in authority, yet are they to be obeyed without all murmuring. For
the which cause God commanded the Jews by the mouth of the Prophet, Iere. 27.
2. King. 24.
to obey Nebuchadnezer: and was angry with Zedechias the king because he
revolted from him. Jeremy also by the commandment of God, admonished and
exhorted the people, to pray for the health of the king of Babylon. And David
would not stretch forth his hand against Saul the Lords anointed, when he
might have done it without any difficulty, and to his great commodity. The
good and godly sort of soldiers which served Iulianus the Apostata, obeyed
him in his military business, neither did they at any time show themselves
mutinous, notwithstanding that they were continually armed. Phocas (when he
had slain Mauritius) possessed the Empire by great violence, and injustice,
and wrote unto Gregory Bishop of Rome, who obeyed Phocas as his Prince, and
gave unto him great reverence, If wicked Emperors and Kings, which were
tyrants and cruel oppressors of their people and subjects, are by the
commandment of God to be obeyed, and not only obeyed, but their prosperous
estate also prayed for: 1. Tim. 2.
how much more are we bound in conscience, in reason, and in nature, to obey
and wish well unto a Christian Prince, our natural sovereign, and most
gracious governor and Queen, without all murmuring, the very root of
rebellion: according to the counsel of most wise Solomon, My son fear the
lord, and the king, and meddle not with them that are seditious. Prou. 24.
The first Murmurer and stirrer up of sedition and rebellion, was Lucifer, by
creation a bright and glorious Angel, but through his ambicious pride, by
which he was drawn into open rebellion against God, he was cast down into
hell, and made the most foul fiend of eternal darkness. As the devil (the
father of murmurers against the ordained powers of God) had this foul fall: so
also no doubt all those which are possessed with the same spirit, are like to
incur the like vengeance of almighty God: as by reading al stories most
plainly is to be seone. Some of the children of Israel being murmurers against
their magistrates appointed over them by God, Number. 12. Number. 11.
were stricken with foul leprosy: many were consumed with fire suddenly sent
from the Lord: some time many thousands of them were destroyed with the
pestilence: sometime they were stung to death with a strange kind of fiery
serpents: and which is most horrible, some pricipall men being captains with
their whole band of murmurers, not dying by any usual or natural death of
men, but the carth opening, Number. 16.
they with their wives, children, and families, were swallowed quick down
into hell. The which are notable examples of perpetual memory, teaching all
subjects, how highly god is displeased with the murmuring and evil speaking of
subjects against their princes: for that as the scripture records, their
murmuring is not against the prince only, Number. 14.
but against God himself, as appears in the book of Numbers. How long
(says the Lord) shall I suffer this wicked multitude to murmur against me?
For as Saint Gregory says, Qui contra supra positam sibi potestatem murmurat
liquet quod illum redarguit, qui eandem homins potestatem dedid: Who so
murmureth against the power which is set over him, it is plain that he
reproves God, who has given that power unto man. Seeing therefore such
murmuring is against God, let them be well assured, that although it be in
never so secret a manner, yet he hears it: for the ear of icalousie hears
all things, Wis. 1.
and the noise of the grudgings shall not be hid. Beware then of murmuring
which profits nothing, and refrain your tongue from evil speaking, for there
is no word so secret that shall go for naught. God will make the birds of the
air to bewray them, Eccle. 10.
as testifies Solomon, Curse not the king, no not in thy thought, for the
foul of the heaven shall carry thy voice, and that which has wings shall
declare the matter.

These murmurers, to prevail the more easily in their diuolish purpose, and to
draw multitudes unto them, have ever pretended the common good of al men:
bearing the people in hand, that they seek only a reformation of disorders,
and a redress of common wealth matters, as may appear unto you by the
examples of Jack Straw, Wat Tiler, Jack Shepherd, Tom Miller, Hob Cartar
Jack Truman, Jack Cade, Robin of Ridsdale, William with the long beard, Jack
Blewbeard, captain Ket, Jack Sharp of Wigmores land, with the whole rabble of
such rakehel rebels, of whom mention is made in our English Chronicles, with
the examples also of some dukes, Marqueses, Earls and lords, whose treasons
and rebellions, with their shameful fall and end, is there recorded, to the
infamy and reproach of their names for ever. I say, what pretense and color
soever such have made show for reformation of Church Matters or common wealths,
their rebellions have been the greatestruine and destruction of all
commonwealths that might be possible. For what other thing can be looked for
to come from such mutinous reformers, their state, persons and conditions
considered: who has evermore been found to be men of most wicked disposition
and quality: that is to say, men inconsiderate and rash in all their actions,
the greatest unthrifts which have lewdly wasted their own goods and lands,
those that are far plunged in debt, and such as for robberies, thefts and
murders, dare not in any well governed commonwealth show their faces, such as
are of most lewd and wicked behavior and life, and all such as cannot, or will
not live in peace, are always most ready to murmur, to be factious, to
control the state, to move sedition, to pull down and set up, and to run
into open rebellion, or at least to conspire with such. And are not these to be
esteemed meet men (think you) to reform disorders, and to bring with them a
commonwealth to other, who has so spoiled and consumed their own wealth and
substance? Very like men to amend other men's actions who have so vile vices,
and abominable conditions themselves? Yet to creep into the hearts of the
most simple and ignorant (which ever desire liberty) they speak against the
payment of tributes, subsidies, and such like taxes, which appertain to kings
and princes, beating into their heads that it is oppression, and so draw them
to murmur and grudge against that which is godly and lawful. For tributes
taxes, subsidies, and such like customs, are to be paid for diverse causes:
especially to maintain and uphold that roial state which God has given unto
kings and Queens: secondly, that they may be the better able to defend and
maintain us and the whole common wealth in godly peace and security: to
preserve us from all foreign invasions, and from open rapine and violence,
which otherwise would be so outrageous, that our goods, our wives, our
daughters, and our lives, would be made common, and commanded by others.
Lastly, we pay tributs, thereby to acknowledge our subjection to our sovereign,
who for her good and royal preservation, has power to command us, our goods,
our lands, our lives, and whatsoever we have. For these causes Vlpian calls
tributes and customs the sinews of the commonwealth, as without which it
cannot either consist, or be governed. Christ himself when he lived here on
earth, confirmed this, both by his own example in paying tribute to the
Emperor, and also in teaching the same to be done, saying to the Herodians,
Give unto Caesar the things which belong unto Caesar. Therefore such Murmurers
as grudge at these royal customs, paid and allowed in all commonwealths,
even from the first beginning, do murmur against God himself, against his
son Christ, and against the doctrine of his blessed Apostles, and are like in
the end, not only to have that same success that Judas and Theudas had, who
when they vaunted, that they would set themselves against the tyranny of the
Romans, to whom the Jews paid tribute, and had lived a while by spoil and
rapine, Act. 5. Joseph. lib. 18. Amtiq.
at the last turned their own weapons upon themselves, and so with their
followers were utterly overthrown: but also shall upon themselves procure the
heavy wrath of God, and so eternal damnation for ever. So that they which
refuse this lawful subjection, shall not only make themselves more bond, and
in the end subject to great slavery and thraule to forreyners and strangers
(according as the Lord has threatened, Thou have broken the yokes of woodde,
Iere. 28.
but in stead thereof thou shall have yokes of iron:) but also undergo this
heavy cursle, He cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, Psalm. 78.
indignation, and wrath, and vexation, by the sending out of evil Angels.

There are yet another sort of murmurers, which grudge at the prosperity,
wealth, and honor of their brethren, the which is occasioned by envy. These
envious murmurers may fitly be resembled to the swelling Toade, who (as some
report) can not abide the smell of the flourishing Vine. And we find this
true by daily experience, that those men which by virtue and good desert are
advanced to honor in the common wealth, have many enemies, and are so enuyed
of some, that how honorably soever they have borne themselves, yet by evil
and malicious tongues are misreported, and barked at by the woorst Dogs. And
some which by true fortitude are forward for the good of their Country to
deserve honor, are by one envious person or other that cannot abide to hear
little David's ten thousand remembered, 1. Sa^. 18.7.
holden back and disgraced all that may be. If Caleb, which has vewed the
enemies land be willing to undertake an exploite, he shall be sure to have
one envious murmurer or other, to raise up an ill report to hinder his intent.
Number. 13.
These are like unto those murmuring laborers, which grudged an equal reward
to be given to their fellow laborers. Matt. 20.
And they play that unkind brothers part, which grudged that his father
should give his younger brother, Luke. 15.
a friendly welcome. They are Besib the devil, who never rejoices but at
other men's harms. These seek to heal themselves with another man's wound: the
which profits them as much, as to gather grapes upon thorns, and figger,
upon thistles. To such the wise man says, Laques peri^^ent, qui oblectantur
casu iustorum: Eccle. 27.
They that rejoice at the full of the righteous, shall be taken in the snare.
All these murmurers whereof I have spoken, Jude (...).
are aptly compared to the raging waves of the sea, because they continally
labor to some out their own shame. For shame and confusion is the end thereof.
Beware then of this, and hearken to the counsel of the apostle. Peter, who
wills us to be harborous without grudging, that is, 2. Pet. 4.
to do with heart and good will, all the good that we are able to perform for
our brethren by word and deed. According also to the exhortation of Saint Paul,
saying, Do all things without murmurings and reasonings, Philip. 2.
that ye may be blameless and pure, and the sons of God without rebuke in
the midst of a naughty and crooked nation. This if we do, we shall not
only escape the contagious infection of a most dangerous leprosy, but also a
fearful separation due to all lepers; as to be cast out of our land, as it
is befallen the leprous Jews at this day: and which is worse, to be cast out
of the favor of almighty God. These intolerable plagues, I say, we shall not
only escape, by forsaking our finne and wickedness, and in offering up to the
Lord clean hands, and pure hearts: but also thereby procure unto our selves,
and to our posterity, the love, mercy, and benediction of Almighty God for
ever: the which he evermore grant us for Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with
the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

