LECTVRES UPON THE (...) Epistle of St. P^^^ (...) the PHILIPPIANS,

Delivered in St. Peter's Church in OXFORD:

By the reverend and faithful servant of CHRIST HENRY AIRAY Doctor of
Divinity and late Provost of Queens COLLEGE,

And now published for the use of GODS Church by C. P. Master of Arts and
Fellow of the same College.

LONDON Printed by EDW: GRIFFIN for William Bladen, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Bible near the great north
door. 1618.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER in God, George, L. Archbishop of Canterbury his
Grace Primate of all England and Metropolitan, And one of his Majesty's most
honorable privy Council.
Most reverend father,
I Could not presume to shroud this unpolished work under so high a Patronage,
if J did not hope, that (as David loved lame Mephibosheth for his good father
Ionothan, so) your gracious favor to this Author (now with God) would excuse
and pardon, yea accept this vnperfited issue of his pains. These papers were
never intended for the common view, being fitted in a plain and familiar style
to a popular assembly; and therefore (J confess) not worthy of your
acceptance: Yet I thought it injustice either to deprive the Church of God of
the benefit of his labors, or not to consecrate them to your Graces hands, to
whom the Author was so much obliged. Your gracious countenance and love unto
him (upon experience of his integrity whereof you were long a witness and
sometime a judge) did much comfort him amidst other occasions of grief and
deiection: His only requital were holy prayers for your happiness, which he
forgot not in the extremity of his last sickness, even then devoutly entreating
the Lord for his blessing upon your person, and government. Besides your Grace
is pleased to make your favors (as it were) hereditary, extending them in
great measure to his Successor our present Governor and to our College; Jn
which respect, the best of all our labors are justly devoted to your Grace, as
a small discharge of our duty, if not rather as an acknowledgement of our
obligation. These Lectures which now I present, are an Exposition of Saint
Paul's divine letter to the Philippians: An Exposition, indeed not suitable to
the niceness and curiosity of our times, not elegant in words, and without
all affectation (unless of plainness:) But yet (lest I too much disparage the
Author and his Work) if I be not mistaken, the naked and natural sense of
this holy Text is here so faithfully opened, and withal so powerfully and
thoroughly applied, that (J doubt not) Gods Church and people may hence reap
much benefit, which was the Authors only aim in the exercise of his
ministry, and shall be my chief comfort. Whatsoever it is, I humbly commend
it to the blessing of God and to the use of his Church, desiring to honor it
with your Graces name, whose Patronage shall procure it respect from others.
The Lord Jesus long preserve your Grace (after the joy of our hearts and the
breath of our nostrills his most excellent Majesty) a great and sure friend of
religion, and a worthy instrument of the welfare and peace of this holy and
happy Church of England.

Your Graces humble Orator Christopher Potter.

To the Christian Reader.
IT was a just taxation of our times by grave and reverend Beza, Dum tempora
superiora cum nostris comparo, dicere consueui plus illos conscientiae
scientiae minus habuisse; nos contra scientiae plus, conscientiae minus habere:
The brains of men were never more stuffed, their tongues never more stirring,
and yet their hearts never more empty, their hands never more idle. The
disease of our forefathers was ignorance, ours is impiety; they were ill in the
head, we are sick at the heart: they were blind but (after their manner)
devout, we are skillful and profane. No age was ever blessed with such a
light of knowledge, and yet none more fruitful of the works of darkness. The
maine reason undoubtedly why wisdom and holiness, learning and sanctity are
so usually now a days divorced, is because (as that Heathen of old could
complain) disputare malumus quam viuere: If men can argue and discourse of
religion it suffices, not one of a thousand thoroughly digests his knowledge,
or turns the holy Precepts of Divinity into practice. Hence, the world
abounds with Polemicall books, which do not so much compose as breed
contentions; (though I confess the fault is not ours, but our Adversaries,
whose perverseness will not be convicted even when they are convicted:) But for
practical divinity and lively devotion, it is an argument not more necessary
then rare, handled but by few and not by many regarded. Yet in this iniquity of
times, wherein the affections of men had more need to be ordered then their
judgments informed: in my opinion, those Treatises are of best service and use
which reduce Christianity into action, and warm the heart and conscience with
devotion. In this rank I account this Commentary: which was a principal
motive unto me (as we all owe our selves unto the common good) not to smother
a work so serviceable for this age, nor to bereave Gods Church of such a
furtherance; especially being herein encouraged by sundry reverend and
judicious.

A Commentary perhaps not to the taste of many men in this age, whose nice
palate does loath the dry manna, and can best relish the unsavory sauces of
Egypt. Others (who cannot fancy Divinity unless she be wantonly trimmed up in
the light colors of humane art and eloquence) will here require elegancie of
words, and quarrel at his careless style. I answer, mores non verba
composuit, and animis dixit non auribus, the scope of his labors was his
auditors instruction not his own applause, nor did he care to please so much as
to profit. To come with the enticing words of man's wisdom, and to preach only
themselves is the note of false Teachers: the charge of Christ's Minister is in
demonstration of the spirit and of power to divide the word of truth aright
unto his people, and this was our Authors aim. Gods oracles are to be
faithfully expounded, not curiously minced, not loosly dallied with, and surely
the plain song of Scripture is the best music without these quauering
descants of man's wit. How licentiously and profanely Popish Friars have abused
Gods holy word by their trifling Postills, it is too manifest. Yea (be it
spoken with due modesty and reverence to those Worthies, to whose industry and
wit the Christian Church is so much beholding,) some of the ancient Doctors
were too far in love with quaint interpretations: especially Origin, whose
excessive allegorizing (by the confession of Eusebius, Lib. 6. c. 18.
who yet was his great favorite and partial in his praises) caused the
Apostate Porphyrius to blaspheme and to scoff at the Scriptures. Which
consideration, no doubt, moved Calvin, Melancthon, Martyr, and the rest of our
late and learned Expositors to stick so close to the letter of the Text, and
in all simplicity to deliver the meaning of the Holy Ghost. Their judgment
our Author approved, and followed their example, opening in these Lectures the
simple and most naturally intended sense of the holy Apostle, and and thence
urging and applying the Observations so effectually, that many (not only of his
ordinary hearers, but even of the University, by whom he was much frequented)
blessed God for the direction and comfort they received from his mouth. The
life of delivery in him was very powerful, and made great impression in his
hearers: this book wants that advantage, which yet is here supplied, because
those things which then were only delivered in the ears of few, are here
submitted to the eyes of all.

Touching the Author himself I need not say much. Although (after a sort) he
condemned himself to obscurity, and affected a private and retired life: yet
he could not hide himself from the eyes of the world, being generally noted
and esteemed for his holiness, his integrity, his learning and gravity, his
indefatigable pains in the discharge of his ministerial function, his
singular wisdom and dexterity in the government of our College, which by
Gods blessing upon his care has sent forth many learned Ministers into the
Church, many worthy Gentlemen into the Commonwealth. Briefly, in his whole
conversation he was so sincere and unrebukable, that by some (partly by
occasion of these Lectures) he was defamed for precisenes. Indeed, as the
times are now, the only means almost to avoid that reproach is to be
notoriously wicked. But (in few words to wipe of that imputation) how much he
condemned the injurious zeal of the Separatists, how far he misliked all busy
disturbers of the Churches peace and quiet, still gravely exhorting to
calmnesse and moderation, how heartily he reverenced his holy mother the Church
of England, and how willingly he conformed himself to her seemly ceremonies
and injunctions, besides his practice, he has so many reverend and grave
witnesses, as he had familiar acquaintance. To say truth, he was not of the
Laodicean temper, nor yet pure in his own eyes: zealous and fervent, not
turbulent and contentious: a faithful servant of God, an humble and obedient
son of the Church, an enemy to faction no less then to superstition. Lastly,
when the few and evil days of his pilgrimage were ended, (as a comfortable
death ever follows a conscionable life,) he patiently and meekly endured Gods
gentle visitation, earnestly longed after his dissolution, and to be with
Christ, which he knew was best of all, and at length (when the time of his
changing was come) devoutly commending his soul to the mercy of his redeemer,
he closed up his eyes in peace, and was carried to his grave with honor. He now
rests from his labors and his works follow him: he has left behind him a
blessed memory, and a name sweeter then any ointment. This holy monument of his
industry I commend to thy use and serious meditation, good Christian Reader:
which favorably accepted may encourage me to publish other of his labors. The
Lord Jesus bless all our endeavors to the building up of his Church, and our
own everlasting salvation, Amen.

Queens College Nou. 28. 1617. Thine in the Lord Jesus, Christopher Potter.

A Table Alphabeticall.
A.
Adversaries of the truth not to to be feared. page 253. Affliction a gift and
grace of God. 89. 700. 707. fruits of them. 80. 180. Comforts in them. 337.
763. 700. whether to be desired. page 709. Aged Ministers to be respected. page
492. Allusions approved in the Scripture. page 592. Ambition a note of false
teachers. page 821. Anabaptists their error touching oaths. page 97.
Apostates censured. page 196. 250. Armor of a Christian. page 512.
B.
Baptism, duties from it. page 342. Bodies of men frail and vile. page 857.
Book of life. page 745. Bowing at the name of Jesus. page 353. Brownists
taxed. page 175. 293. 846. 782.
C.
Calvin we reverence, yet we no Caluinists. page 292. 829. Carfulness. page
800. Censures to be charitable. page 869. Certainty of salvation. page 402.
749. 724. Circumcision two-folde. 597. carnal abolished 602. moral use of it.
page 605. Charity hopes the best. 79. 74^. a work of Christ. page 562. Christ
the only gain. 200. in life. 203. in death. 206. true God. 316. his
obedience. 325. his second coming. 796. duties from it. 843. his sufferings in
soul 329. fruits of his death. 330. how exalted. 341. all creatures subject to
him. 356. the mark of our Christian race. 750. his body not every where. 844.
it is a true body. page 862. Christians to be like minded. 289. why. 290. how
freed from the Law. 328. not void of passions. 538. their courage. page 253.
Church to be remembered in our prayers. 46. not without stain in in this life.
page 286. Company of wicked dangerous. page 437. Confidence must be in Christ.
627. not in our best works. page 637. 661. 649. 657. 666. Contentions
dissuaded. page 299. Contentation in all estates. page 877. 921. Corporal
presence in the Sacrament. page 225. Covetousness. page 880. Cross of Christ.
812. enemies of it. ibid.
D.
DEacons described. page 4. Death may be desired. 215. how. 216. why. 217. not
to be feared. 219. 221. a mercy of God to the faithful. page 532. Devils
subject to Christ. page 361. Distrustful care. 802. reasons against it. ibid.
Dissentions objected to us answered. 291. 786. causes of them. 780. remedies
page 782. Doubting of salvation, a doctrine false and uncomfortable. page 183.
195. 402. 724. Drunkenness. page 826.
E.
EArthly desires. page 825. Elections. page 906. Enemies to the cross of
Christ. page 810. Equity and moderation urged. 774. ^ules for it. page 779.
Erasmus his judgment of Luther. page 591. 621. Exhortations whether they do
inf^^^e (...) page 398. 732. Exalt^tion ^f Christ. page 348. Examp^^s ^^^^tion.
page 790. Expe^^^^ntall knowledge in the word nec^ss^ry. page 124.
F.
FA th commended. 252. a gift of God. 26^. by it are we assured of salu^tion.
403. how it iustifies. page 678. Faithful^^sse. page 919. Faul s how to be
noted. page 734. F^lse teachers, dog^. 583 to beware of them. 587. notes of
them. page 589. 814. Fear servile an ^^fil^all. 406. motives to this la^^er.
page 411. Fellowship in he Go^pell a blessing. page 37. Flock, their duties to
their Pastor. page 231. Freewill con^uted. page 72 398. 415. 731. 893. Friends
their duty. page 54. Fulfilling of the Law. page 888.
G.
GOds immutability the ground of our perseverance. 63. he the author of all
good. 68. 416. delivers out of troubles. 190. providence over his. 791. his
glory cheefely to be aimed at. page 226. Good works. See Works. Good report
to be desired. page 843. Gospel of Christ a great blessing. page 49. 650.
Grace. 4. author of it 5. effects. page 22. 26. Gravity of carriage. page 832.
H.
HEalth a mercy of God. page 530. Hearers of the word their duty. page 374.
Heretics contentious. page 300. Hope a virtue necessary in Christians. 194. it
must be constant. ibid. it is certain. page 409. Hum^lity. 8. an effect of
grace. 87. a preservative of concord. 305. properties of it. page 3^3.
Humiliation of Christ voluntary, 323. it was of the whole person. page 324.
Hypocrisy. page 248.
I.
IGnorance in religion. page 120. Imitation of Saints. 790. rules for it. page
792. Impatience in wrongs. page 794. Inferiors not to be contemned. page 503.
Invocation of Saints condemned. page 26. 57. 59. ^66. Joy in the Lord. 572.
756. it contains the whole worship of God. page 612. Justification not by
works. 150. 672. (See Merits) by imputed righteousness. page 677.
K.
KNowledge in the Word. page 119. 652. Knowledge of Christ threefolde. 643. it
is excellent and precious. 649. 684. great vantage. 651. experimental. page
683.
L.
LEuiticall ceremonies abolished. page 60^. Life ought to be conformahle to our
profession. 242. reasons. 243. a warfare. 511. we are not to esteem it for
Christ. page 558. Light, how the faithful are lights. 442. they communicate
their light to others. page 449. Light behavior. page 833. Love testified by
prayer. 23. persuaded. 103. 114. 250. qualities of true love. 103. to be
guided by knowledge. page 127. Lying. page 829.
M.
MAintenance of Ministers. page 901. Martyrs ground of their cheerfulness.
page 200. Means of grace. page 267. Mercy of God. 5. use of it. page 6. Merit
confuted. 154. 183. 339. 390. 933. it cannot stand with Christ. page 664.
Ministers their duty. 10. 373. 850 calling honorable. 13. 74. their success
from God. 73. willingly to be heard. 175. 475. to love their people. 499. how
they ought to be qualified. 474. whether now worse then ever. 482. how to be
entertained. 549. 555. to visit the sick. 561. to be maintained. page 901.
Ministry a labor. 507. a warrefare. page 512. Multitude not safe to be
followed. page 808. 905. Mutual affection commended. page 471. 547. Murmuring
against God or man. page 421.
N.
NAme of Jesus. page 353. Natural man described. page 71. 440 444. 891.
O.
OBedience of Christ active and passive. page 326. Occasion of this Epistle.
page 2. Oath lawful. 94. conditions of it. page 96. Ouerweening conceit a sin.
page 87. 736.
P.
PApists, their dissentions. 292. slanderers of religion and true professors.
590. 661. enemies of the cross of Christ. page 812. Patrons of livings. page
920. Pastors to love their flocks. 103. 209. 276. 373. 805. 725. 499. to
entreat them gently. 568. 733. ought to be patterns of holiness. 796. 850.
often to iterate their admonitions. page 803. Paul twice prisoner under Nero.
page 156. Peace of God and of conscience. page 4. 813. 859. Pelagianisme by
whom renewed. page 302. Perfection in this life. page 718. 735 759. 888.
Persecution for the Gospel. 82. 259. a gift of God. 88. 268. it does not
diminish the Church. page 159. Perseverance final. proved. 63. 747. 733.
parts of it. page 64. Persuasion threefold. 76. how a man may be persuaded of
another salvation. page 77. Philippi a City of Macedonia. page 3. Physic.
page 530. Popish Clergy. 484. perfection page 762. Poverty comforts in it.
page 884. Prayer to God alone. 26. 54. necessity of it. 43. 51. 108. motives to
it. 109. it is effectual. page 186. Preachers different. 171. marks of a good
Preacher. page 173. Proficiency in religion. page 376. 396. 721. 730. Promises
of God. page 856. Providence of God. page 468. Purgatory confuted. page 224.
360. Purity to be labored after. page 138. 838.
Q.
QVarrelling. 424. to compose them a Christian duty. page 738. Questions
touching ceremonies and discipline not substantial. page 293.
R.
RAge of tyrants a token of their perdition. page 257. Recusants censured. page
351. Regeneration imperfect in this life. 286. 716. 433. the true circumcision.
606. it alters the whole man. page 632. 891. Relapses in religion. page 397.
Resurrection of Christ, duties from it. page 341. Resurrection of our bodies
confirmed. page 854 863. Reward of works. page 916. 929. 933. Rich men their
duty. page 883. Righteousness twofold. 668. of faith and of works cannot
stand together. page 671.
S.
Sabbath. page 836. 941. Sacrifices of Christians. page 464. 933. Saints in
Christ, who. page 3. 433. 944. Saints not mediators of intercession. 28. 57. to
be reverenced. 60. and imitated. 790. subject to infirmities. page 743. 791.
866. Security. page 195. 413. Sickness incident to the faithful, and why, 519.
of flying in the time of sickness. page 559. Schism, causes thereof. 780.
remedies. page 782. Scriptures not obscure. 1^0. to be searched with
diligence. page 121. 584. Soul of man immortal. page 222. 858. Suffering for
Christ. page 268. Swearing reproved. page 9.
T.
TImothy the approuer of this Epistle. page 2. Thanksgiving to God. 34. 809.
how we are to give thanks. page 40.
V.
Vainglory to be avoided. page 303 625. 824. Virtue of Christ's resurrection.
page 692. Unity in affection and judgment persuaded. page 294. Unregenerate,
their actions all sinful. page 151. 153. 891. Unthankfulness to God a
grievous sin. page 35. 810. Usury condemned. page 846.
W.
WAnt does not deiect Gods Children. page 875. Weak to be supported. page 770.
Will accepted for the deed. page 434. Women commended in the Scriptures. page
742. Works good, their causes. 144. we are to abound in them. 145. fruits of
righteousness. 149. their author. 152. their end. 153. persuaded by our
Church. 247. 394. 639. true use of them. 663. no part of our righteousness.
592. 659. 674. 634. how called dung. page 637. 646 661. Word of God a light.
443. 445. a word of life. page 451. Worldly carfulness. page 800.
OBSERVATIONS more largely amplified.
CHAP. I.
Thanksgiving is a service principally required in a Christian. 34 Our
fellowship in the Gospel with other Churches a great blessing. 36 Prayer is
needful even for those graces we have. 43 We are to pray for the continuance
of the Gospel. 48 The ground of our perseverance is the immutabilitie of God.
63 All our sufficiency is of God. 68 Our love to Ministers a good argument of
our growth in godliness. 82 To suffer persecution for righteousness sake is a
gift and grace of God. 88. 268 Prayer necessary for the increase of Gods
graces. 108. 186 We must proceed and go forward in godliness. 112 Christians
are to abound in good works. 145 Good works are the fruits of righteousness.
149 The Church is not diminished but increased by persecution. 158 Afflictions
of the godly turn to their comfort. 180 Christ Jesus the only gain and
vantage of Christians. 200 A Christians desire should be to be dissolved and to
be with Christ. 215 The dissolution of Gods Saints is a passage into heaven.
221 The long life of good Pastors a blessing of God upon a people. 229 Our
practice must be conformable to our profession, 242 In a Christian courage we
are not to fear the adversaries of the truth. 253 The rage of persecutors an
infallible sign of their destruction. 257 Faith is a special gift of God. 265
CHAP. II.
NO Church so reformed, but has somewhat amiss. 286 All Christians are to
strive to be like minded in the Lord. 289 Contentions to be avoided. 299
Humility a preservative against contention and vainglory. 305 Christ Jesus a
perfect pattern of humility. 315 The obedience of Christ the ground of all
our comfort. 325 Christian confession of Christ necessary. 363 To begin in the
spirit is not sufficient, unless we continue. 396 Doubting of salvation a
desperate and uncomfortable doctrine. 402 We are to pass the time of our
dwelling here in fear. 411 Murmuring against God or men forbidden Christians.
420 How Christians may live blameless in the midst of a crooked nation. 438
All the faithful are lights in the world. 443 The glory of Gods Minister is
the gain of souls. 456 The issue of all actions is in the hand of God. 467 A
great sin in Ministers to seek their own more than Christ's. 478 Superiors
in place or gifts ought not to contemn their inferiors. 503 The Ministry is a
painful labor. 507. and a warfare. 512 Children of God never quite rid of
sorrow in this life. 546 The Ministers of Christ are to be entertained with all
respect. 549 Christians are not to respect their lives for the work of Christ.
558
CHAP. III.
THe Minister of God is to temper his speech according to the quality of his
hearers. 568 The joy of Christians must be in the Lord. 572. 7 6 False teachers
are diligently to be avoided. 589 Christians in some cases may lawfully stand
upon their own commendations. 624 Conversion works an alteration in the whole
man. 632 Good works are no part of our righteousness before God. 634. 659. 674
The best of our works are but loss or dung; and how. 637. 661 The knowledge
of Christ Jesus is excellent and precious. 649 To renounce our own
righteousness is both difficult and yet necessary. 657 Righteousness imputed and
inherent in justification cannot stand together. 671 We are justified by
righteousness imputed. 677 Experimental knowledge of Christ necessary to a
Christian. 684 To be afflicted for Christ, is an advantage. 700. 707 The best
of Gods Saints in this life come short of perfection. 716. 735 Gods children
may be certainly assured of their salvation. 726 Christians are to strive
toward perfection. 721. 729. 747 Life eternal the reward of our Christian
race. 753 God alone opens the heart to attend unto the word. 774 In our
Christian imitation we are to make choice of the best examples. 790 It is not
always safe to follow a multitude. 808. 905 The reward of the impenitent is
damnation. 815 We are here but pilgrims, our City is above. 832 Christ will
certainly come the second time to judgment. 843 The faithful desire and long
for that coming. 846 Christ will raise up his children from the grave to
glory. 854
CHAP. IV.
MInisters to instruct and admonish publicly and privately. 736 It is a
Christian duty to compose quarrels and contentions. 738 Christians are to
rejoice in the Lord in all estates. 756 For unities sake we are to yield of our
right. 774 The providence of God is ever near his children to succor them in
troubles. 791 Worldly and distrustful care by all means to be avoided. 800
Thanksgiving unto God a necessary Christian duty. 809 Whatsoever things are
true, honest* etc. we are to practice. 826 Practice must be joined with
profession. 848 The Minister should be a pattern of holiness to his people.
850. 796 Gods graces are not always alike manifest in his children. 869 We are
charitably to censure the slips of our brethren. 869 We are to be content with
that estate wherein God has placed us. 875 The power of doing any good is from
Christ, 892 Ministers are to partake of our temporal things. 901 Good works
further our reckoning in the day of Christ. 915 Works of charity are sweet
smelling sacrifices. 923 God will surely recompense what good soever is done
unto his Saints. 929 Always in all things God is to be praised. 939
ERRATA.
Page 117. for Savior read savor. p 153. in whatsoever good, deleatur. p. 245
secrets, read streets. p. 249. conversion, r. conversation. p. 404. promises,
read praemises. p. 493. was a mother, read was as a mother. p. 500. courses of
Gods house, read courts. p. 590. Martyn, read Martyr. p. 751. viri, fraetres,
deleatur. p. 769. divine eyes, read dim eyes. p. 809. Et hoc sciamus
fortiorem etc. deleatur. Chap. 4. in the beginning, for folio 721. read 865.
866. and so forwards to the end.

LECTVRES ON THE WHOLE Epistle of S. PAVL to the PHILIPPIANS.
LECTVRE I.
CHAPTER I. Verse 1. Paul and Timotheus the servants of Jesus Christ, to all
the Saints in Christ Jesus which are at Philippi, with the Bishops and Deacons.

2. Grace be with you, and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus
Christ.


WHEN first it pleased the Lord to call me to this set work in this place, by
reason of my short time to deliberate, I chose for the time that text of
scripture which was appointed to be read for the Epistle the next Sabbath,
beginning at the 5 verse of the 2 chapter of this Epistle, purposing afterward
to make choice of some other scripture which happily might better fit this
place. But so it pleased the Lord to dispose that I should go forward even
throughout the Epistle unto the end, and the last day conclude my observations
thereupon in your hearing. Now I have thought good again to begin with that
whereof I have made an end, that so, if the Lord will, the meaning of this
whole Epistle, and the doctrines thereof, may in good time be delivered in your
hearing.

Paul and Timotheus] I shall not need to speak much touching the occasion
whereupon the Apostle wrote this Epistle, because I have already spoken almost
of all the things that occasioned it. The Philippians having heard of the
Apostles imprisonment at Rome, sent their Minister Epaphroditus unto him, with
relief from them to supply his necessities. Whereupon Epaphroditus coming to
Rome, told the Apostle the state of the Church at Philippi, how that there were
false Apostles crept in amongst them, which urged circumcision, and the works
of the Law, and that the Philippians constantly withstood them. The Apostle
therefore to commend their constancy for their further encouragement thereunto,
to arm them against the false teachers for their clear satisfaction in the
points which they urged, and to give them thanks for their great liberality
toward him, wherein they showed their care for him, wrote this Epistle unto
them.

Wherein, as in all other his Epistles is 1. set down the inscription. 2. the
salutation. 3. the body of the Epistle it self. In the inscription, 1. we have
the persons saluting. 2. the persons saluted. The persons saluting are
described 1. by their proper names, and then by a title of dignity commune to
them both. The names of the persons saluting are, Paul and Timotheus: Paul,
called also sometimes Saul, the writer of this Epistle, and Timotheus the
approuer of it; or Paul the inditer of it, and Timotheus the writer of it. The
title of dignity commune to them both whereby they are described is this, the
servants of Jesus Christ; servants both, and therefore to attend upon their
ministry and service, and both servants of Jesus Christ, and therefore to
attend upon the ministration of the gospel which he had committed unto them,
but yet the servants of Jesus the Savior of the world, even of Jesus Christ
anointed a King to defend us, a Prophet to teach us, and a Priest to offer up
a sacrifice for our sins. The persons saluted are generally, the whole Church
of Philippi, and more particularly the Bishops, and Deacons there. The whole
Church at Philippi generally is saluted under the name of all the Saints in
Christ Jesus which are at Philippi. for by all the saints in Christ Jesus, he
means all them which in baptism had given their names unto Christ Jesus,
thenceforth to die unto sin, and to live unto God in righteousness and true
holiness, which was all the Church at Philippi. Now this Philppi was a chief
City in the parts of Macedonia, Act. 16.12.
whose inhabitants came from Rome to dwell there, the first City in the
passage out of Thracia beyond the river Strymon. At the first it is generally
thought to have been called Crenida, because of the many fountains about the
hill whereon it was built, (...) being as much as fons: and afterward to have
been called Philippi, because of the fortification and enlargement thereof by
Philip King of Macedon; and now to be called Gricopolis, as if ye would call
it Chrysopolis, a City of gold, because of the great abundance of gold that is
there, so great that Philip is said to have received thence yearly above 1000
talents of gold, which is as much as 600 thousand french crowns. This City is
notably known, as for the great overthrow of Brutus and Cassius there by
Octauius and Antonie; so especially for the preaching of the gospel there by
Paul, and Silas, and Timotheus, for the embracing of the truth there by their
ministry, and for many other accidents there during the Apostle his abode
there: for Paul being warned by the spirit to go into Macedonia, he went
thither, and first came to Philippi, and there preached, and by his preaching
converted Lydia, so that she and her household were baptized. Afterward he
cast out of a maid a spirit of divination. Whereupon he was brought before
the Magistrates, sore beaten with rods, cast into the inner prison, and his
feet thrust into the stocks. Being there in prison, the foundation of the
prison was shaken by an earthquake, the doors were opened, the prisoners bands
were loosed, the Iaylor was converted, he and his house baptized, and the
Apostle delivered. For these things this City is well known, and it was the
Church generally in this City, that the Apostle saluted.

The persons more particularly saluted are the Bishops and Deacons there. Where
by Bishops, he means the Pastors and Teachers which labored in the word and
doctrine. For both the word so signifies throughout the whole New Testament,
and here it must needs so signify, because he speaks of many in one Church.
By Deacons also, he means those that by their office were to receive and
distribute the common liberality of the Church, according to the necessities
of all the poor members thereof, such as we read to have been ordained in the
Church, Act. 6 5. and such as are described by our Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.8. etc.
Unto whom together with the Bishops, the Apostle is thought here to write, as
to magnify their office, so because theirs had been the care chiefly in
respect of their office, to send the Churches liberality to him by their
Minister Epaphroditus.

The salutation follows, wherein he wishes them all good from him which is
the author of all goodness. Where 1. is set down the thing which he wishes
unto them, which is grace and peace, understanding by grace the free favor of
God, wherewith he loves his children, and whence as from the fountain all
other goodness does flow: and by peace every blessing corporal and
spiritual, for this life and that that is to come, flowing from that fountain
of grace. 2. is set down unto whom he wishes this grace and peace, namely
unto all the Saints at Philippi, together with the Bishops etc. 3. is set down
the author from whom, and by whom he wishes this grace and peace unto them,
which is from God our father as the fountain and first original, from whom
comes every good and perfect gift, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, as the
means by whom every grace of the spirit is conveyed and derived unto us. Thus
much for the purpose of the Apostle in these words, and the meaning of them.
Now let us see what notes we may gather hence for our farther use and
instruction.

Paul and Timotheus] First then for the very name of Paul it should not pass
us reading, or hearing of it, but therein we should observe the great mercy of
our gracious God toward sinful creatures. For what was Paul that now wrote
unto the Churches here and there to stablish them in the faith? Surely he was
sometimes a bloody Saul, a cruel persecutor of Gods Church, one that having
received authority of the High Priests, Act. 26.10.
shut up many of the Saints in prison, and when they were put to death gave his
sentence, 11.
and punished them throughout all the synagogues, and compelled them to
blaspheme, and being more mad upon them persecuted them even unto strange
Cities, one that was a blasphemer, 1 Timothy 1.13.
an oppressor, that spared neither men nor women, Act. 22.4.
but beat them, and bound them, and delivered them unto death, Gal. 1.13.
one that persecuted the Church of God extremely, and wasted it. All which
things himself testifies of himself. Could there well have been a more
forlorn man, a more desperate and godles creature? Yet this man was received
unto mercy, yea unto such mercy, that the Lord called him to be an Apostle, and
chose him to bear his name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and the children of
Israel. And that this was a work of the Lord his own mercy, our Apostle
himself witnesses, where he thus says, I was a blasphemer, and a persecutor,
and an oppressor, 1 Timothy 1.13.
but I was received to mercy. And why was he received to mercy? himself tells
us saying, for this cause was I received to mercy, 16.
that Jesus Christ should first show on me all long-suffering, to the ensample
of them that shall in time to come believe in him unto eternal life. It was
then the Lord his great mercy toward him, that of a cruel persecutor he
became an holy Apostle of Christ Jesus, and this mercy was showed on him, that
in him might be an example of Gods mercy toward miserable sinners. I might
instance in the like mercy of the Lord toward Matthew, first a Publican,
afterward an Evangelist; toward Zaccheus, first a sinful man, afterward a
notable convert; toward the thief on the Cross, ere while on the cross,
after a while in paradise etc. but I will not trouble you with multitude of
examples, wherein might appear the riches of Gods great mercies, toward great
and grievous sinners.

Neither let this be any encouragement unto any man, to let loose the reins
unto sin, because where sin abounds there mercy abounds much more: for
if any man upon such examples of his mercies shall presume and make bold to
sin, let him also know, that as the Lord is merciful, so is he also just,
and that toward him and such as he is, justice shall triumph over mercy.
Rather let this so loving mercy of the Lord teach us, neither to despair in
our selves, nor of others, though great sinners: for what though we have
omitted such things a^ we ought to have done, nor only so, but committed such
things as we ought not to have done? What if we have committed incest with Lot?
or murder, and adultery with David? Nay what if we have been blasphemers, or
persecutors with Paul? unjust with Zaccheus? or thieves with him on the cross?
The Lord has mercy enough for us in store, and others as great sinners as we,
and overtaken with the like sins have been recei^ unto mercy. Only let us
acknowledge our sins with David, Luc. 7.38.
weep for our sins with the woman in the gospel, obey when the Lord calls
upon us with Paul, receive him joyfully when he comes unto us with Zaccheus,
and pray fervently unto him with the thief upon the cross, and then assure we
our selves we shall be received unto mercy. And who knows of any but the Lord
may give grace unto repentance, and then surely follows mercy. The Lord his
mercies are in his own dispensing: he may when he will, and he does when he
sees it good, renew the heart, and grant mercy. Though therefore the prodigal
child run a lewd course for a long time, yet let us hope that the Lord will
at length give grace unto repentance, and receive him unto mercy.

Paul and Timotheus] The second thing which I note is, that the Apostle joins
unto himself Timothy, aged Paul, young Timothy, an excellent Apostle, an
inferior Minister; the author of the Epistle, him that only approved it, or at
the most wrote it from his mouth; and all this to grace and credit Timothy
with the Philippians, unto whom he meant shortly to send him, as it appears
by the next chapter, verse. 19. Whence 1. I observe a notable example of rare
humility. for a rare and seldom thing it is to be seen, superiors to receive
their inferiors into the honor of their labors, and to be willing that what
honor or favor may accrue unto them by their labors, may be communicated
likewise to their inferiors, who had little or no hand in them. Nay commonly
superiors in authority, or learning, or otherwise, count it a great debasing
unto themselves, to be thought to have had their inferiors to have joined with
them in their labors, to have used their help, or to equal them with
themselves. Yet such was Paul's humility, that he gladly received Timothy, a
faithful minister of the gospel, but far inferior unto him, into the honor
of his labors, and equalled him unto himself, as if his hand had been as far
in the writing of this Epistle as was his own, that as they should accept of
him for it, so they might accept of Timothy also. He had learned that lesson
well, which our blessed Savior gave both him and us to learn from himself,
Mat. 11.29.
saying, Learn of me that I am meek and lowly in heart. And himself herein
gave the Philippians a good pattern of that, whereunto afterward he exhorts
them, Phil. 2.3.
that in meekness of mind every man should esteem others better than
himself. His estimation of Timothy, and his lowliness of heart are
sufficiently witnessed by this his associating of him unto himself: but such a
selfe-liking has now possessed men that such humility is hardly to be found.
Every man likes his own labors so well, and stands so much upon his
reputation, that he cannot endure the disgrace, that any man should say or
think, that he has had this or that help, this or that advise, that he never
did this or that of himself. To have the credit or commendation of any thing
well done of our selves we like it well, but if any be joined in with us,
especially our inferiors, we make little reckning, and oftentimes had as lieue
want it as have it so. So far are we from the Apostles humility. Whereunto if
we will attain, we must not think of our selves above that is meet, we must
think of others according to their worth, we must not think much to receive
others into the honors of our labors, and we must make our selves equal to
them of lower sort then our selves. And this if we do we shall be good
followers of the Apostles humility.

2. In this joining of Timothy unto himself, I observe a good pattern of that
care which ought to be had of of the Ministers credit with his people. For
wherefore did the Apostle join Timothy unto himself? He meant to send Timothy
shortly unto the Philippians to instruct them in the ways of God more
perfectly, as appears by the next chapter: and therefore for the better credit
of him in his ministry with them when he should come unto them, in writing unto
them he receives him into the honor of his labors, and joins him unto
himself. So should they do that are called unto greater place in the Church
then others of their calling. They should by all means seek the grace, and
credit, and countenance of the Minister with his people; yea whatsoever might
be for the furtherance of him in his ministry they should with all holy care
regard it: for the grace we see of the Minister is the grace of his ministry;
and the more he is countenanced by his superiors, the more he prevails in his
ministry with his people. As therefore they would give testimony of their care
of the Church, and of the building up thereof by the ministry of the gospel,
so they should have care of the Ministers credit with his people. And I wish
they would do so. But I pass over to that which follows.

The third thing which here I note, is the title of dignity common to them
both, whereby both Paul and Timothy are described. In the latter to the
Corinths, and in the epistle to the Colossians, the Apostle in the inscription
of his Epistles ioynes Timothy to himself as here he does, but there in title
he seuereth himself from Timothy, saying, Paul as Apostle of Jesus Christ and
our brother Timotheus: and likewise in the Epistle to Phil^mon, saying, Paul a
prisoner of Jesus Ch is it, and our brother Timotheus. But here he makes no
difference betwixt himself and Timothy, assuming only that title which was
commune to them both, the servants of Christ Jesus. Which title in it self
albeit it be common to them with all that have given their names unto Christ
Jesus, forasmuch as this is the title of all that are baptized into Christ
Jesus; yet both in other places does our Apostle entitle himself, and in this
place entitle both himself and Timothy, and consequently all the Ministers of
the gospel, hereunto in a special respect of their service in the ministry
of the gospel of Christ Jesus, and of the great dignity and honor vouchsafed
them thereby. Hence then 1. I observe a duty for the Ministers of the gospel,
whereof their very names is to put them in mind. They are called the servants
of Christ Jesus; they must therefore remember that they are so, and carry
themselves as servants of Christ Jesus, and not Lords over Gods heritage. A
servant is to do that, and that only which his master commands him, he is to
be faithful in his service, he is not to seek his own, but the things of his
master, his life is not to be dear unto him in the service of his master. The
Ministers then of the gospel, being the servants of Christ Jesus, as he does
bid them to pluck up, or to root out, or to destroy, or to build, or to plant,
so they are to do. If he give them a roll to eat, they must eat it up; if he
give them a commission, they must look unto it, and not go without the bounds
of it; if he send them to Kings and Princes, or whomsoever, they must keep
nothing back, but deliver unto them all the counsel of God; if he require
them to lay down their lives for his sake, they must not love their lives unto
the death. Go, (says our blessed Savior) and teach all nations, baptizing
them in the name of the Father, Mat. 28.19, 20.
and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you. These be the words of our commission: teach.
but what? what I have commanded you. For other, we must say as Balaam unto
Balak, If Balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, Number. 24.13.
I cannot pass the commandment of the Lord, to do either good or bad of mine
own mind: what the Lord shall command that will I speak. We are servants of
Christ Jesus, and therefore we must do as he has commanded us, and not
otherwise.

What shall we say then unto them that coin us out new articles of the faith,
that add, and detract, and change at their pleasure the rites and ceremonies
in the Sacraments, that thrust upon us traditions, and unwritten verities, that
press us with a number of things, as observation of days, and months, and
times, and years, vows of poverty, chastity, and blind obedience,
pilgrimages* invocation of Saints, adoration of images, and the like, things
never commanded by God, nor having any warrant in the word? Are these the
servants of Christ Jesus? They will needs be the Vicars and Vicegerents of
Christ Jesus upon earth. But is not this to carry themselves as Lords over Gods
heritage, thus to rule over them in things not commanded by the Lord? If they
be the servants of Jesus Christ, they may not rule over the consciences of men
in things not commanded by the Lord; or if they so rule over them, they are not
the servants of Christ.

Again, what shall we say unto them that hide their talent in the earth, that
suffer the graces of Gods spirit to wax idle and to decay in them, that do not
use the gifts bestowed upon them, to the gaining of men unto the faith, and to
the increase of Christ his kingdom; that sow pillowes under all arme-holes,
that heal the hurt of the daughter of the Lords people with sweet words,
saying, peace, peace, when there is no peace, that give not the people warning
when they are commanded, that keep back part of their message, and do not
deliver the whole counsel of God as they are appointed? Are these the servants
of Jesus Christ? 1 Cor. 4.2.
Of every servant, and of every disposer it is required that he be faithful.
Now is this to be faithful in the Lord his service, either to leave it undone,
or to do it otherwise then it should be done, or to do it but in part, and by
halues? If so, then let these be servants of Jesus Christ; if not, then either
they are no servants, or unfaithful servants of Christ Jesus. And to be none,
or to be but bad ones is no great difference.

Again, what shall we say unto them that with Demas forsake Paul, and embrace
this present world, that with Diotrephes love rather to have the praeeminence
amongst men then to labor in the works of their calling, that follow their
ease, or their pleasure, or their profit, and look not to the charges
committed unto them, Phil. 2 21.
that seek their own, and not that which is Jesus Christ's, like unto those of
whom our Apostle complains. Are these the servants of Christ Jesus? A good
servants care is about his masters matter, not his own. So that if they be
servants, yet surely no good servants, because they care for their own and not
their masters, or more then their masters.

Lastly, what shall we say unto them, that when persecutions and troubles
arise, start aside like a broken bow, that love their lives better then that
for their ministry, they will hazard them unto the death, that either will not
speak unto Herod, or else will handle the matter better then that for ought
they will speak, they will lose their head with John Baptist, or be cast into
prison, and there have their feet clapped fast in the stocks with Jeremiah the
Prophet? Are these the servants of Christ Jesus? Our Apostle when he was going
unto certain bands, I pass not at all says he neither is my life dear unto
my self, Act. 20.24.
so that I may fulfill my course with joy, and the ministration which I have
received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of God. Here
was a good servant of Jesus Christ, and such should all his servants be, and
they that are not such are either none, or no good servants of Jesus Christ. If
then we will be rightly entitled with Paul and Timothy unto the servants of
Jesus Christ, let his word be our warrant for whatsoever we teach men to
observe and do, and let us not dare to pass the limits of our commission to
do otherwise then we have received commandment of our Lord and master Christ
Jesus: let us faithfully use the gifts and graces of Gods spirit bestowed upon
us, for the gaining of men unto the faith and knowledge of Christ Jesus, and
let us not dare either to smother them, or otherwise to lay them out then to
our masters advantage, let us always in all th ngs seek the honor and glory
of Christ Jesus, and let us not dare to seek out own ease, or pleasure, or
profit, or honor more then the things of Christ Jesus; let our ministration
which we have received of our master Christ Jesus, be most precious in our
eyes, and let not our lives be dear unto us to spend them in his service. Thus
indeed shall we be rightly entitled unto the servants of Christ Jesus in
respect of our ministry; and thus shall we well discharge that duty, whereof
this title may sufficiently remember us.

The second thing which I observe from this title whereunto Paul and Timothy
are entitled, is the great honor and dignity vouchsafed unto the ministers of
the gospel of Christ Jesus. For what greater honor and dignity then this to be
the servants of Christ Jesus, the Savior of the world, the mighty God, the
King of glory, the prince of peace, the great bishop of our souls, the
everlasting high priest of our profession, and that in that service to bear
his name before the Kings, and Princes, and great men of the earth, to be his
Ambassadors to declare his will unto his people, to be his stewards to give
every man their portion of meat in due season? Let a man, says the Apostle, 1
Cor. 4.1.
so think of us as of the Ministers of Christ. and disposers of the secrets of
God. And how can a man be better esteemed then if he be so thought of? Again,
we, says the Apostle, are ambassadors for Christ. What, for Christ? what honor
is this? 2 Cor. 5.20.
To be Ambassadors for a mortal Prince is such an honor, as not many great men
are vouchsafed unto. What honor then is it to be ambassadors for Christ the
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, which all the ministers of the gospel are?
And when the Lord told Ananias, that Paul was a chosen vessel unto him, Act.
9.15.
to bear his name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and children of Israel, in
effect he told him, that he had called him unto the greatest honor among the
sons of men. And yet this is the honor of all them that serve him in the
ministry of the gospel.

Which honor if he knew that will needs be the vicar of Christ on earth, then
why does he not rest satisfied with this honor, to be the servant of Jesus
Christ in the ministry of the gospel of Jesus Christ, but he must be the
supreme head over all persons upon earth, so that Kings and Princes must lay
down their Crowns at his feet, and be deposed and disposed of at his
pleasure? Howsoever he know it, or know it not, if it be known amongst us, why
is it that we are made as the filth of the world, and the off-scowring of all
things? The calling of a Minister what more base and contemptible amongst men?
and yet what calling indeed more high and honorable? Whose person more maligned
and disgraced, then the person of the Minister? and yet whose more to be
reverenced and countenanced? Well, howsoever commonly we be thought of, we are
the servants of Jesus Christ in the ministry of the gospel for your sakes,
and as though God did beseech you through us, we pray you in Christ's steed that
ye be reconciled unto God. And howsoever ye think of us, yet think as ye
ought of the word of your salvation which we bring unto you, and receive it
from us not as the word of man, but as it is indeed the word of God, which is
able to make you wise unto salvation.

The fourth thing which I note is in the persons of them whom he saluteth, and
unto whom he writes. The persons generally are all the saints in Christ Jesus
which are at Philippi, even the whole Church of Philippi, so many as were
baptized into Christ Jesus. Whence I observe, what ought to be the study even
of the whole Church militant, which is, to be saints in Christ Jesus, that such
as they are in outward profession, such they may be in truth and in deed
through the power of the of the spirit of sanctification in the inner man. Now
we are, so many as are baptized into the name of Christ Jesus, by an outward
profession saints and holy, our baptism so witnessing our holy profession, as
circumcision did the Jews. It is then another holiness whereunto we are to
give all diligence, then this sacramental holiness, even an inherent
holiness, that being sanctified throughout both in our souls and in our
bodies, we may be blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. We must
study to be holy in all manner of conversation, even as he which has called
us is holy, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, and living soberly, and
righteously, and godly in this present world. And here unto we do bind our
selves as it were by solemn vow and obligation in the presence of the Church,
when we are sacramentally sanctified by baptism, promising there to forsake
the devil and all his works, constantly to believe Gods holy word, and
obediently to keep his commandments. So that thenceforth, as the Apostle often
exhorts, we should walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, we should
crucify the flesh with the affections and the lusts and walk in the spirit in
newness of life; we should cast off the old man which is corrupt through the
deceiuable lusts, and put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness: in a word, we should die unto sin, and live
unto God. Otherwise how is our baptism the washing of the new birth unto us,
and the renewing of the Holy Ghost? Sacramentally it is, but effectually it is
not, unless by the power of the spirit of sanctification the body of sin be
destroyed in us, that it may not reign in us, and the life of God be renewed in
us, that we may live unto God in Jesus Christ our Lord. Neither does it indeed
at all profit us, to be sealed outwardly with the seal of an holy profession,
unless by the power of the spirit we be sanctified in the inner man, to lead
our lives in all godliness and holiness: for unto these only Christ Jesus is
made of God wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, and
these only are made partakers of that imputed holiness, which properly is in
Christ Jesus, and is imputed unto them which are in Christ Jesus. And this is
it which indeed makes us holy, and saints in Christ Jesus. Our inherent
holiness is utterly imperfect, full of unholiness, and all shall be perfect in
the heavens. Yet is it so accepted with God through Jesus Christ our Lord, that
having it, his is imputed unto us, whereby we are made Saints in Christ Jesus.
So that if as we are called, and as by outward profession through baptism we
are Saints in Christ Jesus, so we will truly be Saints in Christ Jesus. We must
follow after holiness, and be filled with the fruits of righteousness, which
are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God, this inherent holiness
only being the pledge and seal of that imputed holiness, whereby we are most
truly Saints in Christ Jesus.

A good lesson for all them to meditate upon, that are baptized into the name
of Christ Jesus; but whereon it may well seem, that a great many of us never
think. For if we did, could it be that we should so wallow in sin, and drink
iniquity like water as we do? that we should so defile our selves with
adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, hatred, debate, emulations,
wrath, contentions, envy, theft, murder, drunkenness, gluttony, pride, lying,
swearing, and the like, as we do that we should so profane the Lords Sabboths,
so decline from the works of the spirit, and so delight our selves in the works
of the flesh as we do? Know ye not, says the Apostle, Romans 6.3,
that all we which have been baptized into Jesus Christ have been baptized
into his death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of
the father, 4.
so we also should walk in newnes of life? Surely either we know it not, or
remember it not, and whether soever it be, it argues that we are not the men
that we should be. Beloved, sin and saints sort not together. If ye suffer
sin to reign in your mortal bodies, well may the filth of the flesh be put
away through the outward washing, but ye are not indeed of the communion of
Saints, because not washed by the spirit, in the spirit of your minds. Let no
man therefore deceive himself. Either ye must be Saints in Christ Jesus, or
else ye belong not to his kingdom. And if ye be Saints, then may ye not
suffer sin to reign in your mortal bodies. Fly therefore from sin, as from
a serpent, and follow after peace with all men, and holiness, without which no
man shall see the Lord. So shall ye not only be of the number of them that
are called Saints through the body of their outward profeshon, but ye shall be
indeed Saints in Christ Jesus.

LECTVRE II.
PHILIP. I. With the Bishops and Deacons.

Verse. 2. Grace be with you, and peace from God our father, and from our Lord
Jesus Christ.


IT remains now, that we come unto the persons saluted more particularly,
which are the Bishops and Deacons at Philippi. Where by Bishops, he means the
ministers and teachers there which labored in the word and doctrine. For that
the word must needs so signify in this place, appears, because he speaks
of many Bishops in one Church and City. And so frequently it signifies in the
new Testament, as easily may be seen by looking into those places where this
word is used. Afterward the name of Bishop came to be a distinct title of men
more eminent in the ministry, as now it is. By Deacons also the Apostle I
take it, means those that by their office were to receive, and to distribute
the common liberality of the Church according to the necessities of all the
poor members thereof, such as we read to have been ordained in the Church,
Act. 6.5. and such as are described by our Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.8. etc. for albeit
the word here used have likewise other significations in the new Testament, yet
here the distinction of Bishops and Deacons shows, that by Deacons are meant
such as attend on distribution, not on teaching or exhortation. Now unto these
together with the Bishops the Apostle is thought here to write, as to magnify
their office, so because theirs had been the care chiefly in respect of their
office, to send the Churches liberality unto him by their minister
Epaphroditus.

Here then 1. in that the Apostle writes as to the whole Church of Philippi,
so particularly unto the Bishops and Deacons there, I observe that as
admonitions, exhortations, instructions, consolations, and the like, are
continually needful for the Church for the further building thereof in perfect
beauty, so are they likewise needful for the ministers of the Church, and all
others any way interessed therein, for their farther confirmation in the things
that belong unto their peace. Whereupon it was that our Apostle going bound in
the spirit unto Jerusalem, called the Elders of the Church of Ephesus together,
and exhorted them saying, Take heed unto your selves, Act. 20.28.
and to all the flock whereof the Holy Ghost has made you ouer-seers, to
feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood. And
hereupon it was that in his Epistles unto Timothy and Titus, he gave them so
many instructions, admonitions, and exhortations, as he that reads may there
easily see. They were ministers of the gospel, set over their flocks, and well
instructed ^n the scriptures, yet still the Apostle thought it needful to
warn them, and to arm them, and to instruct them in the way of God more
perfitly. For he knew that Judas the Apostle had fallen from the fellowship
which he had obtained in the ministration of the Gospel, Act. 1.17, 18.
and had purchased a field with the reward of iniquity: as also that many that
labored with him in the gospel, sought their own, and not that which was
Jesus Christ's; and that many fainted and shrunk through the opposition of
false Teacherrs.

Here then 1. is a good lesson for them that are greatest and most eminent in
the Church, I mean for the reverend Fathers and Bishops of our Church, that
be it by writing, or speaking, instruction, or exhortation, or else howsoever,
they seek the good as of all the Saints in Christ Jesus that depend upon them,
so withal of the Bishops and Deacons. I mean of them that are appointed for
the work of the ministry, or for any function about the Church. A better
president then the Apostles they cannot have to follow, and as needful it is
now to write and speak unto, and to labor with the Pastors and Teachers of
the people as then it was. For many now we have that with Demas embrace this
present world, but very few that with Demas return again unto their former
love. N^y, which is worse, many now we have that never had former love that was
good whereunto they shou d return; men that first and last sought their ease,
or their pleasure, or their profit, or their honor, but never reckoned to feed
the flock of God Whom as it were needful to reform, so is it also needful
to confirm others, to admonish others, to encourage others. And who so fit for
this, as they that as Paul are of greatest place in the Church?

2. Hence learn you patie^tly to suffer yourselues to be instructed,
admonished, and exhorted. For if these things be needful for your Pastors and
Teachers, how much more needful are they for you? Even so much more as ye are
less taught in the word then they are. Whether then we write or speak unto
you, suffer ye the words of exhortation and instruction from us gladly.

My second observation hence is from this, that there were now Bishops and
Deacons there unto whom he might write. For hence I observe the great blessing
of the Lord upon the preaching of the word. A little while before at the first
preaching thereof unto the Philippians, it was so unsavory unto them, that they
could not brook Paul and Silas, but cast them into prison: but now such a
blessing the Lord had given unto the word preached by them, that the number of
conuerts and believers was very great, insomuch that now they had Ministers to
attend on teaching, and Deacons to attend on distribution, and an absolute
ecclesiastical government as it may seem amongst them. This was the Lords his
doing: 1 Cor. 3.6.
for Paul plants, and Apollos waters, but God gives the increase. And this
increase he gives as it pleases him, sometimes sooner, sometimes later. Upon
one Sermon of Peter there were added unto the Church about three thousand
souls. Act. 2.41.
But at other times, and in other places, the seed of the word which both he
and other of the Apostles did sow, lay oftentimes a good while in the ground,
before it brought forth fruit unto the Lord. So in this City of Philippi, Lydia
at the first received the word gladly: Act. 16.14.
but in others it took root downward, and sprung up afterward, howsoever
sooner or later, as in the primitive Church through the Apostles doctrine, the
Lord added to the Church from day to day such as should be saved; so does he
always make a blessing to follow upon the word, though unto us it seem
oftentimes to perish. So he promised long since that he would, Esaias 55.10,
saying, Surely as the rain comes down and the snow from heaven, and
returns not thither but waters the earth, and makes it to bring forth and
bud that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to him that eats; so shall
my word be that goes out of my mouth, 11.
it shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I will,
and it shall prosper in the thing whereunto I sent it.

Here then is a great comfort over our labors in our ministry with you that
hear us. Though the word which we bring unto you be rejected and despised, and
we reviled and persecuted, yet we faint not but are full of comfort, because we
know that the Lord will give a blessing unto his word. Which howsoever it do
not always appear unto us, yet shall it and does at one time or other, break
forth into the fruits of holiness and a saving knowledge in as many as are
ordained unto life And still we know this, that his word always does his
will, and prospers in that whereunto it is sent; so that this blessing
always follows upon it, that Gods name is thereby glorified, whether it be in
them that be saved, or in them that perish. For as the Apostle says, 2 Cor.
2.15,
We are unto God the sweet savor of Christ, in them that are saved, and in
them that perish. 16.
To the one we are the savor of death unto death, and to the other we are the
savor of life unto life. And let this suffice for the inscription.

Now follows the salutation, wherein the Apostle wishes the Philippians all
good from him which is the author of all goodness. And 1. is set down the thing
which he wishes unto them, grace and peace, understanding by grace the free
favor of God wherewith he loves his children, and by peace every blessing
corporal and spiritual flowing from that fountain of grace. 2. Is set down
unto whom he wishes this grace and peace, viz: to all the Saints at Philippi,
with the Bishops etc. 3. Is set down the author from whom and by whom he
wishes this grace and peace unto them, which is from God our Father as the
fountain and first original, from whom comes every good and perfect gift;
and from the Lord Jesus Christ, as the means whereby every grace of the spirit
is conveyed and derived unto us.

The first thing which here I note is, that the Apostle wishes grace and peace
unto the Philippians. The received manner of salutation among the Jews was
this, Peace be unto you. So Amasia unto David, Peace, 1 Chro. 12.18.
peace be unto thee, and peace be unto thine helpers. So the Lord unto Gideon,
Peace be unto thee. So Christ unto his Disciples, Iud. 6.23. Luke 24.36.110.5.
Peace be unto you. So he taught his Disciples to say, Peace be to this house,
wherein they wished all prosperity and good to them whom they so saluted. But
after the full and clear manifestation of grace in the whole mystery of our
redemption, still we see the Apostles salutations to be, grace and peace be
with you. Wherein they do not only comprehend all blessings absolutely that
are to be prayed for, whether for this life or that that is to come, but
plainly demonstrate the fountain whence all other blessings do flow, and
which principally is to be prayed for, be it in prayer for our selves, or for
others.

3. Hence then I observe, what the things are which we must wish and pray for
to our brethren, if we will wish them all good; and they are grace and peace;
only two blessings of goodness in show of words, but indeed all the
blessings of the God of Isaac unto Jacob and his seed for ever. For what is
grace? It is the love of the everliving God wherewith he freely loves and
accepts us in Christ Jesus. And what is peace? It is principally a
tranquillity and quietness in conscience, through the forgiveness of our
sins by the grace and love of God toward us; but generally whatsoever
goodness flows from grace. Now we see the rich treasures of blessings stored
up in these blessings of grace and peace. In the blessing of grace, there is
given that which is the cause both of peace, and all good blessings whatsoever.
For whence are our election unto salvation, our vocation unto the knowledge of
the truth, our adoption into the sons of God, our justification unto
righteousness, our sanctification unto holiness, our reconciliation with God,
our hope of glorification in the heavens? Whence is it that we believe in the
holy Trinity, that we are strong in hope, that we love God and our brethren,
that we have peace with God and our own consciences, that we rejoice in the
holy Ghost, that in our thoughts we think, in our desires we will, in our
actions we do any thing that is good? Are not all these things from the
blessing of grace? Is not the free favor and love of God in Christ Jesus the
cause of al these things? yes surely, because God loves us in his well-beloved,
therefore does he thus enrich us with spiritual graces in heavenly things; and
further gives us the true possession of all temporal blessings, of health,
wealth, strength, liberty, and the like, so far as he sees it to be good
and needful for us. So that in the blessing of grace all these things are
given as in the cause. Now in the blessing of peace, are given all the good
things themselves which proceed from that cause, whether they be spiritual
graces, or temporal blessings. For so I understand and conceive hereof, that
in the blessing of peace are given all things whatsoever are either certain
tokens, or probable signs of peace with God. So that the spiritual graces of
God, being certain tokens of our peace with God, and the temporal blessings
of God being probable signs thereof, as adversity and trouble are probable,
signs unto man of Gods displeasure, even all these are given in the blessing
of peace. What blessing then of God can we wish or pray for to our brethren
which is not treasured up in the blessings of grace and peace, the one being
the fountain of all good things, and the other being the good things
themselves; the one releasing us from sin, the other freeing us from an evil
conscience, the only two Fiends that trouble and torment us?

Will ye then learn in a brief and short sum, to comprehend whatsoever
blessing is needful to be prayed for for your brethren? I think ye will be
willing, for long prayers either for them, or for your selves is very wearisome
unto you; pray then for grace and peace unto them: First for grace, then for
peace: for unto whom grace is given, peace shall be granted; but if grace be
not first, peace shall not follow, no more then the streams run where the
fountain is dried up.

2. In this Apostolical salutation I observe a most evident testimony of the
Apostles love toward the Philippians, and consequently of their love toward
their brethren that use it. For, beloved, how can I give a better testimony of
my love toward you, then if with the Apostle I say unto you, Grace be with
you, and peace from God our Father etc. Can I pray better for you then when I
pray that the grace of God may abound toward you, that the love of God in
Christ Jesus may be manifest in you? Can I wish you better then when I wish
that you may have peace with God, peace within your selves, and peace one with
another? Can I desire better things at the hands of God for you, then that the
grace of God may continually prevent and follow you, and that thence all
spiritual graces and temporal blessings may be ministered unto you, both for
this life, and that that is to come? Or can mine affection of love be more
enflamed toward you, then when thus I pour out my soul for you, that so by
grace ye may be released from sin, and the punishment thereof, and by peace
from the pitiful throbbes of a tormenting conscience? Did not Moses, and
Joshua, and Samuel, and David, and Daniel, and the rest of the Prophets thus
manifest their love unto the people of God, by praying for them, and wishing
all good things unto them? Did not our blessed Savior thus show his love
toward his Apostles, and all them that should believe through their preaching,
when he made that long prayer for them? Ioh. 17.
And thus should we testify our love unto our brethren, even by Christian
salutations, holy prayers, and hearty wishes for grace and peace unto them
from God, etc.

But such testimonies are not now common: Nay he that shall now give such a
testimony of his love unto any of his brethren by such a form of salutation,
he shall be sure to be noted for his pains, and odiously to be traduced.
Whereof as I see no reason, so neither do I think it meet, that this be the
form of salutation whatsoever be the subject and matter of our writing. But to
let that pass, is it not so, that there are strifes, debates, enuyings,
hatreds, contentions, and divisions amongst us? Is it not so that we wound and
kill one another, if not with swords, yet with tongues whet like swords,
fastening lies, and slanders, and suspicions one upon another? Is it not so
that we rather eat and devour one another, then wish one an others good? yes
surely, the godly man may now sorrow with David and say, woe is me that I am
constrained to dwell with Mesech, Psalm. 120.4.5.6.
and to have mine habitation among the tents of Kedar. My soul has long dwelt
among them that be enemies unto peace. I labor for peace, but when I speak
unto them thereof they make them ready to battle. And is it so with us, and
can we say that we are so affectioned one unto another, as that we wish
grace and peace from God one unto another? Nay, well may we flatter our
selves, but in truth we cannot say so. For as they only love God that love
their brethren, so they only wish peace from God unto their brethren, that
love to live in peace with their brethren. Beloved, we are brethren: why
should we then strive one with another? Why then should there be heart-burnings
in one against another? Rather we should be at peace one with another, and wish
grace and peace from God one unto another. Thus did the Apostle, and herein
left an example for us to follow, that as he walked in love toward all the
Saints in Christ Jesus, so we also should walk in love one toward an other.
Let therefore the same mind be in us that was in our Apostle, and let us from
our very souls wish grace and peace from God one unto another. Let our
greetings be with holy prayers, for abundance of all the Lords mercies unto our
brethren, and so let us testify our loving affection toward them.

3. In this Apostolical salutation I observe a brief sum of Christian
religion, in the using whereof we show forth a most notable testimony of our
faith. I can only note the points of Christianity briefly which it contains,
and must leave the serious consideration and meditation of them unto your
selves. The 1. point is, that all blessings, whether spiritual graces or
temporal blessings bestowed upon us, are from God the father by Jesus Christ
his son. So also says the Apostle James, saying, Every good giving, and
every perfect gift is from above, Iam. 1.17.
and comes down from the father of lights, with whom is no variableness,
neither shadowing by turning. And so we confess when we pray for grace and
peace, whereby all blessings are signified unto our brethren from God our
Father etc. His name therefore for every blessing we have is to be blessed and
praised for ever, and that song of David is of all Gods children to be taken
up, Praise thou the Lord o my soul, Psalm. 103.
and all that is within me praise his holy name; praise the Lord o my soul,
and forget not all his benefits, etc.

The second point is, that only God is to be prayed unto for all blessings by
Jesus Christ. So our blessed Savior has taught us, where he teaches us thus
to pray, Our father which art in heaven, Mat. 6.9.
etc. And so we confess when we pray for grace and peace unto our brethren
from God our Father etc. And as Peter said unto Christ, to whom shall we go,
Ioh. 6.68.
thou have the words of eternal life? so I say, to whom should we pray for any
blessing? Every good giving, and every perfect gift is from above etc. as even
now we heard out of James. Frivolous therefore and impious is the invocation of
Saints, whereby that honor is taken from God, which is chiefly due, and
properly belongs unto him, I mean prayer. For how shall any man call on him
in whom he does not believe? Rom 10.14.
Or in whom shall any man believe but in God only? So then if only we be to
believe in God, then are we only to pray unto God, and therefore not unto
Saints.

The third point is, that the grace, and free favor of God in Christ Jesus, is
the very fountain of all Gods blessings bestowed upon us. So the Holy Ghost
witnesses throughout the whole scripture, Romans 3.24. Ephesians. 2.8. 1 Cor. 15.10.
saying, that we are justified freely by grace, that we are saved by grace, and
that by the grace of God we are that we are whatsoever we be, and whatsoever
blessing we have. And so we confess in effect, when we pray first for grace
and then for peace. that from grace as the fountain, may flow peace and all
the rivers of Gods blessings. Man's merits therefore must stand aside, we may
not hold any blessing of them, but only of grace. For as the Apostle disputes
of election, so may it be said of any blessing of God; if it be of grace, it is
not of works, else were grace no more grace; Rom 11.6.
and if it be of works, then not of grace, or else were work no more work.
One of these excludes the other, so that whatsoever is by the one is not by
the other.

The fourth point is, that we are to believe in God the Father, and in Christ
Jesus his Son* So our blessed Savior teaches us where he says, Ye believe
in God, Joh. 14.1.
believe also in me; as if he should have said, ye believe in God, and so ye
are to do, believe also in me, for so ye are to do. And so in effect we
confess, when we pray unto God the Father, and Christ Jesus his Son for
grace and peace unto our brethren. For as even now we heard, unto whom we pray
in him we are to believe; as also again, in whom we believe unto him we are to
pray. Accursed therefore be their infidelity that either deny there is, or
doubt whether there be a God or no, and make a mock at the son of God. In
whom now they believe not, at his presence they shall tremble, and cry unto the
mountains and rocks fall on us, Apoc. 6.16.
and hide us from the presence of him that sits on the throne, and from the
wrath of the Lamb.

The fifth point is, that we are sure that God has reconciled unto himself by
Jesus Christ, and adopted us through him into his sons. So the Apostle
tells us, where he says, 2 Cor. 5.18.
that all things are of God which has reconciled us unto himself by Jesus
Christ; and that he has predestinate us to be adopted through Jesus Christ
unto himself, Ephesians. 1.5.
according to the good pleasure of his will. And so we confess when we wish
grace and peace from God our Father: for if he our Father, then we his sons,
and a reconciliation made between him and us. And therefore having finished
all things, our blessed Savior says, Joh. 20 17.
I ascend unto my father and your father, to my God and your God. Where give me
leave by the way to put you in mind of one point, wherein of late it may be I
somewhat erred. When last I spoke of this point in handling of those words,
unto God, even our Father, etc. I told you, that it was observed, that not any
says with Christ my Father, as many say with Thomas, my Lord my God. And so in
deed it is observed by Zanchius on those words. But since I perceive by as
faithful and diligent an obseruer of the scriptures, Dr. Rain. Job 34.36.
that Elihu speaking unto God says, my Father let Job be tried etc. not indeed
in our English translations, following the judgment of some of the Rabbis,
but yet in the best approved Translations. So that it may not be a rule that
none may say with Christ, my Father; but as we say, my God, and our God, so may
we say, my Father, and our Father. And herein is the sweet comfort of all Gods
children, that we may cry unto God Abba, which is Father; that we may pray and
say, Our Father, that we may wish grace and peace from God our Father: for if
he be our Father, and we his sons, then are we also heirs of God, and heirs
annexed with Christ. And let all the comforts in the world stoop unto this one
comfort, the very souls joy of all them that have received the spirit of
adoption.

The sixth point is, that Christ Jesus our Lord is our only Mediator, by whom
only we have access in our prayers unto God, and by whom we receive
whatsoever we have of God. So the Apostle witnesses, saying, There is one God
and one Mediator between God and man, which is the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy
2.5.
by whom we go boldly unto God, Heb. 4.16.
that we may receive mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. And so
we confess in effect, when we pray for grace and peace from God our Father,
and from the Lord Jesus Christ, as the means by whom we are partakers of grace
and peace: for so they are from the Lord Jesus Christ, as he is the means by
whom they are conveyed and derived unto us from God, even our Father. The
Saints therefore are no Mediators of intercession for us, either to bring us
unto God, or to bring his blessings unto us. Our high Priest is able perfectly
to save them that come to God by him, Heb. 7.25.
seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them; and as to save them, so
to give them all graces good and needful for them.

The most of the rest of the points I will conclude in one which is this, that
Jesus Christ is God, which we confess when we pray for grace and peace from
him; that he is the Savior of the world, which we confess when we call him
Jesus; that he is that counselor and great prophet, that King and Prince of
peace, that lamb of God slain from the beginning of the world to take away
the sin of the world, which we confess when we call him Christ; and that
unto him is given all power in heaven and in earth, which we confess when we
call him Lord. If he therefore be with us we need not to fear who be against
us. For he is our God, our Savior, our Lord, our Master, our King, our
everlasting high Priest. I cannot prosecute either these or the rest of the
points. By these you will conjecture the rest, and easily see the epitome of
Christianity concluded in this short salutation.

LECTVRE III.
PHILIP. 1. verse. 3.4.5. I thank my God having you in perfect memory. etc.
NOw give me leave, before I come to that which follows, to note one thing
farther from the words already handled; and that is, the Apostles often using
of the name of Jesus Christ in so few words. Out of the abundance of his heart
his mouth spoke, and still his mouth was filled with Jesus Christ, Jesus
Christ, insomuch that three several times still he ingeminates Jesus Christ,
Paul and Timothy the servants of Jesus Christ, to all the saints in Jesus
Christ, grace be with you, and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord
Jesus Christ. Which argues that his comfort was in him, that his love was set
on him, and that he was unto him, as the spouse speaks in the Canticles, the
chiefest of ten thousand. Cant. 5.10.
Hence then I observe a rule whereby commonly to discern what a man is, his
speech commonly bewraieth what he is. The worldling his tongue is still talking
of the world, the covetous man of his money, the voluptuous man of his
pleasure, the proud man of his rich attire, the delicate man of his dainty
fare, the pot-companion of his cups, and the like, commonly talk most of the
things they like best; and by their talk commonly they may be discerned what
they are. And in this respect as it is with them that set their affections on
things which are on earth, so is it with them that set their affections on the
things which are above. They are still talking of the word of their salvation,
of the commandments of the Lord, of the mercies of the Lord, and of the things
that belong unto their peace; as David professes of himself saying, Ps.
101.1.119.13.15.145 5.35.28.
My song shall be of mercy and judgment: with my lips do I speak of all the
judgments of thy mouth: I talk of thy commandments, and have respect unto thy
ways: I will talk of thy worship o Lord, thy glory, thy praise, and wondrous
works, my tongue shall be talking of thy righteousness all the day long, and
I will tell of thy salvation from day to day. But of all other things their
delight is, in their hearts to muse, and with their tongues to talk of Jesus
Christ. Here their hearts dance for joy, and the talking hereof is more sweet
then honey and the hony-combe unto their mouths. Hereon they love, as it were,
to dwell, and their tongues can never be satisfied with talking on him. And
why? here is their comfort, here is their hope, here is their love, here is
their crown of rejoicing. Here is their protector in all dangers, their
reconciler unto God, their mediator between God and them, their Savior from
their sins, and he that is made of God unto them wisdom, and righteousness,
and sanctification, and redemption. Here is he in whom are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, of mercy and love, in whom alone the father
is well pleased. And therefore here as men ravished with joy, they cry, and cry
again, holy Jesus, sweet Jesus, blessed Jesus: even as we see the spouse in
the Canticles not to leave her bridegroom Christ Jesus after once she catch
hold of him, but still cries, O fountain of the gardens, O well of living
waters, Cant. 4.15.5.10.11.
and of the springs of Lebanon My wellbeloued is white and ruddy, the chiefest
of ten thousand. His head is as fine gold, his locks curled, and black as a
raven etc. ad verse. 17. Thus the children of God love to talk of him whom
their soul loves, and thus commonly a man may discern who are saints in
Christ Jesus. Commonly I say, not evermore certainly. For if good speech, and
holy talk, and crying Lord, Lord, and often using of the name of Jesus Christ
were a perpetual and certain rule of a good Christian, the dissembling
hypocrite would be as good a Christian as the best. And a hard matter it is not
to be deceived sometimes by the hypocrite. But commonly, I say, a man's speech
bewraieth what he is, holy, or profane. The ground of which note is that saying
of our Savior, Mat. 12.34.
that of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: and otherwise we cannot
judge whereon the heart thinks, but by that whereon the tongue runs.

Hence then learn you, beloved, to make trial unto your selves, and to give
trial unto others, what ye are Your tongue and talk may tell your selves,
and do tell others, what ye are. What is it whereon your tongues love most to
talk, and wherein ye take most pleasure when ye talk? Is it on the things
which are on earth? It may be a token unto your selves and others that ye are
earthly minded. Is it on the things which are above? It may be a token unto
your selves and others that your conversation is in heaven. If ye love Christ
Jesus, if ye take comfort in Christ Jesus, your tongues will be talking of
Jesus Christ, and your hearts will rejoice, when your tongues are talking of
him. As therefore the Apostle exhorts the Colossians, so do I you, Let your
speech be gracious always, Col. 4.6.
and powdered with salt. Let the mercies which ye have in Christ Jesus be so
sweet and comfortable unto you, that your hearts may delight always to muse,
and your tongues always to talk of Christ Jesus. Let him be hid in your
heart, let him break out in your tongue, and let him rejoice both the heart
and the tongue, that so ye may have testimony within your selves, and give
testimony unto others, that ye are Saints in Christ Jesus. Now proceed we to
that which follows.

I thank my God] After the inscription and salutation, now follows the body
of the Epistle it self: wherein the principal scope and drift of the Apostle
is to confirm the Philippians in the truth wherein they stood, that they might
not only not decrease, but increase in all knowledge, and in all judgment. In
this exordium or beginning of his Epistle, which is from verse 3. to 12. to
testify his love toward the Philippians, that so they might the rather hearken
unto him; 1. he signifies his rejoicing on their behalf for the grace of God
already bestowed on them. 2. he signifies his assured hope of Gods farther
mercy toward them in performing the good work which he had begun in them. 3.
he prays for their perseverance, and increase in all knowledge and in all
godliness. His rejoicing on their behalf he signifies, 1. in his giving of
thanks unto God on their behalf. 2. in remembering them in his prayers unto
God. 3. in praying for them with gladness. The grace of God already bestowed
on them, for which he rejoiced in their behalf, is said to be, 1. their
fellowship with other Churches in the gospel. 2. their perseverance therein
from the first day they had received the gospel, till now that he wrote unto
them. This is the general resolution of these words.

Now for the more particular opening of the meaning of them, in that in the
beginning of his Epistle, he thanketh God on the Philippians behalf, he
observes his usual manner. For so he begins almost all his Epistles, as
anon we shall hear. In that he says, that he thanketh his God, he signifies
his bold, and near approach unto God in giving thanks, and in praying unto him.
Again, in that he says, that he has them in perfect memory always in all
his prayers for them all, he means that as always he thanketh God for them
all, so always in all his prayers unto God he remembers them. And he adds
that his prayers are always powered out unto God for them with great joy and
gladness of heart. Why? because, as he adds the reason, of the fellowship
which they had received in the Gospel. 1. Because they, as other Churches had
received the gospel, and thereby had fellowship with the Father, and with his
son Jesus Christ; and because they had continued in the truth from the first
day of their conversion unto Christ, by his ministry until now that he wrote
unto them. This was the cause of his thanksgiving; and his continual prayers,
wherein he always remembered them, were, that they might continue in that
grace, even in that fellowship which they had received in the gospel. It is
then briefly as if the Apostle had thus said, I thank my God always on your
behalf, for that fellowship which you have with the Father, and the Son,
with us, and with other Churches by embracing the Gospel, and for your
perseverance therein from the first day that I, and Silas, and Timotheus
preached it unto you unto now, and always in all my prayers unto God I
remember you, praying for you, with gladness for the grace already granted you,
that ye may continue and increase in that grace. This I take to be the meaning
of these words.

The first thing then which here I note is, the Apostles beginning of his
Epistle with thanksgiving unto God on the Philippians behalf. And so he
begins all his Epistles with thanksgiving unto God on their behalf to whom
he wrote, only his Epistles to the Galatians, and to Titus, and the former to
Timothy excepted. And so Peter begins his former Epistle. Whence I observe,
that thanksgiving unto God is a service principally requisite in a Christian. I
exhort, says the Apostle, that first of all, 1 Timothy 2.1.
or above all things supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of
thanks be made for all men. And in the former to the Thess^lonians, he wills
in all things to ^iue thanks; 1 Thessalonians 5.18.
for that this is the will of God in Christ Jesus. And not any sacrifice is
more exactly commanded or described in Leuiticus then the sacrifice of
thanksgiving. Whereupon, Leuit. 7.12.
if we look into the practice of the saints of God, we shall find that they
were never slack in this service. Melchisedech after Abraham's victory slacked
not this service, Genesis 14.20.
but gave thanks unto the most high God which had delivered his enemies into
his hand. Moses also and the Israelites after their deliverance from the
Egyptians, Exodus 15.1.
and out of the red sea, slacked not this service, but sung praises unto the
Lord. So did Deborah, and Barak, and Iehoshaphat, and many others after their
victories over their enemies. And how often do we read that, as others of his
servants, so our blessed Savior himself gave thanks unto his father? All
which show clearly how requisite this service of thanksgiving unto God is, if
either we will hearken to the precepts and exhortations of the Holy Ghost, or
do as we have the saints of God, and our blessed Savior for example.

What then? Does the Lord need the praises of man, or is he delighted with his
giving of thanks? No, the Lord needs them not, neither is he delighted
therewith so much for his own sake. Yet does he require them of us, and is
delighted therewith for our sakes* for 1. in giving of thanks unto God, we
acknowledge that to be from him, for which we give him thanks. 2. In giving him
thanks, we show our selves well pleased and content with that spiritual grace
or temporal blessing wherefore we give him thanks. 3. In giving him thanks,
we return what we can unto the Lord, with humble confession that we can no
more, nor that but by grace. Lastly, in giving of thanks unto God, we provoke
him to bestow farther mercies upon us. All which things he requires of us, and
likes well in us. And for these very reasons, besides the former, is
thanksgiving unto God so requisite a service in a Christian.

Yet as requisite a service as it is, we fail as much in it as in any service.
It may be, that being in peril, or persecution, or sorrow, or need, or
sickness, or other like adversity we will make our requests known unto God in
prayer and supplication, as the occasions are publicly or privately. But when
the Lord has heard our prayers, and gr^nted our requests; when he has done
more for us then we could desire or think. What giving o^ thanks is there unto
God either publicly or privately? For instance, now of late when the Lord
opened the clouds of heaven, and threatened by rain to deprive us of that
blessing of the fruits of the earth, which he had showed unto us in great
plenty and abundance, then we powered out both public and private prayers in
our Churches and in our houses, that it would please the Lord to send us such
weather, whereby we might receive the fruits of the earth in due season. But
now that the Lord has sent us seasonable weather, and given us good hope of
reaping the fruits of the earth in due season, in what Congregations
publicly, in what house^ privately is the voice of praise and thanksgiving
heard? I instance only in this; but as it is in this, so is it in other things
Not one of ten that sings the song of praise and thanksgiving after benefits
received: it is too harsh a note, we cannot tune it: all, or the most part of
us being liker unto those nine Lepers that never returned back to give God
praise, then unto the stranger that returned. Luc. 17.18.
Beloved, by unthankfulness we provoke Gods wrath* against us as much as by any
sin; and therefore Paul reckons it up amongst the most heinous sins: 2 Timothy
3.2.
but the sacrifice of thanksgiving is as pleasant and acceptable unto God as is
any sacrifice; and therefore by David the Lord says, Psalm. 50.23.
who so offers me thanks and praise he honoreth me, even with most excellent
honor. Let us therefore cleanse our selves from this sin of vnthankfullnesse,
Phil. 4.6.
and let, as the Apostle exhorts, our requests be showed unto God in prayer
and supplication, with giving of thanks. The fouler that the sin of
unthankfulness is, let us the more detest it: and the more requisite that
thanksgiving unto God is, let us the more abound therein. Let us follow the
counsel of the Apostle, and walk in Christ Jesus, rooted and built in him,
and stablished in the faith, Col. 2.6, 7.
as we have been taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving.

The second thing which here I note is, the cause of the Apostles thanksgiving
unto God, which is, because of the fellowship which they had in the gospel
from the first day until then; 1. because they as other Churches had received
the gospel, whereby they had fellowship with the Father, and the Son, and
because they had continued in the truth from the first day of their conversion
unto Christ by the work of his ministry unto now that he wrote unto them.
Whence I observe a principal matter of our thanksgiving unto God, a principal
cause why we should, upon the blessing bestowed upon us, give thanks unto God
for it. In all things indeed is matter of our thanksgiving unto God. for every
good giving and every perfect gift is from above, Jam. 1.17.
and comes down from the father of lights etc. He created us, formed us, and
made us, and that in his own image, in him we live, move, and have our being;
he gives health, wealth, peace, liberty, food, raiment, he sends rain from
heaven, and fruitful seasons, delivers in all dangers, comfort in all
troubles, helps in all needs, blesses the work of our hands, and fills us
with plenteousnesse of all good things. And for all these we should, and have
great cause from day to day to tell out his praises with gladness, and to offer
unto him the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving. But yet is a more principal
matter behind, which is the fellowship which we have with other reformed
Churches in the gospel of Jesus Christ, and the continuance thereof so long
time amongst us, the preaching of the word of our salvation amongst us, and the
blessed increase thereof under a most gracious government. Here is indeed
principal cause of rejoicing, and thanksgiving. for by our fellowship which we
have with other Churches in the gospel, we have fellowship with the Father,
and with his son Jesus Christ, as John witnesses, saying, that which we have
seen and heard, to wit the gospel, 1 John 1.3.
declare we unto you, that ye may also have fellowship with us, and that our
fellowship also may be with the Father, and with his son Jesus Christ. By our
fellowship in the gospel, we are called out of darkness into his marvelous
light, and we which in time past were not a people are now the people of God, 1
Pet. 2.9, 10.
and we which in time past were not under mercy have now obtained mercy, as
Peter witnesses. By our fellowship in the gospel, we are borne again not of
mortal seed, 1 Pet. 1.3.23.
but of immortal, and are begotten unto a lively hope in Christ Jesus, as the
same Peter witnesses. And by our fellowship in the gospel, 2 Timothy 3.15.
we are made wise unto salvation through the faith which we have in Christ
Jesus, as witnesses our Apostle. O blessed fellowship in the gospel, whereby
we are made wise unto salvation, whereby we are regenerate, and begotten unto a
lively hope in Christ Jesus, whereby we are called out of darkness into light,
and of no people made the people of God, and whereby we have fellowship with
Christ Jesus, which is the great end of the ministry of the gospel, that we
may have fellowship with him, and walk in the light as he is in the light.
Again, the continuance of our fellowship in the gospel from the first day of
her Majesty's most gracious government over us unto now, our pereseuerance in
the truth without being removed away unto another gospel, which is not another
gospel, save that there be some which trouble you, and intrude to pervert the
gospel of Christ, what a principal blessing is this of our good God unto us?
Surely these are such blessings, as may well make us break out into
exclamation with David, and say, Psalm. 116.12, 13, 17.
What shall I render unto the Lord for these his great mercies toward me? I
will receive the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. I will
offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will call upon the name of the Lord.
This was David's resolution upon deliverance from dangers by Saul, and much more
upon such blessings as these have we just cause of such resolution, God being
principally in this soft and still voice of the gospel.

Have we then such principal cause of thanksgiving unto our God for the
fellowship which we have with other Churches in the gospel, and for the
continuance of this fellowship from the first day unto now, even these forty
years? This then 1. should teach us, willingly and gladly to embrace the
gospel of Jesus Christ, when it is brought unto us. For if there be such cause
of thanksgiving unto God for it being had, then surely is there great cause of
gladly embracing it, when it may be had. And yet what dullness, and slacknes,
and coldness herein? In this congregation how is it embraced? I bear you record
some of you, that ye do embrace it willingly and gladly, and I assure my
self that from your hearts you thank your God for it. But others there are
that seldom or never come unto the hearing of it; others that when they should
hear it turn their backs, and depart away from the hearing of it; others that
hear it sleepingly, or coldly, so that either it enters not in, or quickly
after is choked by the cares of this world. Do these thank God for the
fellowship which they have with others in the gospel? Nay they have none, and
some of them will have no fellowship with others therein: and therefore unless
at length they take hold of the grace that is offered them, they shall have no
fellowship with the Father, or with Jesus Christ his son. As for you,
beloved, that gladly embrace the gospel of your salvation, hold on your good
course, thirst after it as the Heart does after the water brooks, frequent the
places where ye may hear it, lay it up in your hearts, that ye may not sin
against the Lord, and let your mouths be ever filled with praises and
thanksgiving to God for it.

Secondly, this should teach us to labor by all holy means to continue in the
grace, and in the truth wherein we stand unto the end. For if it should so
principally cause in us thanksgiving unto God, then should it also work in us
all holy desire and labor, to be daily more and more stablished and
strengthened in the truth of Christ Jesus, and in our fellowship with other
Churches in the gospel. And yet how wavering are we many of us, and how
quickly carried about with every wind of doctrine by the deceit of men, and
with craftiness whereby they lay in wait to deceive? If a runnagate Seminary
that compasses sea and land to make one of his profession, and when he is
made, makes him twofold more the child of hell then he himself is, a
sworne-vassall to that man of sin, a disloyal traitor to his Prince, an
unnatural enemy to his country, if such a one I say, shall with fained words
creep into secret corners amongst us, and glosingly slander the truth of the
gospel of Jesus Christ, and set abroche his own damnable heresies, how
quickly do we listen unto them, and are led captive by them? Howsoever it be
with us, it is thus in too too many places. But, beloved, let us know that
whosoever transgresses and abides not in the doctrine of Christ has not God.
2 Ioh. 9.
He that continues in the doctrine of Christ, he has both the Father and the
Son. If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, 10.
receive him not to house, neither bid him, God speed. I know they will tell
you they bring the doctrine of Christ unto you; but do ye as the men of
Beraea did, Act. 17.11.
which are much commended for so doing, examine it by the scriptures, and
search whether it be so, and ye shall find it to be the doctrine of devils,
1 Timothy 4.1.
as the Apostle speaks, and as even by that place it will appear to be.
Wherefore, beloved brethren, as now ye have fellowship with other Churches in
the gospel of Jesus Christ, so continue therein: Let nothing be able to
remove you from the truth wherein ye stand, but hold fast your good profession
unto the end.

The third thing which here I note is, the Apostles bold, and near, and
joyful approach unto God in his thanksgiving unto God, in that he says, I
thank my God. Whence I observe the manner of our thanksgiving unto God, how we
should offer our sacrifice of thanksgiving unto him: And that is, 1. with such
assurance of Gods love in his mercies toward us, as that in our thanksgiving
for them we dare boldly as sons say, I thank my God. for so shall our
sacrifice of thanksgiving be acceptable unto God, if upon assurance of his love
we boldly power out our souls in praise unto him. And therefore the Apostle to
the Hebrews exhorts, Heb. 4 16.
saying, Let us go boldly unto the throne of grace, be it in prayer, or in
thanksgiving, Let us go boldly unto the throne of grace, praying and giving
thanks unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord. 2. Our thanksgiving should be
offered with such willingness and cherfulness from our hearts unto God,
that we might say, I thank my God. So our Apostle in an other place, 1 Cor.
14.18.
I thank my God, I spoke languages more then ye all. How cheerfully he
opens his mouth in praise of his God. And so shall our thanksgiving be
pleasing unto God, if we offer it from the heart cheerfully; for he loves a
cheerful giver, as of alms unto the poor Saints, so of thanks unto his
name. And how can I go unto him with greater cherfulness and thank him,
then when I go unto him as to my God, and say, I thank my God? 3. Our
thanksgiving unto God should be offered up with such soule-melting passion and
affection, that as if we had greater feeling experience in our souls of his
goodness then others, and would be nearer him then others, we should say, I
thank my God. for such the Lord loves best as press the nearest unto him,
and then the sacrifice of praise pleases most where the soul is tied the
closest unto his God. These are the things in which the manner how we should
offer up our sacrifice of thanksgiving consists, namely in faith and full
assurance of Gods love toward us, with all willingness and cheerfulness
from our hearts, and with a soule-rauisht affection, as of a more then
ordinary feeling-experience of Gods goodness toward us. And this manner I take
it may be observed from this that the Apostle says, I thank my God.

Here then that cold and cursorie form of thanksgiving which commonly is used
is utterly condemned* For what do we when the Lord has remembered us in
mercy, and done great things for us? I doubt not but there are who in their
hearts cheerfully, and with their mouths joyfully say with the Prophet, thou
art my God, Psalm. 118.28.
and I will thank thee, thou art my God, and I will praise thee. But a great
many of us like unto horses and mules which have no understanding either
remember not, or regard not to give God thanks. A man may see it daily in many
of us, that we come from our beds, and from our meals, as dogs from their
kennels, and oxen from their stalls. Others of us have certain words of
course, as to say, God be blessed, God be thanked, I praise God, I thank God,
which being good words in themselves, yet are so coldly and cursorily uttered
by us, as that a man may well see they have their beginning in the lips, and
their ending in the air, but never pierce the heavens. But beloved, if we will
have our voice of thanksgiving to break through the clouds, and to come unto
the highest, we must use Mary's magnificat, and say, My soul does magnify the
Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior. Luc. 1.46.
As therefore it becomes us to be thankful, so let us remember in faith and
full assurance of Gods love toward us to power out our souls in thanksgiving
unto him, that so our sacrif^^^ may be acceptable unto him.

LECTVRE IV.
PHILIP. 1. verse. 3.4, 5. Verse 3. Having you in perfect memory.

4. Always in all my prayers for all you, praying with gladness.

5. Because of the fellowship which ye have in the gospel, from the first day
unto now.


NOw farther the Apostle signifies this rejoicing on the Philippians behalf,
and his love toward them, by remembering them in all his prayers unto God, and
by praying for them with gladness, when he says, that he has them in perfect
memory always in all his prayers etc. It is usual with the Apostle in his
Epistles, as to signify his thanksgiving unto God on their behalf unto whom
he writes, so to signify his remembrance of them always in his p ayers. But
yet here the Apostle signifies this his remembrance of them in his prayers in
more then an usual manner. In the Epistle to the Romans, to the Colossians,
the former to the Thessalonians, and to Philemon, he tells them to whom he
writes, that he makes mention of them always in his prayers. But here he
tells the Philippians that always in his prayers he has them all in memory,
that always in his prayers he has them all in perfect memory, that always he
has them all in perfect memory in all his prayers, that in all his prayers he
remembers them with gladness, each circumstance more then other importing his
most careful remembrance of them in his prayers unto God, that they might
continue in that grace wherein they stood, in that fellowship which they had
with other Churches in the gospel. For therefore thanked he God, and was glad
on the Philippians behalf, because of the fellowship which they had in the
gospel from the first day until then, and therefore he prayed for them that
they might continue in that grace, and in that fellowship with other Churches
in the gospel.

The first thing then which here I note is, that on whose behalf the Apostle
gives such thanks unto God, and is so glad, for them also he prays. Whence I
observe, that whatsoever graces be bestowed on us, still prayer is needful for
us, both that we pray for our selves, and that others pray for us. For neither
is any grace so perfect in any, neither are all graces so complete and full in
any, but that both he has need of perseverance and increase in that grace
wherein he stands, and to have other grace, supplied which he wants.
Abraham full of blessings, yet wants a child, and he must pray that he may
not go childlesse. Isaac full of blessings, Genesis 15.2.
yet his wife is barren, 25.21.
and he must pray unto the Lord for his wife to make her womb fruitful. Jacob
full of blessings, yet he is in danger of Esau his brother, and he must pray
unto the Lord, 32.11.
I pray thee deliver me out of the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau.
Neither is any so enriched with all graces, but that his requests are to be
showed unto God in prayer and supplication for the supply of some. And as not
any are enriched with all graces, so not in any is any grace so perfect, but
that he has need to bend the knees of his soul unto God in humble prayer for
perseverance and increase in that grace wherein he stands. David's delight in
the law of the Lord, in his statutes, and in his testimonies was as great as a
man's could be, as himself shows, saying, Lord, Psalm. 119.97.
what love have I unto thy law, all the day long is my study in it. 54.
Thy statutes have been my songs in the house of my pilgrimage: thy
testimonies have I claimed as mine heritage for ever; and why? they are the
very joy of my heart. 111.
And yet his prayer is, O teach me thy statutes, O cause thou me to make much
of thy law, incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not unto covetousness:
and as he has done, he has left us an example so to do, be we never so
zealous of the law of God. The Apostles likewise it is like, were as strong in
the faith as any man is, and yet they prayed unto the Lord, Luc. 17.5.
Lord increase our faith, and therein left an example for all the children of
God to follow until the day of Jesus Christ, be they never so stablished in
the faith. Never any so zealous of Gods glory and holy worship, but he had
need even in respect of himself to pray, hallowed be thy name. Never any had
his conversation so much in heaven, but that he had still need to pray, thy
kingdom come. Never any man's will so conformed unto Gods will, but that he had
still need to pray, thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Never any
man so filled with plenteousnesse, but that he had still need to pray, Give
us this day our daily bread. Never any man's sins so wholly pardoned, but that
in regard of his continual slidings he had still need to pray, forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. Never any man so
freed from tentation, and from the devil, but that he had still need to pray,
Lead us not into tentation, but deliver us from evil. And therefore our
blessed Savior has appointed this form to be used by all the faithful, unto
what degree of perfection soever they be come even to the end. So that
whatsoever graces be bestowed on us, yet still is prayer needful for us.
Neither only that we pray for our selves, but that others also pray for us. We
are not many of us better then was Timothy, that faithful servant of Jesus
Christ: yet for him Paul powered out prayers night and day, 2 Timothy 1.3.
and no doubt it was needful for him. We are not the best of us like unto Paul
that elect vessel of Jesus Christ, yet he requested the prayers of the
faithful for him, that utterance might be given unto him, Ephesians 6.19.
that he might open his mouth boldly to publish the secret of the gospel, and
that therein he might speak boldly as he ought to speak. He was one that
feared not the face of man, 20.
that kept nothing back, but delivered his message always faithfully and
boldly: yet for this grace he thought the prayers of the faithful needful for
him, and therefore craves them not only of the Ephesians, but likewise of the
Colossians in his epistle to them. Colos. 4.3.


Far therefore be it from us, beloved, to say as the manner of some is, unto
any of Gods children, bestow your prayers where you list, I need not your
prayers, I care not for your prayers, pray for your self, all your prayers
will be little enough for your self, I will pray for my self. These be the
words not of them that abound with grace, but of them that are not taught in
the word, nor know how much the prayer of a righteous man avails, if it be
fervent. Far likewise be it from us once to dream of any such perfection in
our selves, but that we have still need to pray, to abound more and more in
all grace, and in all things daily more and more to grow up into him, which is
the head, that is Christ. For be it our predestination, our election, our
adoption, our reconciliation, our justification, which are as sure unto all the
sons of God as that God is true, yet even in respect of these have we need
always to pray that the assurance of them may be daily more and more sealed
unto our spirits by the pledge of Gods spirit. Again, be it our faith, our
hope, our love, our knowledge, our judgment, or the like, which are the work
of Gods own finger in all his children, yet in respect of these have we need
always to pray for continual increase, and all godly growth in them. Yea be
it whatsoever grace wherein we are so stablished that we are sure we cannot
finally fall from it, yet are we still to pray for perseverance therein,
because he will have all them so exercised, whom he will confirm unto the end.
Whatsoever graces therefore the Lord has bestowed upon us, yet still let us
pray unto him either for our farther assurance and confirmation, or for
perseverance and increase in them. Let us pray for our selves unto the Lord for
every grace needful for us, and let us request to be commended by the
faithful in their prayers unto God. This is our wrestling with the God of
Jacob, and thus wrestling we shall surely prevail. Matthew. 7.7.
for so he has promised, and faithful is he th^^ has promised.

The second thing which I note is, that the Apostle in his prayers for the
Philippians prayed for them all: for so he says, that he had them in perfect
memory always in all his prayers etc. Whence I observe, how in our prayers for
the Church we ought to be affected toward it, namely, that so in our prayers
we commend the whole Church unto God. For what though in the Church, all be
not knit together in one mind and in one judgment? what though all be not
alike forward in acknowledging and embracing the truth? what though many things
be done in the Church through contention, or vain glory? The Apostle knew
well that it was thus in the Church at Philippi, as many evidently appear by
sundry places in this his Epistle: yet in his prayers unto God for them, he
took no such notice of these things, as that he did seclude any of them out of
his prayers unto God, but jointly he commended them all in his prayers unto God
Right so we, in our prayers for the Church, we should not easily take notice of
every contention, of every defect, of every thing that may offend in the
Church, so to seclude any out of our prayers unto God, but in a Christian
affection toward all, and in an holy desire for all, we should commend the
whole Church in our prayers unto God. It was such an ordinary practice with
our Apostle, both to give thanks unto God for all them to whom he wrote, and
likewise to pray for them all, notwithstanding that many things were amiss
amongst them, that we are not to doubt, but that we are so to do as we have
the Apostle for an ensample. Look into his Epistles, and by the beginning
almost of all of them, ye shall see that this was his ordinary practice,
leaving us therein an ensample, that as he did so we should do. And the reason
is plain: for does not the Apostle in writing his Epistles unto the Churches,
still write as unto the beloved of God, and unto Saints in Christ Jesus, still
entituling the whole Church unto which he wrote, unto these titles without
exception of any? Or does the Apostle so, and are not we to do so? Or are we
to do so, and not to commend the whole Church in our prayers unto God? The
reason I take it infers the point, and commends unto us that general care
of commending the whole Church in our prayers unto God.

A good lesson, and well worthy the learning of many in these our days* for as
it fares more privately and particularly amongst men, so does it fare more
publicly and generally in the Church. Amongst men ordinarily every trifling
matter is enough to cut off all love and friendship amongst us, nay to breed
great hatreds, and enmities amongst us, nay to set us at such odds, that rather
we will banne and curse one another, then pray one for another. And if we
differ in judgment one from another about some matters of the Church, then
nothing on one part but carnal gospellers, and time-seruers; nothing on
another part but sacrilegious persons, schismatic persons, troublers of the
state, and hypocritical dissemblers, nothing but slandering and forging things
never writ or spoke, nothing but such uncharitableness, as that it may be
feared that on some part there is little praying for the other, unless it be
to confound them. Neither is it otherwise more publicly and general^y in the
Church, if we may judge by outward appearances. Some parts of the Church unto
some seem to have so many defects and blemishes, so many superstitious rites
and ceremonies that they cannot brook them, they cannot abide in them, they
cannot pray with them, I know not whether they do pray for them. And of
others, other parts of the Church, because of their form of government, are so
misliked, that they cannot with patience hear of them, and therefore it is
like do not in all their prayers remember them. But these and all such might
hence be better lessoned, and such uncharitableness, if any such be in them,
reformed. Let us, beloved, be otherwise minded. Howsoever there be things
amiss in the Church, let us not seclude any out of our prayers unto God, but
let us commend in our prayers the whole Church unto God. In our prayers unto
God let us abandon all cogitation either of private quarrels one with another,
or of public contentions in the Church, and let us pray each for other, and
all of us for the whole Church unto the Lord fervently. Let the same mind be
in us, that was in our Apostle, and let us always in all our prayers have all
the saints in Christ Jesus in perfect memory.

The third thing which here I note is, the thing for which the Apostle prayed
in all his prayers for them; and that was the same in substance with that
wherefore he gave thanks unto God. For as his thanksgiving unto GOD on their
behalf was because of the fellowship which they had in the gospel from the
first day until then; so his prayers unto God for them were that they might
continue in that fellowship which they had in the gospel unto the end. Whence
I observe a very material point to be remembered in our prayers unto God, both
for the whole Church, and for our selves; which is continuance in the
fellowship of the gospel, that our Church may continue in that fellowship
which it has with other reformed Churches in the gospel, and that we may
continue grounded and stablished in the truth wherein we stand. Here is indeed
principal cause of prostrating our selves before the throne of grace, and
pouring out our souls in prayer unto our God, whether we look unto the curse
in the wanting, or unto the blessing in the enjoying of the glorious gospel of
Jesus Christ. For what greater curse or plague of God could fall upon us then
that our candlestick should be removed from us, that a famine of the word
should be sent amongst us, that the gospel of our salvation should be
translated from us to another people? The Lord threatening to bring a fearful
judgment on the Church of Ephesus, if they should not repent, and return to
their former love, says, Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent,
Ap^c. 2.5.
and do the first works; or else I will come against thee shortly, and will
remove thy candlestick out of his place. What is that? that is, he will remove
his Church from thence, by taking his gospel from them. Even as our blessed
Savior also threatened the Jews, saying, Matthew. 21.43.
The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation which shall
bring forth the fruits thereof. So the Prophet threatening a heavy judgment
upon the rulers of Israel, Behold, says he, the days come, that I will send a
famine in the land, Am^s 8.11.
not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the word of the
Lord; which how grievous a famine, and how heavy a judgment it is, appears
by that of Solomon, where he says, that where there is no vision, Prou. 29.18.
.i. no sincere preaching of the word, no sound fellowship in the gospel, there
the people perishes, even perishes both in soul and body.

And as the curse and judgment is great and grievous of wanting, so is the
blessing and benefit of having this fellowship in the gospel exceeding great
and happy. for it is indeed our very life and soul, 1 Pet 1.3.23.2.2.
whereby we are begotten, borne, and nourished unto everlasting tife, as Peter
witnesses. It is the lantern unto our feet, and the light unto our steps to
bring us to the City of the living God, the celestial Jerusalem, Heb. 12.22,
23, 24.
and to the company of innumerable Angels, and to the congregation of the
first borne which are written in heaven, and to God the judge of all, and to
the spirits of just and perfect men, and to Jesus the mediator of the new
testament, and to the blood of sprinkling that speaks better things then that
of Abel. By it we are called out of darkness into light, instructed in the way
of God perfitly, grounded and stablished in the faith, and made wise unto
salvation; Romans 1.16.
for it is the power of God unto salvation unto every one that believes. See
then whether here it be not principal cause for us to pray for our Church,
that in it the gospel of our salvation may for ever be freely and sincerely
preached; and for our selves that we may continue in that grace wherein we
stand by the gospel of our salvation. Yes surely, if either fear of as great
a plague of Gods wrath as can fall upon us may force us to pray, or desire of
as great a blessing of God as can befall us may persuade us to pray: we have
great cause even to power out our souls in prayer and supplication unto our
God, for the blessed continuance of that fellowship which we have with other
Churches in the gospel, that as now, so ever this grace may be continued upon
us. Yea beloved, if ye shall but cast your eyes abroad into the land, ye
shall find that there is great cause thus to pray. For how does Atheism and
abominable irreligion spread it self, and ouer-spread the whole face of the
land? Has it not nestled it self on hie, and said within it self, who shall
bring me down to the ground? How does Papisme and out-worne Pelagianisme now
shoot out the head, and break out in many places, as if now the day approached
wherein they may say, so, so, thus would we have it? How has cunning policy
broken the neck of Christianity, and now so swaieth that it carries all
almost with it? What neglect and contempt of the word is there in all places?
And what else are these but forerunners of a fearful judgment to follow?
What else do these threaten, but the removing of our candlestick from us?
Beloved, shall we see and know these things, and shall we not pray? Let us
pray at evening and at morning, and at midday; let us pray and that instantly,
that this judgment may never fall upon us, that this light of the gospel may
never be put out, but that it may shine amongst us, from generation to
generation until the day of Christ Jesus. The more that the danger is, let us
pray the more fervently, and let us not give our selves any rest, but still
pray unto the Lord for our continuance which we have with other reformed
Churches in the gospel.

The fourth thing which here I note is, that the Apostle thus prayed for the
Philippians always in all his prayers. Whence I observe with what constant
assiduity and carefullnesse, we ought to pray for our Church, and for our
selves, that we may continue in the fellowship which we have in the gospel: we
should never pray but always in our prayers, this prayer for our Church and
for our selves should continually be remembered, that the fellowship which we
now have with other Churches in the gospel may for ever be continued unto us.
To pray always, Romans 12.12. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Luc. 18.1.
and not to faint or give over is a thing much commanded by the Holy Ghost.
Continue in prayer, says our Apostle. And again in another place, Pray
continually. And to the same purpose is that parable of the importunate widow
in the gospel. All which places show us the necessity of prayer, that
whenever we stand in need we have recourse unto God by prayer, so the
constant perseverance that is to be used in prayer, that howsoever for some
time we seem to pray and be not heard, yet we faint not, nor give over, but
still pray, and that instantly. Now as we are to pray, and to pray always, so
always in all our prayers this is to be remembered, that we pray that the Lord
his way may be known upon earth, and his saving health among all nations, that
the preaching of the gospel may be fruitful unto us, and unto the whole
Church, that the word of the Lord may have free passage, and be glorified, that
we may continue grounded and stablished in the faith, as we have been taught
in Jesus Christ, that we and our whole Church, may continue in the fellowship
which we have with other Churches in the gospel. This the example of our
Apostle teaches us to do, who in that he did for others, left us an example
what to do for our selves, and for others.

Yea but is not the Lord always more ready to hear then we are to pray, and
has he not said, that whosoever asks receives, that he that seeks
finds, and that to him that knocks it shall be opened? Or if it be so, what
needs it always in all our prayers thus to pray as has been said? True it
is, that whosoever asks receives, and that the Lord is more ready to hear
and to grant our requests, then we are to pray and call upon his name. for
commonly he preuenteth us with his blessings, and whatsoever it is that we have
by prayer, he it is that teaches us to pray for it as we ought. But some
things we ask often and receive not, Jam. 4.3.
because we ask amiss: and some things he has appointed so to be granted, if
they be continually asked. And of this sort is this thing whereof we now
speak. He will, as it shall be for his glory, continue us in the fellowship
which we have in the gospel, if we continue to ask it in faith, and faint
not.

This then may teach us, of what weight and moment our continuance in the
fellowship of the gospel is. It is not a thing which happens by fortune, or
which humane policy effects, but only it is of God, and therefore always
in all our prayers we are to pray unto him for it. Let us therefore pray unto
the Lord without ceasing for this grace; let us never forget to commense this
suite in our prayers unto God, let us always pray for it, and not faint.

The fifth thing which here I note is, that the Apostle prayed for the
Philippians with gladness, because of their growth in godliness, and in the
knowledge of Jesus Christ by the work of his ministry. Whence I observe a
necessary care which ought to be in the whole Church, I mean in all them that
are taught in the word, and that is, that they so profit and increase in all
knowledge and judgment, in all godliness and holy conversation, that their
Pastors and Teachers may pray for them with gladness. Such a care it may seem
that the Romans had, unto whom the Apostle gives this testimony, that their
faith which was published, and their obedience which was come abroad much
gladded him. Romans 1.8.
Such a care it may seem that the Colossians had, unto whom the Apostle gives
this testimony, that though he was absent in the flesh, yet was he present
with them in the spirit, rejoicing and beholding their order, and their
steadfast faith in Christ. And such a care ought all the people of God to have,
that they which watch for their souls as they that must give accounts unto God
for them, may now pray for them with gladness, and afterward give their
accounts for them with joy and not with grief.

But this care is not common among the people. for where the Pastor in an holy
care for his people prays for them, he prays for them in many places with
great heaviness; with heaviness I say for their neglect and contempt of the
word; with heaviness for their ignorance in the things that belong unto their
peace, and unwillingness to be instructed therein; with heaviness for their
ungodly conversation, and unchristian walking; with heaviness for spending his
strength in vain, and for nothing amongst them. He prays, but his soul
mourns, because he cannot gain them unto Christ Jesus; he prays, but his
soul mourns, because they run, and needs will run headlong to the
devil. So little care commonly there is of profiting by the ministry of the
word amongst them that are taught in the word.

Beloved, let it never be said so of you, but let your care be that they which
labor in the word amongst you may pray for you with gladness. Jam. 1.21.
Lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of maliciousnes, and receive with
meeknes the word that is graffed in you, which is able to save your souls.
Follow the truth in love, and in all things grow up into him, Ephesians. 4.15.
which is the head, that is Christ. Let your conversation be such as it
becomes the gospel of Christ, and strive to increase in all good things with
all godly increasing: for so, and so only shall we have cause to pray for you
with gladness.

Lastly, in that the Apostle having taught the Philippians the way of truth,
gives thanks for them, prays for them, and that with gladness, because of
the fellowship etc. Hence I observe a duty of the Pastors of the Church, which
if time had given leave, and the place had been so convenient should
principally have been stood upon, and that is, that the Pastors are not only
to teach their people with the wholesome word which cannot be reproved; but
they are also to pray for them that the word may have a blessing among them,
that they may grow and increase thereby in all knowledge and holiness to the
Lord; they are to be glad in their souls for their profiting in the word of
grace, and they are to give thanks unto God on their behalf, when they see
their order, their steadfast faith in Christ, their growth in godliness, and
righteousness, and holy conversation. This should be, and might be, and I wish
it were, and if it be not it is their peril in whom it fails to be.

LECTVRE V.
PHILIP. I. Verse 6. And I am persuaded of this same thing that he that has
begun this good work in you will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ.
NOw give me leave briefly to note one thing further from those words, and
that is, that both our thanksgiving, and our praying are always to be unto
God. Our thanksgiving, because all deliverance in dangers, all comfort in
troubles, all help in time of need, all spiritual graces in heavenly things,
and all corporal blessings whatsoever are from him, the father of all mercies,
and giver of all goodness: for every good giving and every perfect gift is from
above, and comes down from the father of lights. Iam. 1.17.
He vpholdeth all such as fall, Psalm. 145.14, 15, 16.
and lifts up all those that be down: the eyes of all wait upon him, and he
gives them their meat in due season: he opens his hand, and fills all
things living with plenteousnes. He kills and makes alive, brings down to
the grave and raises up, 1 Samuel 2.6.
makes poor and makes rich, brings low and exalts. He is our rock and
fortress, our strength and shield, 2 Samuel 22.1.
and he that delivers us in all time of danger. He is the father of mercies,
2 Cor. 1.3,
and the God of all comfort, which comfort us in all our tribulation that we
may be able to comfort them which are in any affliction by the comfort
wherewith we our selves are comforted of him* 4.
He succoureth us when we are tempted, and suffers us not to be tempted above
that we be able, 1 Cor. 10.13.
but gives the issue with the tentation that we may be able to bear it. He
created us, Esaias 43 7. Act. 17 28. Ephesians. 1.
formed us, and made us for his own glory. In him we live, move, and have our
being. He blesses us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in
Christ, having chosen us in him, predestinate us to be adopted through him,
redeemed us through his blood, justified us, and sanctified us, washed and
cleansed us from our sins in him, and begotten us by faith unto a lively hope
in him. In one word, he is all in all things unto us. Unto whom then should we
sacrifice the calves of our lips, Col. 3.11.
and offer the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, but unto him of whom,
through whom, and for whom are all things, and by whom we have all blessings in
good things, and deliverance from all evil, even God blessed for ever?

And as for these reasons we are always in all things to give thanks unto the
Lord, so for the same reasons we are always to power out prayers and
supplications unto him, as we have need either of blessings in good things, or
deliverance from evil. And therefore we read that ever the faithful when
they had need either of blessings in good things, or deliverance from evil,
they had their recourse unto God by prayer, and as they were occasioned by
blessings in good things, and deliverance from evil, so they powered out their
souls in thanksgiving unto the Lord. Moses, and the children of Israel, when
Pharaoh and the Egyptians pursued them, cried unto the Lord with strong cries,
insomuch that the Lord said unto Moses, Exodus 14 15.
wherefore criest thou unto me? And when they had seen the mighty power which
the Lord showed upon the Egyptians, Exodus 55.
they sung unto him the songs of praise and thanksgiving. So Iehosaphat, and
Judah, and Jerusalem when the Moabites and Ammonites came against them to
battle, prayed in the courts of the Lords house and said, 2 Chr. 20.6.
O Lord God of our fathers art not thou God in heaven? and reignest thou not on
all the kingdoms of the heathen? etc. And when the Lord had given them a
marvelous victory over their enemies, they assembled themselves in the valley
of Berachah or blessing, 26.
and there they blessed the Lord. So Ezekiah when he was sick turned his face
to the wall, and prayed to the Lord, and said, Esaias 38.2, 3.
I beseech thee Lord remember now how I have walked before thee in truth, and
with a perfect heart etc. And when the Lord had restored him unto health, he
sang the song of thanksgiving unto him, and said, the Lord was ready to save
me, 10.20.
therefore will we sing my song all the days of our life in the house of the
Lord. So Hannah being barren prayed for a child unto the Lord, 1 Samuel 1.10.
and wept sore: and when the Lord had granted her request she thanked God and
said, 2.1.
Mine heart rejoices in the Lord, my horn is exalted in the Lord, my mouth is
enlarged over mine enemies etc. And what should I more say? The time would be
too short for me to tell you of David, Daniel, Samuel, and the rest, which as
they stood in need either of blessings in good things, or of deliverance from
evil, made their prayers and supplications ever unto the Lord; and again, as
they were occasioned either by blessings or deliverances offered their
sacrifice of praise ever unto the Lord. Thus they were taught, and thus by the
word, and by their example we are taught for all things to pray unto the Lord,
and in all things to give thanks unto the Lord.

Beware then, beloved, of them that with fained words teach you to give thanks,
or to pray unto Saints ^^^erally, or jointly, as to God and our Lady, to God
and S. George, or the like. for wherefore should we either pray, or give thanks
unto them? Do they hear us, or know what we say or think? Esaias says, Esaias
63.16.
that Abraham knows us not, and that Israel is ignorant of us; where the
ordinary gloss cites Augustine saying, that the dead, even Saints, know not
what the living do. And Solomon says, 2 Chr. 6.30.
that the Lord only knows the hearts of the children of men. Do they help
us, or give any thing unto us? The Psalmist says, Psalm. 84.11.
that the Lord gives both grace and glory; neither dare it be avouched that
the Saints give grace or glory, or are the authors of any blessing. Or does any
commandment or example in the holy scripture warrant us to pray, or to give
thanks unto them? Themselves grant that there is no warrant in the scripture
from commandment or example to pray or give thanks unto them, as unto the
authors of any grace, or glory, but only as unto intercessors before God for
us. And yet in their practice it is most plain that they do not only pray
unto them, to pray for them, but to preseure them, to have mercy upon them, to
bring them to the kingdom of heaven etc. But admit that they pray unto them
only as unto mediators and intercessors betwixt God and them. Says not the
Apostle, that there is one mediator between God and man, 1 Timothy ^.5.
which is the man Christ Jesus. How then do they make more mediators? Christ
Jesus, say they, is ^our only immediate mediator before God, but the Saints are
mediators unto Christ, and therefore we conclude our prayers always saying, by
Jesus Christ our Lord. Wherein also they deceive the world: for by their own
portice it appears that they have many prayers both unto Marie, and to other
Saints, in the conclusion whereof they use not to say, by Christ our Lord. But
to let that go, are the Saints our mediators unto Christ to convey our prayers
unto him, and Christ our Mediator unto God to convey our prayers from the
saints unto God? By this shift then it comes about that Christ is not the
mediator between God and us, as the Apostle affirms, but between God and
the saints, and the Saints mediators betwixt Christ and us. And this is the
hand that they make by praying unto Saints as unto mediators of intercession;
they thrust Christ Jesus out from being mediator betwixt God and us, and they
do in truth pray unto the saints as unto the authors of grace.

But admitting that they pray only unto them as unto intercessors betwixt
Christ and us, I demand what commandment or example there is in the scripture
to warrant us to pray at all, or to give thanks at all unto them. Genesis 48.16.
Jacob, say they, prayed unto an Angel. If he had prayed unto a created
Angel, this had not proved ought for invocation of Saints. But it was unto
that uncreated Angel of the covenant, even Christ Jesus, with whom he had
wrestled, and prevailed, that he prayed unto, as both the circumstances of that
place, and conference of it with other places prove. Well, say they, Moses
praying, Exodus 32.13.
and saying thus, remember Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob thy servants, hoped to
have his prayers heard by the merits of those holy men. But it is most plain
by that place that Moses pleads not the merits of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
but only presses the covenant and promise made with them, as the words
immediately following show, where it is said, to whom thou swarest by thine own
self, and saidest etc. Yea but, say they, the place in the Apocalypse proves
most plainly that the Saints in heaven do offer up the prayers of the saints
on earth, where it is said, Apoc. 5.8.
that the 24 elders fell down before the Lamb having golden violls full of
odours, which are the prayers of the saints. But this place makes no more to
this purpose then the rest: for 1. it is a vision, and no thing so done as here
is set down; and therefore no clear argument will hence be drawn. Again,
here is nothing spoken of the saints in heaven: for it is generally agreed upon
that the 24 elders represent the Church militant here on earth, whose
conversation is in heaven, whose golden violls full of sweet odours were their
own prayers powered out of faithful hearts unto the Lord. Lastly, they say that
praying one unto another here on earth to be assisted by their prayers is
lawful, therefore prayer unto Saints in heaven is lawful. But to this we
answer, 1. that to desire one another prayers is warranted by the word, which
they grant: but to request the prayers of the Saints departed has no warrant
in the word, howsoever they contend the contrary. 2. There is no such reason of
desiring the prayers of the Saints in heaven, as of desiring one another
prayers: for we know one another necessities, but they know not our
necessities, as has been proved. 3. Our praying one for another to be helped
by their prayers is a godly request to our brethren, but no religious
invocation of them, as by their merits or worthiness to be brought into Gods
favor, such as is prayer unto Saints. And as we are in a Christian sort to
give thanks one unto another for benefits received, so are we in a Christian
sort to request one another prayers. But that religious thanksgiving, and that
religious invocation whereof we now speak are in no sort due to any but to
God. So that the Saints departed not knowing what we say or think, nor giving
either grace or glory to us, nor any way warranted by the scripturs to have
such honor given unto them, we conclude that we are not to pray, or to give
thanks to them.

Nay absolutely we say that it is utterly unlawful to pray, or give thanks to
them. For 1. prayer and thanksgiving are honors only due unto the Lord, and
therefore he says, Call upon me in the day of trouble, Psalm. 50.
and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me, praise me, give thanks
unto me. Where albeit the word (only) be not expressed, but it be said, Call
upon me etc; as neither it is expressed in Deuteronomie, but said, thou shall
fear the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 10.20.
and thou shall serve him; yet as our Savior Christ shows, that it is there
to be understood by his adding of it, Matthew. 4.10.
and saying, him only shall thou serve; so is it plain that in this place
where the Prophet speaks of the same thing it is understood, as if he had
said, Call upon me only, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me
only. Therefore it is utterly unlawful either to pray, or to give thanks unto
the Saints, unless we will communicate that to others which belongs unto
him, and so make other Gods beside him, Exodus 20.3.23.
and with him, contrary to the commandment. 2. It is unlawful to believe in
them, which they will grant, therefore unlawful to pray, or to give thanks
unto them: for so it is written, How shall they call on him in whom they have
not believed. Romans 10.14
3. To pray unto Saints is injurious unto Christ, who is ordained the only
mediator between God and us, 1 Timothy 2.5. Romans 8.34.
who sits at the right hand of God and makes continual request for us,
Heb. 4.16. Ioh. 16.23.
unto whom we may go boldly, and for whose sake, whatsoever we ask the Father
in his name he gives it us. Many other arguments of like weight might here be
brought to the same purpose. But these for this time may suffice.

Neither let any man think that because we thus teach, we make not that
reckoning of the Saints departed which we ought. Yes, beloved, of the blessed
Virgin Mary we say, that she was blessed above other women, that she was
dearly beloved of God, that she was adorned with excellent gifts and graces
of Gods holy spirit, and that her memory is to be reverenced for ever: and of
all the Saints departed we say, that their memory is blessed, and that they are
to be commended unto the Church, that by their doctrine and examples others may
be strengthened in true faith, and inflamed to follow true godliness: yea and
that in a general desire both for us, and for themselves, and for all the
elect of God, they pray that the day of our refreshing were come, and that all
the people of God were joined in one, and that their enemies were vanquished
and destroyed: and farther, that it may be that God sometimes may reveal some
things in particular unto them at his pleasure, and as it seems good unto
him. Only as the Holy Ghost has taught us, so we teach you, that in the word
is nothing written whereby to prove that they know our affairs in particular,
that they pray for us in particular, or that they do any thing for us in
particular, and therefore that we are not to pray unto them, or to give thanks
unto them, but only to the Lord, to whom alone that honor is due. Give thanks
therefore o Israel, unto God the Lord in the congregations from the ground of
thine heart. Psalm. 68.26. 55.17.
Pray unto the Lord, as David did, evening and morning, and at midday, and
that instantly. As your occasions are for blessings in good things, or
deliverance from evil, so let your requests be showed unto God in prayer and
supplication with giving of thanks. Yea in the midst of troubles give thanks
unto the Lord, that ye are not overcome of them, and pray unto the Lord that he
will give you patience in them. And amongst all things, give thanks unto the
Lord for that fellowship which ye have with other Churches in the gospel, and
pray unto the Lord that ye may continue in that grace wherein ye stand,
through the gospel of your salvation unto your lives end.

And I am perswaded] As before the Apostle testified his love toward the
Philippians, by his rejoicing on their behalf for the grace of God already
bestowed on them, so now likewise he testifies his love toward them, by
signification of his assured hope of Gods farther mercy toward them, in their
perseverance in the same grace unto the end. Where 1. he signifies his assured
hope of their perseverance, verse. 6. 2. He sets down the reason which
caused him so assuredly to hope thereof, namely their piety, and his love of
them, v. 7. 3. He makes earnest protestation of his love toward them, verse.
8. For the first, the Apostle shows his great confidence and assured hope of
their perseverance, when he says, I am persuaded of this same thing etc. And
closely he implies a reason of his confidence, drawn from the constant
immutabilitie of God in his doings, when he says, that he which has begun
etc. for it is as if he had thus reasoned: God is constant in his doings, so
that look what he begins that he finisheth, therefore I am persuaded that
he which has begun this good work etc. Now it is to be noted that the
Apostle says not, I am persuaded that God which has etc. but that he which
has begun, whereby he implies that the beginning of that, as also indeed of
every good work, was alone from God. for if it had been from any other, then
they should not have understood him to have spoken of God, when he said, that
he. Again, it is to be noted, that the Apostle says not, I am persuaded that
you which have begun well, shall also end well, but that he which has begun
etc. grounding his persuasion not on their virtue and constancy, but on the
constant immutabilitie of God which had begun a good work in them. Now the
good work which he had begun in them was their embracing of the gospel,
whereby they had fellowship in the gospel with other Churches, which was
indeed a special good work, and such as they that persecute them in whom God
has begun this good work, make but vain braggs of their good works. I am
then, says the Apostle, persuaded that he that has begun this good work in
you of embracing the gospel, will perform it,.i. will confirm and stablish
you in it, or will finish and perfect it until the day of Jesus Christ, when he
shall come and change your vile bodies, that they may be fashioned like unto
his glorious body: for albeit by the day of Christ, might be meant the day
wherein the faithful die in Christ, yet by the day of Christ I rather
understand here the day of Christ his second coming in the flesh in the last
day, as also it is understood in the next chapter verse. 16. because the Apostle
speaks not only of them that then were at Philippi, ^ut of the Church also
which afterward should be there until the second coming of Christ. Thus much
of the sense of the words.

The first thing then which here I note, is the ground of the Apostles
confidence of the Philippians perseverance. His ground is, not the Philippians
virtue and constancy, as if now they were so well grounded and stablished in
the faith that they could not but hold out, and keep fast their good profession
unto the end, but his ground is the constant immutabilitie of God, who where he
begins to work a good work, there he makes an end of it. Whence I observe
a notable ground of the perseverance of all Gods faithful children in that
grace wherein they stand: and that is this, he that has begun a good work in
them will perform it, and confirm them unto the end. To which purpose also
there are many other places in the holy scripture; as where it is said of
Christ Jesus, Ioh. 13.1.
that forasmuch as he loved his own which were in the world, unto the end he
loved them. Whence we take that commonly received, saying, that whom God loves
once he loves unto the end. And again, where Christ himself says, Ioh. 4.14.
Whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him shall never be more a
thirst, but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water
springing up into everlasting life. Here is, but once drink, and never thirst,
once sanctified by the spirit, and never utterly forsaken of the spirit. And
again where John says, 1 Ioh. 3.9.
whosoever is borne of God sins not, namely unto death: and why? because the
seed of God remains in him, the spirit of God having once seized upon him,
always abides in him. And again, where our Savior says, him that comes
to me I cast not away, once come by faith, Ioh. 6.37.
no fear of forsaking afterward. And the reason is plain: for the gifts and
calling of God are without repentance. Romans 11.29.
He calls us by his gospel, and gives us gifts and graces of his holy
spirit, not for our own sakes, or for any thing that he sees or foreseeth in
us: for then we might well fear a fall and a change; but his gifts are given
freely by grace according to his good pleasure. So that he never repents of
any grace which he bestows upon us, nor suffers his mercies to fail from
us for ever, but holds our souls in life, and keeps us from the pit of
destruction. Whereupon, we read that as David having had experience of Gods
help, in his deliverance out of the paw of the Lion, and out of the paw of the
Bear, afterward feared not to encounter Goliath, but assured himself that the
Lord that had delivered him out of the paw of the Lion, 1 Samuel 17.37.
and out of the paw of the Bear, would also deliver him out of the hand of
that Philistim: so the children of God having once felt the love of God in
Christ Jesus in their souls, and the testimony of the spirit witnessing unto
their spirits that they were the sons of God, afterward feared not the
encounters of sin or Satan, but assured themselves, that nothing should be
able to separate them from the love of God in Christ Jesus. So we see that our
Apostle breaks out and says, Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?
Romans 6.35.
shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or
peril, or sword? Nay I am persuaded that neither death, 38.
nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, 39.
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us
from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord And again, I know whom
I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have
committed unto him, 2 Timothy 1.12.
which is my self against that day. And thus many others of Gods children as
upon other grounds, so in assurance of Gods unchangeable resolution in his
doings, have builded a full and assured persuasion of their perseverance.

Now we must understand, that in perseverance there be two things, which ye may
call the parts of it: the one is a holy will and desire to persevere in that
grace wherein we stand: the other is a real continuance, and continual
persisting in that grace wherein we stand. This real continuance and
continual persisting in the grace wherein we stand, is often in the best of
Gods children so abated and diminished, that it seems utterly to be
extinguished: but that holy will and desire to persevere, the Lord does never
suffer utterly to fail from his children. Take for example the holy prophet
David, and the blessed Apostle Paul: did not David in the bitterness of his
soul cry, Will the Lord absent himself for ever, Psalm. 77.7.8.9. 88.14.15.16.
and will he be no more entreated? Is his mercy clean gone for ever, and is
his promise come utterly to an end for evermore? Has God forgotten to be
gracious, and will he shut up his loving kindness in displeasure? And again,
Lord, why abhorrest thou my soul, and hidest thy face from me? Lord, where
are thy old loving kindnesses? thy terrors do I suffer with a troubled mind
thy wrathful displeasure goes over me, and the fear of thee has undone me.
His real continuance, ye see, seems to be cut off, and himself to be
separated from the Lord; but by his gronings and cries it appears that his
holy desire still remained. Paul's care likewise was interrupted, and his real
continuance remitted, when he was so exalted through the abundance of
revelations, 2 Cor. 12.7.
that there was given unto him a prick in the flesh, even the messenger of
Satan to buffet him: yet in that he then besought the Lord thrice that that
messenger of Satan might depart from him, 8.
it appears that this his holy desire still remained. And this holy desire of
perseuering is it which the Lord accepts, and then is he said to give us this
grace of perseverance, when he gives us a perpetual will and desire, of
perseuering in that grace wherein we stand, howsoever the very act of
perseuering by sin, tentation, or other trouble seem to be cut off and quite
failed sometimes even in the dearest of Gods children.

Here then is a notable comfort for the broken and contrite heart, for the
humbled and afflicted soul. For tell me, o thou distressed soul, has the
spirit sometimes witnessed unto thy spirit that thou wast the child of God?
Has the love of God sometimes been so shed abroad in thine heart, that thou
have verily persuaded thy self of the love of God toward thee? Have thou
sometimes been delighted in the law of thy God, and felt the sweet comforts of
God in Christ Jesus in thy soul? Why then is now thy soul so heavy, and why
is it so disquieted within thee? Why do thoughts arise in thy heart, and why
does the sleep depart from thine eyes? O wait upon the Lord, and put thy
trust in him; for he that has begun a good work in thee, will perform it
until the day of Christ Jesus. He has said it by his holy Apostle, and shall
he not do it? The strength of Israel will not lie, 1 Samuel 15.29.
nor repent; for he is not a man that he should repent. He has begun a good
work in thee, even of his love and his mercy toward thee, and as himself, so
his love is unchangeable, so that whom he loves once, he loves unto the end.
O but therefore thou art troubled, because he does not seem to continue his
loving kindness toward thee. Thou feel not that joy in the Holy Ghost, that
comfort in Gods love which thou wast wont to find, thou art even dead unto the
life of God. Well, did not David cry out, Lord where are thy old loving
kindnesses, where are thy former mercies? Did he not pray, restore me to the
joy of thy salvation, and renew a right spirit within me. And again, O quicken
me according to thy word, quicken me according to thy loving kindness. So
that thou see there has no tentation taken thee, but such as appertains to
man, even such as have overtaken men after Gods own heart. But tell me, does
it not grieve thee that thou do not feel that assurance, that comfort, that
joy that thou wast wont to find in thy God through Jesus Christ? Do thou
not desire and long to feel that assurance, and comfort, and joy that thou
wast wont to find in thy soul? O yes, it is thy doubtings that trouble thee,
and comfort which thou longest for. Well then good enough. It is a broken and
contrite heart that greeueth at his sins, Psalm. 51.17.
that greeueth at his wants, that the Lord loves, and a troubled spirit,
troubled at the cogitation of his slips and imperfections, is a sacrifice
acceptable unto him. And again, this holy desire of any grace is the grace it
self. A desire of comfort is a great part of comfort, and a desire of
perseuering is a chief part of perseverance, and he that desires any grace
of God, tending to salvation shall surely have it. For so Christ has promised,
saying, I will give to him that is a thirst of the well of the water of life
freely: Apoc. 21.6.
which is the same with that in the Prophet, where it is said, Ho, every one
that thirsts, come ye to the waters, Esaias 55.1.
and ye that have no silver come, buy, and eat, come I say, buy wine and milk
without silver and without money.

Comfort then your selves, be of good comfort in the Lord, all ye that thirst
after and desire the things that belong unto your peace. Let not your sins,
or your wants and imperfections too much cast you down or dismay you. What if
he will have you to sail by hell to heaven? He that continues this holy
desire in you, will not suffer his mercies utterly to fail from you for ever.
Heaviness may endure for a night, for a short season, but joy comes in the
morning, after a while heaviness is turned into joy, and sackcloth into the
garment of gladness. Where he has begun he will make an end, and scattering
this cloud he will show unto thee the light of his holy countenance. In the
mean time, let that holy desire which is in thee, be a pledge of his love unto
thee, and assure thy self, he shall fulfill all thy hearts desire, and restore
thee to thy wonted joys again.

LECTVRE VI.
PHILIP. 1. Verse. 7. As it becomes me so to judge of you all, because I have
you in remembrance, that both in my bands, and in my defense and confirmation
of the Gospel you all were partakers of my grace.
THe second thing which here I note is, that God and God only had begun that
good work of embracing the Gospel in them, and would (as the Apostle was
persuaded) perform it unto the end. For once it plain that the Apostle
means, that God had begun this work in them, and would perform it unto
the end; and in that he says not, I am persuaded that God, but that he which
has begun, etc he plainly implies, that God only begun that good work in
them, and would perform it unto the end. For if any other but he only had
intermedled therein, how should the Philippians have plainly understood the
Apostle to speak of God, when he said, that he etc. He, if any other had had
any hand herein, might as well be understood of that other as of God. Hence
then I observe that both the beginning and the perfiting of our obedience to
the Gospel, and indeed of every good work in us, is only from God. And to
this the writings of the holy Ghost every where agree. The Apostle speaking in
general, says, what have thou that thou have not received? 1 Cor 4 7.
no gift, no grace, no good at all, but we receive it from God; be it the
beginning, or the perfiting, or what it may be, if it be good we receive it
from God. Our blessed Savior speaking more particularly of faith in Christ
Jesus, and an holy confession of his sin says, flesh and blood has not
reueiled this unto thee, Mat. ^^
but my father which is in heaven. Faith in Christ Jesus, and an holy
confession of his name are not the fruits of man's wisdom, but they are the
special gifts of God our heavenly father. And speaking of obedience to the
Gospel, he says, oh. 6.44.
no man can come to me except the father which has sent me draw him. No
eomming unto Christ, no obedience unto his will, unless we be drawn and
haled against our wills, and of unwilling be made willing. And therefore the
Spouse in the Canticles called upon her Bridegroom Christ Jesus, and says
unto him, draw me, and we will run after thee. Till he draw us, Cant. 1.4.
we run not after him in whole or in part, but indeed we run from him: but
when he draws us by his cords, even by the preaching of his Gospel, and of
unwilling makes us willing, then we run after him. Have we then no good
thing but which we receive from God? Does not flesh and blood reveal any
mystery of our salvation unto us? Can we not come unto Christ unless the
father of our Lord Jesus Christ draw us? If then we come unto Christ, and obey
his Gospel, it is wholly from God. If we believe or understand any thing in
the way of godliness, it is wholly from the illumination of Gods spirit. If in
us there be any thing that is good, it is wholly the gift of God bestowed on
us. He only has the interest both in the beginning, and in the increase of
it in us. Which also yet farther appears by this, in that we give thanks
unto God for our calling into the fellowship which we have in the Gospel, and
for all other his works of mercy on us, and in that we pray unto God for
increase in all knowledge and judgment, and for every grace of his spirit
which he knows to be needful for us. For whatsoever it is, wherefore we
give thanks unto the Lord, thereby we acknowledge that we have reciued it
from the Lord, and whatsoever it is wherefore we pray unto the Lord, thereby
we acknowledge that it is to be received from the Lord, as every man knows
by the nature of thanksgiving, and of prayer. Do we then well in giving
thanks unto God for our calling into the fellowship of the Gospel, and for
other good things begun in us? Do we well to pray unto God that he will
increase our obedience to ^he Gospel, and whatsoever good grace he has begun
in us? Do we well to give thanks unto God for the beginning, and to pray
unto God for the perfiting of every good work in us? If we do not well
herein, then our Apostle did not well in this place thus to do on the
Philippians behalf, and his example has deceived us: but if we do well
herein, then is both the beginning, and increase, and perfiting of our
obedience to the Gospel, and of every good work in us, only from the Lord,
who is all in all things, Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, as in
regard of his Majesty, so in regard of all creatures; from whom as all
creatures have their beginning, continuance and support, so have all good
graces their beginning, increase, and perfection from him.

Howbeit here ye must understand, that when we thus teach, that both the
beginning, and increase, and perfiting of our obedience to the Gospel, and of
every good work in us, is only from God, we do not either make the
ministration of the Gospel to be of none effect, or transform our selves
into blocks and stones: For albeit he only begin, increase, and perfect in
us our obedience to the Gospel, and every good grace that is wrought in us,
yet does he not this immediately by himself, but he does it by means. He does
it, but he uses the ministry of his servants in the preaching of his Gospel
to effect it: he gives increase, but by the planting of Paul, and watering of
Apollos, as it is written, I have planted, 1 Cor. 3.6.
Apollos watered, but God gave the increase. He reconcileth his children unto
himself, but by the word of reconciliation which he has committed to us his
children, as it is written, all things are of God which has reconciled us unto
himself by Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 5 18.
and has given unto us the ministry of reconciliation. He reuealeth his
truth unto his children, but by his Ministers unto whom he reuealeth his
truth, that they may preach it unto us, as it is written, when it pleased God
to reveal his son in me, Gal. 1.^6.
that I should preach him among the Gentiles, etc. And therefore as it is said,
that faith is the gift of God, so is it also said that faith is by hearing,
Ephesians. 2.8. Romans 10.17.
even hearing of the word preached; so that his gift is given by the ministry
of the word preached. And as it is said, that eternal life is the gift of God
through Jesus Christ our Lord, so is it also said, Romans 6.23.
that the Gospel is the power of God, Romans 1.16.
or the powerful instrument of God unto salvation unto every one that
believes, so that the preaching of the Gospel is the ordinary instrument of
God, whereby he gives salvation and eternal life to every one that believes.
We do not therefore make the ministration of the Gospel to be of none
effect, when we say that God only begins this, and every good work in us,
and also increases, and perfiteth it in us, but rather we magnify the
ministration of the Gospel, in as much as we say that he only does this but by
the ministration of the Gospel, as the ordinary instrument of his spirit.

Neither when we thus teach, do we transform men into blocks and stones, as
though they had no power or faculty in themselves at all to work: for we know
that the natural man has understanding, and will, whereby he differs not
only from stocks and stones, but from bruit beasts. But what is his
understanding, and what is his will till he be renewed by the spirit of God? his
understanding is full of darkness and ignorance, and his will full of
wickedness and vanity. He understands, but not the things of the spirit of
God, as it is written, the natural man perceives not the things of the spirit
of God, for they are foolishness unto him, 1 Cor. 2.14.
neither can he know them because they are spiritually discerned; nay, his
understanding and wisdom is enmity against God, Romans 8.7.
for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. Likewise he
wills, but not any thing that is good, as it is written, all the imaginations
of the thoughts of man's heart are only evil continually, Gen 6 5.
and there is no fear of God before his eyes. Rom 3 18.
This then is it which we say, that man before he be renewed by the spirit of
grace, has no power or faculty at all, I say, not to work or do ought at
all; for this were indeed to transform him into a stock or stone, but to do
any thing that is good; for it is God, and God only that works in him both
the good will, Phil. 2.13.
and the good deed even of his good pleasure. He enlightens the eyes of our
understanding, and corrects our froward wills, and then being renewed by the
spirit we understand the things of the spirit of God, and we will the things
that are good, and we run the way of Gods commandments, but ever with this
necessary limitation, only by God. He makes us understand, and will, and
run as we ought, and we understand, and will, and run as we ought.

Here ^hen, first learn to beware of such as either tell you that man is able
of himself to keep the Law, and to merit everlasting life, a gross and now
outwo^ne error, I hope; or that man is able of himself to begin that is
good, howsoever he be not able to perfect it but by the help of the Lord; or
that man being prevented by grace, is then able by the help of grace ayding
his weak nature to work out his own salvation: for all these errors, as
Dagon* must needs fall to the ground before this testimony of the spirit, and
doctrine of the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost by the mouth of the Apostle says,
that it is God which has begun a good work in us, and that he which has
begun it will go forward with it, and perform it unto the end. What then if a
man shall tell you, that it is in man both to begin and perfect that which is
good? Or that it is in man to begin that is good, though not to perfect it? Or
that it is in man by the help only of God to do that is good? Let God be
true, and every man a liar, Romans 3.4.
that he may be justified in his words, and overcome when he is judged. Neither
beginning, nor ending, nor increase of any thing that is good is of our selves
as of our selves, but he begins, and he which begins performs and
perfiteth, and none but he, even God only. It is the mere and only grace and
mercy of God, not which aideth our nature being weakened, but which changes it
altogether in quality, bringing us out of darkness into light, out of the
power of Satan unto God, and translating us from the death of sin unto the
life of righteousness in Christ Jesus. It is the mere and only grace of God,
not which makes an end of our salvation alone, but wherein our salvation wholly
does consist. Let no man therefore through va^ne and flatte^ing words deceive
you, as if you your selves were somewhat, when indeed you are nothing; but
learn, and know, and ever hold this for a sure ground, that God only
begins, increases, and perfiteth our obedience to the gospel, and every
good work in us.

2. Let the Minister and Preacher of the word hence learn, what he may assume
unto himself in the fruits of his labors, by the work of his ministry. Are
his people reconciled unto God? brought unto the obedience of the gospel?
begotten in the faith of Christ Jesus? grounded and stablished in the truth?
instructed in the way of God perfitly? etc. He is not to take this honor unto
himself, as if he had done these things; for this has God only done, and it
is his work, as it is written, and they shall be all taught of God. Esaias
54.13. Ioh. 6.45.
If we be taught in the word, he has taught us by his spirit: if we believe
in Christ, it is his gift by his spirit: if we be reconciled unto God, he has
reconciled us unto himself by Jesus Christ etc. He I say does all things
only, not immediately by himself, but by the ministry of his servants. And
albeit he, because he works not by his spirit, but by the ministry of his
servants, sometimes vouchsafe them this honor, that they beget men through the
gospel, and that they save them that hear them; yet is this only his work,
and only vouchsafed by him unto them, because in this work he uses the work
of their ministry. Let not the Minister then, dare to assume unto himself
that honor which only belongs unto the Lord. This is his honor, that in the
great work of man's salvation he uses his ministry, and by him as his
instrument works what he will. Let this therefore be his glory and rejoicing,
that the Lord by his means will save his people, and bring them to that
inheritance which lasts for ever in the heavens; and let him so speak as his
Minister out of his word, that so he may be indeed a means to turn many to
righteousness.

3. Hence you may learn in what account and regard ye are to have the
Ministers of Christ Jesus. True and most true it is, as already ye have heard,
that God only begins every good work in us, and likewise confirms, and
strengthens us, and makes us to abound therein more and more. But he does it,
as also ye have heard, by their ministry whom he has separated for the
gathering together of the Saints, and for the edification of the body of
Christ. Ye are therefore so to think of us, as of the ministers of Christ, and
disposers of the secrets of God, by whom he has appointed to open your eyes,
that ye may turn from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God,
that ye may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them which
are sanctified by faith in Christ Jesus, by whom he has appointed to reveal
his will unto you, and to fill you with the graces of his holy spirit, and by
whom he has appointed to bring to pass all the good pleasure of his will in
you. And if any man think not thus of us, it is because he knows us not,
neither him that has sent us, nor what great works the Lord works, what
great mercies the Lord shows unto his children by us. But let this for this
time serve to stir up and to warn your pure minds, that ye so think of us
as ye ought, and as it becomes them that are taught in the word, to have
them which labor among you, and admonish you in singular love and reverence
for their works sake.

The third thing which here I note is, that the Apostle says, that he was
persuaded that he that had begun this good work of embracing the gospel in
them, would perform it until the day of Jesus Christ; or as he speaks to
the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.8.
would confirm them in it unto the end, that they might be blameless in the
day of our Lord Jesus Christ. Whence two doubts may be moved not unworthy the
answering. The one is, how one man may be persuaded of another man's
perseverance or salvation, what a kind of persuasion it is which is of
another perseverance or salvation. The other is, whether the Lord performed
this work of the Philippians continuance in the fellowship which they had in
the gospel, until the day of Jesus Christ, as the Apostle was persuaded he
would. To speak first unto this latter, most lamentable it is, but most true
it is, that in those places where sometimes the name of the Lord was called
upon, and the gospel of Christ Jesus freely and sincerely preached, not only
at Philippi but in many other Churches which the Apostles had planted in
Macedonia, and else where, there now through the secret, but just judgment of
God, barbarous Turcisme, and abominable paganism has taken possession, and
holds it at his will. But as we understand this place of the Apostle, so we
are to make answer to the doubt; for if we understand the Apostles persuasion
to be touching the Church that then presently was at Philippi, that the Lord
would continue them in the fellowship of the gospel until the day of Jesus
Christ,.i. until their death, when they should be translated into his kingdom
of glory, I take it that it may very well be presumed, and safely auerred that
the Lord performed this work of the Philippians continuance in the fellowship,
which they had in the gospel until the day of Christ Jesus, as the Apostle
was persuaded he would: for such was their love and liberality toward the
Apostle, and such their constant abiding in the truth from the first day until
then, that as the Apostle thereupon was persuaded, that the Lord would confirm
them in that grace wherein they stood unto their end, so we thereupon may
persuade our selves that the Lord did confirm them therein unto the end. But
if we understand the Apostles persuasion to be touching the Church successively
at Philippi, that the Lord would continue that Church in all ages, in the
fellowship of the gospel until the day of Jesus Christ,.i. until his second
coming to judgment, then may it seem that the Apostle failed in his
persuasion, because of their subjection now a long time unto the Turk. But
even here also it may be said, that as when the Apostle wrote, the Philippians
shined as lights in the midst of a naughty and crooked nation, so now also in
that hellish thraldom unto the Turk, the Lord has a Church there, though not
so eminent as sometimes it was, yet a Church. For as at the first, the Apostles
were sent as sheep in the midst of wolves, and as it may be hoped that
Christ has his Church even in the midst of Romish Egypt; so may it also be
hoped, that he has his Church in that heathenish tyranny of the Turk, and
even in the City of Philippi. But I now rather approve the former answer, as
better agreeing with the circumstances of this scripture, whereby it seems
that the Apostle speaks of them that then were at Philippi.

Now for answer unto the second doubt, which is how one man may be persuaded of
another man's perseverance or salvation, we must understand that there is a
threefold persuasion. One grounded upon the testimony of the spirit, unto our
spirit, whereby we do most certainly persuade our selves of whatsoever grace
is sealed unto us by the earnest of the spirit. And this persuasion is most
certain, but this persuasion we cannot have of any other, but only of our
selves, forasmuch as this arises of the testimony of the spirit unto our
spirit. Another persuasion there is grounded upon the constant immutabilitie of
God in his doings, whereby we certainly persuade our selves, that whatsoever
good work God has begun in us, he will confirm it unto the end. And a third
persuasion there is grounded upon charity, whereby we persuade our selves of
grace, where we see obedience to the gospel, constant abiding in the truth,
patience in troubles, love of the brethren, and the like. Now one man cannot be
persuaded of an other man's perseverance or salvation, by the first kind of
persuasion grounded upon the testimony of the spirit, because no man knows
what the spirit witnesses unto another spirit, but only to his own. But
both by the second kind of persuasion grounded upon the constancy of the
Lord, and likewise by the third grounded upon charity, one man may be
persuaded of another man's perseverance or salvation. By the first kind of
persuasion the Apostle was persuaded of his own salvation, when he said, I am
persuaded that neither death, Romans 10.38.
nor life, nor Angels etc; and so every one of us upon the like ground, may
persuade our selves of our own perseverance and salvation. By the second and
third kinds of persuasion, the Apostle was persuaded of the Philippians
perseverance and salvation, as in this place we see; and so every one of us
upon the like grounds, may be persuaded one of another perseverance and
salvation. The first never fails, because the testimony of Gods spirit
whereon it is grounded is ever true. The second likewise never fails, because
Gods purposes are ever unchangeable, and with him is no variablenes, neither
shadowing by turning The third has a wonderful great probability, but may
fail, because it leans on the outward fruits of the spirit in man, whose
heart none knows, but he that searches it. The first is not here mentioned:
the second is mentioned verse. 6: and the third has his ground verse. 7. For a
full answer then unto the second doubt, we say that one man may be persuaded of
another man's perseverance and salvation, both by the second and third kinds of
persuasion, and farther that of whose perseverance and salvation we are
persuaded by the third kind of persuasion, of his perseverance and salvation
also we are to be persuaded by the second kind of persuasion,.i. of whose
perseverance and salvation, we may conceive a good persuasion by the fruits of
the spirit in them, of them we are certainly to be persuaded that God will
never leave them, or forsake them, but confirm them unto the end. And thus I
resolve upon the reason which the Apostle sets down of his persuasion,
grounded on the constant immutabilitie of God in his doings: for what says the
Apostle? As it be comes me says he etc. It becomes me, says the Apostle,
so to judge of you, even to be persuaded that he that has begun this work in
you etc. And why did it become him so to judge, so to be persuaded? Because,
says he, I have you in remembrance, because I gladly remember this of you,
that both in my bands etc..i. that whether I were bound for the gospel, or
defended the gospel at Nero his bar, or confirmed the gospel by my
sufferings, you all were partakers of my grace, and were in a sort with me in
my bands, and in my defense, and confirmation of the gospel. I know there are
great diversities of interpretations of this text of scripture; but judging
this to be most simple, I will not trouble you with any other. The reason then
of that his persuasion of them was this, because such was the Philippians zeal
for the gospel, and love of him, that howsoever it were with him, whether he
were bound for the gospel, or defended the gospel, or confirmed the gospel,
they stuck close unto him, and took part with him both in his bands, and in
his defense, and confirmation of the gospel.

The first thing then which here I note is, that the Apostle says, that it
became him so to judge of the Philippians, so to be persuaded of them as he
said verse 6. because of their zeal for the gospel, and love of him. Whence I
observe, that it becomes us certainly, to be persuaded of their perseverance
and salvation, and that they are the children of God, in whom we see obedience
to the gospel, zeal for the truth, love of the brethren, true signs of
godliness, evident fruits of the spirit. That in charity we are every man to
hope the best one of another, the Apostle plainly shows, when he says, that
Charity believes all things, 1 Cor. 13.7.
charity hops all things. Charity believes all things, therefore in
charity we are not to suspect the worst, but to believe the best one of
another. Charity hops all things, therefore in charity we are not to
mistrust the worst, but to hope the best one of another. Neither only so, when
there are such outward tokens of grace and godliness, as ought easily to cause
us to believe and hope the best one of an other; but so also when there are not
so plain tokens of grace, so manifest fruits of the spirit. Nay when there are
manifest tokens of want of grace, fearful tokens of being given up into a
reprobate mind, yet are we not to despair of such a one, but to leave him
unto the Lord unto whom he stands or falls. Witness the Apostle, where he
says, Romans 14.4.
Who art thou that condemnest another man's servant? he stands or falls to
his own master. There hope the best we cannot, and yet condemn him or
despair of him we may not. Now as in charity we may not despair of any, but
hope well where all is not well, and persuade our selves the best where we see
the outward tokens of the spirit: so where we have just cause of this
persuasion by the true fruits of righteousness, we are certainly to be
persuaded that they are the children of God. Which as it appears by this
place of our Apostle, so also by that, where he says of the Thessalonians,
that he knew that they were the elect of God, 1 Thessalonians. 1.4.
drawing one argument from the effectual preaching of the gospel amongst
them, verse. 5. and another from their obedience to the gospel, verse. 6. so
that where we see these and the like tokens of grace and godliness, there we
are after the Apostles example to be certainly persuaded, and to know that
they are the elect children of God. Degrees I know there are in certainty of
persuasion and knowledge; for no man can be so certainly persuaded, so
certainly know another man's salvation, another man's adoption into the sons
of God as his own, because besides all other grounds which he has or can
have touching others, he has the testimony of the spirit witnessing unto his
spirit that he is the child of God, and that his salvation is sure. Yet may he,
and he is certainly to be persuaded, where he sees a good work begun, that
he that has begun etc.

A good lesson for many of us to learn: for so crooked and ill affected are we
commonly one toward another, as that we will easily persuade our selves the
worst one of another, but seldom persuade our selves the best one of another.
Though we see many great tokens of Gods graces in our brethren, if we see any
infirmity or offense in them, we grate upon that, and we could be well
persuaded of them but for that; which if it might have stopped the Apostles
persuasion of the Philippians, he should never have been so well persuaded of
them as he was: for among them there were murmurings and reasonings, and many
things done through contention and vainglory; yet looking upon their
obedience to the gospel, their constant abiding in the truth, their christian
love of him, he persuades himself the best of them, even that he that has
begun etc. So beloved, howsoever we see slips and infirmities in our brethren,
yea though sometimes we see them fall flat to the ground, yet if we see the
manifest tokens of Gods graces in them, let us persuade our selves the best of
them, yea let us persuade our selves of them as of our selves, that they are
the children of God, and that their salvation is surely sealed in the heavens:
for so it becomes us to judge of them after the example of our Apostle,
because of the fruits of the spirit in them.

LECTVRE VII.
PHILIP. 1. Verse 7. Because I have you in remembrance that both in my bands,
and in my defense, and confirmation of the Gospel you all were partakers of my
grace.

8. For God is my record, how I long after you all from the very heart root in
Jesus Christ.


THe second thing which here I note, is the testimony which the Apostle gives
unto the Philippians of their zeal for the gospel, of their love of him, and
of their growth in godliness, through the effectual preaching of the gospel
amongst them, in that he says, that both in his bands, and in his defense, and
confirmation of the gospel they all were partakers of his grace. This was a
sure token that they had well profited in the school of Christ, in that
whether the Apostle were bound for the gospel, or defended the gospel, or
confirmed the gospel, still they stuck close to him, and took part with him,
and were, though they were absent from him, yet in zeal and in an holy
affection, in some sort in bands with him, and in defense and confirmation of
the gospel with him. Hence then I observe a notable argument how we may have
proof unto our selves, and give also proof unto others of our zeal for the
gospel, of our love of the Ministers of the gospel, by whom we have been
taught in the word, of the power of the word in our hearts and souls, and of
our growth in godliness through the preaching of the word. Is there any
persecution of the gospel of Jesus Christ by any cruel tyrants, Pope, Turk,
or Spaniard, or any other? Are your Ministers and Teachers attached, and
brought before any bloody inquisition for the gospels sake of Christ Jesus? Are
they brought unto the bar there, as felons or traitors to defend that truth,
which in all simplicity and sincerity they have taught amongst you? Are they
beaten and scourged, and cast into prison, and bound with bands, and their
feet made fast in the stocks for the defense of the gospel? Are they brought
to the fire and faggot, to the rope and hatchet, to Lions and wild beasts by
their blood to confirm the gospel of Christ Jesus? Such times and tyrannies,
beloved, our forefathers have seen, and it may be that some of you have seen
them: but o Lord, let never our eyes see such times and tyrannies again,
neither let our seed see them, nor our seeds seed from henceforth for ever.
But put case it were thus as has been said. Do ye think ye should stand
close to the truth in such time of trouble, and not start aside like a broken
bow? Could ye find in your hearts to undergo with your Ministers and
Teachers, the merciless cruelty of any bloody inquisition? to stand with them
at the bar in defense of that truth, which they have taught you? To be tried
with them by mockings and scourgings, by bonds and imprisonment? to go to fire
and faggot with them, and with your blood to seal that truth which they have
taught you? Here were zeal for the gospel in deed, here were love of your
Ministers, here were a proof of the power of the word in you, here were an
argument of the effectual preaching of the gospel unto you. And such proofs
and arguments, many in the primitive Church both had unto themselves, and gave
unto others, as the Apostle witnesses to the Hebrews, where he says, Heb.
11.36, 37, 38.
that some were racked and would not be delivered, that they might receive a
better resurrection; others were tried by mockings and scourgings, yea moreover
by bands and imprisonment; others were stoned etc. So powerfully had the word
wrought upon them, that nothing could daunt them, but through persecution, and
anguish, and tribulation, and famine, and nakedness, and peril, and sword, and
all they went.

Yea, but you will say, there was no such matter with the Philippians, whose
example I urge, they gave no such proof of their zeal, or love, or growth in
godliness through the preaching of the gospel, as now we speak of. Well then,
could ye willingly be partakers with your Ministers and Teachers in their
bands, and in their defense and confirmation of the gospel in such sort as the
Philippians were with Paul? Would ye not be ashamed of their chains? Would
ye communicate to their affliction, and supply that which they lacked? Would
ye be careful, that some might minister unto them such things as they wanted?
Would their bands so affect you as if ye were bound with them? Would ye count
their sufferings for the defense and confirmation of the gospel, as common to
you with them? Would ye in heart and soul be joined unto them, both in their
bands, and in their defense, and confirmation of the gospel? This also should
be a notable proof both unto your selves, and others of your holy zeal for the
truth, of your godly increase in all spiritual understanding through the word,
and of the effectual power of the spirit in you, through the ministry of the
word. Such a proof Onesiphorus had unto himself, and gave unto others, as
appears by that testimony which the Apostle gives to him, when he says,
that he often refreshed him, and was not ashamed of his chain; 2 Timothy 1.16,
17, 18.
that at Rome he sought him very diligently, and found him; and that in many
things he ministered unto him at Ephesus. Not once, but often he refreshed him,
he shunned him not, nor was ashamed of him because of his bands, but coming to
Rome, and understanding that Nero had cast him into prison, he sought him very
diligently, and would not rest till he had found him, and before at Ephesus,
he had in bountiful sort cared for him. Here the word had taken root
downward, and brought forth fruit upward, and powerfully wrought on him. And
so the blessing that followed hervpon. 2. Tim. 1.18.
The Apost. prayed for him, saying, the Lord grant unto him that he may find
mercy with the Lord at that day; nor for him only, but for his whole house, 16.
saying, The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus; and in that the
Apostle prayed for him and for his house, 1 Thessalonians. 1.6.
it was in effect a promise of blessing and mercy unto him and to his house.
The like testimony the Apostle gives unto the Thessalonians, where he says,
that they received the word in much affliction, with joy of the holy Ghost.
When there was much affliction, when there was great tribulation and
persecution, because of the word, yet they received the word willingly and
joyfully. Which the Apostle, brings as a plain proof unto them of their
spiritual conjunction with Christ, and election unto life. So that when the
word has wrought thus upon us, that in much affliction we can delight in it,
that we gladly cherish and refresh them that suffer trouble, even unto bands
for the Gospels sake, that we are so affected therewith, as if we also were in
bands with them, that we count their sufferings for the defense and
confirmation of the Gospel, our sufferings, it is a notable argument that the
word has had great power in us, and that we have well profited in the School
of Christ.

But, if many in these our days should examine themselves, by this rule of
what power the word is in them, and unto what growth in godliness they are
come, it is to be feared that their trial would not be much to their comfort.
Our blessed Savior expounding the parable of the Sower, says, That he that
received seed in the stony ground, is he which hears the word, and
incontinently with joy receives it: Yet has he no root in himself, Mat. 13
12.
and endures but a season: for as soon as tribulation or persecution comes
because of the word, by and by he is offended. And our Apostle complained, 2 Timothy 4.16.
that at his first answering no man assisted him, but all forsook him. Not to
speak of those which refuse to hearken to instruction, and to present
themselves in our assemblies, is not much seed now sown in stony ground, if
tribulation and persecution should come, because of the word, would not many of
us be offended, and rather turn, as they say, then burn? If our Paul's and
Preachers should be brought to their answer in the defense of the Gospel,
would they be much assisted, or would they not be utterly forsaken? Yes,
beloved, a great many of us that now give them reasonable good countenance,
would be ashamed of their chains: a great many of us that now hear them
patiently, would fear or disdain to look on them in their trouble. We think
our selves now reasonable good favorers of the Word, and of the Ministers
thereof, if we be not enemies unto them. But if we come unto them, and
countenance them, then we think our selves very forward indeed, and that the
word has much prevailed with us. And it were to be wished, that the number of
such were far greater then it is. But if a tempest should arise, so that our
ship should be covered with waves, would not a great many of us wish our
selves out of that ship wherein we sail, and in another that sailed in a more
calm sea? If our Ministers and teachers should be carried unto the Guild-hal,
there to answer in the defense of the gospel, would we not as Christ his
Disciples did forsake them and fly; and as Peter did forswear them? Here
would be indeed a trial of the power of the word in us. And how we would stand
in this trial, may in part be coniectured by some present experience. For
where the word and the Ministers thereof are favored, if the painful Minister
be poor and bare, because of his small portion and and maintenance, how many
of us will yield up our impropriations unto him, which properly belong unto
him? Or, if we have no such, how many of us will yield up unto him our
covenant with him for our tithes? Or, if we have no such, how many of us will
take care that by our defrauding him of any due, he be not poor or bare? Or,
if we be not guilty herein, how many of us will join our heads and our purses
together to increase his maintenance for his encouragement, and bettering of
his estate? Likewise, if some popishly or naughtily affected, bring him
unjustly into trouble, how many of us will assist him? how many of us will go
to the high Commission with him? how many of us will do our whole endeavor
for him? how many of us will communicate unto his charges in such trouble? Do
we fail in these less things, and would we hold in greater things? Will we
not part with some of our living to him, and would we hazard our life with him?
Will we not now assist him, and communicate to his charges in trouble, and
would we then cleave close unto him, and communicate to his affliction? I leave
it unto every man to think of it. For conclusion of this note, we see how we
may have proof unto our selves, and give proof unto others of our zeal for
the Gospel, of our love of the Ministers of the Gospel, of the power of the
word in us, and of our growth in godliness through the preaching of the word.
Let us therefore willingly and gladly take part, if need be, with our
ministers and teachers in their bands, and in their defense and confirmation of
the gospel; and in the mean time let us give them what countenance and
encouragement, what help and assistance we can, that so the power of the word
in us, and our profiting thereby, may be testified both unto our selves and to
others.

The third thing which here I note, is that the Apostle says that all the
Philipp. were pertakers of his grace, both in his bands, etc. They only
relieved him, and refreshed him, and were careful for him being in bands, and
were in their souls and affections knit unto him, both in his ^ands, and in
his defense and confirmation of the gospel, and for this cause he says, they
were pertakers of his grace in his bands, etc. Whence I observe a good note of
such as are joined in the communion of Saints, and that is this, howsoever they
abound in the measure of grace above others, yet in the grace they prefer not
themselves before others. So we see the Apostle Peter writes to them that had
obtained like precious faith with him, saying, Simon Peter a servant and an
Apostle of Jesus Christ, 2. Pet. 1.1.
to you which have obtained like precious faith with us, etc. In the measure of
faith no doubt he excelled all them to whom he wrote, yet in the grace it self
of faith, ye see, he equalled them unto himself. So we see the Apostle to the
Hebr. says unto them, Holy brethren, Hebr. 3.1.
pertakers of the heavenly calling, etc. In measure of gifts by the heavenly
calling, no doubt, he was far before them to whom he wrote, yet touching the
grace it self, he counts the^ pertakers with him of the heavenly vocation.
And so our Apostle in the measure of sufferings, excelled not not the
Philippians only, but all others, yet in the grace it self he says, that
they were pertakers of his grace both in his bands, etc. And this is the
blessing of the holy Communion of Saints, that they which are joined in this
holy fellowship, willingly equal themselves unto them that are of meaner
gifts, and do not stand upon their prerogatives, either in blessings or in
sufferings, but as they that have one God, and one Lord, and one Baptism, and
one hope of their calling, so they esteem of others graces as of their own.

Which may serve for a bridle unto such ouerweaning spirits, as too hastily and
sharply censure them that come short of themselves in the measure either of
other blessings, or of sufferings. For, to speak only of the latter sort, are
not there some that so brag of their sufferings, that if others of their
brethren come somewhat short of them, they condemn them for white-liuered
soldiers, and faint-hearted brethren? And tell them that you were affected
with their sufferings, as if ye had suffered with them, that ye were not
unmindful of them, but communicated unto their afflictions, will they count
you partakers of their grace in their bands? or rather would they not tell you,
that this is but cold charity in regard of that zealous courage which should be
in you, and that this is nothing in comparison of their sufferings? So vain a
thing is man, as to esteem best of other his own graces, so most of his own
sufferings, and so to stand upon his own measure of grace, that he makes
little reckoning of the same grace in meaner measure in others of his brethren.
But we see the practice both of our Apostle, and of other of the Apostles,
which may serve for our instruction in this point. Let us therefore after their
example, howsoever we abound in the measure of any grace, make reckoning of
them in whom that grace is, as partakers of the same grace with us: for it is
the same spirit that gives the same grace both unto us and others, and the
same spirit distributeth to every man severally the measure of grace as he
will. Let us not therefore for our measure of grace whatsoever it be, be it in
wisdom, learning, patience, suffering, or any other, exalt our selves above
our brethren, but let us make much of the grace of the spirit in them, and let
us rejoice over them, as having obtained the like precious grace with us.

The last thing which here I note is, that the Apostle calls his bands for
the defense and confirmation of the Gospel, a grace: for so we understand that
they were partakers of his grace, in that they were partakers of his bands for
the defense and confirmation etc. Whence I observe, that to suffer bands,
imprisonment, persecution, and the like, for the Gospels sake, is a special
grace and gift of God. So the Apostle again in the latter end of this chapter
affirms, saying, Unto you it is given for Christ, Phil. 1.29.
that not only ye should believe in him, but also suffer for his sake. Whence
it is plain, that as faith in Christ Jesus, so to suffer for his sake is a
special gift of God. And hereupon the Apostles rejoiced when they were beaten,
Act. 5.41.
that they were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for Christ his name. 2 Cor. 11.
And our Apostle rejoiced as much in his sufferings as in any thing. And why,
but because they counted their sufferings as special gifts and graces upon
them?

Where yet first we must note, that simply to suffer bands and imprisonment,
persecution and trouble is no grace or gift of God, but to suffer these things
for Christ his sake, for the Gospels sake, for righteousness sake. And therefore
Peter says, Let no man suffer as a murderer, 1 Pet. 4.15,
or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or as a busie-body in other men's matters:
But if any man suffer as a Christian, 16.
.i. for Christ his sake and the gospels, let him not be ashamed, but let him
glorify God on this behalf. Secondly, that to suffer bands and persecution
for Christ his sake and the gospels, is no grace or gift of God in it self,
and in the nature of the thing, but only by way of consequent: for if to
suffer bands or affliction for the gospels sake were in it self, and in the
nature of the thing a grace and gift of God, then were we to pray for
affliction and trouble for the Gospels sake, as we do for other graces of the
spirit. But now no man does pray to be tried and troubled, to be persecuted and
imprisoned for the Gospells sake; neither is any man so to pray, because this
were in deed to tempt God. But our prayer is for strength, and patience, and
help in trouble, whenever it shall please the Lord by troubles for the
Gospels sake to try us, as the prayers of the godly at all times do show. To
suffer bands then and trouble for the Gospels sake, is no grace of God in it
self, but only in event and by consequent. For what is the event, fruit, and
consequent of suffering for the Gospels sake? First in respect of our selves,
it brings forth the fruits of patience, experience, and hope, as it is
written, We rejoice in tribulation, knowing that tribulation brings forth
patience, Romans 5.3.
and patience experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed. It
is the means to make us like unto the Son of God, as it is written, 8.29.
Whom God knew before he predestinate to be made like to the image of his
Son. Where by the order of our election he shows that afflictions in
general are the means to make us like unto the Son of God. And it causes
unto us eternal glory in the heavens, as it is written, Matthew. 5.10.
Blessed are they which suffer persecution for righteousness sake, 11*
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye when men revile and
persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you for my sake, 12.
falsely; rejoice and be glad for great is your reward in heaven. Again, in
respect of God, by suffering trouble, bands, and death for the gospels sake God
is glorified, as it is written, This spoke Jesus unto Peter, Joh. 21.19.
signifying by what death he should glorify God. And thereby also the power of
Christ dwells in us, as it is written, 2 Cor. 12.
Very gladly will I rejoice in mine infirmities, that the power of Christ may
dwell in me, because the power of Christ is most seen in helping our
infirmities, in loosing our bands, and delivering us out of troubles. And
again in respect of the Church, by the sufferings of the Saints for the
Gospel, many children are strengthened, and many begotten unto the Church, as
it is written in this chapter afterward, Many of the brethren in the Lord are
boldened through my bands, Phil. 1.14.
and dare more frankly speak the word. To which purpose also it is said, that
the blood of the Martirs is the seed of the Church. Because then of the grace
which follows our bands and troubles for the Gospels sake, both in respect of
God, and of his Church, and of our selves, therefore it is that they are called
a grace and gift of God. So that to suffer bands and troubles for Christ his
sake, and the Gospels, is a grace and gift of God, nor in the nature of the
thing, but because of the grace given us constantly and patiently to endure
those troubles, and because of the grace which issues thence for the good of
our selves, for the glory of God, and for the benefit of his Church.

Yea but if to suffer bands, and affliction, and trouble for Christ his sake
and the Gospels were a grace and gift of God any way, why should the children
of God be often so much perplexed thereat as they are? why should they not
always be more welcome unto them then they are? For answer whereunto we must
understand, that in the children of God there is the flesh and the spirit, an
outward man, and an inward man. Are then the children of God often perplexed at
their bands and sufferings for Christ his sake, and the Gospels? It may be in
their flesh and outward man, but in their spirit and inward man they are
always welcome unto them; as our Apostle says, though our outward man perish,
2 Cor. 4.16.
and even sink under the burden of our afflictions, yet the inward man is
renewed daily, and made stronger and stronger through afflictions. And so we
must understand all the places of scripture where the Saints seem to faint
under their afflictions. David in his Psalms often complains of his
troubles, no doubt because they were heavy unto his outward man: but unto his
inward man they were so welcome, that he says, Psalm. 119.71.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I may learn thy statutes:
and again, Before I was afflicted I went astray, 67.
but now I keep thy word. So our Apostle says, that he was pressed out of
measure passing strength through affliction, 2 Cor. 1.8.
so that his outward man no doubt was not able to sustain them; yet in his
inward man he rejoiced in them, and boasted of them, and fainted not under
them. So our blessed Savior himself says, Mat. 26.38.
My soul is very heavy even unto the death, so that by his own will he would
have had that cup to pass from him: but knowing his Fathers will immediately he
adds, nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will. So that howsoever by our
own wills we would avoid bands and troubles for the gospels sake, as heavy
and grievous unto our outward man, yet as our wills are sanctified by Gods
spirit and conformed unto Gods will, so they are welcome unto us, and
acknowledged by us to be a grace of God, given unto his children for their
good, and his glory.

Here then is a notable comfort, for all such of Gods children as suffer bands
and affliction for Christ his sake and the gospels. For what are their bands?
They are the grace of God; and in suffering bands for the defense and
confirmation of the Gospel, they are partakers with the Saints of their grace.
And as here they are called the grace of God, so elsewhere they are called the
marks of the Lord Jesus. Gal. 6.17.
Now may it not be a great comfort unto us, to bear in our bodies the marks of
the Lord Jesus? Yet generally we avoid bands and affliction, nay we murmr
at them, nay we mock at them, and hold them for simple men, that will not
rather turn then burn, that will not rather renounce the truth, then endure
such sufferings for the truth. But tell me, should not he be judged foolish and
ignorant, that should avoid the gift of any grace? Should he not be thought
ridiculous, that should murmr or scorn to be marked with the marks of the
Lord Jesus? And how then shall we think of him, that refuses or murmureth at
bands and afflictions for Christ his sake, or that makes a mock at them which
do suffer afflictions for Christ his sake, which are the grace of God, and the
marks of the Lord Jesus? Beloved, we know not what bands and afflictions bide
us for the Gospels sake. Surely for our sins we have deserved to be delivered
up into the will of our enemies, that they that hate us even with a perfect
hatred should rule over us. And if it shall please the Lord herein to deal
with us according to our deseruings, yet let this be our comfort, that in our
bands for the defense and confirmation of the Gospel, we are partakers with
many of the Saints of their grace, and that the life of Jesus is made manifest
as by most plain tokens, in our bodies, 2 Cor. 4.10.
when we bear about in our bodies the dying of the Lord Jesus. And in the
mean time let us give all diligence that the word of Christ may dwell in us
plenteously, that the effectual power thereof may be manifested in us, through
our patient and constant suffering for Christ his sake and the Gospels, if the
will of the Lord be such.

Now follows the Apostles earnest protestation of his love toward the
Philippians, which was the third thing which I noted in this second branch of
the Apostles exordium, in these words, For God is my record etc. that so, they
might the rather both assure themselves that such was his persuasion of them,
as has been said, and likewise the more willingly hearken unto the things
that he wrote unto them. In the words I note a vehement protestation, and the
thing whereof he makes such protestation. His protestation is a calling of God
to witness that he lies not in this that now speaks, in these words, For God
is my record. The thing whereof he makes such protestation is of his hearty
love of them, saying, God is my record how I long after you all,.i. with what a
longing desire to see you, I love you all from the very heart root, (...).
for so the word here used is very significantly translated, not after the
flesh, but in Jesus Christ, of whom ye are loved, and from whom this my love
proceeds. Where first I note the Apostles vehement protestation, not of a
vain and idle toy, but of his love toward the Philippians, not for any light
or foolish matter, but for their great good, that they might hearken to the
word of their salvation more gladly. Whence I observe, that a protestation, or
an oath to witness a truth, when the glory of God, or the good of our neighbor
does require it, may lawfully be made.

LECTVRE VIII.
PHILIP. 1. Ve^se 8. For God is my record, how I long after you all from the
very heart root in Jesus Christ.

9. And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge,
and in all judgment.


NOw then, the first thing which here I note, is the Apostles vehement
protestation, not concerning any triuiall and ordinary matter, but touching
his sincere and fervent love of the Philippians, nor to small or no purpose,
but to win their attention unto the word of their salvation more gladly. For
he protests and swears, an oath being nothing else but a calling of God to
witness of that we speak, for their assurance to whom we swear, which
whole definition is in this protestation; he protests says, and swears
unto the Philipp. that he longs after them all, and greatly loves them all
from the very heart root in Jesus Christ, that so being persuaded of his love,
they might give the better heed unto the things he wrote. Whence I observe that
a protestation, or an oath by God, when the glory of God, or the good of our
neighbor does require it, may very lawfully be made. And this is proved,
first from the nature and definition of an oath. For, what is an oath? It is,
as even now we heard, an holy and religious calling of God to witness, of the
truth of that we speak, for their assurance unto whom we speak; as here the
Apostle for the Philippians assurance of his sincere love of them, calls God
to witness how he longs after them all, how greatly he loves them all from
the very heart root in Jesus Christ. And what herein is unbeseeming a
Christian, or which may not lawfully be done? Secondly, it is proved from the
express commandment of God, for thus has God commanded, saying, Deuteronomy. 6 13.
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shall swear by his
name. In which words, as to fear the Lord God, and to serve him, so to swear
by his name is commanded. Thirdly, it is proved from the end of an oath, for
the end of an oath is to decide debates, and to make an end of strifes; as the
Apostle shows, saying, Heb. 6.16.
that an oath for confirmation is among men an end of all strife. And as Moses
in a plain case shows, saying, If a man deliver to his neighbor to keep
Ass, or Ox, Exo. 22.10.11.
or Sheep, or any beast, and it die, or be hurt, or taken away by enemies, and
no man see it, an oath of the Lord shall be between them twain, that he
has not put his hand unto his neighbors good, and the owner thereof shall
take the oath, and he shall not make it good. And this being the end of an
oath, why may it not lawfully be made? Fourthly, it is proved from the practice
of holy men of God; for Abraham, as we read, swore unto Abimelech by God, Genesis
21.23. 26.31. 31.53.
that he would not hurt him, nor his children, nor his childrens children: And
Isaac and Abimelech, afterward swear one to another, to the like purpose: And
so Jacob and Laban swear one to another, to the like purpose: Likewise our
Apostle oftentimes in his Epistle protests, and calls God to witness of
that he says, Romans 1.9. 2. Cor. 1.23. and 12.19. And God himself, Esaias 45.23.
Heb. 6.13.
because he had no greater to swear by, swear by himself, as it is said in
the Prophet, and as the Apostle witnesses. Lastly, it is proved from a
necessary consequent, for if an oath be a part of Gods worship, will it not
then necessarily follow, that an oath may lawfully be made? Now that an oath is
a part of Gods worship, appears by many places of holy Scripture; as, Es.
19.18.
where it is said in the Prophet, In that day shall five Cities in the land of
Egypt speak the language of Canaan, and shall swear by the Lord of hosts,
Ier. 4.2.
that is, shall renounce their superstitions, and serve God as he has
appointed. And again, where it is said, Thou shall swear the Lord lives in
truth, in judgment, and in righteousness. And therefore the Lord by that
Prophet, 5.7.
in the next Chapter complains of Judah, and Jerusalem, that they had
forsaken him: and how did that appear? because they swore by them that were no
Gods: Thy children, says he, have forsaken me, and sworn hy them that are no
Gods. So that to swear by them that are no Gods, is to forsake God. And why?
because it is to give his worship to another, even to them that are no Gods:
which, who so does, he forsakes God.

O, but will the godly soul say, this needed not in such a swearing age, to
prove the lawfulnes of swearing; and will the cursed swearer say, this is well
indeed, that I have so good allowance for my swearing from the Preacher.
Hearken therefore yet a while, and know how we may protest and swear lawfully.
First therefore, if we will swear lawfully, we must swear by the name of
God. For both the commandment and practice are so, as already we have heard,
and the reason thereof is very plain: for who can witness, that he that
swears lies not, but God only that beholds the heart, and knows what is
in man? Or who is omnipotent and able to maintain and defend him that speaks
truth, or to punish and take vengeance on him that swears a lie, but God
only which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell? Secondly, if we
will swear lawfully we must swear in truth, Ier. 4 2.
in judgment, and in righteousness. In truth, for the confirmation of the
truth, because we may not call God to witness a lie, least he give us our
portion with liars and swearers, in the lake that ever burns. In judgment,
upon causes weighty, certain, and necessary, when the glory of God, or the
good of our neighbor does require it, because we may not call God lightly, or
rashly to witness upon trial, or uncertainty, or unnecessary causes, least
our judgment be as theirs that take his name in vain. In righteousness, for
the confirmation of things godly, just, and lawful, because we may not call
God to witness things ungodly, unjust, or unlawful, lest we be not holden
guiltles for taking his name in vain: for thus much those three points imply.
Thirdly, if we will swear lawfully, it must be when we have no other way of
proof of our words, or confirmation of our promise: for if otherwise the thing
for which we are to swear can be debated, decided, and ended, then by an oath
we are not to swear, as by the end of an oath it does appear, which is to end
a strife; so that where the strife may otherwise be ended, there an oath is not
to be used. Swear then we may lawfully, but not otherwise then by the name of
God, and that in truth, and in judgment, and in righteousness, and that when
things cannot otherwise be cleared and ended then by an oath.

Which serves first for the confutation of that error of the Anabaptists, who
deny it to be lawful for a Christian to swear at all: the plain contrary
whereof we have heard evidently proved out of the scriptures. The places of
scripture whereon they ground their error are two; Matthew. 5.34, 35, 36, 37.
Jam. 5.12.
the one the saying of our blessed Savior in Matthew; the other the words of
James in his Epistle. The saying of our Savior in Matthew is, Swear not at
all, neither by heaven, for it is the throne of God etc. The words of James
are, Before all things swear not, neither by heaven, nor by earth, nor by any
other oath etc. from both which places they conclude that a Christian may not
swear at all. For answer whereunto we must understand, 1. that not all kinds
of oaths are forbidden in these places. 2. what kind of oaths are there
condemned. For the first, that not all kind of oaths are forbidden in Matthew,
appears by the very scope and drift of our Savior in that place. For what
was his scope and drift there? It appears by his exposition there of sundry
laws, that his meaning was not to destroy the law, for so he says, Mat. 5 17.
I came not to destroy the Law and the Prophets; but his meaning was to purge
the Law from the corrupt glosses of the Pharisees, and to open the true meaning
of it, as he does first in the Law touching murder, and then in the Law
touching adultery, and not in the Law touching swearing. The Law then not
having simply forbidden swearing, neither does our Savior simply condemn
swearing Again, if all kinds of oaths be simply here forbidden, and only
yea, and nay commanded, what shall we say for our Apostle that contenteth not
himself only with yea and nay? What shall we say for our Savior himself,
that not therewith content says, Verily, verily, I say unto you? And again,
oaths being a part of Gods worship, as before we heard, if all kind of oaths
be here forbidden a Christian, then is a part of Gods worship forbidden and
condemned. Seeing then thus it may appear, that not all kinds of oaths are
here forbidden, let us now see what kinds of oaths are here forbidden and
condemned. And this will appear by a short view of the corrupt glosses, which
the Pharisees added to the Law touching swearing. The Law was, Thou shall not
forswear thy self, but shall perform thine oaths to the Lord. Their gloss
was, that if any swear by the name of God, or by the things that were
immediately belonging to the service of God, as by the gold of the Temple, or
the offering on the Altar vainly or perfidiously, not performing his oath, he
offends but if he swear by any other creature, as by heaven, or earth, or
Jerusalem, or his head, or the Temple, or the Altar, or any that is not God,
he offends not, nor is bound to perform his oath. Our Savior his
exposition of the Law against their gloss is, that not only to swear in our
common talk by the name of God, but also to swear by any other creature is an
offense against the Law. So that here are not forbidden oaths made in truth, in
judgment, and in righteousness, but all oaths in common talk, either by God,
or by any creature whatsoever, or by any thing that is not God. Yea but it is
said, Swear not at all. True, in common talk swear not at all, not by the
name of God, for that the Law forbids, nor by any creature, although the
Pharisees allow you, but let your communication be yea, yea; nay, nay. Nay I
add in great and weighty matters swear not at all, if any way you can avoid
it, and when your yea, and nay may be trusted: for whatsoever is more then yea
and nay, always comes of evil, even of the devil in thee if thou swear of
a wicked custom, and of evil in him to whom thou swearest, if having no cause
to distrust thy yea and nay, he do not trust thee but cause thee to swear.
The like answer is to be made to that of James, who uses the very words of our
Savior. Yea, but James adds, Swear not by heaven, nor earth, nor by any
other oath. True, not vainly, or perfidiously. So that no oath by God, or any
creature in common talk is lawful for any Christian, nor in weighty and
necessary matters if we can avoid it, but if we cannot avoid it, an oath
by the name of God in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness is lawful, the
Anabaptists grounds as ye see proving nothing to the contrary.

The second use of our observation is, to restrain the wicked oaths of the
profane swearers of our time. For first are we when we swear, only to swear
by the name of God, and not at all by any creature, or any thing that is not
God? How then dare thou, whosoever thou art, swear by the Mass, by thy
faith, by thy troth, by our Lady, by St. George, or the like? Are these thy
gods whom thou have made to serve them? Or dare thou give the worship due
unto God, unto any but unto him? Did the Lord threaten ruin upon Israel
because they swore by their idols in Dan, and Beersheba, saying, Amos 8.14.
they that swear by the sin of Samaria, and say, thy God O Dan lives, and
the manner of Beersheba lives, even they shall fail, and never rise up again,
and dare thou swear by that idol of the Mass, which was the sin of
England, and is the sin of Rome? Did the Lord tell Judah that her children
had forsaken the Lord, because they swore by them that were no Gods, saying,
Thy children have forsaken me, and have sworn by them that are no gods, Ier.
5.7.
and dare thou swear by our Lady, by S. George, by S. John, or S. Thomas, or
the like, which are no gods? Do thou not see that thus swearing thou
forsakest God, and bring ruin upon thy self? Did our blessed Savior tell
the Scribes and Pharisees saying, Whosoever swears by the Altar swears by
it, Matthew. 23.20, 21, 22.
and by all things thereon; and whosoever swears by the Temple swears by
it, and him that dwells therein; and whosoever swears by heaven swears by
the throne of God, and by him that sits thereon; and do thou think that
when thou swearest by thy faith, thou swearest not by him in whom thou
beleeuest; or when thou swearest by thy troth, that thou swearest not by him in
whom thou trustest etc? In one word, thou that commonly swearest by any thing
that is not God, tell me what think thou, do thou therein swear by God,
or no? If so, then thou take his name in vain, and he will not hold thee
guiltles. If no, then thou forsakest God, in that thou swearest by that which
is no God. And look then what comes upon thy swearing by any creature, or any
thing that is not God.

Again, are we when we swear not to swear by any creature, or any thing that
is not God, but only by the name of God, and not thereby, but only in truth,
in judgment, and in righteousness, and when things otherwise cannot be cleared
and ended? How then dare thou, o wretched man, in thine ordinary talk, upon
every fond and light occasion, no necessity of Gods glory, or thy neighbors
good urging, swear by the holy name of God, and of Jesus Christ? How does not
thy flesh and thy spirit tremble within thee? how does it not pierce thy very
heart and soul to swear by the life, by the body, by the sides, by the
wounds, by the blood of Christ Jesus? Do thou, cursed wretch, hope to live
by his life that swearest by his life; hope to be benefited by his body, that
swearest by his body; hope to be healed by his wounds, that swearest by his
wounds; hope to be washed from thy sins by his blood, that swearest by his
blod? Nay, thou that do these things, do crucify again unto thy self the
Son of God. Thou art one of them that spittest upon him, and buffetest him,
that naylest him unto the cross, that thrustest thy spear into his side, that
art accessory to the death of that just one, and his blood shall surely be upon
thee, unless he grant thee grace unto repentance. A pitiful case that a man
can almost come into no place, into no company, but he shall hear such
ordinary swearing by the name of God, that every third word almost shall be
such an oath. A pitiful case that a man cannot pass the streets, but he shall
hear little ones that have little more then learned to speak, yet swear
wickedly by the name of God. And yet so it is, as if our young ones had never
learned to speak, till they had learned to swear, and as if the elder sort
had never spoken well, till they had sworn lustily. A great many think
themselves no body, unless they can swear it with the best, and that it is
their credit to swear stoutly. But wretched credit with men, that is got with
the loss of Gods favor: and better no body, then such a swearing body.
Hear the word of the Lord by his Prophet Zachary, this says he is the curse
that goes forth over the whole earth: Zac. 5.3, 4.
for every one that steals shall be cut off, as well on this side as on that,
and every one that swears etc. Enough a man would think to make the swearers
countenance change, and his knees to smite one against another.

Let this be enough, beloved, to warn you of this foul sin of swearing, and
to restrain you from it. Swear not at all in your common talk, either by
God, for then he will not hold you guiltles; or by any thing that is not God,
for then ye forsake God, but let your communication be yea, yea, and nay, nay.
Let not your children, or your servants, or your scholars swear by any thing
that is not God; lest in stead of performing their promise in their baptism to
forsake the devil, they forsake God: Neither let them swear by the name of
God, lest by using it without reverence and fear, they provoke him to plague
them. You must all of you know and remember, that his name is glorious and
fearful, that he is a ielous God and a consuming fire, and therefore ye may
not think or speak of him, but with reverence and humbleness, with fear and
trembling. To conclude this point, He that uses much swearing, says the son
of Sirach, Eccl. 23.11.
shall be filled with wickedness, and the plague shall never go from his house,
and if he swear in vain he shall not be innocent, but his house shall be full
of plagues. Accustom not therefore thy mouth to swearing, nor take up for a
custom the naming of the holy One; 9. 10.
for as a servant which is often punished cannot be without some skarre, so he
that swears and names God continually, shall not be unpunished for such
things. Have your faith and your troth with God, but let your communication be
yea, yea, and nay, nay, for whatsoever is more then this comes of evil.
Pardon my dwelling on this point, being so needful to be spoken of, and having
occasion but seldom to speak of it.

The second thing which here I note, is the thing whereof the Apostle makes
such vehement protestation, which is his sincere love of the Philippians. He
protests and takes God to witness, that he longs after them all, or greatly
loves them all from the very heart root in Jesus Christ. Whence I observe how
the Pastor ought to be affected toward his people, and generally one Christian
toward another, and that is thus, the Pastor ought to love his people, and one
Christian ought to love another, even with sincere love. Owe nothing says the
Apostle, R^m. 13.8.
to any man, but to love one another. Which rule is general for all
Christians, and contains in it two good instructions; the one, to fly debt,
that we should not owe any thing one to another; the other, to follow after
love, that we should love one another. And writing unto Timothy more
particularly, he notes the Pastors love of his people, where he says, 1 Timothy 4.12.
Be an ensample unto them that believe in word, in conversation, in love; in
love I say, that as they see your love to be toward them, so their love may be
one toward another: even as the Apostle prays for the Thessalonians, saying,
1 Thessalonians 3.12.
The Lord increase you, and make you to abound in love one toward another, and
toward all men, even as we do toward you. Wherein his love toward them is
signified, the love which should be in the Pastor toward his flock, that as
his is toward them, so theirs might be one toward another.

But since there are so many sleights in love, how can Christians show that
they love one another, and Pastors that they love their people even with
sincere love? that is, our love must be a great love, so great, that if we be
absent from them whom we love, we long after them with a longing desire to
see them, that if we be their Pastors, we may bestow some spiritual comfort
among them, and if otherwise, that we may perform some duties of love unto
them. Such was our Apostles love to the Romans, as he witnesses, where he
says, Romans 1.11.
that he longed to see them, that he might bestow upon them some spiritual
gift to strengthen them. Such also was Epaphroditus love toward these
Philippians, as our Apostle witnesses in the next chapter, verse 26. And such
was his own toward them, as this place shows. And such after their example,
must be the love of all Pastors toward their people, and of all Christians
one toward another, if their love be sincere. Yea, but such and so great may
be their love one toward another, as that they greatly long and desire to see
one another, and yet their love be not hearty, but full of dissimulation.
True, and therefore a second quality is requisite in sincere love, namely,
that it be without dissimulation, even from the very heart root. Such love our
Apostle requires in all Christians one toward another, Romans 12.9.
saying, Let love be without dissimulation. 1 Pet. 1.22.
And so the Apostle Peter, saying, Love one another with a pure heart
fervently. Such was our Apostles love toward the Philippians, loving and
longing after them from the very heart root: and such must be the love of all
Pastors toward their people, and of all Christians one toward another, if
their love be sincere. Yea, but yet such, and so great may be their love one
toward another, as that they long one after another, even from the very heart
root, and yet their love be not sincere, but after the flesh, as the manner of
many carnal men and worldlings is to love; Genesis 33.3.
as we see that Shechems heart claue unto Dinah. True, and therefore yet a
third quality is requisite in sincere love, namely, that it be in the Lord,
even in Christ Jesus, a spiritual, holy, and sanctified love in Christ, and
for him. Such was our Apostles love toward the Thessalonians, 1 These. 2.7.
as himself witnesses, saying, We were gentle among you, even as a Nurse
cherishes her Children. Thus being affectioned toward you, 8.
our good will was to have dealt unto you, not the Gospel of God only, but
also our own souls, because ye were dear unto us. And a little after he
says, 11.
We exhorted you, and comforted, and besought every one of you, as a father his
children. And such, he takes God to witness, his love was toward the
Philippians. And still the precepts run, to love one another in the Lord, and
such must be the love of Pastors toward their people, and of Christians one
toward another, if their love be sincere, they must long after them in their
absence from them, and that from the very heart root, and that in Jesus Christ.

If Pastors should examine their love toward their people, and Christians
their love one toward another by this rule; how much sincere love (think ye)
would there be found either in Christians generally, or in Pastors
particularly? For such is men's love generally, that they do not greatly long
after one another to see them, if they be absent from them, at least, not from
the very heart root, or surely, not in Christ Jesus. Nay, be we ab^ent from
them, or they from us, we care not whether we ^ee them again, or no, but to
long after them, or to love them from the very heart root, that we think
needs not; or, if we do, it is in some carnal or worldly respect, not for
Christ Jesus his sake, or in Christ Jesus. Nay, commonly we can satisfy our
selves well enough with our love of one another, as Christian enough, sincere
enough, and holy enough, though in our love there be never a one of these
qualities, though neither we long after them from the very heart root, in
Christ Jesus; nor long after them from the very heart root, nor long after
them at all. And as it is with men generally, so is it with the Pastors
particularly. Too many that can be long absent from their flocks, and yet not
long after them to see them, to bestow some spiritual gift upon them: too
many that love not their flocks, from the very heart roots: too many that
love their flocks only for their fleece, but not in Christ Jesus: but very
few like unto Aaron, bear the names of their people before the Lord, Exodus
28.12.
upon their two shoulders for a remembrance: very few that bear as Aaron the
names of their people in a breastplate upon their heart, that is, 29.
very few that have their people in their hearts, to deal unto them not the
gospel only, but also their own souls, because they are dear unto the^,
whereas it should be so with all Pastors. Well, ye see what love should be,
both in a Pastor toward his people, and generally in all Christians one
toward another. Think on these things, and blessed shall ye be if ye
think on them, and do them.

LECTVRE IX.
PHILIP. 1. Verse 9. And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and
more in knowledge, and in all judgment, that ye may discern things that
differ, etc.
NOw, after the signification of the Apostles thanksgiving unto God on the
Philippians behalf, for their fellowship in the Gospel, and of his persuasion
of their perseverance therein unto the end, follows for a full complement of
testifying his love unto them, and winning their attention unto him, a
signification of his praying unto God for them in these words, And this, etc.
before he had said, verse. 4. that always in all his prayers he had the^ in
remembrance; and now he shows what his prayer for them was, and that was,
That their love might abound, etc. Which prayer, as it does abundantly testify
his love toward the Philippians, so does it also imply a commendation of them,
and an exhortation unto them: for in praying, that their love may abound yet
more and more in knowledge and in all judgment, he gives them testimony of
their love, and of their knowledge, and judgment, and that they did abound in
these things, and his prayer is, that they may abound yet more and more in
these things. And again, in thus praying for them, he lets them in his own
example see what they are to pray for, and in effect, exhorts them to give
all diligence hereunto, that their love may abound yet more and more in
knowledge, etc. And indeed, this is the very maine proposition, and principal
exhortation of this Epistle, that their love may abound etc. But let us a
little more particularly sift the meaning of the words in this his prayer. His
prayer, ye see, is that their love may abound,.i. that as a fountain which
keeps not his waters in it self, but sends them out unto others, so their
love may not be shut within their own bowels, but issue out unto the good of
others. And he prays that their love may abound yet more and more: whereby
he implies that their love was manifest, and that their love abounded: for the
streams thereof had flowed unto him being in prison at Rome, and he prays
that it may abound yet more and more. but how? in knowledge and in all
judgment, that their love being founded and grounded in sound knowledge, and in
sound judgment, they might discern things that differed etc. Now by knowledge
he means the general knowledge of Gods will out of his word; and by
judgment he means such an experience and sense in themselves of spiritual
things, as through, which men expert in the word of righteousness have their
wits or spiritual senses exercised to discern both good and evil, as by
comparing this place with that to the Hebrews it may appear: for that which
the Apostle there has, Heb. 5.14.
strong meat belongs to them that are of age, which through custom have
their wits exercised to discern both good and evil, is as if we should read
after the phrase of our Apostle here, thus, strong meat belongs to them that
are of age, which through judgment can discern both good and evil. So that
the Apostle prays that they may abound as in love, so in knowledge of Gods
will out of his word, and in all judgment,.i. in sound judgment through a
feeling experience in themselves, of such spiritual things as they know by the
word, whereon their love may be grounded. And why does he pray for their
growth and increase in these things? Even for these ends; 1. that they may
discern things that differ one from another, good from bad, and vncorrupt from
corrupt doctrine. 2. that they may be pure from stain or corruption in
doctrine, faith, or manners. 3. that they may be without offense, neither
slipping back, nor standing at a stay, but holding on a constant course until
the day of Christ. 4. that they may be filled with the fruits of righteousness,
abounding in every good work, which are by Jesus Christ, from whom they have
their beginning, unto the glory and praise of God, which is their end. These
were the ends for which he prayed, that their love might abound yet more and
more in knowledge, and in etc.

So that the things principally to be noted in these words, are three; First,
the Apostles action of praying, This I pray. Secondly, the things for which he
prayed, which were three, 1. their increase in love. 2. their increase in
knowledge. 3. their inerease in judgment. Thirdly, the ends wherefore he
prayed for these things unto them, which were four, as even now we heard. Now
let us see what notes we may gather hence for our farther use and instruction.

The first thing which here I note is, that the Apostle prayed for the
Philippians, that their love might abound yet more and more etc. The
Philippians abounded in love, in knowledge, and in judgment, yet still the
Apostle prayed that they might abound yet more and more in these things. Whence
1. I observe the continual use and necessity of prayer: whatsoever graces the
Lord have bestowed on us, yet still we have need to pray, even that we may yet
more and more abound in those very graces. And therefore the Apostles
exhortation is, Pray continually, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
whether ye be in adversity, or in prosperity, whether ye want, or ye have,
yet pray continually. If ye want, that he may supply your wants, and give unto
you, which gives unto all men liberally, and reprocheth no man. Jam. 1.5.
For so James exhorts, saying, If any man lack wisdom, which is there meant
of wisdom to endure patiently afflictions, but it is true in all graces
generally, if any man lack any grace, let him ask of God which gives to all
men liberally, and reprocheth no man, and it shall be given him. So likewise
if ye have, yet pray continually that ye may increase and abound, and if ye
abound, yet pray continually that you may abound yet more and more in those
graces wherein ye abound. So we see the Apostle prayed for the Thessalonians,
saying, 1 Thessalonians. 3.12.
The Lord increase you, and make you abound in love one toward another, and
toward all men. In the first chapter he had commended their diligent love: so
that it was not for the having of that which they lacked that the Apostle
prayed, but for their increasing and abounding in that grace which they had.
And so here our Apostle prayed for the Philippians, that they might abound yet
more and more etc. What, was it for the having of that which they lacked that
he prayed? No. Was it that they might abound in that which they had? Nor only
so: but that they might more and more abound in those graces wherein already
they abounded. And the Apostle thus praying for the Thessalonians, that they
might increase and abound in that grace which already they had; and for the
Philippians that they might increase and abound more and more in those graces,
wherein already they abounded, therein taught them, and in them us, that we are
to make our requests unto God in prayer and supplication, as for the having of
such graces as we want, so that we may increase and abound in those graces which
we have, and that we may abound still more and more in those graces wherein
already we do abound. So that whatsoever graces we have, still we are to pray
that we may continually more and more abound therein. And the reason why we
are continually so to pray is very plain: for 1. such is our weakness through
the sin that hangs so fast on us, that unto whatsoever measure of grace we
be grown, yet stand therein we cannot, unless he do continually stay us and
uphold us with his hand. Let Peter witness, whose faith fails, Matthew. 14.31.
and he sinketh, if the Lord sustain him not, and save him. Paul also may
witness the same, whose courage in his bands may fail him, Ephesians. 6.20.
if by the power of the spirit through the prayer of the Saints he be not
assisted, that therein he may speak boldly as he ought. In regard therefore
of our unableness to stand or grow, without his continual support and supply,
still we had need to pray unto the Lord, whatsoever measure of grace we be
grown unto. 2. In whatsoever grace we abound, yet therein, we come so far
short of that perfection wherein we should endeavor, that continually we had
need to pray that we may abound yet more and more therein. And therefore David
that was well taught in the Lord his statutes, Psalm. 119.
yet still prays unto the Lord to teach him his statutes, and having more
understanding then all his teachers, yet still prayed unto the Lord to give him
understanding; and taking as great delight in the way of his testimonies, as in
all manner of riches, yet still prays unto the Lord, that he will incline his
heart unto his testimonies. And what was this, but his prayer that he might
abound yet more in the knowledge, and in the understanding, and in the delight
of the Law of the Lord, because howsoever he abounded therein, yet he came
far short of that he should? And for the same reason it behooves us so to
do, as we have him for an ensample.

This then may serve, to condemn our great negligence and slacknes, our great
coldness and faintnes generally, both in public and private prayer unto the
Lord our God. For is there so continual use and necessity of prayer, whether
we want any grace that we may have it, or have any grace that we may increase
and abound in it, or abound in any grace, that we may abound yet more and more
in it? How then is it, that we are so negligent and slack, so cold and faint
in prayer generally? Unto public prayer wherein we pray for what we want, and
for increase in that we have, and that we may more and more abound in that
wherein we abound, how negligent and slack are we, and how cold and faint are
we therein? Some of us come so seldom thereunto as that there is very little
difference between us, and plain Recusants; others of us come so slowly
thereunto, as that we come, as they say it is good to come to a fray, to the
end of it; others of us in time of public prayer are occupied either in
private prayers, or in reading upon some book or other, or in talking one unto
another; others of us either fall asleep, or are troubled with wandering and
by-thoughts, and have our minds at home, or in the fields, upon our
commodities, or upon our pleasures, and rather upon every thing then upon that
we should. Generally so defective and wanting unto our duties we are herein,
as if either we knew not, or cared not how to account of, and how to carry our
selves in public prayer. And as we fail of that we ought in public, so do
we also in private prayer. For how seldom do we, as our blessed Savior
wills us, enter into our chambers, Matthew. 6.6.
and shut our doors upon us, and pray unto our father which is in secret? Can
our wants press us to pray privately unto the Lord that he will supply our
wants? Nay seldom we humble our selves in private before the Lord, even for
the supply of our wants; or if we do, our prayers are so cold, and so faint,
and so troubled with wandering and by thoughts, that we pray and have not,
because we pray not as we ought. Can the graces which we have, and wherein we
abound, press us to pray privately unto the Lord that we may increase in those
graces we have, and abound yet more and more in those wherein we abound? Nay
here commonly we forget our selves, and as if we were well and needed no more,
we pray not unto the Lord for increase, but carrying our selves like unto the
Pharisee, we think we are not as other men, and we say depart from me, for I
am more holy, more learned, more wise, more sober, more modest, more patient
then thou, and forget God by whom we are so. Surely not the best of us all, but
we are guilty of very many defects touching prayer. Let us therefore hereafter
use more carefullnesse herein then heretofore we have done. Let us reform our
negligence and slacknesse in coming to public prayer. It has the promise,
that where two or three be gathered together in Gods name, Math. 18.20.
there will he be in the midst of them; and oftentimes he blesses us,
because of them that pray with us. Let us pray in faith, and waver not, and
whatsoever we ask in prayer, if we believe, 21, 22.
we shall surely receive it. Let us not cease, but in public, and in private,
power out our prayers unto the Lord, both for such graces as we want, and for
increase in such as we have, and that we may abound more and more in every good
grace. Continual need we have: let us therefore, as the Apostle exhorts,
Pray continually, even whatsoever graces we have, let us pray that we may
abound more and more therein.

The second thing which hence I observe is, that Christians are not to stand at
a stay, or to content themselves with reasonable good beginnings, but
whatsoever grace it is wherein they stand, they are continually to labor, that
they may abound more and more therein. Which, as this place shows, so farther
that of the Apostle to the Hebrews, Heb. 6.1.
where he says, Therefore, leaving the doctrine of the beginning of Christ,
let us be led forward unto perfection. Where the Apostle shows, that we are
not always to be a learning the principles and beginnings of Religion, but as
children which at the first are fed with milk, do afterward take and digest
strong meat; so from principles in religion, we should go forward unto
perfection in religion, growing up daily more and more in the unity of faith,
and of the knowledge of the Son of God into a perfect man. Add hereunto the
example of our Apostle, Psalm. 3.12.
he having attained unto a great measure of perfection, yet counted not
himself that he had attained unto it, but he followed hard after it, that
he might comprehend it, and still endeavored himself unto that which was
before. In whose example (as in a glass) we may see that we are not to rest in
any perfection that we can grow unto in this life, but still we are to go
forward from perfection to perfection, and still to labor to increase and
abound more and more in every grace wherewith we are blessed. And how should
any man think othewise, considering what enemies we have which hinder our
perfection. For, can we have the devil ever seeking like a roaring Lion to
devour us, the world laying a thousand baits to deceive us, our own flesh as
a strong armed man evermore assaulting us, so that our whole lives be a
continual sharp warfare unto us, and yet hope for such perfection in this
life, that we need not strive farther? Nay, these continually bid us such
battle that if either we stand or give back, we may quickly take the
foil. Still therefore, we must hold on, and as long as the Lord continues our
life, so long we must give all diligence to abound more and more in every
grace wherein we stand.

This then serves to condemn the miserable corruptions of our times, for so
it is with us, that a great many of us rather go backward, and grow worse and
worse, then better and better. Many which seemed to have begun in the spirit,
make an end in the flesh; which seemed for a time to have run well with the
Galathians, are with them drawn away with diverse lusts, which drown them in
perdition. Others of us pawse at the matter, and, as if there were danger in
every step farther, we stand at a stay and move not our foot forward. But what
do I say, that we stand at a stay? Nay, indeed, and in truth, we plainly go
backward: for not to go forward in the way of Christianity, is to go
backward; and not to increase in the graces of Gods spirit, is to decrease in
them! And therefore the judgment of the Laodiceans because they were not hot,
was as if they had been cold, even to be spewed out of the Lord his mouth.
Apoc. 3.16.
Others of us can be content to make a show of going forward, and increasing in
religion and piety, but it is for our advantage an gain, that under a color
of zeal and forwardness, we may the better compass our commodities, and
bring our purposes to pass: for we like better of the account that gain
should be godliness, then that godliness should be gain, and again we will
make of a show of godliness. The least number by far is of them that having
begun well, do in their souls labor after perfection, that they may abound
more and more in the grace wherein they stand. But let our care, beloved, be,
to be of this number. Let us so strive after perfection, that we may daily grow
from perfection to perfection, till we become perfect men in Christ Jesus. Let
us continually pray with the Apostles, Lord increase our faith; and let us
labor by all holy means of hearing the word preached, and reverent use of the
blessed Sacrament to grow more and more in faith. Let us pray with the
Prophet, Psalm. 68 28.
Stablish the thing (O God) that thou have wrought in us; and let us labor to
be daily more and more grounded and stablished in every grace that the Lord
has wrought in us. And if already we do thus, let us comfort our selves in
this that we do as we ought, and let us hold on our good course unto the end.

The third thing which here I note is, that the Apostle prays, that their
love might abound more and more; their love toward God, their love one toward
another, their love toward the poor Saints and afflicted members of Christ
Jesus. Whence I observe, that in all Christians this must be a continual
care, that they may abound always more and more in love toward God, in love
one toward another, and in love toward the poor Saints and afflicted members
of Christ Jesus. For, first, touching the love of God, how can we love him
enough, who so loved us, even when we were enemies unto him, that he sent his
only begotten son into the world to suffer death for us, that we might live
through him? This was love passing the love of women, and how should we love
him that thus loved us first? Sure our care can never be enough, that still
we may more and more abound in love toward him. Again, touching the love one
of another, we see how the Apostle prays for the Thessalonians, saying, The
Lord increase you, 1 Thessalonians. 3.12.
and make you to abound in love one toward another, and toward all men. Which
his prayer for them, was a plain signification of that care which was
behoouefull to be in them, namely that they might increase and abound daily
more and more in mutual love one toward another, and not in them only, but
in us also, unto whose edification and instruction those things were plainly
written. Also, touching our love toward the poor Saints and afflicted members
of Christ Jesus; we see how the Apostle presses and urges the Corinthians, 2
Cor. 8.
and in them us thereunto, commending their good beginning, and exhorting them
by the example of the Macedonians, and of our blessed Savior, to continue, and
to abound more and more therein. But, what should farther proof of this point
need then this, that love and charity toward the poor Saints is so often
commanded, and commended in the holy Scriptures, and so greatly rewarded? for
the oftener that it is commanded and commended in the holy Scriptures; and the
more, that it is rewarded, the more careful it behooves us to be, that we
abound therein. Thou shall not harden thine heart, Deuteronomy. 15 7.11.
nor shut thine hand from thy poor brother, but thou shall open thine hand
unto thy brother, to thy needy and to thy poor in the land, says the Lord:
Thou shall not harden thine heart, but open thy bowels of compassion, and be
merciful, and loving, and tenderhearted toward thy poor brother. The like
commandment is often given in the holy Scripture. And what a commendation was
it generally unto the Churches of Macedonia, that out of their most extreme
poverty, they were so richly liberal unto the poor afflicted Saints, and
perticularly unto these Philippians, that they communicated to our Apostle in
his bands? Or what greater reward can be given unto any, then is promised unto
them that give the Saints meat when they are hungry, that give them drink
when they are thirsty, that cloth them when they are naked, that visit them
when they are sick, that relieve them when they are in prison, etc. even a
kingdom of glory? In a point so clear, many proofs are not needful. For
more care is not needful, that we may increase and abound more and more in
faith, hope, or other grace of the spirit, then that we may abound more and
more in love, even in love, both toward God, and toward one another, and
toward the poor Saints in their affliction and misery.

Which serves to condemn the more then keicolde love of Christians in our
days. To censure any of you so sharply, beloved, as if ye loved not God, or
at least but with a cold love, would seem it may be hard. For all of you love
God, and he that thinks otherwise is much deceived. But, tell me, do all of
you love one another? It may be that some of you will here yield a little. 1
Ioh. 4 20. Romans 12.10. Heb. 13.1. 1 Pet. 4.8.
And, I tell you, or rather the holy Ghost tells you, that he that loves
not his brother, whom he has seen, loves not God, whom he has not seen.
The Apostles exhortation is, Be affectioned to love one another, with
brotherly love: And again, Let brotherly love continue: And again, Above all
things have fervent love amongst you. But our often brawlings, and divisions,
and quarrels, and contentions, and swellings, and discords show, that we have
not hearkened nor obeyed their counsel, so far have we been from abounding
more and more in love one toward another? And if we do not love one another
as we should, judge ye by the former place whether we love God as we should.
Psalm. 133.1.
Behold, says the Prophet, how good and joyful a thing it is brethren to
dwell together in unity. Surely in any thing we cannot be liker unto God, then
if we love one another: for God is love, and we by love are made Gods house, 1
Ioh. 4.16.
wherein he likes to dwell; For he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and
God in him. We have been too cold in love one toward another, and therefore
too cold in love toward our God. Above all things let us have fervent love
amongst our selves, and so shall we be sure that we love God indeed. And as we
have been too cold in love one toward another, and consequently in love
toward God, so can I not much commend our love toward the poor Saints and
afflicted members of Christ Jesus. I cannot reprove you for not abounding more
and more in this love, because, as yet, you do not abound in this love. Through
a good and godly statute lately made, the poor Saints come not now unto your
doors; but through want of relief they faint in their houses: insomuch, that
as the children of Israel when their burden was heavier, and their task
greater, cried out upon Moses, and Aaron, saying, The Lord look upon you and
judge, for ye have made our savior to stink before Pharaoh and his servants,
in that ye have put a sword in their hand to slay us: So they cry out upon them
that were the means of this statute, saying, The Lord look upon them that
have done thus unto us, for they have made our savior to stink before our
brethren, and have put a sword in their hands to slay us. And where is the
cause of this cry? Not in the statute: for it is as good a statute as could be
devised both for you and them: but the cause is in you. Ye are well content
that they come not to your doors as they were wont; but there wants in you
a willing and ready mind to contribute to their necessities as the statute
requires. When some task or burden should be levied upon you for their
maintenance, in respect of that relief, which they were wont to find at your
doors, here ye draw back the shoulder, and every man would give so little,
that the statute cannot have his entendment. And thus it is that you have a
sword to kill the poor withal: for, by the statute, they may not come to your
doors, and yet you will not contribute to their maintenance according unto the
statute. Beloved, open the bowels of your compassion, let your love toward the
poor Saints appear, communicate to their affliction, misery, and poverty,
and as God has given to every man, so let him give, not grudgingly, or of
necessity, but willingly and cheerfully. They are Gods saints, they are
members of Christ's body, they are your brethren, and many of them it may be as
rich in Gods favor as the most of you, and that which ye willingly and
cheerfully now give unto them, shall further your reckoning in the day of
Christ Jesus. Be therefore ready to give, and glad to distribute, laying up in
store for your selves a good foundation against the time to come. Let your love
toward God, toward one another, toward the poor saints of Christ Jesus be
manifest unto all men, that they which see your love may glorify God on your
behalf. So shall ye be loved of love it self, and live for ever where your
love shall have none end.

LECTVRE X.
PHILIP. 1. Verse 9. In knowledge, and in all judgment.
THe next thing which here I note is, that the Apostle prays, that the
Philippians may abound more and more in knowledge, namely in knowledge of Gods
will out of his word. Whence I observe another continual care necessary for
all Christians, and that is, that they may abound more and more in the
knowledge of Gods will out of his holy word. 1 Cor. 14.20.
My brethren, says the Apostle, be not children in understanding, but as
concerning maliciousnes be children, but in understanding be of a ripe age. The
Apostle had before, signified his own mind of praying and speaking in strange
tongues without understanding, and in a known tongue with understanding,
therein taxing their too great admiring of strange tongues, and too little
regard of knowledge and understanding. Now in effect he tells them that
therein they are like unto little children, which if they see fair and great
and colored letters in a book, are in great love with the letters, but care
not for the sense and understanding of the words. But he exhorts them, be not
children in understanding, as if he should have said, Children indeed care not
for understanding, but it may not be so with you, ye were children sometimes
and cared not for understanding, and ye were children sometimes, and but young
in understanding and knowledge, but ye may not be so still, but ye must grow
to be of a ripe age in understanding, ye must increase in knowledge as in
years ye do increase. And lest they should say that Christ would have them
to be like unto little children, he preuenteth that, Mat. 18 3.
and tells them that he would have them to be like unto little children
concerning maliciousness, but concerning knowledge and understanding he would
have them to be no children, but of a ripe age. So that hence we see that our
care is to be that we be not children, but men of a ripe age touching
understanding,.i. that we may increase and grow forward more and more in
knowledge, even from knowledge to knowledge To the like purpose is that of the
Apostle, where he says, Heb. 6.1.
Leaving the doctrine of the beginnings of Christ, let us be led forward unto
perfection. He had in the end of the former chapter, somewhat sharply told the
Hebrews, that when as concerning the time they ought to be teachers, yet they
had need to be taught the very principles of the word of God. Now therefore he
does exhort them that they would not be still a learning the principles and
beginnings of religion, but that they would go forward from perfection to
perfection, and abound more and more in knowledge. We may not then be as idle
loyterers, which spend their time and profit not, but as our time spent in the
school of Christ does require of us, so must our profiting be in the knowledge
of his will out of his word. Yea look into our own practice, and we shall
find our own judgment to be such. If we have children, and set them to their
books, we look that according to their time spent thereat their profiting
should be, and that they should increase in knowledge and learning, as they
grow in years, and in time spent at their book, and if they do not so
profit, we take them from the school and set them to some other thing. So that
by our own judgment, so many of us as are taught in the school of Christ, we
should increase in the knowledge of Christ, and as we spend more and more time
in the school of Christ, so should we abound more and more in the knowledge
of Christ, and if we do not so, by our own judgments we are to be excluded
as non proficients out of the school of Christ. And what then becomes of us?
Nothing then to set us unto, but as it was said to the unprofitable servant,
Cast that unprofitable servant into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth, Matthew. 25.30.
so shall it be said to such non proficients, cast that non proficient scholar
into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

This then, first may teach us to beware of that leaven of theirs that would
have us misled up in ignorance, and bear the world in hand that ignorance is
the mother of devotion. For such a brood of Satan there is, as will tell you
that the Scriptures are dark, and hard to be understood, and perilous to be
read; that will highly commend your modesty, if ye presume not to read the
Scriptures; that will tell you it is enough for you to believe as the Church
believes, though ye know not how to give account of your faith; that will
allow well of learning nothing, and after many years to be never the wiser; in
a word, that will the sooner suspect you of heresy, the more knowledge ye
have in the Scriptures. Such are they that would have praying, singing,
reading, and all other rites of the Church done in a strange language, that
would have us barred from the reading of the Scriptures in a known tongue,
that would have none but great Clerks and Divines seen in the Scriptures. But
what says the Holy Ghost? Search the scriptures, says our blessed Savior,
Ioh. 5.39.
for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they are they which testify
of me. Grow says Peter unto the Church, in grace, 2 Pet. 3.18.
and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And our Apostle,
Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously in all wisdom. Col. 3.16.
And in this place his prayer is for the Church of Philippi, that they may
abound more and more in knowledge. Now what can be more contrary and repugnant
unto other, then this doctrine of the Holy Ghost unto that doctrine of theirs?
Our blessed Savior sets us unto the Scriptures to search them, and they would
not have us to presume to read the Scriptures. The Apostle Peter, would have us
to grow in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and they would
not have us look into the scriptures lest we fall into heresies. Our Apostle
would have the word of Christ to dwell in us plenteously, and they would have
us only to believe as the Church believes, and care not though we know not
how to give account of our faith. Our Apostle would have us to abound more and
more in knowledge, and they tell us that ignorance is the mother of devotion.
See then whether there be not cause to beware of them, and to bid fie upon the
beast, that speaks so presumptuously against the word of God. As the Apostle
says unto the Galatians touching the false Apostles, they desire to have you
circumcised, Gal. 6.13.
that they might rejoice in your flesh; so I say unto you touching these false
Apostles, they desire to have you close shut up in ignorance, that they may
lead you blindfold at their pleasures into all their deuilish errors, and that
they may rejoice in their advantage by your ignorance. Beware therefore of
them, and hearken not unto them, lest if ye err in your hearts, because ye
know not his ways through your ignorance in the scriptures, he swear as
sometimes he did unto the Israelites in his wrath, that ye shall never enter
into his rest, even to the heavenly Canaan, whereof that earthly Canaan was a
type.

2. This may teach us to give all diligence unto the reading, and hearing, and
meditating of the holy scriptures, that so we may abound more and more in all
knowledge and understanding. Very lamentable it is, beloved, to see and
consider how many hundreths, nay thousands in this clear light of the gospel,
when the scriptures are or may be read and known of us all, yet are as
ignorant in the scriptures, and of the things that belong to their salvation,
as when they sat in the darkness of Egypt, when they could see no light of the
scriptures, by reason of the strange language. We have had many Ezraes that
have read in the book of the law of God distinctly, and given the sense
thereof that the rest might understand; many Ministers of Christ Jesus, that
have read the law and the gospel unto us every Sabbath day in our Churches;
many Preachers of the Gospel that have plainly opened the scriptures unto us,
whereby we might be made wise unto salvation, even 40 years long And have not
the scriptures been read unto the greatest number of us in vain?
Notwithstanding so much preaching, and teaching of the holy word of life, are
we not still ignorant, and have still need to be taught the very beginnings of
Christ, the very principles of religion? Have we not many masters of Israel,
that think themselves great men, like unto Nicodemus, that know not those
things, which the very babes in Christ's school ought to know? Have we not many
leaders of the people, and masters of families, unto whose shame it may be
spoken, that they have not the knowledge of God? Have we not many that if they
be asked, are not able to give an account of their faith, nor know truth from
error, religion from superstition? The thing is too true, and too lamentable.
Beloved, has not the Lord our God said unto us all, Deuteronomy. 6.6.
These words which I command thee this day shall be in thy heart, and thou
shall rehearse them continually unto thy childrem, and shall talk of them etc.
and shall we not hearken to his voice to do according to all he has commanded
us? Has not our blessed Savior told us, Joh. 17.3.
that this is eternal life to know God to be the only very God, and him whom
he has sent Jesus Christ, and shall not we labor to grow in the knowledge of
God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ? Has not the holy Prophet said, that blessed
is the man whose delight is in the law of the Lord, Psalm. 1.2.
and which meditateth therein day and night, and shall we not give all
diligence to the reading, and hearing, and meditating of the holy scriptures?
Nay let me I beseech you exhort you, as that godly Father did his people, Chrysostom.
Provide you Bibles which are the medicine of your souls, if you will nothing
else, at least get the new Testament. In the Bible, there ye have the whole
will of your heavenly father, there ye shall see what legacies he has
bequeathed unto you, and what duties he requires of you. If the father of our
bodies had bequeathed us a great legacy by his will, it would not be much
needful to wish us get our Fathers will, and to look diligently into it, to
see if not what he requires of us, yet what he bequeatheth to us, neither
would we stick at the cost for the search of it, if we knew where to have it.
And shall the father of our souls leave us his Will, and by his Will bequeath
us everlasting life, and shall we not labor to get his Will? Shall a matter of
ten shillings stay us from the having of his Will? shall not we search it and
look diligently into it? Let us beloved get the book of Gods law into our
hand, and let it not depart out of our mouths, Jos. 1.8.
but let us meditate therein day and night, that we may observe and do
according to all that is written therein, as the Lord exhorted Joshua. Let us
likewise flock as Doves unto the windows, unto the places where the word is
preached, and when we have heard let us meditate and confer of that we have
heard. If the children of our bodies had gone to the school, and in the space
of seven years had profited nothing, what would we say unto them, or think
of them? Hardly enough, no doubt. And what shall we then think of our selves,
that in the space of forty years, are scarce yet past our A. B. C. and have
not yet attained unto any reasonable knowledge? Let us hereafter recompense our
former negligence, with greater diligence, and let us slack no holy means,
whereby we may grow into all holy knowledge. Let us labor to be rich in all
knowledge, and leaving the doctrine of the beginning of Christ, let us be led
forward unto perfection. Let us henceforth be no more children, wavering and
carried about with every wind of doctrine, but let us grow up unto a perfect
man, and unto the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ, that we may be
able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth,
and height, and to know the love of Christ, which passes all knowledge, that
we may be filled with all fullness of God. By reading, by hearing, by
meditating, by praying, let your care be to abound more and more in knowledge.

The next thing which here I note is, that the Apostle prays for the
Philippians, that they may abound more and more in all judgment, in all
judgment, that is, in sound judgment, that having their wits exercised
through long custom, they may discern both good and evil. So that, as he
would have them to abound more and more in knowledge, so farther, he would have
them also to abound more and more, in a sound and feeling experience of
spiritual things in themselves, that they might spiritually feel in their
hearts and souls that which they knew out of the word. Whence I observe a
further continual care necessary for all Christians, and that is, that they
may abound daily more and more, not in knowledge only of Gods will out of his
word, but in sound judgment also, through a feeling experience in themselves,
of such spiritual things as they know out of the word, that what they know out
of the word, they may feel the truth of it by experience in themselves. This
care our Apostle shows that he had, where he says, that the thing which he
esteemed was to know Christ, Phil. 3.10.
and the virtue of his resurrection. He knew the doctrine of Christ his
resurrection, and he knew this to be the virtue of Christ his resurrection,
that by it the Saints of God rise from the death of sin unto the life of
righteousness. But his desire farther was, that he might feel in himself,
and know by his own experience the virtue of Christ his resurrection, by the
death of sin, and the life of righteousness in himself, that as he knew by
the word Christ his resurrection, to have such a virtue; so by experience in
himself he might know Christ his resurrection to have such a virtue. And this
care the Prophet exhorts all men unto, where he says, Psalm. 34.8.
Taste and see how gracious the Lord is. Where ye may not think that the
Prophet speaks, as if the gracious goodness of the Lord could be tasted on
with the mouth, or seen with the eye, but his meaning is, that such is the
gracious goodness of the Lord unto his children, that they may have as sound
experimental knowledge thereof, as if they should taste it with their mouths,
or see it with their eyes. It is then as if the Prophet had thus said, Know ye
do the gracious goodness of the Lord, by his manifold mercies; and more then
so, ye may know it by your own experience. Acknowledge therefore him to be
gracious, whom by your own experimental knowledge ye do (as it were) taste
and see to be gracious. As then the Prophet does exhort us, and as our Apostle
both by example and exhortation moves us, our care should be that besides our
knowledge out of the word, we might have a feeling knowledge of that we know
out of the word, by experience in our selves.

This then should teach us to observe the mercies and judgments of the Lord,
to observe the proof and experience in our daily life, of such things as we
know by the word, that so we may have not a contemplative only, but an
experimental knowledge of things in our selves. As for example, the scripture
tells us, that the poor cries and the Lord hears him, and saves him out
of all his troubles. Psalm. 34.6.
This we know to be true, because we find it so in the word. But our care
should be farther to know it by a feeling experience in our own selves. We
must then observe the mercies of the Lord in hearing us when we call upon him,
and delivering us in every needful time of trouble, and so shall we know not
only by the word, but by experience in our own selves, that the Lord hears
the poor when they cry unto him, and saves them out of all their troubles.
Psalm. 34.7.
So David besides this knowledge out of the word, 1 Samuel 17.37.
that the Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about them that fear him, and
delivers them, had observed the truth of it by his own experience in his
deliverance out of the paw of the Lion, Matthew. 16.18.
and out of the paw of the Bear, and thereupon was bold to encounter that
great Goliath, that uncircumcised Philistim. Again, we know that the gates of
hell shall not prevail against Christ his Church, because the scripture says
so. But will we so know it to be so as if our own senses should tell us that
it were so? Then we must observe the storms and tempests, the persecutions and
troubles, the batteries and assaults, that Satan in his members makes against
the Church, and how the Lord brings all their counsels to naught, and makes
their devises to be nothing else but the imagination of a vain thing. And thus
in all things we must observe, that by long experience our spiritual senses
may be exercised to know the truth of every thing that we know out of the
word. But so careless commonly we are, that we pass over the mercies and the
judgments of the Lord, without observation at all, whereby we might grow in
all judgment and sound experience. It may be that some of us sometimes, will
desire to know somewhat out of the scriptures touching the Sacraments, touching
the resurrection, touching faith, touching good works, etc. But what is it? It
is only to know it there, it is not to have a feeling of it in our own
souls. If we have the text of scripture for proof, we think we have
knowledge enough, but for proof out of our own experience in our own soul*
we look not after it. But beloved, ye see we should have a care, as to abound
in knowledge out of the Scriptures, so in sound judgment out of a feeling
experience in our selves of the truth of that we know. Let us not therefore,
^ightly pass over the things that we know out of the word, but let us labor
to increase in a feeling knowledge of them in our own souls. Let us observe
in our daily experience, that as it is written, so it is indeed, that when we
hear or read such and such things out of the word, our own souls within us
may give witness unto the same, and say, it is so indeed, in mine own
experience I find it to be most true. Thus the Apostle exhorts, and thus it
behooves us to do.

The next thing which here I note, is that the Apostle prays for the
Philippians, that their love may abound more and more in knowledge, and in all
judgment, which is, that their love might be founded and grounded in sound
knowledge, and in sound judgment, that each having help of other, and each
being furnished by other, they might the better discern things that differ
etc. Whence I observe yet a farther continual care necessary for all
Christians, and that is, that their love may abound in knowledge, and in all
judgment. Though (says the Apostle) I had all knowledge, and had not love I
were nothing. 1 Cor. 13.2.
So on the other side, though we say we have all love, and have not knowledge,
it is nothing. for what is all our love if it be not grounded in knowledge, and
in judgment? Then these are good when they grow up together, and each has
help of other, and which of these soever grows up without other, like unto
Jonas gourd, it will quickly wither. Our care then must be that our love may
abound in knowledge, and in all judgment. In knowledge, that we may know on
whom our love ought principally to be set. And in all judgment, that knowing
whom we ought to love, we may love them whom we ought, Gal. 6.10.
and as we ought. Let us do good, says the Apostle, unto all men, but
especially unto them which are of the household of faith. Here we are taught
whom we ought principally to love. We are to love all men, but especially them
that are of the household of faith, the^ that are joined unto us in the band of
Christianity. And knowing that they are those who^ we ought principally to love
we are to love them in deed and in truth, and the more nearly that they are
linked unto us in the bands of Christianity, the more dearly we are to love
them. Otherwise our love, If it be not in knowledge, and in all judgment, may
do more harm then good, even as we see that zeal does without knowledge; for
it was in zeal, but without knowledge, Gal. 1.14.
that Paul persecuted the Church of God extremely, and wasted it. And it was
in a zeal of the law that the Jews submitted not themselves unto the
righteousness of God: but their zeal was not according to knowledge, Romans
10.2.
as the Apostle shows, where he says, I bear them record that they have
the zeal of God, but not according to knowledge. So in our love we may do
good unto those, and show kindness unto those to whom we ought not, if our
love be not grounded on knowledge, and in all judgment. And this was it which
the Apostle taxed in the Galathians, Gal. 4.18.
where he said, It is a good thing always to love earnestly in a good thing.
That they loved, and loved earnestly he misliked it not, nay, It is a good
thing, says he, to love earnestly. But that their love was not in knowledge
and judgment, that he misliked. They increased in love toward the^ that
seduced them, and abated their love toward him that had taught them the truth.
This he misliked, and therefore told them, that it was a good thing to love
earnestly always in a good thing. We must love, but we must know that the
thing we love is good, that the person whom we love is good. And therefore our
love must abound in knowledge, and in judgment.

This then serves to condemn our great carelessness in making choice on whom
we set our love, and unto whom we do good, and perform duties of love. Our
love should abound in knowledge out of Gods word, whom to love; and in
judgment to perform the duties of love, to whom we ought. But commonly we
care not where we cast our love, but as he fits our humor, so commonly we cast
our love upon him. If he will bowze and drink with us, if he will game and
play with us, if he will curse and swear with us, if he will play the good
fellow, and run to the devil with us, then we will love him, and what we
can we will do for him. Neither can it be that they should bestow their
loves better, who themselves are no better. Nay, where better graces are, yet
is there no better choice of our love. We commonly look rather how he suits
our affections and likings, whom we would love and fancy, then how he is
beautified with the graces of Gods spirit, how well he is grounded and
stablished in the faith. And howsoever he be scarce sound in the faith, yet if
he suit our affections and likings, we grow to more entire love with him then
with others, more to beloved. If this, beloved, have been a fault in any of
us, let us learn hereafter to reform it, and let our love abound more and
more in knowledge, and in judgment. Let us know out of the word whom we ought
to love, and unto whom we ought to do good, and let us love them and do good
unto them. Let neither our knowledge be without love, nor our judgment
without love, neither let our love be without knowledge, or judgment. Let us
abound more and more in love, and in knowledge, and in judgment; and let our
love abound more and more in knowledge, and in all judgment.

LECTVRE XI.
PHILIP. 1. Verse 10. That ye may discern things that differ one from
another, that ye may be pure and without offense, until the day of Christ.
NOw, having spoken of the Apostles praying for the Philippians, and of the
things for which his prayer unto God for them was, namely, for their increase
in love, in knowledge, and in judgment, that their love might abound more and
more in knowledge, and in judgment; it remains now that we speak of the
ends, wherefore the Apostle prayed for the Philippians increase in these
graces, set down in these words, That ye may discern, etc.

That ye may discern, etc.] The first end wherefore the Apostle prayed for
the Philippians, that they might abound more and more in knowledge, and in all
judgment, was, that they might discern things that differ one from another;
that is, by their knowledge out of the word, and by their judgment out of
their own experience, they might discern between good and evil, virtue and
vice, false and true Apostles, corrupt and vncorrupt doctrine, and so might
follow the good, and fly the bad. The same phrase of speech that is here used,
is also used in the Epistle to the Romans, though not so translated in our
English Bibles there, Romans 2.18.
as here. Behold, says the Apostle there, thou art called a Jew, and restest
in the law, and gloriest in God, and know his will, and allowest the things
that are excellent: Thus it is there translated and read; as also some
translate the phrase here in this place, reading thus, That ye may allow the
things that are excellent. But in that place to the Romans, the reading in the
Margent is better then the reading in the Text, and is all one with the reading
here used in this place of our Apostle; howbeit, the matter is not great
whether reading we admit, both coming much to one: for whether we read thus,
That ye may discern things that differ, the meaning is, that upon trial they
might allow the things that are excellent: or thus, That ye may allow the
things that are excellent, the meaning is, that upon the discerning of things
that differ, they may allow the things that are excellent. But I follow the
reading, as in this place we have it.

The first thing then which here I note is, the end wherefore the Apostle
prayed for the Philippians, that they might abound in knowledge, and in all
judgment, and it was, that they might try and discern things that differed,
right from wrong, truth from error, religion from superstition, etc. that being
able to put a difference between them, they might allow and follow that which
were good, that which they ought. Whence I observe the end wherefore all
Christians ought to labor for increase in knowledge, and in all judgment, and
that is, that they may discern things that differ, good from evil, right from
wrong, truth from error, religion from superstition, etc. that so they may be
pure and without offense, until the day of Christ, etc. For, therefore are we
to follow after knowledge, that we may know what is good and what is evil,
what is truth and what is error, and may be able to try the spirits, and to
put a difference between things that differ one from another: and therefore are
we to labor after a sound judgment, through a feeling experience in our own
souls, of the truth of those things which we are taught out of the word, that
having our wits exercised to discern both good and evil. we may be pure, and
without offense, etc. This place of our Apostle is proof pregnant enough to
this purpose; where ye see that the Apostle in his love toward the Philippians
prayed for them that they might abound in knowledge and in all judgment, to
this end, that they might discern etc. And wherefore is it that now we the
Ministers of Christ, and disposers of Gods secrets do preach unto you the
Gospel of your salvation, and labor amongst you that ye may be rich in all
knowledge, and in all judgment? Is it not to this end, that ye may be taught
in the ways of God, that ye may be able to try the spirits, which is the
spirit of truth, and which is the spirit of error, that ye may be able to put
a difference between good and evil, that ye may be pure in doctrine, in
life, and in manners, that ye may be without offense until the day of Christ?
Yes, beloved, therefore we labor amongst you and admonish you, therefore we
show you the whole counsel of God, therefore as much as we can we help
forward your knowledge, therefore we call upon you to observe in your own
experience the truth of those things which ye know out of the word; yea
therefore as the Apostle, we pray that your love may abound in knowledge, and in
all judgment, that in this dotage of the world, wherein there are so many
spirits of error, so many that walk not as they ought, because they err in
their hearts, ye may be able to try the spirits, whether they be of God, that
ye be not deceived by them, that ye may be able to put a difference between
things that differ one from another; that ye may fly the corruptions which are
in the world and be pure; that ye may hold a right course, and be without
offense; that ye may deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and be filled with
the fruits of righteousness etc. And if for these ends we thus do, then for
these ends also ye ought even all of you, all that hear us, to labor for
increase in knowledge and in all judgment. Reading, hearing, meditating,
praying, every holy course ye ought to use, that ye may increase and abound in
knowledge and in all judgment, to this end, that in such ignorance ye may be
able to discern things that differ, that in such corruption ye may be pure,
that in such declination ye may be without offense vnti l the day of Christ,
and that in such wallowing in unrighteousness ye may be filled with the fruits
etc.

Very justly then are they hence to be reproved, that in seeking after
knowledge even out of the scriptures, propose rather any other end which they
should not, then these which they should. For of those that do vouchsafe to
search the scriptures, many there are whose end is to pervert the scriptures,
thence to build the fancies of their own brain, and to beguile unstable
souls. Such are they that seeing the chaste spouse of Christ to lean upon the
scriptures, do by their corruptions of the text, their corrupt glosses upon the
text, their false conclusions from the text labor to overthrow the truth, and
to build their own errors. Others there are, whose end in seeking knowledge
out of the scriptures is only a vain ostentation, that men may think and
speak of them as great Rabbis, good expounders of the law, and very skillful
in the scriptures. Such are they of whose knowledge the Apostle speaks, when
he says, that knowledge puffs up: for as they regarded nothing in seeking
after knowledge but a vain ostentation, 1 Cor. 8.1.
so having atteined unto knowledge they swell and look so bigg as if all
knowledge were shut up in their breasts. Others there are whose end is, to
inform their own understanding, that they may not be ignorant in the law of
their God, but may know the story of the Bible, the course and meaning of the
scriptures. Such are they that delight themselves only with the knowledge of
the mysteries of God, but show not any fruits of their knowledge in a sober,
honest, and godly life. Indeed men generally in seeking knowledge, out of the
scriptures aim rather at every other end, then at that whereat they should.
But we, beloved, may not be like unto them. Here ye see wherefore we should
labor to abound more and more in knowledge, and in all judgment. Whatsoever
others do, let this be our direction what we are to do. And though the
smallest number by far make the bent of their increase in knowledge the
informing of their understandings, and the reforming of their lives, yet let us
set in with this little number, and let this end stir up our desires to
increase in knowledge. Let us labor, and let us pray that we may abound more
and more in knowledge and in all judgment, even therefore that we may discern
etc. Let us know that our increase in knowledge is nothing, if it be not for
these ends, and let the desire of these ends increase our thirsting after
knowledge.

My next note is from the things themselves wherefore the Apostle prayed, that
they might abound more and more in knowledge, and in all judgment. Whereof the
first was, that they might discern things that differed one from another, that
being able to see the difference of things concerning either doctrine, life, or
manners, they might in each fly that which were evil, and follow that which
were good. Whence I observe an employment necessary and behouefull for all
Christians, namely, that having their wits exercised through long custom, they
may discern good and evil, that seeing the difference between things, in all
kind of things they may choose the good, and refuse the bad. 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
(...).
Try all things, says the Apostle, and keep that which is good. The word
there used is the same with this in this place of our Apostle, and it
signifies to try, to sifte, to examine; and that which is here spoken unto the
Thessalonians, is spoken in them unto all the faithful children of God. What
is then the meaning of the Apostle in these words? This ye must know that then
there were, as still there are, pestilent and deceiving spirits, which trouble
the Church, and corrupt, or discredit the doctrine of the Gospel. And this
also ye must know, that then there were, as still there are some, which
because of such men wilfully reject the doctrine of the Gospel, and others
which foolishly believe every spirit that speaks in the name of Christ. The
Apostle therefore wills them, and in them us, neither wilfully to reject every
thing, because of some wicked men; nor yet foolishly to admit every thing that
is spoken in the name of Christ, but to try, and sift, and examine all things
by the rule of the word. And what then? when by trial we see and discern
things that differ one from another, he wills us to keep that which is good;
for that is the end wherefore we are to try things. So that hence we see that
it is an employment very behouefull for us all, that we may be able to discern
things that differ one from another, that seeing the difference of things we
may embrace that which is good, and avoid the contrary. The same also we may
see by the Holy Ghosts commendation of the men of Beraea, Act. 17.11.
for searching the Scriptures to see whether the things that were spoken were
so. It was Paul that preached unto them, and when he preached unto them, they
turned their books, and looked diligently into the scriptures to see whether in
any thing he differed from the doctrine of the Holy Ghost. And this is
registered both for their commendation, and our instruction, to admonish us that
we are to care that we may discern things that differ either in doctrine from
corrupt doctrine, or in faith from sound, or in manners from a Christian and
holy conversation. And why? The reason is very plain: Psalm. 49.20.
even that we be not like to the beasts that perish, as the Prophet speaks of
a man that is in honor and has no understanding. For what will ye think of
such a man that cannot discern between chafe and wheat, dross and gold,
sour and sweet? Will ye not say that he is like to the beast that perishes?
What then must ye needs say and think of that Christian that can not discern
between truth and error, religion and superstition, virtue and vice, good and
evil? Any better? Nay surely: for these are as wheat and chaff, gold and
dross, and not to discern between them is not to discern between wheat and
chafe, gold and dross. If then we will not be like unto the beasts that
perish, our care must be that out of our knowledge in the Scriptures we may be
able to discern things that differ.

But do we thus employ our care? Nay thus far I have only said what we
should do: but what we do, our unableness to discern between things that
differ one from another too too plainly discover. For what is the cause why so
quickly we hearken unto those deceivers that compass sea and land to make one
of their profession, and when he is made they make him twofold more the child
of hell then they themselves are? Why we are so easily seduced to believe the
spirits of error, and to fall from our own stedfastnes? Is it not even hence
because we cannot discern things that differ one from another? They bring unto
us the fancies of their own brain, the traditions of their own Church, lies
out of their own Legends, and we receive them because we cannot discern them
from the truth of Christ Jesus. They come unto us in the name of Christ Jesus,
but bring with them the doctrine of Devils forbidding to marry, and commanding
to abstain from meats which God has created to be received with thanksgiving,
and we believe them, because we cannot try the spirits whether they be of God,
to see which is the spirit of truth, and which is the spirit of error. For God
forbid that I should think that if we could discern between truth and error,
religion and superstition, any of us would follow their damnable heresies, by
whom the way of truth is evil spoken of. Again, what is the cause why we are
often deceived with the shadows of good things, with the semblances of things
honest, and just, and pure, with the dim shows of virtue, and praise, and
holiness of life? Is it not even hence, because we cannot discern things that
differ one from another? Oftentimes we think we run well, when we run
quite a wrong course; oftentimes we count that our praise, which is indeed our
dispraise; and a great many of us think that we have Abraham to our father,
when indeed we are of our father the devil. And all hence (as I think)
because we cannot discern things that differ.

And yet, tell a great many of us that we know not good from evil, that we
cannot discern between truth and error, right and wrong, etc. we cannot brook
it, but we disdain to be counted so simple and ignorant that we cannot
discern things so different. But let me but ask these questions. How is it
that so commonly we fly that which is good, and follow that which is evil? How
is it that so easily we are drawn oftentimes from the way of truth into error?
How is it that vice under the color of virtue, so often does deceive us? Is it
not because we cannot discern good from evil, truth from error, virtue from
vice? Either it is so, or worse, for either ignorantly we err, as not able to
discern between things that differ, or wilfully we run a wrong course, as
discerning well enough things that differ, but wilfully running our selves on
the rocks. Beloved, let us think of these things, and let us be ashamed of
it, that we cannot discern between things that differ one from other. It is
enough for us that we have spent the time past ignorantly and foolishly. Let us
henceforth redeem the time, and learn to discern things that differ. If we
consider the time that we have spent in the school of Christ, we may well
think that now we should have so much knowledge as to discern things that
differ one from another. And if truth and error, good and evil, etc. be unto
us (as yet) as colors unto blind men, that we cannot discern between them,
we may well think that we are blind. Let us therefore go unto Christ Jesus in
his word that we may receive sight, and see clearly. Let us read, and hear,
and meditate in the holy word of God, that thence we may know what is good and
acceptable unto God. Let us pray, and labor by all holy means that we may
abound in knowledge, and in all judgment, that we may discern things that
differ one from another.

The second thing wherefore the Apostle prayed that the Philippians might
abound more and more in knowledge, and in all judgment, was, that they might
be pure, namely, (...).
from any leaven of corruption in doctrine, life, or manners: for so the word
here used signifies, such as are clear and free from all mixture of
corruption, as white wool never dyed, fine flower never leauened. And this was
so an end of the Apostles prayer, for their increase in knowledge, and in all
judgment, that it seems to be subordinate to the former end; for he would
have them able to discern things that differ, corrupt from vncorrupt doctrine,
etc. that they might be pure from all corruption in doctrine, life, and
manners, and for both these causes he prayed that they might abound more and
more in knowledge. Hence then I observe another employme^t behouefull for all
christians, namely, that they may be pure and free from all corruption in
doctrine, life, or manners. For it is not enough that we be able to discern
things that differ one from another, and to know what in doctrine is corrupt
and vncorrupt, what in life is good and evil, and what in manners is holy, and
what profane; but farther also it is behoouefull that we be pure from
whatsoever is corrupt in doctrine, from whatsoever is evil in life, from
whatsoever is unholy in manners. Know ye not, 1 Cor. 5.6.7.
says the Apostle, that a little leaven leaueneth a whole lump? Purge out
therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened;
for Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us. The Apostle speaks there of
the incestuous person, and having sharply reproved the Corinthians negligence
in not punishing him, and willed them to excommunicate him, he whetteth them
thereunto, saying, Know ye not that a little leaven, etc. as if he should have
said, Ye know very well that a little leaven leaueneth the whole lump or
batch, and know ye not that one naughty man infecteth and poysoneth the whole
congregation? What is then to be done? Purge out therefore the old leaven that
ye may be a new lump, cut off that naughty man from your body, that ye may be
an holy congregation unto the Lord, as ye are unleavened, as ye are called to
be holy: for Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us. Which his exhortation,
as it served for that purpose, so did it lessen them, and in them us, that
forasmuch as a little leaven, a little corruption marreth and poysonneth the
whole man, therefore we should purge out, we should be pure from all leaven of
malitiousnesse and wickedness, even from all corruption whatsoever, that we may
be a new lump, holy vessels for the habitation of the holy spirit, as we are
unleavened, and holy, and pure by our calling in Christ Jesus. And why? for
Christ our passover is sacrificed for us: whereby the Apostle implies thus
much, that as the Jews in the celebration of the feast of the passover were
to put away for all that time all leaven out of their houses, and only to eat
unleavened bread; so we, now that Christ our passover is sacrificed for us,
are to purge our selves, and to cleanse the houses of our bodies from all
leaven, and filthiness, and corruption, and to keep the feast with the
unleavened bread of sincerity, and truth, holiness and godliness, so that
for the whole time of the feast, the whole term of our life, there be no
leaven, no corruption at all found in the houses of our bodies. Can any thing
be more plain for that purity which ought to be in us? Much to the like
purpose is that of our blessed Savior to his Disciples, where he warns them,
saying, Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadduces. In
which words he warns them, Matthew. 16.12.
and in them us, to look unto it, that we be pure from all corruption in
doctrine. And in that he doubleth the caveat, saying, Take heed, and beware,
he shows how very behouefull it is to look unto it: and in that he calls
corruption in doctrine leaven, he shows both the poison of it that it marres
the whole man, as a little leaven that leaueneth the whole lump, and likewise
the riddance that should be of it out of the houses of our bodies, as of leaven
out of the houses in the feast of the passover. So that ye see how behouefull
an employment for us it is that we be pure from all corruption in doctrine,
life, and manners. And the reason is plain: for what fellowship has truth
with error? or what communion has good with evil? We cannot serve both God
and Mammon: we must fly that which is evil, and follow that which is good.
Halting between God and Ball will not serve; we must worship the Lord our God,
and him only must we serve. If we be circumcised Christ shall profit us
nothing: if there be any mixture of corruption in us, our religion is in vain.
It is but the one of two; either pure, or impure. If we will not be impure, our
care must be to be pure.

Here then are met withal such tollerations and indulgences, as either in
policy, or upon any carnal reason, we are wont to take and allow unto our
selves. Whereas the Apost. would have us purged of all corruption, we will
allow some mixture of corruption, and all things shall be well notwithstanding.
Again, we like not of those hot headed fellows, that precisely urge a
conformity in all things, according unto the word, we cannot away with those
pure men, that would have us so pure, that we should not speak a word amiss,
or do any thing that is evil: We are men, and we must play the goodfellowes
now and then, we must swear now and then, we must run at riot now and then,
we must drink, and dance, and play now and then more then we should, we
must pass the bounds of modesty, honesty, and Christian duty, now and then.
And if some of us happily will not break out into such terms, yet we will
think that sometimes we may adventure a little upon some breach of the law,
that we may without great offense commit such and such little sins, that a
little corruption, a little yielding unto the fashions of the world, cannot do
so much harm, that too much strictness and preciseness is naught; and that
to stand so much upon purity and sincerity, is but to make our selves the
talk, and mock, and byword of the people. Thus we will be moderaters over
the holy Ghost, and when he seems unto us to ouer-reach, we will bring him
to the measure of our own scantling.

But beloved, let us not deceive our selves, God is not mocked, but what he
requires of us, it stands us upon to take care of the performance of it. The
end of our calling is, that we be holy in all manner of conversation, as he
which has called us is holy. And therefore has God chosen us in Christ Jesus,
before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy, and without blame
before him in love. And Christ our Passover is once, and for ever sacrificed
for us, that henceforth we should keep the Feast of the Passover unto the
Lord for ever; so that now no leaven of corruption at all may be found in all
our houses. Let us therefore take heed how we make tollerations and
indulgences unto our selves. Let us take heed how we suffer any leaven of
corruption in the houses of our bodies: and let us rather purge out the old
leaven, that we may be a new lump. Let us strive as much as possibly we can,
after this purity that is required of us; and let us assure our selves, that
when we have striuen all that ever we can, after this purity we shall be
impure enough, and too much. We see what it is that is required of us, as
therefore the Apostle wills Timothy, 1. Tim. 5.22.
Let us keep our selves pure, pure from corruption in doctrine and pure from
corruption in life and manners, that as our Apostle afterward exhorts, we
may be blameless and pure, and the sons of God without rebuke in the
midst of a naughty and crooked nation. Let our care be first to discern
things that differ, that we may skill what is pure, what not, either in
doctrine, life, or manners; and then knowing that, let us care and study to be
pure, and sincere, and without all leaven of corruption, either in doctrine,
life, or manners.

The third thing wherefore the Apostle prayed that the Philippians might abound
more and more in knowledge and in all judgment was, that they might be without
offense,.1. that they might not stumble at any thing, but hold on in a constant
course without stumbling, or slipping ba^ke, or standing at a stay, until the
day of Christ, when their constant perseverance should be rewarded. For the
Apostles desire was, 1. that they might be able to discern things that
differed, what were corrupt and bad, and what were pure and good. 2. That being
able to discern and try all things, they might keep that which were good, and
might be pure from all leaven of corruption. 3. That being pure from all leaven
of corruption, they might keep a constant course in their purity without
stumbling, or shrinking back, or standing at a stay, and for these causes he
prayed that they might abound more and more in knowledge etc. Whence I observe
a third employment very behouefull for all Christians, namely that being in a
good course they hold on without stumbling, or standing, or shrinking, being
pure and clear from all leaven of corruption, they keep themselves so until
the day of Christ. Are ye so foolish, (says the Apostle to the Galathians)
that after ye have begun in the spirit, Gal. 3.3.
ye would now be made perfect by the flesh. The Galathians had embraced the
Gospel, and obeyed the truth: but now through certain false Apostles they had
fallen from the pure doctrine of Christ, and admitted some corruptions of that
doctrine. And therefore the Apostle reproues them sharply, and tells them that
it is no course for a Christian to begin in the spirit, and to end in the
flesh, but having begun in the spirit by embracing the pure doctrine of Jesus
Christ, they should end in the spirit, and hold fast that pure doctrine which
they had embraced, even until the day of Christ. So that having obeyed the
truth, we are not to yield to any corruptions of the truth, or to let our hold
slip, but to hold fast the same unto the end. It is for the dog to return to
his own vomit, and for the sow that was washed to return to her wallowing in
the mire; but the man that having put his hand to the plough looks back,
Luke 9.62.
he is not apt to the kingdom of God. Being in a good way, we must with our
Apostle still endeavor to that which is before, and follow hard toward the
mark for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. But I have
lately spoken to this purpose, and therefore now the time being past I will not
farther trouble you. Only with the Apostle I pray, that your love may abound
more and more in knowledge and in all judgment etc.

LECTVRE XII.
PHILIP. I. Verse 11. Filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by
Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God.
IT remains now that we come unto the fourth and last end here mentioned,
wherefore the Apostle prayed that the Philippians might abound more and more in
knowledge, and in all judgment, and that was that they might be fruitful in
all good works, set down in these words, Filled with the fruits and. In which
words I note, 1. the measure of good works, which the Apostle wishes to be in
the Philippians, which is, pressed down and shaken together, even that they
may be filled with the fruits of righteousness. 2. The definition of good
works, in that they are called the fruits of righteousness. 3. The fountain
whence, or author from whom good works, if indeed they be good works are, and
that is Jesus Christ. 4. The end whereunto good works, if indeed they be good
works, do tend, and that is, unto the glory and praise of God. So that besides
the maine point, which is the Apostles desire that the Philippians might be
full of good works, here hence we may know all the causes of good works. The
material cause, or matter and substance of good works is hereby known that
they are called the fruits of righteousness: for this shows that the very
matter and substance of good works is those good actions which as good fruit
grow and spring out of the righteousness of God in us. The formal cause, or
reason which causes our works to be good works, is hereby likewise known that
they are called the fruits of righteousness: for this shows that the reason
why our works are good works, is because of their conformity unto the law of
God, because they are done in righteousness according to the righteous law of
God. The efficient cause, or author from whom good works are is hereby known,
that it is said that they are by Jesus Christ: for this shows that Jesus
Christ works in us whatsoever works are good and agreeable to the righteous
law of God. The final cause, or end of good works whereunto they are to be
referred, wherefore they are to be done is hereby known, that it is said that
they are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God: for this shows
that the end wherefore we are to abound in every good work, is the glory and
praise of God, that his name thereby may be glorified. These are the things
which these words seem unto me to contain. Now let us see what observations
we may gather hence for our farther use and instruction.

The first thing then which here I note, is the rich grace wherewith our
Apostle would have the Philippians to abound, in good works: for he prayed that
they might abound more and more in knowledge and in all judgment, as for other
ends before spoken of, so for this, that they might be filled with the fruits
of righteousness, that they might abound in every good work. My observation
hence is, that we are not only to do the things that are good, and to work
the works of righteousness, but we are to abound in every good work, to be
filled with the fruits of righteousness. To do good, and to have our fruit in
holiness and righteousness, is a thing much urged, and often commanded by the
Holy Ghost in the scriptures, and it is so clear a case that it cannot be
denied or shifted, but that we are to do the things that are good, and to work
the works of righteousness. Yet so cunning are we to deceive our selves, that if
at sometimes we have done some things well, we think we have obeyed the voice
of the Lord herein, though we come far short of being filled with the fruits of
righteousness. The Holy Ghost therefore to meet with our foolish wisdom, and to
clear the point, plainly shows in many places of the scripture, that as we
are to show forth good works, so we are to be rich in good works; as we are to
live righteously in this present world, so we are to be filled with the fruits
of righteousness, that in our whole spirit, soul, and body throughout our whole
life, the fruits thereof may appear. We cease not to pray for you, says the
Apostle to the Colossians, Col. 1.9 10.
and to desire that ye might be filled with knowledge of his will, in all
wisdom and spiritual understanding, that ye might walk worthy of the Lord,
and please him in all things, being fruitful in all good works. The words are
much like to these of our Apostle: wherein ye see he says he prayed for them
unto the Lord, that they might be filled with the knowledge of his will, in all
wisdom and spiritual understanding, to the end that they might walk worthy
of him, and please him in all things, and be fruitful in all good works:
giving them, and in them us thereby to understand, that we are to walk worthy
of the Lord, and therefore to please him in all things; that we are to please
him in all things, and therefore to be fruitful in all good works, like good
trees bringing forth much fruit, unto the glory and praise of God. Again, he
that abides in me, Joh. 15 5.
says our Savior, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit; and
herein, says he, is my father glorified, 8.
that ye bear much fruit. In which place our Savior likeneth him self unto
the vine, and his disciples and children unto the branches of the vine. Now how
shall we know that we are branches of the vine Christ Jesus? If we bear
much fruit in him, if we will glorify the Father, if we will know that we
abide in Christ Jesus, and that he abides in us, if we will know that we are
branches of the true vine Christ Jesus, we must not be like unto the fig
tree that bare no fruit but only leaves, but we must bear fruit, and much
fruit, and much fruit in Christ Jesus. It is not here a grape and there a
grape, here a cluster and there a cluster that will serve the turn, but we
must bear much fruit; neither is it wild grapes, and fruit in the flesh that
we must bear, but we must bear much fruit in Christ Jesus, we must be rich
in the fruits of the spirit, rich in good works. And this was it that was
commended in that virtuous woman Tabitha, that she was full of good works,
Act. 9.36.
and alms which she did. Whose example we may not pass over with a bare
reading or hearing of it, without making farther use of it then to know that it
was so; but we must know, that it was written for our learning, to admonish us,
that as she was, so we should be full of good works and alms deeds, of good
works in general, and of alms deeds in particular.

But what is the reason that we should be filled with the fruits of
righteousness? We have already heard many reasons: as that we may please the
Lord in all things; for so we do please him in all things, Col. 1.10.
if we be fruitful in all good works. Again, that we may glorify God the
Father: Joh. 15.8.
for herein is the father glorified if we bear much fruit. 5.
Again, that we may know that we abide in Christ and Christ in us: for he that
abides in Christ and Christ in him, the same brings forth much fruit.
Again, that there may be none unrighteousness in us: for so shall we be free
from unrighteousness, if we be filled with the fruits of righteousness. Again,
because we our selves should be as good trees, the planting of the Lord, trees
of righteousness, Esaias 61.3.
^s the Prophet speaks: for so shall we be known to be good trees, if we
bring forth good fruit, and the more good fruit that we bear, the better trees
we shall be. That therefore we may be trees of righteousness, we should be
filled with the fruits of righteousness; that we may be the planting of the
Lord, we should bring forth much fruit in the Lord; that we may be as trees
planted ^y the water side, we should always bring forth fruit in due season.
All times of the year our boughs, even the boughs of our spirit, soul, and
body should be full of the fruits of the spirit, of the fruits of repentance,
of the fruits of holiness, of the fruits of righteousness. The trees of the
garden have their seasons to bear their fruit, and in their seasons they do
not always take; but all times are due seasons for our bearing of fruit, and
at all times our trees should be so well taken, that their tender ^oughes
should be even laden with fruit.

Here then first beloved take a caveat, to beware of them that tell you that we
make no reckoning of good works, that all our preaching is of an idle and dead
faith, that we are afraid in our Sermons to make any mention of good works, and
that when we mention them, either we condemn them, or speak so coldly of
them, as if there were no worth at all in them. Let your own ears witness
what we preach unto you, and whether they do not most untruly slander us that
thus speak of us. What more do we beat upon and urge then that ye may be
pure, that ye may be without offense until the day of Christ, that ye may be
filled with the fruits of righteousness, and abound in every good work?
Answer them therefore out of your own knowledge, and tell them that they are of
their father the devil, who is a lier, and the father thereof. Ye your selves
know it, and therefore may boldly speak it.

Secondly, let this be as a spur to prick us forward, and to stir us up to
every good work. For should we be filled with the fruits of righteousness, and
abound in every good work? How is it then that we are so barren in good works,
like unto the heath in the wilderness that brings forth no fruit that is good.
Abound in works we do, but it is in the sinful works of the flesh, not in
good works of the spirit: and full of fruits we are, but it is of the fruits of
unrighteousness, maliciousnes, cruelty, oppression, and the like, not full of
the fruits of righteousness. If there be here and there a cluster of grapes, as
in the gathering after the vintage, if we do some things well, though they be
nothing in comparison of the evil that we do, if after we have run at riot
a long time, at length we have some fruit in holiness, if in the moderation
and government of our affections and actions, we do more savor of the spirit
then in the common course of the world men do, then we think well of our good
works, and count our selves such as have well profited in the school of
Christ. But to urge us to be filled with the fruits of righteousness, to be
fruitful in all good works, to have our whole conversation holy, to show forth
the fruits of the spirit, in our whole spirit, soul, and body throughout our
whole life, this we cannot brook, and this is a thing wherein the Preacher may
well strive with us, but wherein he shall not prevail with us. For here it is
with us, as it was with the young man in the Gospel, who soothed up himself as
if he had been as good a man as lived, till it was said unto him, Math. 9.
If thou will be perfect, go sell that thou have, and give it to the poor, and
thou shall have treasure in heaven; but then he hung down the head, and went
away sorrowful: so we, many of us while it is said, do that which is good,
let your conversation be honest, have your fruit in holiness, we comfort our
selves as having observed these things, but when it is said, abound in every
good work, be ye filled throughout your whole man, and throughout your whole
life with the fruits of righteousness, then we hang down the head, and all
the exhortations in the world will not prevail thus far with us. That the
Lord shall open his hand, and fill us with plenteousnesse in all good things,
we can brook it very well but where is he that is filled with the fruits of
righteousness, to the glory and praise of his name? Some one Tabitha, it may
be may be full of good works, but with the rest it is well if they be not as
bad as the worst. Let us beloved now that we know what we should be, strive
unto that which should be. Let us as we should be, be trees of righteousness,
filled with the fruits of righteousness. As as we are purged by Christ Jesus
to be a peculiar people unto him, zealous of good works; so let us abound in
every good work. Let us not only fly that is evil, and do that is good,
but as men sanctified throughout in spirit, soul, and body, let our whole
life and conversation be such, as becomes the Gospel of Christ Jesus. The
more fruit we bear, the better trees we are; the more by our fruits we
glorify God the Father, the more sure we are that we are branches of the true
vine Christ Jesus. Let us therefore give all diligence, use all holy means,
and pray that we may abound more and more in the knowledge of Gods will, that
we may discern things that differ, that we may be pure, and without offense
until the day of Christ, filled with the fruits of righteousness, and being
fruitful in all good works.

The next thing which here I note is, that the Apostle calls good works, the
fruits of righteousness. For it is as if he had said, filled with good works
which are the fruits of righteousness, therefore called the fruits of
righteousness, because they spring from righteousness, as the fruit from the
tree. The observation then hence is, that good works are the fruits of
righteousness. Righteousness that is the tree, and good works they are the fruit
of the tree; so that as first must be the tree, and then the fruit; so first we
must be righteous, even by the righteousness of God in us, before we can do the
works that are good. Now what is our righteousness before God? Our Apostle
tells us in the third chapter of this epistle, verse 9.
even that righteousness which is through the faith of Christ; for as Abraham
believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness so our faith in Christ
Jesus who is made of God unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification,
and redemption is accounted unto us for righteousness before God. First then we
must believe in Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation
through faith in his blood, before we can do any works acceptable unto God;
and being justified by faith in Christ, then are our works good and acceptable
unto God. And to this our Apostle gives testimony where he says, Unto the
pure all things are pure, Tit. 1.15.
but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving, is nothing pure, but even
their minds and consciences are defiled. In which words, by pure he means
them whose hearts are purified by faith in Christ Jesus, as the antithesis in
the next clause shows, where he expresses whom he means by impure men,
even unbelieving men. Hence then it is plain, that when once our hearts are
purified by faith in Christ Jesus, not only the things which by the law are
counted unclean are clean and pure unto us, but our works also are good and
holy; but till our hearts be purified by faith in Christ Jesus, neither any of
the things which by the law are counted pure are pure unto us, neither is any
work of ours good, but how good soever it be in show, yet it is indeed
abominable before God. To the like purpose is that of the Apostle, Heb. 1^.6.
where he says, that without faith it is impossible to please God: where the
Apostle showing the dignity and excellency of faith, amongst other things
commends it for this, that by it, as Henoch did, we please God; but without
faith, says he, it is impossible that any work of ours whatsoever should
please God. So that our works if they be good, they are the fruits of
righteousness, even of the righteousness which is of God, through the faith of
Jesus Christ, otherwise if they spring not from that root they are not good.

Here then, first learn to beware of them that tell you that our good works,
are that righteousness whereby we are justified before God. Ye see the
Apostle tell eth you, that they are the fruits of righteousness. As Well
therefore may they tell you, that the fruit of tree is the tree, as that our
good works are our righteousness before God. Let God be true, and every man
a lier. If he have said, that they are the fruits of righteousness, then
assure we our selves, that they are spirits of error that tell us that they are
our righteousness.

Secondly, hence learn to beware of them that tell you, that men not begotten
in the faith of Christ Jesus, are able to do the things that are good and
pleasing unto God; for either you must not believe the holy Apostle, or rather
the holy Ghost, speaking by the mouth of the Apostle; or else you must know,
that they only do the things that are good and pleasing unto God, that are
justified by faith in Christ Jesus: for this the holy Apostle has said, That
good works are the fruits of righteousness. Either then our good works must
spring and proceed, from the righteousness of God by faith in Christ Jesus in
us, or else they are not good: so that they only that are justified by faith
in CHRIST JESUS, do the things that are good. And therefore they that tell you
otherwise, they are led by the same spirit of error tha^ they are who tell you,
that by our works we are justified before God.

Thirdly, let this teach us how to examine our works whether they be good or
no. Are they the fruits of righteousness? Do they proceed from a true and
lively faith in Christ Jesus? Is the fountain pure whence they spring, and
their end good whereunto they tend? Then be bold they are good works.
Otherwise, if there be no such warrant for them, seem they never so good, yet
they are not good. Examine but our works according to this rule, and surely we
will not all of us be found full of good works.

The third thing which here I note is, that the Apostle says, that these
fruits of righteousness wherewith he would have the Philippians filled, are
by Jesus Christ. Whence I observe the Author of every good work in us, and
that is Christ Jesus, by the grace of his holy spirit: 2 Cor. 3.5.
for as the Apostle says, We are not sufficient of our selves, to think any
thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God. Now, if of our selves
we be not sufficient to think a good thought, but that must only be suggested
by Gods spirit, then how shall we be sufficient of our selves to do any
thing that is good? Nay, our Apostle tells us in the next Chapter, 13.
that it is God which works in us both the will and the deed, even of his good
pleasure. Neither thought of the heart, nor affection of the will, nor work of
the hand, but if it be good, it is by the operation of the holy spirit in us.
Nay, take an argument even from hence; Good works they are the fruits of
righteousness. Now does the fruit of a tree bud or grow by the labor or
skill of man. Nay, he planteth and waters, but God only gives the fruit in
due season. Right so it is not in man to do that is good, but if he do that
is good, it is of God. Work of himself he may, and to work that which is
evil he is too proane of himself; but if he work any think that is
acceptable unto God, it is wholly by the spirit of God. And why? That God may
be all in all, and that he may have the glory of all.

Let this sufficiently warn us to beware of them, and arm us against them,
that would persuade us that we are able of our selves to do that is good, at
least if we be helped by grace. If we think, or will, or do any thing that
is good, whatsoever fruit of righteousness it is that is in us, it is by
Jesus Christ, not of our selves, for then we had wherein to rejoice in our
selves, but only of his good pleasure, that by his good spirit works it in
us. This our Apostle tells us, and this we learn from him, and if any man
preach unto us, or teach us otherwise then this that we have received, let him
be accursed.

Secondly, let this teach, us unto whom all praise is ^ue for whatsoever good
is in us. Whatsoever good is ^n us, it is by Jesus Christ. So that our song is
always to ^e as the song of the Angels in the Apocalips, Praise, Apoc. 5.13.
and honor, and glory, and power be unto him that sits upon the ^hrone,
and to the lamb for evermore. His name is to be blessed, and the power of his
spirit is to be acknowledged, in whatsoever good in whatsoever good work is
wrought in us.

The last thing which here I note is, touching the end of good works, which as
they are by Jesus Christ, as the author and worker of them in us, so they are
to be done to the glory and praise of his name. Whence I observe, unto what
end our works must be done if they be good, and that is unto the glory and
praise of God. Ye know that of the Apostle, where he says, Whether ye eat,
1 Cor. 10.31.
or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. As also that of
our Savior, where he says, Matthew. 5.16.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your father which is in heaven. And that of Peter, 1 Pet. 2.12.
where he says, Have your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that they
which speak evil of you, as of evil doers, may by your good works which
they shall see, glorify God in the day of the visitation. By which, and many
other places which might be alleged to this purpose, it appears, that the
end whereunto our works (if they be good) must be referred, must be the
glory and praise of God that thereby he may be glorified, both by us, and by
others which see our good works.

Here then, first, we learn not to credit any that shall tell us, that any
action of any unregenerate man can be good. For, what is the end of such men in
their actions? Is it the praise and glory of God? Nay, it is their own
praise, and the praise of men which they seek after, in all the most glorious
things that they do. But hence we learn that so our works are good works,
if they be by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of God.

Secondly, hence we learn, that the end of our good works is not to be, that
thereby we may merit heaven but that thereby God may be glorified. Nay, if
our works be thereby to merit heaven, they cannot be to the glory and
praise of God. For how much so ever is given to merit, so much is taken from
the glory of God. Either therefore we must renounce all merit, or else
whatsoever we say, our works are not to the glory of God.

Thirdly, this teaches us, whatsoever we do, to do it to the honor and
praise of God. Let this therefore be our end in all that ever we do, that
thereby God may be glorified: and let us know that, so only, that which we do
is good, if we do it to this end.

LECTVRE XIII.
PHILIP. I. Verse 12. I would ye understood, brethren, that the things which
have come unto me, are turned rather to the furthering of the Gospel.

13. So that my bands in Christ are famous throughout all the judgment hall,
and in all other places.

14. Insomuch, that many of the brethren in the Lord are boldened through my
band, and dare more frankly speak the word.


WE have spoken of the Apostles exordium, or entrance to his Epistle, and
therein of such things as whereby he testified his love toward the
Philippians, thereby to win their attention unto him, and likewise of such
observations as that scripture offered, together with such uses and
instructions thence as seemed most behouefull for (...). Now in the rest of
this chapter is set down the Apo^^les narration. Wherein first he tells them
of his pre^^nt state, how at this present when he wrote unto them ^atters stood
with him, and this he does from verse. 12. (...) 19. Secondly, he tells them
for hereafter what his ^ope is, namely, that all shall turn to his own
salvation, (...) the furthering of the Gospel, and to their joy and ^omfort,
and this he does from verse. 19. to the end of ^he chapter. The end and drift of
the whole narration ^as, to comfort the Philippians, that they should not be
^wallowed up of overmuch heaviness for his bonds, ^or therefore shrink from
their good profession.

Now touching the former part of the Apostles narra^^on, wherein he tells them
in what state his matters now ^resently were, what effect the bands which he
sustained ^or Christ his sake and the Gospels, at that present had. ^. Therein
we have the proposition of the narration, or ^he maine point whereof he speaks.
2. The confirma^^on or proof thereof by two notable effects of his ^ands. 3.
An amplification of the latter effect, together with an answer to an exception
which might be ta^en. The proposition, or maine point of the former ^art of the
narration is this, that his persecution and im^risonment rather furthered then
hindered the Gospel, ^et down verse. 12. Now this is confirmed and proved, ^y
two notable fruits and effects of his persecution and ^mprisonment: the former
whereof was this, that by oc^asion of his bands, Christ and his Gospel were
known ^n Nero his Court, in Rome, and in other places; and many brought unto
the faith of Christ Jesus both ^n Nero his Court, and in other places, set
down verse. 13. The latter fruit and effect of his persecu^ion and imprisonment
was this, that through his bands and constancy therein, many of the brethren
were emboldned more freely and frankly, to profess and preach the Gospel of
Christ Jesus then before, set down verse. 14. so that by his bands the Gospel
was both farther dispersed into many places, and likewise more fruitfully
embraced in the hearts of many brethren. The amplification of this latter fruit
and effect of his bands is by way of distribution. For of those brethren, that
through his bands were emboldened to preach Christ more frankly then before,
all of them were not of one mind in preaching Christ, but some preached Christ
through envy and strife, not purely and of a good mind, but to add affliction
unto his bands; others preached Christ of a good mind toward the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, and of love unto the Apostle, set down verse. 15.16.17. And
because it might be said, that he had no cause to rejoice in that any preached
Christ not of a sincere and good mind, he answere^h that, and says, that he
rejoices and thinks he has good cause so to do that Christ is preached, be
it sincerely, or not sincerely, let them look to that, but he is glad that
Christ is preached, set down verse. 18. Thus much for the general order, and
meaning of these words in this former part of our Apostles narration. Now, let
us a little more particularly examine the meaning of these words, wherein are
set down the proposition, or maine point, and the proof thereof.

I would ye understood, brethren, that the things which have come unto me]
What were those? Even all those things which befell him in his sailing toward
Rome, at his first going thither from Jerusalem, but especially his bands in
his first imprisonment at Rome. For this ye must understand, that Paul was
twice prisoner at Rome: once in the beginning of Nero his reign, about the
second year of his reign; and again in the latter end of his reign, about
the thirteenth year of his reign. For when being at Jerusalem he was put from
Claudius Lysias unto Felix, and again from Felix unto Festus, and still the
Jews hunted after his blood, at length he was constreined to appeal unto
Caesar, unto the Emperor of Rome, then Nero. Whereupon he was sent thither, and
after many perils and dangers escaped by the sea, he came to Rome, where he
was prisoner two years at the least, Luke testifying so much. At which time
he wrote diverse Epistles unto the Churches, which he had planted in the East,
as unto the Galathians, unto the Ephesians, unto the Colossians, unto the
Thessalonians, as some think, and this unto the Philippians. But as the
Apostle hoped that the Lord would, as we read in the next chapter; so at this
time he did deliver him from the mouth of that lion Nero, both he being less
cruel now then afterward he grew to be, and the Lord having ordained that by
him many of the Gentiles should hear the Gospel, unto whom it had not as yet
been preached. This, as I said, was about the beginning of Nero his reign.
Again, about the latter end of his reign he was cast into prison at Rome, and
then he was indeed devoured by that lion, Eusebius. l. 2. c. 25.
slain by that cruel tyrant and persecutor Nero. Whatsoever then in this
Epistle is spoken of the Apostles bands, ye must understand it meant of his
first imprisonment at Rome. By the things then which came unto him in this
place, we must understand his bands in his first imprisonment at Rome. Now what
of these? These (says the Apostle) are turned rather to the furthering of the
Gospel, then to the hindering of it, contrary to the hope of the adversaries
of the Gospel, which did cast him into prison: for they hoped, that his bands
would prevail much to hinder the course of the Gospel; but he tells the
Philippians, that the Lord had turned them rather to the fu^thering then to the
hindering of the Gospel. But how could that be? Very well. For so his bands in
Christ,.i. which he sustained for Christ his sake and the Gospels, were famous
throughout all the judgment hall,.i. throughout all the Emperors Court, and in
all other places both of the City, and of other Countries. But how were his
bands famous in all these places? Namely, because by that occasion the Gospel
came to be known, and to be believed by many in all these places. This was the
first fruit of his bands, by them the Gospel was far dispersed. Again,
through his bands and constancy therein, many of the brethren in the Lord,
many Pastors and Teachers of the Church, were emboldened more frankly and
freely to speak the word,.i. to profess and preach the Gospel, then before
they durst. And this was the second fruit and effect of his bands, by them the
Teachers of the word took courage, to speak the word more boldly then before
they had done. Plain therefore it was that contrary to the hope of the
adversaries of the Gospel, his bands were turned rather to the furthering,
then to the hindering of the Gospel, inasmuch as by occasion of his bands both
the Gospel was farther spread and dispersed then before, and likewise the
Preachers of the Gospel more encouraged and emboldned to preach the Gospel
then before. Thus much of the sense of the words. Now to the observations.

Here might be noted the Apostles carefulnes to take away the scandal and
offense of his bands, wherewith the Philippians might happily be troubled, and
thereat take offense. And thence might be observed the care which Pastors
ought to have, of taking away whatsoever may breed any doubt, or occasion, any
offense amongst their people. The neglect of which care does often so much
harm, that their silence in the Church were as tolerable, as their
carelessness to remove all scruples and occasions of offense from the people.
But I rather come unto the maine point here to be noted, which is the Apostles
asseueration, that his bands and imprisonment turned rather to the furthering
then to the hindering of the Gospel, for contrary to the expectation and hope
of those adversaries of the Gospel, that cast him into prison.

Whence I observe, that the persecutions and afflictions of the Saints of
Christ Jesus, do rather further then hinder the gospel, rather increase the^
diminish the Church. Ye know the burdens and afflictions of the children of
Israel in Egypt, the house of their bondage under Pharaoh, Exodus 1.
and the Aegiptians. Come, says Pharaoh, 10.
let us work wisely with the people of the children of Israel, least they
multiply, and it come to pass that if their be war, they join themselves
unto our enemies, and fight against us etc. 13.14.
Whereupon by cruelty they caused the children of Israel to serve, and made them
weary of their lives by sore labor in clay, and in brick, and in all work in
the field, with all manner of bondage which they laid upon them most cruelly.
15.
Yea and a commandment came from the King unto the midwiues, that so many
sons as were borne to the weomen of the Ebrewes they should kill them.
Notable practices indeed that they should not multiply. But what says the
Holy Ghost? 12.
The more they vexed them, the more they multiplied and grew. The Egyptians
they vexed the Israelites lest they should multiply, but the more they vexed
them, the more they multiplied: the Egyptians they laid upon them all cruel
burdens to hinder the growth of the Church there, but the Lord turned that
which they did, rather to the increasing then to the diminishing of the Church
there. Dan. 3 8.
Ye know also the great danger of the three children, Shadrach, Mesech, and
Abednego in the land of their captivity, how grievously the Chaldeans accused
them unto Nebuchadnezzar, for not worshipping the golden image which he had set
up, and how the King in a great fury and rage, 20.21.
commanded them therefore to be cast into the midst of an hot fiery furnace,
which also was done as the King commanded. So that now it was like that
idolatry should increase, and that the worship of the true God of Israel should
decrease, because of this cruel execution upon these three children, for the
maintenance of his holy worship, and refusal to worship the image. But lo how
the Lord turned this to the spreading and propagation of his holy worship,
throughout all the dominions of Nebuchadnezzar. For the Lord having wrought a
mighty deliverance for the three children, in saving them from the power of the
fire, 27.
so that neither an hair of their head was burnt, nor their cotes changed, nor
any smell of fire was upon them, both all the Nobles and great Princes which
came to worship the golden image, were spectators of this great wonder which
the true God of Israel wrought, and Nebuchadnezzar himself blessed the God of
Shadrach, 28.
Meshach, and Abednego, for delivering his servants that yielded their bodies,
rather then they would serve or worship any God save their own God; 29.
and likewise made a decree, that none of all his people should dare to speak
any blasphemy against the God of Israel. Thus the Lord turned their practice
and devises against his holy worship, unto the propagation of his holy worship,
so that when it seemed almost to have perished it was farther dispersed. And as
this may be seen in Moses and the Prophets, so also it is clearly ouer-ruled
in the new Testament. You know the rage of Satan, and his instruments against
our blessed Savior. from his cradle to his cross how did they persecute him,
and all to destroy and to abolish his kingdom for ever? How was he persecuted
and forced to fly from place to place even in his infancy? How often was he
tempted by the Devil in the wilderness? How despitefully was he entreated by
the high Priests, the Scribes, and Pharisees, and the rest of the Jews? How
was he mocked, buffeted, spit upon, crowned with a crown of thorns, accused,
condemned, and crucified between two thieves? And when they had taken him and
crucified him, then they thought they had made sure work for the rooting out
of his name, and of his doctrine for ever. But so the Lord provided, that by
his cross his kingdom was established, and by his death the life of his
Church was preserved, so that his sufferings and his wrongs were turned to the
best, and that which they presumed would have hindered the Gospel, turned to
the furthering of the Gospel. Not to trouble you with more proofs to this
purpose, ye know the persecutions and afflictions, the bands and imprisonment
of our Apostle. And when his adversaries had now gotten him cast into prison,
they thought that now he should be safe from preaching any more in Christ his
name, that the rest when they should hear of him should be daunted, and not
dare to preach the Gospel, and indeed that thus the whole course of the
Gospel should most certainly be hindered. But such was the Lord his
providence, that he turned their devises into the imagination of a vain thing,
and that which they thought should have been to the hindering, he turned
rather to the furthering of the Gospel. For, as himself here witnesses, by
occasion of his bands, both the Gospel was farther propagated, even unto the
Emperors Court, into all places of the City of Rome, and into many other
Countries, in all which places many thereby were brought unto the obedience of
the faith, and of the Gospel of Christ Jesus; and likewise thereby the Gospel
took better settling, and deeper rooting in the hearts of many of the Pastors
of the Church, insomuch that many of them were so far from being danted by
his bands, that thereby they were a great deal bolder then before, and durst
more frankly and freely profess and preach the Gospel then before. So that
whether we look into Moses, or the Prophets, unto Christ, or his Apostles,
still we shall find that ^he persecution, afflictions, and bands of Gods
Saints rather further then hinder the Gospel, rather make for then against the
increase of Christ his kingdom upon earth, rather help then hurt the Church.

But how comes this to pass? The adversaries of God^ ^aints intend no such
thing. No indeed, their whole desire and endeavor in troubling and persecuting
the saints of God, is to make havoc of the Church, and to hinder or abolish
the Gospel of Jesus Christ. How then? Is it by the meris of the Saints, by the
virtue of their sufferings, by the force of their blood which they shed for the
Gospel? No, nor so: for all their merits are not of that worth, all their
sufferings and deaths have not that virtue, that thereby the Gospel should be
fu^thered, or the Church increased. How then comes it to pass that the
persecutions and sufferings of the Saints do further the Gospel? 1. By the
power of Christ. 2. By the example of the Saints constancy in their
sufferings. 3. By the freedom of the Gospel then when the Saints are bound
for the Gospel. For such is the power of Christ, that howsoever their enemies
do band themselves against his Saints, so to work the subversion of the
Gospel, and of the truth of Christ Jesus, yet he can at his pleasure, and does
make their devises to be of none effect, nor only so, but turns them to a
clean other end then they had imagined. And therefore the Psalmist says, Why
do the heathen rage and the people murmr in vain? Psalm. 2 1.
The kings of the earth band themselves etc. As if he should have said; The
enemies of Christ plot and practice all that ever they can against him, and
against his truth and gospel* but all in vain: for the God of heaven sees
them and laughes them to scorn, he either frustrateth their wicked plots and
practices, or turns them to his own glory. Again, when men see the Saints
constancy in their sufferings, how little are they danted with the fury of
their adversaries? how patiently they suffer their bands and persecutions? how
by the mighty power of God assisting them and strengthening them, ^hey do even
in their death triumph over death, this very example of their constancy brings
many unto the Church, and much furthereth the Gospel. And h^revpon is that
known saying that the blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the Church. Again,
the word of God is not bound, though the Saints do suffer even unto bands, as
the Apostle says, I suffer trouble as an evil doer even unto bands, 2 Timothy
2.9.
but the word of God is not bound. And therefore in their bands for the Gospel^
sake, they may preach and publish the Gospel so much, that their bands may be
to the furthering rather then to the hindering of the gospel; as we read that
our Apostle in this his imprisonment at Rome for two years space preached the
kingdom of God, Act. 28 31.
and ^aught those things which concerned the Lord Jesus Christ, without let:
and that he wrote almost as many Epistles there unto the Churches as he wrote
else at all. And thus ye see ^oth that the persecutions of Gods saints rather
further then hinder the Gospel, and likewise how it comes to pass that they
do so.

Now the use which we are to make hereof is, hence to be comforted in all our
persecutions and troubles which, the wicked raise up against us. For what
though they seek all occasions against us, because of the truth which we
pro^esse? What though they bring v^ before Kings and Ru^ers, Judges and great
Officers, and there unjustly accuse us ^or arreigne us as evil doers for the
Gospels sake of Christ jesus? What though they p^euaile to get us cast into
pri^on, or thrown out of our livings, or delivered unto death ^or the hope of
our profession? It may be that they may ^aue their will upon us, and bring
their wicked purposes against us to pass. But what of all this? Is thus the
gospels ^urthered? Does the Lord turn these things to the en^argement of his
Church? A chip then for all these, or all that man can do against us. Nay
herein we joy and will ^oy, that by our sufferings or deaths the Gospel is
furthe^ed, and the Church enlarged. If together with our bands, ^he Gospel
also were bound; if together with the torment ^r fall of our bodies they could
ru^ne and pluck down the ^alles of our Church, then might we well shrink at
our suf^ering and wrongs; then might we well be vexed in our ^oules, for the
malicious practices of the wicked against us. But seeing the Lord turns all
that they do unto us to the ^lory of his name, to the furtherance of his
Gospel, and ^o the propagation of his Church, howsoever they intended ^he
clean contrary, we may well rejoice and be glad, when ^hey say or do all
manner of evil against us for Christ his ^ake and the Gospels. And thus in all
our persecutions and ^ufferings we may resolve, that therein the Lord will do
that which shall be to the glory of his name, the good of his Church, and the
furtherance of his gospel. If our deliverance from our enemies, or our
sufferings will make most hereunto, then will he deliver us as he did Daniel
from the Lions, the three Children from the hot fiery furnace, and our
Apostle from this his imprisonment. But if our sufferings or deaths will make
most thereunto, then they that hate us shall have their will over us as they
had over Ste^^^ our Apostle, in his latter imprisonment, and over many blessed
Martyrs which are dead in the Lord. Be we the^ delivered, or not delivered
from the will of our enemies still this is our comfort, that in his gracious
providence the Lord turns all to the furthering of the gospel: Only, let us
be constant in all our troubles, let us cleave steadfastly unto the Lord, and
let us not love our lives unto the death, the men seeing our holy constancy in
our sufferings, for Christ his sake, and the gospels, may acknowledge the
mighty power of God in strengthening us, to endure such sufferings for the
truths sake, and so may be woone to embrace the same truth with us. And
howsoever we be bound yet le^ us give proof as much as we can, that the
gospel is not bound. By teaching, and writing, and how else we can, let us
ever in our bands labor to turn many unto righteousness, and to enlarge the
Kingdom of Christ Jesus. So shall our sufferings be but as the pounding of
spice to make our smell the sweeter, or as the pressing of the Palm tree, to
spread the gospel farther. Our enemies maine purposes shall be disappoynted,
and the name of our great God shall be glorified.

Again, this serves to condemn the faintness and backe-sliding of many in
their persecutions and troubles. Much seed sown in stony ground: Many, that
when storms and persecutions arise because of the word, by and by are
offended. A calm Sea they can, but a storm they cannot brook. They can well
endure to have Christ crucified, preached unto them, but if Chrst come unto
them with his cross, they cannot away with him. Nay, then many faint, and many
fall away. What then? Such fainting at the things whereby the Gospel may be
furthered? Such ^^lling away, for fear of the things whereby the bounds of ^^e
Church may be enlarged? Can your lives or liuely^oodes be more dear unto you,
then the propagation of ^he Church, the furtherance of the Gospel? Matthew. 14.
If any man ^ome unto me, says our Savior Christ, and hate not father, and
mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, 26.27.
^ea, and his own life also, he cannot be my Discisple. And whosoever bears
not his cross, and comes after me, cannot be ^y disciple. Where our
blessed Savior teaches us, that if a^y thing in the world, even our lives be
more dear unto us, ^hen his glory, and the increase of his kingdom, then we
cannot be his disciples. If we do not bear our cross, whatsoever it be that
is laid upon us, we cannot be his disciples. And withal I add, that howsoever
they seemed to admire the word, and to kiss the Gospel, yet, if when the
wind blows, and the storm arises, they start aside like a broken bow,
surely they were never borne a new by the immortal seed of the word of God;
for that endures for ever, as true in it self, so grounded in him that is
begotten thereby, in such sort, that it is dearer unto him than his life. Let
them then look unto it, that when storms arise, fall away from the hope of
their profession. If they faint or shrink, it is more then they should do,
because the Lord may turn their sufferings to the furtherance of the Gospel.
But if they fall away, it is as if they refused to take up their cross, and to
follow Christ. And whereas their lives should not be dear unto them unto the
death, for the furthering of the gospel; their lives, and liuelyhoodes are so
dear unto them, that to save them they hinder the gospel. Let this be our
rule, the Lord turnneth the persecutions of his Saints to the furthering of the
gospel, therefore in persecutions and troubles we may not faint, or slide
back.

Again beloved, this may teach you not to doubt of the truth, or to dislike of
the professors of the truth, because they are disgraced, persecuted, and
cruelly entreated. Ye shall not want enough that will insult over them in
their troubles, that will tell you they are odious men, and me^ unto whom such
sufferings and troubles most justly do befall, and so cunningly will labor to
discredit the truth which they profess. But be not deceived; Whatsoever of
this kind can be said, no doubt was spoken upon Paul's bands and troubles, so
to discredit the gospel which he preached. And it cannot be but that the
world should hate, and persecute, and revile the children of the light, because
they love darkness better then light. But howsoever the world hate them, and
whatsoever it practices against them, the Lord shall turn all their
sufferings and their wrongs to the furthering of the gospel. Let not therefore
the persecutions and troubles of Gods Saints be any argument against the
truth, but rather for the truth, and rather let them cause us to like then to
dislike the^. It is Satan's art to turn their troubles to the slander of
them, and of the truth, but the Lord turns them to the furtherance of the
gospel, and of their reckoning in the day of Christ. And let this be spoken
touching this, which is the maine point principally to be noted in these words.

The next thing which I note is, that the Apostle in his proof that his bands
were turned rather to the furthering of the gospel, then the hindering, says,
that his bands in Christ.i. which he sustained for Christ his sake were famous
throughout all the judgment Hall, and in all other places. Whereby he means,
that by occasion of his bands Christ and his gospel came to be known, and to
be believed, both in the Emperors Court, and in the City of Rome, and in many
other countries. Which as it shows a notable fruit and effect of the
persecution of gods Saints, namely, the propagation of the gospel, which
falls in with the former observation. So farther, hence I do observe the
power of God, to raise up a Church unto himself where he will, and by what
means he will, in Kings courts, in great Cities and Countries where the
gospel is scant heard of, or little regarded, there he can, if he will, even
by the bands of his Saints, raise up a Church unto himself. No place so
profane, so far without God in the world, but if ^e will have his name there
called upon, there it shall be cal^ed upon. Rome at that time (it is likely)
was as heathenish, (...) now it is superstitious. Nero his Court (it is like)
was then ^s profane, and as far without God in the world as might ^e; and the
Countries thereabout, it is like, had not so much (...) heard of Jesus, nor
knew what the gospel meant. Yet, ^ere the Lord would have his Church; and
therefore he ^aith unto Paul, Be of good courage Paul, Act. 23.11.
for as thou have testi^ied of me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness
also at Rome. Here the purpose of God was revealed, and according to this
purpose he brought Paul to Rome, and even by his bands there begat Children
unto himself in Neroes Court, in the City of Rome, and in the Countries there
a^out. Elisha may send his servant with his staff, and the Shunamites Son
not be raised, but if the Lord send his servant whither he will, a Church shall
be raised to the honor of his name, by what means he will, for he can do what
he will, and what means he lists he uses to do his will.

Let no man then measure the Lord by himself. If he send thee whom he has
called to the work of his ministry, to the Princes Court, or to the great
City, go when he sends thee, and fear not thy weakness, but remember his
strength that sends thee. If thou go thither bound with a chain for the
gospels sake, even by thy chain thou shall so preach unto their hearts, that
thou shall gain children in the faith. As it is all one with him to save with
many or with few, so it is all one with him to gather his church by this or
that means, which pleases him best. Whatsoever be thy weakness, he will
perfect his strength in thy weakness. Only be of good courage, and thou
shall see the power of the Lord.

Again, let no man think any place so profane, but that the Lord may have
his Church there. Kings Courts are commonly not the best, pride, pleasure,
ease, and abundance of all things commonly choakes the word therein, so that it
is unfruitful. Nay, says Amaziah to Amos, Amos 7.13.
prophecy no more at Bethell, for it is the Kings Chapel, and it is the
Kings Court. In great Cities likewise sins most commonly rage and reign. No
lewdness or wickedness so grievous and abominable, but there it is so rise
that it ouerfloweth all: Yet in these places the Lord has his Church, even
those that know him, and believe in his holy name. Even in Iezabels Court he
has an Obadiah to hide and feed his Prophets; and in sinful Sodom, he
has a righteous Lot, whose soul is daily vexed with their unlawful deeds.
Far be it therefore, from us, to condemn where the Lord has not condemned.
Who are his he only knows, but that in all places he has those that are
his, we are not to despair, yea, even at this day in Caesar's Court, and in
sinful Rome it self.

The third thing which I note is, that the Apostle says, that many of the
brethren in the Lord were emboldned through his bands, and durst more franckely
speak the word. Whereby he means, that through his constancy in his bands
and sufferings, many Pastors and teachers were emboldned to profess and preach
the gospel more freely then before. Whence I observe another notable fruit
and persecution of Gods Saints, namely, the emboldening of others to the
profession of the gospel more freely. Which, as it serves very notably for
the proof of the maine point, that the persecution of Gods Saints rather
furthereth then hinders the gospel, so may it be a strong consolation for
the children of God against the time of persecution. It may be that some of us
in the time of the peace of the gospel, may doubt how we shall stand in the
time of persecution, and fear, that when the trial shall come, we shall not
quit our selves like men. But let us pluck up our hearts, and be of good
comfort. When we shall see the constancy of other of Gods Saints in their
sufferings, then shall we also be emboldened freely to profess the truth of
Christ Jesus, the Lord shall turn the constancy of them in their sufferings,
for the hope of their profession unto our encouraging and emboldening to make a
good profession. Thus we find it to be in Joseph of Arimathea, of whom it is
said, Mat. 27.57
that he had been the Disciple of Jesus before his Passion: But he showed it
not till then, and then he went even to Pylate himself, and professed
himself his Disciple, and begged his body, and entombed it. The like we find
to be in Nicodemus, of whom it is said, Ioh. 19.39.
that till the death and passion of Christ Jesus, he only came unto him by
night, for fear of the Jews: But then he professed himself, and joined with
Joseph of Arimathea, to bury him most honorably. By whose examples, as also
by the example of these here mentioned in our Apostle, ye see how the Lord,
by the sufferings of his Saints, gives that boldness and courage unto others of
his children, which neither themselves felt, nor ever any saw in them before.
Let us not therefore fear how we shall stand when persecution comes, but let
us depend on the Lord, who alone gives strength and perseverance, and he will
strengthen us to stand.

LECTVRE XIV.
Verse 15. Some preach Christ even through envy and strife, and some also of
good will.

16. The one part preaches Christ of contention and not purely supposing to
add afflictions to my bands.

17. But the other of love, knowing that I am set for the defense of the
Gospel.

18. What then? yet Christ is preached all manner of ways, whether it be under
a pretense, or sincerely, I therein joy: yea and will joy.


NOw follows the amplification of the latter effect and fruit of the Apostles
bands, which was the third thing noted in the former part of the Apostles
narration, set down in these words, Some preach Christ etc. In which words the
Apostle shows that of those brethren in the Lord which through his constancy
in his bands, were emboldened to preach Christ more frankly then before, all of
them did not preach Christ with the same mind, nor upon the same motive, nor
for the same end, but some with a corrupt mind, moved through envy and strife,
and to the end to add more afflictions to the Apostles bands; and others of a
good mind, moved through love, and to the end that with the Apostle they might
defend the gospel. So that here is set down a distribution of such as
preached Christ, according to the diversity of the minds wherewith, of the
motives whereupon, and of the ends wherefore they preached Christ. The
distribution is this, that some preached Christ sincerely, and others not
sincerely, set down ver. 15. The mind wherewith, the motives whereupon, the
end wherefore the worse sort preached Christ is set down verse. 15.16. Likewise
the mind wherewith, the motives whereupon, and the end wherefore the better
sort preached Christ, is set down verse. 15.17. Touching their minds, the
better sort preached Christ of good will, and a good mind toward the Apostle,
and toward the Gospel; but the worse sort preached Christ not purely, but of a
corrupt and bad mind toward the Apostle. Touching their motives, the better
sort preached Christ even upon love toward the Apostle, and toward the
Gospel; but the worse sort preached Christ upon envy toward the Apostle, and
to stir strife and contention in the Church among the brethren. Touching
their ends, the better sort preached Christ to help the Apostle in the defense
of the gospel, knowing that he was appointed of God for the defense of the
gospel; but the worse sort preached Christ to add more affliction to his
bands, thinking by the contentions which they raised in the Church, both to
grieve him, and to exasperate Nero against him. Thus I resolve the order and
meaning of these words.

The thing which hence I observe is, the great difference of such as preach
Christ in the Church of God. For not to speak of such as set abroche false
doctrine in the Church, whereby either the foundation of our faith is either
plucked down, or shaken, or the Church is burdened with ^aine traditions and
commandments of men, which are not after God: as the Apostle in his day, so we
in our day, may ^ee that of those that preach Christ truly and soundly for
^octrine, some preach Christ as they should, and others ^therwise then they
should, some may be called good, and others bad preachers of Christ. Which
difference of Prea^hers, as then it did, so now it does come to pass through
^he diversity partly of the minds wherewith they preach, ^artly of the
motives which cause them to preach, and part^y of the ends wherefore they do
preach. For in some it is ^ery clear, that they preach the glad tidings of
your salua^^on unto you of a very good mind toward God, toward ^ou, and
toward the gospel of Christ Jesus, only desiring and that from the ground of
their hearts, the glory of God, ^^e salvation of your souls, and the growth of
the gospel ^f Christ Jesus. But in others, it is greatly to be feared, that
^^ey preach Christ of a naughty and bad mind, affecting ^ther their own glory
then the glory of God, seeking ra^^er their own things then the things which
are Jesus ^hrists, hunting after yours rather then you, minding any ^^ing else
rather then the growth of the gospel of Christ ^^sus. Again, in some it is
very clear, that the motives ^^awing them to preach Christ, is a sincere and
holy love ^^th toward you, that they may present you holy and vn^^ameable
before God in that day, and in the mean time ^ay rejoice over your faith,
love, and holy obedience, and ^^ewise toward the truth, that the truth by them
may be ^^owne in all places. But in others it is greatly to be fea^^d, that
their coming to preach Christ is upon spiteful ^^uie toward the faithful
servants of Christ Jesus, malig^^ng the gifts and graces of Gods holy spirit in
them, upon ^ontentious humor, casting up and down the firebrands (...)
schisms, strifes, and debates to set the Church on fire; or ^^on every other
inordinate affection, rather then upon ^^e. Again, in some it is very clear,
that the end of their coming to preach Christ is to glorify the Lord, to
beget children in the faith, to comfort the humbled and afflicted soul, to
build up the ruined walls of Sion, and to turn them that belong unto the Lord
unto righteousness, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and
inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith in Christ Jesus. But in
others it is greatly to be feared, that the end of their coming to preach
Christ, is to grieve the soul which the Lord would not have grieved, to cast
dunge in the faces of their brethren, to add affliction unto them that already
are afflicted, and under the name of the Church, to wound the Church even with
a deadly wound. I wish indeed even from my very heart root, that all that
preach Christ in our Church at this day were of the better sort, and that our
day might have this exception from the Apostles day. And I do assure my self
that there were never more in our Church, then at this day there are, which
preach Christ of a pure and good mind, upon a sincere and holy love toward
the Church, and toward the truth, to gain men unto the Church, and to ground
men in the truth. Neither do I, or dare I pronounce of any but that he so
preaches Christ. But as I said, it may greatly be feared, that in this our day
there are such as do not so preach Christ. For as the Apostle reasons,
whereas there are among you envying, 1 Cor. 3.3.
and strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men? So do I
reason touching this point: whereas there are amongst us, such as are ever
obscuring the lights of our Church, ever girding at them whose graces ha^^
been and are most eminent in the Church, ever crossing and thwarting the
things most behouefull for the Church, ever snarling and catching at every
advantage they ca^ take, ever casting firebrands of schisms and contentions i^
the Church, are there not that preach Christ upon enu^^ and strife, and not
purely, but of purpose to grieve? As I wish there were no such diversity among
them that preach Christ, so this diversity for me might have been buried i^
silence, if this scripture had not forced me to so much as (...) have spoke.

The use which I make hereof is, for the Minister and ^^eacher of the gospel,
who hence may take good notes, ^hereby he may know whether he be a good
minister and ^^eacher of the gospel. The first note whereby he may ^low this
is, if he speak the word; for it is not the wise^^me of man, or the
traditions of the Church, or the sophi^^ie of the Schools; but it is the word
of the everliving ^od that he must speak, if he be a good minister and
prea^^er of the gospel; as it is written, If any man speak, 1 Pet. 4.10
let him ^^eake as the word of God. Whereby is employed, that if he ^^eake not
so, he speaks not as he ought.

The second note whereby he may know this, is if he ^^eake the word franckely
and boldly, for it is not for the ^^ord his Ambassador to be babish, or
bleatish, or for fear (...) keep back any part of the Lord his counsel;
but as ^^hn unto Herod, so he must speak boldly unto the faces of ^^e
greatest, and fear not the face of any man, as it is writ^^n, Cry aloud and
spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, Is. 58.1.
^^d show my people their transgression, and to the house of Jacob ^^eir sin:
whereby he implies that this is most requisite (...) the Lord his Prophet and
Minister, that he boldly do the ^^ill of him that has sent him, whether he be
to pluck up, (...) to root out, or to destroy, and throw down, or what ^^se
soever.

The third note whereby he may know this is, if he speak ^^e word boldly, and
of a good mind. For it is not enough ^^at he speak the word, and speak it
boldly, but if he will ^pproue himself for a good Minister and Preacher of the
Gospel, he must also speak out of a good mind toward God to glorify him,
toward them that hear him to save ^^em, and toward the truth of Christ Jesus
to make it ^^owne in all places, as it is written, 1 Timothy 3.9.
that they should have ^he mystery of the faith in a pure conscience, or in a
sincere and good mind.

The fourth note whereby he may know this is, if he ^peake the word upon a
sincere and holy love. For this al^o is requisite, that he preach the word not
upon strife and contention to move brawles and stirs in the Church, b^^ upon
love toward him, who has commanded to feed (...) sheep and his lambs; upon
love toward the sheep (...) Christ, that they wander not as sheep without a
shepherd, and upon love toward the word, that it be not hid as vnde^ a
bushel, if he be a good Minister and Preacher of the word.

The last note whereby he may know this is, if he speak the woe d to the end
that God may be glorified, his Church builded, and his Gospel defended If I
say, he find these notes in himself, hereby he shall know that he is a good
Minister and Preacher of the word. Otherwise if he speak not the word, but the
devises of his own brain, or speak the word coldly and fearfully fearing
men's persons; or speak the word of a corrupt and naughty mind, or upon an
envious and contentious humor, or to grieve the godly, and hinder good things,
let him know that he is not a good Minister and Preacher of the word. Let every
man therefore that is set apart unto this work, examine himself of these
things, and so let him judge of himself, and where be he finds a fault in
himself, let him mend that which is amiss.

Now if any man shall here except and say; how then? If the case thus stand
among the Preachers of the word, that some of them preach Christ even through
envy and strife, not of a pure and good mind, but rather to vex the soul of
the righteous, then to build the Church of God; how shall we brook to hear
such, how shall we love or like such, how shall we take joy or comfort in such?
Whereunto, 1. I answer out of the rule of charity, that because we know not
who do so preach Christ, therefore we are to presume the best of them whom we
hear. The Lord only knows the hearts of men, and the purposes and intents of
their hearts. Who art thou then that iudgest? he stands or falls to his
own master. 2. I answer out of the Apostle i^ this place, that if Christ Jesus
be truly and soundly preached, we are to take great joy and comfort therein,
and willingly and gladly to hear them that deliver the truth sound^^ with what
mind soever, and to what end soever it is, that ^^y do speak the word That
is for them to look unto, (...) for us to joy in the other. Hence then I
observe that, that ^^^ister and preacher of the word is gladly and joyfully to
^^eard that preaches Christ, and the doctrine of the go^^^l soundly and
truly, with what mind soever, upon ^^^t motive soever, or to what end soever
he preach Christ (...) his gospel. To which purpose also, Mat. 23.3.
is that of our Saui^^, where he wills to hearken unto the Scribes and
Pha^^es, sitting in Moses seat: whereby he means, that the ^^ctrine which
the Scribes and Pharisees delivered faithful^^ ^ut of Moses, was gladly to be
received, howsoever in ^^^ir actions and lives, they were justly to be noted.
And (...) reason is, because the word is the Lords which they ^^^g, with what
mind soever they bring it, or how vicious ^^ad soever they be that bring it.
And tell, I pray you, ^^ch of you would much look at the mind or affection
^^he messenger toward you, or other qualities in him, ^^ch should bring you a
bill signed from the Prince, for ^^e pension or living for you? If he should
faithfully deli^^ the bill from the Prince unto you, would ye not ioyful^^
^eceaue it? How much more gladly then, and joyfully ^^ght ye to receive the
word of the Lord, wherein is your (...) when it is faithfully delivered from
the Prince of Hea^^^ and Earth, with whatsoever mind and affection the
^^nister thereof deliver it? If Christ crucified be preached, ^^e holy word of
life be truly and soundly delivered, this ^^uld so warm our hearts, and glad
our souls, that other ^^ngs whatsoever should not greatly trouble us.

This then, first, serves for the confutation of their er^^r, that cut
themselves from us, so that they neither will ^^re the word of us, nor
communicate in the Sacrament ^^^h us, because of some defects in our Church,
because of ^^e blemishes in us. For, I demand, is the word of truth ^^ely
taught with us, are the Sacraments rightly admini^^^d with us, do we labor
amongst our people with vncorrupt doctrine? Then surely, if there were the same
mi^^ in them that was in the Apostle, they would so rejoice (...) this, that
they would brook all things the better for th^^ If we be defiled in our minds,
or in our lives, every thin^ that we touch is likewise defiled. What? to you?
Nay, but to us. The word that we preach shall save you, and the Sacraments
which we administer shall profit you, ho^ fruitful or unfruitful soever
they be unto us.

Secondly, this serves for the reproof of them, that (...) cutting themselves
from us yet, cannot brook to hear the word of such of us, as they think have
gauled them, an^ spoken the word with an hard mind toward them. F^^ thus
commonly it is said, he is a good Preacher, he deliue^ good and sound doctrine,
he teaches the word faithfull^ but in his Sermons I see he says many things
upon a stomach against me, with a mind to girde me, and of p^^pose to note
and brand me before all the people, and the^^fore I cannot brook to hear him,
I take no comfort in t^^ hearing of him. But Paul was of another mind; for
thoug^ there were that preached Christ of a badde mind towar^ him, through
envy and strife touching him, and of pu^pose to add affliction to his bands,
yet that Christ was pre^ched, that gladed him, that rejoiced his heart. And
(...) would it each of us, if we were so singly and sincerely af^^cted toward
the gospel, as he was; whatsoever mind the Preacher carried toward us, yet
would we most gladly an^ joyfully hear the word at his mouth. It were indeed
b^^ of all, if they that speak the word, were as in doctrine, (...) in life
vncorrupt, and that they spoke of a good mind always, and upon love. But if
they preach Christ soundly and truly, we are not so much to be troubled what
their affection, or what their life be. If persecution should come, then we
would be glad if we might hear the word preached, and not curiously look
with what mind it were delivered. Seeing the word, and the worth and price
thereon is the same, now let us with the Apostle, rejoice and be gla^ if Christ
be preached, whether it be under a pretense o^ sincere^y.

LECTVRE XV.
PHILIP. I. Verse 19. For I know that this shall turn to my salvation through
your prayer, and by the help of the spirit of Jesus Christ.

20. As I fervently look for and hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed, but
that with all confidence as always, so now Christ shall be magnified in my
body, whether it be by life or by death.


NOw follows the latter part of the Apostles narration, wherein he tells the
Philippians, what success he hoped his bands, and the practices of those
brethren which imagined mischief against him, should have. And the sum of it
is, that he certainly ^oped and knew that his bands, and all the practices of
the ^icked against him should turn to his salvation, and to their good and
comfort by his coming again unto them; first then, the Apostle sets down
the proposition or main ^oynt for his hope hereafter, in these words, For I
know, etc. Secondly, he sets down the means whereby this shall ^ome to
pass, namely, through the prayer of the Philippians, by the help of the
spirit of Jesus Christ, and according ^o his own faith and hope, in these
words, Through your ^rayer, etc. And thirdly, he explicateth what salvation he
hops for, and assures himself of by these means; as first, the salvation
of his soul, in that by these means he hops, that in nothing he shall be
ashamed, but that with all confidence Christ shall be magnified in his body,
whether it be by life or by death, in these words, That in nothing, etc. And
secondly, the salvation, or deliverance of his body out of prison, to their
good and comfort, in verse. 25. and 26. For the meaning in general the^ of these
words, it is as if the Apostle had thus said, they by preaching Christ, suppose
to add affliction to my bands, that when Nero shall hear that so many preach
Christ, and that so much strife is among them; (...) as the chief man, and
maintainer of that way, may either be forced to desist from preaching of
Christ, and so bring a shame on my self, or else may be put to death. But I
know that this which they practice against me, shall through your prayer, and
by the help of Gods spirit, and according to my certain expectation and hope,
turn to my salvation, even to the salvation of my soul, because of my
confident constancy in the defense of the Gospel, whether it be by life, or
by death, and to the salvation and deliverance of my body out of prison, so
that neither shall I be put to shame for leaving the defense of the Gospel,
nor put to death for standing in the defense of the Gospel. This I take to be
the order and meaning of these words in general. Now it wi^^ be needful that
yet a little more perticularly we sift and examine the meaning of them, For I
know, etc.

These words, ye see, contain in them a reason of something that went before.
Before the Apostle had said, (...) Christ be preached, whether it be under a
pretense, or sincerely, I therein joy, yea, and will joy. Will joy? why? F^^ I
know that this, etc. I know, how? even by the revelation of the spirit, and by
warrant out of the word. What did he know. I know, says he, that this, this?
what? even that this chain wherewith I am bound, and this practice of some
brethren in the Lord, to bring me to shame, by leaving the defense o^ the
gospel, or to bring me to death if I stand in the defense of the Gospel. I
know, says he, that this shall turn to my salvation. Now, what is meant by
salvation, all do not agree. Some think, he means thereby his bodily
deliverance out of prison, as the word is often used for a bodily deliverance:
Act. 7.25.
as, where it is said of Moses, That he supposed that be brethren would have
understood, that God by his hand would have given the^ deliverance, (...), as
here it is said, and often elsewhere. Others think he means the salvation
of h^^ soul in the day of Christ, as the word is most of all used ^^t, I
think the Apostle may be understood to speak of ^^th, whether we consider
the opposition between (...), ^^d (...), or the matter of the Philippians
prayer. For, ^^at was the affliction which they supposed to add unto (...)
bands? Even this, that he, as the chief, by the threats (...) Nero, should be
forced to leave the defense of the gospel, ^his shame, and the hazard of his
soul; or, if he should ^^nd in the defense of the Gospel, should be
delivered vn^^ death. Now in opposition to this he says, that whatsoe^^r they
supposed he knows, that this, even this their ^^actise against his
constancy, or his life, should turn to his ^^luation, even the salvation of
his soul, through his con^^ncie in the defense of the Gospel, so that in
nothing he ^ould be ashamed, etc. And likewise, to the salvation and
^eliuerance of his body out of prison, quite otherwise then ^^ey had intended.
And again, the Philippians prayer no ^oubt was for both these, even that he
might abide con^^ant, so that in nothing he might be ashamed, and that he
^ight be delivered from the mouth of the Lion. And for ^hese causes, I
understand salvation in this place both of ^oule and body, in such sort as
has been said. I know that ^his shall turn to my salvation. How? by what
means? first, through their prayer, praying for his constancy, and
deli^arance. Secondly, By the help of the spirit of Jesus Christ, which should
be given unto his servant to help him every way against all practices. And
thirdly, Romans 8.19.
according to his fer^ent desire, for so the word is translated, or according
to his ^arnest expectation and hope, whereof he should surely not ^e deceived.
I know, says he, that by these means, this shall turn to my salvation. How,
to his salvation by these means? that is, in that thus it should come to
pass, that in nothing pertaining to the defense of the Gospel he should be
ashamed, but that with all confidence and liberty to speak in the defense
thereof, as always; so now, where he strengthens his hope by his
experience, Christ should be magnified and honored in his body, whether he
should live by preaching the gospel, or should die by sealing it with his
blood. Whereupon he signifies his own indifferency to either, life, or death,
and the conueniencie of his life in respect of them, and then he tells them how
this shall turn to his salvation, in the deliverance of his body out of
prison. And thus much for the opening of the meaning of these words in
particular, which as ye see is somewhat intricate and obscure. Now let us see
what notes we may gather hence for our farther use and instruction.

The first thing which I note is in the maine proposition, in that the Apostle
says, that he knows that this casting of him into prison, and this
practicing against him being in prison, shall turn to his salvation, not only
of his body, by deliverance out of prison; but of his soul because of his
constancy in the defense of the Gospel. Whence I observe, what fruit the
godly may assure themselves shall follow upon their sufferings and wrongs, even
their salvation in the day of Christ Jesus. For though the Apostle might know
this some other way then now the godly can, even by the revelation of the
spirit, as no doubt he did know of his deliverance out of prison, yet may the
godly thus far go with the Apostle, and say, I know that my sufferings and
wrongs shall turn to my salvation in the day of Christ Jesus. But how shall
they know this, or assure themselves of this? Even because the Holy Ghost has
said, Romans 8.28.
that all things work together for the best unto them that love God. In which
place, amongst many other arguments for the comfort of the godly against
afflictions and troubles, he uses this drawn from the providence of God, who
so wisely orders and disposes all things, that eue^ the crosses and
afflictions of his children work for the good of his children, even their best
good, their salvation. Be it then tribulation, persecution, famine, nakedness,
sword, imprisonment, or what cross soever that do press us, we know that all
things, even all crosses and calamities work together for the best unto them
that love God; so that if we love God, we need not shrink at all these, or
any such like, but certainly know that they shall turn to our salua^ion. More
plain it may be to this purpose will be thought that of the Apostle, where he
says, Romans 8.7. 2 Timothy 2.12.
that if we suffer with Christ we shall also be glorified with Christ: and
again, if we suffer with Christ, we shall also reign with Christ. Where it i^
to be noted, that the Apostle says, this is a sure word, this is a true
saying, that if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him. This then is
a promise of the Lord unto his children that love him, that if they suffer with
him for his sake, and his Gospels, they shall also reign with him, and be
glorified with him. So that either the godly must doubt of the Lord his
promises, all which are yea and amen, most certain and sure; or else the godly
may assure themselves that their sufferings and their wrongs shall turn to
their salvation in the day of Christ Jesus. For what better assurance then that
which is grounded on the Lords promise? Or what plainer promises can there be,
then these of the Apostle in these places, or rather of the Holy Ghost by the
Apostle? And therefore the Apostle says in another place, that ^t is a
righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them which trouble
others, and to them that are troubled, rest, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6.7.10.
when the Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven with his mighty Angels,
and shall come to be glorified in his Saints. It is a righteous thing with God:
righteous indeed for his justice sake, to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble others; and righteous for his promise sake, to recompense rest to them
that are troubled. Because then God is righteous, and keeps promise for ever,
therefore the godly may assure themselves, that their sufferings and wrongs
shall turn to their salvation in the day of Christ Jesus.

Here then is a notable consolation for all the godly in Christ Jesus against
all crosses, persecutions, and troubles whatsoever. As Christ was to suffer
many things, and so to enter into his kingdom; so the godly in Christ Jesus,
are through many tribulations to enter into the kingdom of God. But the
comfort is, that they shall all turn unto their salvation in the day of Christ
Jesus, when they shall be for ever in the presence of the throne of God, Apoc.
7.15.16
and serve him day and night in his Temple, when they shall hunger no more, nor
thirst any more, nor the sun shall light on them, nor any heat; when he that
sits on the throne shall dwell among them, 17
and the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall govern them, and
wipe all tears from their eyes, as the Lamb himself witnesses touching them
that have suffered tribulation, and washed their long robes in the blood of the
Lamb. 14.
The flesh I know will suggest and say, in the mean while our case is hard, no
man with us, every man's hand against us, we hunger and thirst, we are reviled
and persecuted, we are cast into prison, and made the talk and wonder of the
world, we are driven to many hard shifts, and put to shreude plunges. But what
of all this, when we know that these shall turn to our salvation? Be they
what they will, how great they will, how lasting they will, yet they are but
light, and but for a moment, in respect of that far most excellent and
eternal weight of glory which they cause unto us, as our Apostle witnesses,
where he says, that our light affliction which is but for a moment, 2 Cor.
4.17.
causes unto us a far most excellent, and an eternal weight of glory. Here
is the fruit and consequent of our affliction, glory; our affliction causes
unto us glory: and here is both the smallnes and the shortness of our
affliction, in comparison of that glory which shall be reueiled; be it never so
great and heavy, it is but small and light in comparison of that far most
excellent glory; be ^t never so long and lasting, it is but for a moment, in
comparison of that eternal weight of glory laid up for us in the heavens.
Howsoever therefore when we suffer any cross, persecution, or trouble, these
things for the time be grieuou^ and unpleasant unto us, as no chastizing for
the present seems to be joyous but grievous, Heb. 12.1.
yet seeing they bring the quiet fruit of righteousness unto them that are
thereby exercised, seeing they cause unto us a far most excellent, and an
eternal weight of glory; seeing they shall turn to our salvation, let us be
of good comfort, whatsoever in this kind does befall us. And let us, 1.
as the Apostle wills, run with patience the race that is set before us,
looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, 2.
who for the joy that was set before him endured the ^rosse, and despised the
shame, and is set at the right hand of the ^hrone of God. And whatsoever our
sufferings be, let it be with us as it was with the Apostle, that with him we
may say, as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, 2 Cor. 1.5.
so our consolation abounds through Christ.

Again, here is a good ground and warrant for us against that uncomfortable
doctrine of doubting of our salvation. For, if we may assure our selves that
our sufferings and our wrongs shall turn to our salvation, then may we assure
our selves of our salvation. Yea but it will be said, what an argument and
reason is this, Paul might, therefore we may? I say, it is a good one, because
upon the same ground that he might, we may. Yea, but he might know this by the
revelation of the spirit, which now we are not to look for. True: but he might
also know this out of the holy scripture, where the Lord has passed his
promise for this, and so we may: and on the same promise whereon he might build
his knowledge and assurance, on the same may we, and all the faithful children
of God build our knowledge and assurance, the promise being made unto all that
love God, and are in Christ Jesus. Many doubts indeed we have, and full of
distrustfulnesse we are oftentimes even the best of us: but yet ye see that
upon good ground of Gods promise, by the example of our Apostle, we may assure
our selves of our salvation, if as the Apostle did, so we do belong unto
Christ Jesus, at least if we suffer persecution, and trouble for his sake; for
so far this place will go, that if we suffer persecution and trouble for
Christ his sake, then we may assure our selves of our salvation, because we may
assure our selves, that our sufferings and troubles shall turn to our
salvation. Suffer not your selves therefore, to be deceived by those
uncomfortable teachers of doubting, which teach that not any man, to whom it is
not revealed by the spirit in particular, can be sure of his salvation, but
only in an uncertain hope. As this place does show, that such of the godly as
suffer persecution and trouble may assure themselves that their troubles shall
turn to their salvation, and so consequently may assure themselves of their
salvation; so many other places do evidently convince, that so many as are in
Christ Jesus, may and ought to assure themselves of their salvation. But I have
diverse times heretofore spoken of this point more at large. Let us now
therefore proceed.

If any man therefore here ask how and by what means it could come to pass,
that this the Apostles imprisonment, and this practicing against him in his
imprisonment could turn to his salvation, himself in the next words shows
the means to be, the Philippians prayer, the help of Gods spirit, and his
own hearty and earnest expectation and hope, I know etc. through your prayer
etc. Of which three, two, namely their prayer, and his hearty expectation and
hope were indeed means, but the third, namely the spirit of Jesus Christ was
the author, which by and according to these means turned his sufferings and
wrongs to his salvation. Howbeit in a general signification of means, we may
say, that he knew that by and according to these means this that he suffered,
and that they practiced against him should turn to his salvation. Whence I
observe how according to the promise, the sufferings and wrongs of Gods
children turn to their salvation, namely by the help of God^ spirit, through
the prayer of the Church, according to the^ faith and hope that are troubled
and afflicted. For through the prayer of the Church, the spirit of Jesus Christ
which dwelt in him in all fullness is given unto the godly to help them in
their troubles, and he according to their faith and hope in him, if they put
their trust in him, helps them, and turns their sufferings and their wrongs
unto the best, as it is written, Ps. 145.18.
The Lord is near to all that call upon him, to all that call upon him
faithfully; the Lord is near in the day of trouble to help, and to turn all
to the best: but unto whom is he thus near? Even unto them that call upon
him: what to all that call upon him? Nay to all that call upon him in faith and
in truth, believing in him, and put^ing their trust in him. And that unto such
he is near to ^uch purpose, even through the prayer of the Saints, and of ^he
Church, may appear by the story of Peter's imprisonment, who being in prison,
Act. 12.5.
and earnest prayer being made of the Church unto God for him, was delivered by
an Angel out of prison. Thus the Lord by his spirit works for his children
through the prayer of the Saints, and according to their faith and hope in him.
So that thus we are to resolve, all afflictions and troubles work for the
best, and turn unto salvation: but unto whom? and how? unto such as Paul, unto
the elect of God, the redeemed of Christ, the sanctified by Gods spirit, the
members of Christ his Church, by the help of the spirit, through the ministry
and prayers of the Church, and according to their faith and hope in Christ
Jesus.

First then here can be no hope, nor shall be any help unto such as either are
out of the Church, or are in the Church, but not of the Church. For albeit such
may have sufferings and wrongs, yet shall they not turn to their salvation.
Neither can they turn unto salvation, because they are not for Christ his sake
or the Gospels, to which kind only the promise is made. Nay unto such alients
from the covenant of promise, their troubles in this life are but the
beginnings of that fearful judgment which in flaming fire is reserved for
them against that great day.

Secondly, hence we learn that even unto the godly in Christ Jesus, their
sufferings and wrongs turn to their salvation, not for any their merits, or
through the virtue of their sufferings, but through the prayers of the Saints
etc. If we think upon merit, we may well think that our Apostle might as well
have stood upon merit, as the best that live could: nay in sufferings and
wrongs he was more abundant then the best that lives is, as that place to the
Corinthians shows. Yet he stands not upon them, but that his troubles turn
to his salvation, 2 Cor 11.
he imputes it to the prayer of the Church, and to the help of Gods spirit,
according to the faith and hope which God had wrought in him by his spirit, and
by his example teaches us so to do. Nay, he utterly disclaimeth all merit of
salvation by affliction, and by his example teaches us so to do, where he
says, I count that the afflictions of this present time are not worthy of the
glory which shall be showed unto us. Romans 8.18.
Whence it is plain, that because there is no proportion between the
sufferings of this life, and the reward of eternal glory, Therefore the
sufferings of this life, do not merit the reward of eternal glory. Whatsoever
therefore any merit-monger shall tell you, touching the merit of our
sufferings, trust it not. For it is not for our merits by them that they turn
to our salvation, but through your prayer, and by the help of the spirit of
Jesus Christ.

Now, to speak somewhat more in particular of the means. First, I note, that
the Apostle says, that he knows that this shall turn to his salvation,
through the Philippians prayer. Whence I observe the power and efficacy of the
prayers of the Church, powered out for the afflicted members of Christ Jesus,
which is, that through the prayers of the Church their troubles turn to their
salvation. The prayer of a righteous man, Iam. 5.16.
says James, avails much, if it be fervent. Here is a condition requisite in
prayer, if it be powerful with GOD, that it be fervent, and proceed from an
holy zeal: and being such, it avails much, and has great power with the
Lord, as to save the sick, to stay, or to bring rain, etc. as it is in that
place. Ioh. 15.7.
Now, if the prayer of one righteous man be of such power with the Lord, how
much more the prayer of the Church? 16.23.
Again, If ye abide in me, says our Savior, and my words abide in you, ask
what ye will, and it shall be done unto you. Mat. 21 22.
And again, Whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my name, he will give it
you. And again, Whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, if ye believe, ye shall
receive it. From all which places I note, that the prayers which shall have
power with God; first, they must be the prayers of the righteous, of them that
are engraffed into Christ, of them in whom the word of Christ dwells. And
secondly, they must be fer^ent, they must be made in Christ his name, they must
be ^ade in faith: and then we being such, and our prayers ^eing such,
whatsoever we shall ask, be it for our selves, or ^e it for others, we shall
receive it. And if the prayers of every such shall have such power with God,
much more shall ^he prayers of the Church have such power with God. And
therefore, ye see how often the Apostle requesteth the prai^rs of the Church
for him, as Ephesians. 6.18. Colossi. 4.3. ^. These. 3.1. And in his Epistle to
Philemon, there he pro^esseth as here he does, that he trusts through their
pray^rs to be given unto them by deliverance out of his bands, ^herein
commending himself to their prayers.

A good lesson for us, to stir us up unto public and private prayer, both
for our selves, and for others, seeing they are so powerful with God, as to
bring his blessings and graces both upon our selves, and upon others. And this
lesson is as needful as it is good, especially in this our day, wherein there
is such neglect both of public and private prayer unto the Lord. Private
prayer so rare, that if it be used by any, it is noted by many, and they
straight way censured, as thinking themselves more holy then other men. And
public prayer so little regarded by some, that very seldom they are present
with the congregation in public prayer. I cannot stand of it. Only, I say, he
that neglects the means unto grace, he shall never find grace.

Secondly, hence I observe a duty of the Church in public prayer, which is,
to pray for the afflicted members of Christ Jesus: for the Apostle in saying,
that he knew that this should turn to his salvation through their prayers,
therein stirs them to pray for him. And see the points wherein the Church is
to commend them in their prayers unto God. As first, that the Lord may turn
their affliction and trouble to their salvation. Secondly, that he will help
them by his holy spirit in every needful time of trouble. Thirdly, that they
may so stand in the defense of the truth of Christ Jesus, that in nothing they
may be ashamed. Fourthly, that the Lord will strentghen them with strong faith
and hope in him. Fifthly, that Christ may be glorified in their body, whether it
be by life, or death. Thus the Church should pray, and thus the afflicted
should desire the Church to pray.

LECTVRE XVI.
PHILIP. I. Verse 19. And by the help of the holy spirit of Jesus Christ.

20. As I fervently look for and hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed,
but that with all confidence, as always, so now Christ shall be magnified in
my body, whether it be by life, or by death.


ONe thing hence I observe, which is, that not for our prayers, or for the
prayers of the Church for us, but through our prayers, and through the prayers
of the Church for us, the Lord gives his grace unto us. And therefore the
Apostle says, Verse 22.
I know that this shall turn to my salvation, through your prayers, not for
your prayer. And to Philemon, I trust through your prayers I shall be given
unto you: Neither do we ever read that for our prayers, as for the merit and
worth of them, any grace is given unto any. Neither do I build this note upon
this ground as if because it is said through, therefore it cannot be for our
prasyers. For, I know that we are saved through Jesus Christ, and yet for Jesus
Christ, even for his merits sake, so that the phrase barely considered cannot
infer the note; but hereon it is builded, taht it is so said through, that
neither ever it is, nor can be said, that for our prayers any grace (...) given
unto us. For not for our prayers sake, not for the ^erit and worth of our
prayers does the Lord hear us, and ^rant us our requests, but for the promise
sake which of his ^wne free grace he has made unto our prayers. He has ^assed
his promise, Mat 21.22
that whatsoever we shall ask in prayer in ^is name, if we believe, we shall
receive it: and he has bidden ^s ask, and we shall receive, seek and we
shall find, Mat. 7.7.
knock and ^e shall be opened unto us. Because then he has promised grace
unto our prayers, he is entreated for grace through our prayers. Ask and have,
first ask and then have, and ^he better beggars the greater getters. For it is
not with the Lord as with us: we say a great beggar would have a good ^ay
saier, and unto whom but even now we have given, we love not that they should
by and by come again and beg of us. But I say it is not so with the Lord,
but of the greatest beggar he is most entreated, and the oftener we come a
begging to him, the more welcome we are unto him: for he loves to be entreated,
and being entreated he promises to give, and so through our prayers he gives,
even for his promise sake, but not for our prayers sake; for they when they are
best are so full of imperfections, that they merit nothing but to be rejected.
Seldom but we are troubled with wandering by-thoughts, often we pray for
things, and against things without submitting of our wills unto the Lords will;
often we pray not in faith toward God; often not in love toward our brethren,
often coldly, often hypocritically, and when not so, but that our prayers might
justly be turned into sin unto us? Causes therefore they are not, for which
the Lord bestows any graces upon us, but means only through which we
receive graces needful for us for the promise sake made in Christ Jesus.

Far be it therefore from us to stand upon the merit of our prayers, as if
for our prayers sake we deserved any grace to be bestowed upon us. Let us as we
ought power out fervent prayers unto the Lord in faith, and in Christ his name,
and assure we our selves we shall be heard. But withal let us know that it is
for his promise sake made unto our prayers, and for his Christ his sake which
offers up our prayers whatsoever be our state and place let us not slack
this service, neither let us presume upon any merit by this service If we lift
up pure hands unto the Lord in his Temple, in our houses, or in our chambers he
will hear us, and though not for our prayers, yet through our prayers he will
be entreated of us. Let it be enough for us that he will hear us, and let this
most of all glad us that for his Christ his sake, and for his promise sake he
will hear us. And let this suffice to be spoken touching the first means in
particular, that through our prayers, and the prayers of the Church for us, all
things work together for the best, unto so many of us a^ love God, and are in
Christ Jesus.

The next means whereof the Apostle speaks, is the help of the spirit of
Christ Jesus, whereby he says, he knew that this should turn unto his
salvation: I know etc. Where the spirit is called the spirit of Jesus Christ,
as because of his proceeding from the Son, so because of his dwelling in him
in all fullnes, as also because Christ sends him into our hearts, and by him
works his will in us. And thus also, and for these causes I take it, he is
called in the Epistle to the Romans, Romans 8.9.
and the spirit of the Son in the Epistle to the Galathians. But to omit many
things which might here be noted upon this occasion, Gal. 4.6.
that the spirit is called the spirit of Christ Jesus, because they are not
things specially here intended by the spirit, the principal thing to be noted
is, that the Apostle says, that he knew that this which he suffered by his
bands, and by the practices of the wicked should turn to his salvation, by the
help of Gods spirit, by whom the Father and the Son work in us, and for us.
Whence I observe, the true cause indeed whereby the sufferings and the wrongs
of Gods children turn to their salvation, and that is, by the help of the
spirit of Jesus Christ. The Lord by his spirit helps them, and turns their
heaviness into joy, and their sufferings into the quiet fruit of righteousness
in the heavenly places. Thou Lord, says the Prophet, have brought my soul out
of the grave, Psalm 30.3.11.
thou have kept my life from ^^em that go down to the pit: thou have turned
my heaviness ^^to joy, and thou have loosed my sackcloth, and girded me with
^^adnes. Where the Prophet shows, that it is the Lord that helps us and
delivers us when troubles compass (...) about; that it is the Lord that
lifts us up from the gates ^f death, and puts an end unto all our troubles;
that it (...) the Lord that wipeth all tears from our eyes, and turns ^ur
heaviness into joy. And so Peter, Act. 12.17.
being delivered out ^f prison through the prayers of the Church, professed
that ^he Lord had brought him out of prison. Through their ^raiers he was
delivered, but it was the Lord that delivered ^im; their prayers were the
means, but the Lord was the ^uthor of his deliverance. Again, Behold, says
our bles^ed Savior, it shall come to pass, Apoc. 2.10.
that the devil shall cast some ^f you into prison that ye may be tried, and
ye shall have tribu^ation ten days; be thou faithful unto the death, and I
will give ^hee the crown of life. Which words were spoken imme^iatly to the
Church of Smyrna, but so that they serve also ^or our use. Wherein, the godly
are both warned of perse^ution and affliction which they are to look for in
this ^ife, and persuaded likewise by sundry motives not to ^eare them. Behold
it shall come to pass, that some of you shall be cast into prison: here is the
advertisement of such ^fflictions as they are to suffer. But the exhortation
is, fear ^one of those things which ye shall suffer. And the motives to
persuade us not to fear them, follow. As first, who is the contriuer of all
the persecutions and troubles which we suffer? Even the devil, the Devil
shall cast you into prison. He always kindles the fires of persecutions
against the Church; as also it is said in another place, Apoc. 12.15
that he casts out of his mouth water after the woman, like unto a flood. He
blows the bellows unto all the practices of the wicked. Secondly, what is the
end wherefore we suffer affliction and trouble? not for any harm unto us, but
that we may be tried, That the trial of our faith being much more precious
then gold that perishes, though it be tried with fire, may be found to our
praise, 1 Pet. 1.7.
and honor, and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ, as the Apostle Peter
speaks. Thirdly, what is the durance of our afflictions? We shall have
tribulation ten days, a while, a short while, an evening does heaviness last,
and then joy comes in the morning: 2 Cor. 4.17.
as also the Apostle says, that our afflictions are but light, and but for a
moment in comparison of that far most excellent, and eternal weight of glory
which shall be showed unto us. Lastly, what is the reward of our afflictions?
The reward which our blessed Savior in mercy promises is this, that he will
give unto us the crown^ of life. Iam. 1.12.
As also James says, Blessed is the man that endures tentation: for when he
is tried, he shail ^eceaue the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to
all that love him. Whatsoever then our afflictions be, they turn ye see to our
salvation, by the help of the Lord. Sometimes in the day of trouble he
breaks the cords of the wicked, and delivers us: and sometimes he
suffers them that hate us, to have their wills over us, but suffers us not
to be tempted above that we able, but gives the issue with tentation, that
we may be able to bear it. And always so he provides, that in the end he
turns our troubles to our salvation. He does it, even he alone does it, and
none but he can do it.

A point wherein we will all of us seem very loath, but to be thoroughly
persuaded. For, who is he that will not seem to give full assent unto that
truth which has been delivered, that it is the Lord that helps us in our
troubles, and that he turns them to our best? But tell me, I pray you, whence
is it that in the day of trouble we faint and droope, and hang down the head?
Whence is it that when we are persecuted, reviled, slandered, oppressed,
imprisoned, and hated of men, we sink under the burden, and are ready to fall
away from the hope of our good profession? Whence is it, that in the days of
poverty, sickness, or other adversity, we are oppressed with heaviness,
and hardly will be comforted? Is it not for that we have not yet learned this
lesson, that all this shall turn to our salvation by the help of God? Yes
surely, the taking out of this lesson would rid us of all such passions, when
any troubles do assault us. ^^r how could the things cast us down, which we
know ^ould turn to our salvation by the help of God? Let us ^^w learn it,
and let it teach us to fear none of those ^^ngs which we do, or shall suffer,
but seeing by his help (...) shall turn to our salvation, let us abide
faithful unto the ^^th.

Again, let this teach us in the day of our trouble, to lift up ^^r eyes unto
the Lord. Let others say, as it is in the Pro^^et, I will lift up mine eyes
unto the hills, Psalm. 121.1.
from whence comes (...) help. That is, let others look for help from the
arm (...) flesh; but let us say with the Prophet, Our help stands (...) the
name of the Lord, which has made both Heaven and ^^rth. Let others fly unto
other means, and never look ^^to the Lord when troubles do assault them; but
let us ^^vse other means, that principally we look unto the Lord, ^^d put our
whole trust in him: For by his help, whatso^^er is said or done against us,
shall turn to our salvation. ^^d let this be spoken touching the second means
in par^^ular, that by the help of God the sufferings of the godly ^^ll turn
to their salvation.

The next means whereof the Apostle speaks, is the ^eanes according to which
the Apostle says: this by the ^^lpe of God, and through the Philippians,
should turn to (...) salvation, and that is according to his sure hope, As I
^artily look for, etc. Where, to signify the strongnes and ^^enesse of his
hope, he uses two words, (...).
both expressing ^^us much, that his hope was such, that he expected the ^^e
thing he hoped for, as they that earnestly looking for a ^^ing, stretch out the
head to look for it. Whence I might ^^serue what a hope the hope of the
faithful is, namely not ^^doubtfull and uncertain hope, but a strong and sure
hope, ^^ereby they do as certainly assure themselves of the thing ^^ey hope
for; as they that with stretched necks look for ^^e thing that is by and by
to follow. But the observation ^^ence principally to be gathered, whereinto
that will follow, this, that according to our hope and faith in him, so does
the Lord (through the prayers of the Saints) turn (...) sufferings and our
wrongs to our salvation: so that by t^^ help of God, and through the prayers
of the Saints, (...) sufferings turn to our salvation; but so that we
certain^^^ hope that by the help of God, through the prayers of t^^ Saints,
our sufferings shall turn to our salvation. I^ (...) therefore it is required,
that we certainly hope and beli^^^ in the promises of the Lord, if the
promises of the Lord (...) made good unto us. When two blind men came unto o^^
blessed Savior, and prayed him that they might recea^^ their sight, Mat. 9.28.
he said unto them, Believe ye that I (...) able to d^ this? 29
and they said, yea, Lord. Then touched he their eyes s^^ing, according to your
faith be it unto you. As here faith wa^ required in these blind men, that
they might receive their sight; so in us all hope is also required, that we
be p^rtakers of the Lord his promises. Has the Lord promised that all crosses
and calamities shall work together for the best unto those that love him? And
do we hope that the Lord will make good this his promise unto us? According
to our hope so shall it be unto us. If we doubt not of the Lord his promises,
but hope certainly in him that has p^^mised, then may every one of us in all
our troubles, sa^ with the Apostle, I know that this shall turn to my
salvation according to my certain hope. But, if we doubt and distru^^ the
Lord, and say in our hearts, how can it be? I can^^ conceive it, doubtless
the Lord shall not help us, the pra^ers of the Saints shall not prevail for
us, nor shall our sufferings turn to our salvation. And therefore we read,
th^^ the faithful had always their hope so strong that they bu^^ded even
their prayers thereon; as David, where he says Let mine uprightness and
equity preserve me, Ps. 25.20.
for my hope i^ (...) thee. As if he should have said, according to my hope,
th^^ thou will preserve the just and upright man, so O Lord p^^serue me. And so
very often in the Psalms, the Proph^^ desires performance of the Lord his
mercies, according to his hope in him; and therein plainly shows, that o^^
hope must be surely fixed in the Lord, if we will be par^^kers of his promises.

Here then again we are armed against that vncomfor^^ble doctrine of doubting
of our salvation. For we are ^^rtainely to hope, that according to the promise
of the ^oly Ghost our sufferings and wrongs shall turn to our ^^luation, by
the help of God through the prayers of the ^^ints? And are we to know that
according to our hope ^^e promise of the Lord touching this thing shall be made
^^od unto us? So here we are taught. How then are we to ^oubt of our salvation,
and not otherwise to know it then ^^certainely? Hope say they we may to be
saved, but cer^^inely assure our selves of our salvation we cannot. Is then
^ope any prejudice unto certainty? Does not the Apostle ^^y, that hope is as an
ancre of the soul both sure and steadfast, Heb. 6.19.
^hereby we may lay so sure hold on the promises of God (...) Christ Jesus,
that we may certainly assure our selves of ^ur salvation? Again, does not the
Apostle say, Romans 5.4.
that hope ^aketh not ashamed,.i. deceives not him that hops, be^^use as the
child of God hops so he finds? And ^oth not our Apostle here in some sort
describe hope, to be ^uen a certain and earnest expectation of that we hope
for according whereunto it is certainly done unto us? And ^otwithstanding all
this may we hope, but not be sure to ^e saved? Indeed if our hope were only
in uncertain as ^heirs is, then were we to doubt as they do. But our hope ^s
certain, being grounded on Gods promises, and therefore ^e so hope that we are
sure to be saved. Thus then I reason from this point of hope, we may certainly
hope to be sa^ed, therefore we may assure our selves of our salvation.

Again, this may teach us not to be secure upon the Lord ^is promises. He
promises, and he performs. What ^hen? May we sit us down and say, as he
has promised ^o shall it be done, howsoever matters stand with us. Nay
beloved, let us not deceive our selves. In our selves there must be such graces
as are required of us, or else the promises do not belong unto us, nor shall
ever do us any good: yea and either he must give those graces which are
required of us, or else we can never have them. As in this place, the promise
is that our affliction, if we belong unto Christ, shall turn to our salvation.
But how? according to our fai^^ and hope. Either these graces must be in us, or
else th^^ promise belongs not to us. And how shall we have th^^ graces,
unless he which requires them give them? S^ therefore in all things let us
build upon the Lord his promises, that we look unto the things required of us
to be partakers of the promises. And look what means he has ordained, for
the working of those things in us by his holy spirit, let us in all fear and
reverence use those means, and pray unto the Lord to sanctify them.

Now to go forward, what was it that the Apostle so heartily looked for and
hoped? That is set down 1. negatiuely. 2. affirmatively. 1. that in nothing
he should be ashamed. 2. that with all confidence etc. In which points
stands one part of the salvation, whereunto he knew his sufferings should
turn by and according to those means already mentioned. For how should his
sufferings turn to his salvation by those means? Thus: he hoped that th^^ it
should come to pass, that in nothing perteining to the defense of the Gospel
he should be ashamed, but that with all confidence etc.

The first thing which here I note is, that the Apostle says, that he hops
that in nothing he shall be ashamed,.i. that shame shall never befall him for
leaving the defense of the Gospel. Whence I observe, both that it is a shame
to leave the defense of the Gospel, and that a godly care in this behalf is
needful in every Christian, that this shame may never befall him. Which care,
and regard of which shame how little it is reckoned of in these our days, does
too too much appear by the number of shameless Apostataes and back sliders,
which harkning unto the serpent eat of the forbidden fruit; which opening their
ears to that enchanting whore, drink themselves drunk with the cup of her
fornications and forsake the truth of Christ Jesus. But let us hearken to the
Apostle, Heb. 10.23.
and let us hold fast the profession of our hope. Do we hope in Jesus Christ?
Do we hope that in nothing touching the profession of the truth of Christ
jesus we shall be ashamed? Let us hold fast this hope, and ^et us pray, that
this hope may continually be confirmed in ^s, and that according to this hope
we may stand fast until ^he day of Christ Jesus.

The second thing which I note is, that the Apostle says, that he hops,
that with all confidence and liberty to ^peake in the defense of the Gospel,
Christ shall be magni^ied and honored in his body, whether it be by life, that
he ^iue and preach the Gospel; or by death, that he be put to ^eath, and
seal the Gospel with his blood. Whence I ob^erue another godly care needful
in every Christian, which ^s that God may be glorified in him whether he live,
or die. Glorify God, says the Apostle, in your body, and in your spirit, 1
Cor. 6.20.
^or they are Gods. Where the Apostle by way of exhorta^ion commends this
duty unto every one of us, that we glorify God both in our bodies, and in our
spirits, by con^orming our whole man in all obedience unto his will. And why?
for both our bodies and our spirits they are Gods, and ^hey are bought for a
price by him that has died for both, that we should not henceforth in either
live unto our selves, but in both unto his glory, which died for us, and ^ose
again.

And let this be enough to warn us to beware of dishonoring God in our bodies,
or in our souls, either by shrink^ng from a good profession, or by giving our
members weapons of unrighteousness, unto any kind of sin to serve ^t in the
lusts thereof. Neither let us be so besotted, as to ^hinke that we are not as
well to be sanctified in our bodies, ^s in our souls; or that God is not as
well to be glorified in our bodies, as in our souls, but let us know that we
are to be sanctified throughout, in our spirit, and soul, and body: and that
God is to be glorified in our whole spirit, and soul, and body. Let this
therefore be our care, that God at all be not dishonored by us, but that in our
whole man he may be honored.

The last thing which here I note is, how the Apostle was confirmed and
strengthened in these his hopes, and that was by his own experience: for he
hoped that as always, (...) now. Whence I observe how the hope of a Christian
is nourished and increased. It is begun and grounded upon Gods promises made in
Christ Jesus, but it is strengthened and increased, by observation of the Lord
his goodness toward us in our own experience. So our Apostle also witnesses,
Romans 5.4.
where he says, that tribulation brings forth patience, and patience
experience, and experience hope,.i. experience of the Lord his help in
troubles, confirms and strengthens our hope in the Lord. Ye know the saying
of Da^id: The Lord (said he) that delivered me out of the paw^ of the Lion, 1 Samuel 17.37.
and out of the paw of the Bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this
Philistim. This should teach us to observe the mercies of the Lord toward us,
and not to suffer them to slip out of our mind; and thus to reason with our
selves, as always the Lord has been good to us, so now he will.

LECTVRE XVII.
Verse 21. For Christ is to me both in life and in death advantage.
NOw then, that the Apostle had signified his hope that Christ should be
magnified in his body, and had added, whether it were by life or by death;
implying that it was all one to him, so that Christ were magnified in his body,
whether it were by life or by death, he yields a reason thereof saying, For
Christ is to me etc. as if he should have said, I heartily look for and hope
that Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by life, or by death,
and so that Christ be magnified in my body, whether it be by life, or by death,
all is one to ^^e, for Christ is to me etc..i. whether I live, or die, Christ
i^ ^o me advantage. If I live, and Christ be magnified in my ^ody by preaching
the Gospel, and walking in his ways, ^^erein I count I have great gain and
advantage; and if I ^ie now in my bands, and Christ be magnified in my body ^y
my constancy in the defense of the gospel, and in suffe^ing for the gospels
sake, herein also I count I have great ^aine and advantage; so that if Christ
be magnified in my ^odie, it is all one to me whether it be by life, or by
death; because which so ever fall, Christ and his glory is the thing which I
count my vantage and gain. His glory by me is ^y glory, the increase of his
kingdom by me is the crown ^f my rejoicing; the honor of his name by me,
whether it ^e by my life, or by my death is to me in mine account a ^reat
gain. Thus then I resolve the Apostles reason: Christ and his glory is to me
of that reckoning and regard, that whether he be glorified in my life, or in my
death, I ^ount it a great gain unto me; therefore it is all one to ^e whether
he be glorified in my body by my life, or by ^y death. This sense and meaning
of these words I fol^ow, both because being a reason of the former words, i^
^hus best concludes them in my judgment; as also because the words themselves
in the original may very well ^arie this meaning, if we understand an ellipsis
of the word (...), which is not unusual.

Neither is this meaning of these word vnso^ting with ^he words that follow.
For having said, that Christ and his glory was unto him, and in his account,
as well in death as in ^ife, even both in death and in life an advantage and
gain; upon that occasion by a little digression, he first moves the ^oubt
whether were better for him to choose, life or death, ^f he should choose the
one, verse. 22. and secondly answe^eth that he knows not what to choose, but in
this choice ^s in a strait betwixt two: and thirdly sets down the reasons
why the choice is so hard: as 1. in respect of himself it were better for him
to choose death, verse. 23. and 2. in respect of them it were better that he
chose life, verse. 14. Here is then the strait, whether for his own greater
good he were now to choose death, or for their greater good h^ were to choose
longer life. This I take to be the order and meaning of these words generally,
thus far. Now let v^ see what observations we may gather hence for our
farthe^ use and instruction.

The first thing then which here I note is, the reason wherefore the Apostle
was so indifferent either unto life or death, which so ever God might be
glorified by; and it was because whether he lived or died, if by either death
or life he might gain glory unto Christ, unto him did accrue vantage enough.
Whence I observe, how a Christian becomes indifferent unto either life, or
death, and that is thus if Christ be unto him both in life and in death
advantage, if he seek no other gain but this that Christ may be glorified in
his body, then he is indifferent unto whatsoever it is whereby Christ may be
glorified, be it life, or death. This was it that made those three children
mentioned in Daniel so indifferent either unto life or death. For when
Nebuchadnezzar had called them, and thundered out cruel threatenings against
them, if they should not worship the golden image that he had set up, Dan.
3.16.17.18.
they said unto him, O Nebuchadnezzar we are not careful to answer thee in
this matter. Behold our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the hot
fiery furnace, etc. In which their answer they plainly show, that it was not
life or death that they stood upon, but it was the glory of their God. If God
should deliver them from death to his farther glory by their life, they were
willing to live; and again, if he should deliver them up unto death to his
further glory by their death, they were also willing to die. Life and death was
indifferent to them by whether soever God would be glorified in them, because
the glory of God was all that they sought in life, or in death. The same is to
be said of all those godly Martyrs that are dead in the Lord for the testimony
of a good conscience, and for the defense of the truth of Christ Jesus to the
shedding of their blood. They were willing no doubt to have lived, and they ^re
willing also to die, even very indifferent unto either (...) or death. And how
so that they were indifferent unto ^^her? Because if God were glorified in
them, whether it ^^re by life, or by death that was comfort enough, joy ^^ough;
and gain enough unto them. If they might gain ^rie unto God thereby, came
death, or came life, either ^^s welcome unto them. And in so many of gods
children, ^here is this indifferency unto either, life or death, thus ^commeth
to pass because of the advantage which they ^^ckon upon by Gods glory,
because as either life or death ^akes for Gods glory: so they embrace either;
life, if ther^^ God may be more glorified; and death, if thereby God ^ay be
more glorified.

Let this then teach us, even so many of us as feel not in ^^r selves this
indifferency unto either, life or death; to ^^oke into the cause why it is
that we are not indifferent vn^^ either. And surely, if we be not too partially
affected to^ards our selves, we shall find that it is, because this is the
^ast reckoning with us, that Christ be glorified in our bo^^es. The pleasures
and sorrows of life, and the terrors of ^eath, these be the things that so
affect us, that we are not ^^different unto either, but so heart set on the
one, that we ^^nnot brook to hear of the other. If, as Job speaks, Job
21.8.9.10.
^ur seed be stablished in our sight with us, and our generation ^^fore our
eyes: if our houses be peaceable without fear, and the ^^od of God be not
upon us, if our bullockes gender and fail not, and our Cow calue, and cast
not her calfe. If we spend our ^ayes in wealth, and have all things at our
desire, then do ^e so dote upon these things, that we say with the fool in
^he Gospel, Soul, Luc. 12.19.
thou have much goods laid up in store for ^any years, live at ease, eat,
drink, and take thy pastime. And ^uch a reckoning we make upon the honors, and
pleasures, and commodities of this life, that we could be content to live with
them ever, but cannot abide to depart from them. Again, ^f the rod of the Lord
be upon us, and his countenance ^eeme to be turned away from us, if we be
troubled on every side with fightings without, and terrors within, if we b^
crossed in our substance and goods, in our wife and chi^dren, or in our own
bodies, if we be in trouble, sorro^ need, sickness or other adversity; if
we be tried by mockings and scornings, by bonds and imprisonment; then o^^ the
other side we are so daunted with those things, that w^^ are weary of our
lives, and with Job in his extremity, we c^^ out, Job 3.11.12
and say, Why dyed I not in the birth, or why dyed I not wh^^ I came out of the
womb? 6.9.7.15.
Why did the knees prevent me, (...) why did I suck the breast? O that God
would destroy me, the he would let his hand go and cut me off: my soul
chooses rath^^ to be strangled, and to dye, then to be in my bones. Yea, and
many times like unto Achitophell and Judas, we become our own butchers. One
sort can hear of nothing but life, and another sort wish nothing but death;
very few of us that are indifferently affected to either life, or death, and
all because we mind earthly things. The preferments, and pleasures, and
commodities of this life, they are our advantage and gain. If our desires be
filled with them, then we are nothing indifferent unto death, but all our
delight is set o^^ life. But if we lack them, and instead thereof have our
drink mingled with weeping, then are we nothing indifferent unto life, but all
our desire is of death, and would God we were dead, would God we were dead. As
for the glory of God, it never comes into our thoughts, neither do we ever
make account of life, or of death, as they do make for the glory of the Lord;
for if we did, then would we be indifferent unto either, as either should make
for the glory of the Lord, and not run upon the one as carnal respects, or
terrors of death should move us.

Well, now that we know these things, let us think or these things. Let us
not set our hearts on life for the love of any earthly thing whatsoever,
neither let us wish death for any thing of this life which we want, or for any
cross of this life which we suffer; but let us be indifferent unto either, as
either may make for the glory of Christ Jesus. Let the glory of Christ Jesus
be all the vantage and gain that we make reckoning upon either in life, or in
death, and let it be ^^^h a vantage and gain unto us if he be glorified in us,
^^^t we make no reckoning of it whether it be by our life, ^^y our death, so
that he be glorified in us. Let his glory ^our glory, his kingdom our
kingdom, and so let life ^eath be welcome unto us; as thereby glory is gained
vn^^ Christ Jesus. Let us set this down with our selves to glo^^e Christ Jesus
in our mortal bodies, and let us not care ^^ether it be by life, or by death,
and that upon this recko^^^g, that Christ is unto us in life and death
advantage.

Now to descend unto the particulars, the second thing ^^ich here I note is
that the Apostle says, that Christ is unto (...) in life advantage. Whereby he
means, that if he live, ^^d through life glorify God in his body by
preaching the ^^spell of Christ Jesus, and walking in his ways; even this
^^rifying of Christ in his body by his life is unto him ad^^ntage, even such
an advantage as that this only he coun^^^ his life if he glorify God in this
life. Whence I observe, ^^at unto a Christian should be the greatest gain of
his (...) which he should seek, and whereunto he should bend ^^^selfe in his
whole life, and that is the glory of Christ Ie^^^ by a faithful walking in the
ways of his calling; and by ^^uiding for things honest before the Lord, and
before all ^^^n. The glorifying of Christ in his body by living to his ^^^ry,
should seem such a gain unto him, as that all other ^^^ngs in his life should
seem but loss unto him. Where^^on it is that the Prophets so often remember
us that we ^^re created, formed, and made for the Lord his glory; Esaias 43.7
^^^t our blessed Savior exhorts us saying, Mat. 5.16.
Let your light (...) shine before men that they may see your good works, and
glorify ^^r father which is in heaven: and that our holy Apostle like^^se
exhorts us saying, Whether ye eat, or drink, 1 Cor. 10.31
or what^^uer ye do, do all to the glory of God. Which places show ^^ainely
thus much, that the thing which we are to seek, ^^d whereunto we are to bend
our selves in our whole life, (...) ^he glory of God, even that he may be
glorified in our ^ortall bodies. And the reasons are clear: for first the end
wherefore we were created and made was, as even now we heard out of the
Prophet, the glory of God; that he might show his glory in us, and that we
again might glorify him in the land of the living. Secondly, we are not our
own, but we are bought for a price, and therefore as the Apostle makes the
argument, 1 Cor. 6.20.
we must glorify God, even him whose we are in our bodies, and in our spirits:
henceforth we must not live unto our selves, but unto him and his glory, That
dyed for our sins, and rose again for our justification. Gods glory, that
must be the bent of our whole life, and the vantage that we must seek while
we are at home in the body.

Now, if ye ask how we are to glorify God in our life, I answer, by walking
faithfully in the ways of our calling, whatsoever our calling be, by keeping
our vessels holy unto the Lord, and pure from all filthiness of corruption: by
conforming our wills in all obedience unto his will, and by living soberly, and
righteously, and godly in this present world. All which our Apostle
comprehends in a conversation, 1 Pet. 2.12.
which becomes the gospel of Christ. And Peter, in an honest conversation,
where he says, Have your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that they
which speak evil of you, as of evil doers, may by your good works (which
they shall see) glorify God in the day of visitation. That God may be
glorified by us, this is a point which we must look unto. And how may this be?
by having our conversation honest, that is, by so walking and living, as before
was mentioned.

This then should teach us, so to look unto our ways in our whole life, that
in nothing the Lord be dishonored by us. For, if the glory of God should be
unto us the greatest gain of our life, while we live herein the body, then
should we in all things seek it, and by no means do any thing which may be
to the impairing of it. But, do we in our whole life seek the glory of our
God, as our greatest gain? Do we in nothing dishonor our God throughout our
whole life? If every man should but look how faithfully he walks in the
ways of his calling, the minister, the Lawyer, the Physician, the Soldier,
the Tradesman, the Merchant, the Countrie-man, how careful each of them in
their calling are, that God may be glorified by them; if every man shall but
look how watchful he is over his own body, that it be not defiled with the
corruptions which are in the world through lust, what a conscience he makes of
all his ways, that they be framed in all obedience unto Gods will, and how
desirous he is to lead a sober, a righteous, and a godly life in this present
world; if, I say, every man shall but look into himself, and search, and see
how the case stands with him touching each of these things; each man shall
find in himself so many things whereby God is dishonored, as that I need
not to press them to the shame of all that hear them. Beloved, the thing is
too lamentable, and too true, if we will confess a truth, that whom in our
whole life by all means we should glorify, against him our whole life is a
continual rebellion. For what sin is it, whereof if we duly examine our
selves, we may not find our selves guilty? Look unto the first table. Do we
not trust unto uncertain riches, and give much honor to others, which is due
unto God alone, and so make other Gods unto our selves besides him? Do not
many in the worship of God use superstitious rites, and will-worships, which
God never commanded, and so sin against the second Commandment? Do we not
often abuse the name of God in periuries, in blasphemous oaths, in speaking of
him lightly and irreverently, and so take his name in vain? Do we not
profane the holy Sabbath many of us with bodily labor on that day, many with
riotous banqueting on that day: many with unlawful gaming on that day, and
most of us with neglect of such holy duties as on that day were to be
performed? Look also unto the second Table. Do we not neglect, nay, contemn
our Superiors, and sometimes even make rebellion against them? Do we not
often murder the innocent without a cause, if not in his life, yet in his
credit and name, and in a cruel spite against him? Do we not often steal
from our brethen, by false weights and measures, by selling naughty wares, by
bribes and extortion, by symonie and usury, by deceitful and wrongful
dealing? Do we not often lie one unto another, and so smother the truth that
it can never come to light? Do we not abound with sinful lusts, inordinate
affections, ungodly desires, and unruly motions? True it is which the Prophet
says, that by lying, Hos. 4.2.
and swearing, and killing, and stealing, and whoring we break out, and blood
touches blood. Shall I say all in a word, Christ is not to us in life
advantage, but rather Christ is unto us in life a loss. His glory we count
not our glory, but rather we count all the time lost that is not spent in the
things which tend nothing to his glory. I wish my words might justly be
reproved. Beloved, it is enough that we have spent the time past of our life in
ungodliness and unrighteousness: it is enough that hitherto we have not glorified
God in our mortal bodies, as we ought. Let us hereafter make straight steps
unto the Lord, and let us live unto his glory, in whose glory is our life.
Let us so make account that we live, if we live to his glory; and whatsoever
others count their gain, let us count his glory our greatest gain.

The third thing which here I note is, that the Apostle says, that Christ is
unto him in death advantage. Whereby he means, that if he dye, and by his
constancy in his death bring glory unto Christ, this glorifying of Christ by
his death, is unto him in his death an advantage. Whence I observe, what unto a
Christian should be the thing whereof he should make reckoning in his death, and
that is, that God be glorified by his death; and then if he dye (so that in his
death God have his glory) welcome death whenever, and whatsoever, violent,
or natural. What says our blessed Savior, Luc. 22.50.
I must, says he, be baptized with a baptism, and how am I grieved till it be
ended? In which words he showed his great and earnest desire to die for us,
that the Gospel might the sooner be preached throughout the world. For, having
before signified that his coming was to preach the gospel, which should
kindle a fire throughout the world, and this fire was already kindled by the
preaching of the gospel, he signified likewise that before his passion the
gospel should not be published throughout the world. And therefore, that he
desired to die was, that the Gospel might the sooner be preached throughout
the world. Here then, ye see, what it was that the son of God reckoned upon
his death, namely, the glory of God by the publishing of the gospel
throughout the world. Phil. 2.17.
And because he longed after this, he longed after death. What also says our
holy Apostle, Though, says he, I be offered up upon the sacrifice and service
of your faith, I am glad, and rejoice with you all. Where ye see the Apostle
says, that he would rejoice in death as a vantage unto him, if by his death
God might have this glory, that their faith thereby might be confirmed. The
thing then that he made reckoning of in his death was, that God might be
glorified thereby, and so he would rejoice in death. Semblably, we in death
should principally look at this, that our death be to the glory of the Lord,
that our death be as the death of his Saints, Ps. 116.13.
that our death be in the Lord, and then we may rejoice and be glad in it. For
as the Prophet says, Apoc. 14.13
Right dear and precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of the Saints.
And as our Savior says, Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord.

Hence then we may learn, why it is that we are many of us so unwilling to
dye. If persecution arise because of the word, and fire and faggot be the
portion for us to drink, it is no need to bid us to fly but we run, and we
turn, and turn, and turn again, rather then we will burn. If any sickness
seize upon us, by and by we so shrink, and are so afraid of death, that
whatsoever physic by the Physician, whatsoever comfort by the Minister be
ministered unto us, yet still nothing but death death with us. Every summo^ of
death is so fearful unto us, that if any way we could we would shift it
off. And why is all this, but because we count of no vantage in death, because
Christ is not unto us advantage in death? we never bethink our selves, shall
God be glorified by my death? shall the Saints hearts be strengthened by my
constancy, and my patience in my death? shall the Christian and quiet repose
of my soul in the Lord at my death, cause them that behold me to glorify the
Lord? But what do we think and say, I shall die, I shall die, I shall go down
to the grave, and be no more seen; the terrors of death are upon me, and who
shall deliver me? And thus death triumphs over us, whereas upon the other
cogitations, we should triumph over death. 1 Samuel 25.37.
Ye know the story of Naball, of whom it is said, that when his wife told him
David's words, his heart died within him, and he was like a stone. So is it with
many of us, when any summons of death come forth for us, our hearts fail, and
die within us, and we are even as stones. And no marvel that fear of death
should so work upon us, when in our death there is nothing to comfort us. If
our hearts were so set on the glory of the Lord, that we counted that gain
enough unto us: if any way we might gain glory unto the Lord by life, or by
death, then would we willingly die, whenever our death might be to Gods
glory. But, setting apart all care of Gods glory by life, or by death, we
mind only the pleasures and profits of this life; which have an end in death,
and therefore are unwilling to die. In the terrors of death, then will we not
fear death? Let me die the death of the righteous, and I will not fear what
death can do unto me. Let Christ Jesus be glorified by my death, and then let
death come in fire, in sword, in famine, in pestilence, in what terrible sort
it can come, and I will triumph over death. Let this mind be in every one of
us, and so, that by our death God be glorified in us at what time so ever, and
in what sort so ever it come, let it be welcome to us. And let this suffice to
be observed from these words; whence ye see, first, how we become indifferent
unto either death, or life, namely, if Christ be unto us both in life, and in
death advantage. Secondly, that the vantage whereof we are to make reckoning in
our life is, that Christ Jesus may be glorified by our life. And thirdly, that
the vantage whereof we are to make reckoning in our death is, that Christ Jesus
may be glorified by our death.

Now, upon this occasion that he had said, that he was very indifferent unto
either life or death, because Christ was unto him both in life and in death
advantage: the Apostle makes a little digression, and disputes the point
whether were better for him to choose, life, or death. And first, in this verse
he moves the doubt, and answers it in these words, And whether, etc. Which
words, I know, are diversely read, but the words bearing well this reading, I
follow it, as both best opening the Apostles meaning, and best sorting with
that which follows. Now, when he says, Whether to live in the flesh, ye
must understand that to live in the flesh, and to live after the flesh are much
different. For to live after the flesh, is to follow the filthy lusts of the
flesh and to live in the flesh, is only to live in this frail body The doubt
then is, whether to live in the body were profitable for him, and what to
choose, life, or death, were best for him? And the answer is, that he knows
not what to choose, life, or death. Being in his case, in prison, a man would
have thought this choice would not have been hard Yet, he being in prison, saw
such comfort in death, and such joy in life, that he knew not which rather to
choose. And such love did he bear toward the Philippians, that weighing the
great comfort which he should have by his death, with the great profit which
they should have by his life, he knew not what to choose.

Whence I observe, first, the great love which ought to be in the Pastor
toward his people, and the great desire which he ought to have of their
profit and comfort. Even in case of his greatest comfort, joined with their
loss and heaviness, it should much perplexe him what to choose; his, or their
present comfort. Ye know that of Moses, Exo. 32.32.
where he prayed the Lord either to pardon his people their sin, or to raze
him out of the book of life. And that of Paul, Romans 9.3.
where he wished himself to be separated from Christ for his brethren, which
were his kinsmen according to the flesh. They both knew, the one, that he
could not be razed out of the Book of life; and the other, that he could not
be separated from Christ, only therein they showed how greatly Gods glory in
the peoples good. And true is that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.5.
that Love seeks not her own things, but the things of others. Whence yet I
do not infer, that the Pastor for love of his people, should in case of his
salvation wish his own utter rection, rather then that his people should not be
gained unto Christ. But this, I say, that even in case of his and their
salvation for the love of his people, he is to be perplexed how soon to wish
his salvation by his dissolution, because howsoever his present comfort should
be gained by his present dissolution, yet their salvation should be furthered
by his longer continuance in the body.

A point which does not much perplexe many Pastors. For too many such there
are, as neither caring for their own salvation, nor their peoples, look only
to fleece them, but never care what become of them. A point which might be much
enlarged, but not so fitly in this place. If the urging of it might concern
any here, I beseech them in the fear of God to think further of it with
themselves.

The second thing which here I observe is this, that if we be at peace with
God, and keep faith, and a good conscience, whatsoever our outward state be,
we have such comfort and joy on every hand, that neither we desire to die in
respect of the griefs of this life, nor to live in respect of any fear of
death. The example of our Apostle is proof enough to this purpose. He lay in
prison, and of the brethren none assisted him, but all forsook him; and many
practiced much against his constancy, and against his life; so that his
outward state was very hard, and such, that in respect of the griefs of his
life, he might have desired death; and again, in respect of the fear of
death, he might have desired life. Yet, even then such joy and comfort he
found on every side, which way so ever he looked, to life, or death, that he
knew not whether of them to choose. And where was the reason? Though his case
were hard, yet he was at peace with God, and had faith, and a good conscience.

Far otherwise it is with many in our day, who see nothing but matter of
coffeehouse and discomfort, both in life, and in death. If either promotion
fall not upon them according to their desire, or if crosses fall upon them
otherwise then they desire, then they grow male-contented, they care not to
live, and yet they joy not in death. Such are they that mind earthly things,
but mind not the things of God.

Let us seek to be at peace with God, let us trust perfectly in Christ Jesus,
let us keep a good conscience in all things, and this shall make both life and
death comfortable unto us.

LECTVRE XVIII.
PHILIP. I. Verse 21. And whether to live in the flesh were profitable for me,
and what to choose, I know not.
NOw, upon this occasion that he had said that he was very indifferent unto
either, life or death, because Christ was unto him both in life and in death
advantage. The Apostle makes a little digression, and disputes the point
whether were better for him to choose, life, or death. And first in this verse
he moves the doubt, and also answers it, in these words. And whether, etc.
And secondly, he brings reasons for either part, first, that in respect of
himself it were better for him to choose death, verse 23. Secondly, that in
respect of the Philippians, it were better that he chose life, verse 24. So
that the strait was hard, whether for his own greater good he were now to
choose death, or for their greater good he were to choose longer life. The words
where the doubt is moved are diversely read, but they bearing well this reading
I follow it, as both best opening the Apostles meaning, and best sorting with
that which fol^oweth. The doubt is, whether to live in the flesh, or in the
body, were profitable for him: and what to choose, life or death, but was in a
wonderful strait between the two. Being in his case, in prison, a man would
have thought this choice would not have been hard. Yet, he being in prison,
saw such comfort in death, and such joy in life, that he knew not which rather
to choose. And again, such a love he did bear toward the Philip. that
weighing the great comfort which he should have by his death, with the great
profit which they should have by his life; he knew not what to choose, that
which should be to his greater comfort, or that which should be to their
greater profit.

Whence, first, I observe the great love which ought to be in the Pastor
toward his people, and the great desire which he ought to have of their
profit and comfort. Even in case of his greatest comfort joined with their
loss and heaviness, it should much perplexe him what to choose, his or their
present comfort and good. Exo. 32.32.
Ye know that of Moses, where he prayed the Lord either to pardon the people,
that had sinned, or to raze him out of the book of life: and that of Paul, Rom
9.3.
where he wished himself to be separated from Christ; for his brethren, which
were his kinsmen according to the flesh: They both knew, the one, that he could
not be razed out of ahe book of life, and the other, that he could not be
separated from Christ: but therein they showed abundantly how greatly they
loved their people, and desired their salvation. Neither yet do I here teach
that the Pastor for love of his people, should in case of his salvation, wish
his own utter reiection, rather then that his people should not be gained unto
Christ. But this I say, that even in case of his salvation and theirs, for the
love of his people, he should oftentimes be perplexed how soon to wish his
salvation by his dissolution: because howsoever his present comfort might be
gained by his present dissolution, yet their salvation may be furthered by his
longer continuance in the body.

A point which does not overmuch perplexe many Pastors in our day: for too many
such there are as neither caring for their own salvation, nor for their
peoples, look only to fleece them, but never care else what become of them.
Which point might be much enlarged, if the place were convenient. If the
pressing of it might concern any here, I beseech them in the fear of the Lord
to think farther of it with themselves.

The second thing which hence I observe is this, that if we be at peace with
God, and keep faith and a good conscience, whatsoever our outward state be, we
have such comfort and joy on every side, that neither we desire to die in
respect of the griefs of this life, nor yet to live in respect of any fear of
death. The example of our Apostle is proof enough to this purpose: He lay in
prison for the defense of the gospel, wherein none of the brethren assisted
him, but all forsook him, and many practiced much against his constancy, and
against his life; so that his outward state was very hard, and such that in
respect of the griefs of his life he might have desired death; and again in
respect of the fear of death, he might have desired life. Yet even then which
way so ever he looked, to life or death, such joy and comfort he saw in both,
as that neither the griefs of life made him to wish death, nor the fear of
death made him to wish life. And where was the reason? Though his case many
ways were hard, yet was he at peace with God through Jesus Christ his Lord;
he was strong in the faith of Christ Jesus, whom God set forth to be a
reconciliation through faith in his blood, and he had the testimony of a good
conscience, that in all simplicity and godly pureness he had his conversation
in the world. And therefore neither for the grief of life, nor for the fear
of death wished he the one, or the other, but as either might make more for
Gods glory he was indifferent unto either.

Far otherwise it is with many in our day, who see no thing but matter of
coffeehouse and discomfort both in life and in death: for so it is with many
of us, that if either promotion fall not upon us according to our desire; or if
crosses fall upon us otherwise then we desire, then we grow male contented, we
take no joy in our life, and sometimes we hasten our own death. And again,
many of us if any way we be summoned unto death, by sickness, by the sword, by
the pestilence, or any other way, we so shrugg and shrink for fear of death,
that like unto Nabal, if we surmise any danger of death by and by our hearts
faint and die within us, 1 Samuel 25.37.
and we become like stones. No comfort or contentment a great many of us find
either in death, or in life, but what through grief of the one, and fear of
the other, we are often out of love with the one, and with the other. And the
reason is plain: for it is because we are not at peace with God, nor have the
mystery of faith in a good conscience. We feel no comfort in our God through
our reconciliation by Jesus Christ; we want a sound and a lively faith,
whereby we should take hold of the promises of God made in Christ Jesus, and a
bad conscience so troubles us, that all is disquieted within us. And therefore
we find no comfort or contentment in life, or in death, but discomfort and
coffeehouse in both.

Will we then find comfort and contentment in both, whatsoever our state
outwardly be? Let us labor to be at peace with God let us trust perfectly in
Christ Jesus, and let us keep a good conscience in all things, and this shall
make both life and death comfortable unto us; whatsoever our outward estate be,
both life and death shall be comfortable unto us, if we have peace with God,
and faith, and a good conscience. And let this suffice to be observed from the
doubt which the Apostle moves, where he professes that he knows not what to
choose, life or death.

And why knew he not what to choose, life or death? The reason hereof in the
words following is said to be; because on both sides there were such reasons,
on the one side to choose life, and on the other side to choose death, that he
was in a wonderful strait on both sides. For, says he, I am greatly in
doubt, or I am in a wonderful strait on both sides: on the one side desiring
to be loosed from the prison of this body, or to depart out of the earthly
house of this tabernacle, for so the word may be taken actiuely, (...).
or passiuely, and to be with Christ where he sits at the right hand of God,
which (says he) is best of all viz: for me: nevertheless on the other side,
knowing that for me to abide in the flesh and to live longer in the body, is
more needful for you that ye may enjoy the fruit of my ministry. The former
reason concerns himself, and his own good: the latter concerns the
Philippians, and their good: in the former is signified his great desire to
remove out of the body, and to dwell with the Lord; in the latter is signified
his great desire to abide in the body for their furtherance, and joy of their
faith: unto the former his love toward Christ constrained him, unto the latter
his love toward them constrained him: for the former it was best for him, for
the latter it was most needful for them: and thus between the former and the
latter he was so perplexed, that he knew not what to choose, life or death;
death for his own present good, or life for their further good.

Now the thing which in the former reason I note is, that the Apostle desired
even with a great desire to be loosed from the prison of his body, or to
depart out of the body, and to be with Christ where he sits at the right
hand of the throne of God; and that he counted this better for him in respect
of himself, then to live in the body. Whence I observe that a Christian in
respect of himself is rather to desire to die then to live, to depart out of
the body, then to abide in the body. Unto the proof of this point out of
this place, add also that other of our Apostle, where to the same purpose, and
in the same words almost he says thus, We love rather to remove out of the
body, 2 cor 5.8.
and to dwell with the Lord. And that good old Simeon ye know, when once he
had seen the Messiah which was promised, then he desired with all his heart
to die, saying, Luc 2.29.
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen
thy salvation: as if he should have said, now that I have seen the promised
Messiah, the sweet Savior of the world, now indeed I desire rather to die then
to live. Yea but was it not a great fault in Job that he desired rather to die
then to live, when in the bitterness of his soul he cried and faid, Why died
I not in my birth? Job. 3.11.6 9 7.15
or why died I not when I came out of the womb? O that God would destroy me,
that he would let his hand go, and cut me off: my soul chooses rather to be
strangled and to die then to be in my bones. Yes indeed this was a great fault
in Job thus in impatiency to break out, and to search for death more then for
treasures. Neither is any man, be his crosses or troubles never so great, never
so many, through impatiencie, and because he is weary of his life, to wish
rather to die then to live; much less is he with cursed Achitophel, or
traitorous Judas to become his own butcher, and to cut off his own days: for
this were to repine against the highest, and to take our own matters out of
Gods into our own hands. A Christian therefore in respect of himself is to
desire rather to die then to live, but in no sort through impatiencie, or
because he is weary of his life. Yea but is not death terrible even unto the
godly, and do they not oftentimes so shrink thereat that they are afraid of
it? Yes surely, death in it self, and in it own nature is so terrible, that
David being in great heaviness and distress by reason of Saul's cruelty,
expressed it thus saying, Psalm. 55.5.
The terrors of death are fallen upon me. Whereby he means that he was so
afraid of his enemies, as if death had been ready to seize upon him. And
surely but for Christ Jesus, that he has seasoned it, and that through him it
is but a passage unto a better life, we might all of us, even the best of us
well fear death, as the fruit of sin, and as the reward or wages of sin.

How then do we say, that a Christian in respect of himself is to desire
rather to die then to live? We must understand that a Christian is to desire
rather to die then to live: but how? not simply rather to die then to live, but
so as Paul did, rather to die, and to be with Christ then to live. He does not
say to die, and to be ridd out of the miseries of this life: for so many
desire, whose desire is not good, and for whom it were better rather to live in
the body then to die; but he says, to die, and to be with Christ. Are we not
then while we live here in the body with Christ, and Christ with us? If we
will speak as the scripture usually does we are not. While we live here in the
body we are in Christ by his spirit, and Christ in us by faith, as appears
by many places of holy scripture; but in the usual phrase of the scripture
then principally we are faid to be with Christ, when after the separation of
the soul from the body we do in soul enjoy the continual presence of
Christ in heaven, where he sits at the right hand of the throne of God: even
as the Apostle witnesses, where he says, Whiles we are at home in the body,
we are absent from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.6.
not from being in the Lord, but from dwelling with the Lord in the heavenly
places. So that first our earthly house of this tabernacle must be destroyed
before we can be with Christ where he is as he is man. When then we say that a
Christian in respect of himself is to desire rather to die then to live, the
meaning is, that he is rather to desire the separation of his soul from his
body, and in soul to be with Christ, where he is as man, till he may both in
soul and body be there with him for ever, then to live in the body.

And the reasons are plain and clear: as first because Christ is the husband,
and we the spouse if we belong unto Christ. As then it is better for the spouse
to live with her husband then to live apart from her husband, Ephesians. 5.32.
so is it better for us to be loosed and to be with Christ, then to live in the
body. secondly, because heaven is our home, and here we are but pilgrims and
strangers. As then it is better to be at home then where we are but pilgrims
and strangers, Heb. 11.13.
so is it better for us to be loosed and to be with Christ, then to live in the
body. thirdly, because it is better for the soul to be joined unto Christ,
then unto a sinful body: for as David says of Mesech, and of the tents of
Kedar, Woe is me that I am constreined to dwell in Mesech, Psalm. 120.^
and to have mine habitation among the tents of Kedar; so may the soul say of
the body, woe is me that I am constrained to dwell in this sinful body:
better it were for me to be joined unto Christ. 4. Because the body is as a
prison of the soul, wherein it wants free liberty to do what it would and
should. As then it is better to be out of prison, and to live at liberty, so
is it better to die, and to be with Christ, than to live in the body. 5.
Because in the body we only know in part, believe in part, love in part, live
in part, joy in part, and are blessed in part, with all such graces of the
spirit; but when we remove out of the body, then that which is in part shall
be abolished. As then it is better to know, to love, to live, to joy, etc.
perfectly, than only but in part, so is it better to be loosed, and to be with
Christ, where all these shall be perfected, than to live in the body, where
they are never but in part. Lastly, to pass over the rest in silence, because
it is better to be with God than with men, in heaven than in earth, in a state
freed from sorrow, sin, and temptation, than in a state subject to them all:
Job 14.1.
for man that is borne of a woman, is but of short continuance, and full of
trouble, as Job speaks, yea his life is as a warfare, 7.1. Matt. 6.34.
as the same Job speaks, and as our Savior speaks, every day of his life
brings grief enough with it, neither has his grief an end till his life
have an end. But blessed are the dead that die in the Lord: Ap. 14.13.
even so says the spirit, for they rest from their labors, and their works
follow them. They rest from their labors, inasmuch as all tears are wiped
from their eyes, no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor pain does take
hold of them: and their works follow them, inasmuch as they are had in
remembrance before God, when all other things of our life leave us and forsake
us. I spare to enlarge this point further at this time. Ye may easily conceive
what might be added.

Let this serve for a just reproof of them that are unwilling to die. For come
now, and let us reason the case together: What man is there among you, that if
he were clothed only with ragged, and torn, and patched, and worn, and bad
clothes, would not be willing to be unclothed of them, and to be clothed
with better? And what else is this mortal and corruptible body, but as ragged
and rotten clothes wherewith we are clothed? Why should we not then be
willing to be shifted of those clothes, of this mortal and corruptible body,
and to be clothed with our house which is from heaven, even with incorruption
and immortality? Again, what man is there among you, that if he were in
prison, would not be willing to be set at liberty? or being in a place where
he is but a stranger, would not be willing to be at home? And what else is this
sinful body, but as a prison of the soul, wherein it is so shut, that it
has no liberty till it return unto him that gave it? Or what else is this
world, but as a place wherein we wander as pilgrims, and have no abiding
City? Why should we not then be willing to remove out of this prison of the
body, and to be received into the glorious liberty of the sons of God? or
to loose anchor from this land, wherein we are but strangers, and by death to
sail toward heaven, where is our home, and our abiding City? Where should
the members joy to be, but with their head? Where should the spouse desire to
be, but with her husband? Where should man, whose breath is in his nostrils,
delight to be, but with him that is his life, to see him as he is, and to
live in his continual presence? Surely whosoever thou art that art unwilling
to die, thou do not yet conceive nor believe the blessed estate of them that
die in the Lord; thou have not yet thoroughly learned this lesson, that Christ
is the husband of the Church, that Christ is the life of his body, that in the
presence of Christ there is fullness of joy, and life for evermore: for then
would thou willingly desire with the Apostle to be loosed, and to be with
Christ, which is far the best. If the condition of the children of men, and
the condition of beasts, were even as one condition unto them, so that in their
death there were indeed no difference, or if after death there remained nothing
but a fearful expectation of judgment, then indeed thou had some reason
to be unwilling to die. But now that Christ by death has triumphed over death,
and made death unto thee (if thou belong unto him) a passage unto life without
death, unto joy without sorrow, unto all blessedness without any misery, why
should thou be unwilling to die? Nay now a chip for death, nay now most
welcome death. And so beloved let it be to every one of us. If we belong unto
Christ, there is no cause why we should fear death, and great cause there is
why we should embrace death. Let us therefore never fear death, nor be
unwilling to die, but whenever the Lord his will is, let us be willing to be
loosed, and to be with Christ, which is best of all.

LECTVRE XIX.
PHILIP. 1. Verse 23. Desiring to be loosed, and to be with Christ, which is
best of all.
NOw to proceed: Against this which has been said, it may be objected, that
as no man is to put asunder the things which God has coupled together, as the
soul and the body; so no man is to desire that the things which God has
coupled be sundred, and therefore no Christian is to desire to die. Whereunto
I answer, that it is true, that no Christian is to desire simply to die, nor to
die to this end only, that he may be rid of the miseries of this life, nor to
die otherwise than when the Lord his will is: but yet he may desire to die, and
to be with Christ, to die to this end that he may be with Christ, to die when
the Lord his will is, and when his death may be for his glory. 1 Reg. 19.4
So it is to be understood of Elias, that he desired to die, when he prayed and
said, It is enough, O Lord, take my soul, for I am no better than my fathers.
And so we say, that a Christian may desire to die when the Lord his will is,
not for that death in it self is to be desired, but because he desires to be
with Christ. So that the thing which a Christian desires simply and in it
self, is to be with Christ; neither does he otherwise desire to be loosed,
but that he may be with Christ: and so we say he may desire to be loosed when
the Lord his will is. And thus much for this, which is the chief point in
these words: whence ye see, that a Christian in respect of himself may desire
rather to die than to live.

Other things there are which may not unfruitfully be noted in these words,
which I will only briefly touch, because they are things not principally
intended. The Apostle desires to be loosed, and to be with Christ: to be
loosed, why? that he might be with Christ. Whence I observe, that the death of
Gods Saints is nothing else but a departure of the soul out of the body unto
heaven, where Christ sits at the right hand of the Throne of God. He which
at the first coupled soul and body together, in death parts them asunder,
and takes the soul unto himself, to be where he is, till in the
resurrection he couple them again together, never after to be parted asunder.
Whereof all the godly in Christ Jesus at all times have been so thoroughly
persuaded, that always in death they have done and do (after the example of
Christ Jesus) commend their souls unto the hands of him that gave them, saying
as he did, Father into thine hands I commend my spirit. Luke 23.46.
So we read that that holy Martyr Steven, when he was stoned, called on God,
and said, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Act. 7.59.
And in death it is the very ordinary prayer of all Gods Saints. Wherein they
plainly show their thorow-perswasion, that in death their souls are received
by the Father of spirits into the heavenly habitations, there to be joined unto
Christ Jesus. Contra^riwise, the death of the wicked and ungodly of the earth
is nothing else but a departure of the soul out of the body unto hell, there
to be with the Devil and his Angels. Examples of both we have in the beggar
and the rich man; Luke 16.22
whose deaths, unto the one was the departure of his soul out of his body into
heaven, but unto the other the departure of his soul out of his body into
hell. Or if the persons of these prove not strongly enough, take for example
the death of the two thieves which were hanged with our blessed Savior on the
Cross, unto the one of which Jesus said, that that day he should be with him
in Paradise, Luke 23.43.
but unto the other that railed on him, his death doubtless was a downfall
into hell.

Is then the dissolution of Gods Saints a passage of the soul out of the body
unto heaven, there to be with Christ? Far be it then from us, to think that
the condition of the children of men, and the condition of beasts, is even as
one condition unto them; that when man dies, he returns wholly unto the
dust, and has no more fruit of all the travels that he has taken under the
Sun. Thus indeed sensual man following only the judgment of his weak
sense, and of his own blind reason, thinks, and says, As the one dies, so
dies the other; man and beast have all one breath, and in death there is no
excellency of man above the beast: all go to one place, all to the earth, as
all came from the earth. But the spirit of God has otherwise taught us in his
holy word: for does not the Lord say, that he is the God of Abraham, Matt.
22.32.
of Isaac, and of Jacob? And does he not say, that he is not the God of the
dead, but of the living? Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, then are not dead, but
living. Living? How? In their souls with God. Dead they are in respect of the
separation of their souls from their bodies. But forasmuch as the earthly
house of their Tabernacle being destroyed, they have a building given of God,
that is, an house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1.
as the Apostle witnesses even of all the Saints of God, therefore they are
still living in their souls with God in the heavenly habitations. Howsoever
then the bodies of men be mortal, and in death go down unto the dust, whence
first they came; yet their souls are immortal, and in death return unto the
Father of spirits, whence they came. But what needs more to this purpose then
that which here our Apostle says? In death the sons of men are loosed, that
is, their souls are separated from their bodies. Now if the soul were mortal
as the body, what needed any loosing of the one from the other? Surely both
should fall together, and not the one be loosed from the other if the
condition of both were one. Even this then, that the souls in death are loosed
from the bodies of men shows that the souls are immortal. Again, in death
the Saints of God are loosed that they may be with Christ: After death then
they are with Christ, not in body, for that descends unto the grave there to
rest until the resurrection. In soul then. In death then the souls of Gods
Saints pass out of the body unto heaven there to be with Christ. And therefore
far be it from us to think that in death as of beast, so of man there is
utterly an end, and an entire return unto the dust.

And yet so we live, a great many of us, as if we made no other reckning, for
do we not a great many of us, pass our dwelling here without fear in
chambering and wantonness in gluttony and drunkenesse, in striefe and envying?
Do we not even glut ourselves with sporting and pleasure, and sundry delights
of the flesh, and say let us be merry, and take our fills of pleasure while we
are here? for when we are gone then all the world is gone with us. Surely, if a
man may conjecture by our dissoluteness of life, a great many of us either
think that in death there is utterly an end of us, or too little think what
remains after death. Beloved, we are bought with a price, let us therefore
glorify God both in our bodies, and in our spirits. We may not live unto our
selves, nor give our members weapons of unrighteousness unto sin, but we must
live unto him that died for us, and rose again; and give our members servants
unto righteousness in holiness. Let us so live that in our lives we think
of death, and let us know that if we die the death of the Saints, we shall die
to live for ever with Christ; but if otherwise; our part shall be in that lake
that ever burns.

Again, this may serve for the confutation of that foolish dream of
purgatory. The souls of Gods Saints they are loosed in death from the body,
and being loosed are with Christ: The souls of the wicked they likewise in
death are loosed from the body, and being loosed do, as it is said of Judas,
Act. 5.25.
go to their own place, even the place of the damned Where then is Purgatory?
They that trouble the Church with this fancy, tell us that of them that die,
some are perfect and just men, and they go straight unto heaven, others are
desperately wicked, and they go straight down into hell; and others are
neither perfitly good, nor thoroughly badde, and for these are Purgatory. But
I demand them touching this third sort of men, have they faith, or no? They
grant they have, but a weak faith not a perfect faith. If they have faith, if
it be a true and lively faith though it be but a weak faith, by it they are
saved, and in death received unto glory. Ioh. 3.15.
He that belieueth (says our Savior Christ) has eternal life. He that
belieueth: what? he that has such a measure of faith, he that has such a
degree of perfection of faith? No, but he that belieueth truly though weakly,
and imperfectly, he has eternal life, even living in the body, he has
eternal life in hope, and when he remoueth out of the body shall have it in
possession; has it now in the beginning, and then shall have it in a greater
fruition. Again, I demand touching this third sort of men, where does the
Apostle ever exempt himself from the number of imperfit men? Phil. 3.12.
where does he ever count himself perfect? Nay in this Epistle he plainly
denies it, and both there, and often elsewhere signifies his endeavoring and
contending after perfection. And yet being loosed he speaks not of going into
Purgatory, but of being with Christ. Thus then we teach, that all that die, die
either in the faith of Christ, and so be with Christ; or else die not in the
faith of Christ, and so they go to their place with Judas. As for any, third
place it is a devised dream, and clearly confuted by the Scriptures. The
sum of all is, the souls of Gods Saints being loosed from the body are with
Christ, therefore we are neither to think that when man dies he wholly
returns to the dust, nor yet that he goes unto Purgatory.

Another thing yet farther here I note, which is that the Apostle desired to be
with Christ. Where I observe, that till man be loosed from the earthly house
of this Tabernacle, and be in heaven, he is not with Christ. To which purpose
also is that of our Apostle, where he says, 2 Cor. 5.6.
that whiles we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord: While we
live then here in the body, we are absent from the Lord. First then we must
remove out of the body before we can be with the Lord: with the Lord I say in
corporal presence. For otherwise, touching his spiritual presence, we know
that he has said unto us, I am with you always until the end of the word.
But touching his corporal presence he has said, Math. 28.20 Ioh. 12.8.
the poor always ye have with you, but me ye shall not have always.

This then serves for the confutation of the corporal presence of Christ in
the Sacrament of the Lord his supper. A certain truth it is, that Christ is
truly and really present in the Sacrament of the Lord his supper, and that so
many as come unto that holy supper having on their wedding garment, and having
duly examined themselves touching their faith toward God, their repentance
for their sins, and their love of God, and of their brethren, do there truly
and really eat the body, and drink the blood of Christ Jesus. For there
spiritually we eat the body, and drink the blood of Christ Jesus; there
spiritually Christ is given unto us, and taken of us to be one with us, and we
with him, spiritually I say, and therefore truly and really. And therefore when
we come unto that holy Table, to be made partakers of those great and high
mysteries of Christ his blessed death and passion, we must know that the ground
is holy whereon we stand, we must know that we are present before the Lord, so
that accordingly we must prepare our selves to the reverend receiving of those
holy mysteries, which in this place at this time I add, because it is likely
that many here present purpose to morrow to communicate at that holy table. But
for Christ his corporal presence in that supper we utterly deny it. And for
this time let this one place be enough to prove it. For why should the Apostle
desire to be loosed, and to be with Christ if before he were loosed he were
with Christ? If he desired to be with him by faith, and by the spirit, so he
was with him before he was loosed It was otherwise then that he desired to be
with Christ, even to enjoy his corporal presence. If then that he might enjoy
his corporal presence, first he must be loosed, then it is clear that while
we live here in the body Christ is not corporally present with us, he is not
therefore corporally present in the sacrament. I have stayed longer upon these
points then I purposed. Let us now proceed unto that which follows.

Neuerthelesse] Hitherto we have spoken of the Apostles desire in respect of
himself, which was to be loosed and to be with Christ, which was the best of
all for him. Now follows his desire in respect of them, which was to abide in
the body, which was more needful for them; that by the work of his ministry
they might be farther builded up in he faith and truth of Christ Jesus.
Nevertheless says he, though it be best of all for me in respect of my
self to be loosed, and to be with Christ, yet it is more needful for you
that I abide in the body, and live longer, and therefore in respect of you I
desire to live longer. And thus I am in a strait on both sides, whether to
choose that which is best for me, or that which is more needful for you, in my
desires greatly affecting both.

1. Then, in that the Apostle desired to live longer in the body for their
sakes, although for himself it had been far the best to have been loosed:
hence I observe that our desires are not only to look unto that which is best
for our selves, but unto that which is most for Gods glory, and our brethrens
good. Had it not been the best for Abraham that Isaac his son should have
lived, Genesis 22.10
in whom it was promised that all the nations of the earth should be blessed?
No doubt he desired it even from his soul. But when the Lord required him to
be offered for a burnt offering, Abraham obeyed, and stretched out his hand to
have killed his son. He looked not so much unto his own desires in respect of
himself, as unto the glory of the Lord, and therefore addressed himself unto
his commandment. So no doubt it was far the best for Moses to have his name
still to remain in the book of life. Yet seeing the Lord his fierce wrath
hotely kindled against his people, he looked not so much what was best for
himself, as what was good for his brethren the children of Israel; Ex. 32.32.
and therefore prayed the Lord either to pardon the people that had sinned, or
to raze him out of the book that he had written. So tendered he his brethrens
good and Gods glory, that he preferred that before himself and his own good.
So our Apostle in his brethrens case which were his kinsmen according to the
flesh, wished himself to be separated from Christ for their sakes. He saw and
knew what was best for himself, even that he should abide in the vine
whereinto he was ingrafted. Yet as a man forgetting, or not regarding that
which was best for himself, he looked so much unto the good of his brethren that
he brake out and said, Romans 9.3.
I would wish my self separated from Christ for my brethren, that are my
kinsmen according to the flesh. And so should it be even with all of us, we
should not always look what is best for our selves, but also what is most
meet and needful for Gods glory. And though, as we heard before, it were
far better for us to be loosed, and to be with Christ in respect of our
selves then live in the body, yet are we also to look what is more needful
for Gods glory, and if to live in the body be more requisite and needful
for Gods glory then are we to desire to be in the body.

Good for the Church, and good for the commonwealth it would be if men could
thus frame their desires, not always to run upon that which is best for
themselves, but that which is most for Gods glory, and for the good of our
brethren. For why is it that in Church, and in Commonweal things are so far
amiss as they are. We complain much, and o things were never so badde, never
so much amiss in Church, or in Commonweal. And where is the cause? Even
within our selves. Few such parents as was Abraham; few such magistrates as was
Moses; few such ministers as was Paul that so bridle their desires, that they
prefer Gods glory and the public good before their own good. The minister
now can see and say, this were more needful for the Church, but this is better
for me, more ease for me, more commodious for me, more pleasant unto me, and
blame me not if I most respect that which is best for my self; indeed the
worst for himself, but the best in his corrupt account. The magistrate
likewise now can say this and this indeed were best of all for the common good,
nevertheless, this is better for me, and near is my coat, but nearer is my
shirt, and I count him a very fool that is not chiefly wise for himself.
Parents likewise now can say, to bestow some of my goods and substance thus and
thus were most indeed for Gods glory, and for the good of many of Gods
children: nevertheless is more needful for my children, and no man may blame
me if they be the dearest unto me, if what I have I keep for them. And thus
our desires are carried clean otherwise then were our Apostles. He much
desired his own private good, but more the glory of God, and the good of
others. We much desire the glory of God, and the good of others, shall I say
so? I wish it might be truly said of many mo that it is: but be it so, we much
desire the glory of God, and the good of others, but more our own private
good, more that which we count best for us. If then we will have such things as
are amiss in Church and Commonweal amended, Minister, and Magistrate, and
all of us must reform our desires. Howsoever this or that were best for the
Minister in respect of himself, yet must he look unto that which is more
needful for Gods glory and the good of his Church, and set his desires upon
that. Howsoever this or that were best for the Magistrate in respect of
himself, yet must he look unto that which is more needful for Gods glory,
and the good of the Commonweal, and set his desires upon that. Howsoever this
or that might be best of all for us in respect of our selves; yet, if another
thing be more needful for Gods glory, and the good of others, we must look
unto that, and set our desires on that. Phil. 2.4.
Look not every man (says our Apostle) on his own things, but every man also
on the things of other men. Let us, beloved, both Minister and Magistrate, and
all of us thus do; and whatsoever is most for Gods glory, and for the good of
his Church, let us most set our desires on that.

LECTVRE XX.
PHILIP. 1. Verse 24. Nevertheless, to abide in the flesh, is more needful
for you.

25. And this I am sure of, that I shall abide, and with you all continue, for
the furtherance and joy of your faith.

26. That you may more abundantly rejoice in Jesus Christ for me, by my coming
to you again.


ANother thing yet there is which here is to be noted, and that is that the
Apostle says, that it is more needful for the Philippians that he live
longer, then that he be loosed. Whence I observe, that the long life of the
faith full Pastor is very needful for the Church, and the blessing of God
upon it. A plain proof whereof, we have in the example of Iehoida, touching
whom it is said, 2 Cron. 24.2.17.
That Ioash did uprightly in the fight of the Lord, all the days of Iehoiada
the Priest. But after the death of Iehoiada came the Princes of Judah, and did
reverence to the King, and the King hearkened unto them, and they left the
house of the God of their Fathers, and served groves and idols. What a blessing
of the Lord was here upon Ioash the King of Judah, and upon all Judah by the
life of Iehoiada the Priest? So long as he lived, Ioash did that which was
good in the sight of the Lord, and Judah walked in the ways of the Lord; but
when he was dead, then Ioash the King, and Judah with him, revolted from the
true service of the Lord, and fell unto idolatry. And therefore the Lord
purposing to visit the iniquities of Judah, Psay 3 2.
and Jerusalem, upon them threateneth to take away from them the Judge, and
the Prophet, that is, the Magistrate and the Minister, as if he should have
said, that he would root out all civil government, and all ecclesiastical
discipline from amongst them, and bring an utter confusion and desolation upon
them. Is it then a plague of GOD upon a land, to take away their Prophets, and
their Teachers? And is it a visitation of the peoples sins upon them? By this
then ye see, that the continuance of the Pastors life among the people, is the
blessing of the Lord upon the people; I mean the continuance of the good and
faithful Pastors life. For otherwise, if the Pastor be an idle sheepe-heard,
one that despises his flock, one that cannot, or will not feed the tender
Lambs of Christ Jesus, and lead them forth unto green pastures, and unto the
soft running waters: then surely it is a great blessing of the Lord to deliver
the sheep from such a sheep-heard, and to cut him off from feeding his people.
And therefore the Lord promising in mercy to visit his dispersed flock,
speaks thus unto them by his Prophet, Behold, Ezec. 34.10
I come against the sheepeheards, and will require my sheep at their hands,
and cause them to cease from feeding the sheep, neither shall the sheepeheards
feed themselves any more: for I will deliver my sheep from their mouths, and
they shall no more devour them. As then this is a great mercy of the Lord
unto the flock of his pasture, when the Pastor is an ill one to deliver them
from him, and to cause him to cease from feeding them, whether by death, or how
else so ever; so is it a great blessing of the Lord upon them, when they have a
good and faithful Pastor and Teacher, to continue his life amongst them, for
their further growth and increase in the faith and truth of Christ Jesus.

This then, beloved, should teach you, how when the Lord blesses you with a
faithful Pastor you should be affected toward him, and that is thus, you
should even pray unto the Lord for him to continue his life long amongst you,
by whose life ye have such a blessing. Other duties, many toward them on your
behalf are commanded, as obedience, where it is said, Obey them that have the
oversight of you, and submit your selves, and love: As where it is said, Heb.
13.17.
Know them that labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, 1 These. 5.12.13.
and admonish you, and have them in singular love for their works sake, and
maintenance. As where it is said, Gal. 6.6.
Let him that is taught in the word, make him that has taught him pertaker of
all his goods. Whereunto ye are also to add this duty toward them, even to
pray for the continuance of their life long amongst you. And surely, if either
ye consider the blessing which ye have by the enjoying of them, or the loss
which ye have when such are taken from you, ye will see that ye have great
cause to pray for their abiding in the flesh amongst you. For what, if after
such a faithful Pastor should succeed an idle sheep heard, a greedy wolf,
an ignorant hireling, a slow-belly, a peruerter of the truth, a scandalous man
for life, one whose God is his belly, and whose glory is to his shame, as too
too often after such light follows such darkness. How great cause then
should ye have to wail and lament, and with Jeremy, to say, How is the gold
become so dim? While then ye have them, how ought ye to pray for them, that
long ye may have them, and enjoy the benenefits of their labors.

But how far otherwise do we a great many of us in many places, for so it
is with many of us in many places, that if our Pastor be a faithful teacher,
one that labors amongst us in the word and doctrine, one that keeps nothing
back from us, but faithfully delivers unto us the whole counsel of the Lord;
we are so far from praying for the continuance of his life, that by all
means we labor to make him weary of his life. If we have such a Pastor as
neither can, nor will teach us in the wholesome word of truth, one that will
suffer us to go on in our sins, and never awake us out of our dead sleep of
security: one that will sow pillowes under our elbowes, and cry peace,
peace, when there is no peace, one that will sort himself unto our manners,
and apply himself unto our humors, he is a man fit for us: he is a mild, a
soft man, and a good companion, and we wish that he might live for ever with
us. But if our Pastor with the Prophets of the Lord, threaten the judgments of
the Lord against us for our sins; if with John Baptist he reprove us boldly
to our faces, for such crying sins as reign amongst us; if with the blessed
Martyr Steven, in the application of his doctrine, he shall come upon us and
say, ye stiff-necked and of uncircumcised hearts and ears, ye have always
resisted the holy Ghost, as your fathers did so do ye. If with the Apostle he
shall rebuke us, and say, O foolish people, who has bewitched you, that ye
should not obey the truth: if he shall lance our sores unto the bottom, that
so we may be thoroughly healed, if he shall wound the heary scalpe of him that
goes on in his wickedness, and lay the axe to the root of our sins, him
we can by no means endure, he is a contentious man, a seditious man, a
schismatic fellow, a troubler of the world; away with such a man, he is not
worthy to live upon the earth. Thus the Pastor, from whom it were a mercy of
the Lord to deliver us, we love and like: and him, in the continuance of whose
live were a blessing of the Lord upon us, we cannot away with. So greatly are
we in love with our sins and ignorance, and so little do we love knowledge,
and the things that belong unto our peace. But, beloved, I persuade my self
better things of a great many of you. As already you do, so continue to have
them that labor amongst you in singular love, for their works sake. Let the
feet of them that bring you the Gospel of Christ Jesus be beautiful unto
you. Count the life of your faithful Teachers a blessing of the Lord upon you,
and pray ye unto the Lord when ye have such a blessing for the continuance
thereof unto you This blessing is as needful for you as the greatest blessing
of this life, and therefore rejoice in it, and pray for it as the greatest
blessing of your life. And let this suffice to be observed from the reasons
which made the Apostle doubt what to choose, whether to live in the body, or to
remove out of the body. It follows.

And this am I sure of etc.] In the Apostles narration which began at the 12.
verse, first the Apostle told us what success his bands had already had, and
then what success he hoped they should have. Touching the success which they
should have, we have heard that the Apostle certainly looked for, and hoped
that they should turn to the salvation of his soul through his constancy in
his bands, whether it were in life, or in death. But what should be the
success of his bands touching the salvation and deliverance of his body? The
Apostle now tells the Philippians that, namely, he knew certainly that he
should live, be delivered out of prison, and be restored to them again. And
withal he tells them wherefore God would now deliver him, and have him yet to
live longer, which was for these two ends: 1. for their furtherance and joy of
their faith,.i. that by his ministry they might be confirmed in the faith,
and thereby have their joy increased: and 2. that they might more abundantly
rejoice etc..i. that they seeing the mighty power of Christ, in delivering him
from the mouth of the lion might more abundantly rejoice in Christ the author
of his deliverance, for delivering him, and for bringing him again to them.
The first thing which here I note is, that the Apostle says, that he was sure
of this, that he should abide in the flesh, and continue with all the
Philippians, yet for some time longer. Whence I observe, that the Apostle in
his first imprisonment at Rome was delivered, and restored unto the Churches
which before he had planted; which I do the rather gather hence, for that the
two words which the Apostle uses, (...).
show that he knew so certainly that he should be delivered, as he could not
otherwise but by the revelation of the spirit. And in the Epistle to Timothy
in plain words he professes, 2 Timothy 4.17.
that he was delivered out of the mouth of the lion, meaning of Nero. And the
ecclesiastical stories bear witness, that after his first imprisonment, by
the space of ten years or thereabouts he preached the gospel, and then
returning to Rome again was slain by Nero, about the 14. year of his reign.

Which may serve to encourage the faithful thus far in their troubles, that
whatsoever be their troubles, if it be for his glory, the Lord will deliver
them. As he did with Paul, so will he do with us: as our farther trial, or
present deliverance shall be for his glory so will he try us or deliver us. Let
us therefore in troubles be of good courage, and let us assure our selves of
deliverance, if it be for his glory. Only let us, as himself exhorts, call
upon him in the day of our trouble, Psalm. 50.
and then his promise is, we need no revelation for it, that he will deliver
us; always this condition understood, if our deliverance be for his glory.
And what else is it that we should desire but that he may be glorified in our
bodies, whether it be by life, or death?

The second thing which here I note, is the end wherefore he says he should
abide and with them all continue, which was, for their furtherance and joy of
their faith, that their faith by his ministry might be furthered, and so
their joy in the Holy Ghost increased. Whence I observe wherefore the
Christians life in general, and the Ministers life in particular is preserved
and continued here on earth, and that is, the Christians life in general is
preserved and continued for the glory of the Lord; and the Ministers life in
particular for the good of Gods church, and of that people over whom they are
set. Be of courage Paul, said the Lord unto him, Act. 23.11.
for as thou have testified of me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness
also at Rome: as if he should have said, howsoever the Jews practice against
thy life in Jerusalem, yet fear not, I must yet have farther glory by thy
life, as thou have testified of me in Jerusalem, and there brought ^lory unto
my name, so shall thy life be preserved and con^^nued to the farther glory of
my name by thy testimony of be at Rome. And so is every Christian when he is
delivered ^^om any peril of sickness, enemies, or the like to resolve ^ith
himself that his life is preserved, and continued for ^he farther glory of his
God; and every Minister in parti^ular, that his life is preserved and continued
for the farther ^ood of Gods church, and for the profit of his people by ^he
work of his ministry. The point is clear enough, and needs not any large
confirmation.

This may serve first for the instruction of all Christians ^n general, and of
the Ministers in particular. Of all Christians in general, to teach even all
of us to live unto the Lord, and to the glory of his name, to live to do good.
This is the end wherefore our life is preserved and continued here on earth,
and this being the end in our whole ^ife, we are ever to be looking unto this
end. Of Ministers ^n particular, to teach them to spend willingly their whole
strength and their life, in the work of their ministry for the edification
of the Church, and the furtherance of their faith, over whom the Lord has made
them overseers. This is the end also wherefore they are preserved from all
dangers, and their lives continued unto their people; and this being the end,
in their whole life they are ever to be looking to this end.

What shall we say then unto such Christians in name as live unto themselves,
and unto their pleasures? As would have every body to serve their turn, and
care not for others? As desire to live rather to get goods then to do any good?
For such there are as so live, as if they were to live unto themselves, and not
unto the glory of God; as if the life of others were to be for their good, and
their life not for the good of any others; as if they were to scrape as much
unto themselves as they could, and not to do any good unto any other. Nay I
add further, that such there are as so live, as if in their life they were to
serve sin in the lusts thereof, as if they were to live by the spoil, and
hurt, and loss o^ others; as if they were to fly that which is good, and to
do that which is evil. And surely such are here justly reproved, as men never
remembering that the continuance of their life should be for Gods glory; or
rather as men opposing themselves unto every thing that may make for Gods
glory. What shall we say likewise unto such in the ministry as feed
themselves but not the flock; as seek their own and not that which is Jesus
Christ's; as do more harm by their bad example of life, then they do good by
their pains in teaching, as either for idleness, or daintiness, or other
like reason, will not put their hand unto the Lord his work to help forward
the building of his house, nay as destroy the faith of some which were to be
builded up in Christ Jesus? Is this the end wherefore they live in the body,
wherefore their life is prolonged among their people? Nay surely this also
serves for their just reproof, as men abusing that use which God gives them
of life.

But on the other side, it serves for the great comfort of all them be they
Christians in general, or Ministers in particular, whose life serves for the
good of the Church. For what greater comfort, if we be Ministers, can we have
of our life, then that by our life the Saints hearts be stablished in the
faith, the joy of the faithful be fulfilled, the Church of Christ Jesus be
builded, the truth of Christ Jesus be maintained, the mouth of all gain sayers
be stopped, and our people kept a chaste spouse unto the Lord? Or what greater
comfort can we have of our life whatsoever we be, then that by our life the
Lord be glorified, the good of our brethren procured, and the commonwealth
bettered? Surely so may the Minister, and every Christian make account that he
lives if he live unto God and to his brethrens good, and so may he joy in the
continuance of his life, i^ he look unto the end wherefore it is continued.
Whatsoever therefore we be let us remember that we are to live unto him that
has called us out of darkness into light, and in whatsoever peril our life is
preserved, let us remember that it is continued for the glory of God, and the
good of our ^rethren. And as we are by our calling, Ministers, or others, ^ let
us labor that our abode in the flesh, and continuance ^ life, may be to the
furtherance, and joy, and comfort of ^ur brethren, in every thing that is good.
And let this be ^oken touching the end wherefore the life of Christians in
^enerall, and of Ministers in particular, is preserved and ^ontinued, viz. for
the glory of God, and the good of his Church. Which as it serves for the
instruction of all, to ^each us ever to look unto the end wherefore our life
is ^ontinued upon earth; so for the reproof of such as whose ^^fe does no
good, and for the comfort of such, whose life ^rues for the good of the Church.

Now follows the other end wherefore the Apostle ^ith he should abide, and
with them all continue, viz. that ^hey seeing the mighty power of Christ
Jesus, in delivering ^im from the mouth of the Lion, from the cruelty of Nero,
^ight more abundantly rejoice in him, in whom already ^hey d^d rejoice, for
saving him from death, and bringing ^im again unto them. Whence first I do
observe, the great ^eioycing which ought to be in the people for their Pastors
^eliuerance out of peril, and for the continuance of his life amongst them:
their joy should even abound in Christ Ie^us, as in his great blessing and
mercy upon them. So we ^eade, that when Peter was delivered out of prison by
an Angel, there was great joy among the Christians which were ^ssembled in the
house of Mary, John Mark his mother, Act. 12.12.
^nsomuch that it is said of the maid that came to the door, when Peter
knocked at the entry door, 14.
that she opened not the entry door for gladness, as one so surprised with
joy, that ^he could not rest till she had told it: and when the door was
opened, and the rest saw, it is said of them, 16
that they were astonished, partly through wondering at, and partly through
rejoicing for his deliverance. And so should they that are taught in the word,
abundantly rejoice when their Teacher is freed from trouble or danger, and his
life or liberty is continued unto them: for whether it be life, or liberty
that is granted unto him, it is for their sakes, o^^ whom the Lord has made
him ouerseer; and there^^^^ they are to honor him, and to rejoice for him, as
p^^^ued for them, and the furtherance of their faith.

Such then as grieve at the life or liberty of their faithful Pastors, such
as practice what possibly they can against the life and liberty of their godly
Teachers, such as wash and watch every advantage against them, to get their
mouths stopped, or deprived of their ministry; such as rejoice in their
trouble, imprisonment, or banishment, let such, I say, and all such like, look
unto it, whether they belong to the sheepe-fold of Christ Jesus. Luke 10.16.
He that hears you, bears a^, says our Savior Christ; and he that
despises you, des^^^ me. To refuse then to hear the Ministers of Jesus
Christ is much, because it is to refuse to hear Jesus Christ: likewise to
despise the Ministers of Jesus Christ, is very much, because it is to despise
Jesus Christ: but what then is it ^o practice mischief against the Ministers
of Jesus Christ, (...) rejoice in the loss of their life or liberty, and to
band men selves against them? Surely this is plainly to bewray themselves not
to belong to Christ Jesus.

As for us, if we will know that we belong unto Christ Jesus, let us rejoice
in the life and liberty of our faithful^ Teachers. The life and liberty of
Gods faithful Minister, cause joy in the hearts of them that belong unto the
Lo^^. Let us therefore by this token discern what we are, good or bad
Gospellers.

The second thing which hence I observe, is the effect which the examples of
the power and goodness of Christ Jesus in the deliverance of his Saints out of
their troubles, ought to work in us: such examples should confirm us daily
more and more in that rejoicing which we have (...) Christ Jesus. For when we
plainly see as in a spectacle before our eyes, by the deliverance of his Saints
out of their troubles, that our King and our Savior beholds us from his holy
heavens, looks upon our sufferings and our wrongs, takes our matters into his
own hands, auengeth us of o^ enemies, and delivers us out of the will of them
that hate (...) this should add much unto that rejoicing which before ^ee had,
and cause us far more abundantly to rejoice in christ Jesus, because thus we
see that which before we be^^eued, that our King lives, and reigns, and has
all ^^wer given unto him both in heaven and in earth.

But how little such examples work with us, does ap^eare by our little
rejoicing in Christ Jesus. All our reioy^ng is in the vanities, and pleasures,
and fooleries of this ^^e; neither do we ever vouchsafe to consider the power
^^d the mercy which the Lord shows in his Saints. And ^^erefore we rejoice
not as we should, but as we should ^ot. O let us consider the great things
which our Jesus has ^one, and still does for us. Let us not be so negligent as
to ^asse over, or to forget the things wherein he shows his ^ower and his
mercy toward his Saints, but let us religi^usly regard and remember them, that
so we may have our ^eioycing in Christ Jesus.

LECTVRE XXI.
PHILIP. 1. Verse 27. Only let your conversation be as it becomes the
Gospel of Christ, that whether I come and see you, or else be absent, I may
hear of your matters that ye continue in one spirit, and in one mind,
fighting together through the faith of the Gospel.
HI^herto we have heard the Apostle his Exordium, and his Narration: Now that
which follows, both in this chapter, and in the rest of this Epistle, is for
the most part matter of exhortation. A little in the third chapter he
furnishes them with matter of doctrine against certain false Teachers, which
were crept in amongst them. But because they were well grounde^^ the truth by
his ministry and Apostleship, the spe^^ thing wherein the rest of this
Epistle is spent, is exhorta^^^ unto a Christian life. In this remainder of
this chapter, (...) the Apostle sets down that general exhortation vn^^
Christian life, which is indeed the great and maine exhortation, whereof all
the rest are but branches: and secondly (...) insisteth particularly in some of
those things wherein the life whereunto he exhorts consists. His general
exhortation, is generally unto such a life and conversation amongst men, as
becomes the Gospel of Christ, that i^, conformed unto the doctrine of the
Gospel of Christ, that profession and conversation may go hand in hand
together, in these words, Only let your conversation be, etc. The particulars
wherein such a life consists, and which here a^ mentioned, are three: The
first, constancy in holding and defending the truth of Christ, by the power of
the spirit signified in these words, that ye stand in one spirit, that is,
(...) one truth of the Gospel by one spirit. The second is vn^nimitie and
agreement to stand and fight together for the truth, through the faith of the
Gospel, signified in the^^ words, and in one mind fighting together, etc. And
the thi^^ is patience in sufferings and wrongs by adversaries, signified by way
of dehortation, in these words, And in nothing fear, etc. Where these three
are, there the life is in a good degree such as becomes the Gospel of
Christ. That which i^ inserted in these words, that whether I come, etc. is to
persuade them unto such a life, without all respect of his coming again unto
them, that whether he come and see them, or be absent and hear of them, their
life be such a^ becomes the Gospel of Christ. In that which follows are
set down motives to persuade the exhortation, especially patience in
sufferings and wrongs, whereof hereafter. Thus much for the general order and
meaning of those words.

Now for the further and more particular opening of the meaning of these words,
this that the Apostle in the beginning of his exhortation says, Only let your
conversation, etc. it may either be referred unto that whereof the Apostle
spoke immediately before, and so have this meaning, I say I shall abide and
continue yet with you, for your furtherance, and joy, and rejoicing for me:
yet whatsoever become of me, only look ye to your conversation, that it be
such as becomes the Gospel of Christ: Or else it may be referred unto all
that went before, and so have this meaning; God has done great things for you,
he has caused his Gospel to be preached unto you, and brought you unto the
fellowship of the Gospel: he has begun a good work in you, and it is not
to be doubted but that he will perform it until the day of Christ: he has
made you to abound in love, in knowledge, and in all judgment: he has turned
my bands to the furthering of the Gospel for your comfort, and he has
appointed to deliver me out of bands, and to restore me again unto you, for
the furtherance and joy of your faith, and that ye may the more abundantly
rejoice in Jesus Christ for me. Only be not ye wanting unto that which
becomes you, but let your conversation be such as becomes the Gospel of
Christ. Unto whethersoeuer it be referred, ye see what the meaning is. Now
where it is said in the words following, Let your conversation be, the word
used in the original, (...).
implies that they were Citizens of a City which is above, and enforces this
construction; Only ye, as Citizens of an heavenly Jerusalem, carry your
selves, how? as it becomes the Gospel of Christ, that is, so that your life
be framed after the doctrine of the Gospel, and be answerable to your
profession. But what? Would it serve to make a show of such a conversation for
a time, because he was to come again unto them, that when he came unto them,
all might be well, howsoever their hypocrisy afterward brake out? No, in no
sort: and therefore the Apostle says, Let your conversation be as it becomes
the Gospel of Christ. What? because I am to come again unto you, that ye may
deceive me only by an hypocritical show? Nay, but that whether I come and see
you, or be absent and only hear of you, I may hear and see that in
sincerity and truth which I desire. Yea but how should they order their
conversation so, that it might be such as became the Gospel of Christ? Namely
if they ordered it so, that if he came he might see, and if he were absent he
might hear, 1. that they continued, or stoodfast, for so the word signifies,
(...)
like unto good soldiers which yield no ground, but keep their standing,
that, I say, they stood fast in one spirit, that is, that they abode constant
in one truth of Christ by one spirit whereinto they had all drunk. 2. That
with joint minds and one accord amongst themselves, they fought together for
the truth of Christ against the adversaries of the Gospel, not with carnal
weapons, but with the faith of the Gospel, with the shield of faith to quench
all the fiery darts of the wicked, which here he calls the faith of the
Gospel, because it comes by the hearing of the Gospel preached. And 3. that
in nothing they feared their adversaries, but courageously encountered them, and
patiently endured all wrongs offered by them. If the Apostle might hear that
thus they stood constant in the truth, not cast down by their adversaries,
that thus with one accord they fought together, and threw down their
adversaries, that thus courageously they encountered their adversaries in
nothing fearing them, this might in part show that their conversation were such
as became the Gospel of Christ. This I take to be the true meaning of these
words thus far. Now, let us see what observations we may gather hence for our
farther, use and instruction.

The first thing which here I note, is the Apostles exhortation unto the
Philippians in general, that they should lead such a life, that their
conversation should be such as became the Gospel of Christ Jesus; that as they
professed the Gospel of Christ, so they should lead a life agreeable to the
Gospel of Christ. Whence I observe that so many as profess the Gospel of
Christ Jesus ought to labor by all means to lead a life agreeable to the
Gospel of Christ Jesus. Which thing our Apostle also shows in many other
exhortations which he makes to the like purpose, as when he exhorts the
Thessalonians to walk worthy of God who had called them unto his kingdom and
glory. 1 These. 2 12.
Where the Apostles meaning is, that as God had vouchsafed them this mercy to
call them unto his kingdom and glory, so they were to walk worthy of him,
framing their lives as near as they could unto his life, who was the engraven
form of his person. So that being called by God unto his kingdom and glory by
the preaching of the Gospel, we are to labor to walk worthy of God in all
godliness and righteousness. So likewise he exhorts the Ephesians to walk
worthy of the vocation whereunto they were called. Where again the Apostles
meaning is, that as they were called to be Saints in Christ Jesus, so they
should walk worthy of that calling, even as became Saints in Christ Jesus.
Ephesians. 4.1.
So that being Saints by calling we are to labor to be Saints in life and
conversation. As then is our calling; as is our profession, so are we to labor
to lead a life agreeable to our calling, agreeable to our profession, and
professing the Gospel of Christ Jesus to lead a life agreeable to the Gospel
of Christ Jesus. And why? The reasons are very clear. As 1. that the Gospel
of Christ Jesus be not evil spoken of; Tit. 2.5.
even as young women are taught to be discreet, chaste, keeping at home, good
and subject to their Husbands, that the word of God be not evil spoken of. For
what readier way to cause the profane and wicked to blaspheme the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, then when the Professors of the Gospel live not according to the
Gospel? Romans 2.21.22.23.24.
Thou that preachest a man should not steal, do thou steal, says our
Apostle? thou that say a man should not commit adultery, do thou commit
adultery? thou that abhorrest Idols, committest thou sacrilege? thou that
gloriest in the law, through breaking the Law dishonourest thou God? for the
name of God is blaspheamed among the Gentiles through you. And if it may be
said unto us, thou that professest the Gospel of Jesus Christ, do thou lead
a life which becomes not the Gospel of Jesus Christ, shall not the Gospel
of Jesus Christ be blasphemed and evil spoken of among the profane Atheists,
and miscreants of this sinful world through us? yes surely, they shall say
unto us as the Gentiles did to the children of Israel which poluted Gods name
among them, EZ. 36.20.
These are the people of the Lord, these are the Professors of the Gospel,
these be the fruits of their holy profession, and of the Gospel amongst them.
2. They that profess the Gospel of Christ, are to labor to live agreeably
thereunto, that they may adorn the Gospel of Christ Jesus in all thing, and
win others by their holy conversation unto righteousness and holiness, Tit.
2.10.
even as servants are taught to show all good faithfulness that they may
adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things; and as Peter exhorts
saying, 1 Pet. 2.2
have your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that they which speak evil
of you as of evil doers, may by your good works which they shall see glorify
God in the day of visitation. For when they that fear not the Lord shall see
our good works, then shall they be brought to glorify God our father which is
in heaven; when they shall see that as our profession is holy, so our life also
is holy, then shall they begin to suspect their own ways, and to turn unto
the Lord: as that place of Peter makes plain, where he exhorts the wives to
be subject to their husbands; 1 Pet. 3.1.
and why? that even they which obey not the word, may without the word be won
by the conversation of the wives. Whence it plainly appears that by the holy
conversation of them that are religious and godly, be they men or women, they
that have no good will unto the word are oftentimes won unto the obedience of
the word. 3. They that profess the Gospel, are to labor to live as becomes
the Gospel, because of the commandment, Mat. 5.16.
Let your light so shine before men that they may see your good works, and
glorify your father which is in heaven: because of the promise, as many as
walk according to this rule of the Gospel, peace shall be upon them, and
mercy, Gal. 6.16.
and upon the Israel of God: because it becomes citizens of heaven to have
their conversation in heaven, and them that are called to the knowledge of God
to walk as the children of God; and because it is the lesson which their
profession should teach them, as the Apostle witnesses saying, Tit 2.11.12.
the grace of God which brings salvation to all men has appeared, and
teaches us that we should deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we
should live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present world, looking
for the blessed hope etc. In one word, so only the Gospel is the glad tidings
of their salvation unto the Professors of the Gospel, if their conversation be
as it becomes the Gospel of Christ; and therefore they are to labor that
their conversation be such as becomes their profession.

This then may serve for a just reproof of many carnal Gospellers in our day.
For many Gospellers there are by profession, but not many that lead such a life
as becomes the Gospel of Christ: many there are that profess they know God,
not many that show forth the fruit thereof in an holy conversation: such as
our Apostle speaks of where he says, they profess that they know God, Tit.
1.16.
but by works they deny him, and are abominable and disobedient, and unto
every good work reprobate. So that it may be said of Gospellers as one said of
Doctors, many Doctors, few Doctors, many in name, few in deed; so many
Gospellers, few Gospellers, many in name, and few in deed, many in profession,
few in practice, many in word, few in work, many in tale, few in life and
conversation. For is it not said of many that make a very great profession of
the Gospel and of religion, that they are hard men, unmerciful men, men that
grind the faces of the poor, and sell the needy for shoes, as the Prophet
speaks? Are there not many such that are noted to be Usurers, Oppressors,
Extortioners, and the like? Is it not said of many such that they are as ready
to portion, and to covenant for their dues with their Pastor as any men? that
they are as ready to turn their Tenants a grasing as any men? that they are as
ready to join house to house, to lay field to field, and to enclose all unto
themselves as any men? Is it not said that the complaint of the poor, and
fatherles, and widow is taken up as much against them as against any men? I
would it were not said in Gath, and noised in the secrets of Ashkelon: I wish
the profane Atheist, the superstitious Papist, and the covetous worldling
could not justly twite us with it. Alas, beloved, do we not see and consider
that thus we make our God to be blasphemed, our profession to be slandered,
and the Gospel of Christ Jesus to be evil spoken of for our sakes? Do we not
see and consider that Atheist, and Papist, and every earthly minded man makes
his vantage of these things, and thinks his own ways well patronaged by our
ways? Do we not see and consider, that by such our life and conversation the
froward and obstinate are hardened, the weak are offended, and the edge and
courage of many much cooled and abated? If such spots and stains in our life
did only touch our selves, yet were we to look unto them, because without
holiness of life no man shall see the Lord. But when men seeing that we make a
good profession, Heb. 12.14
and yet live nothing accordingly thereunto, thereupon take occasion to speak
evil of our profession, of our religion, of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, how
careful ought we to be of our life and conversation? Woe to the world, says
our blessed Savior, because of offenses: it must needs be that offenses shall
come, Mat. 18.7.
but woe be to that man by whom the offense comes. And surely if by our life
not answerable to our profession we shall bring a slander upon our religion,
our profession, upon the Gospel, if by our life some shall be weakened, others
hardened, the edge of others abated, and others turned out of the good way,
then woe shall be unto us because of such offense in our life.

I doubt not but such as observe these things in us, and fill their mouths
with talking of them, both are guilty of as crying sins themselves, and most
injuriously tax many of us of these things, But the more ready they are to
observe, and to tax without a cause, the more careful we are to be that they
have no just cause of taxing. Let us therefore, beloved, as we profess the
Gospel of Christ, so labor to live as becomes the Gospel of Christ. As the
Gospel teaches us to be holy, so let us be holy in all manner of
conversation: as the Gospel teaches us to walk in the light, so let us walk
in the light, and have nothing to do with the unfruitful works of darkness:
as the Gospel teaches us to love God, and one another, so let us love God
above all things, and our neighbor as our self: as the Gospel is the Gospel
of peace, so let us be at peace with all men: as the Gospel is true, so let us
speak the truth every man unto his neighbor, and lie not one unto another,
etc. Otherwise we walk not as becomes the Gospel of Christ. In a word, let
us not be hearers or professors of the word only, but doers also of the same,
least we deceive our selves.

Again, as this note may serve for the just reproof of such as profess well,
but live not so well, so may it also serve for a just defense against the
unjust slander of our adversaries, who bear the world in hand that holiness
of life is a matter that we never urge, that we make no great reckoning of.
Your selves have heard and can witness how often since this very exercise has
begun you have been urged to run forward in the race of righteousness,
and to make an end of your salvation with fear and trembling, to labor to be
blameless, and pure, and the sons of God in the midst of a naughty and
crooked nation, to have your conversation in heaven, to communicate unto the
necessities of the poor and distressed Saints, to abound in love, in
knowledge, and in all judgment, to be filled with the fruits of
righteousness, and to strive to be pure, and without offense until the day of
Christ. And now ye hear, that if ye have fellowship in the Gospel your
conversation is to be as it becomes of Christ. Know them therefore to be of
their father the Devil who was a liar from the beginning, and is the father
thereof. And suffer not your selves to be deceived by them, who when they
cannot otherwise prevail against the truth fall to slander the professors of
the truth. And let this suffice to be noted from the Apostles general
exhortation, whence ye see that such as profess the Gospel of Jesus Christ
should labor by all means to lead such a life as becomes the Gospel of
Christ.

But what? will it serve the turn for a time in the presence or company of
such and such persons, to make a show of such a life and conversation, as
hypocrites do, which do all that they do to please men? No: and therefore
the Apostle says, Let your conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of
Christ, that whether I come and see you, or else be absent, and only hear of
you, I may heart and see that in sincerity and truth which I desire. Whence I
observe, that the life and conversation of such as profess the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, is to be framed not after the will of man, but after the will of
God; not to please men, but to please the Lord, that whether man be present or
absent, their life be such as it ought to be. Gal. 1.10.
If I should please men (says the Apostle) I were not the servant of Christ.
The Apostle speaks it of preaching the doctrine of the Gospel, that if he
should apply himself to the humors of men, and preach things pleasing unto
them, he should not please God which tries the heart. But it may also very
well be applied unto the life and conversation of men, that if we shall only
frame our lives unto men's likings, and for the time only seek to please them,
our life shall not be such as becomes the Gospel of Christ. And therefore
the Lord himself sharply reproved it in Ezechiels hearers, where he says.
Ezekiel 33.31
My people sit before thee, and hear thy words, but they will not do them:
for with their mouths they make ieasts, and their heart goes after their
covetousness. Where ye see the Lord taxes Ezechiels hearers to be such, as
when he preached unto them, sat as his people, and hearkened unto their
Prophet, and carried themselves well in his presence; but in their hearts ran
after their covetousness, and out of his presence made but a mock of all that
he spoke unto them. And this was one of the sins wherefore the Lord threatened
to lay the land desolate and waste.

Let this then teach us to beware of hypocrisy. It is not for us to come unto
this place, here to kneel us down on our knees, to knock our breasts, to
lift up our eyes unto Heaven, to sit, and hearken unto the Preacher, and when
we go hence to make a mock at the things that were spoken, or to forget
them, or notwithstanding, whatsoever show of godliness we made in the Church,
in our houses to return unto our vomit. For what else is this but here to
play the hypocrites, and here to make a show of godliness, the power whereof
at home we deny? And what is unto hypocrites but a woe? In the ordering
therefore of our life let us not depend upon man's presence or absence, but in a
religious fear of the Lord, let every one of us so walk as becomes us,
knowing that whether man see us, or see us not, yet God sees us, and
considers all our ways. It is the presence and pleasure of the Lord, that
we are to look unto. Let our life therefore, and our conversation be as in
his presence, and such as may please him, howsoever we please or displease
men. And let this suffice to be noted touching the quality of such a
conversion as becomes the Gospel of Christ. Whence ye see, that it is not to
be hypocritical, or framed after men's liking, for the time to please them,
but to be led in the fear of the Lord to please him.

But how may we so order our conversation, that it may be such as becomes the
Gospel of Christ? That the Apostle now shows in the next place, as namely,
if we continue in one spirit, if we sight together in one mind through the
faith of the Gospel, and if we fear our adversaries in nothing. If we
continue in one spirit, that is, if we stand fast, and abide constant in one
truth of Christ, by one spirit wherinto we are all baptized. Whence I observe
one special part of a conversation, agreeable to the Gospel of Christ, and
that is, constant abiding in the truth. If we stand fast, and abide constant in
the truth, this is one note that our conversation is such as becomes the
Gospel of Christ Jesus. John 8.31.
If ye continue in my word, says our Savior, ye are verily my Disciples: as
if he should have said, if ye stand fast against all assaults whatsoever, and
quit your selves like men, and abide constant in the truth which I have taught
you, so ye show your selves to be my Disciples, and to walk worthy of me. So
that to continue and abide constant in the truth shows us to be Christ his
Disciples, and shows our conversation to be such as becomes the Gospel.
Whereupon it is that we are so often exhorted to continue in the grace of God,
to continue in the faith, to abide constant in the truth, to stand fast, and
shrink not.

Beware then, beloved, of reuolting from the truth, wherein ye have been taught
in Christ Jesus, of being carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the
deceit of men, and with craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive: of
yielding, and giving ground unto the adversaries of the truth. He that
continues unto the end, he shall be saved. But if ye start aside like a broken
Bow, surely ye walk not as becomes the Gospel of Christ. Look to it
then, that ye continue in the things which ye have learned, and that ye fall
not away from the hope of your profession.

Another thing also hence I observe, which is, that to continue and abide
constant in the the truth, is wholly the gift of the holy Ghost. It is not by
our own wisdom, power, and strength; but only by the power of the holy
spirit that we stand fast, without which we can no more stand in the truth,
then can our bodies stand without our soul and spirit.

Both therefore let us beware, that we grieve not the holy spirit by our evil
deeds, or by our evil words; and let us always power out fervent prayers unto
him, that he will vouchsafe ever to abide with us, to strengthen us, to abide
in the truth.

It follows, And in one mind, etc.] Whence, I observe another special note
of a conversation agreeable to the Gospel of Christ, and that is, unity and
concord, and love amongst our selves. If we be knit together in one mind, so
that as we are one body in Christ Jesus, so we be of one heart, and one
soul, dwelling together as brethren in unity, love, and good agreement, this
is a good token, that our conversation is such as becomes the Gospel of
Christ. Ioh. 13.35.
By this shall all men know (says our Savior) that ye are my Disciples, if
ye love one another. A good note that we are Christ his Disciples, and that we
walk as becomes the Gospel of Christ, if we live in love and concord one
with another, if we be of one mind together.

Let us beware then how we nourish hatreds, malice, strife, and contention in
our selves one against another. For these things do so distract us from
another, as that being thus affected one toward another, we do not walk as
becomes the Gospel of Christ; or rather we are injurious unto the Gospel of
Christ. For thus it comes to pass, that the Gospel which we profess is
evil spoken of. Let us therefore be knit together in one mind, and beware of
every thing that may distract and dismember us.

Another thing hence I observe, which is, that this Christian concord must be
to fight together, against such adversaries as fight against the truth, be they
heretics and schismatiques that fight against it and us with lies, slanders,
cauils, false doctrines, and the like: or be they tyrants that fight against it
and us, with fire, sword, imprisonment, banishment, confiscation of our goods,
or the like. We are not only to stand stoutly and constantly for the truth
against them, without being thrown down by them, but being knit together one
with another, in one mind we are jointly and with one accord to fight together
for the truth against them, as good Soldiers to throw them down, that when we
have finished our course, we may say with our Apostle, That we have fought a
good fight. 2 Timothy 4.7.
Otherwise we walk not as becomes the Gospel of Christ.

Let them then look to this, that either for ease and idleness, or for fear
of displeasure some way, or upon any other carnal reason whatsoever, will
rather betray the truth then they will fight for it. And seeing none is crowned
but he that strives lawfully, let us fight together here, that there we may
be crowned.

But how are we to fight for the truth against the devil, and all his
instruments the adversaries thereof. Some by praying, some by preaching, some
by writing, some by patiently sustaining for the truths sake; and all of us, as
hence I observe, by the faith of the Gospel. Resist the devil (says the
Apostle) and he will fly from you. Resist him, and fight against him: 1 Ioh.
5.4.
how? by faith; For this is the victory that overcomes the world, and the
Prince thereof, even our faith. And therefore the Apostles exhortation is,
Above all, take the shield of faith, Ephesians. 6.16.
wherewith you may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. This is the armor
wherewith we must all of us fight.

By an in^ernall faith then wrought in us by the Gospel, let us all of us
fight against Satan for the truth, and by an external confession of the faith
against all tyrants, heretics, and schismatiques whatsoever. Let us hold fast
the mystery of faith in a good conscience against all the enemies of the
truth, and let us boldly always make confession of our faith, both in word by
writing, preaching, disputing, professing, and indeed by joining our selves to
the professor^ of the truth, and constantly and patiently abiding for the truth.

LECTVRE XXII.
PHILIP. 1. Verse 28. And in nothing fear your adversaries, which is to them a
token of perdition, and to you of salvation, and that of God.
A Third thing also is herre mentioned, namely courage against the adversaries
of the truth, set down here in our reading by way of dehortation, And in
nothing fear etc. but is thus to be understood in true coherence with that
which went before, Let your conversation etc, that whether etc, I may hear and
see that ye continue in one spirit, and in one mind fighting etc, and that in
nothing ye fear your adversaries. For so we are to understand the Apostle,
that having exhorted the Philippians to such a conversation as becomes the
gospel of Christ, he does particularly specify some things whereby they might
give proof unto him of such a conversation, as namely if he might hear or
see that they continued in one spirit, and in one mind fighting together etc,
and in nothing fearing the adversaries, or being in nothing afraid of the
adversaries. Thus then I read these words, not by way of dehortation, but as
depending on the former words, and in nothing fearing the adversaries, or, and
being in nothing afraid of the adversaries. The Syriac interpreter reads, in
nothing fear our adversaries; our reading is, in nothing fear your
adversaries. But in the original is neither read our, nor your adversaries,
but as I said before, in nothing fearing the adversaries, or fearing them that
oppose themselves. The meaning is, that if he might hear or see that both they
stood fast by the power of the spirit against the adversaries of the truth, and
that they jointly fought together against the adversaries of the truth, as men
knit together in one mind, and likewise that in nothing they feared them that
opposed themselves against the truth, and the professors thereof, this should
be a good proof unto him that their conversation was such as became the
Gospel of Christ.

Hence then I observe a third special part, and mark of such a conversation
as becomes the Gospel of Christ, which is christian courage against the
adversaries of the truth, and of the professors thereof. If in nothing we fear
the adversaries of the Church, and of the truth, but take a good courage
against the Dragon and his Angels, this is a good note of such a conversation
as becomes the Gospel of Christ. Whereunto the Holy Ghost seems to give so
many testimonies, as he does often dissuade all fear of whatsoever and
whomsoever exalt themselves against God. Fear ye not them, says our blessed
Savior, Mat. 10.28
which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul, but rather fear him
which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell. Mat. 10.28.
In which place our blessed Savior puts the very extremity of that which
any adversary can do against us. For what can any cruel tyrant or bloody
persecutor do more then kill the body? Nebuchadnezzars rage and fury against
those three servants of the Lord, Shadrach, Mesech, and Abednego, can no more
but take hold of their bodies, and cast them into an hot fiery furnace. And
the Devil himself when he would wrecke his malice upon Job, Job 1. and 2.
what could he do more then touch him in his goods, and in his body? Assault
the soul the Devil may by many tentations; and poison the soul Heretics
may by their damnable heresies; but none of them all can kill the soul;
neither can any of them all prevail farther either against the soul, to
infect or defile it by heresies or other pollutions, or against the body to
kill or to afflict it, then they have power from God. The Jews in their rage
may stone Steven to death: Act. 7.59.
but though Nebuchadnezzar in his rage command the furnace to be hot seven
times hotter then it was wont, Dan. 3.19.21.27.
and cast Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego into the midst of it, yet not one
hair of their heads shall be burnt, nor their coats singed, nor any smell of
fire come upon them. And why, but because the Lord gives power over the one,
and not over the other? The very extremity then which any adversary can do
against us, is to kill the body, and that if the Lord give leave they may do:
yet says the Lord fear them not, seeing they can do no more fear them not.

Yea but they are many, and we but few, how should we but fear them? Nay,
though they be many, and we but few, Luc. 12.32.
how should we fear them, seeing our great Captain Christ Jesus has said
unto us, Fear not little flock? Wherein he implies that the adversaries are
many, and we but few, yet (says he) little flock fear not. And shall he
bid us not fear, and shall we fear? Elisha, we read, feared not the King of
Syria, 2 Reg. 6.16.
nor all his horses and charets, nor his mighty host, because he knew that
they that were with him were m^e then they that were against him. Be we nener
so few, we are to take unto us that weapon of faith, whereof we spoke before,
and to believe that God is with us, and then we are not to fear, but with good
courage and comfort to say, If God be with us, who can be against us? Romans 8.31.
for surely if he be with us none shall be able to prevail against us. Yea but
they are mighty, powerful, and strong. Yea but God that dwells on high is
mightier, and be the adversaries that oppose themselves against us tyrants, or
heretics, or spiritual wickednesses which are in the high places, his power
is enough to ^quell them, and to turn all that they can do against us to the
furtherance of his Gospel, and to our salvation. And why are they mightier and
stronger then we? Is it because they are more then we? One God and Savior of us
all Christ Jesus enough for them all. If he go forth with our armies, nay if he
go forth with us alone, with thee, or with me, hell gates shall not be able to
prevail against us.

What then? Are we desperately to run upon their pikes, and to put our
selves in danger, or securely to walk, and only contemn them? No, these are
extremities on the other side, and either to run our selves into danger when
we need not, or to wish assaults by Satan, grapling with heretics,
persecution by tyrants; or on the other side, to sleep the matter when such
adversaries lay their batteries against us, what else is it but to tempt the
Lord by willfulnes and security? We are to fear them so, that we avoid them,
and run not our selves into the danger of them when we need not, and we are
so to fear them that we take heed that we be not circumvented by them. For
our blessed Savior himself so feared, that he run not himself into the
danger either of any other adversary, or of the Devil when he was tempted,
but was led aside by the spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the Devil,
Mat. 4.1.
and so he feared that he took heed of being circumvented either by any other
adversary, or by the Devil, and therefore returned upon his false allegations
of scriptum est* true allegations of scriptum est. And so we are willed to fly
into this City, when we are persecuted in that; to beware of dogs, Mat 10.23
Tit. 3.2.
and of evil workers, 1 Pet. 5.8.
and to watch, because our adversary the Devil (...) a roaring lion walks
about seeking whom he may devour. S^ that we are to fear them to avoid them;
and to fear them to beware of them. But we are not to fear them as to be^
daunted or dismayed by them, or to forsake the truth f^^ them. We are not to
fear them, as for fear of them (...) join our selves unto them, and to
shrink from the hope of a good profession; but herein we are to take a good
courage to stand against them without being thrown down by them, and with one
mind to fight together against them to throw them down. And in this sense it
is where such like exhortations are, as not to fear the adversaries; not to
fear them as to join our selves unto them, or to shrink from a good
profession for them, but in Christ his cause, and in the defense of the truth
to take a good courage against them, even as our Savior wills where he
says, Ioh. 16.33.
In the world ye shall have affliction, but be of good comfort, I have
overcome the world. Though the world afflict and persecute you for the truths
sake, yet fear not, nor shrink from the truth, but be of good comfort, and
stand, and fight for the truth: for though happily they prevail against us,
and have their wills over us, yet neither do they overcome, nor are we
overcome, but if we die for the truth, our soul marches valiantly, and we
triumph gloriously.

This then may serve for a just reproof of them, that for fear of the
adversaries shrink and fall away from the hope of a good profession. Fear
them we shall even in Gods cause, and the Gospels, the best of us; insomuch
that it shall be needful to say unto Paul, Act. 23.11. Luc. 12.32. Ioh. 16.33.
be of good courage Paul; and unto all of us, Fear not little flock, be of
good comfort: for while we live here in the body of this flesh we have our
weakness and infirmities, our wants which had need to be supplied; our falls
which had need to be pardoned, and our faint hearts which had need to be
encouraged. But who so fears them so, that for fear of them he fall away
from a good profession, it had been better for him never to have known the
way of truth, then after he has known it to turn away from it for fear of
any adversary. Such our Fathers have heard of, and some of us have seen. But
let us hearken unto our blessed Saviors exhortation thrice repeated, not to
fear the adversaries. He has there said, Whosoever shall confess me before
men, Mat. 10.26 28.31.32.33.
him will I confess also before my Father which is in heaven: But whosoever
shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in
heaven. And again, 38.39.
He that takes not up his cross, and follows after me is not worthy of me.
He that will save his life shall lose it, and he that loses his life for my
sake shall save it. That Chapter is well worth the reading for this purpose,
wherein our Savior abundantly prepares and armeth his children against
persecution, and fear of any adversaries.

Yea but what reason is there but to fear the adversaries? In the very next
words immediately following, the Apostle gives three reasons to encourage the
Philippians, and in them us: As 1. that the adversaries persecute the truth,
and persecute them, it is to the adversaries a sure token of perdition; and why
should any fear to see his adversaries run unto destruction? 2. That they
fight together against them, and fear them not, is to them a sure token of
salvation* and why should any man fear a mark of his salvation? 3. That
persecution causes perdition to the adversaries, and salvation unto them: it
is of God, and why should an^ fear persecution by the adversaries, which God
turns to the destruction of the persecutors, and to the salvation of the
persecuted? This I take to be the argument and sens^ of these words.

Which is to them a token of perdition.] This is the first mo^iue and reason to
persuade the Philippians, in nothing to fear the adversaries, which oppose
themselves against them, and against the truth, even because this same thing,
that they are adversaries to them and to the truth, is an evident token of
destruction to their adversaries. Whence I observe, that the fury and rage of
tyrants and persecutors against the truth and professors thereof, is an
infallible sign of their destruction. Psalm. 34 21.
Malice (says the Prophet) shall slay the wicked, and they that hate the
righteous, shall perish. Do the wicked then and ungodly of the earth malign
the children of God? This surely is a token of their destruction: for malice
shall slay the wicked. Do they hate and persecute the children of God? This
surely is a token unto them of perdition: for they that hate the righteous,
shall perish. Very plain to this purpose is that of the Apostle, where he
says, It is a righteous thing with God, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6.7.
to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you, when the Lord Jesus shall
show himself from heaven with his mighty Angels, etc. Where the judgment of
the Lord i^ very plainly and peremptorily set down against them that trouble
and persecute the Saints of God. Do the children of darkness then trouble and
persecute the children of light? It is a plain forerunner and prognostication
of that fearful and everlasting perdition, wherewith they shall be punished,
when the Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven with his mighty Angels, in
flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto them. And the more they rage against Gods
children, the more manifestly they declare that they run to their own
destruction: as Cain when he slew his brother Abel, and Iezabel when she
destroyed the Lord his Prophets, then they ran amain to their destruction.
Before, when Cain was wroth with his brother, and Iezabel imagined mischief
against the Lord his Prophets, they were in the high way; but when their rage
brast out into cruel murder, then they marched furiously, and posted apace to
their destruction.

Howbeit, here ye must understand, that persecution and rage against the
Saints of God, is only an infallible sign of destruction unto them that
obstinately persist therein: for if God grant grace unto repentance, their
sin shall no more be had in remembrance. Even as we see in our Apostle, who
persecuted the Church of God extremely, and wasted it, Gal. 1.13.
a^ himself confesses: but he did it ignorantly through unbelief, and
therefore afterward was received unto mercy, and was made the great instrument
of the Lord, to the salvation of many thousands. But unto them that go on with
an high hand, and as they have begun, so continue to persecute the Church of
God, this is an infallible token of their perdition, yea it is a clear cause
of their destruction: as we see heavy plagues and judgments to have
overtaken Hananiah, Shemaiah, Amaziah, Ier. 28.16.29 25. Amos 7.17.
and others, because they were malicious enemies against his Prophets,
Jeremiah, Amos, and others.

The use which our Apostle here teaches us to make hereof, is this, not to
fear the adversaries that oppose themselves against us: for when they
persecute us from one City to another, beat us, imprison us, and every way
afflict us, whom hurt they? Even themselves, they run themselves upon the
rocks, and bring upon themselves swift damnation. They think they have great
masteries over us, but indeed themselves smart for it. Let them therefore look
unto it, how they hold on to wrecke their malice upon us, and let us not fear
all that ever they do or can do against us.

Yea but though they hurt themselves, yet they hurt us also: how should we
then but fear them? Nay that is the next reason wherefore we are not to fear
them, because their persecution and rage against us is no harm unto us, but a
token unto us of salvation. And to you of salvation: that is, The fury and
rage of the adversaries against you, if ye stand fast, and fight together with
one mind, through the faith of the Gospel, is a plain token unto you of your
salvation. Whence I observe, that persecution by the adversaries is unto Gods
children a token of their salvation. We rejoice (says the Apostle) of you in
the Churches of God, 2 Th. 1.4.5.
because of your patience and faith, etc. Again, Gal. 6.17.
I bear in my body (says the Apostle) the marks of the Lord Jesus. Whereby
he signifies, that his afflictions were the very marks of his salvation
through Christ Jesus, as whereby he was made like unto him. Again, If we
suffer with him, 2 Timothy 2.12
we shall also reign with him. And again, Blessed are they that suffer
persecution for righteousness sake, Matt. 5.10.
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. The Scriptures are very plentiful to
this purpose, clearly showing, that persecution by the adversaries is unto
Gods children a token of their salvation: A token, I say, but not a cause; for
that of the Apostle is ever true, that the afflictions of this present time are
not worthy of the glory which shall be showed unto us. Romans 8.15.
Unto the adversaries indeed, their persecution and rage against us, is so a
token, that it is also a cause of their destruction: for sin being a just
cause o^ death, Romans 6.23.
according to that of the Apostle, The wages of sin is death, surely this
great and grievous sin of persecuting the truth, and the professors thereof,
must needs be a just cause of their endless destruction. But unto us, their
persecution and their rage against us, is only a token, not a cause of our
salvation: for both to suffer for Christ, is the gift of God, as it is in the
next verse, and salvation also through sufferings, is his gift by grace through
faith. So that it is no cause; but it is unto us a token of salvation, as both
this and many other places show.

Howbeit, here ye must also understand, that so their persecution and rage
against us is a token unto us of salvation, if we continue in one spirit, and
in one mind, fighting together against them, through the faith of the Gospel,
and in nothing fearing the adversaries. It is not standing (...) while, and not
continuing; or fighting for a blow or ^wo, and then giving the bucklers; or
taking courage for a spirt, and afterward for fear falling away, that
betokens our salvation. But he that continues unto the end, he shall be
saved: Mat. 10.22
he that fights lawfully, and as he should, he shall be crowned; 2 Timothy
2.5. Hab. 6.6.
and he that for fear flatly falls away, purchases unto himself a fearful
judgment.

The use which our Apostle teaches us to make hereof, is this, as of the
former, not to fear the adversaries which oppose themselves against us: for
what if we be tried by mockings and scourgings, yea moreover by bonds and
imprisonments? What if we be stoned, hewn asunder, slain with the sword,
afflicted and tormented many ways? This is unto us a token of our salvation.
They think that t^^s they hurt us, and have their wills over us: but indeed
thus they further our reckoning in the day of Christ Jesus. Let us therefore
not fear what they do or can do against us: but let us be of good courage,
and hold fast the profession of our hope unto the end.

LECTVRE XXIII.
PHILIP. 1. Verse 29. For unto you it is given for Christ, that not only ye
should believe in him, but also suffer for his sake.

30. Having the same fight which ye saw in me, and now hear to be in me.


YEa, but how and whence is it that persecution betokens perdition to the
adversaries, and salvation unto us? It is of God, as our Apostle in the next
words says. And this is the third motive or reason which the Apostle uses, to
persuade the Philippians not to fear the adversaries, because it is of God
that persecution is perdition to the adversaries, and salvation unto them.
Whence I observe, that it is of God that tribulation is recompensed unto them
that trouble us, and salvation unto us which are troubled. This also our
Apostle plainly witnesses in another place, where he says, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6.7.
It is a righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble you, and to you which are troubled, rest with us, etc. Where not only
this is manifestly set down, that God recompenceth tribulation to the
troublers, and rest to the ^roubled; but withal, that it is a righteous thing
wi^h God so to do. A righteous thing indeed with God, in respect of his
justice to the one, and a righteous thing in respect of his promise unto the
other: for in respect of his justice, it is a righteous thing with him to
recompense tribulation to them that trouble his Saints, because they deserve to
have vengeance rendered unto them in flaming fire; according to that of the
Apostle, Romans 6.23.
The wages of sin, that which is due in justice unto sin, is death, and
damnation; and judgment merciless, Iam. 2.13.
due in justice unto him that shows no mercy, and therefore doubtless unto
him that without all mercy rages and persecuteth. And in respect of his
promise, it is a righteous thing with him to recompense rest unto them that are
troubled, because he has promised the kingdom of heaven to them that suffer
persecution for righteousness sake, Mat. 5.10
saying, Blessed are they which suffer persecution for righteousness sake, for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven: and again, If we suffer, 2 Timothy 2.12
we shall also reign with Christ. That persecution then causes perdition to
the adversaries, and salvation unto us, it is of God, who in justice renders
unto them as they have deserved, and for his promise sake renders unto us as
he has promised.

For this ye must here note and understand, that persecutions, afflictions,
sufferings, and wrongs by adversaries, are in themselves, and in their own
nature, punishments of sin, as is also death; and hereby God in justice might
punish our sins and our iniquities: for if he should bring upon us the
bloody persecutions of such Tyrants as were Nero, Domitian, and the rest of
those cruel persecutors in the Primitive Church, he might thus plague us for
our offenses, and himself be just in all his ways, and holy in all his
works. But unto us his beloved ones, and his redeemed, these things are not
that which in themselves and in their own nature they are, and which in Gods
justice they might be unto us, even punishments of our sins, but only
fatherly corrections, and loving chastisements, whereby in mercy God exercises
us, represseth sin in us, and bowlteth the branne of corruption out of us
here in the body of this flesh. And as unto us in mercy death is made of God
not that which in it own nature it is, a punishment of sin, but an entrance
and passage unto life; so in mercy has he promised, that afflictions,
persecutions, and the like, shall be unto us, not that which in their own
nature are the beginnings of greater miseries, but forerunners of our
salvation in the day of Christ Jesus. It is not then of the nature of suffering
persecution, ye see, but it is of God, that persecution betokens unto us
salvation, that salvation is recompensed unto us which are troubled. He in
mercy has promised that so it shall be, and therefore so it shall be, and it
is a righteous thing with him that it be so.

The use which our Apostle here teaches us to make hereof, is as of the
former, not to fear persecution by the adversaries, which oppose themselves
against the truth, and against us for the truths sake: for seeing God turns
their persecution, and rage against us, to their perdition, and to our
salvation, why should we fear them? Whatsoever therefore they practice
against us, let us rest and repose our selves in our God: He shall stretch out
his hand upon the furiousnes of our enemies, but his right hand shall save us:
he shall recompense the adversaries their wickedness, and destroy them in their
own malice; but he shall wipe all tears from our eyes, and after we have
drunk of the brook in the way, lift up our head above all our adversaries.

Again, is it of God that persecution causes unto us salvation? This then may
farther teach us, that by suffering persecution we do not merit salvation. For
if it be of merit that our sufferings bring salvation unto us, then it is not
of God, but the cause is in our selves: and if it be of God, then is it not of
merit, nor is the cause of our salvation in our selves. Not according to the
works which we do, or sufferings which we suffer, but according to his mercy
he saves us: for neither have we wherein to rejoice by works, nor are any
sufferings of this present time worthy of that glory which shall be showed unto
us, nor is there any other name under heaven whereby we may be saved, but only
by the name of Christ Jesus. He that rejoices therefore let him rejoice in the
Lord, of whom it is that our persecutions and sufferings work unto our
salvation. And let this be spoken of this third motive or reason, whereby ye
see that we are not to fear the adversaries, because God recompenseth their
persecution unto them with perditi^n, and unto us with salvation.

It follows; For unto you it is given etc.] These words are both a proof of
that which went immediately before, and a fourth motive likewise to persuade the
Apostles former intendment. Immediately before he had said, that God in
persecution gave them a token of their salvation. The proof here is: Unto you
it is given of God by grace to suffer for Christ his sake; therefore in
suffering God gives you a token of your salvation: or thus, sufferings for
Christ are testimonies of grace unto you of God, therefore they are arguments
and tokens of salvation unto you of God. And as thus these words serve for
proof of that, so are they a notable motive to persuade the Philippians not to
fear the adversaries: for thus out of the Apostles words I frame the motive:
Who will be afraid of a singular gift of God? but to suffer for Christ his sake
is a singular gift of God to you, therefore ye are not to fear persecution by
the adversaries. And that to suffer for Christ his sake is a gift of God he
shows a pari, from the like; as to believe in Christ is the gift of God, so
to suffer for Christ, both gifts of God, and unto whom the one is given, the
other may not seem strange. For unto you it is given, to wit by grace, for so
the word signifies, (...).
for christ, that is in Christ his cause, not only that ye should believe in
him, as others profess they do; but also to suffer for his sake, which many
others shrink to do. Even both these, faith in Christ, and persecution for
Christ his sake are the gift and grace of God toward you.

Here then first I note that the Apostle says, it was given by grace unto the
Philippians to believe in Christ. Whence I observe that faith in Christ is the
gift of God by grace. Which also Christ himself teaches us where he says, No
man can come unto me, except it be given him of my Father. Joh. 6.65.
Whereby he means that no man can come unto him, that is, can believe in him
and his Gospel, except it be given him of his Father. For so by coming unto
him diverse times in that chapter is meant believing in him: a^ when it is said,
He that comes unto me shall not hunger, and he that believes in me, which
expounds the former, 35.
shall never thirst: and again: Him that comes unto me, I cast not away,
which is all one with that, 37.
He that believes in me shall not perish. So that it is clear, that when our
Savior says, that no man can come unto him except it be given him of the
Father, the meaning is, that no man can believe in Christ, except it be given
him of God. And to the Hebrews Christ Jesus is called the author and finisher
of our faith. Heb. 12.2.
And wherefore was it, that when Christ preached, and when his Apostles and
Disciples preached, some believed, and others believed not, but because unto
some he gave grace to believe, and not unto others? For only they unto whom it
is given of God to believe do believe.

But how does God give this gift unto us to believe in him? Even by his holy
spirit, 2 Cor. 4.13.
therefore called the spirit of faith, because God by the inspiration of his
holy spirit works faith in us. But by what means does he work faith in us?
Even by the hearing of the word preached, as it is written, Faith comes by
hearing, Romans 10.17.
and hearing by the word of God. Where the holy Apostle shows, that hearing
of the word, even of the word of God is that ordinary means whereby the Lord
works faith in the hearts of his children. He blesses and sanctifies the
hearing of his holy word unto them, and reaches it unto their hearts by the
finger of his holy spirit, and so they are begotten in the faith of Christ
Jesus. Thus Lydia was brought unto the faith, as Luke witnesses where he
says, Act. 16.1.
that the Lord op^n^d her heart, so that she attended unto the things which
Paul shake, and believed. She heard the word, the Lord opened her heart, and
she believed. And thus 3000 souls were brought unto the faith in one day, of
whom it is said, that when they heard the word they were pricked in their
hearts, Act. 2.37.
and believing they said, Men and brethren what shall we do. They heard the
word, they were pricked in their hearts by the spirit, they believed, and were
baptized. So that faith in Christ ye see is the gift of God, given by his
spirit through the hearing or the word preached: 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. Tit. 1.1.
Non omnibus, non enim omnium est fides, sed tantum electorum: vnde dicitur
fides electorum, and hic v^bis donatum est. Not to all men, for all men have
not faith: whence it is called, the faith of the elect; and in this place, To
you it is given.

Is then faith a gift of God by grace? This may teach us that it is not in our
selves, or in our own power to believe if we will, and when we will, neither
that for any merit or worth of ours this gift is given unto us: for if it be in
our selves to believe, how then is it the gift of God? And if it be given us
for our own merit, how then is it the gift of God by grace? If it be given us,
we have it but of him that gives it, not of our selves. If he give it of his
own grace it is ours; but of his grace that gives it, not of our merit to
whom it is given. He must give it, or else we cannot have it, and therefore it
is not of our selves: and by grace it must be had, or else can never be had,
and therefore not by our own merit. Jam. 1.17.
Every good giving is from above, therefore faith is given of God; therefore it
is not in our selves to believe if we will. And by the grace of God we are that
we are, therefore faith whereby we are the sons of God is by grace, 1 Cor.
15.10
therefore not by any merit or worth of our own.

Again, is faith the gift of God? This then may teach us to power out our
requests unto God in prayer, and supplication for faith in Christ Jesus, for
increase and confirmation of our faith in Christ Jesus: for if he give it, then
we are by prayer to ask it of him, and so we shall receive it; and if he give
it by means, we are to pray unto him that he will so bless those means unto
us, that thereby this gift may be given unto us. Let us therefore (after the
example of the Father of the child, in whom was the dumb spirit) go unto our
God, and say unto him, Lord, I believe, Mar. 9.24.
help my vn^eleefe; help the wants and weakness of faith. And after ^he
example of the Apostles, Lord increase our faith. He gi^eth where it wants,
he increases where it is, and he con^irmeth where it is weak. Let us
therefore by prayer go unto him, to have the wants of our faith supplied, the
weakness of our faith strengthened, the less then graine-small ^ittlenesse of
our faith increased. He has said, Ask, and ye shall receive, and he gives
liberally, and reproacheth no man. Let us therefore ask in prayer faith of him
that gives it, and assuredly he will give liberally, even that mea^ure
wherewith he will be pleased.

Again, does God give faith by the hearing of the word preached? This then may
teach us gladly to frequent those places where we may hear the word preached,
His power ^ know is not limited to this means, but that he can (if he will)
beget us in the faith without these means. But by this means he has
appointed to give this grace, and ordinarily he gives this grace by these
means. And yet how careless are we too too many of us, of using this means
of hearing the word preached; as if either this gift of faith in Christ Jesus
were not given by these means, or we esteemed not this gift, and so neglected
these means, or were strong enough in the faith, and so needed not these
means? Why should we love rather to sit reading in our houses, or drinking in
our houses, or idle in our houses, or to be playing in the streets, or walking
in the fields, or or any otherwise occupied, then to come unto the house of the
Lord, and to hear the word preached.

Now the means of begetting and confirming us in the faith, are offered unto
us. We know not but the time may come, wherein we may think that the Sparrowes
and Swallows are happy, that have their nests by the Alters of the Lord. Ye
that gladly come unto the house of the Lord, and rejoice in the word of your
salvation, comfort your selves in that ye use the means whereby God has
appointed to beget you, and to confirm you in the faith of Christ Jesus, and
assure your selves of his blessing upon these means. As for the rest that love
darkness better then light, and under this or that pretense whatsoever, will
not come to hear the word preached; let them fear, for want of faith and a
good conscience in that day, to hear the word, which will be too fearful for
them to hear, Go ye cursed, etc. But I proceed to that which follows.

The second thing which here I note, is that the Apostle says, it was given by
grace unto the Philippians to suffer for Christ his sake, not simply to suffer,
but to suffer for Christ his sake. Whence I observe, that persecution and
suffering for Christ his sake, is a gift of God by grace. And this our Savior
himself shows by those his words unto Peter, Ioh. 18.11.
when he had cut off Malchus his ear, where he says unto him, Put up thy
sword, shall I not drink of the cup which my father has given me? To suffer
death was a cup which his father had given him to drink, and should he refuse
the gift of his Father? Act 5.41.
And thus it appears, that the Apostles thought, when they rejoiced that they
were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for Christ his name. This they thought was
their glory, and a special gift of God by grace unto them, not communicated
unto others, who could not endure any such sufferings for Christ, but by a
special gift given of god unto them, and therefore they rejoiced in their
sufferings.

Now here ye must understand that all sufferings are not sufferings for Christ
his sake, and that all that say they suffer for Christ his sake do not suffer
for Christ his sake; for such there are as suffer as evil doers; touching
which sort of sufferers the Apostle exhorts us saying, Let none of you suffer
as a murderer, 1 Pet. 4.15.
or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or as a busy body in other men's
matters. And again, such there are as say, they suffer for Christ his sake,
and his truths sake, when in truth they suffer for troubling the Church with
their heresies, as many Heretics heretofore, and for treason against their
Prince and Country, as some in our daie^. Know therefore that two things are
required in him that suffers for Christ his sake. The one is, that his
adversaries persecute and trouble him not as an evil doer, not for tumults ^n
the Church by schism, or heresy, not for treason, or any ^ause that is not
good, but even because of his constant ^rofession of Christ, and of his truth.
And therefore the ^ufferings of malefactors, of Heretics, schismatiques,
trai^ors, or others that suffer for an evil cause, are no sufferings ^or
Christ his sake. The other is, that with patience he suffer ^hatsoeuer he
suffers only for Christ and his truths sake, without respect of shame, gain,
glory, or any other like thing in the world. And therefore the sufferings of
such as ^uffer because they shame to be counted reuoltors and A^ostataes, or
because they desire to be honored as Martyrs, ^r in any like respects, are no
sufferings for Christ his sake. To suffer then for Christ his sake, is with
patience to endure mockings, scourgings, bonds, imprisonments, and death it
self, even for his own sake, and for his truths sake; and ^ather then we will
depart from him, or prejudice his glory. And thus to suffer for Christ his
sake, is a singular gift of God by grace, as has already been showed; not the
afflictions and persecutions themselves in themselves, but ^hus to suffer them.

Now the Use which our Apostle teaches us to make hereof is this, not to fear
the adversaries in any thing. For who would be afraid of a singular gift of
God? Now to suffer for Christ his sake by the adversaries is a singular gift of
God. Let us not therefore in any thing fear our adversaries, but take good
courage against them.

Again, this may serve to teach us what nouices yet we are in the school of
Christ; for how many of us esteem it a singular gift of God to suffer
persecution for Christ his sake? Surely, if we had learned this lesson well,
we had profited very well in the school of Christ. But when we are taught
this lesson, what do many of us, I hope not many here, but in many places what
do many say within themselves? surely I fear to remember what they say. But
do they not say, I bid no such gifts, such gifts be far from me, let him
bestow such gifts on his dearest children, not on me; and such other
blasphemous speeches, which the godly may fear to hear or utter? And indeed
he gives no such gifts to such* But let us know, that then we have well
profited in the schole of Christ when we have well learned this lesson, that to
suffer for his Christ's sake is a singular gift of God; especially when we have
so learned it, that when it comes to the practice, we can so account it.

Again, this may teach us that it is not in our own power, or strength to
suffer persecution for Christ his sake, but this must be given us of God. To
will, to do, to believe, to suffer, all must be given of God: he must begin,
and he must make an end; he must be all in all that he may have the glory of
all. 1 Pet. 1.5.
If Peter be left unto himself a damsel shall be enough to terrify him, and
to make him deny his Lord and Master. And therefore he can tell us out of his
own experience, that we are kept by the power of God through faith unto
salvation. Whether therefore we beliue, or suffer for Christ his sake, let us
know that it is given us of God, and let him have all the glory of it.

Another thing yet I observe in that the Apostle says, unto you it is given
not only to believe, but to suffer for Christ (...) sake: and that is, that to
suffer for Christ his sake is an argument of faith, and a note of Gods Church
and chosen children. For unto none is it given to suffer for Christ his sake
but unto whom it is first given to believe, and it is for him that is borne
after the flesh to persecute him that is borne after the spirit; as it is
written, as then he that was borne afte^ the flesh (speaking of Ismael)
persecuted him that was born^ after the spirit, Gal. 4.29.
meaning Isaac, even so is it now. All of them indeed strive not unto death,
but most of them at one time or other are put to it, P^^
to take up their cross, and only they suffer for Christ his sake: for unto
them it is given, and only to them to suffer for his sake.

This then may teach us, to brook the cross, when he lays it upon us. For
it is no strange thing that the cross be laid upon the children of the
kingdom, and that their faith be tried by troubles. Nay rather it is strange
if it be not so. And therefore the Apostle says, Dearly beloved, ^inke it
not strange concerning the fiery trial which is among you ^ prove you, 1 Pet.
4.12.
as though some strange thing were come unto ^^u, and. If therefore, if it be
the will of God that we suffer ^^r Christ his sake, let us cheerfully take up
our cross and ^^llow him, knowing that afflictions and sufferings are the
^arkes of the Lord Jesus in our body, and that he will not ^^ffer us to be
tempted above that we be able, etc. It ^^lloweth.

Having the same fight] This is the last motive or reason ^o persuade the
Philippians in nothing to fear the aduer^^ries, wherein he presses them with
his own example, ^^at as they had seen him at Philippie in nothing to fear
the ^duersaries, and now heard that at Rome he feared them ^ot, so they should
in nothing fear the adversaries. But ^ow says the Apostle that he had fought,
and now did ^^ght? He fought and overcame, as Augustine says, Non re^^stendo,
sed patiendo, he changed no blows with the aduersa^ies, but in his sufferings
he was patient, and constant, and neither for bonds, nor imprisonment, nor
fear of death shrunk ^^om the profession of his hope. This was his fight, and
^hus he overcame.

Hence then, 1. I observe, that it is no light matter to en^ure the cross for
Christ his sake, but it is a fight with the ^duersarie, even a round trying of
the masterie who shall ^uercome. Now in this fight the field is won, and the
masterie got if we patiently and constantly endure the cross. ^et us therefore
stand fast, that at the last we may say with ^he Apostle, I have fought a good
fight.

2. Hence I observe that the example of Gods Saints, that ^aue suffered before
us, should encourage us gladly to suffer ^or Christ his sake. And therefore our
Savior encourages, his Disciples against persecution thus, saying, so
persecuted ^hey the Prophets which were before you: And again, If the world
hate you, ye know that it hated me before you: And again Take the Prophets
(says James) for an example of suffering adversity, and of long patience. As
therefore we have the holy men of God for an example, let us gladly suffer for
Christ his sake, and in nothing fear the adversaries.

3. Hence I observe that the Pastors ought to be unto their flocks examples,
as of other good things, so of patience and constancy in suffering for Christ
his sake.

4* That great and long crosses may lie upon them when God loves most: as here
on Paul: on the Israelites 400* years in EGYPT: on Abraham in his barennesse.

Laus omnis soli Deo.
THE SECOND CHAPTER.
LECTVRE XXIV.
PHILIP. 2. Verse 1. If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any
comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any compassion and mercy.

2. Fulfill my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one
accord and of one judgment.


THE Apostle having in the former chapter exhorted the Philippians generally
unto such a conversation as becomes the Gospel of Christ, and having
particularly instanced in some of those points wherein such a conversation
consists; now in this chapter he instanceth in some other points wherein
such a conversation consists, as namely in concord, love, and humility, and
most earnestly exhorts the Philippians, and in them us unto these most
necessary virtues and graces of a Christian life and conversation. In the
words I note 1. the manner. 2. the matter of the Apostles exhortation. The
manner how the Apostle exhorts the Philippians is by way of request, as we
say, for all the loves under heaven, in the first verse, in these words, If
there be therefore etc. Wherein the Apostle coucheth 4. very patheticall
arguments to persuade the things whereunto he exhorts them, are inferred, as
ye see, upon the words before; as if he should have said, your selves have
seen what I suffered at Philippi for Christ his sake, what fighting I had
there, and now ye hear what I suffer at Rome for Christ his sake, what
fighting I have here, If therefore etc.

The first argument is, If there be any consolation in Christ, that is, if by
my ministry and Apostleship ye have any comfort in Christ Jesus, then fulfill
my joy that ye be like minded etc. as if he should have said, now show whether
ye have received any consolation in Christ Jesus by the work of my
ministry. If ye have received any, let me have some back again from you,
fulfill my joy etc.

The second argument is, if there be any comfort of love, that is, if you so
love me that ye desire any comfort in these my bands for the defense of the
Gospel, then fulfill my joy etc. as if he should have said; I love you from
the very heart root in Jesus Christ, now show whether ye so love me that
indeed ye desire my comfort in my bands and imprisonment. And if ye do so
love me, then fulfill my joy etc.

The third argument is, If there be any fellowship of the spirit, that is, if
ye be knit together in the bond of one spirit with me and amongst your selves,
then fulfill my joy etc. as if he should have said, Men that are knit together
in the bond of one spirit are to give proof thereof by concord, love, and
agreement amongst themselves: now then show whether ye be knit together in the
bond of one spirit with me, and amongst your selves. And if ye be so knit
together, then fulfill my joy etc.

The fourth argument is, if there be any compassion and mercy, that is, if ye
have any bowels of compassion to show any mercy to me the Lord his prisoner
for your sake, then fulfill my joy etc. as if he should have said, Now show
what bowels of compassion there are in you, what mercy you have on me the
prisoner of Jesus Christ for your sake. And if there be any bowels of
compassion in you, any mercy toward me, then fulfill my joy etc. What more
patheticall to move, more forcible to persuade then these arguments so closely
followed, and so passionately urged. All such, and in such sort pressed that
the manner of the Apostles exhortation could not be devised more effectual, to
persuade the things which now his hearts desire was to persuade.

Now the matter of the Apostles exhortation, is partly touching graces which he
wishes them to follow after, and partly touching faults which he wishes them
to be free from. The graces which he wishes them to follow after in this
second verse are set down first in general, and then in special. In general
he exhorts them that they be like minded; or as it is translated elsewhere,
that they be like affectioned, Romans 12.16.
having their affections, likings, and desires set on the same things. Which
his exhortation is not simply so that they be like minded, but with another
prefixed motive as I take it thereunto, fulfill my joy that ye be like minded.
Which is as if he should have said, I joy in the fellowship which ye have in
the Gospel from the first day unto now, I joy in your constant abiding in the
truth in such assaults by the adversaries of the truth, I joy in your
liberality sent unto me whereby ye communicated to mine afflictions, I joy in
very many mercies and graces of God bestowed upon you in Christ Jesus. But yet
my joy is not full, so long as I hear of any contentions, emulations, and
distractions among you, my joy is not full. If therefore there be any
consolation in Christ etc, fulfill my joy, make full my joy; and so shall ye
make full my ioyt if ye be like minded, like affectioned one toward another.
So that ye see the exhortation is not simply proposed, but with this motive
prefixed thereunto, my joy is not full except ye be like minded; fulfill my
joy that ye be like minded. This is the general virtue whereto he exhorts
them.

The special virtues comprised under this general, whereunto he exhorts
them are, 1. that they have the same love, that is, that they love the same
things in the Lord. 2. That they be of one accord, that is, that they agree in
their wills and desires in the Lord. 3. That they be of one judgment, that is,
that they agree in the doctrine and truth of Christ Jesus. These be the things
which he wishes to be in them, that their conversation may be such as
becomes the Gospel of Christ; in general, to be like affectioned in the
Lord; in special to love the same things in the Lord, to agree in their wills
and desires in the Lord, to agree in the doctrine and truth of Christ Jesus.
Now the faults which he wishes them to be free from are contention,
vainglory, and self-love noted in the verses following, yet so that the
countre-poyson of humility is therein countre-ballanced and persuaded, that
nothing be done through contention etc. This I take to be the order and meaning
of these words thus far. Now let us see what observations we may gather hence
for our own farther use and instruction.

If there be therefore any consolation in Christ Iesus] In this manner of the
Apostles exhortation, 1. In general I note the Apostles vehement obtestation
of the Philippians for the embracing of concord, love, and humility, that they
may never fail from amongst them. He might, as he says to Philemon, have
commanded them in Christ that which were convenient. Verse. 8.
Yet he rather beseeches them; but that he does indeed thoroughly, even for
all the loves sakes under heaven, if there be any consolation in Christ in
them, any comfort of love in them, etc. Whence I observe, in what manner the
Pastors ought to labor to repress such enormities amongst their people, as
hinder the course of a Christian conversation: they are earnestly to beseech
them; even as if they desired no other recompense of their labors and travels
amongst them, then this, that such and such contentions might be taken up, such
and such disorders might be reformed, such and such Christian piety might be
maintained. They are to remember that they are fathers to their flocks, as the
Apostle calls himself, 1 Cor. 4.15. 1 John 2.1.
and as John also implies when he says, my babes, little children, etc. and
therefore they are to deal with them as parents with their children. Now the
father if happily his children be at odds amongst themselves, what does he? He
calls them unto him, he remembers them what care he has had over them,
what cost he has been at with them, what his love has been toward them,
what his desire has been of their good, what honor, duty, reverence, and
obedience they owe unto him, and at length entreats them that if they have
any care of these things, if they desire his comfort, if they will not bring
his life down unto the dust with grief, they will be reconciled, and live
together as brethren in unity. Even so Pastors which are spiritual fathers,
when their people, their children fall to inconveniences which any way breed
offense, they are to remember them with what care they labor amongst them, how
they long after their good from the very heart root in Jesus Christ; what
continual mention they make of them in their prayers unto the Lord: what
honor again, duty, reverence, and obedience they owe unto them as unto them
that watch for their souls, and at length earnestly to beseech them that if
they have any care of these things, if they desire his continuance with comfort
amongst them, if they wish that he may give up his accounts for them in that
day with joy, and not with grief, then they will reform such and such
disorders, live in such and such sort as becomes the Gospel of Christ Jesus.
Our Apostle dealing thus with the Philippians in this place, has therein left
a pattern for all Pastors, that they should so deal with their people as they
have him for example.

Here it may be you will say, that you could like this well, that in things
convenient for you, Pastors would thus mildly deal with you, as parents with
their children. But forsooth, they will rather command as Masters over
servants, and oftentimes threaten the law; they will when things are amiss,
and this ye cannot brook. Will ye then have us to beseech you, and mildly to
deal with you as here the Apostle dealt with the Philippians? If ye do not,
it is because ye are not as were the Philippians. Be ye as were the Philippians
generally, embrace the truth of Christ Jesus, be constant in the faith of
Christ Jesus, be patient in afflictions for Christ Jesus his sake, communicate
to the afflictions of the Saints of Christ Jesus, love them that labor amongst
you and are ever in the Lord, amongst many graces of the spirit let there be
but some infirmities of the flesh, and see whether we will not beseech you, and
deal with you as here the Apostle dealt with these Philippians. But if ye be
like unto the Galathians, unstable souls carried about with every wind of
doctrine, corrupt in judgment, corrupt in manners, then ye may look for it,
that as Paul sharply rebuked them, saying, O foolish Galatians who has
bewitched you that ye should not obey the truth, Gal. 3.1.
so we will learn of him sharply to reprove you. This ye must know that we may
come unto you either with a rod, 1 Cor. 4.21. Philem. 8.
or in love, and in the spirit of meekness; that in Christ, we may command you
that which is convenient for you, even when for loves sake we rather beseech
you. If we come then unto you with a rod, or if we command you, we do that we
may do, but ye drive us unto it by your inordinate ways, and dissolute lives,
which as cankred sores need sharp corrasiues. For this is a thing, ye hear,
which we urge and press, that pastors are to labor to repress such
enormities as arise amongst their people in the mildest sort that may be,
earnestly beseeching them to reform such things as are amiss. And again, if
we come unto you for loves sake beseeching you, we remit of that we may do,
even because in all loving kindness, and meekness of the spirit we would
reconcile you unto God, and join you unto the things that belong unto your
peace. For therefore we beseech you, that by mildness we may prevail in that
wherein of right we may command.

But this withal ye must note, that our beseeching of you is to be unto you as
if we commanded you. For when the Apostle says, 2 These. 2.1.2.
we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our
assembling unto him, that ye be not suddenly moved from your mind etc. What
else is his beseeching of the Thessalonians, but an adiuration of them by these
things, that they be not troubled about the day of the Lord his coming. And,
not to stand upon many places, when our Apostle here says, if there be any
consolation in Christ, etc. What else is this, but an adiuration of the
Philippians, by these things, that they like minded, etc. Albeit therefore we
are to remit of that which we may do, and of that which sometimes ye constrain
us to do, and not to threaten, or command, but only to beseech you in Christ
Jesus, yet are ye to take our beseeching of you as a commandment unto you,
even as a deep charge touching the things whereof we beseech you.

Let this then, beloved, teach you how ye ought for your parts to carry your
selves toward your Pastors and Teachers. Are we in all mildness and meekness
of spirit to deal with you as parents with their children? Then are you in all
obedience as children, to hearken unto us as your fathers in Christ Jesus. Are
we for loves sake to beseech you the things which in Christ we might command
you? Then are ye when we beseech you, to take it as if we commanded, as if we
charged you, and more to be moved therewith then if we commanded, then if we
charged you. Of many of you I am so persuaded, that the Pastor shall not be
more ready to deal with you as a father, then ye will be ready to carry your
selves toward him as children, and that his beseeching of you shall be as if
he commanded, as if he charged you. But for some, to what purpose is it to
beseech them to reform any thing that is amiss in them? Whether in Christ his
steed we beseech them, or in his name we command them, or out of the law we
threaten them, they will not come to hear us, they will none of our
instructions. But I leave them unto him unto whom they stand or fall. And I
beseech you, beloved, by the mercies of God to continue in the grace wherein
ye stand, rooted and built in Christ, and stablished in the faith as ye have
been taught in Christ Jesus. And let this suffice to be observed in general
from the manner of the Apostles exhortation; whereby ye see the manner how
Pastors ought to labor to keep their people in holy duties, and to repress
disorders amongst them, and that is, by beseeching them in all meekness of
spirit for all loves sake to do that which is convenient.

Now in particular, from so many arguments, as are couched in the manner of the
exhortation, may so many sundry observations be gathered. His first argument
is, if there be any consolation in Christ, i. If ye have received any
consolation by my ministry and Apostleship, then fulfill my joy that ye be
like minded, etc. The ground of which argument is, that if the Philippians had
received comfort in Christ by him, then ought they likewise at his request thus
to comfort him as to be like minded, etc. Whence I observe that unto whom
consolation in Christ is ministered, of him, he that ministered it, may require
and look for the like again. For the general, it is so commonly held, that
it is the saying of every man, that one good turn requires an other, and a
pleasure showed requires the like again. And for the proof of this
particular, that of the Apostle is not impertinent: where he says, 1 Cor 9.11.
If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we reap
your carnal things? Out of the general meaning whereof, this particular may
not unfitly be gathered, that where spiritual consolation in Christ Jesus
has been bestowed, there as other things, so comfort, again, as it is
required may justly be expected.

Wretched then is that unthankfulness where hatred is returned for good will,
and where the comfort which was ministered is requited with cause of heaviness.
And yet what more common than such unthankfulness? The Ministers labors for
the consolation of his people in Christ Jesus, are in too too many places
requited with too too great cause of heaviness. Let the faithful minister now
say unto him that has received great comfort in Christ Jesus by his labors,
if there be any consolation in Christ, if you have received any comfort in
Christ Jesus by my ministry, let me beseech you that you set not your
affections so much on things which are on the earth, that you will bridle your
inordinate desires which run too much after covetousness, that you will not
lend your money upon usury, etc. And how seldom does he receive this comfort
from them again thus to prevail with him? Nay to his great grief he finds
that his words are not esteemed. Let it not be so with you beloved, but by
whose labors ye have received comfort in Christ Jesus, let them receive this
comfort again from you, that their holy desires may prevail with you.

His second argument is, If there be any comfort of love, that is, if ye so
love me, that ye desire my comfort in my bonds, for the defense of the
Gospel, then fulfill my joy, etc. The ground of which argument is, that if the
Philippians loved him as he loved them, and in their love of him desired his
comfort in his bonds, then they should fulfill his joy, etc. Whence I observe,
that to yield unto the holy desires one of another, is an effectual token of
Christian love in one toward another. If ye love me (says Christ) keep my
Commandments. Joh. 14.15
Which place shows, that so we make proof of our love of God, if we conform
our selves in obedience to his commandments. But more direct to our very
purpose is that of our Apostle, where he says to Philemon, Philem. 17.
If thou count our things common, receive him as my self. As if he should have
said, Let ^his be a token of thy love toward me, and that thou countest all
mine thine, and thine mine, even to yield to my desire, to receive Onesimus as
my self.

This then in part shows, why it is that we yield not to the holy desires of
such as would gladly have comfort of our good, even for want of love of them.
If sinners shall entice us, and say, Come with us, we will lay wait for blood,
Prou. 1.10.11.12.
and lie privily for the innocent, without a cause, we will swallow them up
alive like a grave, even whole, as those that go down to the pit, etc. we are
ready enough to yield our selves unto their wills, and to run as fast as
they for their lives unto mischief. But let the Pastor say to his people, If
ye so love me, that ye desire my comfort, profane not the Lord his Sabboths,
break off your sins by righteousness, and your iniquities by mercy toward
the poor; or the father to the child, If thou so love me, that thou desire
my comfort, refrain thy feet from every evil path, and walk in the ways of
the Lord; or the friend unto his friend, If thou so love me, that thou desire
my comfort, bridle thine inordinate desires, fly from that which is evil, and
do that is good: what cares the people for the comfort of their Pastor in this
case, or the child for the comfort of his father, or the friend for the
comfort of his friend? Will any of them, for the love of them, that they may
be comforted by them, yield unto their holy desires? Nay we love them not so,
but whatsoever become of their comfort, we will follow our own ways. If it
be so with us, this is verily a fault amongst us, and let us hereafter so love
the godly, whatsoever be their place, that we make reckoning of their comfort,
and in token thereof, let us hearken to such holy advice as they give us.

His third argument is, If there be any fellowship of the spirit; that is, if
ye be knit together in the bond of one spirit, and have fellowship one with
another, as members of one body, under one head, then fulfill my joy, etc. The
ground of which argument is, that men knit together in the bond of one spirit,
are to give proof thereof by concord, love, and agreemen^ amongst themselves.
Whence I observe, that we are to give proof of being knit together in the
bond of one spirit, by the bond of peace, concord, and love amongst our selves.
Thus where it is said in the Acts, of such as were brought to the faith through
the Apostles preaching, that they believed and were baptized, as a token and
proof, that they were all baptized into one spirit, it is also said, that they
continued together with one accord, that they were of one heart, and of one
soul All that believed (says Luke) were in one place, Act. 2.14.
and had all things common. 41.46.
And they sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men, as
every one had need. And they continued daily with one accord in the Temple,
etc. All which things are set down as tokens and proofs, that they were all
baptized into one spirit. And again, The whole multitude of them that
believed, were of one heart, and of one soul; that is, of one mind, will,
consent, and affection: whereby they showed indeed, that they were knit
together in one spirit, and had fellowship one with another, as members of one
head; and therein left us an example how we should show that we are so knit,
that we have such fellowship.

What proof then we give that we are knit together in one spirit, and have
fellowship one with another, as members of one body, let our contentions,
discords, and divisions, witness unto the world. Indeed they do too too
plainly witness unto our faces, that herein we are carnal, and walk not as
they that are knit together in the fellowship of the spirit* But the words
following will give us further occasion to speak of this point.

His fourth argument is, If there be any compassion and mercy; that is, if ye
have any bowels of compassion to show any mercy unto me the Lord his prisoner
for your sake, fulfill my joy, etc. The ground of which argument is, that in
mercy and compassion toward him, the Lord his prisoner for their sake, they
should at his request fulfill his joy, to be like, etc. Whence I observe, that
the godly requests of Gods Saints afflicted for Christ his sake, should move in
us such bowels of compassion, as that we should gladly hearken and yield unto
them. Hereupon our Apostle, before diverse exhortations and requests which he
makes in his Epistles, prefixeth this, that he was prisoner in the Lord,
prisoner of Jesus Christ. I therefore being prisoner in the Lord, says he,
Ephesians. 4.1.
pray you that ye walk worthy of that vocation whereunto ye are called.
Where, in that he says, I being prisoner in the Lord, he thereby implies,
that they were the rather to hearken unto his exhortation, because it was the
exhortation of him that was prisoner for the Lord his cause. And so he
begins his Epistle to Philemon thus, Paul a prisoner of Jesus Christ,
implying that Philemon was the rather to hearken and to yield to his request
for his servant Onesimus, because it was the request of him that was now
prisoner for Jesus Christ. I omit other places. By these ye see how powerful
and effectual the godly requests of Gods afflicted members ought to be with us.

And it were well, that in all places they were so powerful and effectual, as
to stir up the very bowels of compassion toward them. But are not many in
many places rather ready to add affliction unto their bonds? Would it not now
be enough to reject the requests, were they never so godly, if they should come
in the name of the prisoner of the Lord, I the prisoner of the Lord, pray you
that ye reform the wickedness of your ways? Indeed we may well wish in our
days, that enjoying our liberty, we may beseech you in Christ his stead: for
I fear that if out of our prisons and bonds we should thus write unto you, If
there be any compassion and mercy in you toward me the Lord his prisoner,
hearken unto me in this, that ye be like minded, or the like, I say, I fear
me the mention of our bonds would not much prevail with you, or move any
bowels of compassion in you. Well, howsoever it would, it should, and I hope it
will in all that belong to Christ Jesus. And let this suffice to be observed
from the several arguments couched in the manner of the Apostles exhortation.

Now follows the matter of the Apostles exhortation, which is this in
general, that they be like minded. Which is not simply proposed, but with this
motive prefixed thereunto, My joy, though for great cause it be great, yet is
not full, unless ye be like minded. Fulfill my joy, that ye be like minded.
Whence I observe, first, that the godly Pastors joy is to be in the weal of
his people, whatsoever his own case be. If himself be, as Paul here was,
close in prison, bound with chains, and look for nothing but sentence of
death, yet if his people be well, if they stand fast in the faith, he is to
be glad, and rejoice even in his bonds. When our Apostle wrote to Philemon,
he was in prison, as even now we heard: yet says he to him, we have great
joy and consolation in thy love, because by thee the Saints hearts are
comforted. So how hard soever the Pastors own case be, yet if he be a good
one, he has great joy and consolation in his peoples weal.

But too too many Pastors we have in our day, which if themselves be well,
care not in what case their people be. If they have the fleece from them,
their hearts are glad, whatsoever become of them. But such rejoicing is not
good, and shall be bitterness in the end.

2. Hence I observe, that the good Pastors joy is not to be full so long as any
thing is amiss amongst his people. We shall not now need other proof than
this of our Apostle in this place. The Philippians had embraced the faith of
Jesus Christ, they abounded in knowledge and in judgment, they stood fast in
the faith, notwithstanding their assaults by false Apostles, they were careful
over him, and communicated to his afflictions, they were excellent in many
graces. So that our Apostle had great cause to have great joy over them. But
because of some contention and vainglory amongst them, his joy was not full.
A sufficient president for the Pastor, that he count not his joy full, so long
as any thing is amiss amongst his people.

Which may serve to admonish the Pastor, to labor that nothing may be amiss
amongst his people, either touching life or doctrine, that so his joy may be
full, and that his people may be the crown of his rejoicing in the presence of
our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming. But I come unto that which the Apostle
exhorts in general.

The thing which the Apostle exhorts the Philippians in general, is, that
they be like minded, that is, like affectioned, having their affections,
likings, and desires set on the same things. An evident argument, that they
were not like minded, as also the rest which follows is, that some things
were amiss amongst them. And in that he deals so earnestly with them, that
these things might be amended in them, it shows that these are things which
are carefully to be procured, regarded, and maintained.

LECTVRE XXV.
PHILIP. 2. Verse 2. That ye be like minded, having the same love, being of
one accord, and of one judgment: that nothing be done through contention,
etc.
WE have heard the manner of the Apostles exhortation, and therein four very
patheticall arguments couched, to persuade the things whereunto he exhorts:
all so closely followed, and so passionately urged, as that the manner of the
exhortation could not be devised more effectual to persuade the things
whereunto he exhorts, If there be, etc. It remained to speak of the matter
of the Apostles exhortation. We spoke only of that which I took to be only a
motive prefixed before the matter of the exhortation, in these words, Fulfill
my joy. Now we are to proceed unto the maine matter of the Apostles
exhortation, which is, that they be like minded, having the same love, etc. By
which matter of the exhortation, this in general appears, that some things
were amiss amongst them, there was not that love and concord amongst them, nor
that humility which should he in them; many things were done amongst them
through contention, through vainglory, through selfe-seeking of their own
things: so that though many things were to be much commended in them, yet were
some things likewise to be reformed in them, which hindered the course of that
Christian conversation which becomes the Gospel of Christ Jesus.

Whence I observe in general, what the state even of the best reformed
Churches, and so of the most holy men is: no Church so reformed, no men so
sanctified, but that many things are amiss amongst them; though many things
be much to be commended in them, yet some things likewise are still to be
reformed in them. Look into all those Churches unto which our Apostle wrote
his Epistles: ye shall not find any of them so commended for embracing the
truth, and for standing fast in the truth, as this Church of Philippi. He
gives indeed testimony unto the Galathians, that they were sometimes such as
(if it had been possible) would have plucked out their own eyes, and have
given them unto him: so loved they him, and the truth which he taught. But
quickly were they removed to another Gospel, Gal. 1.6.
as the Apostle witnesses, whereas the Philippians still stood so fast, that
the Apostle was persuaded, that he that had begun that good work in them,
would perform it, until the day of Jesus Christ. Yet here ye see, that some
things were amiss amongst them. Again, look into those seven Churches, unto
which John writes in the Apocalypse, and there ye shall see that some were
fallen, others decayed, some were proud, others negligent. Of all the rest of
those Churches, the Church of Smyrna and the Church of Philadelphia, are there
most commended. Yet in both those Churches, by the right understanding of those
Epistles that were written to them, it will appear that there were some
amongst them, who professed themselves to be good Christians, whereas indeed
they were no better than a Synagogue and sink of Satan. Again, look into the
reformed Churches ever since that time unto this day, and at this day, and
still ye shall see, that as in those seven Churches of Asia, so in these there
were and are, as many things to be commended, so likewise many things to be
reprehended. And so long as the Church is militant upon earth, it cannot be but
that she should be black; black I say not only in respect of her
afflictions whereby her beloved does sometimes prove her, and sometimes
chastise her, but black also in respect of her blemishes, imperfections, and
sins which are the causes of her afflictions. For all men while they carry
about with them the earthly house of this tabernacle, unto what degree of
perfection in faith, knowledge, or other graces of the spirit so ever they be
grown, had still need to pray, O Lord increase our faith, our knowledge etc;
and unto what perfection in innocence, obedience, or the like they be grown,
yet still they are taught to pray, O Lord forgive us our debts and trespasses.
For here we know in part, we believe in part, we love in part, we obey in part,
and our greatest perfection is but great imperfection whiles we live here at
home in the body, 1 Cor. 13.9.
as that of the Apostle shows. And so long as we are clothed with corruption,
if we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, 1 Ioh. 1.8.
and truth is not in us. That which is in part either in knowledge, or in love,
or in obedience, or in the like graces of the spirit shall be abolished, our
imperfections shall be taken away, and we shall be made perfect. But where and
when? Not here otherwise then by imputation, but then and there when and where
corruption shall put on incorruption, and mortality shall put on immortality,
as the former place to the Corinthians shows: ver. 10.
and the Church shall be presented unto Christ Jesus her beloved, not having
spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing, but pure, and holy, and without blame; but
then when she shall be made glorious, when her vile body shall be changed
and be fashioned like unto his glorious body, Ephesians. 5.27.
as that place to the Ephesians shows.

This then should teach us to long to be of that triumphant Church, to long to
enter into the holiest of holies, to long to be loosed and to be with Christ.
Here the father of the faithful, holy Abraham; here the man after Gods own
heart, holy David; here that upright and just man, holy Job; here that chosen
vessel to bear Christ his name before the Gentiles, our holy Apostle shall
have their faults, and their falls. Here Abraham and Lot will be sometimes at
variance, here Paul and Barnabas will sometimes not be of one accord, here Paul
and Peter will sometimes not be of one judgment; here we shall have our falls,
we shall have our imperfections whatsoever we be. Only in the City which is
above shall all tears be wiped from our eyes, all wanes supplied, all
imperfections perfited, all sin cease, and all enemies be utterly destroyed:
only there our knowledge, our judgment, our love, our peace, our joy shall be
perfect. How should we not long then to remove out of the body, and to dwell
with the Lord? And yet to earthly minded are we many of us, that here we could
be content to pitch our tabernacles, and never to remove hence even as if we
loved darkness better then light, and had rather dwell in the valley of tears
then in the valley of blessing, where we are but strangers then at home in our
own City. Let us, beloved, remember that here the best of us have our
blemishes, and that when it is it the best with us, we are but in the way unto
that which is best of all for us; that the best reformed Church on earth is not
thoroughly reformed, and that the most sanctified man on earth is but only in
part sanctified: And let us make this benefit hereof daily more and more to
grow out of love with this life, and in love with that life in which there
shall be no more death; daily more and more to weyne our selves from the
vanities of Jerusalem which is on earth, where many things will be done through
contention, and vainglory, and to have our conversation in heaven, where we
shall all be like minded, having the same mind, and being of one accord, and
of one judgment. And let this suffice to be observed in general from the
matter of the Apostles exhortation, whereby ye see the state even of the best
reformed Churches, and so of the most holy men, and what use is to be made of
the imperfections which follow the most perfect in this life. Now let us come
unto the several points whereunto the Apostle exhorts the Philippians, and
in them us.

The first thing whereunto he exhorts them is, in general that they be like
minded, or like affectioned, as the same phrase is translated else where, To.
12.16.
having their affections, likings, and desires set on the same things: for in
this as in the general are comprised, as I take it, those particulars which
follow in this verse. So that when he exhorts them to be like minded, it is
in general that their affections be set on the same things, loving the same
things, according in desire of the same things, and according in judgment of
the same things, but all in the Lord. Whence I observe a necessary duty in
all Christians called to the knowledge of God by the Gospel of Christ Jesus,
which is that they be like minded in the Lord, setting their affections,
likings, and desires on the same things in the Lord. A duty which our Apostle
prescribes almost as often as any other duty. 1 Cor. 1.10.
In the beginning of his former to the Corinthians he beseeches them by the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that they all speak one thing, and that they be
knit together in one mind, and in one judgment. Where ye see he beseeches
them and in them us, even by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to be all of
one mind; and because disagreeing in words engenders dissension of mind,
therefore that we may the rather be all of one mind, he beseeches us all to
speak one thing. In the end likewise of his latter to the Corinthians, 2 Cor.
13.11.
he commends this duty unto them, saying, Finally brethren, fare ye well,
be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind: as thinking this duty so
necessary, that both in the beginning, and in the end, and at all times they
were to be put in mind of it. In this place likewise ye see how roundly and
deeply he adiureth and charge the Philippians, and in them us to be ^ike
minded, saying, If there be any consolation in Christ etc. fulfill my joy, that
ye be like minded. And in the last chapter save one to the Romans, Romans 15.5.
he makes a most earnest prayer unto God for them, that they might be like
minded one toward another, saying, Now the God of patience and consolation
give you that ye ^e like minded one toward another according to Christ Jesus,
that ^ee may with one mind, and with one mouth praise God even the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Where first the Apostle im^lieth that if they be like
minded, God must give them this to ^e like minded, and therefore he prays
unto God to give them this grace, that they be like minded one toward another.
Secondly, he notes how he would have both them and us ^o be like minded one
toward another, viz: according to Christ Jesus, to consent in that truth which
he has taught, and in that love which he has commanded: for otherwise if we
be like minded but not according to Christ Jesus, not in the Lord, what great
thing do we do? Are not the Jews like minded among themselves, the Turks
amongst themselves, the adversaries of the truth amongst themselves? Were not
the Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees of one mind, when they condemned the
innocent blood; and the whole multitude of the Jews when they cried all at
once saying, Crucify him, crucify him, away with him, and deliver unto us
Barrabas? And are not they all of one mind that cast their heads together with
one consent, and consult to work wickedness in what kind soever it be? And
to consent and be like minded in these and the like things, is it not rather a
conspiracy then an unity? We a^e not then only to be like minded, but to be
like minded in the Lord, to be like minded according to Christ Jesus. And
lastly, the Apostle shows to what end he would have us to be like minded,
namely that with one mind, and one mouth we may praise God even the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, not only with one mind, but also with one mouth; nor
only with one mouth, but also with one mind. Thi^ then ye see it to be a
duty so necessary in us and in all Christians that we be like minded in the
Lord, that the Apostle still commends it unto us, beseeching us to be like
minded, charging and adiuring us to be like minded, and praying unto God that
we be like minded.

But why is it so necessary a duty that we be like minded i^ the Lord? Many
reasons might be alleged, but I will one^ mention two. As first because we
have one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of us all: for meet
it i^ that so many as are joined together in the unity of these, be also knit
together in one mind, and in one judgment according to Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 4.5.
even as our Apostle urges this same reason to this same purpose else where.
Secondly, because there is not a better remedy against dissensions and
schisms the^ to be like minded in the Lord, as without which it cannot be but
that there be dissensions and schisms. For what was the cause of the
dissensions and contentions wherewith the Church of Corinth was troubled? Was
it not because they were not like minded in the Lord? One held of Paul, another
of Apollos, one of Cephas, another of Christ; one would pray and prophecy
bare-headed, another with his head covered, and when they came unto the Lord
his Supper one was hungry, and another was drunken. And how can it be but that
there should be dissensions and contentions, when one likes this, and another
that, one would have this, and another that, one draws this way, and another
that way? In a little house, ye know, if the husband be of one mind, and the
wife of another; the Parents of one mind, and the children of another; the
master of one mind, and the servants of another, and every of them will needs
follow their own mind, and fancy their own way, how troubled must needs
that house be? And therefore our blessed Savior being now ready to be offered,
in that holy prayer for all his children prayed, that we might be all one even
as He and the Father were one, Ioh. 17.21.
that we might all be one in the Father and in him, even that we might be
like minded in the Lord. Phil. 3.16.
And in the next chapter our Apostle prescribes it as a remedy against
dissensions in the Church to proceed by one rule, and to mind one thing. If
then we will walk as becomes the Gospel of Christ, we are not only to be
joined in one faith, and in hope, but in all things we are to be like minded
one toward another according to Christ Jesus; we are to love and like, affect
and fancy, will and desire the same things as they are pleasing unto the Lord;
being at one with God, we are to be of one mind amongst our selves.

Here then our adversaries will ask of us, if this be so necessary a duty,
how happens it that ye are not all like minded? What mean the terms of
Zuinglians, Lutheranes, Bez. epist. 5.
Caluinists amongst you? How is it that amongst you some are Brownists, some
Baroists, some Puritanes, some Protestants? How is it that touching ceremonies,
touching discipline, and the like there is such difference amongst you? Does
not these things plainly argue that ye are not like minded amongst
yourselues? For answer whereunto, 1. Of them that ask us these questions I
demand of them the like: are they all like minded? What mean then the terms
of Thomists, Scotists, Vide Par. in Iren. cap. 26.
Ockamists, Canonists, and Divines amongst them? How is it that amongst them
some are White, some Black, some Gray Friars, some Franciscans, some
Dominicans, some Jesuits, some barely Priests? How is it that not touching
ceremonies, or discipline alone, but touching maine and great points of
doctrine there is such difference amongst them? Touching the Scriptures, does
not Arius Montanus say, that the books of the old Testament not found in the
Hebrew Canon are Apocryphal; and does not Bellarmine deny it? Does not Canus
say, that the Hebrew text is wholly corrupt by the malice of the Jews, and does
not Bellarmine deny it? Does not Bellarmine himself for expounding of the
Scriptures sometimes refer us to the fathers of the Church, sometimes to
general Councels, sometimes to the Pope and Cardinals, sometimes to the Pope
himself? It would be too long to run through the rest of many points of
doctrine where in they dissent among themselves. They need no other to note
this unto the whole world then Bellarmine himself, who in the beginning of the
discussing of every controversy betwixt us and them, shows how not only we
dissent therein from them, but how they dissent amongst themselves. First
therefore, let them pluck out the beam of their own eye that so they may see
clearly the mote which is in our eye, le^ them clear the point that they are
like minded amongst themselves, and then let them tell us that we are not all
of one mind.

But how do they show that we are not all of one mind? If ye be, say they,
then what mean the terms of Zuinglians, Lutherans, Caluinists, amongst you?
But I say unto them, what do they mean to note us by such terms? The
memories of these men we honor and reverence, as also we do other notable
lights which have been in the Church, and are at this day. But if we be named
after any other name then only the name of Christ Jesus, it is through their
malice not by our desire. Yea, but how is it say they, that some amongst you
are Brownists, some Baroists, some Puritans, some Protestants, that touching
ceremonies, and outward discipline there is such difference amongst you? I
answer, that if there be any Brownists or Baroists amongst us we hold them
not to be of us, and therefore their distraction from us ought not to be
objected unto us. Now for our difference about ceremonies, and outward
discipline, I wish we were all like minded in these things, and it is a fault
and blemish of some in our Church, that we are not like minded in these things.
But for the substance of doctrine, and grounds of religion wherein is it that
we are not like minded? If they could, no doubt they would tax us in the
substance as they do in the accident; and as they cannot in the substance, so
I wish they could not tax us in the accident. So should the joy of our Sion be
full, if we were all like minded, both for the substance, and for the accident,
and so many as love the peace of Sion, and wish her prosperity, pray also that
this her joy may be fulfilled.

Again, this may serve to reprove a fault too too common amongst us. For if we
be joined together in one faith, and in one hope, if we agree in the substance
of truth, we think it a small matter to dissent amongst our selves about
smaller matters. And indeed it is the less matter. But yet it is a thing which
we ought to labor, even to be like minded in the Lord in all things. Which our
Apostle sufficiently shows when in his exhortations unto us to be like
minded, he does not limit us unto these or these things, but indefinitely he
would have us to be like minded, according to Christ Jesus. In matters of
faith, and in matters of ceremony, in matters of doctrine, and in matters of
discipline, in matters of life, and in matters of learning, in matters of
religion, and in matters of civil conversation he would have us to be like
minded, as in the Lord it may be warranted. Let us therefore beware how we
sooth up our selves in dissenting about matters of less moment, when we agree
in matters of greater importance. The more like minded we are in the Lord, the
more is our conuer^ation such as becomes the Gospel of Christ. Let our care
^herefo^e be, that both in matters of less moment, and likewise in matters of
greater importance we may be like minded ^n the Lord, as becomes the Gospel
of Christ.

But how may we be like minded in the Lord? This our Apostle shows in the
next words, and that is, 1. If we have the same love, i. If we love the same
things in the Lord. 2. If we be of one accord, i. If we agree in our wills and
desires in the Lord. And 3. if we be of one judgment, i. If we agree in one
truth of Christ Jesus. For these the particulars are as I take it comprised
under, and meant in that general; so that i^ we thus love and agree in the
Lord then are we like minded in the Lord, and our conversation in a great part
is such as becomes the Gospel of Christ. Because I have stood long upon the
general, I shall the less need to stand upon these particulars, which in
effect have been handled in the general. Briefly therefore of these as time
will give leave.

The 1. thing then, which in these particulars I note is, that the Apostle
would have them to have the same love, the same I say, in respect of the
object, that they should love the same things, the same Church, the same
Gospel, the same truth even as we say that they have the same faith, who
believe in the same Christ. Hence then I observe, that if we will be like
minded, and walk as becomes the Gospel of Christ, the^ must we love the
same things in the Lord, not one one thing and another an other thing, but the
same things, as simply the same things. For we may love the same things, and
yet be f^^ from that love of the same things which becomes us, as namely, if
we love the same delights of the flesh, the same sins or corruptions
whatsoever; but the same things in the Lord and in the love whereof he is
delighted, and well pleased. Thus it is commanded us every where in the book
of God that we all love the same God, the same truth, the same means of our
salvation in Christ, and generally the same things whatsoever they be that
belong unto our peace. And the reason of it is plain. For where one loves one
thing, and another another thing; as for example, one Christ, and another
Antichrist, when one hates that which another loves; where every man loves
that which himself likes, and scarce two love the same things, what love can
there be, nay what distractions must there not needs be, nay what desolation
are not likely to ensue? In the Church of Corinth they loved not the same
things, but one loved this man, another that man and what dissentions bred it
in that Church? In our neighbor kingdom of France they love not the same
things, but one sort love the light of the word, another sort love darkness
better then light, and what blood has it shed in that kingdom? Amongst our
selves we love not the same things in the Lord, but one sort love their
pleasures, another sort their profits, another sort their promotions, the
fewest sort the things that they should love, and what but a judgment likely
to ensue?

Nay beloved here is the misery, and like to be the ruin of our Land, in our
Land we love not the same things in the Lord, but we love too many of us that
man of sin, and the poisoned cups of the fornications of that whore, and
too few of us the simplicity of the truth of Christ Jesus, to speak plainly
we love too many of us the Pope and his merchandise, and too few of us Christ
and his truth, we speak not the ^anguage of Canaan, but half in the speech of
Ashdod, and half in the language of Canaan. Hereupon it is that Pope and his
adherents conceive courage against us to subdue us and our Land, and to make us
a prey unto their teeth.

Beloved, if we will not for the love of the Lord, and because the holy Ghost
has commanded us, yet for the love of our own lives, and that we be not made
a prey unto our enemies, let us love the same truth of Christ Jesus, and
generally the same things in the Lord. Let us no longer halt between God and
Baal, Christ and Antichrist, religion and superstition; but with religious
hearts let us love the same truth, the same God, the same things in the Lord,
that some may be ^ike minded according to Christ Jesus.

The 2. thing which in these particulars I note is, that the Apostle would have
the Philippians to be of one accord, i. to ^gree in their wills and desires
touching every thing that is good, belong it unto religion, or unto civil life
and conuersa^ion. Whence I observe another necessary duty for us that we be
like minded, and walk as becomes the Gospel of Christ, and that is, that we
agree in our wills and desires in the Lord, that unity and concord amongst us
be preserved and maintained. To agree in mischief we are ready enough,
neither need we any to move us thereunto. For, as it is in the Prophet, Psalm.
50.
If we see a thief we consent unto him, and we are partakers with the
adulterers, we run with the wicked to do evil, and we easily join hands
with the wicked and ungodly. But to be of one accord in the Lord we are not
so easily drawn, albeit this be the agreement that the holy Ghost requires of
us, and commends unto us. Ps 133.1.
Behold, says the Prophet, how good and joyful a thing it is brethren to
dwell together in unity, i. to live together in that concord, and good
agreement which is acceptable to the Lord. And the more to show the precious
worth of holy agreement amongst the sons of God, be likeneth it unto the
ointment prescribed for Aaron, which was so sweet that when Aaron was
anointed therewith, Ex. 30.23.
the smell of it was most pleasant unto all that were by. And even so sweet
and pleasant a thing it is to see brethren to be of one accord in the Lord.
This is that which is commended in the faithful in the Acts, Act. 4.32.
that they were of one heart, and of one soul agreeing in their minds, wills,
desires, and affections. And where this agreement in the Lord is not, there the
Lord is not.

And yet in matters wherein we differ one from an other, how hardly are we
brought to be of one accord in the Lord? If we differ in matters of religion,
either we will not vouchsafe one to talk with an other in them, or if we do,
we will be sure to set that down with our selves, that howsoever we be
convinced, yet we will never yield to agree with them that would persuade us. We
have too too lamentable experience of it. For when we talk with them that are
popishly affected, though they be convinced, yet will they not yield to agree
with us. Likewise if we differ in matters of civil life, how hardly are we
brought one to yield unto another, and all to agree on that which is most
evidently good? Nay if we have once taken a stitch against it, we will never
agree to it whatsoever come of it. But beloved, this becomes not the Gospel
of Christ. If we will walk worthy of Christ, let us be like minded, having the
same love, being of one accord.

The 3. thing which I note is, that the Apostle would have them to be of one
judgment, i. to agree in one truth of Christ Jesus. Whence I observe a
threefold necessary duty for us, that we be like minded, and walk as
becomes the Gospel of Christ, and that is, that we agree in one truth of
Christ Ie^us, even in that truth which the Prophets and Apostles have ^aught
us. All agreement without this is but disagreement. This alone knits the knot
of good agreement. Let our adversaries look how they agree in this, in those
manifold positions which they maintain besides and repugnant unto this.

LECTVRE XXVI.
PHILIP. 2. Verse 3. That nothing be done through contention or vainglory,
but that in mecknesse of mind every man esteem other better than himself.

4. Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of
other men.


IT remains now, that we speak of those unchristian vices which the Apostle
disswadeth, as the very bane of that love, concord, and unanimity, which
before he had persuaded, in these words, That nothing be done through
contention, etc.

That nothing be done, etc.] In these words then the Apostle amplifieth his
exhortation, first, by two evils which he disswadeth, as the very bane of that
love, concord, and unanimity, which before he had persuaded, namely
contention and vainglory, That nothing, etc. 2. By the contrary virtue unto
them, which he persuades as the very foster-mother of that love, concord, and
unanimity, which before he had persuaded, namely humility, but in meekness
of mind: amplified also by the definition thereof, which is, that it is a
virtue whereby one man esteems another better than himself. So that here is
both a dehortation, and an exhortation. A dehortation from contention and vain
glory, That nothing be done, etc. An exhortation unto humility and meekness
of mind, but in mecknesse of mind etc. So also in the next verse is first an
evil dissuaded; secondly, the contrary virtue persuaded: a dehortation, and an
exhortation. A dehortation from selfe-seeking of our own things, which also is
an enemy unto that love, concord, and unanimity, which before he had
persuaded, in these words, Look not, etc. An exhortation unto a regard of
other men's things, a means of preserving that love, concord, and vnnimitie,
which before he had persuaded, in these words, be^ every man also on, etc. So
that here are three breeders and causes of discord and dissension dissuaded,
viz. contention, vainglory, and selfe-seeking of our own things; and two
preseruers of love and concord persuaded, viz. humility and due regard of
others: the one dissuaded, and the other persuaded, that love, concord, and
unanimity may be maintained. This of the order and meaning of the words in
general

Now for the more particular opening of the meaning or them, the words ye see
in themselves are imperfect, and do thus depend upon the former: Fulfill my
joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, and
of one judgment. Why? That nothing be done through contention and vainglory.
As if he should have said, If there be among you contention and vainglory, it
is not possible that ye should be like minded, having the same love, being of
one accord etc. For these are the very firebrarnds of discords and dissension,
and the very bane of concord and love. So then shall ye be like minded, to
love the same things, to agree on the same things, to be of one judgment
touching the truth, if ye mortify, if ye kill and crucify these earthly and
vile affections of contention and vainglory, That nothing be done amongst
you ^^^gh contention and vainglory, but that in mocknesse, etc. (...) by
contention the Apostle means a delight to differ (...) men in judgment, and
in every other thing; and (...) glory he means a tickling desire to get glory
by (...) singularity in things. So that when the Apo^^^ (...) ^^ue nothing
done through contention, his meaning is, that he would have none of them to
take a delight in ^issenting from other men, but when they think the truth ^o
be like minded unto them. And when he would have nothing done through
vainglory, his meaning is, that he would have none of them to be tickled
with such a desire of glory, as to single out himself in judgment from the
rest, and to disdain to think as the rest do, think they never so well. The
rest that follows is more easy to be understood, and may further be opened
as we come to the several points. Now let us see what observations we may
gather hence for our further use and instruction.

The first thing which here I note, is, that the Apostle would have nothing
done among the Philippians through contention, he would have none of them to
take delight in ^issenting from other men in judgment, or in any other thing,
he would have none of them to be contentious persons, ^uch as cannot abide to
agree with others, though they be in the right, such as are never well but
when they are in opposition, in contradiction. Whence I observe, that amongst
Christians called to the knowledge of God by the Gospel of Christ, all
contention should be abandoned, nothing should be done amongst them through
contention, they should take no pleasure in dissenting from other men, either
in judgment, or in any other thing. This our Apostle plainly shows, where he
says, first, that contentions are a work of the flesh; and then, that they
that are Christ's, Gal. 5.20.24.
have crucified the flesh, with the affections, and the lusts. Lay then these
together thus: They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the
affections and the lusts, so that they do not serve sin in the lusts
thereof. But contentions are an affection and lust of the flesh, reckoned up
with adultery, fornication, idolatry, witchcraft, heresies, murders,
drunkenness, gluttony, and such like. What then must needs follow, but that
they that belong unto Christ, must abandon all contentions, must do nothing
upon a humor to thwart and to cross, upon a delight to dissent and to differ.
And the reason hereof is very plain: for when men once grow to that, that they
take a delight and pleasure in crossing and thwarting other men, and in
opposing themselves unto whatsoever they say, be the thing never so clear,
never so true, how can they as becomes Christian be of one accord with
others? Nay how can it be, but that such opposition and contradiction should
breed great discord and dissension? Pro. 26.21.
It is one of Salomons Proverbs, As the cole makes burning coals, and wood a
fire, so the contentions man i^ apt to kindle strife. Whence it is clear, that
contention is as fit to stir up strife, as cole and wood to make a fire.
Look into the Church: The schisms and heresies, the broiles and stirs,
wherewith the Church at all times is troubled, whence are they? Are they not
commonly from men of contentious humors, which take a pleasure in dissenting
from the rest of the Church, and in maintaining new and quaint opinions by the
sharpness of their wits? Arrius, Nestorius, Macedoni^^ and many other the
like, by whose heresies the Church has heretofore been troubled, were they
not such men? And what are they that endanger the peace of the Church in our
day? Are they not such men? Again, look into the Commonwealth: The divisions
and discords, the tumults and brabbles, wherewith all societies and bodies are
troubled* whence are they? Are they not commonly from contentious men, which
love to say and do otherwise than the rest? Experience has so tried it, that
it will not be denied. So that ye see there is great reason of abandoning al
contentions among Christians, that nothing be done through contention amongst
them.

What then? May nothing be done through contention? If 400. false Prophets
counsel Ahab to go to war, 2 Chro. 18.
may not Michaiah set himself against them all, and tell Ahab, that if he go,
Ier. 15.10.
he shall fall there? May not Jeremy contend and strive even with the whole
earth, as himself witnesses that he did? Indeed if Michaiah or Jeremy do
so, they shall be counted contentious men for their pains, insomuch that
Jeremy shall cry out, and say, Woe is me, my mother, that thou have borne me
a contentious man, and a man that strives with the whole earth; for so he was
accounted. And so our whole Church, for dissenting from the Romish Church, we
are counted schismatic, heretical, contentious men. But ye must know that
there is a great difference betwixt (...) and (...), betwixt a due examination
and a perverse opposition, betwixt dissenting from others, and a delight to
dissent from others, betwixt dis^enting from others to maintain a truth, and a
dissenting from others only to contradict, whether the thing be true or ^alse.
We may not (as our Apostle here says) do any thing through contention, but
we may and must duly examine things that are called into question. We may not
take a de^ight in dissenting from others, but we may dissent from others: we
may not dissent from others only to contradict, ^hether the thing be true or
false, but we may and must dis^ent from others to stand for the truth. Let it
be proved then that Michaiah dissented from the 400. false Prophets only upon
a humor to contradict them, or that Jeremy strove ^ith the whole earth, upon
a delight to set himself against all men, and then let it be said that they
were contentious men ^ndeed. And let it be proved, that we generally in
dissenting from the Romish Church, do it upon a delight and pleasure that we
take to make a perverse opposition, and then let it be said that we are
contentious men indeed. Otherwise in vain ^s it said, that either those
Prophets did, or that we in the ge^erall, or in the particular, do any thing
in these matters through contention.

To know then whether any thing be done through con^ention, these two rules are
necessary: 1. Is it done upon a ^umour and delight to contradict, whether it
be true or ^alse? Then is it done through contention. 2. When the truth is
manifested, is the opposition still maintained? Then ^s it done through
contention. Otherwise if we dissent from others at the first, and afterward
when the truth is manife^ted, yield unto the truth, as often it falls out,
when there ^s dissenting through ignorance; or if we dissent from others ^n
the things wherein they dissent from the clear truth, only for the truths
sake, wherein we desire that they would agree with us, that which we do can
no way be said to he done through contention: for thus we may do many
things, but nothing may be done through contention.

Now I wish we were all of us as far from being contentious, as we are
every one of us loath to be called contentions, and that both Church and
Commonweal were as free from the thing, as the name is odious in both. Every
man more ready than other to post the name off from himself, and none so ready
to abjure that he takes any delight in dissenting from other men, as he that
is most contentious of al^ None will be contentious, and yet both Church and
Commonweal groan under the burden of contentious men. I^ our Church what
Cockatrice eggs be now a hatching? what out-worne errors of Pelagianisme be
now a broaching? Liberty of will, universality of grace, salvation of all
men, and other like damnable errors must now be set on foot again, though the
whole Church be set on fire therewith. And by whom, but by contentious men,
which cannot abide to agree with the Church in the received truth, but in a
conceit of themselves, and pride of their own wits, must run out from the
rest, and have a conceit beyond the rest? In the Commonweal likewise, what
siding and factioning, what garboiles and divisions in every Company and
Society, in every Incorporation and Body? And by whom, but by contentious men,
which because they will be above also then, wi^^ not agree with any others?
The truth is, that whereas nothing should be done through contention, nothing
almost is done, but through contention. And yet every man will wash hi^ hands
of contention. But it is but as Pilate washed his hands of the innocent blood,
when as his fingers dropped with the blood of that just one. And as well might
Arrius, Nestor^^ Macedonius, and other like Arch-heretikes wash their hands as
many in our day can wash their hands of contention. Well, we see the Apostle
would have us to do nothing through contention. Let us hearken unto the
Apostle, and let us take heed of taking a delight in dissenting from others,
and being always ad oppositum.

Another fault likewise it seems there was amongst the Philippians, which the
Apostle would have repressed, and that was vainglory* a vain affectation of
glory, which is, when vain men to get themselves glory single themselves in
some vanity from the rest. Now the Apostle would have nothing done amongst
them through vainglory, he would have none ^f them so tickled with a vain
desire of glory, as to disdain ^o be like unto others, or to affect
singularity in judgment, ^r any other thing from the rest. Whence I observe,
that as ^ontention, so vainglory should be abandoned amongst Christians,
nothing should be done amongst them through ^^ine-glory, they should not in
the vanity of their hearts sin^^e themselves in any thing from the rest, so to
get glory amongst men above the rest, neglecting the glory that com^eth of God
alone. Hereunto also makes that exhortation ^t the Apostle, where he says,
Gal. 5.26.
Let us not be desirous of vaine-^lory, provoking one another, envying one
another. In which place ^^rst we have a very plain prohibition of vainglory,
let us ^ot be desirous of vainglory. It is a fault which haunteth even ^ery
good men, but (says the Apostle) let us not be desirous of ^aine-glory: and
then the rather to dissuade us from all desire ^f vainglory, he sets
down two such fruits thereof, as ^ewes it to be a bitter grape: the one,
provoking of one another, ^or that men desirous of vainglory are wont to
provoke others to emulations and strife, that by dissenting from them ^hey may
get some glory unto themselves: and the other, en^uing of one another, for that
men desirous of vainglory are ^ont to envy and spite others that seem any
way to stand in their light, and to be as good as they themselves are.

So that hence also the reason why we are to do nothing ^^rough vainglory
is very plain; for when men once grow ^^ that to be desirous of vainglory,
it is not possible that they ^ould as becomes Christians be of one accord
with o^^ers. For then forsooth we may not be as others either in ^^dgment, or
in any thing else; nay then we disdeine others, ^ay then our thoughts are
running on such things as wherein ^e may be singular above others. Then if we
be men of the Church, as we are called, we must either have new opinions ^y our
selves, or some new interpretation by our selves, or ^^me new kind of defense
of some thing by our selves. And ^^ we be other men, yet some thing or other
there must be sin^^ular in us: whereupon some have called vainglory the ve^^
mother of heresies and dissensions whereby both Church and Commonweals have
been ruined. So that ye see there is great reason of this caution amongst
Christians, that nothing be done through vainglory.

Where briefly note this withal, that it is vainglory that we are not to
affect: for this glory we may all affect, that men may speak well of us, and
glorify God on our behalf, ever as our Apostle professes that he did, where
he says, We give no occasion of offense in any thing, that our ministry
should not be reprehended; whereby he means that to the utmost of his power
he endeavored that his ministry might be magnified; and this glory also we
may affect so to do that which we do as that we may have praise with God. But
we are to do nothing through vainglory, that by singling our selves from
others we may get praise amongst men.

And yet how many things are done through vainglory by many of us? Our first
parents were not more ready at Satan's suggestion to eat of the forbidden fruit
through a vain desire of glory to be like unto God, then we their posterity
and children after their own image are ready through the like desire to do
many things that we should not do. What is it that makes us go to Bellarmine,
and setting a fresh vernish upon his reasons to set abroch in the Church new
and strange opinions? What is it that makes us plead the Popes cause more then
we need, and more then is either for the quiet of the Church, or has sound
warrant by the word? What is it that makes us disdain to walk in the old and
beaten way, (...) to seek out new ways to walk in? If it be not through
contention, is it not through vainglory, that we may get us a name? I point
only at some things, which I had rather you should conceive with your selves,
then I speak of them. It i^ utterly a fault amongst us, that many things are
done through contention, many things through vainglory, and good it were that
the means how this might be remedied were diligently to be thought upon.

Now the means how this might be remedied are prescribed in the next words by
our Apostle: let every man put on meekness of mind, and in meeknes of mind
let every man esteem other better then himself, and then nothing shall be
done through contention or vainglory, but that etc. Where first ye see that
humility and meeknes of mind is opposed unto contention and vainglory as a
preservative against them, and preserver of that unity and concord whereof
they ^re the bane. Secondly, ye see how it is defined, to be a ver^ue whereby
every man, not only men of meaner place and ^ate, but whereby every man of
what state or place soever he ^e, esteems other better then himself. Whence
I observe sovereign preservative against contentiousnes and vaine-^lory, and
so an only foster-mother of love, concord, and ^animitie, and that is
humility and meeknes of mind, to ^teeme every man better then our selves. If
we our selves would ^e free from these cankred affections of contentiousnes and
^^ine-glory; if we would have nothing to be done amongst us ^ther in Church or
in Commonweal through contention and vainglory; if we would have unity,
love, and concord ^aintained amongst us, then must we every man of us put ^n
meeknes of mind, and in meeknes of mind every man of us ^ust esteem other
better then himself, be our state and place ^igher or lower, better or meaner,
we must every man be low ^ our own eyes, every man willingly yield unto
another, and every man think meanlier of himself then of other. ^erevpon our
Apostle being to exhort the Ephesians to keep ^e unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace, begins his exhortation ^^us: I therefore being prisoner in the
Lord, Ephesians. 4.2.
pray you that ye ^alke worthy of that vocation whereunto ye are called with
all ^mblenes of mind, and meeknes etc. thereby implying that ^mblenes and
meeknes of mind is one of the best preser^ers of the unity of the spirit in
the bond of peace, and so conse^uently one of the best preservatives against
contentiousnesse ^^d vain glory. Which yet will evidently appear, if a
little ^e compare the contentious, and the vainglorious man ^th the meek and
humble-minded man. The contentious ^an takes a delight in opposing himself
against all, the hum^e man does not willingly oppose himself unto any; the
^^ntentious man will not yield, the humble man willingly ^eldeth; the
contentious man stands stiffely in what he ^aintaineth be it true or false,
the humble man easily relenteth from the false, and gladly submits himself
unto the truth; the contentious man is in his element when he is stirring up
strife, the humble man grieueth much to strive, if then we were humble men,
nothing would be done through contention amongst us. Again, vainglorious men
think better of themselves then of others; the humble man esteems other
better then himself; the vainglorious man is puffed up with a conceit of his
own excellentnes, and disdeineth others, the humble man is lowly in his own
eyes, and reuerenceth others; the vainglorious man must be singular for some
thing above others, the humble man is gladly of one accord, and of one judgment
with others; the vainglorious man thinks every great place too mean for
him, the humble man thinks himself too mean for every place. If then we
were humble men, nothing would be done through vainglory amongst us. Again,
the humble man gladly assenteth, willingly likes, meekly submits himself
unto every thing that is good: if then we were humble men, we should easily be
knit together in one mind, and in one judgment. Indeed if we were hamble
men, it must needs be that we should be like minded, having the same love,
being of one accord, and of one judgment, it could not be that any thing
should be done through contention, or vainglory amongst us.

An excellent virtue then, an excellent grace of God is this humility and
meekness of mind: but as rare as it is excellent. For who is he that in
meeknes of mind esteems other better then himself? Very common it is with
us in the vanity of our mind to esteem of our selves better then of others,
to think of our selves as the proud Pharisie did in the Gospel of himself,
and of others as he did of the Publican; to think our own penny the best
silver, to value our own gifts at the greatest worth, to make our selves
equal unto the best, and in taking honor to prevent one another. But very rare
it is to think of others better then of our selves, to make our selves equal
to them of the lower sort, in giving honor one to go before another, in rating
of gifts to set our own as the lowest rate. Nay we can say that this is no
world for humbleness and meeknes of mind, we must now either think well of
our selves, or else none will think well of us, we must now thrust out our
selves before others, or else we shall be left behind all others; we must now
either exalt our selves in some conceit of our selves, or else we shall be so
humbled, that we shall be naught set by. And it is so indeed. But the less
that this virtue is practiced, the more it is to be urged; and the less favor
it finds amongst the sons of men, the more it sauoureth of such grace as
becomes the sons of God. Yea but we can object against it, and say, what if
we know that we are better then others, more learned then others, more wise
then others etc, are we then in meeknes of mind to esteem others better then
our selves? Whereunto I answer, understanding this to be spoken as it is to the
Church, that if we know some things in our selves, whereby we are better then
others of our brethren, yet withal we must know that this grace is not given
us to lift up our selves above them; but for our selves in comparing our selves
with others, we are to look upon our own wants and imperfections, and thereby
to be humbled in our selves; and for others, we are to cover their wants with
charity, and to look upon the good things in them, and so to prefer them
before our selves. Or we may say, that in modesty we are to yield in many
things of our own right, so that tho David knew himself to be better then
Saul, yet in modesty and in meekness of mind he may esteem Saul better
then himself. Whatsoever be objected against this rare grace of humility, yet
thus we must cut off contention and vainglory, or else unity and love shall
never be preserved amongst us.

Here then we see why it is that we are not like minded one toward another,
having the same love, being of one accord, and of one judgment: why it is that
many things are done amongst us through contention and vainglory; and it is
because there is not in us that meeknes of mind to esteem others better then
our selves. In the words therefore of the Apostle, I beseech you as the elect
of God, holy and beloved, Col. 3.12.
put on tender mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meeknes, long suffering
etc; in giving honor go one before another; be not high minded, but make your
selves equal to them of the lower sort; deck your selves inwardly with
lowliness of mind: for God resists the proud, and gives grace to the
humble; and he that humbles himself shall be exalted. Let nothing be done
through contention, or vainglory, but in meeknes of mind let every man
esteem other etc.

Look not etc.] Here is a dehortation from selfe-seeking of our own things,
which is a third enemy unto that love, concord, and unanimity which before he
persuaded; as it is also to humility, and an exhortation unto that virtue
which is both a preservative against this evil, and a preserver of that love,
concord, and unanimity which before he persuaded, and also of humility.
Whence briefly I observe two means whereby to come to humility, and to
preserve love, concord, and unanimity: the one is not to look on our own
things; the other, to look on the things of other men. For if we look every
man on his own things, as for example, every man on his own graces, on his
own wit, on his own learning, on his own judgment, or every man on his own
commodity etc, and neglect or contemn the things of other men, what else will
follow of this self-love but vainglory? and what will follow of it but
contention? What was the cause of the Pharisees pride, and disdeine of the
poor Publican? Luc. 18.11.
He looked upon his own fastings, and Sabbath keepings, and tithe-payings, and
such like things; he looked not on the Publicans confession, contrition, and
humble prayer. We may look on our own things, on our own graces, to glorify
God by them and for them, not to glory in them, and on our own commodities, in
a Christian sort to seek them and to use them; but we may not only look on
our own things, but also on the things of other men; not to be busy in their
matters, but on their graces to reverence them, and on their commodities to
regard them. Thus shall we be humbled in our own eyes, and thus love and
concord shall be easily preserved.

LECTVRE XXVII.
PHILIP. 2. Verse 5.6.7.8. Let the same mind be even in you that was in Christ
Jesus, who being in the form, etc.
THE Apostle being now prisoner at Rome for Jesus Christ, in writing this
Epistle to the Philippians, and diverse others which he wrote there in his bonds
for the Gospells sake, gives most manifest and evident proof of the great
care which he had over all those Churches which he had planted in all places.
In all which his Epistles as here labors to confirm them in the truth of
that doctrine which by his preaching they had embraced, so most carefully every
where he admonishes them not to be troubled at the bonds which he suffers
for the Gospells sake, assuring them that his imprisonment, afflictions, and
all things that came to him were to the furtherance of the Gospel which he had
preached. In which points also the Apostle having labored earnestly in the
former Chapter of this Epistle, now in this Ch^pter in the words before my
text, he exhorts them above all things to humility, meekness of mind, and
brotherly love, that they should do nothing through contention, or vain
glory, or self-conceit, but that every man should esteem other better then
himself, and should look on the things of other men, and not on his own
things.

In these words which I have now read unto you, the Apostle goes forward to
excite and stir up the Philippians, and in them us, unto this same true
humility, meekness of mind and brotherly love. Wherein that he might the
rather prevail with them, he presses the example of Christ, saying, Let the
same mind be in you, etc. In the opening and declaring of which example of
Christ Jesus, he first sets down his humility, and then the issue thereof,
which was his exaltation into glory. His humility is here described to be
twofold. First, in that he being in the form of God, i. being God, and without
all injury to the Godhead, equal in might, power, and majesty unto the
Father, yet made himself of no reputation, and took on him the form of a
servant, 1. was made man, even the most abject amongst men. 2. In that being
made man he humbled himself, willingly laying aside as it were the power of
his Godhead, and became obedient, in all things which the law required of him,
unto the death, even the most shameful death of the Cross. After this double
description of Christ his humility, follows, and is set down the issue
thereof, which was that he was not left in this lo^ estate, but was highly
exalted far above all principality, and power, and might, and domination, and
every name that is named not in this world only, but in that also that is to
come, so that at his name should bow every knee, both of things in heaven etc.
The argument then or reason, which the Apostle draws, to perswad them to true
humility, and brotherly love one toward another, from Christ his example in
effect is this: If Christ who being God blessed for ever, and equal to the
father, yet so far humbled himself that he became man, and took on him the
similitude of sinful flesh: And again, if Christ descending from heaven in
the similitude of sinful flesh, and being made man, did yet so far humble
himself, that he became obedient to the death, even the death of the cross.
Lastly, if Christ being God, and having humbled himself to be man, and being
man, having humbled himself to the death of the cross, was therefore highly
exalted, and had a name given him above every name etc. how then ought we
sinful men to put on us this humility, and meeknes of mind, no man through
arrogancy treading down his weak brethren, but every man esteeming other
better then himself? This I take to be the Apostles argument in this place. It
is then as if he had thus said:

O ye Philippians my hearts desire for you is, that ye may be found perfect and
entire, lacking nothing, in the day of Jesus Christ. Wherefore I beseech you
that nothing be done among you through contention, or through vain glory, but
that ye be like minded one toward another, that ye love one an other, and that
in all humbleness and meekness of mind ye submit your selves one unto an
other, and every man esteem other better then himself. Learn I beseech you of
Christ Jesus himself, whose Disciples, whose servants, members of whose body
ye are, learn I say of him to be humble and meek. For he being God, and
without all injury to the godhead equal in glory, and honor, and majesty
unto the Father, yet made himself of no reputation, and became man, and was
like unto man in desires, in infirmities, in sorrows, and in all things sin
only excepted: yea being man, he so far humbled himself, that he was obedient
in all things even unto the death, and that the shameful death of the cross,
where ^he hung between two thieves. Let the same mind be in you that was in
Christ Jesus: be ye humble and meek as he was, not in that degree, but in
some measure frame your selves unto that humility that was in him, and then
assure your selves, that as Christ was not thus lef^ but was highly exalted,
etc. so you, if you humble your selves, you shall be exalted. This I take to be
the meaning of these words of the Apostle.

They branch themselves, as you may see, into three parts: whereof the first
is, an exhortation unto humility, and meekness of mind, Let the same mind
etc. 2. Is set down the humility of Christ, as a pattern for them to look
upon, and to persuade them to humility, Who being in the form of God, etc. 3.
Is set down Christ his exaltation into glory after his humiliation here on
earth, as a motive also to persuade them unto love and humility, Wherefore God
has also, etc. I can only point at those manifold notes, and most profitable
instructions which hence might be gathered.

First therefore in the exhortation we are to note what it is whereunto the
Apostle exhorts the Philippians, and in them us. The thing whereunto he
exhorts both them, and us, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, is,
that we should be humble and lowly, kind and courteous, gentle and loving one
unto an other, in all humbleness submitting our selves every man one unto
another, and in all meekness of mind esteeming every other man better then
himself. The like exhortation the same Apostle makes, Romans 12.01
where he says; be affection^^ to love one an other with brotherly love, and
in giving honor go out before an other. In which place the Apostle together
with his exhortation unto humility, the fruit whereof is the preferring of
our brethren in honor before our selves, ioineth the ground thereof, which is
love. For if we love our brethren, then we can willingly submit our selves
unto them, and prefer them before our selves: but where this love of our
brethren is not, there is contempt of them, and lifting up of our selves above
them. The like exhortation also the Apostle Peter has, 1 Pet. 5.5.
where he says, Submit your selves every man one unto an other, and deck your
selves inwardly in lowliness of mind: In which place you see how the Apostle
speaks of humility, as of a special ornament wherewithal the child of God
is decked, and beautified more than with all costly jewels, and precious
ointments whatsoever. But here it is to be observed, even from the Apostle in
this place of Peter, that there is a two fold humility and holiness; the one
inward, the other outward; the one of the mind, the other to the eye, the one
true and holy, the other ill and hypocritical. Of the outward and
hypocritical humbleness the Apostle speaks where he thus writes unto the
Colossians; Let no man at his pleasure bear rule over you by humbleness of
mind, Colos. 2.18.
and worshipping of Angels, etc. For the understanding of which place it is to
be understood, that there were craftily crept in amongst the Colossians
certain which taught them to worship Angels, because forsooth it was a point
of great arrogancy streight-way to rush into the holy place, and to worship
God: greater humblenes beseemed them then forthwith to rule into Gods
presence, and to fall down before him, and to worship him. Much like unto
those who at this day teach men to use the intercession of the saints departed
this mortalytie, and to make their prayers unto them, not boldly and
presumptuouslie themselves to enter into the Kings palace before the throne of
grace, but in all humblenes to prostrate themselves before the saints and their
images, that so their prayers and supplications through their intercession may
be accepted with God. But against such as by such humblenes ^eeke to abuse us,
the Apostle plainly warns us in this place; ^or that this humbleness is a
voluntary submission not taught ^y God, but chosen according to men's own
fantasy. The ^nward humility, and lowliness of mind is that whereof Pe^er
here speaks, and whereunto our Apostle in my text exhor^eth. It is the heart,
the mind, and the soul that God regards: there must be the seat of
humility, if it be true humility. The glory of the true Christian is within;
and therefore it is said, The Kings daughter is all glorious within: Psa. 45.13.
the kings daughter, i. the Church, and then if thou be a lively member of the
Church, thy glory is within, and thy outward humility is then good when it
proceeds from within, even from the lowliness of the mind.

And now that you see what it is, even what humility it is that the Apostle
exhorts unto, I beseech you (with the Apostle) that the same mind be in you
that was even in Christ Jesus, that in meekness of mind every man esteem
other better then himself. It is an exhortation, which if we shall a little
look into some of those properties which always follow this humblenes of
mind whereunto the Apostle exhorts, I fear me we shall find that we have
either never heard of, or never hearkened unto. The property of it is, in
giving honor to prefer others, Romans 12.10
as ye have already heard out of the Apostle: and as is further proved by that
parable of our Savior Christ unto the guest when he marked how they chose out
the chief rooms at feasts. Luc. 14.7.
Out of both which places it may appear that he that is truly humbled, in
matters of honor prefers not himself before others, but prefers others
before himself. But how far we are from this humility, the great ambition
of men in our days, and great seeking of every preferment, yea of every petite
office in every town incorporate, would speak if I should hold my peace. Nay
so far are we from preferring others before our selves, that rather than we
will not clime over the heads of those that are better than our selves we will
use all bribery and corruption, yea and out of our false hearts we will devise
all manner of lies and slanders against them, and rather then fail we will
libell against them. It is so, and where it is so there wants this humbleness
of mind here spoken of.

Another property of it is, that he that is humble, and a^ our Savior calls
him poor in spirit esteems others better than himself, as the Apostle
shows verse. 3. He stands not upon the conceit of his knowledge, of his
honor, of his wealth, of his friends. If he have these things he
acknowledges them to be the blessings of the Lord, but no cause why he should
swell with pride, or advance himself above his brethren. But does not the
wealthy rich man tread under foot, and oppress with all wrong and violence
his poor neighbors? Is not the great Scholar, and wise man so puffed up with
his knowledge that he counts of others little better than fools? Does not the
great man, whether it be that he be great in office, or in birth and friends,
does he not disdain his inferiors, and oftentimes make a mock of them? I
wish it were not so: but if it be so, there wants in them this humbleness of
mind here spoken of.

A third property of it is, as to humble us so before God that we willingly
acknowledge whatsoever good thing we have, to be only from God without any
merit in our selves so without self respects to regard the good of others, and
of Gods Church. For the truly humbled man does not look on his own things,
as it is in the former verse, as so loving them that he cares not for the
things of other men; but he looks on the things of other men, and whatsoever
is good for Gods Church that he does. I wish there were no cause of fear that
this humbleness of mind were wanting. But who sees not that the reformation
of many abuses is hindered, that many godly and Christian exercises are stayed,
that much good many times is left undone? and why? Forsooth because such a one
moved it, because such and such men call for it, such and such men like too
well of if, and therefore rather then please their humors, let things stand as
they are. A thing in practice too too common, and what humbleness of mind
where it is so? By this which has already been spoken, I think, it may
appear how little hitherto we have hearkened to this exhortation of the
Apostle. Well I beseech you, that whatsoever is amiss in this behalf may be
amended. Deck your selves inwardly with lowliness of mind: in giving honor
go ^e before another: esteem every man another better then himself: ^t neither
opionion of wisdom puff you up, or of wealth make you ^ell; but submit your
selves one unto another, and let the same ^ind be in you that was in Christ
Jesus. And so I come to my se^ond note out of this exhortation.

2. In this exhortation I note the inducement which the ^postle uses to move
them unto this humbleness of mind, which is the example of Christ Jesus. Let
the same mind be ^ you that was in Christ Jesus. Will ye then have a reason
why ^e should be lowly in mind? Christ Jesus, whose example is ^erule of our
life, and whose actions ought to be our instru^tions, he so humbled himself
that being God he for our ^^kes became also man; how then ought we to submit
our ^elues one unto another in all humbleness and meekness of ^inde? The like
motive or reason is used by our Savior Christ himself, where he says unto
the people that were with ^im, Learn of me that I am meek and lowly in heart:
Math. 11.^0. Ioh. 13.^5.
as also ^here he washes his Disciples feet to teach them humility, and ^hen
says unto them, I have given you an example that ye should ^n even as I have
done to you. What should I go forward to ^uote Scriptures to this purpose?
Nothing more usual in the ^criptures then by the example of Christ to stir
up unto our ^euerall duties: and what ought to be more effectual with us ^o
persuade us? when the soldier sees his Captain fight, ^here needs no further
spur to set him into the batteil. Christ is our Lord, and we his servants: if
he our Lord and Master have given us such an example, and have said unto us,
^oe as ye have me for example, should there need any further ^purre unto us
for this duty? If he have so humbled himself ^or us, that being God he became
also man, if he have had ^uch compassion on us that when we were enemies unto
him ^e reconciled us unto God, if he so loved us that he laid down his life for
us, how ought we to be humble and lowly minded one toward another? how ought
we to have compassion upon our poor brethren, especially in this heavy time?
how ^ought we to love one another with brotherly love? Christ my brethren is
our head. If we be members of his body, we must draw our life and our
spiritual nourishment from him; we must in all things grow up into him which
is our head. Fare be it therefore from us to disdain our brethren, to wrong
them, to oppress them, to contemn them, to swell in pride against them. Nay
rather, let us use one another with all kindness, with all gentleness, with
all meekness. Let us submit our selves one unto another, let us be like minded
one toward another in Christ Jesus. Himself exhorts us hereunto, he has
given us an ensample, Let the same mind, etc.

Thirdly, I note the humility of Christ, whose example the Apostle here
exhorts us to follow. His humility is here described by the Apostle, first
by his incarnation, in that being God, he vouchsafed to take flesh of the
blessed Virgin, and to become man, like unto us in all things, sin only
excepted secondly, by the work of our redemption, in that being man he yet
again further humbled himself, and became obedient to the death, even the
most shameful death of the Cross. In the description of Christ his
incarnation are very many things most worthy our observation, touching both the
natures in Christ his God head, and his Manhood. I can only point at some of
the heads of those observations which hence were to be made, and more fully
handled. First for the Godhead of Christ, in that it is here said, that he was
in the form of God, it is thereby proved, that Christ was true God: for in the
self same manner and phrase of speech that here he is said to be in the form
of God, in the same is it afterward said that he took on him the form of a
servant. Where by the form of a servant the Apostle expresses his Manhead, as
here by the form of God is expressed his Godhead. Neither indeed can any be in
the form of God, who is not true God. And as in this place he is said to be in
the form of God, whereby is meant that he is God; so in other places plainly
and directly heads said to be God, Romans 9.5.
as in the Epistle to the Romans, Of when are the Fathers, and of whom
concerning the flesh Christ came, wh^ is God over all, blessed for ever: and to
the Colossians, In Christ dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily:
Coloss 29.
and in the Acts, Take heed etc. Act. 20.28
to feed the Church of God, which he has purc^^sed with his own blood. The
phrase of speech in this place is somewhat different, but it is all one as if
he had thus said, who ^eing God. Secondly, I note touching the Godhead of
christ, that he was equal in all things unto God the Father, the Apostle
plainly shows, where it follows, that he ^ought it no robbery to be
equal with God: for in that he says, thought it no robbery, he plainly
shows, that it was his ^ght, and no injury at all unto the Godhead, for him
that ^as God to be equal unto God. If then it be Christ his right, ^^d no
injury at all to the Godhead, that Christ be equal vn^^ God the Father, then
Christ as touching his Godhead is ^quall unto God the Father, howsoever
touching his Man^ood he be inferior to the Father. And this be noted tou^^ing
the divine nature of Christ.

Now touching Christ his Manhood: First, in that it is here ^id, that he made
himself of no reputation, or as the word signi^^eth, that he emptied himself,
and of all brought himself unto nothing, I note Christ his Manhood not
forcibly to have ^eene imposed upon him, but himself voluntarily to have ^^ken
on him the form of a servant. When therefore it is said, ^^at God sent his
Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and again, ^^at God so loved the
world, that he gave his only be gotten Son, etc. where God the Father is said
to have sent, and to have gi^en his Son, and the Son is said to be sent,
and to be gi^en, we are to understand the speeches thus, that God the ^^ther
sent his Son, and God the Son was sent of the ^^ther, yet God the Father,
and God the Son, being not ^wo Gods, but one God distinguished into two
persons, it is ^ghtly said that God the Father sent the Son, and that the
^onne being one God with the Father, made himself of no ^^putation,
voluntarily descending from his Majesty, to be ^artaker of our misery: for
if himself had not thus humbled ^imselfe, who could have imposed this base
estate upon him, ^^mselfe being God blessed for ever? The Angels which kept ^ot
their first estate, they were thrown down lower than ^he earth, even to be
reserved in everlasting chains under ^arknesse, unto the judgment of the
great day. But Christ ^hen he was equal unto God in fullness of power, glory,
ma^^estie, knowledge, abased himself, and of almighty, made himself full of
infirmity; of immortal, made himself mortal. Secondly, in that it is said,
he took on him the form of a servant, I note that Christ so became man, as
that he ceased not to be God. For it is not said that the Godhead was changed
into the Manhood, but that Christ being God, took (...) him the form of a
servant, so uniting the God head and Manhood in the unity of person into one
Christ, as the reasonable soul and flesh is united into one man. A distinction
therefore of natures there is in Christ, but no confusion of substance; one
Christ, and he both God and man. Thirdly, it that it is said he was made like
unto men, I note the truth o^ his Manhood: for the Apostles meaning is, that in
no sort be took on him the nature or qualities of Angels, but took the seed
of Abraham, and so made himself man; that in nothing he differed from the
common sort of men, tasting of all man infirmities, and in all things was as
man, sin only excepted Lastly, in that it is said, he was found in shape as a
man, I note the same thing that before, namely the truth of Christ his Manhood:
for in these words the Apostle his meaning i^, that his very person and
behavior showed him to be a man and a man (as the Prophet speaks) full of
sorrows. Th^^ have I briefly pointed at some of those notes and observation
which may easily be gathered touching the Godhead and Manhood of Christ, out
of this description of Christ his humility in his incarnation.

To knit up the whole in one general note and observation, here we may most
clearly observe the great humility of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus: even
this one description of his incarnation may both most lively present it before
our eyes, and be a most clear pattern unto us how we ought to be minded one
toward another. He that was very God, of the substance of the Father,
glorious in majesty, wonderful in power, only wise, of right, and without any
injury to the Godhead at all, every way equal unto God the Father, of
himself vouchsafed to descend from his high and glorious majesty, and to take
into the unity of his person the nature of a man, even the base condition of a
servant, and in every thing that concerns man's nature to be like unto all
other men, sin only excepted. Here is love passing the love of women, and
here is humility beyond all comparison. Who knows not this? and yet who
follows this pattern of Christ Jesus set before him? He when we were enemies
unto him, vouchsafed to come unto us: which of us will vouchsafe ^o go unto
our enemy, and be reconciled unto him, though ^he commandment be, that the
Sun should not go down upon our wrath? Nay how hardly are we drawn to come
unto him that has thus vouchsafed to come unto us? Let the ^ell ring in the
fore noone and in the after noone to call us to come unto him, that we may
hear his will out of his word, yet either we will not come at all, or at our
best leisure, when our own business is dispatched. He for us vouchsafed to
descend from his high Throne of Majesty, and to become man: But which of us
will stoop down a whit, or at all let down our sail for our poor brethrens
sake? Nay if we be above them, rather than we will look so low, we will
turn them out of house and home, out of lands and goods, yea we will suffer
them for want of food to perish in our streets. O if Christ Jesus had been so
unkind unto thee, how had thou ere this been plunged into the bottomless
pit of hell, and so been prevented of this unkindness to thy brother? He
disdained not to take on him even the basest condition of a man, even of a
servant, and for our sakes to become poor, that we through his poverty might
be made rich. But how many of us with patience doc bear our poverty? Nay do
we not murmur and grudge against God, as an unequal disposer of these
temporal blessings? Do we not often break out into these intemperate
speeches, Rather than we will thus want, we will rob by the high ways side,
or steal; Rather than we will starve, we will have it out of the rich man's
belly? etc. But know thou, that unless Christ had been poor for thy sake,
thou had had thy portion with the Devil and his Angels. He took upon him
our infirmities, that so he might take compassion on our infirmities. But how
many of us are moved to take compassion on the miseries, distresses, and
infirmities of our brethren? Nay how many of us do shut up all bowels of
compassion against those that are in misery and distress? not clothing the
naked, not feeding the hungry, not visiting the sick, not releeuing the
distressed. O my brethres, let the same mind be in you that was in Christ
Jesus. If he thus humbled himself for our sakes, let us follow him in the
practice of humility. Let us equal our selves unto them of the lowest degree.
Let us pluck down our high sails, and be ready to distribute unto the
necessity of the Saints. Let us d^e good unto all, but especially unto those
that are of the household of faith. Let us not say with the Angel of the Church
of La^^icea, I am rich, and increased with gold, and have need of nothing but
let us cast down our selves for our sins, and let every man be humbled in
his own soul, and so shall we submit our selves one unto another. Let us
always set before our eyes the humility of Christ Jesus in his incarnation,
and thereby be provoked to all humbleness and lowliness of mind. Meditate on
these things all ye that fear God, and ye shall find rest unto your souls.
Meditate on these things, ye that now come, or hereafter mean to come to the
Lords Table, to be made partakers of the mysteries of Christ his blessed death
and passion. Here Christ Jesus, who was made bone of our bone, and flesh of our
flesh, inuiteth you unto this holy Supper, that you may be made bone of his
bone, and flesh of his flesh. Here by a true and lively faith, through the
operation of the holy spirit, ye are made bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh, members of his body, and vessels of his glory. But there must be in you
the same mind that was in Christ Jesus ye must put away all hatred and
contention, all rancour and malice, and as he came to us in love toward us, so
we must come unto him in perfect love and charity toward all men. As he
came unto us to kill sin in our flesh, so we must come unto him purged from
the corruption which is in the world through lust, 2 Pet. 1.4.
that so we may be partakers of the divine nature, as Peter speaks. As he
came unto us, giving us an ensample so to walk as he has walked, so we must
come to him with full resolution, and settled purpose, so to walk as we have
him for an ensample in all humbleness and lowliness of mind: or else in
coming unto him to this holy Table, we heap unto our selves wrath against
the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the just judgment of God.

The Lord give us his grace, that we may walk as we have Christ Jesus for an
example, that submitting our selves one unto another, we may be like minded
one toward another in Christ Jesus, that every man esteeming other better than
himself, we may all together in all things grow up into him which is our
head, that is, Christ.

LECTVRE XXVIII.
PHILIP. 2. Verse 8. He humbled himself, and became obedient unto the death,
even the death of the Cross, etc.
HE humbled himself, etc.] In which words the Apostle first proposes this
second humiliation of Christ in general, saying, He humbled himself.
Secondly, the Apostle describes it more particularly by the obedience of
Christ unto the death, saying, and became obedient unto the death. Where the
Apostle notes a twofold obedience of Christ, the one before his death in his
whole life, the other in and at his death; the former consisting in Christ his
fulfilling of the Law, the latter in his whole sufferings of death, and all the
pains and sorrows thereof: for in that it is said, that Christ became
obedient unto the death, the Apostle his meaning is, that Christ was obedient
in all things that the Law required of him, both doing the will of his Father
in the whole course of his life, and further subiecting himself unto the
death; so that he was not only obedient to his Father to fulfill the Law for
us, but he was obedient unto the death, to lay down his life for our sakes.
Lastly, this circumstance of his death is amplified by the kind thereof, he
became obedient unto the death, even the death of the Cross, which was the
most shameful and most accursed kind of death. So that the meaning of the
Apostle in this place is, that Christ who so had already humbled himself, that
of the Son of God he was now become the son of man, did yet further humble
and abase himself, and became obedient unto his Fathers will in all things
that the Law required of him, even unto the suffering of death for us miserable
sinners, submitting himself unto death for us, and that the most shameful
death of the Cross. This I take to be the meaning.

In these words then we are to note four doctrines touching Christ. The first
is touching his humiliation: The second touching his obedience in his life: The
third is touching his death: The fourth is touching his kind of death.

In his humiliation I note first the person that was humbled, secondly the
manner of his humiliation, both set down by the Apostle, when he says, he
humbled himself. For the first, touching the person, hence it appears that
he who being God, and equal with the Father, was now become man, humbled
himself, and became etc. The person then that was humbled was Christ, God and
man, perfect God and perfect man, subsisting of a reasonable soul and humane
flesh. And necessary it was that he who was now to work the work of our
redemption, should be both God and man: man, that as man had sinned, so sin
might be punished in man, for so Gods justice required: God, that he might be
able to sustain the grieuousnesse of the punishment due to our sins, which
should be temporal, but yet equivalent to eternal pains; for our sins
being infinite, and the punishment due unto them being infinite, because
thereby we had grieved an infinite God, the person must needs be infinite
which should pay the price of our sins. Again, it was necessary that he
should be man, that he might suffer death, because for sin man had deserved
death; and necessary likewise that he should be God, that he might be able to
wrestle with the wrath of God, which none else could do but he that was God.
Needs therefore must he be both God and man. And that he was so, as by this
place it is plain, Act. 20.28.
so by that likewise in the Acts, where the Apostle exhorts the Elders of
Ephesus to feed the Church of God, which he (says the Apostle) has purchased
with his own blood. In which place, he who has purchased a Church unto
himself, is both called God, and also witnessed to be true man, in that he
purchased it with his own blood.

Here then we may see the heinousness and grieuousnesse of our sins, and the
greatness of our misery by reason of them. God blessed for ever must become
man, and God and man must be united into one Christ, and being thus united,
must be humbled unto the death, and must pay the price of our sins by
shedding of his own blood, or else the everlasting curse of Gods wrath abides
upon us, and our portion is with the Devil and his Angels in the lake that
burns with fire and brimstone for ever. And yet what account or reckoning at
all is made of sin? Surely so little, that it may be very well said unto us
which Hosea the Prophet sometime said unto the children of Israel, Hear the
word of the Lord, Hos. 4.1.1.
ye children of Israel, for the Lord has a controversy with the inhabitants
of the land, because there is no truth, etc. And yet what remorse of these
things even now when the whole land mourns for them, and groaneth under the
burden of them? It had not been possible to satisfy Gods justice for the
least of our sins otherwise than by everlasting death, unless God had become
man, and so humbled himself to suffer whatsoever was due for man's sin: and
yet who is he that considers in heart his sins, to reform the wickedness
of his way? O consider this, ye that forget God, and grieve his holy spirit by
your continual committed sins, lest he pluck you away, and there be none to
deliver you. Fly from sin as from a Serpent. Christ Jesus both God and man
has paid the price for our sins. Let us not therefore henceforth serve sin
in the lusts thereof, but let us glorify God both in our bodies and in our
spirits.

The second thing which I noted in Christ his humiliation was the manner of
Christ his humiliation: which I note 1. was voluntary. 2. that both his
manhood and his Godhead was abased. That his humiliation was voluntary
appears by that it is said, that he humbled himself. As then his first
humiliation, when being God he took on him man's nature, was voluntary; so his
second humiliation, when being both God and man he subjected himself unto the
law, and unto death, was voluntary. How then is it said, that he was made
obedient for so it is read in the original. He was made obedient, not of any
other but of himself, neither forcedly, but willingly he made himself
obedient, even as willingly he humbled himself. Now for the other point that
Christ was abased and humbled both according to his Godhead and his manhood. 1.
For his manhood it does appear, in that it was made subject to the infirmities
of man's nature, as also to the miseries and punishments which were due unto man
for sin 2. for his Godhead, it was also abased, not as it is considered in it
self, for so it is immutable; but in respect of the veil of the flesh, under
which it was so covered, that it lay hid from the first moment of Christ his
incarnation, to the time of his resurrection, without any great manifestation
of his power and majesty therein.

Did he then who was both God and man thus voluntarily humble himself in his
Godhead, and in his manhood? did he so abase himself that he would be borne in
a cratch, converse with poor fishermen, eat and drink with Publicans and
sinners, be baptized of John, be tempted of the Devil, wash his Disciples
feet, and as a Lamb before the shearer so not open his mouth? What should
this teach us my brethren? Even willingly to submit our selves one unto
another; and all of us to deck our selves inwardly with lowliness or mind.
If abundance of wisdom and knowledge, if greatness in honor and dignity, if
sovereign power and authority had been sufficient motives and inducements
for our Savior Christ to stay himself from thus humbling himself, his name
was wonderful, counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting father, the prince
of peace, to him did belong all honor and glory, in him were hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, and of his fullness have all we received,
and grace for grace: yet for all this he thus humbled himself willingly, as
ye have heard. Let not therefore the conceit of wisdom and knowledge in our
selves; let not the conceit of our wealth and riches, of our preferments and
honors, of our birth and friends cause us to swell with pride of our own
gifts, or to lift up our selves above our brethren, to disdain our inferiors;
let not these be any stays why ^ere should not be in us the same minds that
was in that christ Jesus. Let every man make himself equal unto them of the
^est degree, and let every man esteem other better then himself: ^e God
resists the proud, and gives grace unto the humble. and let this be noted
touching Christ his humiliation. It ^^^loweth.

And he became obedient, or, he was made obedient] Whence I ^^te the second
point which I proposed to be spoken of, to ^t, Christ his obedience in his life
unto the law to fulfill the ^v. For if the question be asked, when, and how
long was ^rist obedient? The Apostle answers, vsque ad mortem, vn^^ the
death; not as if his death were no part of his obedi^ce, but the Apostle
plainly implies thereby, that, as in the (...) of his life he was obedient
unto his Fathers will, to fulfill ^e law for us; so was he obedient in his
death to redeem us ^m death, hell, and the Devil. Touching his obedience vn^^
the law to fulfill the law, the Apostle says, that when the ^nesse of time was
come, Gal. 4.4.
God sent forth his Son made of a man; and made under the law, that is,
subject unto the law to fill the law. And of himself thus our Savior himself
^aketh; Mat. 5.17.
think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the ^ophets; I am not come to
destroy them but to fulfill them. Christ ^n was made subject to the law, and
came into the world to ^^fill the law. And therefore he was circumcised the
eight ^y, he was represented to the Lord after the days of Mary's
^^rification, and as the text says, Luc. 2.39.
all things were done for him ^^ording to the law of the Lord. He gave sight to
the blind, ^^de the deaf to hear, the dumme to speak, the lame to go etc.
Es. 35.5, 6.
^it was so written of him. He preached the Gospel to the ^re, bound up the
broken hearted, 61.1, 2.
preached deliverance to the ^tiues, set at liberty them that were bruised,
preached the accep^le year of the Lord etc, as it was so written of him. He
was ^uted with the transgressors, though he had done no wickedness, 53.12.
^ther any deceit was in his mouth* he bare the sins of many, and ^yed for
the trespassers, as it was so written of him. In a word, ^atsoeuer was written
of him in the law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms, all that
he fulfilled. And therefore when John would have put him back from his
baptism, he said unto him, Mat. 3.15.
Let be now, for thus it becomes us to first all righteousness; as if he had
said, stay not this act of my baptizing; for we must render perfect obedience
unto the Father in all things which he has ordained. Now will ye know the
reason why Christ thus fulfilled the law, as it was written (...) him. Gal. 4.5.
The Apostle gives it, where he says, for this cause (...) was made subject
unto the law, that he might redeem them when were under the law; Romans 8.4.
or as the same Apostle says, that the right^ousnesse of the law might be
fulfilled in us, which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit,.i. that
his fulfilling of the law in o^ flesh might be imputed for righteousness unto
the children o^ his kingdom, as well as if they had fulfilled the law in the
own persons. For when (as the same Apostle there speake^^ by reason of our
sinful flesh we were not able to fulfill the law, and therefore must needs
perish by the law, then God s^^ding his own Son in the similitude of
sinful flesh ma^^ him obedient unto the law, that his fulfilling of the law
might be imputed for righteousness unto us which believe in Christ Jesus whom he
has sent, and walk not after the flesh, but are the spirit. Again, the work
of our redemption consisted not only in Christ his sufferings and death, but
in his ful^^ling of the law also. For the sufferings and death of Christ
considered apart from his legal obedience, only takes a^ the guilt and
punishment, frees man from death, and make him of a sinner to be no sinner; but
that he may be fully reconciled to God, and accepted as righteous to life
everlasting this legal obedience of Christ must be imputed unto v^. Witness
the Apostle, Romans 3.19.
where he says, As by the disobedience of (...) man many were made sinners, so
by the obedience of one shall (...) be made righteous: where speaking generally
of obedience, b^ means Christ his whole obedience, which in all his life time
he performed. For as in the disobedience of Adam there (...) transgressio legis
vnde facti sumus peccatores, sic in obedience Christi fuit impletio legis, vnde
sumus iusti: the transgressne^ the law whereby we are made sinners, so in the
obedience of Ch^^ there was the fulfilling of the law, whereby we are made
just. And therefore that he might be made of God unto us perfect iustication
and redemption, besides that he suffered and died for ^s that he might free us
from sin and death, he also fulfilled ^he law for us, that so we might be
made the righteousness of ^od in him.

Here then is an exceeding great comfort for every faithful Christian soul.
Christ has fulfilled the law for us; and his ^bedience unto the law is now
made our righteousness; so that ^ow there is no condemnation unto them that are
in Christ jesus. Whatsoever the law required of us, all that he has ^ulfilled
in his own person, that so the righteousness of the ^aw, which was impossible
for us to perform, might be im^uted unto us, and we delivered from the bondage
of the ^aw. He made himself subject unto the law, that by fulfilling ^f the
law for us he might free us from all fear of condemna^ion by the law. Does
then the law present before thine eyes (...) curse and condemnation, if thou
do not continue in all things that are written in the book of the law to
do them? and does thine own conscience tell thee that in many things ^hou
have offended, and many ways thou have transgressed ^he law of thy God? Be not
troubled, nor fear. Cast thy ^urthen upon Christ Jesus. He has fulfilled the
law, not for himself, but for thee, that his obedience might be imputed for
righteousness unto thee. Again, know thou that nothing that is vnpure or
unclean has at any time entered into Gods sight, and would thou be
presented pure and unblameable before him in that day? Here is the garment of
thy elder brother Christ Jesus: in this his obedience thou shall appear
righteous before thy God in that day. Thine own obedience, thine own works,
thine own righteousness, seem it never so great and goodly must vanish as a
morning cloud in that day: for even thy best righteousness is but as the
menstruous clothes of a woman, as the Prophet speaks. The cloak where
withal thy nakedness must becouered, is the righteousness of Christ Jesus,
which righteousness is made thine own, if thou by a true and lively faith lay
hold on him where he sits at the right hand of the Father in the highest
places. What greater comfort can there be unto thine afflicted soul, then
this, both to be delivered from the curse of the law for not keeping it, and to
be presented pure before thy God a that day? And all this comfort thou may
have by this obedience of Christ Jesus.

And as this obedience of Christ Jesus unto his Fathers wi^^ to fulfill the law
for us, may justly minister this comfort unto us, so may it further teach us to
yield all obedience unto the will of our heavenly Father. For howsoever we be
freed from the condemnation of the law, because Christ has fulfilled the law
for us; yet are we not freed from the performance of our obedience unto the
moral law of God, but even by th^^ example of our Savior Christ we are more
straightly tied thereunto. 1 John 2.6.
For he that says he remains in Christ ought even so to walk as he has
walked, in all humility, and in all obedience to his heavenly Fathers will. He
that says he knows God, and keeps not his commandments, 4.
is a liar, and the truth is not in hi^^ but he that keeps his word, in him
is the love of God perfect indeed and hereby we know that we are in him, and
that we love him, if ^e keep his commandments. 5.
As therefore Christ walked in the law, and performed all obedience unto his
Fathers will, so remember thou to walk with thy God, and to keep his
commandments with thine whole heart. Beware that thou dissemble not; beware
that thou present not thy self in the assembly of Gods saints to hear his
word, or to receive his holy sacrament either for fashions sake, or for fear
of the law only to save thy purse: for so thou purchasest unto thy self a
fearful judgment. Beware how thou dalliest with thy God: for he sees not as
man sees. Well thou may dissemble with man, but he searches the heart and
the reins, and he knows all thy thoughts long before they be conceived by
thee. Let thy heart be sound with thy God, and his commandments, let them be
in thy heart to do them. And so much of Christ his obedience.

It follows; And became obedient even unto the death] His death being
likewise a part of his voluntary obedience unto his Fathers will; for both in
fulfilling the law, and in suffering death for us, he showed his obedience unto
his Father, and wrought the works of our redemption. Here then is the third
doctrine touching Christ which I proposed to be observed, which is touching his
death: under which name I understand not only the separation of his soul from
his body, but all the pains and agonies which he suffered both in soul and
body. For as it was written of him, He bare our infirmities, Esaias 53.4.
and carried our sins, he was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken
for our iniquities, he made his soul an offering for sin, the chastisement of
our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed; as thus, I say, it
was written of him, so thus he suffered, and was obedient unto the death. Will
you then see what manner of death Christ suffered? He suffered not only a
bodily death, and such pains as follow the dissolution of nature, but he
suffered likewise in his soul the wrath of God for the sins of the world
lying so heavy upon him that it wounded his flesh and his spirit also as the
scripture speaks even to death. For if he had suffered no more but in body,
then he overcame no more but a bodily death, and then were our state most
miserable: but our sins having deserved not the bodily death only, but even
death both of body and soul, by the death which he suffered he overcame death
and the power of it both in our bodies and in our souls. Whence was it that
when his death approached he began to be in sorrow and heaviness? Whence was it
that he said unto his Disciples, my soul is very heavy even unto the death?
Whence was it that so often he fell on his face, and prayed, that if it were
possible that cup might pass from him? Whence was it that an Angel appeared
from heaven unto him to comfort and strengthen him? Whence was it that as he
prayed, his sweat was like drops of blood, trickling down to the ground? Was
not this and all this even from the pains which he felt in his soul by reason
of the wrath of God against sin? Can we think that all this came to our
Savior Christ for fear of a bodily death? Have his servants that receive of
his fullness so despised this death of the body, that either they wished for it
to be with Christ, or rejoiced in the midst of it before the persecutor, and
did our Savior himself so fear and tremble at the remembrance of it? Did the
Apostles sing in prison, and rejoice when they were whipped and scourged? Did
Paul glory in the tribulations which he suffered, and did our Savior in such
like pain cry in the bitterness of his soul, my God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Nay my brethren, that which made Christ to be heavy would have
crushed his Apostles in pieces: that which made him sweat blood in the garden
would have sunk them into hell: that which made him cry would have held both
men and Angels under everlasting woe and lamentation. Besides his bodily death
therefore, and the pains that followed thereupon, he felt in his soul most
grievous pains through the wrath of God which was upon him for our sins. And
thus ye see what death he suffered for our sakes, when he was made obedient to
the death.

The fruits and benefits which we receive by Christ his death are these. 1.
By his death we are freed from that death which is both of body and soul, have
the victory over that death which is the reward of sin, as witnesses the
Apostle. For our Savior by his death has pulled out the sting of death, Heb.
2.14. Romans 8.1.
and on the cross has triumphantly said, O death where is thy sting, o grave
where is thy victory? and therefore when we feel the pangs of death approach
we should not fear but be full of hope, considering that our death is now
changed by the virtue of Christ his death, and is the entrance into an
everlasting ^ife. 2. By Christ his death we have remission and forgiveness of
our sins, as says our Savior himself, where in the institution of his
supper, Math. 16.28.
this my blood which is shed for many for the remission of sins. For the
remembrance of which his blessed death and fruits of his passion, he has
ordained this holy Sacrament of his supper to be continued in his Church for
ever. In which holy supper the death and passion of our Savior, is so lively
represented unto us a, if we had seen it with our eyes. the bread betokening
the body, the wine the blood of our Savior Christ; the breaking likewise of
the bread signifying the breaking of his body with those unspeakable torments
which he suffered, and the pouring out of the wine the shedding of his most
precious blood, when his blessed side was gored with the spear of a soldier;
our eating of the bread and drinking of the wine, assuring us of our
incorporation into Christ, to be made partakers of all the benefits of his
passion. When ye come therefore to this holy Supper, remember that ye are
called hither to continue the remembrance of his blessed death and passion,
until his blessed coming again. Repent you earnestly of your manifold sins
for the remission whereof Christ shed his own hearts blood. Love one an other,
even as he has loved us who laid down his life for us. And have faith in
Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in
his blood. By faith in Christ Jesus we receive remission of our sins, and all
other benefits of his death and passion. By love of our brethren we testify
our love of God, who sent his son to be a reconciliation for our sins. And
with the contrition and sorrow of our hearts for our sins, the Lord is better
pleased then with all burnt offerings and sacrifices. These are the things
which the Lord requires of us, even faith, repentance, and love, and as at all
times, so at this time especially when we come to the receiving of these holy
mysteries let us think of these things. He that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation, crucifying again unto
himself the Lord of glory, and King of our peace. But he that examineth
himself, and so eats of this bread, and drinks of this cup, is made one
with Christ, and Christ with him, and Christ shall raise him up at the last
day, so that he shall never see death, because he belieueth in him who died for
our sins, and rose again for our justification. It follows.

Even the death of the crosse] The most shameful death that they could put him
unto. Here then is the fourth and last point which I noted in these words,
which is, the kind of his death, whereunto he submitted himself. The kind of
his death was, he was crucified between two Thieves, where he was mocked of
all sorts of men, where in feeling of the whole wrath of God upon him, he cried
out, my God, my God why have thou f^^saken me, where having performed all
things that were written, he said, it is finished, and so commended his spirit
into the hands of his Father.

Whence 1. we may learn with bitterness to bewail our sins, for which
Christ was thus cruelly nailed on the cross, and there suffered the whole
wrath of God. 2. To crucify our flesh, and the corruption of our nature, and
the wickedness of our hearts. Gal. 3.24.
For they that are Christ's crucify the flesh with the affections and the
lusts. 3. It may teach us that when we suffer any judgment, cross, or
calamity in body, or in mind, we do not suffer them as any curses of God,
but as the chasticements of a loving father. For Christ Jesus in his cross
being accursed for us, has delivered us from all curse. Beloved, let us think
of these things, mourning for our sins, mortifying the deeds of the flesh,
and comforting our selves in the cross of Christ Jesus, who abased himself
for us, fulfilled the whole law for us, died for our sins, and was nailed to
the cross for our iniquities.

O Lord teach us to humble our selves both before thee, and one unto another;
teach us to do thy will, teach us to die unto sin that we may live unto
thee, and daily more and more crucify the old man in us, that being renewed in
the spirit of our minds we may henceforth serve thee in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life.

LECTVRE XXIX.
PHILIP. 2. Verse 9.10. Wherefore God has also highly exalted him, and given
him a name above every name; that at the name of Jesus, etc.
IT remains now that we proceed from the description of Christ his humility,
unto the description of his exaltation into glory after his humiliation here
on earth, set down in these words:

Wherefore God has also, etc.] In which words the Apostle 1. in general
sets down Christ his exaltation into glory as a consequent, or effect
following his humiliation, and obedience unto the death, when he says,
Wherefore ^od has also etc. Him, even Jesus who was crucified, him ^ath God
raised unto life, set him at his right hand, and made ^im both Lord, and
Christ. 2. The Apostle sets down a ^ore particular specification, and
explication of Christ his ex^^tation into glory, 1. when he says, and given
him a name, etc. Whereby is meant, that God having raised him from the ^ead
has given him such majesty, and glory in the heavenly ^aces, that he has
appointed him Lord over all things, and ^ade him head unto the Church, which is
his body. 2. When ^e says, that at the name, etc. Whereby is meant, that God
^ath made all things subject under his feet, and that all crea^res shall
confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord unto the glo^^e of God the Father. It is
then as if the Apostle had thus ^^d: Christ when he was God humbled himself to
be man, and being God and man he humbled himself, and became o^edient unto the
death for us; therefore God has highly ex^lted him that thus humbled himself,
and has crowned him ^n the heavenly places with glory and honor far above
all ^rincipalitie, and power, and might, and domination, and every name that is
named; so that all creatures now do, and shall cast down their crowns, and
fall down before him, and say, praise, and honor, and glory be unto him that
set^eth upon the throne, and unto the lamb for evermore. And ^et this be
spoken touching the order, and the meaning of ^hese words in general. Now let
us a little look unto the ^enerall scope of them, and see what lessons we may
learn from them.

Wherefore God has etc.] The general scope and drift of ^he Apostle in these
3. verses is, by the consequent and good unto which God gives unto humility,
further to persuade us unto humility, and lowliness of mind, that so if the
exam^le of Christ his humiliation cannot prevail with us, to move us unto
humility, yet the excellency of that dignity where^nto he was exalted after,
and for his great humility may per^wade us thereunto. Whence I gather these
three obseruati^ns for our instruction.

1. Hence I note the gracious goodness of our merciful God, who seeks every
way to win us unto that which he requires of us. Sometimes he threatens, that
so for fear of (...) judgments we may walk in the law that he has appointed
for us: sometimes he punishes, for that in our affliction we see^^ him
diligently as the Prophet Hosea speaks, and sometimes (...) promises, Hos.
5.15. 2 Pet. 1.4.
that by his promises we may be partakers of the d^uine nature, as Peter
speaks. 1. that so we may be drawn from the corruptions which are in the world
through lust, as the same Apostle there expounds himself. In this place
having press^^ us with the example of Christ his humiliation unto humility, he
sets down the excellency of that dignity whereunto Christ was exalted
after his humiliation, that so seeing the reward, or at least the consequence
which follows humility we may embrace this holy virtue which he requires
of us. A man would have thought that this should have been enough to persuade
us, to set before us the example of Christ Jesus. And we when we have used any
reason to such, or such purpose, we think we have done well, and bid him
whom we speak unto look to the afterclappes if he hearken not unto us. But
such is the mercy of our good God, that he leaves not with a little, but he
heapeth reason upon reason, and adds motive unto motive, and rather then he
will not prevail with us, he will do with us as we do with little children,
by most great and precious promises he will persuade us unto that he requires
of us. O let us take heed how we hearke^ not unto the voice of so good and
gracious a God!

2. Hence I note the dullness of our minds unto every good motion of the
spirit, unless the Lord do, as it were draw us with the cords of love, and
even force us by multiplying his mercies toward us. There must be precept unto
precept, line unto line, reason unto reason, and after all this promise, or
hope of reward, or else be the motion never so good, yet we will not hearken
unto it. Unto pride and vainglory, unto contention and oppressing one of an
other we run apace, and need no spur to set us forward, nay not any
reason here shall rule us, but run we will after our own unbridled
affections. But to prevail with us, to put on tender mercy, kindness,
meekness, humbleness of mind; to persuade us to be courteous one unto an
other, and to submit ^^r selves one unto an other there must be exhortation
upon ^^hortation, the example of Christ Jesus must be proposed ^^to us, and
besides all this there must be certain hope of ^^ory after humility, and well
if all this can persuade us unto ^^mblenesse and lowliness of mind: Such is
our backward^^sse, and so slow are we to hearken unto the things that being
unto our peace. We should love our God, even for him^^^fe, because he is good
and goodness it self; we should ^^epe his commandments, because they are
his, and good ^^d righteous altogether; we should embrace humility, be^^use we
should be conformable to the image of Christ Jesus. ^ut to stir up our
slacknes, and dullness unto these, and the ^^e duties he has given us most
great and precious promises, ^^d assured us that the performance of these
duties shall not (...) in vain in the Lord. Let us not still harden our hearts
as (...) the day of slaughter, let us not still stop our ears at the ^^ice
of the Charmer charm he never so wisely; but if no^^ing else will prevail
with us, yet let his promises persuade ^ unto our duties, and let the sure hope
of glory stir us up unto humility.

3. Hence I note, that the highway to be exalted into glory, is to deck our
selves inwardly with lowliness of mind. Which is not only proved by this
example of our Savior, ^^e consequent of whose humility was an eternal weight
of ^lory, as here we see, but by many other places of Scripture ^oe. Our
Savior Christ says, Whosoever exalts himself ^^all be brought low, and
whosoever humbles himself shall be ex^lted. Solomon says, the reward of
humility, and the fear of God, Pro. 22.4.
^^riches, and glory, and life. And in an other place, the fear of ^he Lord,
is the instruction of wisdom, 15.33.
and before honor goes ^umilitie. The reason is given by the same Solomon in
an other ^rouerbe, where he thus says, 3.34.
with the scornful the Lord ^corneth, but he gives grace unto the humble:
which the Apostles Paul, Peter, and James does thus read, God resists the
proud, and gives grace to the humble. How humble and lowly min^^led David, and
Solomon were the Scriptures do witness, as al^o how high the Lord exalted the
throne of their glory. The like might be said of many others mentioned in holy
Scriptures, which I willingly now pass over, because I have her^tofore pressed
this point. Only in a word with Saint James, ^ exhort you to cast your selves
down before the Lord, and he sha^^ lift you up. Pro. 29.23
The pride of a man shall bring him low, but the humble in spirit shall enjoy
glory. Swell not therefore with pride one against an other whatsoever blessings
you have of wisdom wealth, or honor one above an other. Let nothing be done
among you through contention or vainglory, but let every man in meeknes of
mind esteem other better then himself: (...) the same mind be in you that was
in Christ Jesus, and this know for a surety that as here in Christ he was first
humbled and there exalted, 18.12.
so before glory goes lowliness and humility. And le this suffice to be
observed out of the original scope and dr^^ of the Apostle in these words. Now
let us a little more nearly look into them, and see what further use we may
make of them and first of these where the Apostle sets down in genera^
Christ his exaltation into glory, saying:

Wherefore God has etc.] In which words I observe 1. The cause of his
exaltation, or rather the sequel of his cross 2. Who exalted him. 3. In what
sense he is said to have h^^ exalted. Touching the first, the word, wherefore,
here used may either signify a cause, or a consequence; so that we may
understand the Apostle either thus, that because Christ th^^ humbled himself,
and became obedient unto the death, even the death of the cross, therefore God
highly exalted him: or thus, that Christ first humbled himself, and tasted of
the sorrows of death for us, and afterward God highly exalted him. After this
latter sort does the Apostle speak where he says, Heb. 2.9.
that Christ was made a little inferior to the Angels to the end that he
might suffer death, and so was crowned with glory and honor. After this sort
also does Christ himself speak unto the two Disciples which were going toward
Emma^^, saying, Luc. 24.26.
ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?
In both which places, the Apostle, and our Savior himself speaks of his
crown of glory and honor as a consequent of his cross, not as caused by the
cross, as following his cross, but not as merited by his cross. And if we
follow this sense, hence we may gather this very profitable ^sson, that if we
desire to reign with Christ in glory, then ^ust we be content to bear his
cross in this life, and with ^m to suffer affliction in this vale of misery.
Psalm. 110.7
He first drunk the brook in the way, as the Prophet speaks, and then he
^t up his head: first he had his cross, and then his crown; ^st he did
wear a crown of thorns, and then a crown of ^ory. So we if we will be
made like unto his image, we ^ust suffer with him, that we may be glorified
with him; ^ee must through our sufferings and crosses be driven even shed
tears, if we will have all tears wiped from our eyes. ^e disciple is not
above his master, nor the servant above his Lord. ^ he has chalked the way,
so must we walk, even through ^flictions and troubles, through sorrows and
crosses, unto ^at inheritance immortal and undefiled, reserved in heaven ^r us.

Let not then thy soul be troubled or cast down at whateuer trouble, sorrow,
need, sickness, cross or persecution. ^et not loss of goods, loss of
friends, the reproaches of the ^cked, the contempt of the world, the misery of
thy life, or the manner of evil things which can be said or done against ^ee
for Christ his sake, trouble or dismay thee. Nay in the ^iddest of all thy
crosses and afflictions, comfort thy self ^th these things: First, afflictions
and troubles are that strait ^d narrow way which leads unto life, Act. 14.22.
for we must through ^any afflictions enter into the kingdoms of God. Secondly,
by ^r sufferings and afflictions we are made like unto the image Christ, who
being the Prince of our salvation, was conse^ated through afflictions. Thirdly,
by crosses and aduersi^s we are brought to acknowledge our sins unto the
Lord, ^d to reform the wickedness of our ways. And therefore ^auid said, It
is good for me that I have been in trouble, Ps. 119.67.71.
that I ^ght learn thy statutes: and again he says, Before I was trou^ed, I
went wrong, but now I keep thy word. And the Lord by ^sea says, In their
afflictions they will seek me diligently. ^urthly, in all our afflictions
Christ suffers with us: and ^erefore Paul calls his afflictions which he
suffered by sea land, of friends or enemies, in body or in spirit, the
afflictions of Christ. In every cross he suffers with us, and every cross
seals his love unto us. Lastly, our afflictions are b^^ for a little while,
and after them is glory for ever; as it is wr^ten, Heaviness may endure for a
night, but joy comes in the morning. Why art thou then so sad, O thou
distressed soul, and why do thoughts arise in thine heart? Comfort thy self
in this, that thine afflictions conform thee unto Christ his image, and set
thee in the plain and right way to salvation and glory. Thou art chastised of
the Lord, but because th^^ should not be condemned with the world; thou
lamente^ and weepest, but that Christ may wipe all tears from thi^e eyes; thou
die with Christ, but it is that thou may live for ever; thou here eatest
the bread of tears, and drinkest the water of affliction, but the Lord has
reserved for thee li^^ and joy for evermore: 2 Timothy 2.11.12.
for it is a true saying, If we be de^^ with Christ, we shall also live with
him; and if we suffer with Christ we shall also reign with him. And let this
suffice to be not^ from this sense.

Now if we follow the other sense, and understand the Apostle thus, that
because Christ humbled himself, and bec^^^ obedient unto the death, even the
death of the Cross, therefore God has highly exalted him, then we are
further hence (...) note, that Christ his exaltation into glory for us, was not
only a consequent of his death and passion, but his death and p^^sion was a
cause of his exaltation into glory for us; so that by his death and passion he
deserved exaltation into glory. I do^ not here dispute the question, which
commonly hence is moved, whether Christ by his death and passion deserved this
exaltation into glory for himself, or only for us. The whol^ tenor of the
Scripture running thus, that Christ became m^^ for us, fulfilled the Law for
us, was tempted for us, was clothe^ with infirmities for us, tasted of sorrows
for us, made hi^ soul an offering for us, died for us, rose again for us, an^
whatsoever he did, did all for us; I understand the Apostl^ thus, that by his
death and passion he merited and deser^e^ exaltation into glory for us. My
observation then hence i^, that by the merits of Christ his death and passion
is purchased salvation and glory to all them that obey him: for by (...) blood
has he obtained eternal redemption for us, Heb. 9.12.
and entered in ^ce into the holy place, that is, into heaven for us. Yea even
by ^he merits of his death do we plead and sue for that inheri^^nce,
immortal and undefiled, reserved in heaven for us. A ^riuiledge only proper
unto Christ, that by his sufferings he ^ould merit at all, either for
himself, or for others. For of all ^ur afflictions and sufferings, that is to
be said which Paul says ^f his afflictions: Romans 8.18.
I account (says he) that the afflictions of this ^resent time are not worthy
of the glory which shall be showed unto ^. Where the Apostle plainly renounceth
all merit of life and glory unto his sufferings and afflictions. And our
Savior christ likewise plainly tells us, that when we have done all that
we can, even all that is commanded us, we must say, ^ee are unprofitable
servants, Luke 17.10.
we have done only that which ^as our duty to do. If when we have done all
that we can, ^ee are unprofitable servants, if when we have done all that
commanded us, we have only done our duty, then what ^aime can we make by
merit or desert? Nay if we look unto our merits, we shall find that
eternal life is the gift of ^od through Jesus Christ, and that we have only
deserved ^eath and everlasting condemnation. Iam. 2.10.
For whosoever keeps ^e whole Law, and yet fails in one point, he is
guilty of all, and ^f the condemnation due to the breach of them all. Now
cer^ine it is, that in many things we offend all, and that our best
^^ghteousnesse is but as the menstruous clothes of a woman, ^uen the best thing
that we do is stained with sin, and full ^f unrighteousness: so that if
we stand upon our own me^ts, we see we must needs perish all. We must then
fly from our selves, and renouncing our own merits, rest our ^elues wholly
and only on the merits of Christ Jesus, by whose ^eath and passion we have an
entrance into glory. For his ^assion being the passion of the Son of God, was
both a ^ll satisfaction unto Gods justice for us, and worthily deser^ed the
glory which he has purchased for us, and given unto us. And let this be
spoken touching the sequel of Christ his passion, or the cause of his
exaltation into glory. ^t follows:

Wherefore God etc.] The second thing which hence I observed, was, who exalted
him, and that is here set down, when it is said, God has highly exalted him.
Christ then having humbled himself, and been obedient even unto the death,
God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ raised him from the dead, and set
him at his right hand in the heavenly places. Act. 2.31.
So David had said long before, saying, Th^^ shall not leave my soul in grave,
neither shall thou suffer thine holy one to see corruption. Which Peter
avouches to be spoken of God raising up Jesus from the dead: To this likewise
give all the Scriptures witness, that God raised up Jesus our Lord from the
dead: the Father by the Son, and the Son by the eternal Spirit that was
within him. Here then is our comfort, that he who has loosed the sorrows of
Christ his death, and raised him up by his power, will also give a good end
unto all our troubles, and raise us up also by Jesus, and set us with him Many
are the troubles of the righteous, Psalm. 34.18.
but the Lord delivers him out of all. And if it be so, that thou see not the
fruit of this promise in this life, but go to thy grave in mourning vnde^
the cross, yet know this, that he which has raised up the Lord Jesus, shall
raise thee up also by Jesus, and set thee with him, and there wipe all tears
from thine eyes, and cover thee with the garment of gladness. But withal let
me give you this caveat; 1 Pet. 4.15 16
Let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil do^r, or
as a busy body in other men's matters: But if any man suffer as a Christian,
poverty, sickness, persecution, imprisonment, or what cross else soever, let
him not be ashame^, but let him glorify God in this behalf. For Christ has
also suffered once for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us
unto God, and God for our momentanie and light afflictions in that day will
give us an eternal weight of glory. Wherefore, as the Apostle does, so I
exhort you, Let him that suffers, 1 Pet. 4.19
what cross soever it be, according to the will of God, commit his soul to
God in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator, and he that loosed the
sorrows of death from Christ, shall give in his good time a good end to all
his troubles. And thus much touching the second point, to wit, who exalted him.
It follows:

Wherefore God has also highly exalted him.] Where we are to see in what
sense Christ is said to have been exalted, and not only so, but highly
exalted, which was the third thing which I proposed hence to be observed. 1.
Therefore Christ was exalted, when he was raised from the dead, when his body
which was sown in dishonor was raised up in glory. 2. He was highly exalted,
when ascending into heaven he was set in the heavenly places, far above all
principality and power, and might, and domination, and every name that is
named, not in this world only, but also in that that is to come. Thus God
exalted and highly exalted Christ Jesus whom the Jews had crucified. Here then
first we have the testimony of the Apostle for that ^oint of our faith, the
resurrection of Christ Jesus. He made his grave with the wicked, as the Prophet
had prophesied. He was buried, and the pit had shut her mouth upon him, Esaias
53.9.
even the ^ombe of the earth had enclosed him in: but God the third day ex^lted
him, raising him from the dead, and not suffering his body to ^ee corruption.
If I thought it needful further to prove the resurrection of Christ Jesus unto
you, his sundry appearances after he rose again from the dead, first unto
Marie Magdalen, ^hen unto the two Disciples that went to Emmaus, then to Pe^er,
then to all the Disciples together, save Thomas, then to all ^he Disciples,
then to more then five hundredth brethren at ^nce; these I say his manifold
appearances, and many other ^estimonies of holy scripture might at large prove
the same unto you. But my desire rather now is to lesson you in such things, as
Christ his resurrection may teach us.

First therefore the resurrection of Christ Jesus may put us ^n mind of this
duty, that as he was raised again from the ^raue wherein he lay dead unto
life, so we ought to rise from ^he graves of sin wherein we lie dead unto
newness and ^olinesse of life. If ye be risen with Christ, says the Apostle,
Colos. 3.1.
^hen seek those things which are above: as if he should have ^id; Christ is
risen from the dead, if ye be risen with him, and lie not still dead in your
sins, then seek those things which are above. Where ye see how the Apostle
puts them in mind of Christ his resurrection, so to awaken them from the
dead sleep of sin unto holiness of life. More ^laine to this purpose is
that of the same Apostle, where he thus says; Romans 6.4.
We are buried with Christ by baptism into his death, that like as Christ was
raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we also should walk in
newness of life. In which words most plainly ye may see, how the Apostle
presses the similitude of Christ his resurrection to prove that we ought to
walk in newness of life. But in this place most worthy our consideration it
is, how the Apostle makes Baptism a resemblance of Christ his death, and
resurrection, and so by an argument from our Baptism proves, that we ought to
walk in newness of life. By baptism, says the Apostle, we are buried with
Christ into his death, that at he died for sin, so we by the power of his
death should die unto sin: again, in baptism we are baptized into Christ
his resurrection, that as he was raised again from death unto life, so we
should rise from sin wherein we are dead unto newness and holiness of life.
Want ye then motives to persuade you unto newness of life? Behold Christ is
risen again, behold we are baptized into Christ his death, and resurrection,
therefore we ought to walk in newness of life. Art thou then a Christian, and
y^^ want thou proof that thou ought to walk in newness of life? Look
back into thy Baptism. Wast thou not there visibly received into the Church
of Christ, and communion of Gods saints? Wast thou not there sacramentally
adopted into the number of the sons of God? Was not there thy name registered
amongst the children of the most high? Did thou not there receive press
money to fight under the banner of Christ Jesus? Did thou not there promise
unto the Lord thy God in the congregation of his Saints to forsake the world,
the flesh, the Devil? Did not thy God there make a covenant with thee, that he
would be thy God, and thou again with him that thou would be his child?
Wast thou not there sacramentally borne again of water and of the spirit, as
at the first thou wast naturally borne of flesh and of blood? In a word, wast
thou not baptized into Christ Jesus, even into Christ Jesus dead, and risen
again from the dead? Wast thou not baptized into Christ his death that thou
might die unto sin? Wast thou not baptize^ into his resurrection, that
thou might live unto God? Ye^ men and brethren, if you look back into your
baptism ye shall find every of these things true in every one of you. And
therefore we bring little children to be baptized, that here they may receive
the seal of that great covenant whereby God is their God, and they his people,
that here they may be visibly ^eceiued into the Church, adopted into the sons
of God, ^egistred amongst his children, and receive as it were presse-money to
fight under the banner of Christ Jesus against the world, the flesh, and the
Devil; that here they may be bapti^ed into Christ Jesus, even into the death
and resurrection of Christ Jesus. And want we yet a sufficient reason to
persuade ^s unto newness and holiness of life? Surely we want no ^ufficient
reason to persuade us, but yet this reason is not suffi^ient to persuade us and
prevail with us. The Ministers of God may lift up their voices, and cry daily,
Ephesians. 5.14.
Awake thou that ^eepest, and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give
thee life: They may cry till their hearts bleed within their bodies; nay ^hey
may cry till the breath go out of their bodies, Know ye ^ot that all ye that
are baptized are baptized into Christ his death, and into Christ his
resurrection, that ye might die unto sin and live unto God? But who does
hear? Whose hearts are ^o pricked that they cry, Men and brethren what shall
we do? Sound a trumpet in a dead man's ears, he moves not, he ^eares not. And
surely so dead are we in our sins, that how ^owde and often soever the
trumpet of Gods voice sound unto us a retrait from sin and wickedness unto
newness and ^olinesse of life, yet we hear it not, we are not at all moved
^herewith. O my brethren, the very meditation of our bap^isme with our selves,
and the seeing of the same administered unto others, should sufficiently preach
unto us mortification from dead works, and sanctification in holiness of
life: ^specially baptism being so notable a resemblance of Christ ^is death
and resurrection, as that it does most lively repre^ent unto us, 1. our
remission of sins by the death of Christ, ^n that our souls are so cleansed by
the spirit from the filthiness ^f sin, even as the filth of the body is
washed with water. ^. our regeneration and new birth by the power of his
resur^ection, in that after the washing by the spirit we rise again cleansed
by the same spirit. Let these things, men and brethren, sink deep into your
souls. Let the meditation of your baptism call to your remembrance the death,
and resurrection of Christ, and let all these stir you up unto ne^nesse and
holiness of life, that as he was exalted rising from death unto life, so ye
may be exalted rising out of your s^^^ to live in righteousness and true
holiness.

The second thing which Christ his resurrection may teach us, is that our
bodies also howsoever they be turned into du^^, torn of beasts, or devoured of
fishes, yet shall rise again at that day. For his resurrection is a most
certain and sure pledge of our resurrection; and therefore is he called, the
first fruits of them that sleep: because as in the first fruits which were
offered by the law, 1 Co. 15.20
all the rest of the corn was sanctified so in Christ his resurrection we have
a most sure pledge of our resurrection. But yet this withal thou must note,
that unless thou have part in the first resurrection, thou shall never have
part in the second,.i. unless thou first in this life rise from sin in
newness of life, thou shall never rise again after this life into glory, but
only unto everlasting condemnation which is called the second death. Unto you
therefore I say, as Paul spoke to the Romans, If the spirit of Christ that
raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, Romans 8.11.
then he that raised Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal
bodies. And by this yet know that the spirit of Christ dwells in you, if ye
mortify the deeds of the flesh by the spirit, and walk after the spirit i^
newness and holiness of life. O strive to have your second resurrection into
glory assured unto you by your first resurrection in newness of life. Blessed
and holy is he that has p^^ in the first resurrection; Apec. 20.6.
for on such the second death has no pow^^, such enter not into condemnation,
but have their part in the second resurrection.

LECTVRE XXX.
PHILIP. 2. verse 9, 10. And given him a name above every name, that at the
name of Jesus should every knee bow etc.
ANd given him a name etc.] Where we are not to understand that God gave unto
Christ after his resurrection any new name which he had not before. For as
before so after, and as after so before he was and is called the wisdom of
God, the power of God, the true light at the world, faithful and true, holy
and just, ^he Apostle and high Priest of our profession, a Priest after ^he
order of Melchisedech, the Savior of the world, the Prince of peace, the
Mediator of the New Testament, the ^ead of the Church, the Lord of glory, Jesus
Christ, the ^mage of the Father, the Son of God, and God; neither had he any
name after his resurrection which he had not before, But by a name is to be
understood in this place, glory, and honor, and majesty, and dominion over all
things crea^ed, as the same word is elsewhere used, Ephesians. 1.21.
Ephesians. 1.21. So that when it is said, that God has given him a name above
every name, ^he meaning is, that God having raised up Christ Jesus from ^he
dead, has so highly exalted him in the heavenly places, that he has given him
all power both in heaven and earth, ^ll dominion over all creatures whatsoever,
and the same glory which he had with him from the beginning; so that now he
^eigneth and rules with him, King over all, and blessed for ever. Now this
power, dominion, and glory whereunto Christ Jesus after his resurrection was
exalted, is further opened and expressed by the Apostle: 1. By that subjection
and worship which all things created now owe, and at length shall yield unto
him, in these words, that at the name etc. 2. By that acknowledgement whereby
all creatures now ought, and at length shall confess that Jesus Christ is the
Lord, unto the glory of God the father, in these words, and that every tong^^
etc. The sum then in brief of the Apostle his meaning i^ these words, is
this, that God having raised up Christ Ie^^^ from the dead, has crowned him
with such honor and glory above all creatures in heaven, or in earth, or under
the earth; that they all do, or shall bow unto him, be subject under his
feet, and acknowledge that he who was cruelly, di^dainefully, and dispitefully
handled, and crucified, is King and Lord, and God blessed for ever unto the
glory of God the Father.

In these words therefore I observe 4. principal points: 1. The great honor
and glory wherwithall Christ was cro^ned after his resurrection, and ascension,
set down in these words, and given him a name etc. 2. The subjection, and
worship which all creatures owe, and at length shall yield unto him, set
down as a branch, and an end of hit glorification it these words, that at the
name etc. 3. The confession and acknowledgement of all creatures that Jesus
Christ crucified is the Lord over all, and that all power belongs to him both
in heaven, and in earth, set down as an other branch and end of his
glorification in these words, and that every tongue etc. 4. The issue of the
whole, which is, that the whole glorification of Christ redoundeth to the
honor of God the Father, set down in these words, unto the glory etc.

Touching the 1. point, viz. the great honor and glory wherewithal Christ
was crowned after his resurrection, which our Apostle here signifies by the
name which God gave unto him above every name, the Apostle to the Hebrews
gives most evident testimony thereunto, Heb. 2.9.
when he says, But we see Jesus crowned with glory and honor which was made
a little inferior to the Angels that he might suffer death: as if the Apostle
should have said, that Jesus which in no sort took on him the nature of
Angels, but the nature of man, even flesh and blood, and mortality, to the end
that he might suffer death for our sins; he now being raised from the dead is
crowned with honor and glory, even unto him is given the excellency of all
dignity far above all things created whatsoever. The ^^me also is further
confirmed by the testimony of our Apo^^le to the Ephesians, where he says,
Ephesians. 1.20.
That God raised up Christ jesus from the dead, and set him at his right hand
in the heavenly ^laces, far above all principality, and power, and might, and
do^ination, and every name that is named, not in this world only, 21.
but ^lso in that that is to come, etc. Where the Apostle most plain^y shows,
how highly Christ was exalted above all creatures whatsoever after that God had
raised him from the dead. Now ^f ye ask me what was that majesty and
excellency of digni^e whereunto Christ was exalted after his resurrection, I
an^were that it was that glory wherewithal Christ before his pas^ion prayed to
be glorified, when he thus prayed, Ioh. 17.5.
glorify me ^hou father, with thine own self, with the glory which I had
with ^hee before the world was. The glory then whereunto Christ was exalted
after his resurrection was his own glory, that ^lory which he had before his
incarnation even before the ^orld was, with his father; that glory which he had
when being in the form of God he thought it no robbery to be e^uall with
God. For we know that he was heard in all things ^or which he prayed of the
Father: so that having prayed for that glory which he had from the beginning
with the Father, ^he glory whereunto he was exalted was his own glory which
^e had with the Father from the beginning. Now if ye ask ^ne again what
glory this was which he had with the Father from the beginning, I answer that
it was all power both in heaven and in earth. For so our Savior himself after
his resur^ection from the dead said, saying, Mat. 28.18
all power is given unto me in ^eauen and in earth; where, by all power is
meant, all authori^y, all sovereignty over all things created both in heaven,
and ^n earth; so that both the Angels are his ministering spirits, and with his
word he commands the foul spirits, and they obey him, and of all men it is
true, that unto one he says go, and he goes, and to another come, and he
comes. Thus ^hen it appears, that Christ after his resurrection both was
highly exalted unto all honor and glory, and that his glory was and is that
absolute Lordship and sovereignty which he has over all creatures in heaven
and in earth. Yea he was exalted unto that glory which he had with the father
before the world was. If now again it be demanded whether Christ were exalted
unto this glory, and dignity according to both his natures, both his Godhead,
and his m^nhood: I answer, according to both. According to his godhead, not as
it is considered in it self, but in as much as his godhead, which from his
birth unto his death did little show it self, after his resurrection was made
manifest in his manhood. For as the Apostle says, Romans 1.4.
He was declared mightily to be the son of God by the resurrection from the
dead. Even by the resurrection, and after his resurrection from the dead, he
which was thought only to be man, was most plainly manifested likewise to be
God Now as touching his manhood he was therein exalted unto highest majesty in
the heavenly places, not only shaking off all infirmities of man's nature, but
also being beautified and adorned with all qualities of glory both in his
soul, and in his body, yet so that still he reteineth the properties of a true
body. For even as he was man he was set at the right hand of the father, to
rule and reign over all, till all his enemies be^ destroyed and put under his
feet. To knit up all in a word Christ God and man after his resurrection was
crowned with glory and honor, even such as plainly showed him to be God, and
was set on the throne of God, there to rule and reign as sovereign Lord and
King, till he come in the clouds to judge both quick and dead.

Here then is both matter of comfort, and consolation unto the godly, and
likewise of fear and astonishment unto the wicked and ungodly. For therefore
is he ascended into heaven, even to prepare a place for us, that where he is
there may we be also: Ioh. 14.2.
for so himself speaks. And therefore is he exalted far above all men and
Angels as in all fullness of gifts and graces, so in glory and majesty that he
may succor us in all our miseries, and help us in all dangers. Whatsoever
infirmities we have, whatsoever persecutions we suffer, whatsoever crosses we
endure we need not be dismaide or troubled. For Christ Jesus who bore our
infirmities, whom the high Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, and all the Jews
persecuted unto the death, who endured the cross, and despised the shame, is
exalted unto the highest glory for us, and both (...) able to succor us, and
will not suffer us to perish. If Christ ^ad not overcome death, and sin, and
the world, and the Devil, nay if he had not as a most triumphant King led
cap^^uitie captive, and so crushed them that though they would ^et they can not
hurt us; nay if he did not now as Lord and ^ing so bridle their rage that they
cannot prevail against us, ^hen might we well fear death, and sin, and the
world, and ^he Devil. But now that he has overcome all these, and ^uleth all
things henceforth with his mighty power, so that ^ne hair of our heads cannot
fall away without his heavenly ^ill, and nothing can touch us but as he gives
leave, what ^re of death, what danger of sin, what care of the world, that
care of the Devil. Let death draw out his sharp arrows against us, let sin
assault us, and seek to tyrannize over us, ^t the world hate us and band
themselves against us, let the ^euill rage, and lay what battery he can against
us; our King and our God which dwells in heaven he laugheth them to ^orne,
and our Lord has them in derision. He says unto ^em, touch not my chosen,
and do my children no harm. He ^tteth them their bounds which they cannot
pass, and he ^miteth their power even as it best pleases him. And there^^re
death shall not deadly wound us, but only transport us unto a life that
lasts ever: sin shall not tempt us above ^at we be able, but together with
the tentation we shall have ^e issue that we may be able to bear it: the world
and wick^^ instruments of Satan shall either not at all prevail against ^, or
no farther then shall be for Gods glory, and our good: neither shall the
Devil, rage he never so horribly, be able to ^rre ever a whit farther then the
linkes of his chain shall be ^osed unto him. When Solomon was anointed King
over ^rael in stead of David his father, 1 King. 1.40.
it is said that all the people came ^ter him, that they piped with pipes, and
rejoiced with great joy, so ^at the earth rang with the sound of them. Shall
the people of ^rael thus rejoice the crowning of Solomon, and shall not ^e much
more rejoice when as Christ Jesus is placed in heaven at the right hand of his
Father, and has the everlasting ^epter of his kingdom put into his hand.
Shall not our souls be filled with joy and gladness for the crown of his
glory and honor which is the prince of our peace, and the strong rock of our
salvation? Surely the Apostle so rejoiced in this crown of his glory, that he
bid defiance unto condemnation, and whatsoever accusation could be laid
against him: who shall lay any thing, says he, unto the charge of God chosen?
Romans 8.33.
it is God that justifies. Who shall condemn? it is Christ which is dead, yea
or rather which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, 34.
and makes request for us etc. Where ye se^ plainly how the Apostle upon the
ground of Christ hi^ death, or rather upon the ground of that crown of glory
whereunto Christ was exalted after his resurrection from the dead; henceforth
fears neither accusation, nor condemnation, nor whatsoever can be laid unto
his charge. And as the Apostle does, so all the children of Christ his kingdom
may bid defiance unto accusation and condemnation, and whatsoever can be
laid unto their charge, now that Christ sits at the right hand of God to
make intercession for us. The Lord is King, the earth may be glad thereof, he
i^ great in Sion, and high above all people. Let the heavens rejoice, and let
the earth be glad, let the sea roar, and all that therein is. Psalm. 91.1.2.3.
etc.
Thou that dwell under the defense of the most high, and abidest under the
shadow of the almighty, say unto the Lord, etc.

Now as this sovereignty of power, and excellency of dignity whereunto Christ
was exalted after his resurrection may be matter of comfort and consolation
unto the godly, so may it be matter of fear and astonishment unto the wicked
and ungodly. Psalm. 2.9.
For he shall bruise his enemies with a rod of iron, and break them in
pieces like a potters vessel. He shall even deal with them as Joshua dealt
with the five Kings that were hid in the cave, he shall tread them under
feet, and make a slaughter not so much of their bodies as of their souls. For
as his exaltation into that glory, is for the good of his Church and faithful
people, so is it for the confusion and utter destruction of his enemies. For it
is a righteous thing with him to recompense tribulation to them which trouble
his children, and to give rest to his children which are troubled. Yea but what
does this touch us, these judgments we need not to fear: we are no enemies
to Christ, we are Christians, and we are baptized into his name. True it is,
we are Christians, and baptized into Christ his name, and therefore we should
die unto sin, and live unto God. But yet see for all this whether many of us
be not enemies unto Christ. Luc. 19.27.
Those mine enemies ^aith Christ himself, that would not that I should reign
over them bring them hither, and slay them before me. Where again ^e hear the
peremptory sentence of death and destruction unto those that are Christ his
enemies. But who are enemies ^o Christ, let Christ himself tell us, Those mine
enemies, says ^e, that would not that I should reign over them. They then are
^nemies unto Christ which would not have Christ to reign ^uer them. Yea, but
we are all very willing that Christ should ^aigne over us. Look then I beseech
you, whether all of us ^ubmit our selves to the scepter of his kingdom, even
to the ^ule of his most sacred and holy word, to be ruled and guided ^hereby in
our whole life. For if we do not submit our selves ^hereunto, to be ruled
thereby, we are indeed, and in truth of those that would not have Christ to
reign over them, what^oeuer outward profession we make otherwise. Do we then
^ll of us submit our selves to the scepter of his kingdom to ^e ruled by his
holy word? Are there not some who seldom ^r not at all present themselves in
the great congregation to ^eare the wholesome word of truth that they might
receive ^nstruction thereby; who refuse to hear the Lord speaking unto them in
his holy word, and loath this heavenly Manna which is the food of our souls? I
mean the recusant, who ^efusing to come to these holy assemblies to hear the
word ^reached, which God has ordained to be the ordinary ^eanes of our
salvation, submitting not himself to the scep^er of Christ his kingdom, but
in effect says of Christ, we ^ill not have this man to reign over us. Again
are there not ^ome who though they come to hear the word preached, yet ^re so
hardened in their sins that they are not at all softened with the hammer of
Gods word, but rather are like unto the ^mithes anuill, which the more it is
beaten with the hammer ^he harder it is? I speak not now of such as only come
for fashions sake, or such as think they sit on thorns when they sit at a
sermon, especially if it be any longer then they desire, or such as whose
thoughts are wandering up and down upon their profits, or their pleasures, or
the like, and attend but ^^^tle unto the word preached, or such as hang down
their heads, and fall to sleep while the Lord is knocking at the door of
their hearts, and ears by the ministry of his servants: such might, and
should learn so to assemble themselves in the house of God, as Cornelius and
his kinsmen, and friends, and family assembled themselves when Peter came to
preach unto them; Act. 10.33.
We are all here present before God, says Cornel^^^, to hear all things that
are commanded thee of God: so they might, and should learn that here they are
present before God, to hear and learn all things that are commanded then of
God; and therefore that here they should be reverent, diligent, and careful to
hear that which is preached and taught out of the holy word. But I say I
speak not now of such: But I speak of such as suffer sin to reign in their
mortal bodies, and obey it in the lusts thereof, notwithstanding that they be
rebuked of their sins out of the holy book of God I demand then, has the
covetous man left off to be covetous, has the drunkard left off to be drunk,
has the thief left off to steal, has the whoremonger left off to delight is
strange flesh, has the lier left off to lie, has the blaspheame^ and swearer
left off to blaspheme and swear; because it is written that neither
fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, not wantons, nor thieves, nor
covetous, nor drunkards, nor blaspheamers, nor liars shall inherit the kingdom
of God? What turning unto God is there from any sin whereof we have been
reproved by a true and an unfeigned repentance of the same sin? Nay does not
every man go forward in his sin without remorse be the book of God never so
wide opened against it? And can we say that we submit our selves to the
scepter of Christ his kingdom, while we yield our selves servants unto sin,
and suffer it to reign in our mortal bodies? Nay certainly, men and
brethren, if when we hear^ our sins plainly rebuked out of the world, we
notwithstanding walk on in our sins, and reform not the wickedness of our
ways, we do in effect say unto Christ, we will ^ot have thee to reign over
us, and so by our Savior his ^wne testimony we are enemies to him; and what
then re^aineth, but that he bruise them with a rod of iron, and break ^em in
pieces like a potters vessel? Beware therefore, men ^d brethren, how ye still
harden your hearts when the Lord ^ath so directed the tongue of the Preacher,
that your own ^onscience tells you he has rightly hit you, and noted your ^ne.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living ^od, for he is a
consuming fire, and renders vengeance vn^^ all them that know not him, and
which obey not his Go^ell. And thus ye see with what honor and glory Christ
^as crowned after his resurrection, as also what matter of ^mfort and
consolation this may be unto the godly, and ^ntrariwise what fear and
astonishment unto the wicked ^ad ungodly. It follows that in the next place
we speak of ^at subjection and worship which all creatures owe, and at ^ngth
shall yield unto Christ thus exalted, which is a branch ^f Christ his glory,
and set down here as an end of his glori^^cation, in these words, That at the
name of Jesus, etc,

Where by the name of Jesus, we are not to understand the ^re name of Jesus,
as though it had the virtue in it to drive ^ay devils, or as though at the very
sound of if all were to ^ow their knees: for at the name of Savior, which is
the ^me with Jesus, none boweth, and the name of Christ, of Em^anuel, of the
Son of God, of God, are names no less pre^us and glorious than is the name
of Jesus. True it is, that ^wing of the knee at the name of Jesus is a custom
which ^th been much used, and may without offense be retained, ^hen the mind
is free from superstition. But to bow and ^eele at the very sound of the name,
when we only hear the ^me of Jesus sounding in our ears, but know not what
the ^me means, sauoureth of superstition. By bowing the knee ^e Apostle here
means that subjection and worship which ^ creatures ought continually to
perform, and which all ^atures shall perform to Christ in that day, some
willingly ^d cheerfully, as holy men and Angels, some unwillingly ^d to their
confusion, as the devils, and wicked men his instruments: for so the Lord by
his Prophet uses the same phrase of speech, Esa. 45.23.
where he says, Every knee shall bow unto me that is, shall be subject to
me, and worship me.

Here then is a duty prescribed, necessarily to be performed of every
Christian, which is, to glorify him who is exalted into the height of glory,
both in our bodies and in our spirit^, to worship him with holy worship, to
subject our selves unto him in all obedience unto his heavenly will: for worthy
is the Lamb that was killed, Ap 5.12.
to receive all power, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and
pr^ise. The Angels in heaven they glorify the name of Jesus, in that they are
always ready to execute his will, and to do whatsoever he commands them.
H^b. 1.14.
Whereupon they are called ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for their
sakes which shall be heirs o^ salvation. This also is that holy worship
wherewith we ough^ to worship him, and to glorify his name, even to be hear
and doers of his word, to obey his will, to walk in his laws and to keep his
commandments. Not the bare and outward capping and kneeling at the name of
Jesus, but principally obedience unto his will, that is named, is the honor
which here he accepts of us. For as not every one that sai^^ unto him, Lord,
Lord, shall enter into his kingdom, so no^ every one that boweth at the name
of Jesus, shall enter in^^ his kingdom, but he that does his will, and walks
in hi^wayes. Saul when he was sent to slay the Amalekites, though to honor God
greatly by sparing the best of the sheep are of the oxen to sacrifice unto
him. But it was said unto hi^. Has the Lord as great pleasure in burnt
offerings and sacrifice^ as when his voice is obeyed? 1 Sa. 15.22
Behold, to obey is better than sacrifi^^ and to hearken is better than the fat
of Rams. So you happi^ may think you honor our blessed Savior greatly,
when y^ bow your selves at every sound of his name: but behold (...) obey his
will is better than capping and kneeling, or all ou^ward ceremonies whatsoever.
Yet mistake me not I besee^^ you, as though I thought that the names of Jesus,
of Christ of the Lord, of God, of the Father, of the Son, or of the holy
Ghost, were names of ordinary account and reckoning, or to be passed over
without reverence, as other names. Nay whenever we hear, or speak, or
think of them, we are ^o reverence the majesty of God signified thereby. And
feare-^ill it may be to them that think or speak of them pro^hanely, or
lightly, or upon each light and trifling occasion, ^r otherwise than without
great reverence and fear, that the lord will not hold them guiltless. But
this I say, that neither ^he sound of these syllables of Jesus, nor the name of
Jesus should affect us more than any other names of Christ, a^ though there lay
some virtue in the bare word: but whenso^uer we hear, or think, or speak of
him, we are to reue^ence his majesty, and in the reverent fear of his name,
to ^^biect our selves unto his will. This is a part of that duty ^hereby we
must glorify Christ Jesus.

Men and brethren, let us at length look to it. He that ^all come, will come,
and will not tarry. We pray daily, Thy ^all be done in earth as it is in
heaven; but it is but lip-labor. The Angels in heaven are always ready to
execute his will: ^ut on earth we follow our own wills, and walk in the ^ayes
of our own hearts. We regard not to walk in the way ^f the Lord, or to
hearken to the words of his mouth: We ^ill not obey, we will not incline our
ear, but we will go after the counsels and stubbornness of our wicked
hearts. ^ell, rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, 1 Sa. 15.23
and transgression ^ wickedness and idolatry. Take heed, and put not off from
^ay to day. Come and learn to know the Lord his will, and ^e not forgetful
hearers, but doers of the word. If we now ^rue him and do his will, we shall
afterward reign with ^im. But he that now will not be subject unto his will,
let him ^now that we shall all appear before the judgment seat of Christ,
and then every knee shall bow unto him. Blessed are ^hey that hear the word
of God, and live thereafter.

LECTVRE XXXI.
PHILIP. 2. Verse 10.11. That at the name of Jesus should every knee be^, both
of things in heaven, and things in earth, and th^^g^ under, etc.
NOw before we proceed unto the next point it the words following, one or two
doubts arising from these words are first to be resolved and answered. The
Apostle says that God has given unto Christ being raised from the dead, a
name above every name, that a the name of Jesus should every knee bow, etc.
that is, that all creatures should be subject unto him, and worship him.
Herethe^ it may be doubted and demanded, how it is that all creatures are not
subject unto Christ, that all creatures do not worship him? For not only the
Devils in hell, but likewise many wicked men, instruments of Satan here on
earth, are so far from being subject unto him, that they are sworn enemy
unto him, and to his kingdom, and swell and rage against him, some against him
in his own person, and all against hi^ in his members here on earth. True it
is indeed, that Christ has many enemies which are not subject unto him, nor
worship him: 1 Cor. 15 25
For he must reign (as says the Apostle) till her (...) put all his enemies
under his feet. Where the Apostle plainl^ implies, that Christ has and shall
have enemies which (...) not be subject unto him and worship him, even till
such time as he shall deliver up his kingdom to his Father, that is, e^^^ till
he shall come in the last and great day to judge both the quick and the dead
in his second coming. Yea and it is for the glory of his kingdom, that still
there be enemies unto hi^ kingdom, that so he may be glorified both by the
victor^ which he gives unto his Saints here on earth over these enemies, and
likewise by the victory which himself shall ha^^ over them in that day, when
their faces shall gather blacknes and darkness before him, and when he shall
adiudge them unto that Tophet prepared of old, Esa. 30.33.
the burning whereof is fire and ^uch wood, and the breath of the Lord like a
river of brimstone ^oth kindle it, as the Prophet speaks. But to answer unto
^he question, how it is that all creatures are not subject unto Christ, and
worship him, seeing God has given him such a ^ame, even such honor and glory
above all creatures, that all ^reatures should bow at his name, and be subject
unto him; answer, first, that all creatures ought to bow at his name, and ^ be
subject unto him, even all the powers of darkness, and ^l such their slaves as
have sold themselves to work wicked^esse in this life, ought to bow unto him,
and to worship him. ^or that Law which afterward was given by Moses unto man ^
keep, Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, Deuteronomy. 6.13.
was ^o doubt in the beginning a Law both to men and Angels, ^d still continues
to be a Law, whereby not men alone, but ^en, and Angels, and infernal spirits,
are bound to fear and ^rue him, to worship and obey him, even with holy
worship. and therefore is the judgment and condemnation of all ^em most just,
who do not obey him that they might be ^ued. Secondly, unto the question I
answer, that all crea^res now are subject unto him, so that unto whom he
says, ^oe, he goes, and unto whom he says, Come, he comes, ^d otherwise
they stir not, nor cannot. The Devil him^fe touches not, nor can touch
either Job his substance, Job 1.12.2.6.
or ^s children, or himself, till he give leave, and then no fur^er than he
gives leave. Nay he cannot enter into the heard ^swine till he give leave.
Mar. 5.13. Esa. 7.18.19.
He hisseth for the fly that is at the ^ermost parts of the floods of Egypt,
and for the Be which ^n the land of Ashur, as the Prophet speaks, and then
they ^me and light in all the desolate valleys, and in the holes the rocks,
and upon all thornie places, and upon all bushie ^ces: that is, He brings the
Egyptians and the Assyrians ^on the land of Judah, and they come, and they lay
the land ^ste without an inhabitant. And every enemy that inuadeth ^y land, he
is but the rod of the Lord his wrath, and the ^ffe of his indignation,
neither can this rod strike, but ^ere and as he will. The famine which dries
the bones, and faints the soul, the pestilence that walks in the
darkness, and destroieth at the noone day, the sword that deuoureth one as
well as another, and all alike, these messengers of his wrath are sent by him
for our sins, and they come; when he says unto them go, they go, and when
he calls them back, they return. The like may be said even of since, and
of death. Sin reigns not, nor cannot, but in the children of disobedience.
Death wounds not deadly, nor cannot, but only the vessels of wrath and
eternal destruction. And of all things in general this is true, that all
things are so subject unto Christ, Apoc. 7.3.
that if he say, Hurt not the sea, nor the eart^, nor the trees, none can hurt
the earth, or the sea, or the trees; and if he say to the seven Angels, 16.1.2.
Go your ways, and pour out the seven vials of the wrath of God upon the
earth, then they power them out upon the earth: That is, if he say, touch not
my children, then nothing can harm them; and if he say, let the ungodly of
the earth come to an end, then they are as dust which the wind scatters from
the face of the earth. As he says, so is it done, and all things are thus
subject unto hi^ subject (I say) unto him, not by any voluntary subjection,
whereby they worship and honor him, and submit themselves unto him; but
subject unto him, so, that though they would, yet they cannot but do his will,
howsoever they do^ it not to do his will, but only to work their own malice.

Lastly, unto the question I answer, that in the last and great day when Christ
shall descend from heaven with a shou^e, and with the voice of the Archangell,
and with the trump^ of God, when the heavens shall pass away with a noise, and
the el^ments shall melt with heat, and the earth, with the works that (...)
therein shall be burnt up, then shall every knee bow unto him, then shall all
creatures be subject unto him. The Sea sh^^^ give up her dead which were in
her; and death and grave sh^^ deliver up the dead which were in them, all
nations shall be gathered together, and all shall appear before the judgment
se^ter Christ to receive according to that they have done, whether it be good
or evil. Then the Kings of the earth which made fle^^ their arm, then the
rich and covetous men of the work which made the wedge of gold their God, then
the whoremongers, murderers, idolaters, sorcerers, blasphemers, and liers,
then those churlish Nabals, and unmerciful men which have not fed, nor
clothed, nor visited, nor lodged Christ in his poor members; then those that
rebelliously have murmured against God for poverty, sickness, or what cross
else soever, shall say to the hills cover us, and to the rocks fall upon us,
and to the rocks fall upon us, and hide us from the presence of him that
sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. But it shall be to no
purpose: for all shall stand before him, and fall down before him. The
redeemed of the Lord shall fall down before him, and worship him, and
willingly subject themselves unto him, as unto their Lord, and their God. The
wicked, and Satan himself shall fall down before him, and be forced to be
subject under his feet, and to yield to that last sentence as most just,
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the
Devil and his Angels. And then when all things are put down under his feet,
he shall deliver up the kingdom to God, even the Father, that God may be all
in all. Unto the question then, how it is that all creatures are not subject
unto Christ, seeing God has given him such a name, and crowned him with such
honor and glory that all creatures should bow unto him, and be subject unto
him? The answer is, 1. that all creatures, even all absolutely ought to bow at
his name, and to be subject unto him. 2. That even the wicked and ungodly of
the earth, and all the powers of darkness are now so subject unto him, that
though they would, yet they can do nothing but what his will is. 3. That in
the last and great day, all creatures, even all absolutely shall be subject
unto him, holy men and Angels willingly subiecting themselves unto him, and
worshipping him; and all the rest, though unwillingly, subiecting themselves
unto him, and to their final judgment, as just in it self unto them, and
from a most just God.

By the first answer we are instructed in a necessary duty, which is, that we
ought to be subject unto Christ in obedience unto his heavenly will; and to
worship him with all holy worship, walking in his ways, and keeping his
commandments. By the second answer we may receive exceeding comfort in Christ
Jesus, that though the world hate us, and Satan seek continually like a
roaring lion to devour us, yet they can do nothing against us but what he
will, they are but his rods to chastise us, and they shall at length be cast
into the fire, and burnt, but we shall shine as stars in heaven for ever and
ever. By the third answer we learn quietly to repose our selves in the power
of his might who shall subdue all his enemies under him, and give unto us a
crown of eternally glory, but in flaming fire render vengeance unto them that
have no^ obeyed his Gospel. And let this be spoken for the clear^^ of the
first doubt.

Another doubt is here to be answered touching that superstitious and fond
fancy of Purgatory, which some would gladly ground on these words of the
Apostle. For thus hence they reason: Saint Paul says, that unto Christ was
given such a name, that at the name of Jesus should every knee bow, both of
things in heaven, and things in earth, (...) things under the earth: but the
Devils, and the damned in he^ are so far from bowing unto Christ, that they
blasphe^^ his holy name, and gnash their teeth against him: they the which
being under the earth do bow unto Christ, mu^^ needs be those which worship
Christ in Purgatory, therefore there is Purgatory. But see, I beseech you,
the vanity and foolishnes of their reason, which they make for the upholding
of this dream. The Devils, say they, and the damned i^ hell are so far from
bowing unto Christ that they blasphere him, and gnash their teeth at him;
therefore by the things under the earth which bow unto Christ, must needs be
mea^^ the souls in Purgatory. I answer, 1. that the Devils, and damned in
hell, howsoever they do blaspheme Christ, ye they ought to bow unto him, and
to be subject unto him, as I showed before by that law which first was given
unto them and still does bind them, thou shall fear the Lord thy God, (...)
serve him. And so the Apostle may very well be expounded that God has given
unto Christ a name above every name, that a the name of Jesus should every knee
bow, of duty, both of thing: in heaven etc. And then what a poor shrowde
has Purgatory in this place? 2. I answer, that the Devils do now bo^^ unto
Christ, and are subject unto him. Add unto the for^her proofs of this
assertion, that one testimony out of Luke, Luc. 8.
where the Evangelist storying the deliverance of one posses^ed with a Devil,
shows most plainly how the Devil, nay ^n any Devils, for a Legion possessed
him, fell thrice prostrate before Christ, and acknowledged his power over them.
First ^ith S. Luke the Evangelist the Devil cried out, and said, 28.
What ^aue I to do with thee Jesus the Son of God, the most high? I ^eseech
thee torment me not. Again, when Jesus had asked the Devil his name, the
Evangelist says, 30.31.
they besought him that he ^ould not command them to go out into the deep:
and agine, the Evangelist says, they besought him that he would suffer them to
^nter into the heard of swine feeding thereby on an hill. 32.
Where ^ee see how not one, but a Legion of Devils, not once, but ^hrise in one
miracle prostrated themselves unto Christ, and ^cknowledged his power over
them. And shall we not think that now much more they do so, when Christ
sits at the ^ight hand of God in the heavenly places? Iam. 2.19.
Yes S. James tells ^s that they fear and tremble. A servile fear they are
in, and ^nwillingly they are subject unto him, howsoever they do ^laspheme
him. False therefore is it when they say, that the Devils bow not unto him. 3.
I answer, that the Devils shall be subject unto him in that great and last day:
and so ^he Apostle may be understood, and then what help here ^or Purgatory?
For thus I understand the Apostle; God has ^iuen unto Christ a name above
every name, that at the name of jesus every knee should bow, now of duty; and
shall bow then ^n that day, some willingly, and some unwillingly: both which
being truly affirmed even of the Devils, inasmuch as now ^hey ought, and in
that day they shall bow and be subject unto him, though unwillingly; what
need is there to understand ^his place of the souls in Purgatory? Lastly,
the Rhemists note no such thing upon this place, which yet they would have
done, if it had made ought for that purpose: and Bellarmine quite disclaimeth
it, understanding by things under the ^arth, the devils in hell, which as I
have said, now ought, and ^n that great day shall bow and be subject unto him.
And ^ndeed the whole tale of popish Purgatory is a mere dream, having no
ground at all either in this, or in any other place of scripture, but is so
contrary thereunto as nothing more. It^ the blood of Christ Jesus that purges
and cleanses us from all f^^ it is not any purging fire which does it, 1 Ioh.
1.7.
or can do it after the life. Nay after this life there is but heaven, or
hell: Heaven for them that die in the Lord; for blessed are the dead that (...)
in the Lord, Ap. 14.13.
even so says the Spirit; they rest from their labo^^ and their works follow
them: and Hell for the wicked, are such as forget God; for that is their
portion prepared for them of old with the Devil and his Angels. Thus having
cleared these words of the Apostle from these doubts, it remains that now we
proceed in that which follows in the Apostle. It follows therefore.

And that every tongue should confess etc.] We have hea^^ of the subjection of
all creatures unto Christ Jesus, set down by the Apostle as a branch of his
glory, and an end of his glorification. Now in these words the Apostle sets
do^^e another branch of Christ his glory, which is the confession and
acknowledgment of all creatures, that Jesus Christ is the Lord, and sole right
commander in heaven and in earth: for as every knee shall bow unto him, so
every tongue shall confess him, God having given him a name above every name,
that every knee should bow unto him, and that every tongue should confess him
to be Lord and Sovereign king. By every tongue, the Apostle means not only
all nations and languages in the world whatsoever, but every tongue both of
things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth; not that
things in heaven, or things under the earth have tongues, as neither they have
knees, but as there in the former words, by every knee both of things i^
heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth is meant all creatures;
so here in these words, by every tongue of things in heaven, and things in
earth, and things under the ear^^ is meant all creatures. When it is added,
that every tongue should confess, the Apostle thereby shows both what all
creatures still ought to do; and also what all creatures shall do in that
last and great day. For his meaning is, that all creatures ought still to
confess, and at the last shall confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord, even that
that Jesus which was crucified, which made his grave with the wicked in his
death, is Lord God, and that all honor, power, and glory belongs unto him.

Here then we are put in mind of a duty necessarily to be ^erformed of all
Christians, which is, not only to be subject ^d obedient to Christ his will,
but to confess likewise and ^^knowledge, that Jesus Christ is the Lord. The
Angels, and ^e Saints in heaven which stand before the throne, and be^re the
Lamb, clothed with long white robes, and palms in ^eir hands, they cry aloud,
and they say, Apoc. 7.9.
Salvation comes ^ our God that sits upon the throne, and of the Lamb:
yea ^ey cease not day or night crying, and saying, Praise, 12.
and glo^, and wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and power, and might be ^^to our
God for evermore, Amen. Yea the powers of darkness ^emselues ought thus to
confess Jesus Christ, that all power, and honor, and might belongs unto him,
inasmuch as they ^ere created, formed, and made for his glory, not only to be
^ewed in their confusion, but that they might sound forth his ^raise and his
glory. The Angels and Saints in heaven they ^oe; Devils, and damned in hell
they ought to confess ^at Jesus Christ is the Lord; and shall we doubt whether
it ^e man's duty to confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord? With ^e heart man
believes unto righteousness, To. 10.10.
and with the mouth ^an confesses to salvation, says the Apostle. Where the
Apo^^le plainly shows, that as faith in the heart, so confession ^ the mouth
is needful to salvation. The Evangelist S. John ^ith, that among the chief
rulers of the Jews, many believed (...) Christ Jesus, Joh. 12.42.
but because of the Pharisees they did not confess ^im, left they should be
cast out of the synagogue. Did they be^eeue in Christ Jesus, but not confess
him? In that they did ^ot confess him, it is a plain argument that their
faith was ^ut a weak faith. Happily they begun to embrace the truth ^f Christ,
and to be astonished at his miracles, but in that they ^urst not confess him,
it is plain that they did not truly be^eeue in him. Which is yet more plain
by that S. John far^her adds, they loved the praise of men, 43.
more then the praise of God. which preposterous love wheresoever it is, there
is neither the love of God in deed, nor faith in Jesus Christ. The Apostle to
Titus tells us of some that profess that they (...) God, Tit. 1.16.
but by their works they deny him, and are abominable are disobedient, and
unto every good work reprobate. As before we had faith in Christ, but no
confession of Christ; so here we have confession and profession of Christ, but
no practice of the life of Christ; and therefore as their faith was justly
a^gued to be no sincere and sound faith, because they did not confess Christ;
so the profession of these, of whom the Apostle speaks, may justly be argued
to be no sincere and sou^e profession, because in their lives they practice not
that whereof they make profession with their mouths. They seemed to have faith
in Christ, but they did not confess Christ; and therefore they may be truly
said, neither to have sound^y believed in Christ, neither to have confessed
Christ. These seem to profess to know God, but by their works they deny
him, and therefore they may be truly said neither to have sincerely confessed
Christ, neither to have practices, his will.

Seeing therefore it is so, that both where Christ is not confessed, there
Christ is not believed; and again, where Christ is confessed, there many times
his will is not practiced; very behouefull it will be for us, whose duty it is
to confess and acknowledge before all men that Christ Jesus is the Lord, to
see what a kind of confession it is which our duty does require of us. We
must then here take heed that we do not deceive our selves with a bare and
naked confession of Christ Jesus, with a simple and outward profession of his
name and religion, as if all were well when by an outward show we had bleared
the eyes of men; or as if we had then performed this duty, whereof I speak,
as well as the best, when we have made confession of our faith, and said the
Lords prayer; or when we have been at the Church, and heard the service, and
happily a Sermon; when we have made some fair weathe^ without, howsoever all
within be full of rapine, bribery, and excess. Nay, nay, brethren, Christ
himself has told us, that not every one that says unto him Lord, Lord, shall
enter into his kingdom. Nay he has pronounced a woe unto such hypocrites,
Mat. 23.25
as make clean the utter side of the cup, and of the platter, when within they
are full of briberie and excess: and he has ^kened them unto whited tombs,
Mat. 23.27.
which appear beautiful out^ard, but are within full of dead men's bones, and
of all filthiness. ^t is not then the lip-labor of a bare and naked
confession of Christ, it is not a simple and outward profession of religion
that will serve the turn, or is acceptable unto God; it is not ^he discoursing
knowledge of Christ, nor the discoursing ^lke of his kingdom, which pleases
the Lord: but the con^ession of a Christian, and that which is here required,
is, that ^ut of a faith unfeigned, with our mouths we confess that jesus
Christ is the Lord, and because he is the Lord, therefore ^ee will not give his
honor to another, but will serve him without fear in holiness and in
righteousness before him all ^he days of our life. The root then whence our
confession ^f Christ must spring, if by it we will please the Lord, is an
^nfained faith, for faith is it which makes us not ashamed, ^ut makes us bold
to confess our Christ in all places. I be^eeued (says the Prophet) and
therefore I spoke. And most sure ^ is that then and never but then we do
boldly and sincerely ^onfesse Christ, and profess his religion, when faith
has ^lly seized upon our souls, that we believe perfectly in Christ Jesus:
for because we believe fully in him, therefore ^ee boldly and freely confess
him. Whosoever therefore ^hou art, that wilt not, or dare not confess thy
Christ, and ^rofesse his religion, for fear of trouble, or displeasure, or
al^eration of the State, or any like respect, know this, that thy ^eart is not
sound with thy God, and that this is for want of ^rue faith in thee. Let them
look unto this, who for fear of ^ change, or for fear of displeasure, fear
to be too forward ^n confessing Christ, and professing his name, and therefore
^raw back the shoulder, and shrink at every blast of wind.

Now the confession which must spring from this root, is, that Jesus Christ is
the Lord; the Lord, and therefore his ho^our not to be given to another; the
Lord, and therefore to ^e served in holiness and righteousness all the days
of our ^^fe. Thus says God the Lord, Esa. 42 5.8.
even he that created the hea^ens, and spread them abroad, etc. to wit, Christ
Jesus, I am ^he Lord, this is my name, and my glory will I not give to another,
neither my praise to graven images. Where we see how our Savior Christ both
challenged that unto himself, to be the Lord, and plainly avouches that he
will not give his honor to another. He then that confesses Jesus Christ to
be the Lord, and yet gives his honor unto another, does only i^ words
confess that, which indeed and in truth he does de^^. Let them look unto
this, that make their prayers and supplications unto the Saints in heaven, that
worship images, crosses, 1 John 2.2.
or what relics soever. We have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the just, and he is the reconciliation for our sinne^. He sits at the right
hand of God, and lives ever to make intercession for us. Whosoever then
prays unto, or uses the intercession of any other, be it Saint, or Angel,
he gives Christ his glory to another. As also he does, who does worship any
other but God, and him whom he has sent, Jesus Christ, seeing it is said,
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, (...) him only shall thou serve.

He likewise that confesses Jesus Christ to be the Lord, and yet serves him
not in holiness and in righteousness all the days of his life, his
confession is in vain, because in deed and in truth he denies that which in
words he does confess A son honors his father, Malac. 1.6.
and a servant his master: If I the (says the Lord by his Prophet) be a
father, where is mine ^^nour? and if I be a master, or a Lord, where is my
fear? When^^ it is most plain, that fear and obedience to his will belongs
to the Lord. They certainly unto whom the Lord by his Prophet thus spoke,
confessed the Lord, which they plainly afterward show, taking their reproof
hardly, and saying. Wherein have we despised thy name? But because they fear^
not the Lord whom they confessed, because they walked not in his ways, nor
kept his commandments, therefore the^ confession was as no confession, the
Lord regarded them not, but his wr^th was kindled against them. This, men and
brethren, is a thing needful for us to look unto. We would be loath so deeply
to be charged, as not to confess Jesus Christ to be the Lord. But if he be the
Lord, where is his fear? When we confess Jesus Christ to be the Lord, we
confess him (...) be the sole rightful commander of us, and our selves to be
his servants; him to have all power over us, and our selves wholly (...) be
his. What means then such neglect of conforming ^ur selves according to his
most holy will, and of yielding ^bedience unto that which daily we are taught,
and which ^ee know to be his will? If we give our members as weapons ^f
unrighteousness unto sin, which should be as weapons ^f righteousness unto
God, whatsoever confession we make, ^ee are the servants of sin, we are not
the servants of Christ ^^e Lord; and we are like to those or whom I spoke
before, ^^at profess they know God, but by their works do deny ^im.

O my brethren, if ye did indeed confess Jesus Christ to ^e the Lord, your
souls would be filled with gladness when our mouths were filled with this
confession, yea your very ^earts would be warm within you when your tongues
were ^^us talking that Jesus Christ is the Lord; your wills would be ^amed to
his will, your feet would rejoice to come into the ^ourts of his house, and to
run the way of his commande^ents. Jesus Christ is the Lord, deny him not
before men, Luke 12 9.
^or he that shall deny him before men, shall be denied before ^he Angels of
God. And certainly he believes not, that ^ares not confess him. Jesus Christ
is the Lord; confess ^im so to be, and give not his honor to any other, to
men or Angels, much less to stocks or stones. Confess him to be ^he Lord,
and serve him in holiness and righteousness all ^he days of your life. This
confession becomes the Saints ^f God, and this is a good confession before
God. And ever ^emember that, that they which will not now thus confess jesus
Christ to be the Lord, shall then in that last and great ^ay be forced to
confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord, when he shall judge his enemies on
every side, and render to the wicked according to the wickedness of their
ways.

Unto the glory of God the Father.] Here is the issue of all, ^uen of our
subjection unto Christ, and of our confession that jesus Christ is the Lord.
All this redoundeth to the glory of God the Father: for he that honors the
Son, Joh. 5.23.
honors ^he ^ather; and he that honors not the Son, honors not the
Father: for the Father is in the Son, and whatsoever is done unto the Son,
is done also to the Father. Let us the^ so subject our selves unto Jesus
Christ, let us so confess his to be the Lord, as already we have been
taught. God has created us, Esa. 43.7.
formed us, and made us for his glory. Seeing the^^ our subjection unto Christ
Jesus, and our confession or be glorious name in such sort as has been
taught, is unto the glory of God the Father, let us be subject unto him in all
obedience to his will, and let us out of an unfeigned faith confess that he is
the Lord, even our Lord.

LECTVRE XXXII.
PHILIP. 2. Verse 12. Wherefore by beloved, as ye have always obeyed, or as
in my presence only, but now much more in (...) absence, etc.
WHerefore my beloved, etc.] In these word now following we have the
conclusion o^ the Apostle his exhortation unto the Philippians, set down by
way of applying Christ his humility, and obedience unto his Father, unto their
use and instruction and consequently unto ours. In this conclusion of the
Apostle his former exhortation, the Apostle again exhorts the Philippians,
and in them us, first unto humble obedience toward God, verse. 12.13. secondly
unto humble and modest conversation toward our neighbor, verse. 14.15.16. and
thirdly he adds as a reason why he thus exhorts them, the comfort and joy
which they shall bring unto him in the day of Christ, if they so walk as he
exhorts them, verse. 16.17.18. In the first exhortation, which is unto
humility and obedience, or humble obedience toward God, we have first to
consider the exhortation it self, verse. 12. secondly the reason thereof, verse.
13. The exhortation of the Apostle unto the Philippians, and in them unto us,
is, that we would run for^ard in the race of righteousness, which leads
unto salua^^on, with all humbleness of mind, and in all obedience vn^^ God:
for when the Apostle says, make an end of your own ^^luation, therein he
exhorts thus much in effect, that as we ^aue begun in the spirit, so we would
go forward and make ^ end in the spirit; as we have entered the way of
righteous^esse which leads unto life, so we would persevere and con^^nue in
the same way, and follow hard toward the mark for be price of the high calling
of God in Christ Jesus. For by ^luation the Apostle here means not, as often
elsewhere he ^oth, that glory and immortality which is laid up for us in
^eauen, and which is the end of our calling, but he means ^e whole course of
godliness which leads unto salvation, ^e whole path of a Christian life
which God has ordained us ^ walk in. So that when he says, make an end of
your own ^luation, it is as if the Apostle had said, let it not seem enough
unto you to have begun well, but continue to walk in those good works which
God has ordained you to walk ^n: as ye have begun to walk in the way that
leads unto ^luation, so make an end therein, and run unto the end ^he race
that is set before you. When the Apostle adds, make an end of your own
salvation with fear and trembling, he ^heweth the manner how we must run in
the way of righte^usnesse which is set before us, to wit, in all humbleness of
^inde and reverence, Psalm. 2.11.
as dutiful children serving the Lord ^n fear, and rejoicing in him with
trembling, as the Prophet ^peaketh. Likewise when he says, So make an end,
etc. there^y he means, that we must run in this race of righteous^esse in
all obedience unto God: for so much is implied in the lord So, as may appear
by the coherence of this word with ^he former, whereon it does depend. As ye
have always ^beyed, says the Apostle; whom? to wit, God, and his word: As ye
have always obeyed God and his word, so in the like ^bedience to God and his
word, make an end of your own salua^ion with fear and trembling. The
substance then of the Apo^tle his exhortation in this place is this, that we
would run forward in the race of righteousness, which leads unto
salvation, with all humbleness and reverence, and in all obedience unto God.

Now besides the substance of the exhortation, there are many circumstances
whereby the exhortation is amplified and enlarged, and which are together with
the exhortation to be opened and declared. To comprise then the whole, in these
words of the Apostle I consider these points: first the ground whereon the
Apostle does build his exhortation which is the humility and obedience of
Christ, noted in the word wherefore; for it is as much as if the Apostle should
have said, Seeing such was Christ his humility, and such his obedience, as ye
have heard, therefore my beloved follow his example, and as ye have always
obeyed, etc. Secondly, the Apostle his kind entreaty of the Philippians, so
to win them to harken to his exhortation in that he calls them his beloved
wherefore my beloved. 3. The Apostle his commendation o^ their former obedience
unto God, and to his word, that so he might stir them up to continue their
obedience, in these words, as ye have always obeyed, to wit, God, and his word
4. The Apostle his mild insinuation of a change in them now in his absence
from that which was before in his presence, in these words, not as in my
presence only etc. 5. The Apostle his exhortation, to run forward in the way
of righteousness which leads unto salvation, in these words, make (...) end
etc. Lastly, the manner how they should run in this race, which is first in
obedience unto God, signified in the word, so, so make an end etc. and then
with all humbleness and reverence, signified in these word, with fear and
trembling. These be generally the points to be observed out of these words of
the Apostle. Now let us a little more particularly look into each of them, and
see what Use we may make of them.

Wherefore my beloued] In this word, wherefore, is noted as I told you, the
ground whereon the Apostle does build the exhortation that follows. For it
is as much as if the Apostle should thus have said; seeing such was Christ his
humility and such his obedience, as already ye have heard, therefore my
beloved etc. The ground then of the Apostle his exhortation unto a reverent and
humble obedience toward God in ^^ding a godly life, is the humility of
Christ, and his obedi^^^ce unto his father. The observation hence is this, that
the ^^militie of Christ, and his obedience to his father ought to a sufficient
motive and reason unto us, why we should run the race of holiness, and
righteousness that is set before with all humbleness of mind, and in all
obedience to^^rds God. So the Apostle thought when he made this the ^ound of
this his exhortation: and so our Savior himself ^ought, as appears by that
exhortation unto the people in ^e end of one of his sermons, Mat. 11.29
Learn of me that I am meek ^^d lowly in heart. And great reason, men and
brethren, why ^e should so think also. For wherefore was Christ humbled? as it
for himself? Nay he might still have kept that glory which he had with the
father before the world was, and if he ^^d not at all descended from the
bosom of his father, none ^ould any way have impeached him for the same. For
it was ^o robbery for him always to be equal with God, as our A^ostle
speaks. It was not then for himself that he was ^umbled, but he humbled
himself for us, tha the might save ^ which had lost our selves; and that he
might reconcile us unto God, breaking down the partition wall that was betwixt
^im and us by reason of our sins. So says the Apostle Paul, 1 Timothy 1.15.
^his is a true saying, and by all means worthy to be received, that Christ
Jesus cmae into the world to save sinners. And so says S. ^ohn, We have and
advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the just, Ioh. 2.1.2.
^^d he is the reconciliation of our sins. Again, Esa. 53.9.
Why was he obedient unto the Father to fulfill the law? was it for himself?
Nay be ever did any wickedness, neither was any guile found in his mouth. ^t
was not for himself, but for us, that he might redeem us which were under the
law, and purchase righteousness for us. So says the Apostle, God sent forth
his son made of a woman, Gal. 4.4.5.
and made under the law, that he might redeem them which were under the law;
and as the same Apostle says to the Romans, Romans 8.4.
That the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us. Seeing ^hen it
was for us that Christ was humbled, and that he was obedient unto the law, and
unto the death, great reason it is that his humility and obedience should be a
sufficient motive to persuade us unto humility and obedience in the whole
course of our life. Should it be, my brethren, a sufficient motive unto us?
and why is it not? Why it is not I know not, but that it is not every man sees
it. Our high conc^^^^^ our selves, whether it be of our wisdom, or of our
rich or of our honor, our contentions and vainglory, our delight in our
own ways, and our neglect to walk in the waie^ of the Lord; these and the
like testify unto our faces that Christ his humility, and obedience little
prevail with va^^ persuade us unto these holy duties. O my brethren, let this
be an healing of our error. So often as we hear or read that Christ thus
humbled himself for us, that he became man for us, that he bare our
infirmities, that he was led as a sheep v^ to the slaughter for us, that he
made his soul an offering for our sin, and that he made his grave with the
wicked in his death for us; let these be so many remembrancers unto us to
pluck down our proud peacockes feathers, to put away wrath, contention,
pride, vainglory, and in all meekness of mind to submit our selves one unto
an other, and all of v^ unto our God. So often as we hear or read that Christ
became obedient unto his Father in all things that the law required of him,
that he fulfilled all righteousness, and never gave over to do the will of
his Father till he had tasted and drunk of deaths cup, and all for us; let
this suffice to sl^^ us up to walk in all dutiful obedience unto our heavenly
Fathers will. Yea let us thus hereupon resolve with our selves and say unto our
own souls, has the son of God, my Christ, and my God, vouchsafed to
descend from his high throne of glory, to be clothed with my flesh and my
skin to suffer hunger, cold, poverty, and manifold tentations for me, to be
slaundered, reviled, buffeted, spit upon, condemned, nailed on the cross, and
to be buried for me, and shall bear my self above my brethren, shall I walk
with a st^^^ neck, and disdain my inferiors, or shall I not make my self
equal to them of the lowest degree, and pass the time of my dwelling here in
fear, and in all lowliness of mind? Hat^ the son of God, my Christ, and my
God, fulfilled all righteousness; done his fathers business, and yielded all
obedience unto his father for me, and shall I kick against him with ^e heel,
shall I draw my neck from under his yoke, and re^^se to walk in the ways of
his laws, or rather shall I not ^nforme my self in all obedience to his holy
will, and do at which is good and right in his eyes? This use we should ^ake
of Christ his humility, and obedience unto his father, ^^d to this end he
makes it the ground of his exhortation in is place. It follows,

Wherefore my beloued] The 2. thing which I observed in ^ese words of the
Apostle: was his kind and loving entrea^e of the Philippians, signified in
that he calls them his be^^ued. Which kind entreatie of them he uses the
rather to ^inne them to harken unto his exhortation. Here then is a ^te for us
whom God has set apart unto the holy work of ^s ministry, to wit, that we
should not only be careful to struct them that hear us in the wholesome
words of truth, at that likewise we should seek in all kind and loving sort ^
win them unto that wherein we do instruct them. Here^pon are those kind and
louesome speeches so often used in ^e writings of the Apostles, my brethren, my
beloved, my babes, ^ little children, dearly beloved, dear brethren, I
beseech you, ^ethren by the mercies of God, and the like. Not to speak of
^ther places, this one place of our Apostle might suffice suf^^ciently to
instruct us in this lesson: where the Apostle does ^ot only exhort the
Philippians to walk in the way of godli^esse with humbleness of mind, and in
obedience unto God, and strengthen his exhortation both by the example of their
^wne former obedience, and by the example of Christ his ^umility and obedience;
but in all kind and loving sort he ^roposeth his exhortation, calling them,
his beloved, that so ^e might the rather win them to harken to his
exhortation. or even so the dispensers of God his holy mysteries should ^ot
only labor in a godly care to teach them that hear them the words of truth
in all evidence of the spirit, and to ^onfirme and strengthen the same out of
the sacred worth of truth, but further they should seek with all kind
speeches, and in all loving manner to lead them forth unto the waters of
comfort, and to bring them unto Christ Jesus. And here happily a man that
should long beat upon this point, and to large it to the full, might have
great applause in many place especially there where the exception against their
Teacher i^ that he is too sharp, and that he presses the judgment of God
against sin too sore, and too vehemently. Here the^^ I beseech you a lesson
for you that are hearers our of thi^ place.

As we that are the ministers of the Lord for your comfort are hence taught to
strive in all kind and loving sort to bring you unto Christ Jesus; so you that
hear us are likewise he^^^ to learn so to carry your selves as that we may
speak unto you as unto our brethren, and unto our beloved. If the love ^ God be
not in you indeed, how can we speak unto you a unto our beloved? If your
honor not God, nor keep his commandments, how can we speak unto you as unto
(...) children? If ye be not joined with us in one faith, and in one hope in
Christ Jesus, how can we speak unto your as to o^ brethren? Nay I say more
unto you, if ye know not us that labor amongst you, and are over you in the
Lord, and ad^^nish you, if ye have us not in singular love from our works sa^^
how can we speak unto you as unto our beloved? If when (...) labor to beget
you in the faith, and to present you before God blameless in that day, you
either stop your ears the voice of our charming charm we never so wisely,
or speak evil of us as of evil doers, can we speak unto you as v^^ our
babes and little children? If you embrace not the tr^^ which we preach unto
you, but rather hate us for the message which we bring unto you, can we speak
unto you as unto on dear brethren? Nay certainly, if ye will have us to co^^
unto you with kind speeches, and in all loving manner, wi^^ my beloved, my
little children, my dear brethren, the must ye study so to approve your selves
both unto God and men, as that we may speak unto you as unto our beloved unto
our brethren etc. Otherwise, as Christ came not (...) all with this, fear not
little flock, but unto some with this, O generation of vipers, how can ye
speak good things, when ye (...) evil: And as the Apostle came not to all
with this, I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God, but unto some with
this, O foolish Galathians, who has be witched you that ye should not obey
truth; so ye must look that as sometimes we come in ^e and in the spirit of
meekness, so sometimes we should ^me unto you with a rod, and with a woe
unto such as o^ not the Gospel of Christ Jesus that they might be saved ^n and
brethren our hearts desire is that ye may be saved in ^ day of Christ, and we
watch for your souls as they that ^st give accounts unto God for them: have ye
care that we ^y do it with joy, and not with grief. We are loath to come ^o
you with a rod, we had rather come in love, and in the ^^rit of meekness;
have ye care that we may come unto ^u, and that we may speak unto you as
unto our beloved. ^ we sometimes sharply reprove sin, it is for your sakes,
at we may reclaim the sinner from wandering out of the ^^ht way: and again, if
sometimes we restore such as are ^^en with the spirit of meekness, it is for
your sakes, that ^e may bind up the broken hearted, and minister a word of
^^mfort unto the troubled, and afflicted soul. Both, I mean ^arpnesse and
meekness, the rod and love, both, I say, in ^^eir due places is needful,
and wise discretion in them both most needful. And so I come to the 3. point.

At ye have always obeyed] What? the Apostle in falling own unto him, and
kissing his feet, as is now done unto at man of sin? Nay the Apostle herein
commends ^^eir former obedience unto God, and unto his word after ^^ch time
as they had received the Gospel of Christ Jesus. and this he does to stir
them up to continue their obedi^nce, that as they had begun well, so they
might now go ^orward as they had begun. Whence we are taught, that ^is not
enough to begin well, and for a time to embrace ^e truth, and to obey the
Gospel of Christ Jesus, and after^ards to quence the spirit, and to suffer our
selves to be en^ngled in the filthiness of the world, but having begun in
^^e spirit we must go forward in the spirit, and having begun ^o love and
like the truth we must not fall from our first love, ^ut hold fast the same,
and continue therein. Whereupon ^re those often exhortations in the Apostles to
continue in ^he faith, to continue in the grace of God, to continue in the
things that we have learned, to hold fast the profession of o^^ hope without
wavering, and with full purpose of heart (...) cleave unto the Lord. The reason
hereof is, the school (...) Christ is not a school of idleness, or a school
of non proficiencie, but the scholars of Christ his school they must follow
the truth in love, and they must in all things grow up (...) him which is the
head, Ephesians. 4.15.
that is Christ as the Apostle showed. And therefore our Savior Christ
himself told the Jews (...) believed in him, Ioh. 8.31.
saying, if ye continue in my word, ye are (...) my disciples; and shall know
the truth. They, no doubt, (...) whom he spoke, had begun well, and had
embraced (...) truth, but he tells them that if they will be his scholars
they must continue as they have begun, and they must grow forward and
increase in all knowledge, and spiritual understanding. A lesson as needful
to be taught in these our d^^^ as any other. For we see by our own experience
that the word of the Lord is of such majesty, and so powerful, that draws
oftentimes the veriest miscreants that be unto a liking of it, and causes them
many times to do many things we. But as it is in the parable of the seed in
the Gospel, Mat. 13.
some receive the word with joy, but when persecution comes the^ are offended:
other hear the word, but the cares of the world and the decietfulnesse of
riches choke it, that it made unfruitful; in others the evil one comes and
catches the word that was sown in their heart, and in a great many the liking
of the word, and the obedience thereunto is but like unto a flash of
lightening, come and gone again almost in a moment. For a day, or for a
month, or happily for a year or two they will harken, and obey, they will
make a good she^ of loving and liking the word, and many things they will do
well. But after a while they will loath this heavenly Mann^, and in their
hearts return unto the flesh pots of Egypt, 2 Pet. 2.22.21.
or, a Peter speaks, with the dog they will return unto his vomit, and
with the sow unto her wallowing in the mire. Men and brethren, we must not be
like unto such men. For, as Peter speaks in the same place, it had been
better for such men not a have known the way of righteousness, then after
they have known it to turn from the holy commandment given unto them. We
must having tasted of the good word of God, and having begun to forsake the
corruptions that are in the world through lust, continue in the grace of God,
and grow ^orward from grace unto grace till we be perfect men, and ^ome unto
the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ. Having begun to have a
liking of the word, and to desire ^he preaching thereof, we must take heed
that we grow not weary of it; but the more we have it, the more our souls
must ^ong after it, and the more we hear it, the more we must grow in
obedience unto it, to frame our lives according thereunto. We must not here
stand at a stay, much less must we go backward; we must go forward, and we
must prick hard unto the mark of the high calling that is set before us. For
in the way of godliness that is most true which is so common, not to go
forward in that way is in truth to go backward. But I shall have occasion
again to speak of this point in handling the exhortation.

To leave therefore this point, here it may be demanded ^how the Apostle says
that the Philippians had always obeyed, as ye have always obeyed. For in
that the Apostle does admonish them, every man to esteem other better then
himself, as verse 3. and to do all things wihout murmuring and reasoning, as
verse 14. he plainly signifies that there were many faults amongst them, even
contention, vainglory, murmuring, reasoning, and the like. How then does he
give them this testimony, that they had always obeyed? Lied the Apostle unto
them, or did he flatter them? God forbid: let God be true, and every man a
liar. He lies not unto them, neither does he flatter them, and yet their
obedience unto God, and unto his word, was not perfect; for no doubt such
faults were amongst them, as already we have spoken of. In this sense then we
are to understand the Apostle, when he commends the Philippians as having
always obeyed God and his word; not as if there had nothing lacked in their
obedience: for in many things we sin all; Iam. 3.2.
and if we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, 1 Ioh. 1.8.
and the truth is not in us: but therefore are they said always to have
obeyed, because howsoever their obedience in it self was imperfect, yet was it
unto them reputed as perfect, because through faith they were ingrafted in
Christ, and for his sake their very desire to live godly was accepted with God
as a life most holy. For such is the fruit of our communion with Christ, that
being ingrafted into his body, and made bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh, through him, and for him, our faith in him is accounted to us for
righteousness, and our very desire to live goldy in this present world, is
accounted unto us for holiness of life. If there were no other proof for this
point, but even this whereof I speak, that the Apostle here makes reckoning
of the Philippians as having always obeyed, though there lacked much in their
obedience, because they believed in Christ, and desired to live godly, it were
enough: but the scriptures every where witness the same.

Here then we have an exceeding great comfort in Christ Jesus, that howsoever
our obedience be imperfect, yet if we believe perfitly in Christ Jesus, and
study to live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present world, it is
accounted as if we had always obeyed. Our iniquities are forgiven, one sins
are covered, our infirmities are passed over, our unrighteousness is not imputed
unto us; only that which we have well done is had in remembrance, and if we
have given but a cup of cold water in his name, it loses not the reward. This
is that which does and may uphold our weary and fainting souls, which
otherwise would fall under their burdens; and this is that which may and ought
to persuade us to follow peace with all men, Heb. 12.14.
and holiness, without which no man shall see God.

Not as in my presence only, but now much more in mine absence] In these words
the Apostle lightly touches a defect in their obedience, that it was not
altogether such now in his absence from them, as it was when he was present
with them; but he does not touch it as with purpose much to note them for it,
but his drift rather is in these words to instruct them in the quality of
their obedience, that it ought not to be fained, as service only to the eye,
but it ought to be sincere, and from a pure heart, as unto the Lord who sees
all, and is present every where.

Here one or two things may be noted but only by the way, because the Apostle
does only lightly touch them, and as it were by the way advise us of them. 1.
In that the Apostle ^mplieth a change in them now in his absence from them,
which was nto in his presence with them, thence we may note ^ow requisite the
presence of the Pastor with his people is. True it is, that the Apostle was not
their Pastor, but sent to reach unto the Gentiles in all places, and
Epaphroditus was their Minister, who remained with them after Paul's departure
from them. But if in Paul's absence from them, when yet their Minister was
present with them, they began in a short ^pace somewhat to decline, how can we
think but that they must needs decline where their Pastor is never with them?
Where prophesying fails the people perish; and when the Pastor is not
present, the Wolf comes, and the flock is scattered.

2. In that the Apostle only lightly touches a defect in their obedience, but
not with purpose much to note it in them, we may note what care is to be taken,
that we do not sharply censure every defect or fault which is in the godly.
Some things in them must be lightly passed over, and they must be drawn on
with all kindness and meeknes to run on in the race that is set before them.
The godly is admonished by a word, but the wicked goes on in his folly, and
cares not what is said.

But chiefly hence we are to note the quality of our obedience unto our God,
that it ought not to be fained, as service to the eye, but sincere, and from a
pure heart, as unto him that sees all, and is present every where. Which of us
is there that will commend that servant, which is only an eye-seruant, which
will work well in his masters sight, but not at all when he is absent? Nay we
will all condemn such a servant. But let us take heed that therein we do not
give judgment against our selves. If only we make an outward show of
holiness, and serve not the Lord with our whole hearts, making his law our
delight, and a single obedience thereunto our chief desire, what are we but
eye-seruants, and our portion what shall it be but the portion of hypocrites?
Beloved, our God whom we serve is not as man: he sees all things, he is
present every where, he searches the hearts and the reins, and he
understands all our thought long before they be conceived. It is no halting
with him. Whatsoever we do in the darkness, it is unto him as if it were done
in the light: for the darkness and light to him are both alike. Gehazi may
offend when Elisha sees not, and may hope to conceal it from him, because he
sees it not. But if Elisha can descry his fault, how much more can our God
descry all our ways, how hidden soever they be? Let us therefore walk before
him with a single heart; let us serve him in spirit and in truth; let our
obedience unto him, and unto his law spring from a pure heart, from a good
conscience, and from an unfeigned faith. Such obedience he requires of us; and
such obedience is the way wherein we must walk to our heavenly Jerusalem.

LECTVRE XXXIII.
PHILIP. 2. verse 12, 13. So make an end of your own salvation with fear and
trembling. For it is God that works in you etc.
MAke an end of your own saluation] The Rhemists read thus out of the vulgar
translation, work your salvation; out of which reading that doctrine of
salvation by works is by some in part maintained. Does our Apostle then in
this place teach us, that we are to work our salvation, so that by the merit
of our works we may obtain salvation? Surely in other places of his Epistles
he teaches us a quite contrary doctrine. By grace, says the Apostle, are ye
saved, through faith, and that not of your selves; Ephesians. 2.8.9.
it is the gift of God; not of works, lest any man should boast himself. In
which place see, I beseech you, how the Apostle sets down the grounds of
our salvation. Grace there is the first ground of our salvation. It is God that
justifies ^, and saves us: salvation is his gift, as the Apostle here says.
^ut why does God save us? Surely in respect of our selves we ^^e saved freely
by his grace, and according to his mercy: In re^pect of Christ indeed we are
saved by the merits of his death ^ passion. He has brought us with a great
price, even with the ^rice of his own precious blood which he shed for the
remissi^n of our sins. But we our selves have no part in this payment; ^
respect of our selves we are freely through the exceeding ^ches of his favor
and grace toward us, saved. Faith, that is he next occurent in our salvation;
Romans 8.3.
by grace we are saved through ^aith. For faith is that hand, whereby we take
hold on salvation ^eached unto us by grace. Here then, ye see, how salvation
is ^oth given and taken; given by God, and taken by us. It is given ^y God by
grace; it is taken by us by faith. What then, have ^e no part in the purchase
of our salvation? No surely; faith whereby we are saved, and salvation it
self, they are the gift of God. What, have our works no interest in the
meriting of our salvation? No, by grace we are saved, through faith, not any
way of our selves, nor of our works. Why? lest any man should boast himself.
For as the same Apostle reasons; Romans 4.2.
if Abraham were justified by works, he has wherein to rejoice, but not with
God. Why not with God? because to him that works, 4.
or meriteth by his works, the wages is not counted by favor, but by debt. And
therefore in another place thus he reasons: if of grace, 11.6.
then ^ot of works, else were no more grace; but if of works, then no ^ore of
grace, or else were work no more work. So that when the Apostle here says,
that by grace we are saved, it is even thereby plain that we are not saved by
our works: yet he puts down both, saying that we are saved by grace, not of
works. Again in his Epistle to Tatus; Tit. 3.5.
God (says he) our Savior has saved us, not by the works of righteousness
which we had done, but according to his mercy etc. Where again you see the
author of our salvation is God our Savior: the cause which moves God to save
us, his mercy, not our good works. I might here likewise produce the whole
disputation of our Apostle in his Epistles to the Romans, and to the
Galathians, where at large he disputes the question, and plainly resolves
that we are justified and saved freely by grace through faith in Christ his
blood, and not by our works wrought according to the as But I purpose not any
large discourse upon this point. By the which already has been said, ye see
how the Apostle is other of his Epistles teaches clean another doctrine th^^
salvation by works. For he teaches that we are saved freely by grace, through
faith; not of our selves, not of works, (...) out the works of the law.

How then? is the Apostle contrary to himself? Does ^e here did us work our
salvation, as if by our works we might merit our salvation, and elsewhere tell
us that our salvation a not of works, but of grace? God forbid that we should
so s^^ or think. The spirit whereby the Apostle spoke both here and elsewhere
is always one, and the same, and is not changed. He is the spirit of truth,
and directed the Apostle his tongue and pen into all truth; so that he is not
any where contrary to himself, but here as elsewhere delivers the same
truth. Look we then a little into the words, and into the meaning of the words
in this place of the Apostle. Here then we are to note, 1. that it is not
simply said, work your salvation, bu^ work out, or finish, or make an end of
your own salvation. For the word here used does properly signify not simply
to work^ but to work out, to finish, to make an end of a thing. So it is used
by the Apostle where he says, Take unto you the whole armor of God, Ephesians. 6.13.
that ye may be able to resist in the evil day, and having ^^nished all
things, stand fast. Again, when it is said, work (...) or finish or make an
end of your own salvation, by salvation is not meant, as often else where,
that price of our high calling, that crown of immortality which at the end of
our race is la^^ up for him that overcomes and continues unto the end, but
by salvation is meant the whole course of a godly life which leads unto
salvation. So that when he says, Make an end of your salvation, he does exhort
us thus much in effect that as we have entered the race of righteousness which
leads unto salvation, so we would run on in the same race unto the end, and
fully finish our course in doing such good works, as God has ordained that
we should walk in them.

The thing then which hence is to be noted from our Apostle touching good
works, is not the merit of our saluati^^ by our works, but that good works are
the way which God ^^th ordained us to walk in; and in doing whereof he would
^ue us to finish the whole course of our life. And this we do ^ost gladly teach
every where, and beat upon in all our Ser^ons, and in all our exhortations.
Only we are careful to ^^ch you the truth touching good works; namely, that
they ^e not the causes of, but the way which leads unto saluati^^. Salvation,
it is the gift of God, given us by Jesus Christ, ^^rough faith in his name. So
our Savior himself tells us ^^ing, My sheep hear my voice, Job
10.27.28.17.2
and I give unto them eternal ^e. For as it is another place; God gave him
power over all ^sh, that he should give eternal life to all them that believe
in him. ^^luation then is the gift of God, given by Christ, through ^^th in
him, it is not any way caused or merited by our works: ^t good works are the
way which God has ordained us to ^^ke in unto salvation. And this is plainly
proved out of ^e places before alleged: for the Apostle in the place to the
^phesians, having set that down that we are saved by grace ^^rough faith, not
of works, Ephesians. 2.8.9.10.
immediately after he tells us that ^ are the Lord his workmanship created
unto good works, which ^^d has ordained that we should walk in them. Likewise
in the ^ace to Titus, having set that down that God has saved us, Tit. 3.5.
^e by the works of righteousness which we had done, but according to his
mercy; immediately after he speaks thus unto Titus, 8.
is I will that thou should affirm, that they which have believed God,
might be careful to show forth good works. By which pla^es it does appear,
that howsoever our good works are not ^e cause, or the means of our salvation,
yet they are that way which leads unto salvation; yea and that way wherein if
^e do not walk we cannot be saved. So says our Savior ^imselfe, Every
branch that bears not fruit in me, Joh. 15.2.
the Father ta^eth away, and it is cast into the fire, and burnt. He does not
say, ^uery plant that is not planted in me: albeit that likewise be ^ost true;
but every branch that bears not fruit in me. What fruit? Even the fruit of
the spirit, which is in all goodness, Ephesians. 5.9.
and righteousness, and truth, as the Apostle speaks: Every branch that
bears not such fruit in me, he is taken away, and cast into the fire, and
burnt. To like purpose is that of the Apostle, where he says, Heb. 12.14.
Follow peace with all men, and holinesses, without the which no man shall see
the Lord. And to the like purpose now many places might and ordinarily are by
us produced in our Sermons.

Here then first I beseech you learn to beware of such a traduce us, and the
doctrine which we preach, as if by preaching of faith we had banished good
works, and as if we were so far from exhorting men to good works in our
Sermons, that either we mention them not, or condemn the^ for such there are,
that are not ashamed to say, that now we are afraid to handle the doctrine of
good works, that we have preached salvation by faith so long, that we have
banished good works out of the Country; that either we dare (...) speak of
good works, or if we do, yet so coldly, that as good never a whit, as so
barely and coldly. But beware of such: for having their foolish hearts seduced
to believe lies, they speak evil of the way of truth, which they know not,
and of ^ whom either they will not at all hear, or with such enchanted ears,
that they pervert whatsoever things are spoken, unto their own destruction.
Such if they would, they might hear and know that these are false suggestions,
wherein they slander us and the truth which we teach. For we preach both faith
and works, and in all places we exhort all men that they abound in every good
work. But why is it that the^ thus traduce us and our doctrine? Forsooth
because we teach that our works are no causes of our salvation. And are we
then thus to be traduced because we tell you the truth? We tell you that
which the Scriptures have taught us, and we bring with us the evidence thereof
to confirm that which we teach. We dare not challenge any part of our
salvation a^ due unto our works, because all the honor thereof belongs unto
the Lord, whose free gift it is according to his mercy. But the way wherein
God has ordained us to walk unto salvation, we say is holiness of life,
without which no man shall see the Lord. This the Scriptures teach us, this we
teach you: beware therefore of such deceivers as tell you otherwise.

Again, if good works be the way which God has ordai^^ us to walk in, and
if without holiness of life no man ^ I see the Lord, then walk with God, as
Henoch did, in ho^^esse and righeousnesse. You believe in Christ Jesus: show
^th the fruits of your faith: your works must testify your ^^h, both unto
your selves, and unto us; for it is a vain and ^ead faith, where no fruits of
holiness of life do follow. ^ree is known by his fruit: a good tree brings
forth good it, and a corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit. As many ^re lead
by the spirit of God, they walk after the spirit, and ^y bring forth the
fruits of the spirit. Beloved, God has ^t a time wherein to try the faith and
religion of such as he ^h enabled to do some good unto his children Now he
^^keth that we should show forth the fruits of faith, and the ^ens of
religion, by showing mercy and compassion upon (...) poor afflicted and
distressed brethren. Pure religion, Iam. 1.27.
and defiled before God, even the Father, is this, that we visit the fa^lesse
and widows in their adversity, and that we keep our ^es unspotted of the
world. If therefore there be any faith, if ^re be any religion, if there be any
bowels of compassion in ^^, withdraw not your morsels from the poor, nor your
re^^fe from the needy. According to that where withal God ^^h blessed you, be
it small or great, be ready to do good ^^d to distribute, laying up for your
selves a good foundation heaven. Blessed is he whom the Ioines of the poor in
their ^uersitie blesses. Generally this I exhort, that ye study to ^e
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, and glorify God by the
holiness of your conversation: for ^ow this, that whom God has justified,
forgiving their sins ^d iniquities, them also has he sanctified, that they
serve ^n in holiness and in righteousness; and whom he has ^actified, them
also, and them only he glorifieth in the king ^^me of his Son. As he then
which has called you is holy, be ye holy in all manner of conversation.
Hereby ye ^ll know that ye are the sons of God, if ye walk as he ^^th
walked, and keep his commandments. And this is a ^e witness that ye belong
not unto him, if ye delight in righteousness, and defile your selves with the
unclean conversation of the wicked and ungodly. Give therefore a diligence to
make you calling and election sure, sure (I say unto your selves and to your
own souls, by walking in such holiness of life as God in Christ Jesus has
ordained your walk in. And thus much of that holy course and race of
godliness wherein the Apostle exhorts us to run, when he says, Conficite
salutem, etc.

Make an end, etc.] What it is whereunto the Apostle in these words does exhort
us, in part we have already heal, by the way wherein he prescribes us to
walk. The (...) which leads unto salvation being holiness of life, the
Apostle exhorts us to walk in this way, to run in this (...) Now it is to
be observed that the Apostle does not only prescribe the way which leads unto
salvation, and exhort v^^^ walk and run in that way, but he exhorts us to
run (...) in the same race unto the end, and fully to finish our course^
doing such good works as God has ordained that we she^^ walk in. Whence we
are to learn this lesson, that we (...) not only begin in the spirit, and
grow forward like^^^^ from grace unto grace, but we must persevere and
conti^^^ unto the end, that as the beginning and progress were in (...)
spirit, so the end also may be in the spirit, that after the (...) run we
may have eternal life. It is a good thing to begin well; but how little it
profits us unless we continue, le^^ example of Lots wife, whose temporal
punishment, bec^^^ she looked back unto Sodom, is registered in the old, and
(...) example of Judas the betraier of Christ, whose fearful end because he
went astray from that ministration and Apostle (...) which he had obtained with
the rest of the Apostles, is r^^stred in the new Testament, 1 Cor. 9.24.
bear witness. Know ye not ((...) the Apostle) that they which run in a
race, run all, yet ^^e receives the price? namely he that runs to the
end. So (...) (says the Apostle) that ye may obtain. How is that? that is,
to the end. Run to the end, that ye may obtain the pri^^^ for none are
crowned but they that strive as they ought (...) do. 2 Timothy 2.5.
Now who are they that strive as they ought to do, b^^ they that without
fainting and failing in the way hold our unto the end? In most miserable case
then are they that like (...) Church of Ephesus forsake their first love, that
is, that having ^^ce followed the truth in love, and embraced pure religion,
^^d walked in the paths of righteousness, do afterward fall ^ay, and run
themselves upon the rocks, either of errors opinion, or of corruption in life.
Luk 9.62.
No man (says Christ) that ^^teth his hand to the plough, and looks back,
is apt to the king^^me of God. And the Apostle says further, 2 Pet. 2.21.
that it had been ^^ter for them not to have known the way of righteousness,
than ^er they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment ^^en unto
them. The reason is given by the Apostle: Heb. 10.26.
For if we ^ue willingly after that we have received the knowledge of the ^th,
there remains no more sacrifice for sins, 27.
but a fearful king for of judgment, and violent fire, which shall devour
the ^^uersaries. Take heed therefore, brethren, Heb. 3.12.
lest at any time there in any of you an evil heart, and unfaithful, to
depart away from (...) living Lord: For we are made partakers of Christ, 14.
if we keep ^e unto the end the beginning wherewith we are vpholden. Let
run with patience the race all out that is set before us. ^ur Savior Christ
did so before us, Heb. 12.2.
who for the joy that was set ^ore him, endureed the cross, and despised the
shame. And shall ^e be weary and faith in our minds? We serve a most
boun^^^ull Lord, which gives us all things liberally; let us serve ^^en with
all that we have. We serve a most loving Lord, no will not change his favor
for ever; let us not serve him ^e a time, but for ever. And this let us know
for a surety, ^t if at our last end, when death does summon us to yield ^r
bodied unto the grave, and our spirits into the hands of ^m that gave them, if
then with Paul we can say, I have fought good fight, I have finished my course,
I have kept my faith, we all find more sound joy and sure comfort herein,
than in I things else under the cope of heaven whatsouer: Mat. 24.13.
for he that dureth unto the end, he shall be saved, says our Savior Christ.
and again: He that over comes, Ap. 2.26.
and keeps my works unto ^e end, to him will I give power over nations; and
he shall rule them ^^th a rod of iron, and as the vessels of a potter shall
they be broken. 27.
^uen as I received of my Father, 28.
so will I give him my morning ^urre. Make an end therefore of your own
salvation.

Now before we proceed unto the manner how we are to run in this race, and
to finish this course, a doubt arising from the Apostles exhortation is first
to be resolved, and answered. The Apostle as ye see, exhorts us to make an
end of our own salvation, to run on the race of righteousness which leads
unto salvation, outright unto the end. Whe^^ upon some do gather that our
freewill is here called upon that is, that we are not wholly and only
assisted by grace^ the way of salvation, and in the works that lead thereunto
but that it is in us to consent unto the grace which is offered, and that we
of our selves, being helped with grace, by the power of our free will, are able
to work the things that a^^ good, and acceptable unto God. For why else (say
they) do^^ the Apostle exhort us to work out our own salvation, it ^ us there
be no power at all to work? And generally they (...) conclude, that all
admonitions, exhortations, reproc^es, ^^cepts, promises, and threatenings in the
Scriptures, are in va^^ if free will in man be not granted, by the power
whereof (...) may together with grace work that which is good. The doubt then
is, whether this exhortation of our Apostle d^^ not implie that we by the power
of our free will are able pa^^ of our selves to make an end of our own
salvation, and (...) run the race of righteousness which leads to
saluations The resolution and answer whereunto is, that it does not at (...)
implie any such thing: which yet more clearly will appear, if first we show
the friuolousnes of their whole reason, dra^^ from admonitions, exhortations,
etc. in general, which (...) this: If it be not (say they) in our own power
to do the thing which is good, and whereunto we are exhorted and ad^^nished,
etc. then in vain are admonitions, exhortations, pr^cepts, reproves, and the
like. But see the vanity of their reason. Are not admonitions and the like
needful, if it be (...) that it be wholly of grace, and no way of our selves,
to do those good things whereunto we are exhorted? It is as if they should
say, If the increase of the earth be wholly the blessing of the Lord, then it
is not needful for the husbandman to (...) his ground: if faith be wholly the
gift of God, it is not needful to come to hear the word preached, etc. for as
he gives corn, and wine, and oil, and all things needful for this life, b^^
yet by such means as he has ordained thereunto, and as ^his his gift, but yet
given to us by the means of hearing word preached; so God works in us both
to will and to ^^e those things whereunto he exhorts and admonishes but by
the means of such admonitions, exhortations, and like. Howsoever then it be
not in our own power to do good things whereunto we are exhorted in holy
Scrip^^e, yet admonitions and exhortations there used are there^e needful,
because they are the means whereby God wor^h his graces. Again, if we look
into the book of God, ^e shall easily see that all these things whereunto we
are ex^ted, they are wholly given of God by grace in Christ Jesus, are no way
of our selves. To take a little view thereof: ^e Lord by Joel exhorts or
commands, saying, Joel 2.12.
Turn unto me, with all your heart, with fasting, weeping, and mour^^: and
yet Jeremy shows plainly that conversion unto the ^^d is wholly the gift of
the Lord, when he thus prays, ^uert thou me, and I shall be converted, Ier.
31.18.
for thou art the Lord God. Likewise our Savior Christ exhorts, Mat. 11.28
Come unto all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you: and yet
shows plainly, that to come unto him is wholly from Father, when he thus
says, No man can come unto me, Ioh. 6.44.
ex^^ the Father which has sent me draw him. In another place exhorts,
saying, Take heed and beware of covetousness: Luke 12.15.
to do thus is wholly from the Lord, as the Prophet shewby that his prayer
unto the Lord, Ps. 119.36
Incline mine heart unto thy ^^^nies, and not to covetousness. Generally the
Prophet ex^eth to fly from evil, and to do the thing that is good: 37.27.
James tells us, that to do good is wholly from the ^d, saying, Every good
and perfect gift is from above, Iam. 1.17.
and com^^h down from the Father of lights, etc. The like is to be said
^eproofes. Man. 16.14
Christ reproved the eleven of their unbelief hardness of heart: and yet the
Prophet shows that it is Lord that takes away the stony heart out of our
body, EZ. 36.26.
gives us an heart of flesh: and the Apostle, that faith is gift of the Lord.
The like is to be said of all precepts, pro^^e^, threatenings, reproves,
admonitions, exhortations, and like in holy Scripture. The Lord uses them all
as means to work his own will in us, and gives unto us whatsoever he
requires of us, He sets down laws and statutes, (...) as if it were in
our own power to keep them, but that (...) may know what to ask of him, and
with the Prophet to (...) O be gracious unto thy servant that I may live and
keep thy (...) He promises good things to those that will obey him, not (...)
if it lay in us to obey him if our selves would, but that b^^ may work such a
will in us by his promises. He admonish^^ and exhorts us, not as if we were
able of our selves to w^^ or do the things, but that so we may look into our
own ^e^nesse, and turn unto him, and he may heal us. You see (...) how vain
their whole reason drawn from admonitions, exhortations, and the like in
general is; for that neither (...) argue any power in us of our selves to do
good, neither a^^ they needless and vain, because they are the means wh^^ by
the Lord works in us both to will, and to do that whi^^ we are commanded,
and exhorted. Now to the reason de^^ in particular from this exhortation, in
brief I answer, that a^beit the Apostle exhort us to work out our own
salvation yet it does not follow that it is at all in our power so to do. For
as it follows in our Apostle, it is God which works in (...) both to will
and to do, even of his good pleasure. The Apostle therefore exhorts us to
make an end of our own salvation, not for that we are able to do so, but to
teach ^^flie unto him who works in us both the will and the de^^, even of his
good pleasure.

Now let us make this use of that which has been spok^^ for the resolving of
this doubt. It is not in our own pow^^ we see to fly the evil we are
forbidden, to do the good (...) are commanded, or to embrace the virtuous and
godly (...) whereunto we are exhorted, but wholly from grace, only from the
Lord. So often then as we hear, or read any p^^cepts or laws in the book of
God, let us therein ackno^ledge our duties, and seeing it is not in our power
to keep them, let us fly unto our God, and pray to him; Lord g^^^ me grace to
do that thou command, and then comma^^ me what thou will. So often as we
hear or read any pr^mises, or threatenings, let us therein acknowledge our o^^
frowardness, and seeing it is not in us to bend at promises threatenings,
unless he touch us with his holy spirit, let us (...) unto our God, and pray
unto him; Lord take from me ^ hard and stony heart, and give me for it a soft
and fleshie ^^rt, that thy promises and thy threatenings, may work in (...)
obedience to thy will. So often likewise as we hear or ^^de of admonitions,
or exhortations, let us therein acknow^^^ge our own infermities, and seeing we
cannot of our selves (...) or do the thing whereunto we are exhorted, let us
fly to our God, and pray unto him; Lord frame my will accor^^^g to thy blessed
will that I may do what thy will is. And conclude this point, seeing we cannot
run this raze where^o the Apostle exhorts us, but God must work in us both
(...) will and the deed, let us fly unto our God, and pray un him, Lord
sanctify me with thy holy spirit, that by thy ^ce guiding me I may walk in
those good works which ^^u have ordained me to walk in unto my lives end.

LECTVRE XXXIV.
PHILIP. 2. ^ers. 12.13. With fear and trembling. For it is God which works
in you both the will and the deed, even of his good pleasure.
WIth fear and trembling] From these words some there are that gather that
uncomfortable doctrine of the uncertainty of our salvation, Rhem. in loc.
affirming it to be pride and presumption to dare to be so bold as to be
assured of our salvation, and clean contrary to the teaching the Apostle in
this place. So that the meaning of the A^^stle by their judgments in this
place is this, that we should work our salvation that yet we should always
doubt of ^^r salvation. But how far this is wide of the Apostles meaning, may
easily appear by those manifold Scriptures whe^^ by the certainety or our
salvation is affirmed, and consequ^^^ly this uncomfortable doctrine of the
doubting of our sal^^tion is utterly overthrown. I am sure, Job. 19 25.26.27.
says Job, that m^ ^^deemer lives, and he shall stand the last upon earth,
and though after my shinne worms destroy this body, yet shall I see God (...)
flesh, whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and (...) other
for me. Lord how this holy man so assures himself of his salvation, that he
beats upon it as if he could ^^satisfie himself with any words, but fills
his mouth with^^ ioycing hereat amidst all his afflictions. Romans 8.38.
I am sure, says ^^, my Redeemer lives, I shall see God in my flesh, I my
self shall (...) him, mine eyes shall behold him, none other for me but I my
(...) shall behold him. He does as fully assure himself of his salvation as if
he were already in full possession thereof. Of the like assurance of his
salvation our Apostle protests, saying, I (...) persuaded that neither death,
nor life, nor Angels etc. When the Apostle does not only speak of a probable
persuasion, but of such a sure confidence; as whereby else where he says, from
henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness etc. 2 Timothy 4.8.
Neither groundeth he this persuasion upon any special re^^lation, but upon
that ground which is common to him (...) all the faithful even the love of God
in Christ Jesus. No^ as Job, and Paul, not to instance in any others, assured
themselves of their salvation, so we by the power of the same spir^^ and upon
the same ground of the love of God in Christ Jesus may and ought to assure our
selves of our salvation. True^ is that if our salvation and the certainty
thereof stood any way in our selves, or depended upon our works, we might
indeed justly doubt of our salvation, as knowing our selves by reason of our
sins and iniquities to have deserved death and damnation. But the ground, and
the foundation of the certainty of our hope is the sure promises of God in
Christ Jesus, who has promised in his word eternal life to all th^^ believe.
We look not upon our selves, or our own works, or our own worthiness (for
then must we needs doubt) b^ we look upon him that has promised: even as
Abraham did, whose faith we are to follow; of whom it is said, that her neither
did consider his own body, which was now dead, ^eing almost an hundredth years
old, neither the deadness of ^^raes womb; Romans 4.19.20.21.
neither did he doubt of the promise through (...) belief (where note how
doubting is termed unbelief) ^^t was strengthened in the faith, and gave
glory to God, be ^^^g fully assured that he which had promised was also able to
^e it. He then being faithful which has promised saluati^n to them that
believe in his name, we are sure to be saved. ^ut what need we to look
farther for this point then into (...) every nature of faith? which the
Apostles have defined to ^e such a full assurance, that if ye take away
assurance ye take way faith. For what else does that mean that the Apostle
^^metimes calls faith the ground of things which are hoped for, Heb. 11.1.
Coloss. 2.5.
^^d the evidence of things that are not seen, sometimes a steadfast ^^th;
sometimes a full assurance, Romans 4.21. Iam. 1.6.
sometimes an assurance without ^uering; and sometimes the anchor of the soul
both sure and ^^^dfast? Let us draw near. says the Apostle, with a true heart
assurance of faith, sprinkled in our hearts from an evil conscience, Heb.
6.19.10.22.23.
^d washed in our bodies with pure water. Let us keep the profes^^ of our hope
without wavering. for he is faithful that promised. ^oth the Apostle exhort us
unto an assurance of faith, unto hope without wavering, resting upon his
promises that is ^^thfull and true? Surely if we ought thus to believe, if we
^^ght thus to hope, and that upon this ground that he is ^^thfull that has
promised; then may we and ought to assure ^^r selves of our salvation. Whether
then we look upon ^e examples of holy men in the Scriptures, or upon the sure
^omises of God in Christ Jesus made in the Scripture, or vp^^ the nature of
faith in the writings of the Apostle; still we ^ll find that we ought not to
doubt, but certainly to assure ^^r selves of our salvation through a sure and
steadfast faith in christ Jesus, who has promised life and salvation to all
them at believe in his name.

This then may serve for the confutation of that vncom^^rtable doctrine of the
Papists, where they teach, that with^^t special revelation no man ought, or
can assure himself (...) faith of his salvation. The erroneousnesse of which
do^trine though it has been fully manifested by that which already has been
said for confirmation of the plain opposite doctrine which we teach; yet for a
further clearing of the truth in this point, I beseech you in a few words to
cons^^^ how weak proofs they bring for what they teach.

Why then I demand, may no man without special re^^lation assure himself by
faith of his salvation? Because (...) man can say my heart it clean, Pro. 20.9.
I am pure from sin. Men (...) be clean from sin, says Bellarmine, but no
man, says he, (...) so, Lib. 3. de Iustif. c. 4.
because they that are cleave cannot certainly know that they o^ clean,
therefore no man without special revelation may assure himself by faith of
his salvation. But see the weakness of this pro^^^ which 1. is grounded upon a
corrupt reading, as the te^^ the original shows, whence the words are thus
to be read, who can say, I have made my heart clean? and are spoken to (...)
press the insolency of such as think to be justified by th^^ own strength.
And 2. leans upon a point of man's p^^^ from sin in this point, which
plainly contradicts the holy Ghost, both in that text, and throughout the
whole Scripture which has concluded all under sin. And 3. con^^deth without
promises, Gal. 3.22.
inasmuch as nothing thence can be concluded against assurance by faith of
justification, or sal^^tion. For though no man can say, that he has made his
be^^ clean, that he is pure from sin in himself, or by himself, yet
inasmuch as the holy Ghost witnesses, that by faith (...)purifieth our hearts,
Act. 15.9. 1 Ioh. 1.7.
and that the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses (...) from all sin, in him, and
by him through faith in his blo^^ we may assure our selves of our
justification, and salvation.

Eccles. 9.1.
Yea but the Preacher saying, that a man, (speaking, says Belarmine, of the
just, and wise,) knows not whether he be worthy of love, or hatred, but all
things are kept uncertain for the time ^ come, shows thereby that not the
just, or wise, and so not the faithful; can assure themselves of their
justification, or salvation. But see the weakness of this proof also, which
1. as the forme^ is grounded upon a corrupt translation, as the original (...)
shows, where the reading is much different from the vulgar and so very
obscure both there, and in the Greek, that it i^ an unfit place for the proof
of such a point. And 2. fail^^ in understanding that of the just and wise only,
which is spoken of all, both just, and wicked, as the next verse where the
^eacher expounds himself, shows. And 3. proves ^ely, that no man by
outward things in this life knows ^hether he be loved, or hated of God. For
so the words are be read, that no man knows love, or hatred; i. whether he
loved, or hated of God, by all that that is before them. By the outward things
which happen unto them. Which ^peareth to be most true, in that neither the
just only pros^^er, nor the wicked only are afflicted, but the wicked many
^^nes flourish more than the just, and the hand of God many ^nes lies heavier
upon the just then upon the wicked; but ^aketh nothing against assurance of
salvation by faith, which ^neth not upon any outward things, but only upon the
^^omise of God in his word. Yea but Saint Paul, say they, ^^rst not assure
himself that he was justified, as appears by ^^at he says, I know nothing
by my self, 1 Cor. 4.4.
yet am I not thereby iusti^^d: and therefore no man may assure himself of his
saluati^^. But they might see, Romans 8.33.
1. that the Apostle there speaks ^t of any uncertainty of his
justification, whereof else where assures himself; but by express negative
plainly denies at he was justified by the cleanesse of his conscience that he
^oweth nothing by himself. 2. That he speaks there of ^s ministry, and
service therein, and acknowledges that ^ough his conscience accuse him not of
any crime therein, ^r he is not thereby justified. Which makes against
iustifi^^tion by any thing in a man's self, though done in as great ^^rfection
as mortal man can do it, but not at all against iu^^fication, or assurance of
salvation by faith. Yea but when ^e says, work your salvation with fear and
trembling, Phil. 2.12.
he speak ^h against the vain presumption of Heretics, say the Rhe^^sts on
that place, that makes men secure of their predesti^^tion and salvation, and
wills the Philippians to work ^^eir salvation with fear and trembling, Pro.
28.14.
according to that ^her scripture, blessed is the man that always is
fearful. Wher^nto the answer is, 1. that both the Apostle here, and Salo^on
in that other Scripture, and the same Apostle again when ^e says, be not high
minded, but fear, and Peter when he says, Romans 11 20 1 Pet. 1.17
^sse the time of your dwelling here in fear: and the Spirit of God generally
when he speaks to like purpose, speaks other against vain presumption in
our strength, without do acknowledgment of our own frailty, and due depending
upon the Lord; or against careless security of our salvation, without due
regard of Gods threats and judgments, and without inward grace and fear of
God, issuing into a godly life and conversation, but not against faithful
boldness and confidence, not against assurance of our salvation by faith
grounded upon the promises of God in Christ Jesus.

2. That there is a twofold fear, a servile fear, and a fili^^ fear; a fear
opposite unto faith, and a fear attending upon faith; a doubting and
distrusting fear, and a careful and loving fear; a fear of discouraging
diffidence, and a fear o^ awefull reverence; a fear from the law to be
punished, and a fear from grace to offend and deserve punishment; a fear
begotten by the spirit of bondage, and a fear begotten by the spirit of
adoption; a fear whereof S. John says, there is (...) fear in love, 1 Ioh.
4.18. 2 Co. 7.11. Pro. 28.14.
but perfect love casts out fear, and a fear when of S. Paul says, that
godly sorrow causes fear; and Solomon that blessed is the man that fears
always. Now from that fear the Holy Ghost every where dehorteth, saying, Fear
not, for I am with thee, Esaias 41.10.43.1.
be not afraid, for I am thy God: and again, fear not, Mat. 8.26.
for I have redeemed thee etc. and again, why are ye fear full, O ye of
little faith? But unto this fear he every where exhorts, Psalm. 2.11.
saying, Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice unto h^^ in trembling, or, with
reverence: and again, fear him which after he has killed has power to cast
into hell, Luke 12.5.
yea, I say unto you, 1 Pet. 2.17. Apoc. 14.7.
him fear: and again, Fear God, honor the King: and again, Fear God, and
give glory to him; and generally where ^e exhorts unto fear, it is to this
fear. So that when the Apostle exhorts to work our salvation with fear and
trembling, ^e exhorts unto this fear, even to fear the judgments and
threatenings of God, which the faithful always do, because faith believes
them; and to fear to trust in our selves, which every faithful man also does,
because faith it self imports trust in God, and as the Apostles reason also
shows we should, because it is God which works in us both the will, and the
deed, even of his good pleasure; and so to fear, as the Prophet does, when he
says, serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice to (...) with reverence; the words
are as in the Apostle, cum timore tremore: but neither here, nor any where does
the Holy ^host exhort unto that servile, and doubting, and distrusting ^^re, as
to stand in fear of our salvation. Yea but seeing the ^^rd of God does no
where speak namely and particularly (...) or of any of us, therefore by faith
which is to be grounded on the word of God, we cannot assure our selves of our
^^^uation. Whereunto first we answer, that though the word God speak no where
immediately by name, and personally any of us, yet what it says to believers
generally, it says to ^^ery believer; and what to sinners generally, it says
to every ^ner, and every man is to conceive it as particularly spoken himself,
and to believe the same word preached by the ^inister of the Gospel, as if
Christ himself did perso^ly speak unto him. So that when as the word says,
^ecept ye repent, ye shall perish, Luc. 13.3.
he that believes this ^rd, believes also touching himself that except he
repent shall perish; so when the word says, that whosoever belee^^h in Christ
shall not perish, but have everlasting life, Joh 3.15.
as hence ^^ul said to the Iaylor, Believe thou in the Lord Jesus, Act. 16.31.
and thou ^t be saved; so every Minister of the Gospel may say to ^omas such a
one, John such a one, and James such a one etc, ^eeue thou in the Lord Jesus
and thou shall be saved, and ^ery believer which believes this word, may by
faith ^ounded on the word particularly assure himself of his sal^ion, because
he believes, inasmuch as otherwise the word ^e not true, whosoever believes
shall be saved. Secondly, we ^e them whence their Priests, seeing the word does
no ^ere speak namely and particularly to any of them, have ^horitie to remit
the sins of their poenitentiaries? They ^^l tell us, though untruly as they
practice it, that they have of them particularly authority from Christ his
word, where says, whosoever sins ye remit they are remitted unto them, Joh.
20.23.
^d their poenitentiaries must believe it. Thus they will take ^^ue to
themselves, though they will not give us leave, from ^enerall to infer a
particular. But if their seduced ones ^st believe, that though their Priests be
not there named, yet thence they have all of them particularly authority to
f^^ give sins, much more may every man that believes, though he be not named
where Christ says, whosoever believes s^^ be saved, yet thence assure
himself particularly by faith of (...) salvation. Yet but seeing it is no
article of the Creed, to believe a man's own salvation, therefore no man is
bound (...) believe it. Whereunto we answer, that in professing the art^cles of
our Creed, we profess the assured belief of our o^^^ salvation: for each man
in his particular to profess and say, I believe in God the Father, I believe
in Jesus Christ his Son, etc. is all one as to profess and say, I believe in
God, that he is (...) God, and my Father, and my strong salvation; I believe
(...) Jesus Christ, that he was borne unto me, and died for my (...) and rose
again for my justification; I believe in the H^^ Ghost, that being sanctified
by his work, I shall be glori^^ with my Savior; and I believe the holy
Catholic Church that I am a member of it, and that unto me belongs the
forgiveness of my sins, the resurrection of my body, a^^ life everlasting,
without which particular application to (...) selves, the Devil may believe
the articles of the Cree^^^ And albeit we do not always so infallibly believe
our o^^ salvation as we do assent unto the articles of the Creed, (...) as
our faith is in degree less, or greater, so our apprehension of salvation is
weaker, or stronger; yet in our weak apprehension of our salvation we truly
believe it, and ought^ ways strongly and steadfastly to believe it, and to pray
wi^^ the Apostles, that from weakness of faith, and slender assurance, Luc.
17.5.
we may grow unto strength of faith, and full assurance as the Apostles did.
Yea but the greatest certainty we ^^^ have of our salvation is only the
certainety of hope, not an^ certainety of faith; we may hope well of salvation
doing o^^ duties, but we may not without great presumption assure ^^^selues by
faith of it. Whereunto we answer, 1. that howsoever hope as vulgarly men talk
of hope, and as the Pap^^ speak of it, be always joined with fear, and
doubt, and (...) uncertain; yet the certainty of that Christian hope where^^
the scripture speaks, and which nothing else but a const^^ and patient
expectation of that which we believe shall be, (...) a undoubted and sure, as
the certainety of faith, whereon it grounded, and whereof it is the proper
effect; Romans 5.5.
inasmuch as ^e scripture says of it, that hope makes not ashamed, which as
Justin notes it should do, in Ps. 36. Romans 5.2.
if he that hops failed of his ^pe: and again, that hope makes us to
rejoice, which it should ^t if it made us not certain and sure of that we hope
for: ^^d again, he calls hope an ancre of the soul, Heb. 6.19.
both sure and ^^dfast; and gives unto it, confidence, 3.6.
and rejoicing, and assu^^nce. 2. That doing our duty can yield us neither
faith, ^r hope truly so called, because we come so short of ^ing our duty,
that as Hierom says, if we consider our own ^erits, we must needs despair;
and so our hope is grounded, ^t upon doing our duty, but upon faith, and it
upon the ^^omise of God in his word, whence both faith and hope are ^rtaine of
that they believe, and hope for. 3. That it were ^eat and wicked presumption to
hope for salvation by virtue our own doings, but no other presumption then
godly to sure our selves of our salvation by faith, inasmuch as this is ^e
presumption of true faith, which presumes not upon our ^^ne works, but upon
the grace of Christ, and upon the ^^^omise of God made in his word. Let us now
look a little ^erer into the words; and the meaning of the words in this ^^ace
of our Apostle is evident.

With fear and trembling] We are therefore to remember that I have already
told you, that there is a double fear men^^oned in holy scriptures: the one a
servile and slavish fear, ^^ch as is in the children of disobedience, who
fear not to ^^end and displease the most high God, but so fear the hor^r of
that punishment which is due unto their sins, that ^^ey carry with them even
an hell within their own bosom. ^^ch a fear in the end breeds despair,
and is always so re^^gnant unto love, that in love there is no such fear, but
per^^ct love casts out such fear. There is another fear, 1 Ioh 4.18.
which is godly, and a sonne-like fear, such as was in Job, of whom it is ^id,
that he was one that feared God, and eschewed evil; Job 1.1.
and such was in Cornelius, of whom it is said, that he feared God with ^ his
household, and that he gave much alms to the people, Act. 10.2.
and that ^aied continually. This is such a fear as wherewith the good child
stands in awe of his father, and fears to displease him. For as the good
and dutiful child fears his father albeit he doubts not of his fathers
love toward him, nay as he does the more fear to displease his father, the
more certainly that he is persuaded of his fathers love toward him: so the
child of God in whom this godly fear does dwell, the more certainly he is
persuaded of the love of God toward him in Christ Jesus, the more he fears
him with this fear, the more he fears to displease him; and therefore does
the more eschew that which is evil, and follow after that which is good and
acceptable in his sight. And this is so far unlike unto that servile and
slavish fear, that this fear is never severed from love, but the more we love
the more we fear to displease him whom we love, and the more we fear to
displease him whom we love, the more we love him. Now it is not to be doubted
but that the Apostle in this place speaks of this godly fear, the other
being such a fear as the Holy Ghost throughout the whole scriptures would have
utterly abandoned in all the children of God. Yea but it is added with fear
and trembling, which shows that the Apostle does not speak of such a fear
as has with it joined assurance of love, but of such a fear as is full of
doubt; for trembling must needs argue doubtfulnes. See then I beseech you that
place of the Prophet where they are both joined as here in the Apostle, Serve
the Lord with fear, Psalm. 2.11.
says the Prophet, and rejoice in trembling. Where by trembling cannot be
meant any doubt or distrust: (for what rejoicing can be in such trembling as
arises of doubt or distrust?) but by trembling is meant a reverence of his
majesty, in whose love we are so to rejoice, as that withal we fear to
displease him. And as there the Prophet, so here our Apostle would have us to
serve the Lord with fear, to exclude all carnal security, whereby we grow
careless and negligent to do that which is good; and with trembling, to
exclude arrogant presumption, whereby we grow pharisaically proud of that good
which we do. The Apostle then when, he exhorts us to make an end of our own
salvation with fear and trembling, his meaning is this, that we should finish
our course in doing such good works as God has ordained us to walk in. But
how? with fear and trembling,.i. with all humblenes and reverence toward God,
not doubting of his love toward us, but because we know he loves us, fearing
to displease him, either by carnal security of doing any good at all, or by
vain presumption of our own worthiness for that good which we do.

The lesson then which hence we are taught is, what ought to be the continual
conversation of a Christian, and how we ought to walk in the whole course of
our life. We ought to pass the time, even the whole time of our dwelling here,
1 Pet. 1.17.
as the Apostle speaks, in fear, even in the reverent fear of his most holy
name, in whose favor is life, and joy for evermore. Because we know he loves
us in his well beloved Son, we ought to be most loath any way to displease
him, and as dutiful children we ought to avoid and eschew every thing that
may offend his godly will. If I be a master, Mal. 1.6.
says the Lord by his Prophet, where is my fear? Whence it is plain that all
that are his servants ought to fear to despise his name, as the Priests there
did, and to displease the most high. Now two motives there are which may
persuade us unto this reverent and careful walking in the whole course of our
life, and fear to displease him. The one is this, his eyes always behold us,
whatsoever we do is naked before him, he knows the very thoughts of our
hearts before we do conceive them, and there is nothing hid from him. This
surely should make us watch even over our thoughts, it should make us careful
in all our ways that we do not any thing whereby we may grieve his holy
spirit. And if we kept this always in remembrance, that whatsoever we do God
sees us, it would stay oftentimes even the best of us from many things which we
do. For therefore it is that we fall into many noisome lusts, that we defile
our selves with much filthiness of the world, that by many sins we displease
our God, because we think not of his presence and forget that he sees us.
Which of us is there that in our Princes presence would not, fear to displease
him? How much more ought we to fear to displease our God, in whose presence we
are always, and who beholds whatsoever we do? Even the regard of his
majesty, before whom we stand, should cause us to walk before him with fear
and trembling. The other motive to persuade us unto a reverent and careful
walking, as fearing to displease our God, is this, the quick and eagle-sighted
eyes of the wicked are ever prying and looking into all our ways, that they
may have some advantage against us, whereby they may take occasion to dishonor
our God, and to speak ill both of us, and of the Gospel which we profess.
This also should make us watchful over all our ways, that thereby we do not
offend and displease our God. Have your conversation honest, says the Apostle,
1 Pet. 2.12.
among the Gentiles, that they which speak evil of you, as of evil doers,
may by your good works which they shall see glorify God in the day of the
visitation. The Apostle saw that the Gentiles, among whom they lived, were
ready to pick a quarrel at every little thing wherein they offended, thereby
to dishonor God, and to discredit the Gospel. And therefore he exhorted them
to look unto their conversation, that thereby God might be glorified amongst
the Gentiles. And surely the Gentiles then were not more prying into the ways
of Christians, then the wicked and ungodly of the earth now are into the ways
of Gods children. For if they tread awry, if they through the malice of Satan,
or the infirmity of the flesh, or the deceitfulnes of sin slip out of the
right way, wherein they should walk, by and by the wicked have it, and with
open mouth they cry, these be our pure and holy men, these be our great
professors of the Gospel, these be the men that would be counted the only
religious men. How careful then ought we to be of our conversation, even in
regard of the watchful eye of the wicked, that we do or say nothing, whereby
they may take advantage against us, or occasion to dishonor God, or to speak
ill of the Gospel? Whether therefore we regard the majesty of our God, whose
eyes always behold us; or the quick eyes of the wicked which narrowly espy
into our ways, we see that we ought to pass the time of our dwelling here in
fear, and to make an end of our salvation with fear and trembling.

Ought we then thus to walk before the Lord with fear and trembling? Here
then are two extremities, which are as two cancres of the soul, to be looked
unto; the one, carnal security, the other vain presumption. For such is Satan's
subtlety, that first he labors to make us careless of doing that is good;
and then if he cannot so deceive us, he takes another course, and labors to
make us proud of that good which we do. But we ought to walk before the Lord
with fear and trembling, therefore first we ought not to be careless of doing
that is good, but still we ought to fear lest our Lord and Master come in an
hour when we shall be found doing no good. It was the fault of those dispersed
Jews unto whom James wrote, that they boasted too much of their religion, and
were too brag of their faith, but were altogether careless of doing those good
works wherein God had ordained them to walk. And I wish it were not a fault
in our days, that men did now but too much content themselves with the names
only of faith, and religion, and were too careless of doing that which is
good. But beloved, let us know that if we believe in God we must walk before
him in holiness of life with fear and trembling. We must not be careless to
do good, but we must be careful to show forth good works, as the Apostle
tells us. This fear wherein we must walk must expel all carelessness in
walking. Tit. 3.8.
And as this fear wherein we must walk must expel all carelesnes in our
walking, so must it likewise expel all vain presumption and pride in our
walking. It was the Pharisie you know that stepped forth and said, Luc. 18.11.
O God I thank thee that I am not as other men, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers, or even as this Publican: I fast twice in the week, I give tithe
of all that ever I possess. 12.
And others there are as pharisaicall as this proud Pharisie was, who presume
so much of the worth of their works, that they dare by the merits of them
challenge heaven unto themselves. But if the person of the poor Publican better
beseems us, of whom it is said, 13.
that he did not so much as lift up his eyes unto heaven, but smote his breast,
saying, O God be merciful to me a sinner. We must not be puffed up with the
vain opinion of the worth of our works how good soever they seem to be, but
we must run on the race that is set before us with fear and trembling. As
holiness, so humbleness and reverence becomes the house of God, which we
are, if we believe aright in the Son of God, Pro. 14.16.
and so live as he has commanded. A wise man fears, and departs from
evil; but a fool rages, and is careless, says Solomon. Whereby he teaches
us, that a reverent fear of Gods Majesty is a notable means to make a good
man to avoid sin. Pass the time therefore, I beseech you, of your dwelling
here, in fear, and walk in those good works which God has ordained you to
walk in, with fear and trembling, with fear (I say) and trembling, both in
regard of the majesty of God, whose eyes always behold us, lest you displease
him; and in regard of the wicked, whose eyes are prying into whatsoever we
do, that they may have no advantage against you. Grieve not the holy spirit,
either by carnal security and carelessness to do that good which ye should,
or by vain and proud presumption of the worth of that good which ye do, but
walk before the Lord as becomes the Saints of God, with fear and trembling,
fearing not to do good, and trembling at the good which ye do, lest either
not doing that good which ye ought, or presuming of that good which ye do,
ye displease him who loves you, and in whose love is life and joy for
evermore. And let this be spoken touching the manner how we ought to walk and
to finish our course. Now follows the reason why we ought thus to walk.

For it is God which works, etc.] This is the reason why we ought not simply
to make an end of our own salvation, but to make an end of our own salvation
with fear and trembling: with fear and trembling, why? For it is God which
works, etc. Neither the will nor the deed in any thing well done is from our
selves, that we should be puffed up with any pride thereof, but from the Lord;
and therefore when he guides us, we should not be secure to follow. It is God
(says the Apostle) that works in you both the will: the will, how? not by
helping the weakness of our will, as if being a little helped by grace, it
were in us to will that is good; but by sanctifying our corrupt will, that
whereas before it was wholly and only inclined unto evil, now it loves, and
likes, and follows after that which is good: and the deed, how? by giving
grace to do that good, to the desire whereof he has sanctified our will. It
is then as if the Apostle should thus have said: Walk in well-doing before the
Lord, but with fear and trembling; why? for it is not in you either to will or
to do that is good, but it is God that first sanctifies your wills, to desire
the things that belong unto your peace, to hunger and thirst after
righteousness, to acknowledge and lament your sins, and the like, and
afterward gives grace to believe and to live according to God in Christ
Jesus. Whence are many lessons for us.

Here then first that doctrine of free will is utterly overthrown. If we will
or do any thing that is good, it is God that works in us both the will and
the deed. Whosoever therefore shall tell you, that we have power in our selves
to will and to do that which is good, and that we need only to be helped,
but not wholly assisted by grace, believe him not. For I ask what it is that
is left unto us, when both the will to do good, and the deed it self, are
given us of God? If it be God that works in us both the will and desire to
do good, and likewise the grace of doing that which is good, then what is it
that we can challenge unto our selves? If it had been said, that God is the
Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end of every good thing that we do,
then happily some starting-hole might have been found. But when it is said,
that it is God that works in us both to will and to do that which is good,
out of doubt all power is taken from us of doing any thing that is good. True
it is, that Adam before his fall had free will to choose the good, and to refuse
the evil: but by his fall he lost that which in his creation he had, even all
free will unto all the things of the spirit; so that till such time as he be
regenerate by the spirit of God, he cannot at all by his own power understand,
think, will, or do any thing that is good, but is wholly and only carried to
that which is evil, and can do nothing else but sin, lying bound in the
chains of sin, not as a man fettered, which has a desire to be loose, but
of himself naturally willing and desirous so to lie. The natural man (says
the Apostle) perceives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him: 1 Cor. 2.14.
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. Where the
Apostle understanding by the natural man, the unregenerate man, whose
knowledge and understanding the Lord ha^h not yet cleared and lightened by his
holy spirit, plainly shows, that the unregenerate man has none understanding
at all in the ways of God, and the things that belong unto his peace, neither
can have till the Lord sanctify him by his holy spirit, changing his corrupt
will, and working in him both the will and the deed. Many Scriptures might be
brought for the enlarging and further proof of this point: but by that which
has been spoken ye see what the truth is in the point, namely that it is not
in our own power at all to will or do that which is good, but that it is God
which works in us both the will and the deed, so that the thing which we do
is no further good, than it is wholly guided and directed by the spirit of God.
Take heed therefore and beware of such as tell you otherwise than as ye have
now heard and learned, that ye be not deceived by them.

Secondly, hence we are taught whence all our sufficiency and all our
strength to walk in the ways of God is, even from God, who is the alone
author of all goodness, and the giver of all blessings. What have thou (says
the Apostle) that thou have not received? To prepare our hearts unto that which
is good, Psalm. 10.17 2 Cor. 3.5.
this is from the Lord, for he prepares the heart. To think a good thought,
this is from the Lord, for we are not sufficient of our selves to think any
thing as of our selves, but all our sufficiency is of God. To will and desire
that which is good, and to do that which is good, is likewise from the Lord,
for it is God that works in us both the will and the deed. So true is that of
our Savior, Ioh. 15.5.
Without me ye can do nothing. Where the meaning is not only that we are so
weak that we are not able of our selves to do any thing that is good, unless
we be assisted by grace; but that we are no more able than the branch that is
plucked from the tree is able to bring forth fruit. The sum of this point is,
that the fruits of the spirit in us are altogether from the spirit, even as the
fruits of the flesh are altogether from the flesh. Do thou then at any time
feel any good motions of the spirit within thee, any desire to fly that which
is evil, and to do the thing that is good? Is thine heart enlarged to run
the way of Gods commandments, and to glorify thy Father which is in heaven?
Are the bowels of thy compassion opened toward thy poor brethren, to relieve
the necessities of Gods Saints? It is God that works in thee all these, and
whatsoever is like unto these; and they are so many testimonies unto thee of
Gods holy spirit dwelling within thee. Acknowledge therefore Gods mercy toward
thee, who when thou wast in thy blood, said unto thee, Ezekiel. 16.6.
thou shall live; that is, who when thou wast dead in sins and trespasses,
and had no will to be raised from the dead sleep of sin whereinto thou
wast fallen, has quickened thee by his spirit, and of unwilling made thee
willing to do those things that are good and acceptable in Gods sight. Glory
not in any good thing that thou have, as though thou had not received it. For
when thou wast as unable to will or to do any thing that is good, as the dead
man is unable to exercise any function of life, then did he circumcise the
foreskinne of thine heart, and did not only work in thee a power to will and
to do the thing that is good, but gave thee also grace both to will and to do
the thing that is good. Glory therefore in thy God, let thy soul rejoice in
him, and let his praises be ever in thy mouth. He it is that fills thy heart
with good desires, and he it is that directs thy steps in the way wherein
thou should walk, and which leads unto life. And why does he show such
mercy on us? Even of his good pleasure.

Even of his good pleasure.] We have heard that it is God that works in us
both to will and to do that which is good. And why does he so? That God may be
all in all, and all the glory of out salvation may be wholly his. The Apostle
tells us, that this he does even of good pleasure: it so pleases him, and
howsoever the cause or this his pleasure be hidden from us, yet it is good, and
just, he does it even of his good pleasure. Here then we have the first and
furthest cause even of the whole mystery of our salvation. He has
predestined and chosen us unto eternal life through Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.4.
before the foundation of the world. And why? The Apostle tells us he did it
according to the good pleasure of his will. 5.
He has opened unto us the mystery of his will. And why? This also he did
according to his good pleasure. He has made us accepted in his beloved, Ephesians.
19.6.7.
by whom we have redemption through his blood. And why? This also is according
to his rich grace. He has wrought in us both to will and to do the things
that belong unto our peace. And why? Even of his good pleasure. Will thou then
know why God has chosen thee, and refused him; why he has made thee a
vessel of honor, and him a vessel of dishonor; why he has taken away the
hardness of thy heart, and suffers him still to walk in the hardness of
his own heart; why he has sanctified thy will, and left him in the
frowardness of his own will? He has not done these things for any good
thing which he saw in thee, or for any goodness which he foresaw would be in
thee, not for thy birth, wealth, sex, or condition, but even of his good
pleasure: for look into the whole book of God, still thou shall find that
the last and great cause of all our good is his grace, his mercy, his love, his
purpose, his will, the purpose of his will, his good pleasure, the good
pleasure of his will. And when thou come hither, here thou must stay thy
self, and cry with the Apostle, O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom
and knowledge of God, etc. Romans 11.31.
If it be the potters pleasure to make of the same lump of clay one vessel to
honor, and another to dishonor, who shall question further with him, when
this answer is once given. It was his pleasure, even the good pleasure of his
will?

Is there then nothing in us to move him, but is it even of his good pleasure
that he saves us, and that he does so great things for us? O what great
thankfulness, what dutifulness, what obedience ought this to stir us up
unto? The greater that the gift is, and the freer that it is, the more it ought
to stir us up unto these duties. Now what greater gift than our salvation,
and all the means thereunto? And how could this gift be more free, than to
have it given us even of his good pleasure, without respect of any thing that
was or might be in us? Let us then with all thankfulness yield all obedience
unto this so merciful a God, who has done so great things for us, even
because his good pleasure was such. He has given us all: let him have the
glory of all. Neither can we attribute too much unto him, neither can we
detract too much from our selves. Whatsoever good thought, whatsoever good
desire, whatsoever good deed is in us, he of his good pleasure has wrought it
in us, and he is to be glorified in it, and for it. Other fountain of our good
there is none, and therefore all the praise, and honor, and glory thereof, is
due unto him alone.

LECTVRE XXXV.
PHILIP. 2. Verse 14.15. Do all things without murmuring and reasonings, that
ye may be blameless, and pure, and the sons of God, without rebuke, etc.
HItherto then we have spoken of that humble obedience, which we following
the example of Christ his humility and obedience, ought to yield unto our God
in all holiness of conversation. Now follows another branch of the Apostle
his exhortation, upon the same ground of Christ his humility and obedience,
and this is unto an humble and modest conversation toward our neighbor,
toward our brethren, in these words, Do all things without murmuring, etc.
For as the example of Christ his humility and obedience should stir us up
unto all humble obedience unto our God, to walk before him fear and with
trembling; so ought it likewise to persuade us unto all humble and modest
conversation toward our brethren, laying aside all secret murmuring, and all
contentious reasonings, and with meekness every one yielding one unto another,
and every one forbearing one another.

Do all things without murmuring, etc.] These words you see are a dehortation
and disswasion from things to be eschewed, and by consequent they are an
exhortation unto things to be embraced. Two things there are, you see, which
the Apostle disswadeth, the one murmuring, the other reasonings. By murmuring
the Apostle (I take it) in this place does not so much mean murmuring against
God, as secret grudgings in our selves against our brethren, and privy
whisperings, such as closely run from hand to hand, to defame or to disgrace
those whom we like not. By reasonings are meant such open discords and
contentions as those secret grudgings and privy whisperings do for the most
part break out into. Both these faults the Apostle would have avoided and
eschewed amongst men one toward another, that neither there should be secret
grudgings and privy whisperings one against another, neither there should be
open quarrelling or contending one with another. Now it is further to be
understood, that in this dehortation from these faults the Apostle implies an
exhortation to those good virtues whereby these bad faults may be redressed,
namely unto a modest conversation with our brethren, and a peaceable agreement
with all men. When the Apostle therefore says, Do all things without
murmuring, it is as if he had thus said: Let there be no secret grudgings
amongst you one against another, nor any privy whisperings running closely
from hand to hand, to defame or to disgrace one another; but let every one
amongst you approve himself unto another, in all modesty of conversation,
modestly yielding unto his superior, and equal, and willingly making himself
equal unto them of the lowest degree. Again, when he says, Do all things
without reasonings, it is as if he had thus said: Let there be no open
discords or contentions amongst you, either through bearing out your selves one
above another, or upon any occasion what else soever; but follow peace and love
with all men, and do all things with patience and mildness. This I take to
be the meaning of these words. Now before we proceed unto the opening of the
rest that follow, let us see what use we may make of this exhortation.

Do all things without murmuring.] The first thing which the Apostle here
disswadeth is murmuring. Now we read of two sorts of murmurers in the holy
Scriptures: the one of such as murmur against the most high God, Lord of heaven
and earth. So we read that the Israelites often murmured, Number. 21.5.11.5.
sometimes for want of water, sometimes for want of bread, sometimes for want
of the cucumbers, and the pepons, and the leekes, and the onions, and the
garleeke, and the fleshpots of Egypt, and for want of such things as caused
their often murmurings, it is said that they returned in their hearts into
Egypt. And such murmurers against God at this day are they who in this our time
of want of bread, either break out into such impatient speeches as these; What
means the Lord to kill us with famine? what greater sinners are we than such
and such that have the world at will, and all things at their desire? Would God
he would either mend these things, or make an end of us: who can endure such
a^^ard time? better to die any way, than to die of famine, etc. they (I say)
that either break out into such impatient speeches, or through
male-contentednesse seek to raise up seditions, and vprores, and rebellions in
the commonwealth, so to procure a remedy by a worse mischief, are found to
be murmurers against God, grudging at that which he does, and seeking a way
without him to redress it. But what was the end of those murmurers amongst the
children of Israel? Some of them were consumed by fire from heaven, others were
smitten with an exceeding great plague, others died being bitten and stung with
fiery serpents; and of all of them this was true, that none of them came into
the promised land. A fearful end upon murmurers against God: some die one way,
and others are slain another way, every one has a fearful end, and never a
one comes into the promised land, never a one enters into that heavenly rest,
where only is rest and joy for evermore. As therefore the Apostle exhorted the
Corinthians, saying, 1. Cor. 10.10
Murmur not as some of the children of Israel murmured, and were destroyed of
the destroier; so I say unto you, Take heed that none of you be found
murmurers against God either for this his judgment, whereby he now does most
justly visit our sins and our iniquities upon us, or for any thing else, lest
his wrath be kindled against you, and there be none to deliver you. For all
these things whereof we have spoke, came unto the children of Israel for
ensamples, and were written to admonish us upon whom the ends of the world are
come.

Another sort of murmurers there are, which murmr against their brethren,
grudging either at their wealth, or at the love and favor, or at the credit
and preferment wherein they go before them, and closely seeking their
discredit, whispering amongst their neighbors whatsoever evil they can devise
against them. So the Evangelists every where testify that the Scribes and
Pharisees murmured against Jesus, and against his Disciples, because they saw
that the people fell every where unto them, and followed them. So we read that
the Grecians murmured against the Disciples of Christ, Act. 6.1.
pretending that their widows were neglected in the daily ministering. And this
principally is that murmuring which our Apostle in this place would have
abandoned, that we should not malign one another, that we should not have any
grudgings or heartburnings within our selves one against another, that we
should not secretly and closly seek the discredit or disgrace one of another.
A fault whether more bad, or more common it is hard to say, and that even
amongst neighbors, amongst brethren. For what more ordinary then one neighbor
for some cause or other to murmr against another? If he be our superior in
wealth, or in honor, or in credit, we murmr against him as too great to
dwell so near us, and be he never so kind unto us yet still we do imagine
that he bears himself too much upon his wealth, or upon his birth, or upon
his place etc. and ouerlookes us. If he be our equal, we grudge that he
should come forward as well as our selves, that he should be as much honored,
that he should be as much loved, that he should be as well customed as our
selves. If he be our inferior, we disdain him, and that liuelihood which he
has we wish unto our selves, and would be content that he should shift as he
could. Thus amongst all sorts there is murmuring, and grudging, and repining;
so that whereas all things should be done without murmuring, nothing is done
without murmuring. Yea, and which is the vile malice of this disease, if
happily sometimes there be some just cause, we speak not of it, we do not
friendly and neighbourly expostulate things one with another, but we make fair
weather outwardly, when as yet both we foster within our selves ill conceits
and opinions one of another, and likewise whisper one with another such things
as tend to the disgrace one of another. Now see the root whence this murmuring
springs: surely it springs even from an evil and a cankered mind within our
selves which makes us that we cannot brook any of any sort, but whatsoever
their place be, superior, equal, or inferior to us we mutter and we are
impatient toward them, and whatsoever almost is done on said we take occasion
to be offended thereat. And such as is the root whence it springs, such is the
fruit which it brings forth, both bad, and exceeding bad. For howsoever we do
smother and suppress it for a time, and carry it so closly that he whom we
grudge at suspect nothing by us; yet will it most commonly in the end burst out
like a flame, into brawles, and heates, and open contentions, and discords, and
the more closely the fire has been covered, the more vehemently it will
break out. It behooves us therefore carefully to look unto it that we be not
tainted with this fault, and if there be any such root of bitterness in any of
us to weed it out. Let every man look into his own heart, and examine
himself how this may concern him: and this with the Apostle I exhort that ye
do all things without murmuring. Be not ready to take offense at every small
fault one with another, foster not within your selves any ill opinions, or
conceits one of an other; whisper not any thing amongst your selves which may
tend to the discredit, or disgrace one of another; grudge not to perform any
duty every man in his place one unto an other. But contrariwise let every man
approve himself in all modesty of conversation one unto another; let every
man think well one of another; let every man yield one unto another; let every
man bear one with another; and let all things be done with cheerfulness and
modesty. For this ye must know, that he that disswadeth murmuring amongst
neighbors and brethren, does withal desire that all cheerefulnes and loving
kindness be maintained amongst them. Have your conversation then one with an
other with all cheerfulness and brotherly kindness, and do all things that
any way concern your duties one unto an other without murmuring, and likewise
without reasoning: for so it follows in the next place.

And reasonings] This is the second thing which the Apostle disswadeth, that
we should fall to reasonings about any thing that we do. 1. That we should
fall unto open brawling or quarrelling, or contentions one with another. We
read that when there was fallen a debate between the heardmen of Abraham's
cattle, and the heardmen of Lots cattle, Abraham said unto Lot, Genesis 13.7.8.
Let there be no strife, no brawling or falling out between me and thee,
neither between mine heardmen, and thine heardmen: for we be brethren. See how
careful Abraham was to stay all contention and brawels. He was Lots elder, and
Uncle, and so his better in that respect, but he stands not upon that;
neither does he hearten his servants, and set them on, as the manner of some
is, but he goes unto Lot, and talks with him of the matter, and that not
hotly, but kindly and friendly, with great meekness of love, and requests him
that there may be no brawling or contention between their servants, or betwixt
themselves; and to that purpose he both uses reasons to persuade thereunto,
and yields of his right rather then there should be any such betwixt them.
Whereby you see this holy Patriarchs judgment of them: rather then he would
have any brawles and contentions with his brother, he would resign that right
unto him which he might rightly have challenged unto himself. Now what account
the Apostle makes of brawling and contention, and discords of men one with
another, ye may clearly see by those notable fruits of the flesh wherewith he
sorteth this fault whereof we now speak, Gal. 5.20.
as namely, with adultery, fornication, idolatry, witchcraft, heresy,
murder, drunkenesse, gluttony, and such like. Ye see then what vice it is from
whence the Apostle here disswadeth us, when he disswadeth us from reasonings,
and brawles, and contentions one with an other; even from that which Abraham by
his example has taught us to redeem with the loss of our own right, and
from that which the Apostle sorteth amongst the most ugly monsters which reign
amongst men. And these brawlings, and contentions, and discords are the fruits
which follow those murmurings, and privy grudgings whereof we spoke before.
For as wood and fuel is unto the fire, so are those close murmurings unto
these open brawles and contentions, even the very ground and matter whereout
they do spring: and as the fire long covered and smothered is not always kept
under but at length bursteth out into a flame; so those concealed hatreds
howsoever for a time they lie boiling within the breast of him that fostereth
them, yet do they at length show themselves in their colors, even breaking out
into open strifes and contentions. It stands us upon to strangle both the
mother, and the daughter, to avoid both the one, and the other, least yielding
possession in our hearts unto the one we our selves be overtaken and strangled
with the other. And to this end as the Apostle before exhorted us to do all
things without murmuring, so now to do all things without reasonings and
contentions one wi^h another. The Apostle thus writes to the Corinthians, I
fear lest when I come among you I shall not find you such as I would, and
least there be among you strife, envying, wrath, 2 Cor. 12.20.
contentions, backbitings, whisperings, swellings, and discord. I do not,
neither can I charge you with any of these things. Only with the Apostle I
exhort you that there be no debate, or quarrelling, or iarring, or contention,
or strife amongst you. Let not every foolish and flying word, every toying and
trifling matter breed brawles, or kindle the coals of dissension amongst you.
It is the counsel of wise Solomon, Pro. 25.8.
Go not forth hastily to strife, least thou know not what to do in the end
thereof, when thy neighbor has put thee to shame; but debate thy matter with
thy neighbor In which words he teaches us quickly to cut off all occasions of
strife and contention, and to use charitable conference one with an other for
the taking up of all such things as may breed strife and contention. Again,
in an other place says the same Solomon: Pro. 17.14.
the beginning of strife is as one that opens the waters; therefore ere the
contention be meddled with leave off. Where he likeneth him that moves and
begins strife unto a man that by plucking up a sluice lets in the waters
which before were shut up, and so drownes whatsoever is in the way. But the
thing which therein he teaches us is this, that we should withstand the
beginnings, as of all evils in general, so in particular, of striefe and
contention. Beware therefore I beseech you that ye suffer not this canker to
spread amongst you. Brawling and debate, striefe and contention becomes not
them that have given their names to Christ Jesus. Peace and love, kindness and
gentleness one toward another best beseems you. Follow therefore after
love, seek peace, and ensue it. Be kind and courteous one unto an other; be
gentle and loving one unto an other, and have peace amongst your selves, and so
the God of peace shall be with you and bless you.

That ye may be blameless, and pure etc.] Now follows the reason, as I take
it, of both the branches of the Apostle his exhortation; namely why we should
both walk in holiness of life before the Lord with fear and trembling, and why
our conversation with our neigbours and brethen should be without murmuring and
reasonings. The reason is twofold: the one in respect of the Philippians, that
they might be blameless, and pure etc. the other in respect of the Apostle
himself, that he might rejoice in the day of Christ etc. The sum of the
first reason in respect of the Philippians, and consequently in respect of us,
is this; we ought to lead a life as the sons of God in the midst of a froward
people, therefore we ought to pass the time of our dwelling hear with fear
and trembling, and to do all things without murmuring and reasoning. The
reason seems to be drawn from the end why we should so walk, why we
should so do. Why should we so walk, why should we so do? to what end? that
we may be blameless etc that is in brief, that we may be as the sons of God
in the midst of a froward people. But the particulars whereby this is
enlarged have their several uses, and are very well worthy our serious
consideration.

That ye may be blamelesse] we must walk thus, and do thus that we may be
blameless that is, that we may not give unto any any just cause of complaining
of us, or blaming us. And this is set down for us as a mark to shoot at,
whereat in our life we must leuel as near as possible we can, even to live
without blame and reproof amongst men. Yea but is this possible? Could our
Savior Christ himself, or could his Apostles and Disciples escape the
reproof and hatred of the Jews? No, they could not: neither can we. For our
Savior himself, has told us, that the world, i. the wicked men of the world
shall hate us, aad speak all manner of evil against us for his sake, falsely.
Ioh. 15.25.
Yet therefore were they blameless, because the Jews hated them without a
cause, as our Savior says of himself, Luc. 1.6.
because there was no just cause of their reproof. And so it is said of
Zacharias and Elizabeth his wife, that they walked in all the commandments and
ordinances of the Lord without reproves. Without reproof: how? in respect of
God? no: but in respect of men they were without reproof, inasmuch as they
gave no just cause of exception against them unto any man. And this is it
whereunto we must bend our selves, and our studies, even so to live as that we
give no just occasion of offense or complaint of us unto any man either by
word, or by deed. Yea, but this also is impossible, so to live as not to give
many times just occasions of offenses, just occasions of reproves. True it is:
for who is he that lives so well, that gives not just occasions of reproves?
But what then? must we not therefore study so to live as not to give any just
occasion of reproof? Our Savior Christ tells us that we must be perfect
even as our Father which is in heaven is perfect. A thing altogether impossible
for us to be perfect in this life. Yet must we even in this life strive
thereunto, that though we cannot come as far as we should, yet we may
endeavor to come as far as we can; even as our Apostle witnesses of
himself, where he says, Phil. 3.^^.^^.
I forget that which is behind, and endeavor to that which is before, and
follow hard toward the mark etc. Where he plainly shows that though he
could not come unto perfection yet he labored thereunto Right so, although we
cannot be blameless, nor happily without just occasion of blame and reproof,
yet must we study and endeavor so to live amongst men as that neither by
word not by deed we give them just occasion to complain of us, or to blame
us. But how far a great many in these last and worst days are from this
study and endeavor, he sees little that sees not. When the Apostle says,
do all things without murmuring and reasonings, that ye may be blameless; he
shows plainly that those that are tainted with those faults of murmuring,
and brawling, and contention, are not blameless, but are justly to be
reproved, giving just occasion thereof by their wranglings, and malecontented
contentions. To go one step further, the profane swearer is he such a student
as now we speak of, does he study to be without just reproof? Nay reprove
him for his cursed swearing a thing most worthy reproof, yet reprove him, and
great odds but he will heap oath upon oath to let you know how little he
esteems just reproof. I speak that I know, having sometimes my self to my
great grife heard it. And if we should go farther, how few such students should
we find as study to be blameless? ye your selves do see it, and find it in
the ordinary course of life, and common experience. Well, let us know that not
only Scholars ought to be such students as now we speak of, but all generally
of what sort or state soever they be ought to study so to lead their lives as
that they may want just reproof amongst their brethren. And if we ought, then
let us be such students, and let every of us set such a watch before our lips
that we may not offend with our tongue, and so order our steps that we give no
just occasion of exception against us, that so we may come as near unto this
of our Apostle as we can to be blameless.

The next clause is, that we may be pure. We must walk before God with fear
and trembling, and we must do all things with our neighbor without murmuring
and grudging, that we may be pure, that is, that in our spirits there may be
found no guile, but that in singleness of heart we may speak and do
whatsoever we speak or do. And this is set down as an other mark for us to
shoot at, whereat likewise we must level so near as we can in the whole
course of our life, even to be pure and clean from all fraud and guile both
in our words and deeds. And if we hit this mark we shall not miss of the
other, if we be pure we shall be blameless, if whatsoever we speak or do
proceed from the singleness of a sincere heart we shall avoid all lust
reproof for whatsoever we say or do. That therefore we may be blameless we
ought to study to be pure from all contagion of sin. Yea but the stars are
unclean in his sight: how much more man, a worm, even the son of man which
is but a worm: and he has laid folly upon his Angels, how much more upon us
that dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, which shall be
destroyed before the moth? True it is, none can say I have made mine heart
clean, I am clean from my sin, but if God should dispute with us we could
not answer him one thing of a thousand. Yet ought we to endeavor to be pure
even from all contagion of sin, and to keep our selves unspotted of the
world. And if so, then ought we to be simple, and sincere, and plain dealing
in all our words and works, Mat. 10.16.
which the Apostle especially here intends. Be ye wise, says our Savior, as
Serpents, and innocent as Doves. Where the same word is used that here is used.
And albeit that be spoken in particular there unto the Apostles, yet the use is
general that all should be innocent as Doves, all should lead a life pure
from all fraud and guile. So of that which in particular the Apostle speaks
unto servants, Ephesians. 6.5.
Servants be obedient unto them that are your Masters, according to the flesh,
with fear and trembling in singleness of your hearts as unto Christ: Of this
I say we ought to make this general use, that we ought to speak and do all
things in singleness of our hearts as unto Christ. For as James says, Iam.
1.8.
the double minded man is unconstant in all his ways. He that has a heart and
a heart, he that can dissemble with his lips, and flatter with his tongue,
there is no trust to be given unto him. Our speech ought to be simple, yea, and
nay, and we our selves ought to be simple, and pure in heart, that both in word
and in work we may be found sincere, and entire. A point not unworthy your
meditation, but most needful to be practiced. For this ye must know that the
more fraud and guile ye use be it in word, or be it in work, the farther ye
are from God, and the nearer ye are unto the Prince of this world. Be not
afraid of being too pure, and too too precise. When ye have studied this point
as much as ye can yet ye shall still be impure enough, and too far short of
that purity which should be in you. Study to be as in word, so in deed, and
pure in both. Let there be no deceitfulness in any of you, either in the
works of your hands, or in the words of your lips. Ye are purified, and
purged, and washed by the blood of that immaculate lamb Christ Jesus, which he
shed for the remission of your sins. Defile not your selves again with the
filthiness of the world. Be ye pure, that ye may be blameless; be ye
blameless, and pure, that ye may be as the sons of God, without rebuke in
the midst of a naughty and crooked nation: which are the words next
following to be handled.

LECTVRE XXXVI.
PHILIP. 2. Verse 15. And the sons of God without rebuke, in the midst of a
naughty and crooked nation, among whom ye shine as lights, etc.
ANd the sons of God without rebuke, in the midst, etc.] This is the third
clause in the Apostle his reason why we should hearken unto both the former
exhortations, why we should walk before the Lord in holiness of life, with
fear and trembling, and why we should do all things with our neighbor
without murmuring and reasonings, that we may be the sons of God, etc. that
is, that being the sons of God by adoption and grace, we may be known to be
so, by our care to walk without rebuke in the midst of a naughty and
crooked nation, keeping our selves undefiled by their wicked conversation. By a
naughty and crooked nation, the Apostle understands all such wicked and
ungodly men, as walking in the darkness of their own understanding, are
enemies unto the truth of Christ, and hate the light because their works are
evil. And such it seems were the greatest part of them of Macedonia, in the
midst of who^ that small number of the faithful which were at Philippi, and
which by Paul's preaching had embraced the Gospel of Christ Jesus, lived. The
Apostle therefore applying the example of Christ his humility and obedience
unto them, exhorts them so to walk both before God, and with their brethren,
that they may be blameless, and pure, and the sons of God, that is, both
known to be the sons of God, by leading an holy and vncorrupt life amongst
the enemies of Christ and his truth, and continue so to be, notwithstanding the
corrupt conversation of the wicked among whom they live.

Here then is a third mark set down for us to shoot at, a third thing
whereunto we must bend our selves and our whole studies, even that it may be
known that we are the sons of God. Known, unto whom? Both unto our selves,
and unto others. Our labor and endeavor must be, that we may know our selves
to be the sons of God, and that others may also know that we are the sons
of God. 2 Pet. 1.10.
Give all diligence (says Peter) to make your calling and election sure. In
which words of the Apostle, ye see how carefully the Apostle would have us to
be employed in this study: he would have us to give all diligence hereunto,
that we may be sure that we are the sons of God, elect and chosen in Christ
Jesus before the foundation of the world. Our election it is according to the
good purposes of his will, who has predestined us unto eternal salvation.
Our adoption likewise into the sons of God through Jesus Christ, it is
according to the riches of his grace and favor toward us. And these things,
even our election, and adoption into the sons of God, are most sure in
themselves, neither can they by us any way be procured either to be if they be
not, or being, to be more sure than they be. For whom he has chosen and
adopted into sons, them he has chosen and adopted before the foundation of
the world, and his decree is beyond all degrees of comparison more unalterable
and unchangeable than are the laws of the Medes and Persians. Yet such are the
mercies of our God toward us, that howsoever we can help nothing unto our
election, or unto our adoption into the sons of God, yet may we know whether
we be elected, whether we be the sons of God, and besides we may give proof
thereof unto others. And hereunto it is that we ought to give all diligence,
and to bend our selves and our whole studies, that it may appear both unto our
selves, and unto others, that we are the sons of God. A study whereunto the
comfort which thence may arise may be a sufficient inducement unto any. For
wherein should we rather labor than in that wherein we may take the greatest
comfort? Or wherein can we take so great comfor as in this, that we know that
we are, and that it does appear unto others that we are the sons of God?
Herein alone is sound joy and comfort, and without this what can there be else
but restlesnesse of thoughts, and disquietnesse of mind?

Yea but you will ask me how this may appear either unto our selves or
others, that we are the sons of God? I answer out of the Apostles, even by
walking without rebuke in the midst of a naughty and crooked nation, by the
fruits of the spirit showing themselves in the holiness of our conversation:
Romans 8.14.
For as many as are lead by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God. Now
who are they that are lead by the spirit of God? Even they that by the power of
the spirit of sanctification mortify the deeds of the body, as there the
Apostle shows, and bring forth the fruits of the spirit. So then they which
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, flying from sin as from a
Serpent, and being zealous of good works, they have an infallible testimony
that they are the sons of God, and heirs of eternal life. Hereby then we
our selves know that we are the sons of God, even by the fruits of the
spirit, which he has given us. And therefore Peter in the place before
alleged, Give diligence to make your calling and election sure, immediately
adds, For if ye do these things, that is, if ye bring forth those fruits
mentioned before, ye shall never fall. Where the Apostles plainly shows, that
the way to confirm our election unto our selves, is by the fruits of the
spirit which he has given us. Hereby likewise we make it apparent unto others
that we are the sons of God, if we walk in those good works which God
has ordained us to walk in. And therefore our Savior Christ exhorts us,
saying, Let your light so shine before men, Mat. 5.16.
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
heaven, even him whose sons they shall know you to be by those good works
which they shall see you do. So that as the end wherefore we were
predestinate to be adopted into the sons of God through Jesus Christ, was
that we should be holy, and without blame before God in love; so the means
whereby we are declared both to our selves and others to be the sons of God,
is our holy conversation, and walking without rebuke in the midst of a
naughty and crooked nation. When therefore I say that we ought to give all
diligence that we may appear to be the sons of God, the meaning is, that we
ought to be holy in conversation, and without blame in the midst of a
naughty and crooked nation, that so it may appear that we are the sons of
God.

Yea, but here again it will be said, where is he that is holy in all manner
of conversation? And who is he that walks without rebuke amongst the sons
of men? And therefore how can it appear by the note of our sanctification that
we are the sons of God? I answer, that howsoever our sanctification here in
this life be so imperfect, that we cannot be holy in all manner of conversation,
or walk without rebuke amongst the sons of men, yet if we strive and labor,
if we study and endeavor to be holy without blame, and to walk as the sons
of God amongst the sons of men, hereby it does and may appear that we are
the sons of God. If we hate the sins of unfaithfulness, and let no such
clean unto us; if we suffer not sin to reign in our mortal bodies, but
strive to subdue the flesh unto the spirit; if we fly the corruptions which
are in the world through lusts, and study to live soberly, and righteously,
and godly in this present world; if we long and thirst after those things that
belong unto our peace, and can in the needful time of trouble come unto our
God, and cry, Abba Father, hereby it does and may appear that we are the
sons of God. The godly strife against sin, and careful desire of walking
in the ways of God without rebuke, they are the sure and undoubted stampes of
the spirit of our adoption into the sons of God, and the certain fruits of
that spirit whereby we are sealed until the redemption of the possession
purchased unto the praise of his glory. If thou desire further proof of these
things, look into the holy scriptures, and they shall instruct thee
sufficiently herein. Mat. 5.6.
Blessed (says our Savior Christ) are they that hunger and thirst after
righteousness. Where our Savior shows that not they alone which are
righteous, but they also which hunger and thirst after righteousness are
blessed, and consequently the sons of God. So we read that Abraham's
willingness to offer up his only begotten son Isaac for a burnt offering unto
the Lord, Genesis 22.12.
was accepted with God for as sure a proof of his faith and obedience, as if
he had offered him up indeed. Insomuch that in regard of his willingness
thereunto, the Apostles plainly say, that he did offer up Isaac when he was
t^ied. Heb. 1^.17. Iam. 2.21.
So little difference the Holy Ghost puts between the will and the deed,
when the will is inclined unto that which is good. 1 Chro. 28.2
The like may be said of David's willingness and desire to build a Temple unto
the Lord. He builded it not, yet his purpose and desire to have builded it was
accepted with God. And generally this is true, that the will and desire is
accepted with God as the deed: so that the will, and desire, and endeavor to
walk in the ways of God without rebuke, do plainly s^ew us to be the sons
of God, and are accepted with God as if we walked holy and without blame. The
like is to be said of striving against sin, that even the very striving
against sin does plainly show us to be the sons of God. For proof whereof
what need any other than that example of the blessed Apostle Paul, who has
registered such a dangerous fight in himse^fe between the flesh and the spirit,
that it made him cry out, O wretched man that I am, Rom 7.24.
who shall deliver me from the body of this death. And yet because in his
inner man, and in his spirit he delighted in the law of God, he adds
immediately in the next words following, 25.
I thank my God through Jesus Christ our Lord, to show that in the strife the
flesh took the foil, and he by the power of his Lord and Christ did stand.
The assaults of the flesh made him to cry, O wretched man etc. and the conquest
of the spirit made him to add, I thank God etc. Such a strife and fight the
blessed Apostle had in himself; and such a strife and fight all the children
of God have within themselves; and this striving in them is a witness unto them
that they are the sons of God. For to turn a little aside unto the sons of
Belial, and children of disobedience, what strife or fight at all is there in
them betwixt the flesh and the spirit? what denying of ungodliness and worldly
lusts? what care to subdue the flesh unto the spirit? what flying of the
corruptions which are in the world through lusts? what love of God or good men?
what desire to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world is in
them at all? Nay contrariwise they delight in unrighteousness, and sell
themselves to work wickedness, they commit sin even with greedines, and gladly
give their members servants to uncleanness and to iniquity to commit iniquity;
they hate to be reformed, and cast the word behind their backs; they refuse to
hearken to instruction, and stop their ears at the voice of the charmer charm
he never so wisely. And therefore the Apostles calls them a naughty and
crooked nation, because they quite pervert the straight ways of the Lord,
giving their members as weapons of unrighteousness unto sin, which should be
given as weapons of righteousness unto God. So far they from striving against
sin, and from a desire to walk holy and without blame. Only they that are the
sons of God feel this strife, and this desire within themselves, and this
very strife against sin, and desire to walk after the spirit without blame in
love shows plainly that we are the sons of God. Thus then ye see what should
be our study in the whole course of our life, to wit, as that we may be
blameless, and that we may be pure; so that we may be known to be the sons
of God even unto those amongst whom we live. Ye see likewise how this may be
known not unto others only but unto our selves, both unto our selves and
others, even by the spirit of sanctification, Romans 8 16.
which both witnesses unto our spirits that we are the sons of God, and
which by the fruits and effects which it works in us shows as much unto
others. And howsoever our sanctification here in this life be imperfect, yet ye
see that our very striving against sin, and our desire to be holy and without
rebuke plainly does and may show both unto our selves, and unto others that we
are the sons of God. Comfort then thy self, o thou afflicted soul whosoever
thou art, that so gronest under the burden of thy sins that thou want
this sweet comfort of thy soul. For tell me, do thou feel in thy self a
striving against sin; art thou touched with remorse and compunction of heart
for thy sins; do thou desire to lead a life according to Gods will, and
have thou a longing after this comfort that thou art the child of God?
Whatsoever be thine infirmities, how crimson-died so ever thy sins be,
whatsoever doubts else thou call, yet doubt not, thou art the son of God,
and unto thee belongs the inheritance of the sons of God. For it is the
spirit, even the spirit of sanctification that fills thy heart with good
desires, with desire to fly that which is evil, Phil. 1.6.
and with desire to do that which is good, and be that has begun this good
work in thee will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ, when thou shall
be crowned with glory and immortality in the highest heavens. As for the
wicked and ungodly of the earth which wallow in their wickedness, and make a
mock of piety and religion, which have not God in all their thoughts, nor make
mention of his name with their lips, unless it be to blaspheme and dishonor
his holy name, they have no part in this comfort, this rejoicing in the spirit
belongs not unto them. But for us, beloved, let us labor and strive to have
this comfort sealed unto our souls, that we are the sons of God, by our
striving against sin, and our careful endeavor to walk without rebuke. Yea
let us so look unto our steps and take heed unto our ways; let us so decline
the pleasures of sin, and delight our selves in the law of the Lord, that men
seeing the mortification of our earthly members, and the integrity of our
conversation may have nothing concerning us to speak evil of, but may say
that God is in you indeed, and so may glorify him in the day of visitation.

Yea but ye will say again unto me, how can we thus live? Is it not a naughty
and crooked nation, a froward and wicked people with whom we live? Can a man
touch pitch and not be defiled therewith? or walk amongst thorns and not be
pricked therewith? True: we live amongst wicked men whose hearts are set on
mischief, even as the Apostle here says, that the Philippians lived in the
midst of a naughty and crooked nation. Yet the Apostle ye see writes unto
them to walk so both before God, and with their neighbor that they might be
blameless and pure, and the sons of God without rebuke in the midst of a
naughty and crooked nation. Which teaches us thus much, that howsoever the
whole wolrd lies in wickedness, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Ioh. 5.19.
yet may we live in the world, and amongst the enemies of the light, as
children of the light, and as the sons of God, showing our selves to be so
even unto them by walking with all care to be without rebuke amongst them.
Otherwise no doubt the Apostle would have bid them to get out from amongst that
naughty and crooked people, that so being separated from them they might not be
defiled with their unclean conversation: whereas now he warns them so to
order their steps that they may be known to be the sons of God by walking
with all carefulnes to be without rebuke in the midst of a naught and crooked
nation. There is great danger indeed that we shall be defiled with pitch if we
touch it, and that we shall be pricked with thorns if we walk in the midst
of thorns. Proofs hereof there are too too many in all places. Joseph being
caught in the ways of God feared God no doubt: Genesis 42.15.
yet after that he had lived a while in Pharaohs Court he learned too readily
to swear by the life of Pharaoh. Number. 25.1.
So it is said that whiles Israel abode in Shittim, the people began to commit
whoredom with the daughters of Moab. And common experience teaches us that
there is nothing more pernicious and dangerous then is conuersing with the
wicked. For such commonly we are as they are with whom we converse: and this ye
shall always find to be most true, that sooner and oftener is he that is good
made worse by him that is bad, then he that is bad is bettered by him that is
good. Whereupon it is that so many caueats are every where given to beware of
the company and inticements of the wicked. Prou. 1.10, 11, 12, 13, 14
As where it is said in the Proverbs, My son if sinners do intise thee
consent thou not: if they say, come with us etc. And again, enter not into the
way of the wicked, Pro. 4.14, 15.
and walk not in the way of evil men: avoid it, and go not by it; turn
from it, and pass by. In both which places Solomon would have us to take heed
of the company and fellowship of the wicked, as a thing very dangerous. And
certainly so it is, and therefore great heed to be taken, lest by conuersing
with the wicked we be defiled with their unclean conversation. Our care
therefore must be that we may with the Prophet David protest, and say, I haunt
not with vain persons, Psalm. 26.4.5.
neither keep company with the dissemblers: I hate the assembly of the evil,
Psalm. 1.1.
and have no company with the wicked. For blessed is the man that does not
walk in the counsel of the wicked, nor stand in the way of sinners, nor sit
in the seat of the scornful. What then? Because the case so stands that
the whole world lies in wickedness, must we needs sever our selves from the
company of men, and either shut up our selves in some cloister, or get us into
the wilderness there to lead a solitary life? So some have thought, and so some
have done, pretending that cause that they might not be defiled with the
corruptions of the world. But this is a thing altogether needless, Genesis 19.1.
2 Pet. 2.8.
as the example of just Lot shows, the integrity of whose holy conversation
amongst the wicked Sodomites is registered both in the old and new Testament. If
it be so therefore that either through the general iniquity of the time, or
upon what reason else soever, we do converse and live in the midst of a
naughty and crooked nation, we see we may live in the amongst them without just
rebuke as the sons of God. Neither being thus seated amongst the wicked and
ungodly are we by and by to think of a cloister, or a wilderness to dwell
in, but rather we are to think of these precepts following.

Romans 12.2.
First, that we fashion not our selves like unto the world, that is, that we
grow not like unto the wicked of the world in life and manners, and so be
defiled by their unclean conversation. For whatsoever is in the world, as the
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, 1 Ioh. 2.16.
and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. We must not
therefore suffer our selves to be entangled with these things, we must not
walk in the paths of the wicked. 2. We must, by the example of just Lot, be
even vexed in our souls when we see and hear the unlawful and ungodly deeds
of the wicked. As also we read of David, 2 Pet. 2.8.
Psalm. 119. v. 158.136.
where he says, I saw the transgressors and was grieved, because they kept not
thy word. And again, Mine eyes gush out with rivers of water, because they
keep not thy law. And again, 53.139.
Fear is come upon me for the wicked that forsake thy law. And again, My
zeal has even consumed me, because mine enemies have forgotten thy word. All
which shows how we should be affected at the contempt, and at the ungodly
conversation of the wicked, it should even be a pain and grief unto us. 3. We
must after the example of Noah, that preacher of righteousness, admonish the
wicked of their ways, and warn them of the judgments of God against all
unrighteousness and ungodliness. For albeit they scorn admonition, and make a
mock of instruction, yet must we, as conveniently we may, put them in mind of
such things as belong unto their peace, and accompany salvation. 4. We must in
holiness of life, and integrity of conversation amongst them show our selves
to be the sons of God, that if it be possible our conversation may win them
to walk in the ways of Christ. So our Savior wills, saying, Let your light
so shine before men that they may see your good works, and glorify your
father which is in heaven. These I say are the precepts which if we follow, we
need not to think of cloister, or of desert, or of going out of the world,
but we may live with a pure conscience, and as the sons of God, be the sons
of men never so wicked amongst whom we live. This I say we may do. Howbeit I
do not hereby encourage any either to thrust himself into the company of the
wicked when he need not, or longer to stay amongst them then he should. But
this I exhort, especially that ye fashion not your selves like unto the wicked
of the world; and next that ye avoid the company of the wicked and ungodly.
At no hand suffer your selves to be defiled by their unclean conversation, and
if ye may keep your selves from their assemblies. In a word, study to be the
sons of God without rebuke in the midst of a naughty and crooked nation; and
the more wicked that they are with whom ye live, be ye the more careful of
your conversation, that it be such as becomes the sons of God, that thereby
they may be drawn, if it be possible, to glorify God in the day of
visitation, or at least they may have nothing concerning you to speak evil
of, always remembering that by grace and adoption we are severed from them to
be the sons of God.

Mat. 12.39. Deuteronomy. 32.5.
Lastly, hence I note what we are by nature before we be regenerate and borne
again by the spirit; We are even a naughty and crooked nation, as the Apostle
here speaks; an evil and adulterous generation, as our Savior speaks; a
froward and crooked generation, as Moses speaks; a faithless and stubborn
generation, as David speaks, a sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity,
Esa 1.4. Ephesians. 2.2.3. Romans 3.13. etc.
a seed of the wicked, corrupt children, as Esaias speaks, children of wrath,
and children of disobedience, as the Apostle speaks. Our thoughts wicked, our
will depraved, our understanding darkened, our throats open sepulchers, our
tongues full of deceit, etc. So vnpure that even our minds and consciences are
defiled, so untoward that we clean pervert the straight ways of the Lord,
and in stead of giving our members weapons of righteousness unto God, making
them weapons of unrighteousness unto sin, and in stead of serving God,
altogether yielding our selves servants unto sin. Most miserable and wretched
is our state, darkness without light, igno^rance without understanding,
foolishness without wisdom, before such time as all mists of darkness,
ignorance, and foolishness be expelled by the bright beams of Gods holy
Spirit, and we brought unto the glorious liberty of the sons of God. Yea and
such thou stand, as by nature thou art whosoever thou art that sleep in
sin, and delightest in unrighteousness, making no conscience of thy ways,
but treasuring unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and of the
declaration of the just judgment of God. But thou that fear God, and
walk in his ways consider from what bondage and into what freedom the Lord
has brought thee, how of a child of wrath, of death, and of hell he has
brought thee into the glorious liberty of the sons of God, and made thee an
Heir of everlasting glory, how he has sanctified thy corrupt will, and heart,
and understanding, how he has new molded thee, and framed thee, and renewed
thee, how he has begotten thee again, not by flesh and blood, but by the
immortal seed of his holy word: consider these things I say, and let them be
as goades and spurs unto thee to stir thee up as unto thankfulness to thy
God: so unto obedience to his will. Has he made thy darkness to be light?
walk not in the unfruitful works of darkness. Has he freed thee from the
bondage of sin? fly from sin as from a Serpent, and have nothing to do
with the stool of wickedness. Has he sanctified thy will, and all the powers
and faculties of thy soul? glorify thou thy God with all the powers and
faculties of thy soul. Has he washed and cleansed thee both in thy body and
in thy spirit? glorify thy God both in thy body and in thy spirit. So shall
the King have pleasure in thy beauty, so shall thou make true and right use of
thy natural corruption, and of thy regeneration by God his spirit, and so
shall thou show thy self to be the son of God without rebuke in the midst
of a naughty and crooked nation.

LECTVRE XXXVII.
PHILIP. 2. Verse 15. Among whom ye shine, as lights in the world, holding
forth the word of life.
AMong whom ye shine, etc.] In this last clause of the Apostles former reason
we have a notable commendation of the Philippians, which the Apostle so truly
gives unto them that withal in the wisdom of God given unto him he does
implie a duty, or an exhortation that they show themselves to be such as he
commends them to be: insomuch that some read these words thus, among whom do
ye shine, as lights etc. Their commendation ye see is, that they shine amongst
that naughty and crooked people with whom they live, even as lights which shine
in darkness, and which hold forth the word of life to give light to them that
sit in darkness: they are called lights, shining lights, lights shining in the
midst of a naughty and crooked nation, lights holding forth the word of life
unto others. The whole form of speech seems to be drawn from those high
places by the seacoast, whence continually lights and fires are set out for
the direction of seamen into the haven, and safest entrance. For even such the
Apostle here commends the Philippians to be, lights which shined in holiness
of life unto them that sat in darkness round about them, by the direction of
which their light they might come into the haven of everlasting rest, where
they might find rest for their souls. Now let us see what we may observe hence
for our use.

1. In that the Apostle calls the Philippians light, I note the singular
prerogative and honor of all the faithful members of Christ Jesus. For that
which the Apostle here gives to the Philippians, belongs to all the
faithful. All the faithful children of Christ are called lights, shining
lights, lights shining in the world. Now for our better instruction how they
are called lights, we are to understand that there are four special lights
mentioned in the holy Scriptures. The 1. is that light, Christ Jesus, the light
of the world, and the brightness of his father. This light by a principal
prerogative is called that light, that true light which lights every man that
comes into the world, that son of righteousness, that star of Jacob,
that day spring from an high, that brightness of his fathers person. 2. The
word of God in many places of the Scriptures is termed a light, as where it is
said, Thy word o Lord is a lantern unto my feet, Psalm. 119.105. 2 Pet. 1.19.
and a light unto my paths: As also where the godly are commended by the
Apostle Peter, for that they attend unto the sure word of the Prophets, as unto
a light that shines in a dark place. By this light the holy Ghost
illuminateth the blindness and darkness of our gross understandings, and
directs us in the ways of God which lead unto salvation. 3. The Apostles
and Ministers of Christ Jesus are called lights, as where our Savior says
unto them, ye are the light of the world. Mat. 5.14.
Which glorious title is given unto them, both because of that testimony which
they give unto that true light, the everlasting son of God Christ Jesus, and
because of the Gospel of Christ Jesus which they preach unto us. 4. All the
faithful members of Christ Jesus, all Christians are called lights: as where
the Apostle tells the Ephesians, that they were once darkness, Ephesians. 5.8.
but are now light in the Lord, and therefore exhorts them to walk as
chrildren of the light; and in this place of our Apostle, where they are called
lights in the world, shining among the sons of darkness, and holding forth
the word of life. Now the faithful are called lights in these respects: 1. In
respect of Christ Jesus that true light which lighteneth every man that comes
into the world, inasmuch as he has vouchsafed to communicate his light unto
us, and by the bright beams of his holy Spirit shining into our hearts to
expel thence the thick mists of blindness, darkness, and ignorance. For
whatsoever light the faithful have they have it from him, who has light in
himself, and of himself, and in whom is no darkness. They borrow their light
from him, even as the Moon, and the stars do borrow their light from the
Sun in the firmament. For he is the son of righteousness which springing
from an high has through the tender mercy of our God visited us, to give light
to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and to guide our
feet into the way of peace, and so far as this light shines unto them their
darkness is turned into light, and they are termed lights of that light which
they have from this son of righteousness. So that when the holy Ghost
calls the faithful, lights, he notes therein the fellowship which they
have with Christ Jesus, from whose most clear light they borrow their light.
2. The faithful are called lights in respect of the word, inasmuch as they
believe, and embrace, and profess the holy word of God which he has ordained
to be a lantern unto our feet, and a light unto our steps. For albeit it be
the son of righteousness alone, by the bright shining beams of whose holy
Spirit our darkness is turned into light, and we made lights in the world;
yet because we receive this light by the ministry of the word therefore both
the word itself is called light, and they likewise that receive the word with
gladness, and walk in the light thereof are called lights. For as much then
as the faithful profess the holy word of God, ordained to be the rule of our
life, and our direction in matters of religion, in respect of this profession
they are called lights. 3. They are called lights in respect of their life and
conversation, inasmuch as by the holiness of their life, and integrity of
their conversation they show themselves to be exempted and delivered from the
power of darkness. Both their works in respect of the unfruitful works of
darkness are called lights, and themselves glorifying God by these works are
called lights. Now see what instructions these things may minister unto us.

1. In that the faithful are called lights, not from any light in themselves
as of themselves, but from that light which they have and borrow from Christ
Jesus that son of righteousness, this may teach us what we are without
Christ Jesus, even darkness without light, men sitting in darkness and in the
shadow of death. For look into the best things that we have. Our reason what
is it but gross darkness? our wisdom what is it but mere foolishness? Our
understanding what is it but blind ignorance? for the natural man, 1. He on
whom this son of righteousness has not yet shined, perceives not, 1 Cor.
2.14.
nay he cannot perceive by all the reason, wisdom, and understanding that he
has, the things of the spirit of God. Ephesians. 5.8.
And therefore the Apostle writing to the Ephesians tells them thus, ye were
once darkness, to wit, before the son of righteousness had shined upon
them, but are now light in the world, now that the son of righteousness had
shined upon them their darkness was turned into light. Where he most plainly
shows what is the state of all men both before and after that the son of
righteousness have shined upon them: before, they are darkness, after they
are light. O what a good and gracious God then have we, who when we sat in
darkness, and in the shadow of death gave us this light, and so translated us
out of darkness into light. Not unto us o Lord, not unto us but unto thy name
give the praise, for that thou have called us out of darkness into thy
marvelous light. When we walked in darkness thou made us to see a great
light, and when we dwelled in the land of the shadow of death, thou did
cause the light to shine upon us. We were once darkness, but now we are light.
Blessed be thy name o Lord which have changed our darkness into light.

2. In that the faithful are called lights in respect of the word which they
profess, and in the light whereof they walk, this may teach us how precious
the holy word of God ought to be unto us. If walking after the direction of the
word we only walk in the light, then judge ye how we walk without the word.
Surely without it we walk in darkness, and know not whether we go, no more
then the blind or blind-folded man, who not discerning his way quickly
wandereth out of his right path, and walks into every by-path, and runs
himself upon every danger. For by the word alone we descry every by-path, we
see every danger that is to be avoided, and understand the glory that is
prepared for us at the end of our journey. And yet as if their we loved
darkness better then light, or else know not that by the ministry of the
word of darkness we are made light in the Lord, we care not for the word, we
regard it not, we let it pass as a tale that is told. A hard saying truly:
but yet as true as hard. For if we shall consider our great slacknesse in
coming, or our great negligence in hearing, or our great carelessness to lay
up in our hearts the things that we have heard, all these will witness what
account we make of the word, even no more then of a tale that is told.
Otherwise how should it be, which has been observed, that since this exercise
begun not half of that congregation which should be here present have been
assembled in this house of the Lord at any one Sermon. Again, a great
slacknesse in coming of those that do come, howsoever they may be observed
which either come too late, or depart too quickly from this holy exercise, yet
who knows how many depart hence as little edified and instructed as when they
came hither? A great negligence in hearing. Again, who is he that having heard
the word, does afterward think or meditate with himself of the things that he
has heard, and lays them up in his heart to make them the rule and direction
of his life? A great carelessness to make that use we should of that we have
heard. And what else do all these argue, but that we make no more account of
the word than of a tale that is told? Well, whatsoever account we make of it,
either we must walk in the light of this word, or else we cannot be such
lights as here the faithful members of Christ Jesus are said to be: either
this word must be a light unto our paths, or else we can be no light in the
Lord; either the Lord must go before us in this word, as in a pillar of fire,
or else we shall be made a prey unto our enemies, the world, the flesh, and
the devil, who seeks continually like a roaring Lion whom he may devour.

Thirdly, in that the faithful are called lights in respect of their holy life
and conversation, this may teach us what manner of conversation will best
become us if we will be lights in the world. The light of our holiness of
life and integrity of conversation must so shine before men, that they may see
our good works, and glorify our Father which is in heaven Ye were once
darkness (says the Apostle to the Ephesians) but are now light in the Lord;
Ephesians. 5.8.
walk as children of the light. In which words the Apostle plainly shows,
that being made lights, we ought to walk as children of the light, approving
that which is pleasing unto the Lord, having no fellowship with the unfruitful
works of darkness, but reproving them, if not by word, for that we cannot
all at all times do, yet at least by the example of our holy and unblameable
life. But of this we shall have more occasion anon to speak. Let this suffice
to be spoken generally why the faithful children of God are called lights, and
of the instructions which the reasons thereof may minister unto us.

Secondly, here I note two qualities attributed to these lights mentioned by
the Apostle: The first, they shine in the midst of darkness, in the midst
of a naughty and crooked nation: Secondly, they hold out unto others the light
that is in them, even the word of life, showing it self in the integrity of
their conversation. Whence I note two properties necessarily requisite in all
the faithful children of God: the one is, that they have light in themselves,
the other is, that they communicate it to others. Touching the first, light ye
know is not called light, unless it have light in it self, in whatsoever
darkness it shine. The faithful children of God then, if they will be, as
here they are called, lights, they must still so look unto themselves and
their own ways, that howsoever they walk amongst the children of darkness,
yet they suffer not that light which is in them to be darkened, but that they
shine as lights in the world amongst them whose hearts are set on mischief.
The Sun when it sets forth as a Giant to run his course, casts forth
his beams, and they are dispersed throughout all places of the earth. And
albeit often times it light and shine upon most loathsome and filthy places,
yet still does it remain in his own purity, not at all defiled therewith.
Herein these lights (I mean the faithful children of God) must resemble this
light of the Sun. It cannot be that they should not at all converse with
wicked and ungodly men, for then they must go out of the world, 1 Cor. 5.10.
as the Apostle says: but herein they must be as lights; though they live
amongst wicked and ungodly men, yet must they keep themselves unstained of the
corruptions which are in the world through lusts; though they have to do with
profane and impure men, yet must they retain still within themselves the
purity of the sons of God. And therefore the Apostle in the place before
alleged thus exhorts, Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness. He does not simply forbid all fellowship with the children of
darkness, but with the unfruitful works of darkness, such as are gluttony
and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, strife and envying, and the like:
with the filthiness of these and the like fruits of sin he would have us
not to defile our selves. For what fellowship (as says the Apostle) has light
with darkness? Surely no more than has righteousness with unrighteousness,
the believer with the Infidel, or Christ with Belial. If then we be such
lights as here the faithful children of God are termed, no question we hate
all fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness: and if we have
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, then we are no such
lights. A rule whereby ye may quickly try and examine whether ye have that
light in your selves which ye hear the faithful children of God should have
in themselves. Light where it is, expels all darkness. If then ye have the
light of the sons of God within your selves, ye have no delight in the
works of darkness. Now what the works of darkness are ye know out of the
Apostle, even gluttony and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, strife
and envying, and generally all the works of the flesh, even whatsoever things
are such as the doing whereof may not well abide the light. Examine your selves
of these things, and condemn your selves, that ye be not condemned of the
Lord. If any of you be tainted with any of these things, purge out this old
leaven, that ye may be a new lump; cleanse your vessels from these filthy
dregs, I mean, your selves from these pollutions of sin, that ye may be an
holy Temple unto the Lord. True it is, God alone is light without any
darkness, and there is no child of God whose light is not dimmed with some
darkness. But this is no ground for thee, that therefore thou may wallow in
wickedness and may delight thy self in the works of darkness. Thou if
thou will be the child of God, thou must come as near unto God as thou can:
as he is light without darkness, so thou must strive thereunto. And therefore
thou must strive to abandon all sin and wickedness, thou must be careful to
walk honestly as in the day, thou must approve in thine heart, and in thy
word, and in thy works, that which is pleasing to the Lord. And this if thou
do, whatsoever is wanting shall be imputed unto thee, and the light that is
in Christ Jesus shall be thine, and expel whatsoever darkness is in thee.
Suffer therefore the same words of exhortation that the Apostle uses to the
Ephesians, Ephesians. 4.17.
Walk not henceforth as others do, in vanity of their mind, etc. And again
with the same Apostle I say unto you, Romans 13.12.
The night is past, the day is at hand, let us therefore cast away the works
of darkness, etc. Have light in your selves, and communicate the light that is
in you unto others: which is the second quality mentioned here by the Apostle.

The second quality which I noted here in these lights, in the Philippians, is
that they held forth the word of life unto others. How? Not so much in word,
and talk, as that by the example of their life they gave plain proof that
the word of life dwelt in them plenteously. Whence I noted another quality
necessarily requisite in all the children of God, which is, that they have not
only light in themselves, but they also communicate the same unto others. The
children of God must not think it enough to keep themselves unspotted of the
world, but they must by word, and deed, and example of life, help to pull
others out of the fire. The Prophet describing the wicked man by certain
fruits of the flesh, amongst other things says he, When thou saw a thief,
Ps. 50.18.
thou runnest with him, and have been partaker with the adulterers. But the
faithful servant of God must not only be no such man as will run with others
unto mischief, but he must reprove the sins of unfaithfulness, either by
word, or at least by example of life, that either by word, or by example of
life he may reclaim the wicked from the wickedness of his ways. The Sun
(ye know) keeps not his light unto it self, but communicates it to the
benefit of all creatures under heaven. The Moon and the stars likewise,
which have their light from the Sun, do the like. The like also must the
sons of God do. That light which they have by their fellowship with Christ
Jesus the Sun of righteousness, whether it be the light of the knowledge of
Gods will revealed in his word, or the light of the spirit of sanctification,
all the light that is in them they must communicate to the benefit of their
brethren, doing good unto all, and turning many unto righteousness. And albeit
the Ministers of Christ, and dispensers of Gods holy mysteries, ought
especially to be such lights as now we speak of, holding out the word of life
unto others, and turning many unto righteousness, both by word, and by example
of life; yet we see that also all the faithful children of God ought to be
such lights, as having the word of life in them, show plainly that they have
it, in that the fruit thereof breaks forth in them, sometimes in word, and
always in example of life, unto the benefit of their brethren. The word of
life must be hid even in the hearts of all the sons of God, and it they must
hold out in holiness of life, and good example unto their brethren. Yea, what
so general? No exception of countrymen, of artificers, of simple women, of
poor laborers? Must all be lights holding forth the word of life? This surely
is rather for scholars, and Ministers, and learned men, whose employment is in
that study, and who make that their profession. Belike then the Apostle was
deceived: for by the Apostle it does plainly appear, that all the sons of
God should be lights holding forth the word of life: so that from the word of
life hid in their hearts, as from the root, should spring all the fruits of
that light which they should communicate unto the benefit of others. True it
is, that as one star differs from another in glory, so amongst the sons
of God, some are more clear and bright shining lights than others, some better
instructed and taught in the word of life than others: for some are ordained to
teach, some to be taught; some by hearing only, some both by hearing and
reading, grow up in the knowledge of the word of life. Yet still this is true,
that in all the sons of God there should be some measure of the knowledge of
the word of life whereof they should make show at least in holiness of their
life, and integrity of their conversation, whereby they might draw others unto
God. And as it should be, so it were to be wished it were. But so far are we
from holding out the word of life in holiness of life unto others, that by our
profaneness and wickedness a great many of us show plainly that the word of
life is not in us. How ready we are every one of us to run with another unto
mischief, to spend the time one with another in excess, and riot, and
unthriftiness, to deceive, oppress, wrong, revile, and shame one another if
we can, he sees little that sees not. Again, how slow we are to provoke
one another to godliness and good works, to draw one another out of the
snares of the devil, that we be not taken and holden therewith, to stir up
one another unto peace, and love, and meekness, and temperance, and patience,
and almsdeeds, and brotherly kindness, and other such like fruits of the
spirit, who sees not that sees ought? And if these things be so, how can we
think that the word of life is in us? Certainly where it is, it makes the man
of God so to abound in every good work, and so to hate every work of the
flesh, so to shine in himself, and likewise to give light unto others, that it
does easily appear that God is in him indeed. Take heed therefore lest the
light which seems to be in you be indeed darkness. Have light in your
selves, and communicate the light that is in you one with another. Hate the
sins of unfaithfulness, and the works of darkness, both in your selves, and
in others. Provoke one another to godliness, and to good works, and hold
forth the word of life in all holiness of life one unto another. Remember that
ye are lights; walk therefore as children of the light. It is a title wherein
the ministers of Christ Jesus do worthily glory, that they are the lights of
the world. Ye see that not they alone, but ye also are lights of the world,
if ye be the faithful children of God. Strive herein to be as near unto
thy God as thou can, that so thy light may shine, that there be no darkness
at all in thee: and make it a great part of thy study and delight by the light
that is in thee to bring others out of darkness into light. And let this
suffice to be spoken touching this honor given to the saints of God, that they
are called lights, and touching the qualities required in these lights, namely
that they have light in themselves, and that they communicate it unto others.

The last thing which I note in these words is the glorious title given unto
the word of God. The word of God, and the Gospel of Jesus Christ ye see is
here caled the word of life. So likewise Peter calls it when he says unto
Christ, Master, Ioh 6.68.
to whom shall we go? Thou have the words of eternal life. So likewise the
Angel calls it where having brought the Apostles out of prison, he says
unto them, Go your way, Act. 5.20.
and stand in the Temple, and speak to the people all the words of this life.
Now the reasons why the word of God and the Gospel of Christ Jesus is called
the word of life, are many: As first it is called the word of life, because by
it we are begotten and borne again unto a new life, even a spiritual life in
Christ Jesus, as the Apostle Peter witnesses, saying, 1 Pet. 1.23
Love one another with a pure heart fervently, being borne anew, not of mortal
seed, but of immortal, by the word of God. Secondly, it is called the word of
life, Romans 1.16. 2 Cor. 2.16.
because it is the power of God unto salvation unto all them that believe, and
the savor of life unto life in them that are saved, as witnesses the Apostle.
Thirdly, it is so called, because therein Christ which is our life, and who is
properly called the word of life, is preached and offered unto us, together
with all the benefits of his blessed death and passion. Lastly it is so called,
because it is the lantern unto our feet, and the light unto our steps, to
direct us in the right way that leads to eternal life and salvation. Here
must all other writings in the world whatsoever stand back. No word of life
but this: nay indeed no word but this; for no man's writing whatsoever was ever
called the word. Only the word of God that is the word, and that is the word of
life. I meddle not now with those other glorious titles given to the word in
holy Scriptures, as that it is called the word of God, the wholesome word of
truth, the Gospel of salvation, etc.

Even this, that it is called the word of life, may teach us how precious the
ministry and preaching thereof ought to be unto us, even more precious than
thousands of gold and silver, and as we desire to be saved in the day of
Christ, so should we thirst after these most sweet waters of life. But what
thirsting is there after them? They are brought unto us in conduits even unto
our doors, and yet we will scarce step out of our doors to drink of them:
nay we will sit in our doors, and in our houses, talking and sleeping, rather
than we will come into the house of God, and drink of these waters. Every
light excuse and every small business will serve to stay us from coming to
hear the word read and preached. I told you even now of our slacknesse in
coming, of our negligence in hearing, of our carelessness to meditate after we
have heard of the holy word of life. If I should add unto that complaint
another of profaning the Lords day, which should be wholly spent in hearing,
and reading, and meditating of the holy word of life, of profaning it, I say,
with dancing, and drinking, and playing at this or that game, or keeping this
or that unprofitable and unnecessary observation and custom, should I justly
be reproved? Yea but this ye do in the morning, or in the evening, not in
seruice-time of day: Yea but this ye do on the Lords day, which the Lord has
commanded to be kept holy, not only in seruice-time of day, but Remember (says
he) that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. He does not limit it to this or that
part of the day, but keep the day holy, by hearing, and reading, and
meditating in the holy word of life. Yea but this is too precise, and strait,
and savors too much of Puritanisme. Well, be it as it will, thou must either
be a Puritan in observation of the commandment, or else thou bring upon thy
self judgment. O consider this, men and brethren, what it is that we call
you unto. It is the word of life, by which you must be begotten unto eternal
life, or else you cannot be saved, by the direction and guidance whereof you
must enter into rest, or else you shall never find rest unto your souls.
David when he could not be present in the assembly of Gods people, to praise
his God, and hear his word, because of his persecutors, he thought the
sparrowes and the swallows happy, that might nestle themselves in the house of
God. Insomuch that he brake out, as Psalm. 42.1.2.84.1.2.3.4 10. Our case is not
as David's was: we may come. We should say therefore with David in another
place, I was glad, etc. Yea we should call one unto another, and say as it is
in Esaias, Come and let us go up, etc. Psalm. 122.1 Esa. 2.3. Col. 3.16.
Scrutamini Scripturas, etc. Ioh. 5.39. Let the word of Christ dwell in you
plenteously, etc. In a famine of bread ye need no exhortation to seek for
bread to refresh and sustain your bodies. Your souls far more precious than
your bodies; and your souls hunger-starued, and yet what care for your souls?
The sickness is most dangerous when it is least felt.

LECTVRE XXXVIII.
PHILIP. 2. verse 15, 16, 17, 18. That I may rejoice in the day of Christ that
I have not run in vain, nor labored in vain etc.
THus far of the former reason, and of the uses thence to be made by us
heretofore. Now follows the latter reason drawn from the Apostle himself in
these words, that I may reiojce in the day of Christ etc.

That I may rejoice etc.] This is the Apostle his latter reason whereby he
would enforce his former exhortations: and it is as if he had said; My beloved,
I exhort you that you make an end of your own salvation with fear and
trembling; and that ye do all things with your neighbors and brethren without
murmuring and reasonings: and these things I would have you to do as for your
own sakes, that ye may be blameless and pure etc; so for my sake also, that
I may rejoice etc. Yea, and if ye mark it, even in these words he would have
them to do as he has exhorted them both for his sake, and for their sakes
also. For he would have them to walk before God in all obedience with fear
and trembling, and with their neighbor in all love without murmuring etc. why?
that he may rejoice: that's for his own sake. But wherein does he desire to
rejoice? Even in their salvation, that he has not run in vain, nor labored
in vain amongst them, but that by his Ministry and Apostleship they are
gained unto Christ; That I may rejoice in the day of Christ etc. By the day of
Christ the Apostle means that day when God shall judge the secrets of all men
by Jesus Christ; that day of Christ his second coming unto judgment, when it
shall be rendered unto every man according to that he has done in his flesh be
it good or evil; as also in many other places of the new Testament. This day
is called sometimes the day of Gods wrath, sometimes the day of his appearing,
sometimes the day of judgment, sometimes the great day, sometimes that day,
sometimes the day of the Lord, sometimes the day of our Lord Jesus Christ,
sometimes the day of Christ. Now that day of Christ his second coming unto
judgment is therefore called the day of Christ, because in that day God shall
give all judgment unto him, and he shall descend from heaven with a shoute,
and with the voice of the Archangell, and with the trumpet of God, and all
shall appear before his judgment seat, and he shall separate the sheep from
the goats, and set the sheep on his right hand, and the goats on the left,
and shall say to the one, Come ye blessed of my Father; and to the other,
Depart from me ye cursed. Now the Apostle would have the Philippians so to
walk both before God and men, that in this day of Christ when he shall give to
every man according as his work shall be, he may rejoice: wherein? that he
has not run in vain etc,.i. that by his labors he has gained them unto
Christ. The manner of speech which the Apostle uses, seems to be borrowed
from them that run in a race, wherein though many run, and labor hard
toward the mark, yet one alone receives the price, and the rest run in
vain, and labor in vain, because they obtain not the pr^ce or the thing
which they run for. So the Apostle makes his account that in respect of them
he should be like unto those that run in vain and labor in vain, if having
labored to gain them unto Christ, they should not walk worthy of Christ.
This therefore in this place is the sum of the Apostle his desire, that the
Philippians would so walk worthy of Christ both before God, and with their
brethren, that in the day of Christ, when his labors in the Lord should not be
in vain he might rejoice that he had not spent his strength amongst them in
vain, but by his preaching of Christ Jesus unto them had gained them unto
Christ, who should then give both unto him and them the crown of salvation for
their glory. This is the sum, and the sense likewise of that which the
Apostle speaks in this place. Now let us see what use we may make hereof for
our selves.

Here then 1. I note that the salvation of Gods people is the joy and crown of
the faithful Minister of Christ in the day of Christ. This shall be his glory
in that day with his Christ, whose Minister he is, that he has gained many
unto Christ. And therefore this our Apostle in another place calls the
Philippians his joy and his crown; Phil. 4.1.
whereby he signifies both the present joy and comfort which he takes in
them, and the sure hope which he has that they shall be his joy and his crown
in the day of the Lord. To the like purpose he writes to the Thessalonians, 1
These. 2.19
saying, what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? are not even you in
the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? 20.
Yes ye are our glory and joy: when? not only now present, but in the
presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming. As plain to this purpose is
that in the last of Daniel, Dan. 12.3.
where he says, that they that turn many unto righteousness shall shine as
the stars for ever and ever; which no doubt is principally meant of the
Ministers of Christ Jesus. And if it shall be said in that day unto every good
and faithful servant, Mat. 25.21.
It is well done good servant and faithful, enter into thy masters joy; how
much more shall it be said so unto the faithful Minister of Christ Jesus? What
greater encouragements can there be unto the Ministers of Christ Jesus to make
them faithful and painful in their places, to make them labor with all
alacrity and cheerfulness to gain many unto Christ, to turn many unto
righteousness? O but there are many discouragements: For who more contemned,
who more disdained, who more hated, who more disgraced then the Ministers of
Christ Jesus? True it is, and it is the shame of our times, that they are
counted of many as the very of-scourings of the world; and the more faithful
that they are the more they are hated, and oftentimes the more persecuted. If
we sow cushions under all arme-holes; if we speak smoothing and fawning
words; if we cry peace, peace, all is well; if we meddle not with the sins of
the people, but only teach a truth in a generality, happily we shall please,
or not displease, but live in rest and quiet. But if we lift up our voices like
trumpets, and tell the house of Jacob their sins, and the house of Israel
their transgrassions; if we search, and cut up, and lance the sores of our
people; if we sharply reprove such and such sins whereof their own consciences
condemn them to be guilty, then they begin to hate us, to disgrace us, to
persecute us, to traduce us as cursed Chams, as seditious fellows, and
troublers of the State, and to speak all manner of evil sayings against us.
Herod, ye know, when he heard John did many things, Mar. 6.20. Mat. 14.10
and heard him gladly. But after that John had reproved him for his incest he
quickly lost his head. The Jews likewise heard Steven a great while answering
for himself: But when he began to come somewhat near unto them, and to touch
them to the quick, when he came upon them with, Act. 7.51.54.55.
Ye stiff-necked and of uncircumcised hearts and ears, ye have always
resisted the Holy Ghost etc. then it is said, that their hearts brast for
anger, and that they gnashed at him with their teeth, and quickly after stoned
him to death. I say not that it fares so at this day. For sin, God be
thanked, may be boldly rebuked without fear of such danger. But this we find
true by experience, that whose sore we touch his hatred most commonly we
purchase, and if we be but suspected in our reproves of sin to note such
and such men, we shall not want whatsoever they can say or do against us. Thus
render they unto us hatred for our good will, and when we strike at the root
of any sin, and wound only that we may heal; they tell us we only utter our
choler or malice, and that we might well enough find our selves other matter
then to note them in our Sermons. But this, as I said, is the shame of our
times, that the more faithful and painful they are the worse commonly they
are entreated. But herein we comfort our selves that our conscience bears us
witness in what singlenes of heart as before the Lord we do the work of our
ministry, and that howsoever now through their disgraces, and reproaches, and
contempts, and hatreds, and persecutions our rejoicing be diminished; yet our
rejoicing in the day of Christ shall no man take from us, but then they that
have believed, and they that have been converted from going astray out of the
right way by our ministry, shall be unto us the crown of our rejoicing. Then
for that we have laid out our talent to the best advantage we could, we shall
hear that voice, It is well done good servant and faithful, and then those
that hated us without cause, and disgraced us without our desert, shall not
dare to hold up their heads against us, but shall be confounded in that day. In
the mean time, if when we have sown the seed of Gods word many sharp
showers do follow, and many black tempests overtake one another, yet must we
with the husbandman patiently expect the time of harvest; we must in patience
possess our souls until the day of Christ, and then we shall rejoice in the
presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming, when we and they whom we have
gained unto Christ shall meet him in the clouds, that we may be ever with the
Lord. For they whom we have gained unto Christ shall be the crown of our
rejoicing in that day.

Yea but what if when we have labored either we see no fruits of our labors
in them that hear us, or that fruit which seemed to shoot forth in the blade
do afterward fall away and wither, 2 Timothy 1.15
as the Apostle complains that they of Asia were turned from him, does the
glory of the Minister in that day depend upon the salvation of them that hear
him? Does he run in vain, and labor in vain, if he gain not them unto
Christ? Certainly of this I am persuaded that the more souls they gain unto
Christ, the more glorious shall be their crown of rejoicing. And therefore the
Apostles glory, no doubt shall be exceeding glorious, by whose labors so many
Churches were planted, so many souls were brought unto the faith. Yet his
glory in that day does not wholly depend upon the salvation of them that hear
him. The using of his talent faithfully shall be accounted unto him as gaining
with it. Neither is his running and his laboring in vain in respect of
himself, but only in respect of them whose hearts the Lord does not open that
they should hear, and believe, and be saved: as it is plain out of Esaias,
where Christ in his members thus complains, I have labored in vain, I have
spent my strength in vain, Esaias 49.4.
and for nothing: but my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God:
though Israel be not gathered, 5.
yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my
strength. By which words it is out of all doubt cleared, that howsoever the
Ministers labor be often in vain, howsoever his strength be often spent in
vain in respect of them that hear him, because thereby their hearts are not
mollified, and they brought unto the obedience of the faith, yet for themselves
their judgment is with the Lord, and their work with their God. Though they
that hear them be of such uncircumcised hearts and ears that they cannot be
gained unto Christ, yet shall they be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and
their God shall be their strength. To the like purpose is that in Ezechiel,
where the Lord instructing the Minister, and watchman of the house of Israel in
his duty, he says, EZec. 3.17.19.21
Son of man I have made thee a watchman etc. if thou warn the wicked, and he
turn not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall die in his
iniquity, but thou have delivered thy soul etc. What is then the Ministers
duty? To warn the wicked: and his duty is to turn from the wickedness of
his ways. If the Minister warn, his labor is not in vain in the Lord, he
delivers his own soul: but if the wicked being warned turn not from the
wickedness of his ways, he dies in his iniquity; so that his Minister in
respect of him has run in vain, and labored in vain, because he has not
reclaimed him from the wickedness of his ways.

Here then is a notable advertisement for them that are hearers of the word, to
take heed that their watchman which is set over them spend not his strength in
vain, and for nothing amongst them. The Minister, ye hear, he runs, he
labors, he sweates, he is still playing his prizes, still trying his
maisteries, still plowing up the fallow ground of your hearts, in every season,
yea in season and out of season sowing the immortal seed of the word, always
on his watch tower in cold and in heat, giving warning of every enemy which
he does descry. Happily ye have another conceit of the Ministers labor, at
least many have, that it is no such continual labor, that there is no such
care or pains therein as is pretended. Well whatsoever account ye make of the
labor, therein he spends his strength, and oftentimes his blood. It is for you
to look unto it that he spend not his strength in vain. If he teach you the
ways of the Lord, and ye receive not instruction, if he reprove such sins
as break out amongst you, and ye hate to be reformed, if he call to fasting,
weeping, and mourning, and ye fall to eating, drinking, and dancing; if he
exhort you to study to be blameless, and pure, and the sons of God in the
midst of a naughty and crooked nation, and to shine amongst them as lights,
holding forth the word of life, and ye give your members servants to
uncleanness, and to iniquity, to commit iniquity; in a word, if he out of the
word either teach, or improve, or correct, or instruct in righteousness, and
ye refuse to hearken to the voice of the charmer charm he never so wisely,
what else does he in respect of you but run in vain, and labor in vain?
And if he spend his strength in vain amongst you, his work is with his God;
but your blood is upon your own head, ye die in your sins, but his soul is
delivered. The minister his desire is to rejoice in the day of Christ, but
wherein? in your salvation. If in that day he shall not rejoice in your
salvation, what do ye think will be your portion? His desire is not to run
in vain, nor to labor in vain: but it is in respect of you, that he may
gain you unto Christ. For he knows that his labor is not in vain in the
Lord. Hearken therefore and obey, and harden not your hearts as in the
provocation, and as in the day of tentation in the wilderness. If thou
hearken, thou shall be the crown of his rejoicing, and the crown of his
rejoicing is in thy salvation. And in any case take heed that thou judge not
amiss of him that is set over thee in the Lord, to admonish thee of thy w^^es.
For whatsoever it is wherein he either teaches, or improueth, or corrects,
or instructs thee it is that he may rejoice in the day of Christ, that he
has not run in vain, nor labored in vain. And this much of this later
reason to enforce the former exhortations.

Yea and though I be offered etc.] The Apostle as ye have heard urged the
Philippians that they would walk in all obedience with God, and in all
meekness with their brethren, even the rather for his sake that he might
rejoice over them in the day of Christ. Now the better to enforce this reason
drawn from himself, in these words he assures them that such is his longing
after their salvation, that if by his death they might be confirmed and
strengthened in the faith, he would most willingly and joyfully give his life
for them, and if he shall do so, he would not have them to be sorry, but to be
glad and rejoice thereat. The manner of speech here used is drawn from the
sacrifices of the old law, wherein the Priests were commanded after their
coming into the land of Canaan, Number. 15 7
always to pour out a drink offering upon the sacrifice that was offered.
The Apostle therefore alluding hereunto says, that if his soul should now be
poured out as a drink offering upon that spiritual sacrifice of their faith,
which by his ministry and Apostleship they had embraced for their farther
confirmation and strengthening therein, he would be glad, and rejoice with them
for that their faith by his death were strengthened.

Here then we may observe how zealous the Pastor ought to be of the salvation
of his flock, he ought with Saint Paul in this place to be willing to give up
his life for them. Joh. 10.11.
The good shepherd, says our Savior, gives his life for his sheep. Christ
himself was indeed this good shepherd here spoken of, who when we were yet
sinners died for us. But herein likewise he set before us a pattern, how we
should approve our selves to be good shepherds. Nothing should be so dear
unto us as the good of them over whom the Lord made us overseers, persecution
and banishment, stripes and imprisonments, yea the loss of life it self must
rather be endured then their salvation be neglected. What then? are we simply
to give up our lives for our flocks: What if they be such as will be glad
thereat, and rather then fail will themselves persecute us, yea and take our
lives from us? Such sheep indeed there are as persecute their shepherd, and
desire if they can to make him weary of his life. But this is that which now
from our Apostle we teach, that if our death may be for the enlarging of
Christ his kingdom, and for the confirmation and increase of their faith unto
whom we have preached the Gospel, then we are not to love our lives unto the
death. What then? because our death may be for the confirmation of their faith,
are we to offer our selves unto death? Nay we may not seek death, nor
willingly run our selves into danger. But if the will of the Lord be such
that by our blood we seal that testimony which we have given to Christ Jesus,
and so confirm our brethren in the things that they have heard and learned by
our ministry, we are not to shrink at it, but willingly to embrace it. Yea
but the cup of death is bitter, how then can we be glad and rejoice in it.
True, happily we should not greatly rejoice in that violent and untimely death
being considered in it self. But knowing that our blood is the seed of the
Church, and that by our death and persecution many are made more bold to
profess the Gospel of Christ Jesus, we should be glad and rejoice in the
fruit that we know comes to the Church by our death and persecution. And thus
our Savior by precept has taught us to do saying, Mat. 5.11.12. Act. 5.41.
Blessed are ye when men revile you, and persecute you etc. rejoice and be
glad, for great is your reward in heaven. Thus the Apostles likewise have
taught us by example, who when they had bin cast in prison, and afterward
beaten, departed rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for
Christ his name. As they by precept and example have taught us, so ought we to
rejoice in tribulations and persecutions, and to be glad though we be offered
up upon the sacrifice of their faith who by our ministry have believed.

Should then the salvation of your souls, and the confirmation of your faith
be so dear unto us, even dearer then our own lives? How ought ye then to be
affected toward us, and our ministry? It was a notable testimony that the
Apostle gave unto the Galathians, Gal. 4.15.
wherein he bore them record that if it had been possible they would have
plucked out their own eyes, and have given them to him. Nothing more dear then
their eyes, and yet so near had their souls been knit unto him in reverence
and love for the Gospells sake, that they would have given him their very eyes
to have done him good. Shall I say that ye ought to be thus affected toward
us? I say not so: but I say that ye ought so to think of us, as of the
ministers of Christ, and disposers of the secrets of God. Ye ought to think
of us as of the Ambassadors for Christ, and that we pray you in Christ's stead,
as though God did beseech you through us. In a word, if we ought to lay down
our lives for our sheep, our sheep ought to hear our voice. And certainly
if we were so lively and Christianly touched with a feeling of the sweetness of
the word of life as we should be, if the powerfulness thereof had so seasoned
and seized upon our souls as it ought, then would we hear his voice, and obey
him, and follow him, we would reverence and regard him for the truths sake
which he preaches. It is said of Lydia, that when she had heard Paul preach,
and the Lord had so opened her heart that she believed the things that Paul
spak, she was so desirous that Paul and those that were with him should come
into her house, and abide a while with her, that she never left them till she
had constrained them; Act. 16.15.
If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord says she, come into mine
house, and abide there, and she constrained us says Luke. It seems besides
other purposes which she had, that she thought her house would be the better
if she might get them into it. Not many Lydiaes. I wish we might have such
hearers, as Peter had, that when they had heard us would be pricked in their
hearts, and say unto us, men and brethren what shall we do? Act. 2.37.
such as would be so careful to hear what we speak that they would lay the
same up in their hearts, and digest it in their souls. Our desire is as I said
ere while, that our labor in the word may not be unto you in vain, but that
by our ministry we may offer you up as living sacrifices, holy, and acceptable
unto God. If we ought not to spare our lives unto the death for you, ye ought
so to hear the word of us that ye grow up in faith, and love, and every good
work. If we ought to pour out our blood for an offering for you, for the
confirming of your faith, ye ought first by faith through our ministry to be
made a spiritual sacrifice unto God, that so our souls may be poured out as a
drink offering upon the sacrifice of your faith. For both these are implied
here in our Apostle. We hear what Pastor and people should do: and we see
in daily experience what they do, even both so little answerably unto that
they should do, that it may be as truly now said, as it was in the Prophets
time, like Pastor, like people. But I will not now stand farther to open and
cut up these soars. Consider only in a (...) me, I beseech you, a reason which
me ^hinkes may be gathered from these words for the stirring up of both Pastor
and people unto that they should do.

If ye mark it, both the obedience of their faith which are gained unto Christ
by the ministry of the word, and likewise the martyrdom and death of those
that give their lives for their sheep, are by a borrowed speech called
sacrifices and offerings. Though I be offered, there the Apostle his death is
called an offering: upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, their faith,
whereunto by his service and ministry they had obeyed, is called a sacrifice.
Now what sacrifices be these? These be the sacrifices of the new Testament:
these be lively sacrifices and holy, and acceptable unto God: and these
together with the sacrifice of praise, and of the works of love are the only
sacrifices which now Christians are to offer unto their God. An end of all
other sacrifices was then when Christ cried upon the cross, it is finished.
These only remain, and these are our reasonable serving of God. How should
not this stir up both Pastor and people to do that they should? In the
Pastor his burning zeal to give his life for his people, in the people their
obedience of faith by the ministry of their Pastors, are their holy and
Christian sacrifices, and their reasonable serving of God. And these sacrifices
are now no less to be offered by us in the new Testament, then were those
sacrifices of beasts and other like things to be offered in the old Testament,
and surely are far more acceptable unto God then were they. But I promised
only to speak of this in a word. Now a word likewise of that that follows.

For the same cause etc.] In these words the Apostle armeth them against sorrow
if he should be offered up upon the sacrifice of their faith. As he would be
glad and rejoice with them if their faith should be confirmed by his death, so
he would have them likewise to be glad and rejoice with him if he by his
blood should seal the testimony of their faith. What then? must we be glad and
rejoice when our best Pastors and teachers are taken from us? Did not the
Church well, when Steven was stoned to death, Act. 8.2.
to make great lamentation for him? Yes no doubt they did well: and whenever
the Church is deprived of any worthy member, especially of any worthy Pastor
and Teacher, there is just cause of great sorrow. And the Apostle allows a
moderation in lamenting for the dead, so that we sorrow not as they that have
no hope. 1 These. 4.13.
And it was a part of Iehoiakims plague that he should be buried like an Ass,
and none to make lamentation for him. The meaning then is not, that we should
rejoice and be glad, and not mourn simply at the death of our best Pastors and
Teachers, but that we should be glad and rejoice at the fruit which comes to
the Church by their death, if they suffer martyrdom for the confirmation of the
brethrens faith. For seeing their constancy and their cheerfulness to seal
that truth with their blood which they taught and preached, this should both
make us rejoice that God gives such strength unto his Saints, and likewise
confirm us in the faith of Jesus Christ, and further animate us patiently to
endure whatsoever tribulations for Christ his sake. The Apostle himself would
not, no doubt, rejoice simply in his suffering and death, but in that only
thereby God should be glorified, and Gods children strengthened. So we are to
rejoice not simply that our Pastors and Teachers are taken by the hands of
Tyrants, and racked, and martyred, but in that God vouchsafes thus to conform
them to the image of his son, and to make their blood the seed of the
Church, so that thereby both the faith of them that are already in the Church
is confirmed, and others likewise are brought unto the faith. Here only we are
to look to this caveat, that we do not judge of a martyr only by his
suffering, but further by the cause of his suffering. For not the suffering,
but the cause of his suffering makes him a Martyr. If he suffer death for the
testimony of Christ Jesus his death is well called a martyrdom. And in his
death we are so to rejoice as already ye have heard. Thus far of the reasons
enforcing obedience to those exhortations which the Apostle infers upon the
example of Christ his humility and obedience, which the Apostle laid as a most
strong and sure ground of his exhortation unto humbleness and lowlines of
mind.

LECTVRE XXXIX.
PHILIP. 2. Verse 19.20. And I trust in the Lord Jesus to send Timotheus
shortly unto you, that I also may be of good comfort, when I know your state
etc.
AND I hope in the Lord Iesus] In this latter part of this Chapter the Apostle
his desire is to comfort the Philippians, and indeed to confirm them that they
should not be troubled though they lived in the midst of a naughty and
crooked nation, as it appears they did ex verse. 15. but that they should grow
forward from grace unto grace that when he should hear of them, he might
hear of them to his comfort. To comfort them therefore he 1. promises to send
Timothy unto them, a man whom themselves knew to be a faithful minister of
Christ Jesus, and to love them sincerely. 2. He puts them in hope of his
own coming shortly after unto them. 3. He tells them that now he sends
their faithful minister Epaphroditus unto them, and the causes why. By all
which things as the Philippians were justly to be comforted, so were they so
many caueats to warn them that neither Timothy, nor he, nor Epaphroditus
might find any cause of grief, or discomfort amongst them when they should
come unto them. In his promise to send Timothy unto them, I note, 1. his
promise to send him; 2. the reason why he sent him rather then any other. In
his promise 1. I note the holy limitation thereof. 2. The promise. 3. The end
of sending him.

Touching the 1. Paul does not absolutely promise to send Timothy unto them,
but, says he, I hope in the Lord Jesus etc. It is to be understood that at
this time when the Apostle wrote these things, he was in prison at Rome, where
Timothy ministered unto him, and served him in such things as he needed. Now it
seems he was in hope shortly to be delivered out of prison, and then his
certain resolution was first to send Timothy unto them, and then shortly after
himself to come unto them. But how the Lord would dispose of these things he
knew not. Only he knew that the heart of Nero who had cast him in prison was
in the hand of the Lord Jesus to dispose of as seemed best to his godly
wisdom, and so he loved them that he hoped the Lord Jesus would deliver him
out of prison, and bring him unto them. Because therefore he knew not
certainly how it would please the Lord to dispose of these things, he does
not absolutely promise to send Timothy unto them, but inasmuch as his love to
them made him to hope the best, he says, I hope in the Lord Jesus etc.

The lesson which hence we have to learn is this, in all things whatsoever we
purpose to do still to depend upon the will and pleasure of the Lord Jesus;
not resolutely to set down this or that will I do, but with these or the like
conditions and limitations, I hope in the Lord Jesus to do it, if God will I
will do it etc. For as in God alone we live, and move, and have our being, so
he alone directs all our ways, and orders all our counsels as seems best
unto his godly wisdom. We may purpose, and we may intend such and such things
as come into our heads, or our occasions lead us unto, but neither lies it in
us to bring the things to pass, neither do we know what shall be the event
of such things as we purpose. It is God that by his special providence does
direct the event of whatsoever we purpose even as it best pleases him. This is
plain by diverse places of scripture which might be alleged to this purpose.
The heart of man purposes his way, Pro. 16.9.
says Solomon but the Lord directs his steps. His steps. What is that? even
all men's actions and whatsoever he takes in hand are governed by God, and
directed as seems best unto him. Again, it is an other proverb of Solomon;
Pro. 20.24.
The steps of man are ruled by the Lord, how can a man then understand his own
way: the meaning is that whatsoever a man does it is wholly and only guided and
ruled by God his almighty power and providence, so that he cannot possibly
understand certainly the issues of his own thoughts and purposes. And
therefore the Prophet Jeremy thus confesses unto the Lord and says, O Lord I
know that the way of man is not in himself, Jer. 10 23.
neither is it in man to walk and direct his steps. Which the Prophet spoke
upon occasion of Nebuchadnezzars turning his power to go against Jerusalem
because of Zedekiaes rebellion; when at his first setting forth from home he
had purposed to have made war against the Moabites and Ammonites. Such is the
power of the Lord to turn the purposes and devises of man's heart which way it
seems best unto him, so that whatsoever his purpose be, yet can he not tell
what shall be the issue thereof. Nay if we look a little farther into the
matter we shall find, that howsoever it seems unto man that it is in
himself to purpose and devise what himself lists, yet can he not devise or
purpose any thing that is good, unless God by his grace preventing him put
them in his heart; according to that it is said, It is God which works in us
both the will, and the deed, even of his good pleasure. And therefore that
place mentioned before, The heart of man purposes his way; and that in the
beginning of the same chapter, The preparations of the heart are in man etc,
they are to be understood only by way of concession, as if Solomon had thus
said; Be it that man has innumerable thoughts in his heart, be it that in his
head he devise this and that, as if it were in himself to purpose and devise
what he would, which is not, yet the answer of the tongue is of the Lord, says
Solomon. The meaning of the whole indeed is this, that both the thoughts of
man's heart, and the words of man's mouth are wholly guided and governed by the
Lord. Not only then the success and event of whatsoever we purpose, but both
the purposes of our hearts, by grace preventing us, and likewise the issues
thereof by grace following us are wholly governed of the Lord. He in his
special providence orders and disposes all things as seems best unto him.
We are therefore to learn wholly to depend upon him in whose hand are our
hearts and all our ways; and whatsoever it be that we purpose to do, we are
not resolutely to set down this or that will I do, as if our own ways were
in our own hands, but still with submission unto the Lord, I hope in the Lord
Jesus, and, if the Lord will. It was the Apostle James his complaint, that men
too much presuming of themselves would set down and say, Iam. 4.13.
We will go to day or to morrow into such a City, or such a City, we will
continue there so long and so long, we will buy and sell such and such wares,
and we will make such and such gain. And I wish it might not justly be
complained of at this day, that we do too too resolutely break out into such
speeches as these mentioned by the Apostle, and other such like. Well, that
which the Apostle laid down for a rule unto them, ought also to be a rule unto
us: we ought to say in all such cases, if the Lord will we will do this or
that: or as our Apostle says in this place, I hope in the Lord Jesus to do
this or that. This form of speech best beseems Christians, and using this
form of speech we show plainly whatsoever it is we go about, or purpose to
do, that we depend wholly upon the Lord his pleasure for the success and issue
thereof, and acknowledge that only what he will shall be done therein. Howbeit
I do not urge this form of speech as so precisely necessary that I put any
religion therein, or condemn the omitting thereof as profane and wicked. For
I know that many godly men who gladly acknowledge that truth which I have
taught, and likewise that many of the saints and servants of God even in the
holy scriptures have not used this form of speech always upon such occasions.
Yet could I wish, and would exhort even all the children of God upon all such
occasions even precisely to observe this form of speech: and that with such
reverence and holy fear, as that thereby they would plainly show that indeed
they do not forget themselves, but know that it is the Lord that orders them
and all their ways even as it best pleases him, and what success he gives
to their purposes that they shall have, whether it be to prosper them, or to
overthrow them. I add this of observing this form of speech with reverence
and holy fear, because it so falls out, I know not how, that oftentimes we
use good forms of speech, when as notwithstanding our thoughts are little set,
at least not so reverently as they ought, upon that we say. For example, what
more common then when we have sworn to say, God forgive me that I swear; when
we have done such an evil thing, to say, God I cry thee mercy what meant I to
do that; and in this that we now speak of, when we mean to do such a thing
to say, I Will do it, and God will. Speeches commonly used, and oftentimes, I
doubt not, very well used; but oftentimes in such an idle and only customarie
manner that therein we greatly offend, because thinking not what we speak, we
speak not with that reverence we ought to speak. And indeed it is a plain
breach of the third commandment, wherein we are forbidden to take the name of
the Lord in vain: for so often is this holy name taken in vain, as it is used
without great reverence and fear. To conclude this point therefore, let us
learn in all things whatsoever we do, or purpose to do, still to depend upon
the will and pleasure of the Lord; let us by the very form of speech which we
use show that we do so, saying with our Apostle, I hope in the Lord Jesus to
do such a thing; or with James, If God will and give leave I will do such a
thing; and these words let us use with all reverence and holy fear, as
speaking from our heart that which proceeds out of our lips. Thus much of the
limitation of the promise. The promise follows.

To send Timotheus shortly unto you] This was the Apostle his promise to send
Timothy unto them. Who Timotheus was appears out of Act. 16.1. His mother a
Iewesse, his father a Grecian, a man famously known and much renowned by
reason of those two Epistles which Paul wrote unto him; whom Paul sometimes
calls his companion, sometimes a minister of God, sometimes his brother and
fellow-helper in the Gospel of Christ, sometimes his beloved son, sometimes
his natural son in the faith. The Apostle therefore knowing that the
Philippians lived in the midst of a naughty and crooked nation, and being
advertised by Epaphroditus their Minister that they were troubled with certain
false Apostles which gloried in their Circumcision, promises for their comfort
to send Timothy unto them.

And this commends unto us the godly care that ought to be in the Minister of
Jesus Christ toward his people to comfort them in all their distresses. The
same care that Paul had to comfort them by sending a faithful Minister unto
them, the same ought now the Minister of Christ to have to comfort his people
by the ministry of the word. We are not now to send others: we have now our
standings appointed unto us, and therein we are to labor to be such comfort
unto our people by the ministry of the word, as Paul purposed that Timothy
should be unto them. Yet how it falls out I know not, but so it is, though we
be neither Apostles, but tied unto our several charges, nor lie in prison that
we cannot come our selves, but live at ease in other places following our own
pleasures, yet will we, as Paul here did unto them, send unto our people, not
Timotheus, but such as are not at all able to minister a word in due season.
But I only touch this, this place of scripture as me thinks, urging me
thereunto, the enlarging of the point being more fit for other places then this.

The end wherefore he sent Timothy unto them was, as here he says, that he
might be comforted when he knew their estate. In that he says, that I also may
be of good comfort, this does plainly show that which I noted before in the
promise, that the Apostle meant to send Timothy unto them that they might be
comforted by his ministry. For so he says, I trust etc. to send etc. that I
also may be of good comfort,.i. that as you shall be comforted by his coming
to you and his ministry among you, so I likewise may be comforted when at his
returning from you he shall tell me your state, that you stand in the faith,
and in the fellowship which ye have with other Churches in the Gospel of
Christ Jesus.

Here then we may observe a note of true Christianity, and sincere love, which
is to be so mutually careful one for an other that we rejoice one in another
good, and that we be sorry one at another misery. A thing whereunto if either
precept, or example, or nature may stir us up we cannot want encitements
thereunto. To. 12.15.
Rejoice (says the Apostle) with them that rejoice, and weep with them that
weep. Where (ye see) the Apostle his rule and precept is, that we be so
mutually affectioned one unto another, that the joy of one may be the joy of
another, and the grief of one may be the grief of another, being so knit
together with the bond of Christianity that both we rejoice, and likewise
weep together. Now see the practice of this rule in the Apostle himself: For
as touching rejoicing, does he not in the beginning of all his Epistles almost
testify his comfort and rejoicing in all those Churches for that they
continued in the faith, and rejoiced in the Gospel of Christ? How often does
he begin his Epistle with this and the like saying, I thank my God always on
your behalf for the grace of God which is given you in Christ Jesus etc? All
his Epistles to the Churches, save that to the Galatians have this or the like
beginning. Whereby he signifies his rejoicing in their joy in the Holy Ghost.
Likewise touching weeping and sorrowing at the griefs of others, he says, Who
is weak, 2 Cor. 11.29.
and I am not weak; who is offended, and I burn not? As if he should have
said, such is my care of all the Churches, and so is my soul knit unto them,
that the things that happen unto them I count to happen unto my self; so that
as their joy is my joy, so their weakness is my weakness, their scandal is
my scandal, and their grief is my grief. What should I bring other examples
to this purpose? Does not even nature teach this mutual care one of another,
and this mutual affection one toward another? In the members of our body, 1
Cor. 12.26.
if one member suffer, do not all the members suffer with it, and if one
member be had in honor, do not all the members rejoice with it? Let but the toe
be pricked, head and hands, and all bow down to it to help it, and are
grieved with it. Let the hungry belly be satisfied, all the rest of the members
are refreshed and cheared therewithal. And as it is in the members of the
natural body, so should it be in the members of the mystical body. All we
(my brethren) are baptized by one spirit into one body. We are all members of
Christ Jesus, and every one another members, if we be indeed the sons of
God. We should therefore be so affectioned one toward another, as both the
precept of the Apostle, and the example of the Apostle, both here, and often
else where, and as nature it self does teach us. We should be so mutually
careful one of another, that we should be comforted one in another comfort,
and grieved one in another grief. Our joy should be the joy one of another,
our sorrow should be the sorrow one of another, and our affections should be
mutual one toward another. But look generally into the Church, do we take
comfort in the state of such Churches as we ought to be comforted in? and
again are we grieved for the state of other Churches which we ought to be
grieved for? Nay I fear me that the state of such Churches as should comfort
us does grieve us, and that we are not grieved for the state of other Churches
which should grieve us. Look particularly into our selves, is it a comfort
unto us when we know of the good state one of another; and is it a grief unto
us when we hear of the decayed state one of another? Nay commonly we repine
when we see the state of others better then our own either in wealth, or in
honor, or in favor, or the like: and commonly we are glad when we see another,
especially if he be of the same trade and profession with us, go down the
wind, as we say. We joy not one in the joy of another, we grieve not one in
the grief of another: but contrariwise we rather joy one in the grief of
another, and grieve one in the joy of another. Well, such rejoicing, and such
grieuing are not good. Let us, even so many as fear God, be otherwise affected
one toward another. Let us take comfort in the good one of another, in the
growing up in wealth, in honor, in favor, in knowledge, in wisdom, and in
every good grace of the spirit one of another; and let us be grieved in the
misery, in the penury, in the trouble, in the sorrow, in the ignorance, in the
badnes one of another. And if we shall do this, so many precepts of love and
charity shall not be needful for us, but by the fruits of an unfeigned love
we shall show our selves to be Christians indeed: for this is an undoubted
note of true Christianity, and of sincere love so mutually to be careful one
for another, that we rejoice one in another good, and be sorry one at another
grief or misery. Now follows the reason why he sent him.

For I have no man like minded etc.] This is the reason why he rather sends
Timothy then any of the rest that were with him, because of all that were with
him none were like minded in general to do their duty in their ministry,
and none which in particular would so faithfully and sincerely care for their
matters, and for the good of their Church as would he. A great commendation of
Timothy which was sent, great love in the Apostle to send such a man unto
them, and very behouefull for them to receive such a man sent in such love with
all gladness, and to make much of such: all points very well worthy a large
discourse; but I can only point at them. The commendation of Timothy a very
fit pattern of a man meet to be commended to the work of the ministry, and
to be placed over a Congregation, to serve in the Tabernacle. He should be such
a one as in general has a prompt and ready mind to do the work of the
Lord, to labor in the Lord his vineyard, to do the work of an Evangelist,
and of a Minister; and such a one as in particular has an earnest desire to
procure their good unto whom he is sent, and will faithfully and diligently
labor to present them over whom he is set pure and unblameable before God. For
first his very office, which is to preach the Gospel of Christ Jesus, should
work in him a love and cheerful mind to teach the Lord his will, and to
preach the Gospel of Christ Jesus. Otherwise he is not meet to be commended
to the work of the ministry; or at least not so meet as those that have a
prompt mind to do the work of the Lord. And again, his love of that people
unto which he is sent should make him faithfully to labor to gain them unto
Christ, that they may be his crown and his joy in that day. Otherwise he is
not meet to be set over that people, or at least not so meet as they that
would faithfully labor to that purpose.

Again, the Apostle his care to send such a man unto them, may be a good
pattern to Bishops and Patrons of Benefices, what manner of men to commend
unto the work of the ministry, and to commit the charge of souls unto. In
the like care and love of Gods people, they should commend such men to this
work, and this charge, as we have already spoken of, men willing to do the
work of the Lord, and which will faithfully care for their matters over whom
they are set. Otherwise to say the least, they show themselves not to have that
care and love of Gods people which the Apostle had of these Philippians:
whereas their care should be the greater, because they commend unto a
continual charge, and Paul only sent Timothy to continue for a season with
the Philippians. But the speaking of these things in this place is to little
purpose; therefore I briefly pass them over.

The third thing which I observed in these words, was, how behoouefull it was
for the Philippians to receive such a man, sent in such love, with all
gladness, and to make of such: for therefore (no doubt) did the Apostle the
rather commend him so as has been said, that so the rather they might receive
him, and embrace his doctrine the more gladly, and be the more careful that he
might not mislike any thing amongst them when he should come amongst them. And
this may teach you in what reverence you ought to have such men when they are
set over you in the Lord, even for the words sake which they preach unto you.
They faithfully care for your matters, not for your worldly matters, either in
respect of you, or of themselves; for they seek not yours, but you: but they
faithfully care for your spiritual matters, even for the salvation of your
souls; in Christ his stead they beseech you, and exhort you unto the things
that belong unto your peace; they teach, they improve, they correct, they
instruct you, and all is, that your souls may be saved in the day of Christ.
Now they lead you forth besides the waters of comfort, now they bring you to
feed in green pastures, now they call you back when ye are wandering out of
the way, now they lead you on along in the way, now they wound and break the
hairie scalpe of him that goes on in his wickedness, now they heal the
bruised and afflicted soul, groaning under the weight and burden of his sin.
These are such of your matters as they care for, and these they faithfully care
for, if they be faithful Ministers of Christ Jesus. In what regard do ye
think ye ought then to have them even for their works sake? Obey them that
have the oversight of you, Heb. 13.17
says the Apostle, and submit your selves unto them, for they watch for your
souls, as they that must give accounts, that they may do it with joy, and not
with grief. And in another place: We beseech you, 1 Th. 5.12.
says the Apostle, that ye know them which labor amongst you, and are over
you in the Lord, and admonish you, that ye have them in singular love for
their works sake. By both which places ye see what reverence is to be given
unto the faithful Ministers of Christ Jesus. Now, as Samuel said unto Saul, 1
Sa. 15.22
Has the Lord as great pleasure in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as when his
voice is obeyed? so I say unto you, Have we as great pleasure in any outward
reverence that can be done unto our persons, as when the word of the Lord which
we preach unto you is obeyed? No, my brethren, that's not the thing which we
urge, albeit that also is by you to be regarded, but the principal mark which
we shoot at, is, that we may not run in vain, nor labor in vain amongst
you, but that we may bring you to the obedience of the faith. We would have
you to take heed unto the wholesome word of truth, which is able to make you
wise unto salvation, and to esteem of it not as the word of man, but as it is
indeed, as the word of God: for howsoever we be sinful and mortal men, of
the same mould and metal with your selves, that bring you this treasure, yet
is it the word of life which we bring you. O let it dwell plentifully in you,
that ye may abound in all knowledge and every good work, and love and honor
them which faithfully care for your matters.

LECTVRE XL.
PHILIP. 2. Verse 21. For all seek their own, and not that which is Jesus
Christ's. 22. But ye know the proof of him, that as a son, etc.
FOr all seek their own, etc.] Touching the meaning of which words it is
first to be understood, that the Apostle does not speak in this place
generally of all men, but of such Ministers of the Gospel as were then at Rome
with him. What then? Did all the Ministers of the Gospel that were then with
him, Timothee only excepted, seek their own, and not that which was Jesus
Christ's? No, the Apostle I take it is not so to be understood, that he
speaks universally of all them, but because very many did so, therefore he
says all seek their own etc. even as we in our common phrase of speech are
wont to say, that all the world is set upon covetousness, because so many
run after riches; and all the world is set on mischief, because so many
delight in wickedness. And this manner of speech is not unusual in the
Scriptures. Ier. 6.13.
From the least to the greatest every one is given to covetousness, says the
Prophet, and from the Prophet to the Priest all deal falsely. Where the
Prophets meaning is, that very generally these faults reigned, and that very
many had thus corrupted their ways, not that all universally were such without
exception. And not to instance in more Scriptures; this we may often observe in
the Scriptures, that in reproves of sin all are accused, if many have
offended. When therefore the Apostle here says, all seek their own, etc. his
meaning is, that it was grown to be a very general fault amongst those
Ministers of the Gospel that were with him, that very many of them sought
their own, etc. Again, touching the fault noted in them, it is to be
understood that the Apostles meaning is not, that they sought their own, but
not that which was Jesus Christ's at all: for it is very likely that the Apostle
does not here compare Timothee with those that had fallen from the faith, and
turned aside after the world, but with those that did sincerely preach the
Gospel of Christ, yet were further in love with the world than they should
have been. The Apostles meaning therefore I take it is, that many of those
that were with him sought their own; their own, what? their own ease, their
own profit, their own honor, more than the glory of Christ Jesus. They did
not simply not seek that which was Jesus Christ's, but they did not seek that
so much as they did seek their own. They looked more unto their own ease,
and pleasure, and profit, than they did unto those things which might be for
the glory of Christ Jesus, and for the increase of his kingdom. For it is very
likely that the Apostle had dealt with the rest to go to Philippi, to see
them, and to comfort them, and to confirm them in the faith: and finding them
unwilling to undertake that journey in diverse respects, he dealt with Timothee
to that purpose. Upon whose prompt mind thereunto above the rest, he gives
him this commendation above the rest. They then whom the Apostle does here
note, ye see are of those Ministers of the Gospel of Christ that were then
with him. The thing which he notes in them, is, that they sought and regarded
more the profit, and pleasure, and ease, and honor of themselves, than the
glory of God, and the building up of the Church of Christ Jesus.

Here then first the Apostle descrieth a notable fault in the Ministers of
Christ Jesus, which is to seek their own, and not that which is Jesus
Christ's, to regard more their own ease, or pleasure, or profit, or honor,
than the honor of God by preaching the Gospel of Christ Jesus. A grievous
fault in them that both by integrity of life and vncorrupt doctrine should
draw others unto God, that they should seek any thing rather or sooner than
the honor of God: for as our Savior says, Matt. 6.23
If the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness? so I
say, If they that should be principal light, in Gods Church, and by the light
that is in them should bring others out of darkness into light, if they shall
turn aside after the world, or prefer any thing before the doing of their
heavenly Fathers business, how great and how grievous must needs their fault
be? And yet as grievous as the fault is, how faulty this way have the Priests
of the most high God in the old Testament, and the Ministers of Christ Jesus in
the new, been at all times? The sons of Eli, Hophni, and Phinehas, Priests
of the Lord, ^ Sam. 2.
they so turned aside after the love of their bellies, and after the love of
their pleasures, that they forgot, or else cared not for the Law of their God.
And how often do the Prophets complain of such Shepherds as feed
themselves, and not their flocks? In the new Testament the Apostle noted it in
John Mark, Act. 15 38.
that he departed from him and Barnabas from Pamphilia, and went not with them
to the work; in Demas, that he forsook him, and embraced this present world;
and in this place he notes (it seems) many, that they sought their own, and
not that which was Jesus Christ's. And if here this fault had stayed, the harm
had been the less. But both always there have been, and still there are
even to this our day, many tainted with this fault: for not to speak of those
monsters of men, rather than Ministers of Christ, that intrude themselves into
this holy calling, not with any purpose to work in the Lord his vineyard, but
only to feed upon the portion of the Levites, making of the ministry no more
but a plain occupation; not to speak, I say, of these, because these are not
worthy to live; Of those that do sincerely preach the Gospel of Christ Jesus,
are there not many that do more seek their own than that which is Jesus
Christ's? How many are there that do withdraw their shoulders from this burden
as much and as often as they can, and take as little pains in this work as
they can? And do not these seek their own ease more than that which is Jesus
Christ's? Again, how many are there whose minds being bewitched with the love
of the world, are so carefully occupied about the things of this life, that
they do not intend the work of their ministry as they should? And do not
these seek their own profit more than that which is Jesus Christ's? Again,
how many are there that preach themselves rather than Jesus Christ, seeking
rather their own praise than that which is of God, and studying rather to
speak unto the ear than unto the heart? And do not these seek their own
credit and praise rather than that which is of Jesus Christ? Again, how many
are there which preach Christ rather through strife and envy, than of good
will; rather in hope of preferment for their pains, than of desire to gain
them that hear them unto Christ; rather for any other respect almost, than in
any zeal of the glory of God? And do not all these seek their own rather
than that which is Jesus Christ's? Well, it is a fault, and a grievous fault in
the Ministers of Christ Jesus, in any respect to prefer any thing before the
glory and increase of his kingdom whose Ministers they are, to seek either
their own ease, or their own pleasure, or their own profit, or their own
honor, or any thing else rather or more than the building up of Christ his
Church in faith, and in love, and in every good work of the spirit.

Now if this be a fault in them, hereby we are taught what duty is requisite
in the Ministers of Christ Jesus, namely so to seek their own, as that first
and principally they seek that which is Jesus Christ's. And what is that? That
is the glory of Christ Jesus, the increase of his kingdom, the building up of
his Church unto a spiritual Temple, the turning of many unto righteousness,
the salvation of men's souls. This is that business which they must first and
principally intend, and then such other things as may be fur^herances, or at
least no hindrances thereunto. Our calling and commission is to preach the
Gospel of Christ Jesus: a woe is unto us if we preach not the Gospel; and
our Apostle most straightly does adjure us unto this duty, 2 Timothy 4.1.
saying, I charge thee before God, and before the Lord Jesus Christ, etc. The
work then of our ministry is the thing that we have to look unto; the
thing wherein we must spend our strength and our study, is to do our heavenly
Fathers business in begetting men unto the faith, and teaching them the way
that leads unto salvation and life everlasting. We must not seek our own,
but that which is Jesus Christ's. Our Savior, when his mother Mary came and
expostulated the matter with him, why he stayed behind them in Jerusalem,
Know ye not, says he, Luke 2 44.
that I must go about my Fathers business? Whereby he plainly teaches us,
that the principal thing we are to regard is the principal end of our being
and calling. So that this being our calling, and the thing whereunto we are
set apart, to preach the Gospel of God, we are by Christ his example to mind
this above all things else whatsoever.

What then? Must a Minister so wholly intend the work of his ministry, as
that he may not care for his family? must he so weyne himself from the
affairs of this life, as that he may not at all meddle with the things of
this life? No, not so, he may and ought to care for his family, 1 Timothy 5 8.
otherwise he is worse then an Infidel. And again the Apostle declaring in
particular the office of a Minister, says, 1 Timothy 3.4.5.
he must be one that can rule his own house honestly, having children in
obedience with all honesty: For (says the Apostle) if he cannot rule his own
house, how shall be care for the Church of God? Out of which words ye may
observe the clearing of two points; whereof the one is, that they may have
house and family, wife and children; otherwise how should the Apostle say that
the Minister must be such a one as having children under obedience, can rule
his own house honestly? The other is, that an honest and godly care over his
own house, and the things that belong thereunto, is very requisite in the
Minister of Christ Jesus. All care then, and all seeking of his own, all
intermedling with the things of this life, is not simply forbid the Minister of
Christ, but such only as does withdraw him from that ^hereon his principal
care should be set. He may seek his own, so that principally he seek that
which is Jesus Christ's: for that is the fault here noted, that they seek their
own m^re then that which is Jesus Christ's; and that is the duty here implied,
that they ought first and principally to seek that which is Jesus Christ's, and
then that which is their own. This then is generally to be concluded, that
neither ease, nor pleasure, nor profit, nor honor, nor any thing else should
withdraw them from the work of their ministry, neither in the work of their
ministry should their eye be set upon any thing, but only upon the glory of
God, and the edification of the Church of Christ Jesus: and hereon should their
zeal be so set, that they should be even eaten up and consumed therewith.

The second thing which I note in these words, is touching the time when the
Apostle noted this fault in the Ministers of Christ. It was a fault, and a
general fault then in the time of the Apostles, in that golden age of the
Church, when they that were immediately called by Christ Jesus, and put apart
to preach the Gospel of God, taught the ways of God most perfectly. Then even
those Ministers which had been taught and instructed by the Apostles
themselves, those whom the Apostles ceased not to put them in mind of their
holy calling, and of the duties belonging thereunto, even they sought their
own more then that which was Jesus Christ's: they looked some after their ease,
some after their profit, some after their pleasure, some after their honor,
more than after the high price of their calling in Christ Jesus. Which note I
do the rather observe in particular, because of those that are always
complaining, as of all things in general, that they were never worse, so of
the ministry in particular, that it was never worse then now it is. For as
this is the humor of very many, always to mislike the present state the most,
and to commend former times, though a great deal worse, yet a great deal more
then the times wherein they live; so if once we come in talk of the
Ministry, oh Ministers never worse, never more idle, never more covetous,
never more ambitious then now they are. Yea enter this discourse, and ye shall
have many will never want matter, but the more they talk, the more they may of
this argument. And I wish we were able to stop their mouths when they so
willingly observe the general corruption in the ministry in our days, I
wish we were able to say truly that simply they speak an untruth. But I
cannot, neither is it my purpose to excuse the the faults of our times in the
ministry. Be it therefore true, which indeed is true, that very many of our
coat and calling do more seek their own then that which is Jesus Christ^, is
this fault now more general in the Ministers then ever it was? What, are
Ministers now more idle, do they now seek their own ease more then ever they
did? Does not the Apostle in his day note John Mark for this fault? Act. 15.38.
Are they now more covetous, do they now seek their own wealth more then
ever they did? Does not the Apostle in his day note Demas for this fault? Are
they more ambitious, 2 Timothy 4.10
do they now seek after and love preeminence more then ever they did? 3 John 9.
Does not the Apostle John in his day note Diotrephes for this fault? Oh, but
if a note were now taken of those that are faulty these ways, not one, but
very many should be found faulty each of these ways. As though because the
Apostle noted no more, there were then no more. Nay, in that the Apostle notes
these of these faults, we know that even then the Ministers of Christ were
tainted with these faults, but how generally we know not. But tell me ye that
press this point so hard, that Ministers are now worse then ever they were:
say the most and the worst ye can, can ye say more or worse then this, that
all seek their own, and not that which is Jesus Christ's? And said not the
Apostle thus much in his day, as here we see? The Apostle in his day meant it
not universally of all, neither can ye say it at this day universally of all,
that all seek their own, and not that which is Jesus Christ's. Nay if we
shall speak unto the point, that which the truth is indeed, I am persuaded
that never in any age the number of faithful Ministers was greater then our
age has and does afford; never more that with less selfe-respects, and more
zeal to Gods house, labored in the work of their ministry, then now there
do. I^ may be that the graces of Gods holy spirit were powered down in greater
measure and abundance upon some in some times heretofore, then now they are,
and that the word has been more powerful through a greater operation of the
holy spirit in the mouths of some heretofore, then now it is, as it was (no
doubt) in the time of the Apostles, with whom the Lord wrought most powerfully
and wonderfully, and as happily it has been in some since that time; yet, as
I said before, I am persuaded that never in any time there were more, more
enflamed with the zeal of Gods spirit, faithfully, painfully, and sincerely,
without self respects, to labor in the work of their ministry, and to
build up Christ his Church in faith, and in love, and in every good work, then
now there are. For if we should look into all succeeding times after the time
of the Apostles, especially if we should look into the times since the
mystery of iniquity began to work in and under that man of sin, what
else should we find but idleness, and covetousness, and licentiousness, and
ambition, and what wickedness not? He has lifted up himself on high, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
and has exalted himself against all that is called God, or that is
worshipped, so that he does sit as God in the Temple of God, showing himself
that he is God. And what else does his whole Clergy seek, but the abetting of
his pride, and the maintaining of his triple Crown, together with such ease,
and pleasure, and profit, as follows thereupon? So that if ever it were truly
said of any, that they sought their own, and not that which is Jesus Christ's,
then in my judgment may it as truly be said of them as of any. Thus then ye
see that it is not the fault of our time alone, that now Ministers seek their
own more then that which is Jesus Christ's, but that even in the Apostles time
it was so, as also that how general soever the fault now be, yet is it not
more general then ever it was, but rather the number of them that seek that
which is Jesus Christ's more then their own, is now greater then ever it was.
Take heed therefore, men and brethren, lest at any time ye be deceived. The
Ministers of Christ they ate as beacons on the top of an hill, in every man's
eye, and every man's tongue talking of them, and what talk of them more common,
then of branding them with some fault or other, thereby to discredit that truth
which they preach? It is no new thing, ye see, that Ministers have their
faults, and he is the best that has the fewest. And howsoever they tell you
that Ministers are now worse then ever they were, believe them not: for if the
worst be said that can be, there cannot be worse then this, that all seek
their own, and not that which is Jesus Christ's; and thus much said the Apostle
in his time.

The third and last thing which I note from these words, is, that howsoever
properly, and in the meaning of the Apostle, these words in this place be only
affirmed of the Ministers of Christ Jesus, yet may they truly be affirmed even
of all men in general, that all men for the most part do seek their own
more then that which is Jesus Christ's, first looking unto the things of this
life, and then afterward unto the things that belong unto their peace in
Christ Jesus. This is a point which needs not long to be stood upon, being so
plain a truth in our own experience, that which way soever we cast our eyes,
unto high or low, rich or poor, it cannot be denied. For look into the
delights and desires of men, and see what it is that they principally hunt and
seek after. Are there not many that are so ambitious, that they seek by all
means possible to be great, and to be had in honor of all men? And yet how
many of them, Psalm. 75.
remembering that promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West,
nor yet from the South, but that God alone puts down one, and sets up
another, do first seek the Lord and his strength, and do first honor him,
that so he may honor them before all people? Nay every plot is sooner and
oftener cast then this, and this comes seldom or never within their thoughts,
or if it do, yet this is too slow a course for them, God must give them leave
to climb up another way, and then when they are where they would be, they will
serve him perhaps when they think of him. Again, are there not many that are
so covetous, that they seek by all means to be rich, and to be Lords (if it
were possible) of the whole earth? And yet how many of them remembering that the
Lord makes poor and makes rich, do first seek the Lord, so to become rich
by him? Nay if fraud, oppression, usury, or the like will make them rich, they
will not wait upon the Lord, but thus they will become rich. Yea but these, and
such like, as seek and delight only in pleasures, and idleness, and riches,
and honor, and the like, they seek these things altogether, they seek not
the Lord at all, neither is God in all their thoughts: but thou seek the
Lord, and delightest in his Law. And so do many, which yet seek their own
more then that which is Jesus Christ's. Will thou then see whether thine own
things or the things of Christ Jesus be more sought of thee, whether in some
things thou prefer not thy self before thy Christ and his will? Ask thine
own heart, and see whether if thy God should bid thee do as Zacheus did, Luke
19.8.
give half of thy goods to the poor, and if thou have taken from any man by
forged cauillation, to restore him fourfold, whether (I say) it would not
grieve thee so to do. See whether if thy Christ should say unto thee as he
said to the young man in the Gospel, Go sell that thou have, Mat. 19.21
and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven, and come and
follow me, whether (I say) thou could be content to do so. See whether in
thy care for thy health, for thy wealth, for thy life, etc. thy first and
chief care therein be that thereby thy God may be glorified. See (I say) and
look into these and the like things with a strait eye, and this shall be a
good rule for thee to know whether thou seek thine own more then Jesus
Christ's. And howsoever you shall find your selves in the examination of these
things, guilty or guiltless, this you must know, that Christian duty
requires this of us, that first and principally we should seek the glory of
God, and the things that belong unto our peace, and then afterward the things
that belong unto this life. We are careful for many things, what to eat, what
to drink, wherewith to be clothed, how to live and pay every man his own, how
to provide for our wives and our children, how to maintain our state and
calling, etc. and so we may, and so we ought to have a godly care of these
things, without diffidence or distrust in Gods gracious providence: but the
rule which our Savior Christ gives, that must we still keep, Mat. 6.33.
first to seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and then all these
things (which are outward means of living and well living) shall be cast upon
us. Christ must be unto us health, and wealth, and life, and all things else.
We must cast our care upon him, and he will care for us. Above all things we
must submit our selves unto his will, and walk after his Law, and whatsoever
things are needful and meet for us, he will minister unto us. Let every man
therefore so seek his own things, that first and principally he seek the
things of God; let him so mind earthly things, that his affections be
principally set on the things that are above; let him so regard his body, that
he principally look unto his soul.

LECTVRE XLI.
PHILIP. 2. Verse. 22.23.24. But ye know the proof of him, that as a son
with the father, he has served with me in the Gospel.
NOw the Apostle in these words, to clear Timothee of that fault wherewith
very many of the rest were tainted, that he sought not his own more than that
which was Jesus Christ's, he asks no other or better proof thereof then their
own knowledge and experience of him, for that they knew very well that
Timothee as a son with the father, served with the Apostle the Lord Christ in
preaching of his Gospel.

But ye (says the Apostle) know the proof of him, etc.] As if the Apostle
should have said, The rest that are with me, at least very many of them, seek
their own more then that which is Jesus Christ's. But for Timothee, your selves
will serve to clear him of this fault: ye know upon that knowledge and proof
which ye have of him, that he is another kind of man, that he has served
with me, even as a son with his father, whom? Christ Jesus: wherein? in the
Gospel, that is, in the preaching of the Gospel, his ministry is fully
known unto you, that both he and I have walked after one rule in preaching of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, even that we have walked as the father and the
son in the self same steps, unto the building of the spiritual Temple of
Christ Jesus, he walking as he has me for example. This I take to be the
Apostle his meaning in these words. The notes hence to be observed I will
rather point at, then much stand upon, especially in this place and auditorie.

1. Hence I note that Timothy whom the Apostle sent unto the Philippians, was a
man of whom they had had proof and experience before, and whose faithfulness
in the work of his ministry was so well known unto them that they could not
doubt thereof. And this was the cause why the Apostle thought it not needful
to labor much in the clearing of Timothy from such faults as had infected the
rest, or in the enlarging of his commendation: they knew that as a son with the
father, so he had labored with the Apostle in preaching the Gospel of Christ
Jesus. A thing whereunto even all the ministers of Christ Jesus ought most
earnestly to strive, by their faithful and careful walking in the works of
their calling to approve themselves, not only before the Lord, but also before
men, to be the faithful servants of Christ Jesus. Yea but here is all the
skill to do so: or rather it seems a thing impossible to approve our selves
both before the Lord, and also before men. For if we yet should please men we
were not the servants of Christ. And therefore the Apostle in an onother place
protests against pleasing of men, Gal. 1.10.
and says, we so speak, not as they that please men, but God which tries our
hearts. 1. These. 2.4.
How is it then possible for us to approve our selves both before God, and
before men? True, it is a matter of no small difficulty. If we cry peace,
peace, all is well, if we sew cushions under their elbowes, and speak fair
and smoothing words, if we suffer them to take their fill of pleasure, and to
wallow in their wickedness, and either say naught unto them, or run with
them, happily we may please men, but doubtless we shall not please God.
Again, if we cry aloude and lift up our voices like trumpets, and tell the
house of Jacob their sins, and the house of Israel their transgressions, if
we rouse them out of that dead sleep of sin whereinto they are fallen, and
lay the axe to the root of sin to cut it up by the roots; if we pour
vinegar into such wounds as fin has made in their souls, and denounce the
sharp threatenings of the law against them, happily we may approve our selves
unto the Lord, but doubtless we shall not approve our selves unto men. Nay
what almost can we say or do, whereby we shall be able to approve our selves
both before the Lord, and before men? What then? are we to strive unto an
impossibility? Not so neither; but this being out of doubt that we ought to
approve our selves before the Lord whose Ministers we are, and whose name we
bear before our people; we ought likewise so faithfully and carefully to
walk in our calling before men, as that unto their consciences we may give
certain proofs that we are the servants of Jesus Christ. We cannot always so
approve our selves unto men, as that what we say or do shall please them,
neither do we or ought we to strive thereunto; but we may and ought so to
work the work of our ministry, and to do the duties of our calling as that
they ought to approve us, and may know that we are the servants of Jesus
Christ, howsoever we come unto them, whether, as the Apostle says, with a
rod, or in love, 1 Cor. 4.21
and in the spirit of meekness. For whether we come with a rod, or in love,
and in the spirit of meekness, whether we improve, or correct, or instruct, or
exhort, or rebuke, our care and endeavor therein is to approve our selves unto
him whose Ministers we are, and that we may be found faithful among you.

Now as we ought thus to approve our selves unto you, and by our faithful
walking in our calling to give such proof of our selves unto you that ye may
know that indeed we serve the Lord in the Gospel; so again ought ye to
take heed of approving any who gives not plain proof that he serves the Lord
in the Gospel. They whom ye must approve, must be such as seek not yours but
you, such as first seek that which is the Lord Jesus Christ's, and then that
which is their own, such as ye know by your own proof that they serve their
Lord Jesus Christ in preaching of his Gospel, and not themselves or any else
whomsoever. For from their lips ye shall receive knowledge and instruction, and
by their mouth ye shall be taught in the ways of the Lord, and in the works
of his commandments. For they serving the Lord Jesus from their hearts purely
out of the abundance of their hearts endite good matters, and their tongue is
as the pen of a ready writer. Now whether all of this congregation approve
such, and none but such, your selves can better tell then behooves me to judge.
But not to dissemble my fear, I am in fear, as the Apostle says, of some of
you, that you more approve of such as serve that man of sin in seducing you
by traditions, then of such as serve the Lord in the preaching of the Gospel.
The Apostle ye know makes mention of some bad ones, it is easy to guess who
at this day do most resemble them, 2 Timothy 3.6.
which creep into houses, and lead captive simple women laden with sins, and
led with diverse lusts etc. And our Savior likewise makes mention of such as
compass sea and land to make one of their profession, Mat. 23.15
and when he is made they make him twofold more the child of hell then they
themselves are. I fear least some of them have beguiled some of you, and
seduced your foolish hearts that ye should not hearken and obey the holy word
of life, which only is able to make you wise unto salvation through the faith
which is in Christ Jesus. For how else comes it to pass that some do so
seldom present themselves in the holy place where they might hear the things
that belong unto their peace? And how else comes it to pass, that some when
the Preacher begins make an end of their devotion, and leaving the house of
God go to their own houses? Have they any exception against us? Do we teach
for doctrines men's precepts? Do we handle the word deceitfully? Do we keep
back any of Gods counsel? Nay in all these things, as in the whole work of
our ministry we study to approve our selves both before the Lord, and before
men. An exception they have, but almost they know not what. The truth is; they
are not able to try the spirits whether they are of God. And therefore they
approve them which prophecy lies unto them out of their own brain. But ye
beloved learn to know and approve him who gives plain proof that he serves
the Lord in the Gospel, in the sincere and faithful preaching thereof.

Yea, but ye will say unto me, we would gladly approve them that serve the
Lord in the Gospel. But how shall we know who serve the Lord in the Gospel?
For they that are wholly devoted unto the service of that man of sin, and
prophecy lies out of their own brain will say that they serve the Lord in the
Gospel, as well as they will which sincerely preach the Gospel of Christ Jesus
unto the confusion of that man of sin. Note therefore that the Apostle in
this place does not simply say of Timothy that he served the Lord in the
Gospel, but that he served with him in the Gospel. Wherein he gives him this
testimony that he did sincerely teach Christ Jesus, preaching no other
Gospel then that which the Apostle himself preached, but walking in the same
steps with him unto the building of the spiritual temple of Christ Jesus,
even as he had him for example. Will ye then know who they are that serve the
Lord in the Gospel? Even they that serve the Lord in the Gospel with Paul,
they that preach no other Gospel then Paul preached, they which ground the
doctrines which they teach, not upon men's precepts, but upon the sure
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. Try therefore who they are that walk
as they have the Apostle for example, see who they are that after his example
testify the kingdom of God, and preach unto the people concerning Christ
Jesus out of the law of Moses, and out of the Prophets. Act. 28.23.17.11.
It is registered ye know, unto the great commendation of the men of Berea, that
they searched the Scriptures daily, and sought whether the things which they
heard of Paul and Silas were so. Observe the same rule: search the Scriptures;
for they testify of Christ and of his truth. It is our desire that ye would
try by this rule both us, and them which teach otherwise then we teach; and
then that ye would approve them whom by proof ye shall know to serve the Lord
with Paul in the Gospel. The rule which we have given whereby to know them
that serve the Lord in the Gospel is most certain and sure, and it stands
you as well upon to approve them, and them alone, who give plain proof that
they serve the Lord in the Gospel, as it stands us upon to labor by
faithful walking in our calling to approve our selves before the Lord, and
before men.

The next thing which I note out of these words is, that which the Apostle
adds by way of amplification, that Timothy served with Paul as a son with
the father, for the Apostle does not simply say, ye know the proof of him that
he has served with me in the Gospel, but by way of amplification unto
Timotheus greater commendation he adds, that as a son with the father he had
served with him etc. Whence I observe a notable example of that modesty and
reverence which ought to be in particular in younger Ministers toward them
that are their ancients and have gone before them in that work, and which
ought to be in general in all the sons of God toward their Elders, but
especially toward those that have begotten them in the faith. Young Timothy
serving with aged Paul in the Gospel even as a son with his father, should
teach younger Ministers to honor and to reverence their ancients in the
ministry, and to walk as they have them for example, especially if they walk
as aged Paul did faithfully and painfully in the works of their calling.
Otherwise, if they delight in idleness, or mind earthly things, if they seek
their own more then that which is Jesus Christ's, they are to be no more
patterns unto us to follow then the examples of old Eli, or Demas, or the
like. Nay I think the younger may and ought, yet with all modesty because of
their years, to put them in mind of their duties, and to beseech them that as
fathers they will go before them in all holiness of example, with incorrupt
doctrine, with gravity, integrity, and with the wholesome word which cannot
be reproved. But if they walk as aged Paul did faithfully, and painefully in
the worke^ of their calling, if in all holiness of example they walk before
them, as fathers before their children, if as fathers they have begotten them
in the faith, then surely ought the younger Ministers to honor and to
reverence them even as sons do their fathers, and as Timothy did honor Paul. A
note wor^hy the urging and enlarging if the place were as convenient for the
urging of it as the time requires the urging of it. A son will not easily
get himself up to the top of an hill thence to glance at such things as may
turn to his fathers shame, much less thence to cast dung in his face, and
purposely to speak such things as justly may grieve him, least of all upon an
imagined error in his father will he thence load him with blasphemies. A
son, I say, will not thus do, and a minister should not thus do. For he
should serve the Lord with him in the Gospel, as a son with the father.

Again, young Timothy used himself toward aged Paul as a son toward his
father. A good lesson for those of younger years to teach them in what regard
they ought to have their elders and their betters; they ought to honor and to
reverence them, and to perform other duties unto them in some sort as to their
fathers. For so we see the Scripture would have them accounted as fathers, as
where the admonition is, rebuke not an elder, but exhort him as a father, and
the elder women as mothers. And the fashion and custom of them is good whose
manner it is to salute elder men as fathers, 1 Timothy 5.1.2.
and elder women as mothers. I do only point at this note by the way, because
of the ill education of many of our youth, who regard not at all the gray
hairs of the aged, but oftentimes most contumeliously do abuse them, calling
them old fools, dooting fools, and the like. Well, the precept is, Leuit.
19.32.
Thou shall rise up before the hoare-head, and honor the person of the old
man. But this punishment is just with the Lord unto him that reuerenceth not
the person of the old man, that either he shall not come unto the honor of
old age, or else his old age shall be without honor.

But an especial thing which all of us hence should learn is, how we should
walk in respect of them that have begot us in the faith of Christ Jesus. As
Timothy regarded Paul who had begot him in the faith, so must we regard those
that have begot us in the faith, even as a son carries himself toward his
father, so should we carry our selves toward them. And therefore are they
called our spiritual fathers in the Scriptures, and we their sons if by
their ministry they have begotten us in the faith. I beseech thee, says the
Apostle in the Epistle to Philemon, for my son Onesimus, Philem. 10.
whom I have begotten in my bonds: where he calls Onesimus his son. In the
Epistle to the Corinthians, Though ye have, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.15.
ten thousand Instructors in Christ, yet have ye not many fathers: for in
Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel: Where he calls himself
their father in the same respect that before he called Onesimus his son, even
because he had begotten them in the faith. And in the Epistle to the
Galathians, Gal. 4.19.
My little children, says he, of whom I travel in birth again until Christ
be formed in you: where he shows that he was a mother, and they as the sons
of his womb. And wherefore is it that the ministers of Christ his Gospel are
thus called our fathers, and mothers as it were, and we their sons, but to
note unto us that we have our life in Christ Jesus through their ministry,
and so to put us in mind of that duty which we owe unto them in respect of our
regeneration and new birth by the immortal seed of God his word through their
ministry. Look then what honor is due by children unto their parents,
whether it be reverence, or obedience, or maintenance, or whatsoever else it
be, the same we must account due by us unto our spiritual fathers in Christ
Jesus. And therefore faith our Savior Christ, Luc. 10.16. Heb. 13.17
He that hears you hears me, and he that despises you despises me. And
the Apostle, obey them, says he, that have the ouer-sight of you, and submit
your selves unto them; for they watch, says he, for your souls, etc. Again,
says the same Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.17
The elders that rule well are worthy of double honor, especially they which
labor in the word and doctrine etc. Let us therefore take heed how we do
despise, or not reverence these our spiritual fathers in Christ Jesus. Pro.
30.17.
For if the eye that mocketh his father, and despises the instruction of his
mother shall be a pray unto the ravens of the valley to pick it out, and unto
the young Egles to eat it: How much more shall it be so unto us if we despise
the instruction of our fathers in Christ Jesus, and if we stop our ears at
the voice of their charming charm they never so wisely. Again let us take
heed how we do not obey those our spiritual fathers in Christ Jesus. Deuteronomy.
21.18
For if the stubborn and disobedient son that will not hearken to the voice
of his father, or of his mother, nor will obey their admonition, shall be
stoned with stones unto the death; how much more shall the judgment of God
overtake us if we will not hear, nor incline our ears to obey the voice of
our fathers in Christ Jesus, if we will not hearken and obey their
admonitions, and exhortations which in Christ his steed do beseech us, and
admonish us, and exhort us. Hear the voice of wisdom, a voice fearful yet
most true, Pro. 1.24.
because, says Wisdom, I have called, and ye refused, etc, Even thus shall
it be unto all them that obey not the voice of wisdom in the mouth of the
Minister. Hearken therefore and obey: for obedience is better then sacrifice.
Yea, and reverence the person of the Minister for the words sake which he
brings. In a word, from this one example of Timotheus commendation, let
Ministers of the younger sort learn to reverence their ancients in their
ministry, let young men learn to honor the person of the aged, and let all
of us learn to carry our selves toward them that have begotte us in the faith
as sons unto their father.

Now follows the conclusion of his first promise, which was to send Timotheus
unto them, in these words, him therefore I hope etc. Wherein is set down the
repetition of the former promise, and likewise a farther signification of the
time when he would send him. Him, says he, I hope to send, there is the
repetition of the former promise; as soon as I know how it will go with me,
here is the signification of the time when he would send him. Before he had
said, I trust to send Timotheus shortly unto you, now he shows what he meant
by that shortly, that is as soon as he should know whether he should be
delivered from his bonds by Nero, which he hoped should be shortly. And the
cause why he sent him not presently with Epaphroditus was because as yet he
knew not certainly how his matters would go, and he was very desirous that at
his Timotheus coming unto them they might be comforted over his deliverance
from his bonds. I have already pointed at such notes as I thought meet to be
gathered from this promise. It follows.

And I trust in the Lord] In these words he puts them in hope of his own
coming shortly unto them. Which his promise, as the other depends upon the
hope of his deliverance out of prison. This hope also of his coming unto them
he puts them in for their farther comfort, and likewise for their farther
confirmation in the faith. Whence 1. we may note the Apostle his great care
that they might be comforted, and therein observe the great care that the
Ministers of Christ Jesus should have of the comfort of their people in the
times of their distresses: of which note we have already spoken before. 2. We
may note the Apostle his great care that they might grow strong in the faith,
and abound in every good work unto the glory of God the father. And this care
ought also to be in the Ministers of Christ Jesus toward their people, as also
I have heretofore observed. Only here remains one doubt to be answered. For
here some happily will ask, how it fell out with this hope and confidence of
the Apostle, was he deceived of his hope and confidence, or did he as he hoped
he should send Timothy shortly after unto them, did he as he trusted he should
come himself shortly after unto them? Whereunto 1. I answer, what if he were
deceived of his hope and confidence? does this at all impair his credit and
authority? If it had been a matter of faith and doctrine it should. But this
was a thing casual and contingint, wherein he might be deceived, and yet his
credit no whit diminished. For albeit he had the spirit of truth to lead him
into all truth in whatsoever doctrine he delivered unto the Church. Yet in
things that concerned himself, especially in things future and contingent
might he be deceived; even as we see in this place that albeit he had the gift
of healing, yet Epaphroditus whom he dearly loved had like to have died with
him. 2. I answer that whether he were deceived of his hope and confidence or
no, I cannot certainly tell, because it appears not by the Scriptures. But
very well it might be that both he sent Timothy unto them, and that himself
came afterward unto them. For this we must know that he was twice imprisoned
at Rome by Nero. First he was cast into prison in the third year of N^ro, and
delivered in the fifth. Again he was cast into prison in the twelfth year of
Nero, and was put to death in the thirteenth of his reign. Writing therefore
this his Epistle in his first imprisonment, it might very well be that in that
seven or eight years between that and his second imprisonment, (...).
both he sent and went to Philippie. And the word which the Apostle here uses
makes it very probable that both he sent and went thither, being a word which
signifies an assured confidence, and is seldom or never used but when the
thing follows, which thus is trusted. Howsoever he went, or went not it is
no matter of our faith, or where about we need to be troubled. This is sure,
he trusted in the Lord to come unto them, and to see them, that so they might
be comforted one in another, and that he might confirm and strengthen them
in the faith. And let this be spoken touching his second promise.

LECTVRE XLII.
PHILIP. 2. Verse 25.26. But I supposed it necessary to send my brother
Epaphroditus unto you, my companion in labor, and follow soldier, etc.
But I supposed it necessarie] In this last part of this Chapter which
concerns Epaphroditus, the Apostle 1. signifies his present sending of
Epaphroditus back again unto them. 2. He sets down the causes why he sent
him now presently, and stayed him not till either Timothy, or himself should
come unto them, or till he should certainly know how his matters would go,
whether he should be delivered out of prison, or no: lastly he prays them to
receive him with gladness, and to make much of him, and such as he is.
Touching Epaphroditus it appears that he was the Minister of the Church at
Philippy; one that so labored in the work of his ministry as that he
approved himself very well both unto the Apostle, and unto the whole Church at
Philippy. When the Philippians had heard that Paul was taken prisoner at Rome,
they sent this their Minister Epaphroditus to see him, and to carry him some
relief from them, and there to abide with him, as it may seem, during his
imprisonment, and to minister unto him such things as he needed. Which trust
of the Church, and duty unto Paul whilst he faithfully and painefully
discharged, he fell into a very great and grievous sickness, so that he was
very near unto death, even at deaths door as we say. Yet such was the Lord
his mercy toward him, neither toward him only, but likewise toward Paul,
whom his sickness had very much affected, that he restored him unto health
again. But when he heard that the Philippians had heard of his sickness, he
grew full of heaviness, fearing least these two things, both Paul's bands, and
his sickness should bring too much grief and sorrow unto the Church. Being
therefore desirous to return unto them, and again being very loath, and
happily not well daring to go, and leave Paul in prison, he was marueilously
perplexed what to do, and grew full of sadness and heaviness. Which when the
Apostle perceived, and understood that the Philippians were much moved at his
sickness, he thought it necessary both for his and their comfort to send him
presently unto them, as here he says, I supposed it necessary etc. And this
may serve for a general view of these words.

Now for a more particular view of these words, see how the Apostle, least the
Philippians should suspect that Epaphroditus had some way not approved himself
unto him, because he sent him back before such time as he knew certainly how
things would go with him; see (I say) what great titles he honors him
withal, thereby to witness unto them what account he made of him, and of his
service whiles he was with him. 1. He calls him his brother, to wit in
Christ, begotten in one faith, by one Gospel, unto one God, which is above
all, and through all, and in us all. 2. He calls him his companion in labor,
as in diverse places he does diverse others who labored with him in the
preaching of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, and in the building up of his body.
3. He calls him his fellow soldier, as also he does Archippus in the Epistle
to Philemon, one that fought against spiritual wickednesses, as he did, and
did not only preach as he did, but also suffer troubles, and endure manifold
tentations as he did. 4. He calls him their messenger, whom the whole Church
at Philippi sent unto him to visit him at Rome where he lay in prison* for so
the word Apostle here used in the original is very well translated in our
English Bibles. Lastly, he says of him, that he was one that ministered unto
him such things as he wanted, which (I think) he says, both in respect of
that relief which he brought unto Paul from the Philippians; and likewise in
respect of that great use which he had of him all the while he was with him.
Thus then ye see how the Apostle thinking it necessary to send Epaphroditus
home unto them for such causes as afterward he mentions, sends him laden
with commendations, lest happily they should judge of him at his return unto
them in any respect otherwise then were meet. Now let us see what notes and
observations we may gather hence for our use.

1. In the sending of Epaphroditus at this time unto the Philippians, I note
the singular great care of the Apostle over those whom he had begotten in the
faith of Christ Jesus. He was now in prison, he knew not certainly when, or
whether he should be delivered out of prison, or no; and besides this, it
seems that there were very few of the rest that were with him, save he only,
and Timothy, in whom the Apostle did or could take any great comfort. For as
we heard a little before, all the rest that were with him, surely very many of
them sought their own, their own ease, their own pleasure, their own
profit, their own honor etc, not that which was Jesus Christ's, not that so
much as they sought their own ease, or honor, or pleasure, or profit, or the
like. Though therefore both Epaphroditus were desirous to go to them, and they
likewise desirous to see him, yet a man would have thought here had been
sufficient matter of excuse, especially unto them who ought unto him not their
Minister alone but themselves also. Yet such was his love toward them, and
such was his care of their comfort, that he preferred that before his own
necessity, more regarding their good then his own need.

Now what should this teach us: Surely it should teach even all the Ministers
of Christ Jesus this lesson, so to tender their good, and their comfort in
Christ Jesus over whom the Lord has made them overseers, as that they should
more regard the things that belong unto their peace, then the things that
belong unto their own estate. Yea though they should be offered up upon the
sacrifice of their faith, that is, though they should give up their lives for
an offering unto the Lord for the confirmation and strengthening of their faith,
yet should they therein even be glad and rejoice; so that they should not love
their lives unto the death, if so their death might be for a saving health unto
their people. To urge the necessity of this duty, or to complain of the
neglect of this duty, though our times require it, yet this place is not so
fit for it. And besides every where almost our people can tell us of our duty,
and can open their mouths wide to complain of our negligence in our duty.
But if our care must be such for you, that we must care more for you then for
our selves, what do ye think should again be your care? Surely ye should
as newborn babes desire the sincere milk of Gods word, your care should be
by our ministry to grow up in the knowledge of his will, and in all obedience
thereunto, and this ye should more care for then for all the things of this
life whatsoever. Yet care we never so much for your saving health, labor we
never so much to breed the love of God, and of his word in you, so to gain
you unto Christ; though we be altogether careless in our own matters, and
only careful that ye may know Christ and him crucified, what sense or
feeling of religion, what love of God or godliness, what longing or thirsting
after the holy word of life which is only able to make you wise unto salvation
through faith in Christ Jesus, do we beget and engender in you? Nay every
petty excuse shall serve for good enough to keep you from coming unto the
courses of Gods house, and presenting your selves in the holy place, where ye
might hear the things that belong unto your peace. Some are too old to be
taught even in the ways of God, though they know them not at all; and some are
so young that they may learn all betimes so much as will serve their turn:
some have such business that they cannot come: some are so froward and
obstinate that they will not come: some are so idle that they list not to come:
some can do as much good at home as if they came; and some would come oftener
then they do if they might have another Preacher then they have. Thus this,
and that, and I know not what stays us too too much from washing our selves in
those waters whereby we might be cleansed from all leprosy of sin; and
plainly show that we care not for the things that belong unto our peace. Nay
where is there greater opposition in the people against their Minister, and
some things that they teach, then where the Minister is most painful and
careful that he may present his people holy unto the Lord? And will ye know
whence it is that so little care of growing up in the knowledge of Gods will,
and of walking in the ways of his commandments is in the people,
notwithstanding the never so great carfulness in the Minister of Jesus
Christ. Paul may plant, and Apollos may water, 1 Cor. 3.6.7.
but unless God do give the increase, Paul's planting, and Apollos watring are
not any thing, to no purpose at all. Semblably the Ministers of Christ Jesus
may like good watchmen stand upon their watch, and give warning from the Lord;
they may labor in all good conscience and with all carefullnesse to stir up
their people unto a godly care of walking soberly, and righteously, and godly
in this present world; but unless God do stir up this care in them by the
power of his holy spirit, the Minister spends his strength in vain and for
nothing in respect of them. Hence then it is that there is so little care of
growing up in the knowledge of Gods will, and in all obedience thereunto, even
because the peoples hearts are not so softened and mollified by Gods holy spirit
that they should take care of the things that belong unto their peace, but
lying still in the hardness of their hearts they only mind earthly things, and
set not their affections on the things that are above. Examine therefore your
selves, men and brethren, and see whether there be in you that care to grow up
by the ministry of the word in all holiness and righteousness, which you
persuade your selves ought to be in the Minister of Christ, that so ye may
grow up. For if I should at large have discoursed of that care which ought to
be in the Minister toward you, which I only touched, I doubt not but ye
would have easily assented thereunto: nay ye think ye can discourse, at
least ye will take upon you to discourse largely enough of that point your
selves. See then whether there be in you such an ardent and an inflamed desire
to grow up by the ministry of the word, as ye think there should be in the
Minister that ye may be profited by his ministry. If ye feel no such care
and desire in you, it is because the Lord has not as yet by his powerful
spirit wrought this holy care and desire in you. Strive therefore by prayer
unto the Lord for the grace of his holy spirit, whereby ye may be stirred up
unto this care and desire, and frequent with all diligence places of holy and
religious exercises, that so that weak and languishing desire which is in you,
by the power of Gods Spirit working with the word, may be raised and increased.
As for you whose hearts the Lord has inflamed with a godly care and desire
that ye may grow up in all knowledge of Gods will, and in all obedience
thereunto, follow on hard toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of
God in Christ Jesus; go on from grace to grace, from strength to strength, and
this I pray, as our Apostle does in the former chapter, that your love may
abound yet more and more in knowledge, Phil. 1.9, 10, 11.
and in all judgment etc. In a word, let those that are the Ministers of
Christ, and disposers of Gods secrets, so tender their good over whom the Lord
has made them overseers, that they more regard the things that belong unto
their peace, then the things that belong unto their own estate. And again,
ye that hear the law of the Lord at their mouths, and are taught in the
ways of your God by their ministry, so care to grow up by their ministry
in the knowledge of Gods will, and in all obedience thereunto, that ye care
more for that then for all things else of this life whatsoever. And let this
serve for our first note.

2. In this great commendation of Epaphroditus, and in these many titles
wherewith the Apostle honors him, I note the Apostle his great modesty
toward those that were called to be Ministers of Christ Jesus, and walked
with a straight foot unto the work of their ministration. Paul had many and
most excellent prerogatives above him, yet does he call him his brother in
Christ: Paul was called immediately by Christ Jesus himself to be an Apostle,
and put apart by him to preach the Gospel of God, and filled with gifts and
graces above others to that purpose, and labored more abundantly in preaching
of the Gospel of Christ then the rest, yet does he call Epaphroditus his
companion in labor, and in preaching of Christ his Gospel: Paul was in
stripes, in prison, in perils, in persecutions, and in death more plentiful,
and more often then the rest of the Apostles, yet does he call Epaphroditus his
fellow soldier, and one that fought against spiritual wickednesses, and
suffered many troubles, and endured manifold tentations as he did. In one word,
he was every way far and incomparably above him, yet does he make him one as
it were, and almost equal with himself, and highly honor and magnify the
gifts and graces of Gods holy spirit in him, neither does he account it any
disparagement unto himself to do so.

Now what should this teach us? Surely this should be a lesson unto all in
general whom the Lord has any way advanced above their brethren, not to
despise the meanest of their brethren; and in particular unto those of greater
places in the ministry, that they should not extenuate and lessen the g^fts
and graces of Gods spirit in their inferior brethren, but that they should
honor and much esteem of whatsoever good graces in them. First therefore in
general, it is the rule of the Apostle, that no man should despise another,
but that every man should make himself equal unto them of the lowest degree,
the high unto the low, the rich unto the poor, the wise and man of
understanding unto the simple and ignorant. For what have thou, o man, that
thou have not received? Is thine honor and promotion great? Psalm. 75.7.8.
Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor yet from the
South, but it is the Lord that puts down one and sets up another. Art
thou increased in wealth and riches? The Lord makes poor, 1 Samuel 2.7.
and makes rich: prosperity and adversity, life and death, poverty and
riches, even all these come of the Lord. Have thou more wisdom, and knowledge,
and understanding then others of thy brethren? Job 38.38.
The Lord only has put wisdom in thy reins, the Lord only has given thine
heart understanding. Not to instance in more particulars, that of James in
general is most true, Every good giving, and every perfect gift is from above,
Jam. 1.17.
and comes down from the father of lights, with whom is no variableness,
neither shadowing by turning. Now wherefore has he made thee great and mighty?
that thou might tyrannize over and oppress thy brother? Wherefore has he
made thee rich and wealthy? that thou might grind the faces of the poor,
and lift up thy self in pride above them? Wherefore has he made thee wise and
of an understanding heart? that thou might disdain and laugh at the
simplicity and rudeness of thine inferior brother? Nay whatsoever blessing it
is that thou have, it is conferred upon thee for the honor and glory of thy
God, and for the good and comfort of thy brother. Mat. 26.11
Ye shall have the poor always with you, says our Savior Christ; and in
Deuteronomie the Lord says, there shall be ever some poor in the land; Deuteronomy.
15.11.
therefore says the Lord, thou shall open thine hand unto thy brother, to thy
needy, and to thy poor in the land. It is then that thou may do good unto
thy poor brother that God has made thee rich and wealthy: it is that thou
may instruct, and that thou may advise thy brother in what he stands
need of thee that he has made thee wise and learned: it is that thou may
strengthen and lift thy poor brother out of the mire that God has made thee
great and mighty. I wish our great and mighty men of the world that still
climb, and never think themselves high enough; I wish our rich and wealthy
worldlings that make no end of gathering riches and increasing their substance;
I wish our wise and great learned men, whose knowledge puffs them up more
than is meet, would consider these things and lay them up in their hearts, and
practice them in their lives. But do they not rather glory in these things, as
though they had not received them, or at least knew not for what end they had
received them? When they are become as great as Haman, do they not prove like
unto Haman, even such as think of nothing but of oppressing, and undoing, and
murdering the people of God? When they are become as rich as Nabal, do they
not prove as churlish and as ill conditioned as Nabal, even such as will part
with nothing for the releeuing of the necessities of the poor Saints of God?
When they are become as wise as Ahitophel, do they not prove like unto
Ahitophel, even such as use their wisdom and counsel unto the utter ruin of
Gods children, and desolation of his inheritance? The world sees, and let the
world judge whether it be so, or no. As for us, men and brethren, let us know,
that the wise man is not to glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his
strength, nor the rich man in his riches, but he that rejoices is to rejoice
in the Lord, who gives him wisdom, and honor, and strength, and riches, and
all things plenteously. Neither is he for these things, or any things of like
sort, to advance himself above his brethren, as though he were the man unto
whom all men should bow, and on whom all men's eyes should be set; but he is so
to use these things to Gods glory, and to the good and comfort of his brethren,
and to make himself equal unto them of the lowest degree. This (I say) let us
know, and let our knowledge break forth into all holy practice, that so we may
live without pride, and disdain, and contempt one of another, submitting your
selves one unto another, every man esteeming other better than himself, and
communicating the things wherewithal God has blessed us, whether wisdom, or
knowledge, or riches, or what else soever to the good one of another with all
cherfulness, and in all singleness of heart. And let this be spoken
touching that which in general all men who are any way advanced above their
brethren may learn from this great mildness of the Apostle, in equalling
Epaphroditus almost with himself, and magnifying the gifts and graces of Gods
spirit in him, notwitstanding that he was far inferior unto the Apostle.

2. From this same example they in particular that are of greater places in the
ministry may learn a good lesson, which is not to extenuate and lessen the
gifts and graces of Gods spirit in their inferior brethren, but to honor and
esteem whatsoever graces of God in them, though far meaner then those in
themselves. For are they not worthily reproved, which say, as it is in Esaias,
stand apart, come not near to me; Esaias 65.5.
for I am holier then thou? And are they not as worthily to be reproved, who
because of their places and gifts above their brethren carry themselves
insolently toward their brethren, and in stead of countenancing and gracing
them do vilify and disgrace them, notwithstanding the good gifts and graces
of God in them? Who greater in the Church then Paul was? and whose gifts
greater then were his? If he then so countenanced those who were his inferiors
much in the ministry that he called them his brethren, his companions in
labor, his fellow soldiers, if he for such gifts and graces of Gods spirit as
he saw in them, though far inferior unto his own, yet loved and honored them
for them, why should it not be thought a thing most beseeming them who are of
eminent gifts and place in the Church herein to follow the holy example of the
blessed Apostle? Why should not they use those that are their inferiors in the
ministry as their brethren, as their companions in labor, as their
fellow soldiers? Why should no^ they grace, and encourage, and stir up Gods
graces in their inferiors? Humbleness, and meeknes, and brotherly kindness
much beseems all the children of God one toward another, but most of all the
Ministers of Christ Jesus on^ toward another. And if in whomsoever they be,
the gifts and graces of God are by all men to be acknowledged and to be
honored, then surely especially in the Ministers by them that are Ministers of
Jesus Christ with them, howsoever in place they be above them. This point might
be much enlarged, and what the practice is might be observed, and most worthly
reproved, if this place were as fit for the urging, as the time requires the
urging of this point. But my especial desire and purpose is in this place to
insist and stand upon such things as may be most for your use.

LECTVRE XLIII.
PHILIP. 2. Verse 26. For he longed after all you, and was full of heaviness,
because ye heard that he had been sick.
IT remains now that we proceed unto the causes why the Apostle sent
Epaphroditus now presently unto the Philippians, if first we shall observe one
or two notes from one or two of those titles wherewithal the Apostle honors
him in the 25. verse.

Amongst those titles wherewithal the Apostle honoreth Epaphroditus, ye see
how he calls him his companion in labor. In labor? In what labor? In the
preaching of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, and in the building up of his body by
the work of his ministry. What then? Is preaching of the Gospel of God such
a labor? Is the work of the ministry, and the teaching of the people in the
ways of God such a matter that it is to be counted or called a labor? Surely
no, in many men's account it is not. An easy matter and no labor at all for a
Minister to speak an hour unto his people. What pains can this take him?
What toil can be in this work? No more but turn the cock, and then the
water gushes out. He is either worth little, or else too too dainty, that will
not come at every call unto the people to preach to them. Thus many account
this work little or no labor. Well, is cunning in a race where there is
striving for the maistery, or for the winning of the price, or of the crown
that they run for, is thi^ any labor? They in those Countries where this
running is much used can tell that it is a labor. And how often does the Holy
Ghost compare the work of the ministry unto this running in a race? To go
no farther for proof, we heard and spoke of this comparison in the 16 verse of
this chapter, Phil. 2.16
where the Apostle exhorted them unto their duties both toward God and men
that he might rejoice in the day of Christ, that he had not run in vain, nor
labored in vain, that he had not run nor labored in vain: what is that?
that is, that hi^ preaching amongst them had not bin in vain unto them.
Again, is the work of the husbandman, whose work has end, but is
continually either dunging, or tilling, or reaping or gathering in the fruits
of his ground, or hedging, or ditching or the like, is this any labor? The
husbandman knows, and we can easily imagine that it is a labor. And does not
the Holy Ghost sometimes call the Ministers of the Gospel Gods husbandmen, and
you that hear, Gods husbandry, and oftentimes compare them unto husbandmen? We
together (says the Apostle) are as Gods laborers, 1 Cor. 3 9.
and ye are Gods husbandry, and Gods building. Where it appears by the
antithesis between the Minister and the people, that the Minister is called
Gods labourer, that is, Gods husbandman, even as the people are called Gods
husbandry. And in the latter Epistle to Timothy the Minister is plainly
compared unto an husbandman, 2 Timothy 2.6.
whose portion it is to labor before he receive the fruits. Again, is the
work wherein men through painfulnesse and earnestness do even weary
themselves, is it any labor? If any be, then certainly that is. And does not
the holy Ghost so speak of the Ministers work as of a work wherein they even
weary themselves with hard labor? We beseech you (says the Apostle) that ye
know them which labor among you, 1 Th. 5.12. (...).
and are over you in the Lord; which labor, that is, which painfully and
earnestly labor amongst you till they be weary. But what need more proofs for
this point? The Minister that will speak plainly to the understanding of his
people, that will speak soundly unto the heart of his people, that will speak
in the evidence of the spirit unto his people, that cares what and to what
purpose he speak unto his people, must certainly labor both for speaking
plainly, and soundly, and in the evidence of the spirit, and for speaking to
good purpose. Nay what part is there of his ministry which is not full of
labor? Ier. 1.
To pluck up, to root out, to throw down, to build, and to plant, all works
of the Minister, all great works, and all works full of labor. So that
whatsoever account men make of the work of the ministry, and of the
preaching of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, it is a work full of labor, no
less painful to the mind, then is the work of the husbandman, or artificer
to the body, and consequently the Apostle well called Epaphroditus his
companion in labor, even in a painful labor, in preaching the Gospel of
Christ Jesus.

This should teach the people over whom the Lord has made them overseers,
willingly to yield unto them whatsoever duty by the Law of God or man
belongs unto them, whether it be of maintenance for their liuelihood, or of
reverence unto their persons. And first for their maintenance, it is the
Apostle his disputation in the former to the Corinthians, that those which sow
unto others spiritual things, should reap their carnal things. 1 Cor. 9.11.
If we have sown unto you spiritual things, says the Apostle, is it a great
thing if we reap your carnal things? 13.
Do ye not know that they which minister about the holy things, eat of the
things of the Temple; and they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the
Altar? So also, 14.
says the Apostle by way of application, has the Lord ordained that they
which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. For as the Apostle had
said before, 7.
Who goes a warfare any time at his own cost? or who planteth a vineyard, and
eats not of the fruit thereof? or who feeds a flock, and eats not of the
milk of the flock? As if he should have said, no man does so. The reason
whereof he brings out of the Law of Moses: 9.
For it is written (says he) in the Law of Moses, Thou shall not muzzell the
mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn. In which whole disputation, that
being presupposed and taken as granted, which I have proved, namely that the
work of the ministry is no idle speculation, but a painful and hard labor,
ye see how the Apostle infers thereupon, as I now do being taught by him,
that seeing the Ministers of the Gospel do labor and watch for our souls,
as they that must give account unto God for them, therefore we should give
unto them that portion which is due unto them for their maintenance, and this
we should do with all cheerfulness as unto the Lord. Now how this duty
toward them is every where almost neglected, they that live abroad see and
know too well: for so it is, that every little is now too much for the
Minister; if he may have some reasonable portion of that whole which is due
unto him, it is thought that he is very well used; if any thing of his due may
be concealed and kept from him, it is thought to be very well saved, and better
so saved then ill spent: for so commonly they account of that which they give
unto the Minister, albeit it be not theirs, but his which they give. Far
otherwise then it was in the times of greatest ignorance, and blindest
superstition: for then they thought they could not give enough unto their
Massing Priest, and now they think they cannot pull enough away from the
teaching Minister; then they thought every penny better bestowed then other upon
their Confessor, now they think every penny worse bestowed then other upon
their Pastor. But it is no new thing to see blind devotion sometimes to carry
men further then does sound and sincere religion. How ready were the people of
Israel to pluck off the golden earings from their ears to give them unto
Aaron to make a molten calfe withal? Exodus 32.3.
Judge. 17.10
How liberal was Micah unto the Leuite, to get him to stay with him to be unto
him a father and a Priest? And so it falls out very often, that in time of
darkness and ignorance men are more enflamed toward the Church and Pastors
thereof, with a blind zeal, then with a true zeal in the clear light of the
Gospel. Well, let us know that we are to give unto them that labor amongst
us, and watch over our souls, that which is due unto them, whether it be of
maintenance for their liuelihood, or of reverence unto their persons. And for
conclusion of this point, let that one place of the Apostle serve for both
these purposes, where he says that those Elders especially which labor in
the word and doctrine are worthy of double honor, 1 Timothy 5.17
which is, as diverse do expound it, of maintenance for their life, and of
reverence unto their persons. They are Gods laborers, both laboring for God,
and ^o bring us unto God: let us therefore carry our selves toward them as
toward Gods Vice gerents upon earth, giving unto them with all cheerefulnes
that which is due unto them, as unto the Lord. And let this suffice touching
this, that Paul calls Epaphroditus his companion in labor.

Again, he calls him his fellow-souldier. What then? Paul or Epaphroditus,
were they soldiers? Went they forth to battle? Were not the Levites, and are
not the Ministers of the Gospel of Christ Jesus exempted from service in
war? Is the Minister to labor like an husbandman, and besides also to fight
as a soldier? Yea certainly, Paul and Epaphroditus were fellow soldiers:
neither are any of the Ministers of Christ exempted from war, but fight they
must, and soldiers they must be. But neither are their weapons carnal
wherewithal they must fight, neither are the enemies against which they must
fight so much flesh and blood, as spiritual wickednesses, and the princes of
the darkness of this world. They are soldiers to fight with the sword of the
spirit against every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of
God, and to bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. In
this then that the Apostle calls Epaphroditus his fellow-souldier, we are
put in mind as of the state of all Christians in general, so of the Ministers
of the Gospel in particular, namely that the life of all Christians in
general, and of the Ministers of the Gospel in particular, is nothing else
but a continual warfare, wherein we must still play the soldiers, and still
fight. We look for a City where there shall be no more death, no more sorrow,
no more crying, no more pain, neither any enemies to fight withal, where we
shall triumph over every enemy that has exalted himself against us, and
where we shall reign and ever be with the Lord in the kingdom of Christ
Jesus for ever and ever. But whiles we are members of the militant Church here
upon earth, no man better or worse, rich or poor, may promise rest unto
himself, but all must stand upon their guard, and all must always be in a
readiness to fight. Job 7.1.
Whereupon Job calls the life of man a warfare, because together with his
life his warfare shall only have an end. And our Savior tells us, that the
day has enough with his own grief, that is, Matt. 6.34
never a day of a man's life which brings not grief enough with it upon it own
back. Now the enemies which we have to fight withal, are the world without
us, the flesh within us, and the devil seeking continually like a roaring Lion
to devour us; none of all which want either will, or skill, or might to
overthrow us, unless we hold fast the rejoicing of our hope unto the end. The
flesh has so many sugared baits and deceitful delights to allure men unto the
enticements thereof, that sometimes David's, and Salomons, and men after Gods
own heart, cannot avoid the snares thereof, but are entangled therewith. The
world likewise has so many ways to deceive, as that even the Disciples of
Christ Jesus cannot avoid it, but be deceived thereby. And the devil so
furiously rages, as that the Son of God Christ Jesus himself cannot avoid
his manifold tentations. These are those enemies which we have all of us to
fight withal, and these we shall have to fight withal so long as we live in
this flesh, and whatsoever battery any of these or all these can lay against
our souls we shall be sure of it whiles we live in this world: Romans 7.23.
for the flesh evermore rebelleth against the spirit, and ever strives to
lead us captive unto the law of sin which is in our members. The world
likewise knows not the Lord, but the amity of the world is the enmity of
God, Ioh. 17.25. Iam. 1 4. Ioh. 2.15. 1 Pet. 5 8.
and if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. The
devil likewise seeks continually like a roaring Lion whom he may devour.
Nothing to rid any of us from the assaults of all these till death, and
therefore all of us must be soldiers and fight against all these, as in our
baptism all of us have promised, so long as we carry about with us our
earthly house of this Tabernacle.

And as this is the state of all Christians in general, to live in continual
fight against their spiritual enemies, so the Minister in particular has a
chief part in this fight. I will not stand to enlarge this point. The devil
knows that if the shepherd can be turned out of the way, his sheep will
quickly be scattered; and if he can make the Angel of the Church of the
Laodiceans to be neither hot nor cold, he will quickly bring the Church unto
his bent. And therefore he bends his full force against them, arming both the
flesh, and the world, and himself against them, to see if he can overthrow
them, even as he did against Christ, desirous to break the head, whereas his
power was limited only to bruise the heel.

Now what should this teach us? Surely first it should teach us this lesson,
that since we have such enemies continually to deal withal, therefore we
should put on the whole armor of God, that we may be able to resist in the
evil day, and having finished all things, stand fast: for so the Apostle
teaches us in the last to the Ephesians, where having set down what enemies
we have to wrestle against, as against principalities, against powers, Ephesians.
6.12.
etc. For this cause, says he, take unto you the whole armor of God, etc.
Yea but what is this armor of God, which may serve as the best armor of
proof against these mighty enemies which we have to wrestle and encounter
withal? The Apostle sets it down in the same place The girdle wherewithal
our loins must be girded must be verity, and integrity of doctrine: 14.
our breast plate which we must have on our breast for the defense thereof, must
be righteousness and holiness of life: 15.
the shoes wherewithal our feet must be shod, must be the preparation of the
Gospel of peace, even a prompt and ready mind to confess and embrace the
Gospel of peace: 16.
the shield wherewithal we may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked, must
be faith, which (as John says) is the victory whereby we overcome the world:
1 Ioh. 5.4.
17.
our helmet for our head must be the hope of salvation purchased by the death
and passion of our Savior Christ Jesus: our sword wherewithal to wound our
enemy must be the word of God: and prayer and supplication in the spirit is
also a necessary part of our armor, if we will be so thoroughly armed that we
will be without all gunshot, as they say. This is that armor which the
Apostle prescribes us both to defend our selves, and to offend our enemies
withal; and this armor if we put on, we shall be able to stand against all
the assaults of the devil, for here is armor for the whole body, from the
head to the foot, unless we will turn our back upon our enemy.

Now consider this, men and brethren, and lay it unto your hearts. Ye cannot
but see by this which has been spoken, that ye have great enemies every one
of you to encounter withal: ye cannot but see that the whole armor of God is
necessary for you if ye will be safe from your enemies. If either ye want your
helmet and head piece, which is the hope of salvation by Jesus Christ, or if
ye want your breast plate, which is righteousness and innocence of life, or
if ye want the sword of the spirit, which is the word of life, or if ye want
the girdle of your loins, which is verity and soundness in religion, or if
ye want your shoes, which is a mind prepared and ready to embrace the
Gospel of peace, or if besides all these things, ye be fainting and failing
in prayer and supplication in the spirit, in such parts as these are wanting,
one or more, ye are disarmed, and lie open unto every stroke of that enemy
which wounds deadly, and every of whose venewes are as so many stings of
death. It is the Apostle James his advice, Resist the devil, and he will fly
from you. Iam. 4 7.
Would ye then have your great enemy the devil to fly from you? Ye must not
turn your back and fly from him: for having no armor, as even now I told
you, for your back parts, if ye fly, he follows, and strikes, and wounds
deadly, because there is no armor to keep back the force of his stroke. If
ye will put him to flight, ye must stand to him, and resist him. Now your
resistance must be by putting on this armor of God; and if the whole armor be
not put on, the enemy quickly espies his advantage, and there assaults where
any part of the armor wants. Now will ye know whither to come for this armor
of God, and where to have it? Come to the word of God, and the Gospel of
peace, there shall ye have it, and there shall ye learn so to put it on, that
the enemy, would he never so feign, yet shall not be able to hurt you. This is
that word, unto the reverent hearing and embracing whereof I do often exhort
you, neither can I ever too much exhort you. And now again I tell you, that if
ye will stand fast in the evil day, if ye will be safe from such enemies as
wound the soul deadly, if ye will as good soldiers so fight that ye will
never fly, then must ye let the word of the Lord dwell in you plentifully:
for so, and so only, ye shall be mighty through God to cast down holds,
and every thing that exalts it self against God, whether it be the lust of
the flesh, or the lust of the eyes, or the pride of life, or whatsoever other
thing else of the world it be.

The second lesson which this should teach us, is, that if our whole life be
nothing else but a continual warfare against such mortal enemies, then should
we desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, rather then to continue
still in such a vale of misery, where there is continual fighting. After a
sore and sharp fight at Sea, or at Land, continued by the space of seven or
eight hours, or happily a whole day together, would we blame them if then
they did desire rest, or rather would we not marvel at them if then they
should not desire rest? Now the fight which we maintain against our
spiritual enemies, is not only for the space of certain hours, or days,
but for days and nights, even for the whole term and course of our life.
Should it not then seem a thing marvelous and strange, that we should not
desire peace and to have our warfare at an end? Yet who is he that is not loath
to lay down his house of clay? Who is he almost, that when death knockes at
his door, would not live a little longer if he might? Yet let me not here be
mistaken: for I do not say this as if I liked of this, that men should desire
to be loosed from the bonds of this life before the time appointed of the Lord
come. Nay let the children of God submit themselves unto his will, who will
dislodge them when it seems best to his godly wisdom; and in the mean time
let them this know, and therein comfort themselves, that howsoever their fight
be long and great, yet that the Lord has so done with their enemies, as Judah
dealt with Adonibezek, Judge. 1.6.
even cut off the thumbes of their hands and feet, that is, so abated their
power, and broken their strength, that though they continually assault them,
yet can they never prevail against them. This therefore I do not say as if I
liked that any should desire to die before his time appointed of the Lord come,
but rather to lesson us in this, that when our glass is run, and our time
appointed of the Lord come, we should not then be unwilling to lay down our
lives, but rather be then glad and rejoice that our warfare is at an end, and
that we shall be joined with our head Christ Jesus. A man would think we
should greatly desire to be delivered from these miseries whereunto this life
is subject, rather to triumph over our enemies, then to live still at the
staves end with them; rather to reign with Christ in the valley of blessing,
where there is peace, and joy, and life for evermore, then to fight under
Christ in the valley of tears, where he shall bear away many strokes, though
not any deadly wounds, because his life is hid with Christ in God. What then
should be the cause why we should not most willingly lay down our lives in
the time of death? Surely in my judgment it is because in the time of our
health we mind too much earthly things, and set our affections too little on
the things that are above. For if in the time of our health our conversation
were in heaven, as it should be, we would most patiently and willingly look
for the Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body
that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, and when death approached
we would cry with the Apostle, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. To conclude this
point therefore when our time appointed of the Lord comes, let us willingly lay
down our lives, and let us be glad and rejoice that our warfare is at an end.
And to the end that in the time of death we may do so, let our conversation in
the mean time, in the time of health be in heaven; let us set our affections
on the things that are above, and not on the things which are on the earth.

For he longed after all you etc.] In these words the Apostle sets down the
cause why he now presently sent Epaphroditus unto the Philippians, and did not
stay him till either Timothy or himself should come unto them. The cause was
(as appears by the Apostle) because Epaphroditus greatly longed, it is not
said after his own people, and them of his own family, but because he longed
after the Church at Philippi, neither so only, but after all the Church at
Philippi; neither did he only long after them all, but so he longed that he
was full of heaviness till he might come unto them. And why did he so long
after them that he was full of heaviness till he might come unto them? The
Apostle says, because the Philippians had heard of his sickness. Epaphroditus
then longed after all the Church at Philippi, and was full of heaviness till
he might come unto them, and therefore the Apostle sent him presently unto
them; and again, Epaphroditus knew that the Philippians had heard of his
sickness, and therefore he longed after them all, and was full of heaviness
till he might come unto them. To knit up then both the causes in one, and to
gather the sum of all, the cause why the Apostle sent Epaphroditus now
presently unto them, was because Epaphroditus having heard that the Philippians
knew of his sickness, longed greatly after them all, and was full of
heaviness till he might come unto them, and comfort them over his sickness,
lest they should be swallowed up of too much grief for both Paul's bands, and
his sickness.

Here then I note what mutual love and affection there should be between the
Pastor, and his people, even the like that was between Epaphroditus and his
people of Philippi. The Pastor his sickness or sorrow whatsoever should be the
peoples sorrow and heaviness of heart: and again, the peoples trouble of
mind or affliction of body should be the Pastors anguish of soul, and
vexation of spirit. So it was between Epaphroditus and his Church at Philippi,
as here we see: and so it was between Paul, and all the Churches, at least on
his part, as himself witnesses, saying, that such was his care of all the
Churches, 2 Cor. 11.29.
that if any were weak he was also weak, and if any were offended he also
burned. And I wish I could truly instance in the like affection between many
Pastors and their people in this our day. But such examples are not every where
with us: nay in too many places with us the Pastor cares not if he may have
their fleece, though he never see or hear of his people and flock: and
again in too many places the people care not, if they may have their forth in
their own delights, and desires, though they never see or hear of their
Pastor. Yea so far are they from this sympathy and mutual love and
affection one toward another, that so the one may have his profit, and the
other their pleasure, they are not much touched without any further respect
either of other. Well, it should not be so, but the joy of the one should be
the joy of the other, and the grief of the one should be the grief of the
other.

Now here happily it may be demanded, why either Epaphroditus or the
Philippians should be so full of heaviness, and take the matter so much to
heart, seeing his sickness, which was the cause of all this heaviness, came
unto him by the will of God, and his gracious providence. Whereunto in one word
I answer, that this mutual heaviness one for another was only an argument of
their mutual love one of another, not any argument of their ignorance or doubt
of Gods providence in his sickness. Our Savior Christ, as we read, groned in
the spirit, and was troubled in himself, Joh. 11.33.
and wept for the death of Lazarus. This showed his great love of Lazarus, as
the Jews very well gathered, saying, behold how he loved him: 36.
but will any man gather hence that he knew not or doubted of Gods providence
in his death? Nay himself plainly said in the beginning of that chapter, that
that sickness was not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the son of
God might be glorified thereby. So that albeit he knew that his death was by
Gods providence, God so providing that his Son might thereby be glorified,
yet such was his love toward him that he wept, and was much troubled for him.
Well then Epaphroditus and the Philippians might be full of heaviness each for
other, in regard of that love and tender affection which they had each to
other, and yet might they well both acknowledge the providence of God in his
sickness, which was the cause of heaviness each in other. To the point in
general in one word I say, that in that love which we bear, and ought to
bear one toward another we may be sorry one for the things that befall unto
another, albeit we know certainly of the providence of Almighty God therein:
yet so in love one toward another we must be sorrowful one for another, that
our faith in Gods providence must stint our sorrow that it be not exceeding
sorrowful, because we know that all things work for the best for Gods
children.

LECTVRE XLIV.
PHILIP. 2. Verse 27. And no doubt he was sick very near unto death: but God
had mercy on him, and not on him only, etc.
AND no doubt he was sick, etc.] In these words the holy Apostle 1. confirms
that report which the Philippians had heard touching their Ministers sickness,
that it was no vain or false report, but a very true report; and secondly
he signifies his recovery, and restoring unto health. That the report which
they had heard was true, the Apostle does assure them, first affirming his
sickness, and no doubt he was sick, and then the extremity of his sickness,
very near unto death. In the signification of his recovery and restoring unto
health, which is in the next words, the Apostle 1. sets down the cause of
his recovery, which was Gods mercy, but God had mercy on him. 2. The extent
of Gods mercy herein, which was not to Epaphroditus alone, but to Paul also,
and not on him only, but on me also. 3. The cause why the Lord in mercy to
Paul also restored him unto health, to wit, least he should have sorrow upon
sorrow. i. least his sorrow which he had by his own bonds and imprisonment
should be increased by the death of Epaphroditus their Minister, least I should
have sorrow upon sorrow. The words need no farther opening or explicating, being
in themselves easy enough to be understood. Let us therefore now see what
notes and observations we may gather hence, whereof we may make some use unto
our selves.

1. Here we see that Epaphroditus a faithful servant of Jesus Christ, a
painful Minister of the Church, one whom the holy Apostle made that reckoning
of that he called him his brother, his companion in labor, his
fellow-souldier, was sick, and that very sore sick. Whence I gather this
observation, that the children of God, and most faithful servants of Jesus
Christ are subject, as unto many miseries, and troubles, and infirmities of
this life, so unto sickness and diseases of the body. How faithful a servant
of Jesus Christ Timothy was ye heard a little before upon occasion of the
Apostle his promise to send him unto the Philippians verse. 19. And how subject
he was unto sickness may appear by that advise which the Apostle gives unto
him in his former Epistle unto him, 1 Timothy 5.23.
where he advises him to drink no longer water, but to use a little wine for
his stomachs sake, and for his often infirmities. Of Epaphroditus his sickness
likewise ye see how plain testimony the Apostle gives in this place. Nay
what child of God freed or exempted from bearing of this cross, and drinking
of this cup? What shall we say then? Are not sicknesses and diseases of the
body the rod of Gods wrath a herewithall he does punish the sin and
rebellion of the wicked? Or does the Lord lay the rod of his wrath wherewith
he punishes the wicked, upon his own children and faithful servants? True it
is, that sickness and diseases of the body are the rod of Gods wrath
wherewith he punishes the disobedience and rebellion of the wicked, as the
Scriptures plainly prove unto us. Let that one place in Deuterenomie serve for
all the rest; where the Lord having made great promises of blessings unto them
that obey his commandments, afterward threatens curses and plagues unto them
that will not obey his voice, and keep his commandments. And amongst other of
those plagues which the Lord would bring upon them, Deuteronomy. 28.2.3.15.
it is said, the Lord shall smite thee with a consumption, and with the fever,
and with a burning ague, and with a fervent heat etc. Where ye see plainly
that consumptions, and feauers, and hot-burning agues, and such like diseases
are reckoned among those plagues and rods of his wrath wherewith he punishes
the sins of that Land, 22
or that Country, or that town, or that people whatsoever that will not
hearken unto his voice, nor obey his commandments. And may we not justly fear
that the Lord has taken this rod into his hand, and already begun to
punish us therewith? Look unto the disobedience, and rebellion, and neglect of
walking in the ways of Gods commandments that is generally amongst us, and
see whether we have not given him cause to take this rod, and to punish us
therewith? Again, look unto such hot agues, unto such sharp, and strange,
and pestilentiall diseases and sicknesses as are now generally amongst us, and
see whether he have not begun to do with us as he threatened in his law?
Surely for our sins, even because we have not obeyed his voice, and done
after his commandments, he has taken his rod, and already begun thus to
punish us therewith. And this rod of his wrath, as we our selves may see, he
does lay even upon his own children, and faithful servants as well as he does
upon the wicked and ungodly of the earth: but yet with this difference. Upon
the ungodly he lays this rod of his wrath, in wrath and displeasure to
render unto them according to the wickedness of their ways: the same rod
also he lays upon his children, not in wrath, but in love to reform them and
to reclaim them from the wickedness of their ways. Upon the ungodly he
lays this rod and the stroke thereof enrageth them against God, so that in
their sickness they are not only with out all comfort and patience, but like
unto cursed Caine they cry, my sickness is greater then I am able to bear,
why am I thus, what a severe judge is this that lies his hand so heavily upon
me; the same rod also he lies upon his children, but he gives them
patience under the rod, and strength to bear whatsoever he lays upon them,
so that in their sickness they are comfortable both in themselves, and unto
others. So that albeit the same rod lie upon both, yet does God lay it upon
them with great difference. Which yet will better and more plainly appear
unto us if we shall briefly touch some of those reasons why he lies this
rod upon his children, why his children are visited with sickness. One
reason is, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 11.32.
that being chastened of the Lord they may not be condemned with the world. For
such is the loving mercy of the Lord toward his children, that when they have
either omitted some such duty as they ought to have performed, or committed
some such sin as they ought not to have done, he as a loving father toward
his tender child whom he dearly loves, corrects and chastises them with
the rod of sickness, or weakness, or some such like rod, that so they may
see their own error and be healed. For this cause, says the Apostle, many are
weak and sick among you, 30.
and many sleep. For this cause: for what cause? even for not discerning the
Lord his body in coming unto the communion of the body and blood of Christ. In
which place the Apostle plainly shows, that therefore many of Gods children
are weak, and sick, and die, even because they do not duly and diligently
examine themselves before they come unto the celebration of the Lord his
supper. But, says he, when we are judged and punished, we are chastened of
the Lord as children of their father, that we should not be condemned with the
world, even with the wicked men of the world, whose portion is in the lake that
burns with fire and brimstone for ever. Sometimes then Gods children are
sick, that so their error, or their negligence, or their wickedness may be
reformed, and they brought into the right way wherein they should walk.
Another reason is, that so they may be stayed from such inordinate ways as
whereunto naturally they are bent, and wherein sometimes they would walk if
they were not holden back as with a bridle. For whose delight in the ways of
the Lord is so entire and so altogether vncorrupt before him. That he makes,
as he should do, his law his whole delight, and his counselor? Nay whose
paths are so straight that he has not an ouerweening delight in some crooked
by-pathes? or whose will and desire, and affections are so sanctified that they
are not often inclined, and sometimes carried as it were with a maine stream
unto that which is evil? And therefore the Lord only wise knowing best what is
best for his children, sometimes visits them with sickness, that so being
exercised with his rod they may not run into such danger of body and soul
as otherwise they would. A third reason why the children of God are sick
sometimes is, that thereby he may make trial of their faith, and of their
patience, to see whether they can be conrent as to receive health, so to
receive sickness of the Lord, and whether as in health, so in sickness they
will put their trust in the Lord, and submit themselves unto his will. For both
health and sickness they are of the Lord, and both in health and in sickness
we should put our trust in the Lord, and submit our selves unto his will. Yet
so choice we are that we can be content to receive health from the Lord, but
hardly to receive sickness from the Lord, and so weak we are even the best
of us that howsoever we do in health, yet in sickness we can hardly submit
our selves unto God his will, and oftentimes more put our trust in Physicians
then in the Lord, 2 Cron. 16.
as we read that that good King of Judah Asa did, therein declining from that
right path wherein he ought to have walked. Sometimes then as I say Gods
children are sick that the Lord their God may so try whether they will still
cleave fast unto him, and patiently submit themselves unto his will. A fourth
reason why the Lo^d sometimes visits his children with sickness is, that
they also may have a farther trial of the merciful goodness of the Lord
toward them. For albeit his children are never without great experiences of
his merciful goodness toward them, yet wherein have they greater experience
thereof, and wherein their soul more to rejoice then that in the time of their
sickness he assisteth them with the comfort of his holy spirit, and gives
them strength and patience to endure what he lays upon them, and suffers
not their faith, or their hope to fail, but so prepares them unto him, that
come death, come life, they can willingly embrace either, because they know
that come death, come life they are the Lords. An especial great goodness of
the Lord toward his children. Whereof they have such trial in time of their
sickness as that thereby not themselves alone, but such as are about them are
and may be greatly comforted. And sometimes no doubt they are sick that
seeing the goodness of the Lord toward them in time of their sickness; they
may the rather praise the Lord for his goodness, and study to glorify his
name in the time of their health. Not to trouble you with more reasons hereof,
the last reason why the Lord visits his children with sickness is, to put
them in mind both of that sin which dwells in them, and also of their
mortality. For sickness is both the fruit of sin, and also the Harbinger
of death. For howsoever sin be not the only cause wherefore sickness
comes, yet is it always a cause wherefore it is sent: insomuch that we see
when our Savior healed some that were sick, he would say sometimes unto
them, some be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee: Math. 9 2.
In which speech he gave them this note, that sin was the principal cause of
their sickness: and sometimes he would say unto them, Behold thou art made
whole, sin no more, least a worse thing come unto thee; wherein in effect he
told them that their sickness was a chasticement for their sin. And again
howsoever death does not always follow sickness, yet ought sickness always to
put us in mind of our mortality. Well it may be that those our houses of clay
which in this or that sickness threaten to fall, may for a time be patched up
again, yet they which threaten now to fall, at length shall fall, and down to
the ground they shall be brought. For as the Psalm mist speaks, who lives
that shall not see death, Psa. 89 47.
or who shall be able to deliver himself from the hand of the grave? Of the
dust of the earth we are, and to earth we shall return; and so many sicknesses
as we are visited withal should be unto us as so many remembrances both of
that sin which cleaves so fast unto us, and likewise of death which is the
fruit thereof. Thus then ye see the reasons why the Lord lies this rod of
sickness upon his own children, namely, as a merciful and loving father to
reform whatsoever error, negligence, or other fault is in them, to keep them
back as with a bridle from inordinate walking, to make trial of their faith,
and patience, to give them trial of his merciful goodness toward them, and
to put them in mind of sin dwelling in them, and of their mortality. Whereby
also ye may easily discern in what a different sort the Lord lays on this
rod on the godly, and on the ungodly; on the one as a father, on the other as
a judge, on the one in love, on the other in wrath, on the one to chastise and
correct, on the other to punish and revenge, on the one to reform the
wickedness of their ways, on the other to recompense them their wickedness,
on the one to save them from death and hell, on the other to bring them to the
pit of destruction.

Hence then may the children of God receive notable comfort in all their
sickness, and in all their visitations. For O thou (...) of God, and servant
of the most high, is the hand of thy God upon thee? art thou sick? This is no
other cup then ^paphroditus has drunk before thee, or then is common unto
thee with all the sons of God. And albeit thou may seem unto thy self
that thou art not privileged from the wicked and ungodly, because thou
drinkest of the cup of his wrath, because thou art visited with sickness as well
as they, and perhaps more then they, yet pluck up thine heart, be not
discouraged, but be of good comfort. For he does not rebuke thee in his anger,
neither does he chastise thee in his displeasure: but as a merciful and
loving father, in tender love and in great compassion by this his gentle hand
and loving correction he calls thee to remembrance of thy ways, and lets
thee see what thou art, and whether thou must. Thy heart is not sound and right
with thy God, thou art negligent in doing of his will, thou have walked in some
by-path wherein thou should not have walked; thus lovingly and mildly he
corrects thee that thou may reform the wickedness of thy ways, and
there may be an healing of thine error. Again, thou art walking where and
whether thou should not; thus he staieth thee that thou run not thy self
upon the rocks, and that thou make not shipwreck of faith and a goood
conscience. Again, thus he tries thee that thy faith and thy patience being
tried thou may be made like unto pure and fine gold purified seven times in
the fire. Again, thus he gives thee full trial of his merciful goodness
toward thee, comforting thee with the joy of the holy Ghost in the bed of
thy sickness, giving thee patience to endure his cross, confirming thy faith
in Christ Jesus, and assuring thee of the hope of thy salvation. Lastly, thus
he puts thee in mind of thy self, that thou should not forget thy God,
or thy self, but remembering that thou art both sinful, and mortal,
should shake of sin, and so number thy days that thou might apply
thine heart unto wisdom. O how should not the remembrance of these things
comfort thy soul when thou lie sick upon thy bed. Beloved in the time of
health let us think of these things, and in the day of sickness let us not be
discouraged. I have stood the longer upon this point because the time seems
unto me so to require. Many of our brethren the Lord has already taken unto
himself, many in many places are presently sick, and sharply visited, and
when our turn shall be he only knows who makes sick, and restores unto
health. In the mean time, let our health be to the glory of his name, and in
the time of sickness let us comfort our selves with these things.

I might here note the time when the Lord lay this his rod of sickness upon
Epaphroditus, which was even when he was faithfully and painfully occupied in
the work of Christ, when he was carefully discharging the trust reposed in him
by the Church of Philippie, when he was ministering unto the holy Apostle lying
then in prison such things as he wanted. Let it not therefore seem strange
unto us if when we are faithfully laboring in the works of our calling, even
then the Lord strike us with any rod, or visit us with sickness. Which note
I do the rather now point at by the way, because the manner of some is upon
such occasions to make wonderful ill collections. As for example: the Preacher
confuting a point of popish doctrine grows to be so sick that he is forced
to break off, and to come down before he can end the point. What is the
collection? Did not ye see, say some that are popishly affected, how the Lord
did even control his discourse, and by his judgment upon him gave sentence on
our side. Another example: the Judge from his seat of justice pronouncing
sentence against the wicked Traitor, or vilemalefactor, presently or quickly
after falls sick, and happily not long after dies. What is the collection?
Thus say some, has the Lord given judgment upon him for such judgment as he
gave against others? And thus because their foolishness cannot reach unto the
depth of Gods counsel and wisdom in his visitations, they condemn them whom
the Lord has not condemned, and judge that as unholy and ill, which the Lord
approves as holy and good. Whatsoever he does is holy and good, and if he
chastise us with his rods even then when we are doing his will, who shall ask
him a reason of that he does? Let us therefore learn to submit our selves unto
the Lord, and let us beware how we judge of things according to our own reason
and imagination, least happily we condemn that which the Lord has not
condemned. But my meaning was only to touch this by the way. Now a word of the
extremity of his sickness.

Very near unto death.] Here was the extremity of his sickness, Epaphroditus
had been sick, and so sick that he was very near unto death, even without
all hope of recovery of health in man's sight and judgment. Whence I note the
wonderful counsel and wisdom of our God, who oftentimes brings his children
even to the gates of hell, and thence calls them, to the pit of destruction,
and thence fetches them to deaths door, so that there is but a step between
them and death, and thence delivers them. Joseph was cast into the deep
dungeon, and his feet set fast in the stocks, and thence the Lord delivered
him. Jonas was cast into the sea, and there the Lord kept him alive. Daniel was
thrown into the den of Lions, and there the Lord rescued him, and delivered
him from the teeth of the Lions. The three children were cast into the hot
firie-furnace, and there God provided for them that the fire had no power over
them to burn no not an hair of their head. But most befitting our present
purpose is the example of that good King Ezechias, who was so sick that all
Physicians as we say in a case of extremity gave him over, and there was no
hope of life: insomuch that the Prophet Esaias came unto him, and said unto him,
Thus says the Lord, Esa. 38.1.
put thine house in an order: for thou salt die and not live. Here was even the
like extremity of sickness that Epaphroditus was brought unto. A step only
between them and death, or rather no steppel, but they delivered out of the
jaws of death as a pray out of the teeth of the wild beast, or as a bird out
of the snare of the fouler. And this the Lord may seem to do for these causes
amongst many other. 1. Thereby to make his power more to be known amongst the
sons of men. For what can more manifest the power of almighty God then to
save us when the pit is now ready to shut her mouth upon us, and nothing but
present death before us? 2. To increase their thankfulness who being brought
unto the gates of death are thence delivered. For how much nearer they were
unto death, so much greater praises are due unto him that has delivered them
from death. 3. Thereby to humble them for ever under his mighty hand by whom
they yet live, move, and have their being. For what should more humble us then
plainly to see that it is no way in our selves, but in the Lord only to save
our life from death, and to deliver us from the power of the grave?

Seeing then it pleases the Lord oftentimes to bring even his dearest
children, and choicest servants into such extremities, as of other dangers, so
of sickness, let us take heed how we judge them as plagued of God for their
offenses, because they are so extremely visited. Ye know it was the great
fault of Jobs friends that still they urged him that surely he was a great and
grievous sinner, a wicked and an ungodly man, because the Lord his hand was so
heavy upon him. Nay my brethren, though some of our brethren in these hot and
sharp diseases through extremity of pain, or otherwise howsoever, should
sometimes break out into impatient speeches, yet let us take heed how we judge
them as forsaken of the Lord, ye know the example of Job, into what
execrations, and words of impatiencie he brake out through that extremity of
grief wherewith he was holden: who yet was a very choice servant of the Lord,
and whose patience is commended in the Scriptures.

Again, seeing it pleases the Lord oftentimes to bring even his dearest
children, and choicest servants into such extremities of sickness, let this be
a comfort unto us in what extremity of sickness so ever we shall be. For no
new thing herein does befall us, but such as oftentimes does the dearest
children of God, and he which delivered them from the hand of the grave when
the pit had even shut her mouth almost upon them, will also deliver us if it
shall be for his glory, and our good. Sickness, and extremity of sickness
all are of the Lord, and all for the best unto his children. Let us therefore
in all things that befall us so submit our selves unto the will of the Lord, as
that both in heart and voice we ever pray and say, thy will be done in earth as
it is in heaven.

LECTVRE XLV.
PHILIP. 2. Verse 27. But God had mercy on him, and not on him only, but on me
also, lest I should have sorrow upon sorrow.
But God had mercy on him] Where the Apostle first sets down the cause of
his recovery and restoring unto health, which was Gods mercy. 2. The extent
and bountifulnes of Gods mercy therein, reaching not to Epaphroditus alone, but
to Paul also. 3. The Apostle sets down the cause why the Lord in mercy
toward him also restored Epaphroditus unto health, to wit, left he should have
sorrow upon sorrow,.i. lest unto that sorrow which already he had by his bands
and imprisonment there should have been added another sorrow for his death.
The words are so plain and easy in themselves to be understood, that there
needs no farther opening or explication of them. Let us therefore see what
notes and observations we may gather hence whereof we may make some use unto
our selves.

But God had mercy on him] By which phrase of speech the Apostle signifies
Epaphroditus his recovery and restoring unto health: Yet see how the Apostle
was not content barely to say, but he was restored unto health; but signifying
even this same thing he withal notes both who restored him, and wherefore he
was restored unto health, saying, But God had etc. As if he should have said,
but God for his mercies sake restored him unto health. Whence I note, that it
is the Lord that wounds, and makes whole, that both visits us with
sickness, and also holds our soul in life, and heals all our infirmities.
For so the Lord himself says, Behold now, for I, Deuteronomy. 32.29
I am he, and there is no God with me, I kill, and give life, I wound, and I
make whole. And again in Exodus says the Lord, Ex. 15.26.
I am the Lord that heals thee. And therefore the Prophet thus prays, Heal
me o Lord, and I shall be whole, save me, I^r. 17.14. Ps. 103.2.3.
and I shall be saved. And the Prophet David thus stirs up himself to
praise the Lord, saying, Praise the Lord o my soul, and forget not all his
benefits, which forgiueth all thy sin, and heals all thine infirmities, or,
all thy sicknesses and diseases. It is the Lord then ye see that heals our
sickness, and holds our soul in life; yea it is even he that delivers us
both from the first, and likewise from the second death. Yet I would not here
be so mistaken, as if I judged that because it is the Lord that heals our
infirmities, therefore in the bed of our sickness we should only call upon the
Lord, and neglect the means ordained for the recovery of our health. For as
he has appointed the end, so has he ordained the means unto the end: And
albeit sometimes he work without means, and restore unto health without any
medicine or physic at all, yet most ordinarily he works by means, and
restores unto health by medicine and physic. And therefore we are not at any
time to neglect the means of physic and such like helps for the recovery of
our health, but rather we are to use them with all thankfulness unto the Lord
for them, and with all prayer and supplication in the spirit for his blessing
upon them. We see how that good King Ezechias, when it had been told him of
the Lord by the Prophet, 2 Reg. 20.5.6.
thus, Behold I have healed thee, and the third day thou shall go up to the
house of the Lord, and I will add unto thy days fifteen year; yet for all
that, 7.
when the Prophet said unto him, take a lump of dried figs, and lay it upon
the boil, and thou shall recover, he took it, and laid it on, and recovered.
He might have said, has the Lord spoken and will he not perform it? He has
promised me heal^h, and a lengthning of my days for 15 years; what need I
more then his word, what need I any medicine, or prescript from any Physician?
But we see he used no such speech, but as it pleased the Lord to use these
means in restoring him to health, so he with all thankfulness used the means,
and was restored unto health. Let us therefore know that it is the Lord only
that delivers from death, and restores unto life and health; and that this
he does sometimes without means, and most commonly by means. Let us therefore
in the bed of our sickness call upon the Lord, and let us not neglect the
means which he has ordained for the recovery of our health. Let us only
trust in the Lord, and let us know that if the means be helpful unto us, it
is because of the Lord his blessing upon them. He blesses the means, and
therefore we are healed by the means, so that he heals, and therefore we are
healed.

Now what is the cause wherefore the Lord having visited us with sickness does
again raise us from the bed of our sickness, and restore us unto health? This
is not for any thing in our selves, but for his own mercies sake, as the
Apostle plainly shows when he says, but God had mercy on him* for it is as
if he had said, but God for his mercies sake restored him unto health. Whence I
gather this note, that restoring unto health is a mercy of the Lord. Which is
farther proved unto us by that song or psalm of thanksgiving, which Ezechias
made after his restoring unto health, where he says, Esaias 38.17.
Behold for felicity I had bitter grief, but it was thy pleasure to deliver
my soul from the pit of corruption. It was thy pleasure, or it was thy love to
deliver my soul etc, where that is ascribed to Gods love, whence his mercy
flows, which in our Apostle is ascribed unto Gods mercy. So that restoring
unto health is a loving mercy of the Lord. What shall we say then? When wicked
and ungodly men are restored unto health, is this a loving mercy of the Lord
toward them? Yes surely. ^or albeit so their sin, and consequently their
judgment be increased, yet this not coming from this mercy of lengthning
their days, but from their own corrupt nature, we are to account that health,
and life, and wealth, and whatsoever else they have are temporal mercies of
the Lord upon them. Howbeit the mercies of the Lord in restoring his children
unto health, and in restoring the wicked unto health, are much different. His
mercy wherein he restores the wicked unto health, is a general mercy whereby
he takes pity upon all men, proceeding from such a love as whereby he makes
his sun to arise on the evil, and the good, and sends rain on the just,
and unjust. But his mercy wherein he restores his children unto health is a
special mercy, whereby he takes pity upon his children, proceeding from that
love wherewithal he loves us in Christ Jesus: by that the wicked are only
restored unto bodily health, by this the children of God are so restored unto
bodily health, that farther in soul they are more quickened then before: by
that the judgment of the wicked is increased, for that they abuse their
health, whereunto in mercy they are restored, unto the dishonor of God; by this
Gods name is more glorified in his children, for that they use their health,
whereunto in mercy they are restored, to the praise of the glory of Gods grace.
In a word, by that the wicked are made more inexcusable, by this the children
of God are made more fruitful in good works, and more assured of Gods love.
Albeit then it be a mercy of the Lord both to the godly, and likewise to the
ungodly that they are restored unto health, for that the Lord might in justice
have suffered his rod to lie longer upon them, if he had dealt with them in
weight and measure; yet is it such a special mercy proceeding from such a
special love which he vouchsafes unto his children in restoring them to
health, as that the wicked and ungodly have no part or portion at all therein.

Is it then such a special mercy unto Gods children that they are restored
unto health? Were not death rather a special mercy of the Lord unto them? or
had not death then been a special mercy unto Epaphroditus? Surely it cannot
be denied, but that it is a special mercy of the Lord unto his children, if
when he has exercised them with his rod, and prepared them by sickness unto
himself, he take them by death out of the miseries of this life, and translate
them into the kingdom of his Son. Ap. 14.13.
For so says the Spirit: Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord: and why?
for they rest from their labors, and their works follow them. They rest from
their labors. What is that? that is, by death they are delivered and freed from
such griefs, and sorrows, and labors, and troubles and reuilings, and
persecutions, and hatreds, and other manifold calamities whereunto this life is
subject, yea and from that grieuious yoke and heavy bondage of sin, which
made the Apostle to cry, Romans 7.24.
O wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
Again, their works follow them. What is that? That is, their good deeds which
they did in the the love of God, and in the love of his truth after death
acompanie them, and they receive that crown of glory which the Lord in mercy
has promised to all them that love, and fear him, and walk in his ways. So
that whether we respect the end of wretched miseries, or the perfect fruition
of everlasting happiness which the children of God have by death, it cannot be
denied but death is an especial mercy of the Lord unto them. And in these
respects death then had been a special mercy of the Lord unto Epaphroditus:
and in these respects I doubt not it was, that Paul desired in the former
chapter to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, Phil. 1.23.
even that he might be freed from the miseries of this life, and that he
might be joined with his head Christ Jesus, to reign with him in his kingdom
for ever in the time appointed of the Lord. But as death, so likewise life, and
restoring unto health is a special mercy of the Lord unto his children,
because so they are made farther instruments of his glory who has restored
them unto health. For being restored unto health, both they consider the
merciful goodness toward them, and so break out into his praises who has
done great things for them; Esaias 38.18
whereas the grave cannot confess the Lord, neither death can praise him, but
the living, the living, as says Ezechias, they confess him, and sing praises
unto his name: and again being restored unto health, they consider that the
Lord has reserved them for his farther glory to be manifested in them, or by
them, and therefore their study and care is so to lead their lives, as that
Gods name may be glorified in them, and by them. A good nature (ye know)
rejoices in every opportunity that is given him, whereby he may show himself
thankful and dutiful, though it be to his trouble and cost. Even so the
children of God, though this life be full of trouble and grief, yet when their
health is restored and their days lengthned, they rejoice in the opportunity
that God has given them to do good in the Church, or in the commonweal, and
are careful therein to show themselves both thankful and dutiful unto their
God. For answer then unto the point, in man we are to consider briefly these
two things, the good of himself, and the good of others unto the glory of God.
In respect of the good of himself, death is a special mercy of the Lord unto
every child of God, because then they rest from their labors, and their
works follow them. And therefore the Apostle said, it is best of all to be
loosed, and to be with Christ. Phil. 1.23.
But in respect of others and of the glory of God, it is a special mercy of
God unto his children to be restored unto health, because so they are made
farther instruments of his glory, and of the good either of Church, or of
Commonwealth. And therefore the Apostle adds, 24.
nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you. Albeit then
death had been a special mercy of the Lord unto Epaphroditus in respect of the
good of himself, yet in respect of the Church at Philippi, it was a special
mercy of the Lord, as our Apostle here says, that he was restored unto health.
Neither yet would I so here be understood, as if I thought, or taught, that it
is a special mercy of the Lord unto his children to be restored unto health
only in respect of the good of others, and not at all in respect of the good
of themselves: for albeit death be so a special mercy of God unto them in
respect of the good of themselves, for that thereby they are freed from the
troubles of this life, and received into everlasting joy and bliss; yet is
health also and life a special mercy of the Lord unto them, even in respect of
the good of themselves, because the oftener they pass through the fire, the
more they are purified, and made the finer gold; the more they are boulted and
sifted, the finer flower they will be. Albeit therefore by life they have more
troubles, yet because by troubles they are made more glorious, therefore is
life and restoring unto health a special mercy of God unto his children, not
only in respect of others good, but in respect also of the good of themselves.

Are then both death and recovery of health special mercies of the Lord unto
his children? If then we be the children of God, let not our hearts be troubled
nor fear in the bed of our sickness. If it please the Lord by death then to
cut off our days, this let us know, that in mercy toward us he does it, that
so we may not see the evils that are to come, that so we may have rest from all
our labors, and from all the troubles of this life, and that so we may be
ever with our head Christ Jesus, and have the full fruition of those joys
which eye has not seen, neither ear has heard, nor has entered into the
heart of man to think of. And again, if it please the Lord to restore us unto
health, let us know that in mercy likewise he does it, that so we may confess
his name, and sing praises unto him in the land of the living, that so we may
be further instruments of his glory in doing good unto others, either in in the
Church, or in the Commonwealth, and that so being further tried, we may be
further purified, to return as fine gold out of the fire. Has any of us then
cause to mourn for them that do already sleep in the Lord? Let us mourn,
but not as men without hope: for the Lord has had mercy on them, and in his
mercy toward them has delivered them out of prison into a most glorious
liberty, and has brought them from a most troublesome sea of miseries, unto
the most happy haven of everlasting blessedness. Again, has any of us been
restored from sickness unto health? Let us remember that the Lord herein has
had mercy on us, as he had on Epaphroditus. For this mercy let us show our
selves thankful unto the Lord, and our thankfulness unto the Lord let us
testify unto the world by walking worthy of this mercy. He has reserved us
unto his further glory. Let us glorify God both in our bodies, and in our
spirits, for they are Gods. Let us be faithfully, and painfully, and carefully
occupied in the works of our calling, whatsoever it be, unto the glory of our
God. And in particular, as this time requires, as God has had mercy on us by
restoring us unto health, and bringing us from the gates almost of death unto
life, so let us take pity and compassion on our poor distressed brethren, and
by our morsels of bread and other relief, let us save their lives from death.
As our lives were precious in Gods sight, so let their lives be precious in our
sight, who happily are as dear unto God as we are. For know this, that
blessed are they that consider the poor and needy, etc. Psalm. 41.1.2.3.


And not on him only, but on me also.] We have heard of Gods mercy on
Epaphroditus in restoring him unto health, which was both a work of the Lord,
and a work wherein the Lord showed his mercy on Epaphroditus. Now see the
riches and the bountifulness of Gods mercy herein: for in restoring him unto
health, Gods mercy was not showed on him alone, but on the Apostle Paul also.
The note which hence I gather, is this, that in the mercies of the Lord upon
his children there is oftentimes a blessing not for them alone in particular,
but for others of his children also* So sometimes he shows mercy on the
child, and kee^^h him alive for his parents sake, to be their staff of
comfort in their old age; and again sometimes he shows mercy upon parents,
and keeps them alive for their childrens sake, to bring them up in the fear
of God, and in the knowledge of his will. So likewise sometimes he shows
mercy on the Pastor, and from sickness restores him to health for his peoples
sake, both that they may be kept safe from scattering by the Wolf, and that
they may be taught in the ways of the Lord: and again, sometimes he shows
mercy on the people for their Pastors sake, lest that punishment which should
justly light upon them should bring too much sorrow upon him. So we read that
he showed mercy unto that good King Ezechias being sick unto death, 2 Reg.
20.1.
in restoring him unto health, neither unto him alone, 7.
but even therein likewise he showed mercy unto the people of Judah, in that so
he kept them for fifteen years space from such manifold miseries and
corruptions in religion as afterward followed in the reign of Manasses. 21.2.
Thus the Lord rich in mercy, so shows his mercies unto his children, as that
therein there is a blessing not to them alone, but to others also.

This should teach us thus much, that we should not be too much puffed up for
whatsoever mercies the Lord vouchsafes unto us, as if for our own sakes alone
they were bestowed upon us, but seeing therein the Lord also purposes a
blessing unto others, our care should be to use them to the benefit of others:
our health to profit others, our wealth to do good unto others, our knowledge
to instruct others, and whatsoever mercies we have unto the good of others.
Which lesson also our Savior Christ taught unto Peter, when he said unto him,
Luke 22.32
Thou when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren. But how have they
learned this lesson, that like unto that unprofitable servant in the Gospel,
Matt. 25.
hide their talent in the ground, and never do good with that knowledge
wherewithal God has blessed them? or they that like unto that rich man in the
Gospel, Luke 16.19.
only feed and cloth themselves, and never regard to refresh poor Lazarus, no
not with the crummes that fall from their tables? or they that like unto Nimrod
that mighty hunter before the L^^d, by their power and might cruelly oppress,
and wickedly tyrannize over their poor brethren? How have those parents
learned this lesson, that never regard the godly education of their children?
or those children, that despise their fathers instruction, and forsake their
mothers teaching? or those Pastors, that seldom or never look unto their
sheep? or those sheep, that will not hear the voice of their Pastors?
Certainly in men of all sorts there is either great ignorance, or great
forgetfulness, or great contempt of this instruction: for generally we do
not use the mercies of God upon us unto the benefit of others, but either we
know not, or we forget, or we neglect so to use them, or we do abuse them
unto the hurt of others. Well, let us know that as this mercy was showed on
Epaphroditus not for his sake only, but for Paul's, lest he should have sorrow
upon sorrow, so whatsoever such mercy is showed on us, it is not for our own
sakes only, but for others also, that they may have comfort and profit thereby,
or otherwise lest they should some way be grieved and troubled. And therefore
as the Lod has bestowed this or that mercy upon us, of health, or of wealth,
or of wisdom, or of knowledge, or the like, let us use the same to the good
and benefit of others, as our state, or place, or calling does require, and in
any case let us beware that we abuse them not unto the hurt of others.

Now let us see wherein it was a mercy of God upon Paul, that Epaphroditus was
restored unto health. The Apostle shows it when he says, lest I should have
etc. Herein then was it a mercy of God on Paul that Epaphroditus died not upon
that sickness, because so he should have had sorrow upon sorrow, unto his
sorrow by his own bands and imprisonment should have been added another sorrow
for his death. God therefore had mercy on Epaphroditus and restored him unto
health, not for his own sake only, but for Paul's, lest he should have sorrow
upon sorrow.

What then? Was Paul sorrowful for any thing that befell him, or that was
likely to befall him? Did he not with patience bea^e whatsoever did or could
befall him? Or could he be said to bear that with patience for which he was
sorrowful? That Paul was sorrowful for many things, may and does appear even
by this one place. He was sorrowful for his own bands and imprisonment; he
was sorrowful to see Epaphroditus, and to hear the Philippians to be so full
of heaviness: and if Epaphroditus had now died, his death would have made him
very sorrowful. All which notwithstanding, he did with patience bear both his
own bands, and the heaviness of Epaphroditus, and the Philippians, and so
would have borne Epaphroditus his death if he had died. For he^ein was his
patience seen, that he did with such constancy and courage for Christ's sake
suffer those things which caused his sorrows, as that he was not overcome of
sorrow, but so moderated it, as that he mildly bore whatsoever caused sorrow.
And how is patience seen, but in moderating sorrows, and quietly suffering
them, and whatsoever may cause them?

The note then is, that sorrow and the like affections and passions of minds
are nothings unbeseeming Christians, as some have foolishly thought, but rather
such things as very well beseem them. Esa. 53.3.
It was prophesied of our Savior, that he should be a man full of sorrows;
and that he was so, may appear by his weeping over Jerusalem, by his trouble
in spirit at the death of Lazarus, and by many other things. Nay how shall we
call him a Christian that has shut up all bowels of compassion, and is not
touched with a fellow-feeling of his brethrens infirmities? Herein is a good
point of true Christianity, that we rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep
with them that weep, and that we bear with patience our own sorrows, and
whatsoever loss or cross which may cause sorrow.

Yea, but was it not a fault for Paul to be sorry for Epaphroditus his
sickness? or should it not have been a fault in him if he had been sorry for
his death, seeing these things came and should have come by the will of God? No
surely: both in him it was, and in all Christians it is a Christian thing to
visit the sick, and to be sorry for their infirmities, and for their death. So
was Christ, so were the Apostles, and so are all Christians, and ought to be.
For what other thing is this for them that be strong and in health, then for
the rich to give unto the poor, for the learned to instruct the ignorant, for
the strong to help the weak, etc.

1 Th. 4.13.
Yea, but we are forbidden to sorrow for the dead: How then should it not have
been a fault in Paul to have sorrowed for Epaphroditus his death? Sorrow for
the dead is not there simply forbid, but such sorrow as they have which have no
hope of the resurrection of the dead, and of life everlasting after this life.
They sorrow immoderately, because they think that when death comes there is an
end. Such immoderate sorrow for the dead is there forbid, lest we should seem
by our too much sorrowing so to think of the dead as the Gentiles did. But a
moderate sorrow is neither there, nor elsewhere forbid, but rather commended
unto us by this example of our holy Apostle. So that we may sorrow for the
dead, if we do it moderately, and with submission unto the will of the Lord,
knowing that whatsoever he does is good, and that all things work together for
the best unto those that love and fear him.

Yea, but had not Paul the gift of healing? If then Epaphroditus his sickness
or death were such a matter of sorrow unto him, why did he not heal him? That
Paul had the gift of healing appears by many places in the Acts, as where it
is said, that God wrought no small miracles by the hands of Paul, so that from
his body were brought unto the sick kerchiefes, Act. 19.11 12.28.8.9.
or handkerchiefes, and the diseases departed from them. And again, where it
is said that he healed the father of Publius, who lay sick of a fever, and of
a bloody flix, and that he healed many which had diseases in that Island. Yet
it is very like that he could not heal Epaphroditus, albeit no doubt he would
gladly have had him whole. And this is a plain proof unto us, that the
Apostles healed sicknesses and wrought other miracles, not by any virtue or
power of their own, but by the power of God; not whenever they would
themselves, but when it pleased the Lord they should: as also it is said in the
Acts, Act. 5.12.
that God wrought many signs and wonders by the hands of the Apostles. Being
therefore only Gods instruments to heal diseases, and to work miracles,
neither our Apostle, nor any of the rest, could whenever they would do these
things, but only when he would whose instruments they were.

LECTVRE XLVI.
PHILIP. 2. Verse. 28.29.30. I sent him therefore the more diligently, that when
ye should see him again, ye might rejoice, and I might etc.
THus far of the first cause why Epaphroditus was so presently sent unto the
Philippians. Now follow the other cause;

I sent him therefore, etc.] The first cause why he presently sent him unto
them, was (as we have heard) because of Epaphroditus himself, because he so
longed after them, that he was full of heaviness till he might see them, as
verse 26. Other two causes of such present sending him unto them are mentioned
in this verse in the words now read unto you: The one, because of the
Philippians, that they when they should see their Minister again might
rejoice, in these words, that when ye should see him again, etc. The other,
because of the Apostle himself, that he might be the less sorrowful, when
they should have cause to rejoice by his presence with them, in these words,
and I might be the less sorrowful. The words, ye see, are inferred by way of
conclusion, I sent him therefore, etc. Where it is to be noted, that whereas
before he had said, I thought it necessary to send him unto you, now he
adds a note of diligence and speed which he used herein, saying, I sent him
therefore the more diligently. And wherefore did he use such diligence and
speed in sending him? That is signified in the next words, to have been partly
in behalf of the Philippians, that when they should see him again they might
rejoice that he had so well recovered his health, and that now they might have
the fruit of his labors amongst them; and partly in behalf of himself, that
he might be the less sorrowful. Whereby the Apostle signifies, that albeit
he shall not be quite without sorrow when they shall have cause to rejoice in
Epaphroditus his presence, because there were many things besides which gave
him cause of sorrow, yet he shall be much less sorrowful, because he shall be
eased of that sorrow which he conceived upon Epaphroditus his sickness, and
upon their heaviness for his sickness. Now before we proceed farther, let us
see what observations we may gather hence for our use and instruction.

I sent him therefore the more diligently] In these words I note the diligence
and carfulness, and speed which the Apostle used in sending Epaphroditus
unto the Philippians, notwithstanding himself at this time had so great use of
him as that almost he could not be without him. For the Apostle lying now in
prison where Epaphroditus ministered unto him such things as he wanted, it could
not be but he must needs have great use of him. Yet when the Apostle heard
that they were so full of heaviness for his sickness, and that they greatly
desired to see him, he slacked no diligence, neither used any delay, but with
what diligence and with what speed he could he sent him unto them. Whence I
observe the nature and disposition of a faithful friend, which is not to delay
the time, but whatsoever excuse else we might make, with all diligence to
gratify our friend when his need does require. For as cheerfulness and
willingness, so carefullnesse and readiness then to pleasure when need does
require are very requisite in the performance of every duty of one friend unto
another. Yea but where shall a man find such a friend, as without delay, when
need does require, will do the duty of a friend, when he might have happily
just excuse to the contrary? Surely I must here say unto thee as Isaac said
unto Jacob, when he advised him whence to take a wife; Genesis 28.1.2.
Take not a wife (says he) of the daughters of Canaan, arise, get thee to
Padan Aram to the house of Bethuel thy mothers father, and thence take thee a
wife of the daughters of Laban thy mothers brother; 24.3.4.
or as Abraham had said before touching the marriage of Isaac; Thou shall not
take a wife unto my son of the daughters of the Canaanites among whom I
dwell, but go unto my country, and to my kindred, and thence take a wife unto
him: so I say unto thee, if thou will make a good choice of thy friend, get
thee unto the household of faith, and there shall thou find such a friend as
now we speak of; join thy self unto them in whom there is religion and the
true fear of God, and in them thou shall find that which thy soul desires.
Others can and will make as fair a show oftentimes as the best, and yet fail
thee happily then when thou most need them. Every little pretense will serve
them for excuse good enough; but if they can have such an excuse as here Paul
the Apostle might have had, though thou stand in as much need of help, as here
the Philippians stood of comfort, hope thou may, but help thou shall find
none. But they that are joined unto thee in Paul's spirit, they that are linked
unto thee in that best bond of love, the fear of the Lord, they will not fail
thee in the needful time of trouble, they will not shift thee of for this and
that time with this or that excuse, but with all diligence, and with all speed
they will be ready to help thee, and to comfort thee as thy need does
require* for indeed sincerity in religion, and the true fear of the Lord,
are the best bands of christian friendship. We read in profane stories of some
much renowned for most rare friendship. But what else were those but as
shadows in respect of the body? What friendship of theirs came ever near
unto that of Jonathan and David, 1 Samuel 18.1.
whose souls were so knit either unto other as that either loved other as his
own soul? Who more faithful unto any then Hushai the Archite unto David, 2 Samuel 15.
at whose request he took (as we say) his life in his hand, and undertook
with all diligence and speed to bring to naught the counsel of Ahitophel? Yea
generally where religion and the fear of the Lord knits the knot, there the
friendship is most sure, and the duties thereof best performed. If therefore
thou will have such a friend, as without delay (when need does require) will
do the duty of a friend, and not shift thee of for this and that time with
this and that excuse, join thy self unto him that is religious and fears
the Lord, and let your love be in the Lord, and for the Lord. For what is the
cause wherefore friendship is so rare, and why there is such slacknes in all
sorts of men to help one another, and to comfort one another in any time of
need? Surely hence, even because our love is only a cold love grounded on
this or that worldly respect, but we do not love one another in the Lord, and
for the Lord, because our soul delights in them that fear the Lord. O let
all of us delight in them that fear the Lord, and then will we, no doubt, as
Paul's scholars, be diligent one unto another good, and one unto another
comfort in every time of need.

It follows, that when ye should see him again, ye might reioyce] In these
words the Apostle sets down a second cause and reason, wherefore he sent
Epaphroditus unto the Philippians with such diligence and speed. The cause
was, as here it is signified, that after such sorrow and heaviness of heart as
they were filled with upon the hearing of their Ministers dangerous sickness,
thinking they should never see him again, they might rejoice when they should
see him again thoroughly well in health, and able to do the work of his
ministry. Here then we see how a faithful friend is especially to employ his
diligence and his carfulness, namely, as in matters most needful, so in them
to the best purpose he can devise. A notable pattern whereof we have in this
example of our Apostle. The Philippians were at this present full of heaviness
and sorrow, as we have heard, for their Ministers sickness, and they much
needed to be cheered and comforted. The Apostle he used all diligence, and
after he heard and knew of it, he delaied not the time to cheer them, and to
comfort them. But how? he might have written his letters unto them, and
therein signified their Ministers recovery of his health, and so have cheered
and comforted them. But because he thought neither messenger, nor letters, nor
any thing else would so much rejoice them as his presence with them, and the
sight of him, because they thought they should never have sent him again,
therefore he sent himself unto them, that when they should see him again
they might rejoice, so taking the best course that he could devise to comfort
them. So we see in the example of Hushai before men^ioned: when David was in
great distress by Absolon his son Hushai came unto him with purpose to go
with him, 2 Samuel 15.32.34.
and in life or death not to leave him. But when it was thought that his
friendship would be to better purpose unto David, if he should return unto
the City, and bring the counsel of Ahitophel to naught, he did that which was
thought would be to the best purpose Right so, if we will approve our selves
faithful friends indeed, as we must employ all diligence and carfulness in
matters most needful for our friend, so must we do it to the best purpose we
can devise. For albeit diligence and carfulness in every matter of our friend
be very commendable in us, yet is it then worthily most commendable when it is
employed to the best purpose; 1. When our care is specially bent to that which
apparently may be to our friends greatest good and comfort. A matter of too too
rare practice. Few careful of others good, and of those few that will seem
sometimes to be careful, very few that will care for them in things most
needful, and fewest of all that will in such sort care for them in things
needful, as may be most behouefull for them. If the course most behouefull for
our friend be somewhat hurtful for our selves, we will rather think of some
other course then that whereby we may so help our friend as that withal we
may not hurt our selves: And so that we show our selves friends we think it
is well though we do not so much as we should. Well, I wish we would think
of this example of our holy Apostle, and as he was most diligent and careful
not only to comfort the Philippians, but in such sort to comfort them as they
most desired; so we would be diligent and careful both to do good unto
others, and that likewise in such sort as they thereby might receive the
greatest good, though happily our selves should be somewhat endamaged thereby.

What then? happily you will say unto me, was it such a commendable matter in
the Apostle to send their Minister back again unto them? or was it such a
pleasure unto the Philippians to see their Minister again? It may be that some
would stand at an answer to these questions in particular, who show but too
plainly by their practice what they think or these questions in the general.
For touching the Ministers in general, who is he that if his Minister be
absent from his Church greatly longs after him? who is he that if his
Minister be sick unto death greatly wishes his restoring unto health? who is
he that if his Minister be absent and sick fears that he shall never see him
again? or who is he that will take such a pleasure and joy of heart in it if
he shall see him again? Some such, God be thanked, there are, and God for his
mercies sake increase the number of them, and his graces in them. But generally
if the Minister be such a one as makes a conscience of his ways amongst them,
as carefully feeds them with the bread of life, and painefully leads them
forth besides the waters of comfort, such a one as will religiously call them
unto the sanctification of the Lord his Sabbath, and restrain them of their
meriment, and sports, and pleasures, and wanton dalliances, such a one as will
sharply reprove their sins, boldly put them in mind of their duties, and
carefully reclaim them from such inordinate ways as they walk in, such a one
as we may very well presume this Epaphroditus was; if the Minister, I say, be
such a one, generally we long not for his presence if he be absent, generally
we sorrow not for his sickness if he be sick, generally we take no such
pleasure either in his presence, or in his life. Nay rather if he be absent we
will wish him far enough, and to tarry long enough; and if he be sick unto
death we will rejoice and be glad at his death: So far short of these
Philippians that were but newly planted in the Church, and had but lately
embraced the truth of Christ Jesus, are we who have long enjoyed the
ministry of the word, and the bright light of the holy word of truth. For so
they accounted, that the Apostle could not have given a greater token of love
of them, then to send their minister back again unto them, and it was the
greatest pleasure and joy of heart that might be unto them to see their
minister again thoroughly well, and in good health. And surely if we took that
joy and comfort in the word that we ought, we would take more joy and comfort
in the Ministers of the word then we do. But how the Ministers of the word are
to be accounted of, we shall see in the handling of the next verse that
follows. It now follows.

And I might be the less sorowfull] In these words the Apostle sets down a
third cause or reason why he sent their Minister unto them with such diligence
and speed. And this cause respected himself. For it was that he might be the
less sorrowful. 1. That howsoever his sorrows after this should be some for
some other things, yet they might be the ^esse when their joys were fulfilled
by their Ministers presence, and when their Minister should again be amongst
them to labor amongst them. In that then that the Apostle says not, and that
I might be without sorrow, but only, and that I might be the less sorrowful.
Hence I gather this observation, that the children of God are not much to hope,
nor greatly to seek in this life to be quit and rid of all sorrow, but it is
enough for them if their sorrows be abated, and if they have less sorrow then
they deserve, and then they are enabled to bear. Ioh. 16.33.
In the world, says our Savior, ye shall have affliction, even many-causes of
sorrow, and grief, and vexation of spirit. For so it is ordained that through
many afflictions we should enter into the kingdom of God, Act. 14.22.
a^ the Apostle says. And therefore our Savior Christ says again, if any
man will come after me, let him deny himself, Luc. 9.23.
and take up his cross daily, and follow me. Daily says he. For as one day
follows an other, so one cross follows in the neck of an other. We look
and hope for an holy city, Apoc. 21.4.
the new Jerusalem, where God shall wipe all tears from our eyes, and where
there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither any more
pain. But that city is not here on earth, where we be but Pilgrims, it is in
our Coun^rey in heaven, where we shall have an abiding city, and where we
shall be ever with the Lord. Nay if it were here on earth we would not long for
that in heaven. Let us not therefore look in this life to be without all
trouble, or sorrow, or grief. Let us rather consider how in this life our whole
life is stained with many sins, and how for our sins we have deserved not
only death everlasting after this life, but troubles also and sorrows
unsupportable in this life. And then when we see that we are not only freed
from that death by the death of Jesus Christ, and by says in his name, but
that our sorrows in this life are much less then we deserve, let us rejoice in
the Lord, and comfort our selves in his mercies that our troubles and sorrows
are nothing in comparison of that we have deserved. And again, let us
consider that howsoever our troubles, and sorrows, and griefs be many, yet so
only they press us, as that we are able to say with the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4 8.9
We are affected on every side, yet are we not in distress; in poverty, but
not overcome of poverty: we are persecuted, but not forsaken, cast down, but
we perish not etc. And then when we see that our troubles, and sorrows, and
griefs are no more but such as the Lord has enabled us to bear, let us
rejoice in the Lord, and comfort ourselves in his mercies toward us, who does
not suffer us to be tempted above that we be able, but gives the issue
together with the tentation that we may be able to bear it. For surely these
are great mercies of the Lord toward us, that our sorrows are so lessened and
abated that they are neither such as we have deserved, neither such but that
we are able to bear them by the power of him who does strengthen us hereunto.
And therefore though in this life we be not quite free from all troubles and
sorrows, yet let us account this a great mercy of the Lord unto us that we
are less sorrowful, that our sorrows are less then the desert of our sins,
and less then he enableth us to bear.

But how was it that the Apostle should be less sorrowful by sending their
Minister Epaphroditus unto them? because by his presence they should have
occasion to rejoice. For as by their heaviness for their Minister his sorrow
was increased, so again by their rejoicing for their Minister his sorrow would
be abated. Here then we may observe another notable quality of Christian love
and friendship, Romans 12.15
which is to weep with them that weep, and to rejoice with them that rejoice.
A rule which the Apostle gives all Christians to observe and keep, and from
which who so declineth may seem therein to cross even nature it self. For
naturally we see that the members of our body are so affected one toward an
other, as that if one member suffer all suffer with it, and if one be had in
honor, 1 Cor. 12.26
all the members rejoice with it. How much more should it be so in the
mystical body of Christ Jesus, that they who are joined together in one faith,
and in one baptism, should so likewise be joined together in love and
affection one toward an other that the sorrow of one should be the sorrow of an
other, and the joy of one should be the joy of another? But I have had occasion
heretofore to observe this note unto you, and therewithal the great want of
this Christian love in us one toward another, for that we are so far from
this duty, as that we weep and are sorry one at the prosperity of another,
and again laugh and rejoice one at the calamity of another. If either by that
or this instruction ye be taught in this duty, then practice it; and if either
by that or this admonition ye see your want in the performance of this duty,
then study to amend that which is amiss, and learn so to be affected one
toward another, as that ye will rejoice with them that rejoice, and again
weep with them that weep.

Again, it may be that the Apostle was sorry that by his occasion their
Minister and Teacher was so long absent from them. And therefore now when
Epaphroditus was sent back again unto them he was the less sorrowful. But
this being only a conjecture my purpose is not to ground any observation
thereupon. Only this, neither may the example of the Apostle be any president
for any to deteine the Minister from his charge, neither may the example of
Epaphroditus be to any Minister any president to absent himself from his
charge. For Epaphroditus was now absent from his people being sent by them to
Minister to the necessities of the holy Apostle, so that albeit he was absent
from them yet was he laboring for them even in the work of Christ, as the
Apostle speaks in the last verse of this chapter. How then can this example
help them who absent themselves either for idleness and their own ease, or
upon other pretenses which have no lawful warrant? Again his staying there
with the Apostle was not so much by the Apostle his deteining of him, as by the
Philippians charge that he should stay with him, and by the sickness
wherewith God visited him. How then can this example be any warrant unto them
whom deteine Ministers from their charge, either for their own pleasures sake,
or in some other respect which has no better warrant? I wish that both these
men would be as sorry for deteining Ministers from their charge as it is
likely the Apostle was, and likewise that the Ministers as sorry for being
absent from the^r charges as it is likely Epaphroditus was. This were a
president worthy the following, the other is a president without all ground, or
shadow of any semblance. But I purposed only to touch this by the way. Now
follows the Apostle his request for Epaphroditus.

Receive him therefore in the Lord etc.] The Apostle having showed the causes
why he sent Epaphroditus unto the Philippians, now commends him unto them,
and makes request for him, that they would entertain him at his return as
they ought, showing withal a reason in the next verse why they should do so.
In this verse, 1. He shows how they ought to receive and entertain him in
particular. 2. How they ought to entertain all Ministers generally being such
as he was. First touching the entertainment of him in particular, the Apostle
wills them to receive him, first in the Lord, then with all gladness. In
that he wills and exhorts them to receive him in the Lord, his meaning is
that they should receive him not as a private friend, not as one sent from him,
whom for his sake they should use kindly, but as the servant of the Lord, and
as one sent even by God himself unto them. For herein the Apostle may in part
seem to allude unto that extremity of sickness, whence he could not possibly
have been delivered but only by Gods mercy on him. And therefore now he was
sent unto them, not so much by the Apostle, as by the Lord, who only did save
his life from death. Again, in that he exhorts them to receive him with all
gladness, his meaning is, that as he longed after them all, so they should all
receive him with all gladness, even with exceeding joy for his coming unto
them. For so the same words that are here used are well translated Iam. 1.2.

Here then we are taught how to entreat, and entertain, and receive the
Ministers of the Lord first, in the Lord, that is, as servants of the Lord, and
sent by God unto us. So the Apostle gives testimony unto the Galathians that
they received him, where he says, But ye received me as an Angel of God,
Gal. 4.14.
yea as Christ Jesus. And that they are so to be honored and accounted of, he
again shows where he says, 1 Cor. 4.1.
Let a man so think of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and disposers of the
secrets of God. And why are they so to be thought of, and so to be honored?
The reason is plain, they are the Ambassadors of Christ Jesus, in Christ his
stead beseeching us that we would be reconciled unto God. So says the Apostle,
Now then (says he) we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech
you through us, 2 Cor. 5.20.
we pray you in Christ his stead, that ye be reconciled unto God. Now
Ambassadors, ye know, are to be received as the Prince from whom they are
sent: so that the Ministers of Christ are to be received even as Christ Jesus.
And therefore our Savior says, He that receives you, receives me, Mat. 10.40
and he that receives me receives him that sent me. Again, Ambassadors
(ye know) speak not in their own name, but in the Princes name that sent
them: so that the Ministers of Christ are to be heard as Christ whose Ministers
they are. And therefore our Savior says, He that hears you hears me, Luke
10.16.
and he that despises you despises me, and he that despises me despises him
that sent me. And yet see how hardly we are brought to receive and harken to
this instruction. Indeed it grieueth me to see how the Ministers of the Lord
are received even in this auditorie. Every fit opportunity has been taken to
put you in mind of these things. And what nearer are ye then at the first?
Are the Ministers of Christ Jesus to be received in the Lord, and for the Lord?
Are they the Ambassadors of Christ Jesus, and therefore to be received, and to
be heard as Christ Jesus? How happens it then that some will not at all almost
come to hear them? that some come so slackly to hear them? and that some
turn their backs upon them, and will not stay to hear them? If the Ambassador
of an earthly Prince should be used in such like sort, would not sharp storms
and sore displeasure follow upon it? And shall the Ambassadors of the King of
heaven, and King of Kings be so used, and will not his anger and heavy
displeasure be kindled at it? If we sought our honor, we might well go
without it, seeing the Lord cannot have it: But we seek not our own honor,
but the honor of him that sends us, even the honor of Christ Jesus, whose
word we preach unto you. We would be honored for the words sake, and therefore
we would have the word much more honored. And therefore we call you unto the
hearing of the word, even of the word of life, even of the word of your
salvation. But how prevail we? Those that will not come, what should I speak
unto them? I judge them not, there is one that judges them. Of such as do
come, some come so seldom, that it may seem they come when their leisure from
other business gives them best leave. Business belike they have of greater
importance then this, and which they are more to regard then the salvation of
their souls. Others, they turn their backs upon the Preacher, and stay they
cannot, or they will not. I cannot but speak of it. What an unseemly thing
was it, when the last Lords day after the celebration of that holy sacrament of
Baptism, which seeing the opportunity was given, might well have been
celebrated after the Sermon; but what an unseemly thing (I say) was it, to see
so many then turn their backs, and go their ways, some upon that occasion,
and others therein keeping their wonted manner? But take heed, men and
brethren, how ye despise the word, and turn your backs upon it. For howsoever
now ye turn your backs upon it, Joh. 12.48.
yet shall it judge you in the last day. If there be a fault in any of you,
study to amend it, and let the word of Christ dwell in you all plenteously and
in all wisdom. Romans 1.16.
For it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes. Receive
the Ministers of Christ in the Lord, and harken unto their message for the
Lord. For though they be men that come unto you, yet are they men sent from the
Lord, and their words are to be heard not as the word of man, but as it is
indeed as the word of God. Happy are ye if ye hear these things, and
meditate thereupon with fruit unto your souls. Blessed are they that hear the
word of God and keep it.

LECTVRE XLVII.
PHILIP. 2. Verse 29. Receive him therefore in the Lord with all gladness, and
make much of such. 30. Because that for the work of Christ he was etc.
WIth all gladnesse] This is the second manner of entertainment that the
Apostle would have given unto Epaphroditus their Minister at his return unto
them. He would have them to receive him in the Lord, and to receive him with
all gladness, that is, with such gladness, as that both all should rejoice at his
coming and that with an exceeding great joy: so that he would have both their
joy to be universal, that all should rejoice for him, as he had longed for
them all; and again, no ordinary joy, but an exceeding great joy, as the same
words are very well translated, Iam. 1.2.

What such joy, so universal joy, so exceeding great joy for their Ministers
returning home in health unto them? Was Epaphroditus their Minister? Was their
Minister thus to be received? Indeed this would make a man to doubt, as the
world goes now, whether Epaphroditus were their Minister* Enough for a noble
man, a great man, one of the Peers o^ the Realm thus to be received. A
Minister thus to be received, it is a scorn, a mere jest. Well, let it seem
unto the world (as it will) a scorn, and a jest, the Apostle here we see would
have them thus to receive their Minister, and the Ministers of the Gospel are
thus to be received, even with a^ gladness, so that all their people should
rejoice, and tha^ with exceeding great joy for them. Esaias 52.7.
O how beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that declares and
publishes peace, says the Prophet, that declares good tidings, and
publishes salvation, saying unto Zion, thy God reigns. Now of whom speaks
the Prophet this? The Apostle plainly applies this unto the Ministers of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ. To. 10.15.
They are they that declare and publish our peace and our reconciliation with
God the Father by Jesus Christ his Son; they are they that declare the good
tidings of the full and free remission of our sins by the death and passion
of Jesus Christ; they are they that publish salvation unto every one that
calls upon the name of the Lord, and departs from iniquity. How beautiful
then should their feet be unto us? When they come unto us, or when the Lord
rather sends them unto us with what gladness should we receive them? Surely
I will tell you. Consider that place yet a little further. The Prophet there
speaks first and primarily of the deliverance of the children of Israel out
of the captivity of Babylon, and of them that should bring the message and
gladd tidings thereof. With what gladness then may we think would the children
of Israel, when they were in the land of their captivity, receive them that
would bring them good tidings of their deliverance out of captivity, and
return unto their country, and ancient liberty? Would not all of them
receive them with great gladness? Would not all of them receive them with
exceeding and unfeigned joy and rejoicing? With what gladness then should we
receive the Ministers of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, who bring unto us most
joyful tidings of a most blessed deliverance out of the most woeful thrall and
captivity that ever was, even out of the most tyrannical captivity of sin,
death, and the devil? Surely we should receive them with an universal joy; we
should receive them with an exceeding great joy, we should all of us be glad
even in our very souls for them, and every way that we could we should
testify this our gladness for them. A good show of such gladness many of the
Jews then gave, when Christ riding into Jerusalem on an Ass, they spread their
garments in the way, and cut down branches from the trees, and strawed them in
the way, and cried through the streets of Jerusalem, and said, Hosanna the
son of David, Mat. 21.8.9.
blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord, Hosanna thou which art in
the highest heavens. Here were tokens as of great honor done unto him, so of
great gladness for him that was the high Priest of our profession. And the
Evangelist S. Luke storying the same thing says, that the whole multitude of
the Disciples rejoiced, Luke 19.37.38.
and praised God with a loud voice, saying, blessed be the King that comes
in the name of the Lord, peace in heaven, and glory in the highest places. The
whole multitude rejoiced, and that with no small joy, when they lift up their
voices, and said, Blessed be he etc. So we read that when Philip came to
Samaria, Act. 8.5.6.8.
and preached Christ unto them, the people gave heed unto those things which
Philip spoke with one accord, hearing and seeing the miracles which he did, and
it is said, that there was great joy in that City. They heard Philip when he
preached Christ unto them, they gave heed to the things he spoke, and that
with one accord, and upon this there was great joy in that City. So we read
that when the Apostles passed through Phanics and Samaria, Act. 15.3.
declaring the conversion of the Gentiles, and no doubt strengthening the
brethren also in the faith wherein they stood, it is said, that they brought
great joy unto all the brethren; no ordinary joy, but a great joy; not unto a
small number, but unto all the brethren. Thus ye see with what gladness the
Ministers of the Gospel ought to be received: ye see how our Savior Christ
the high Priest of our profession was thus received when toward his passion he
came down from the mount of Olives unto Jerusalem: ye see how the Disciples
and Apostles of our Savior Christ were thus received, even with great joy of
all the brethren. And thus at this day the Ministers of the Gospel are
received, even with all gladness of all the brethren. But as then it was, so
now it is, the multitude, of the brethren no great multitude, as may easily
appear even by this one note, that the multitude of them that receive the
Ministers of the Gospel with all gladness is no great multitude. Well (beloved)
to stand no longer upon this point, I cannot better exhort you touching this
point then out of these words of the Apostle, Receive the ministers of Christ
his Gospel in the Lord, receive them with all gladness, and make much of them,
for so it follows.

And make much of such] In which words the Apostle brings it to the general
which before he had spoken in the particular, and tells them how he would have
them to receive not only Epaphroditus in particular, but the Ministers of the
gospel in general. Make much of such, make much account of them, have them in
high honor and estimation: (...).
for so the word here used in the original signifies. But whom must we have
in such honor? Make much of such; such as Epaphroditus, such as faithfully and
painefully work in the Lord his harvest, such as carefully watch for our
souls, as they that must give accounts, such as labor in the word and
doctrine make much of them, and account them worthy of double honor.

Here then we are taught in what account we are to have such Ministers of the
Gospel as faithfully and painefully labor in the word and doctrine. We are to
make much of them, we are to have them in high honor and estimation, we are to
account them worthy of double honor. For so the Apostle else where also tells
us, saying, 1 Timothy 5.17
The Elders which rule well are worthy of double honor, especially they which
labor in the word and doctrine. Where whatsouer be meant by double honor in
particular, in general it is meant, that all honor is due unto them that
labor in the word and doctrine. Yea indeed? honor such? make much of such,
such finde-faults, such troublers of the state, such hotheaded fellows, such
discoueries of their fathers shame, such publishers of whatsoever they know,
even in Gath, and Ashkelon. For thus commonly they are accounted of, especially
if according to the necessity of the times they lift up their voices like
trumpets, and show the people their transgressions, and the house of Jacob
their sins. If they tell Herod of his incest, they may do it without that
danger that John did, but let them look for no less then to be counted
troublers of all Israel, 1 Reg. 18.17. Act. 19.25.
as Elias was accounted by Ahab. If Demetrius and the craftsmen men with him be
like to sustain any loss by their preaching; if the godles Atheist, or the
superstitious Papist think themselves galled by their preaching, then they
traduce them by such and such names, and then they raise up whatsoever troubles
possibly they can against them. Thus are they rewarded with evil for good, and
with hatred for their good will; thus do they become enemies because they tell
the truth; thus are they honored and accounted of the world; thus commonly are
they made of in the world that are careful not to do the work of the Lord
negligently. Yea and see the strangeness of it. The cause why we should make
much of the Ministers of the Gospel is, for the message sake which they bring
unto us, because they bring unto us the holy word of life, the Manna, and food
of our souls; and because out of it they both teach us that truth which we are
to believe and embrace, and improve those errors which we are to beware and
avoid, and correct those faults in our life which we are to fly and detest,
and instruct us in that way of righteousness wherein we are to walk all the
days of our life. Thi^ I say is the cause why we should make much of them, and
this is the very cause why we cannot away with them. It would best of all
please a great many of us that they should hold their peace, and so (...), and
suffer us to sleep in our sins. Other o^ (...) ^^ppily can away with it that
they should reach, and instruct, and exhort, and speak to the ear: But that
there should be amongst the Disciples of Christ son of thunder, that the
Ministers of the Gospel should power into the wound both oil and vinegar,
that they should improve and rebuke, that a great many of us cannot away with,
and therefore when they do so we break our into terms at our pleasure
against them. Well, he that will be soundly healed he must suffer both oil and
vinegar to be powered into his wounds, and he that will live must suffer
himself to be awaked out of his dead sleep of sin, and he that will show
himself to have profited in the school of Christ must make much of such as
both teach, and improve, and correct, and instruct as the glory of God, and the
good of hi^ people does require. As for those that are not such I say now no
more, but I wish they were such, and that they would study to be such.

Beloved, I have urged this point, touching the Ministers of the Gospel, of
receiving them in the Lord, of receiving them with all gladness, of making
much of them, partly the last day, and partly this day: For your sakes, that
ye might know how to use the Ministers of the word, that so ye may give
testimony how ye honor the word. For as men like or mislike the Ministers of
the word, so commonly they are affected toward the word. Let the word of
Christ therefore dwell in you plenteously, let your delight be in the law of
the Lord, and love the word of life as your life: and for a proof thereof,
such as faithfully and painefully labor in the word and doctrine, receive them
in the Lord, receive them with all gladness, and make much of such. It follows.

Because that for the work of Christ etc.] This is the reason which the
Apostle brings why the Philippians should receive their Minister in the Lord,
and with all gladness. The reason then briefly is this: Epaphroditus was near
unto death for the work of Christ, and regarded not his life to fulfill that
service etc. therefore ye ought to receive him in the Lord, and with all
gladness. By the work of Christ the Apostle means in this place that whole
pains and labor which Epaphroditus took in coming to him to Rome, in
bringing with him that relief which the Philippians sent unto him, and in
ministering unto him in prison such things as he wanted. A service well called
the work of Christ, because commanded by Christ, and performed to the servant
of Christ for Christ his sake. Again, in that the Apostle in the end of the
verse says, to fulfill that service etc. the Apostle his meaning is not
thereby to note any fault in the Philippians, as if they had been any way
wanting unto him, but therein he commends Epaphroditus his faithful and
painful performance of that service, which they if they had been present
with him would have done, but now could not because of their far distance
from him. The whole reason is indeed drawn from the commendation of
Epaphroditus. His commendation is that he took such pains with him and for him
that it had been like to have cost him his life, and that he made not so much
reckoning of his life as he did of discharging that trust that was reposed in
him, and performing that service which the Philippians themselves would have
done if they had been present. This (I say) is the commendation which the
Apostle here gives him, and for this cause he wills them to receive him in
the Lord with gladness.

Whence I gather this general observation, that it is a very commendable thing
in the servants of Christ, not to regard their lives unto the death, but to
hazard their lives for the work of Christ, which either Christ has commanded
them to do in their place whatsoever, or which for Christ his sake they are to
perform unto any servant of Christ. What thing more commendable or memorable
in Esther, Ester. 3.13.
then that when the Kings decree was past against the Jews, to root out, to
kill, and to destroy all the Jews, 5.1.
both young and old, children and women in one day, she put her life in present
danger to deliver her people? For it was a matter of death by the law for one
not called to come into the inner court unto the King. 4.11.
Yet for this work of God, the deliverance of his Church from the devouring
sword she put her life in most eminent danger, and went in into the King, 16
which was not according to the law. We see it likewise registered unto the view
of all posterity touching the Apostles, that their lives were not dear unto
them so that they might fulfill their course with joy; that they were ready not
to be bound only, but also to die for the name of the Lord Jesus; that
howsoever they were threatened, yet they would not cease to preach in the name
of Christ Jesus. And whiles this Epistle shall be read Epaphroditus his praise
shall not die for hazarding his life for the work of Christ in releeuing Paul
his necessity when he was in prison, and ministering unto him such things as he
wanted. Yea and what if we should not only hazard our lives, but give up our
lives for any work of Christ? Have we not a sure promise? He that loses his
life for my sake (says our Savior) shall save it. Matthew. 10 39. 1 Reg. 17.
If therefore Eliah, or any of the poor children of God be an hungered, and
want to satisfy their hunger, though we have but an handful of meal in a
barrel, and a little oil in a cruse for our selves and for our family, and
though we have no more hope of sustenance but even to die when that is spent
and eaten, yet let us with that good widow of Sarepta strain and hazard our
selves that they may be somewhat relieved. If Paul or any godly brother in
Christ be in prison, though our watchings, and care, and pains, and travail
with them and for them be not without manifest danger of our health, and
happily of our life, yet let us with godly Epaphroditus by all these hazard our
selves and our lives for their good, and such things as may be needful for
them. If any brother be sick, though it be with some danger let us visit him,
and comfort him. If for the work of our ministry we be so pressed that in
our selves we receive the sentence of death, as our holy Apostle was often
pressed, yet let us not shrink, but let us declare unto the people all the
words of the Lord, and speak of all the judgments of his mouth. In a word, in
whatsoever work of Christ (for I do not now speak of this work alone here
mentioned) but in whatsoever work of Christ which he has commanded us in our
places to do, or which being done for his sake he accounts as done for
himself, let us be bold in the Lord, let not our lives be dearer unto us then
the performance of his will, but let us hazard our lives for the work of
Christ.

But here the doubt may be made, and the question demanded, whether we are
always to hazard our lives for the work of Christ, whether in some work of
Christ we may not sometimes withdraw our selves from danger, and provide for
our health, and for our lives? As for example, whether we may not forbear the
visiting of the sick, when the sickness is pestilentiall and contagious, whether
in such times we may not provide for our health, and for our lives? The
question I know is hard, and the doubt not easily answered, neither will I take
upon me the decision of the doubt: only I show my opinion, and willingly submit
it to the judgment of others. Touching private men therefore, I mean such as
whose place and office does not necessarily require a more public care then of
themselves and of their own family, they may in my judgment spare themselves,
and not hazard their health or their lives, but for the time withdraw
themselves from the danger, especially if such reasonable order be taken for
the sick, as that by coming unto them they may more endanger themselves and
others, then do them good. My reasons are these, 1. By the law of Moses, we
see that those that were troubled with any contagious disease, as with the
leprosy, Leu. 13 46.
they were commanded to dwell apart, and to have their habitation without the
camp, and in places where they came to cry, I am unclean, I am unclean.
Which does plainly show that all were not to come unto them, but both they
were to give warning unto others, and others were to take warning by them, lest
happily they should be infected by them, if they should come unto them. Again,
howsoever in such cases we could be content to hazard our selves and our own
lives, yet may we and we ought to have care over our own household, and over
that charge that is committed to us. 1 Timothy 5.8.
For if there be any (says the Apostle) that provides not for his own, and
namely for them of his household, be denies the faith, and is worse then an
infidel. We must then provide for our own, as for their wealth in good sort,
and things necessary to this life, so for their health, and therefore avoid
such occasions as whereby we might bring their health in danger. Again, we
have many examples in the holy Scriptures of that great Eliah, of our Savior
Christ Jesus, of the blessed Apostles, and of many others that did for the time
avoid such dangers as otherwise would have overtaken them, and did not always
think it meet to hazard themselves in every occurrent danger. Which reason I
do the rather in this place bring, because if they might, then much more
private men sometimes may for the time withdraw themselves from danger.

Now if here it be objected and said, that avoiding of sickness and other
dangers is an argument of distrust in God, and therefore we may not withdraw
our selves in such times; I answer that it is no sure argument. The wicked
indeed withdraw themselves in such times of danger because they distrust in
God, and think that God either cannot or will not help them, and deliver them
from the danger: and such avoiding of sickness or other danger is wicked and
ungodly. The children of God therefore withdraw themselves, because they know
that it is lawful to use such remedies against dangers as are lawful and
good: and such avoiding is lawful. Again, if it be said that to avoid at such
times is to no purpose, because God has certainly decreed whom to take and
whom to leave at such times, and none but they alone shall die; I answer, that
in like sort it may be said, that it was to no purpose for Jacob to send into
Egypt to buy corn, Genesis
because God had certainly decreed to save him and his family from the famine:
Act. 27.
and likewise to no purpose that Paul should keep the mariners from flying out
of the ship by boat, lest all should perish, because God had decreed to save
all them that sailed with them. And yet we see that both Jacob sent into
Egypt, and Paul caused the soldiers to cut off the ropes of the boat, both
using such means as God had ordained whereby to bring his will to pass, and
therein leaving us an ensample to do the same. Again, if it be said that it
is a scandal so to withdraw our selves, I answer that it is a scandal taken,
not given. Again, if it be said that whereas we should love our neighbors as
our selves, thus we do forsake them, and so leave the rule of love and
charity. I answer, that to leave them for a time, when there are either some
of their friends, or some others provided for the nonce to look unto them, is
not to forsake them, neither is against the rule of love and charity. Nay it
were very preposterous love and charity so to be devoted unto this or that
private friend, as by that occasion to bring in danger a whole family or
charge whatsoever committed unto them. Neither do I know any thing which can
be brought to cross that which has been said touching private men's avoiding
of dangers, which may not as easily be answered.

Now touching public men, Magistrates and Ministers, the doubt is somewhat
more difficult. To instance in Ministers, to show mine opinion in brief, in my
judgment the Ministers are first and principally to look unto the good of the
whole Church, and then unto the good of every particular member thereof. If
there be many Ministers of one Church, some one by lot or common consent may
be deputed to regard the sick, and the rest may avoid the danger. But if there
be but one, he is so to be careful for the sick, as that the rest of the
Church may not be deprived of his ministry. He may and must comfort the
sick, and go unto them in such sort, and so near as he well can without
danger: and again, he may and must avoid manifest danger for the good of the
rest of the Church so much as he can without impiety. Neither may too much
fear withdraw him too much from danger, neither through too much boldness may
he thrust himself too much into danger: for by too much fear he is more
slow to the work of Christ then he should be, and by too much boldness he
more endangereth both himself and the Church then he should. To conclude the
whole point therefore, howsoever it be most true that it is a very commendable
thing in the servants of Jesus Christ to hazard their lives as Epaphroditus
did for the work of Christ, yet sometimes both private and also public men
may withdraw themselves from danger in such sort as already has been showed.

Another particular observation hence I gather, which is this, that releeuing
them that are in bonds and in prison, and ministering unto the necessities of
Gods Saints upon earth, is a work of Christ; for so the Apostle in this place,
as we see, calls it. It is, I say, a work of Christ, such a one as he
commands, Heb. 13.3.
and loves, and rewards. Remember them that are in bonds, says the holy
Ghost by the Apostle, as though ye were bound with them, and them that are in
affliction as if ye were also afflicted in the body. 1 Timothy 6.16.
And to Timothy the Apostle says, Charge them that are rich in the world, that
they be ready to give and glad to distribute, laying up in store for themselves
a good foundation, etc. Again, how the holy Ghost loves this work, may
appear by that of Paul, 2 Timothy 1.16.
where he says, The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus, for he often
refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain, etc. and by that where the
Apostle says, Heb. 13.16.
To do good and to distribute forget not, for with such sacrifices God is
pleased. Again, how Christ rewards this work we see in the Gospel, where
setting the sentence of the last judgment he says, Mat. 25.34
Come ye blessed of my Father, etc. Contrariwise, how the Lord hates the
neglect of this duty, of ministering unto the necessities of his poor Saints
on earth, we may see both by the example of that churlish Nabal, of whose
badnesse this is especially registered as most hateful unto the Lord, 1 Sa.
25.10.
that he would not relieve the necessity of David being in distress, but sent
away his servants with crooked and churlish answers: and likewise by the
example of the rich man in the Gospel, of whom likewise this is especially
registered, as most hateful unto the Lord, Luke 16.19.
that when Lazarus lay at his gate full of sores, and desired to be refreshed
with the crummes that fell from the rich man's table, the dogs came unto him,
and did more for him then the rich man would do: and likewise by the
testimony of John, where he says, Whosoever has this worlds good, and sees
his brother have need, 1 Ioh. 3.17.
and shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him?
As if the Apostle should have said, Whatsoever show this man makes, the love of
God dwells not in him; neither he loves God, nor God loves him. Men and
brethren, what should more stir you up unto this holy work of releeuing of
Gods poor Saints, a thing so needful now to be urged and pressed, what (I
say) should more stir you up unto it then this which has already been said?
It is a work of Christ, which Christ commands, which he loves and likes,
which Christ highly rewards, and unmercifulness to the poor he hates and
detesteth. As every man therefore wishes in his heart, so let him give unto
the poor Saints, not grudgingly, or of necessity, for God loves a cheerful
giver. 2 Cor. 9.7.
If it be a work of Christ, it well beseems thee if thou be a Christian; if
he have commanded it, it stands thee upon to obey it; if he love and like it,
thou have great cause to move thee to it; if for his mercies sake he reward it,
thou have great reason to be occupied in it; and if he so hate the neglect of
it, it behooves thee not to be negligent in it. As therefore every man has
received of the Lord, so let him be ready to give according to that he has.
He that has mercy on the poor, Pro. 19.17.
lends unto the Lord, and the Lord will recompense him that which he has
given. And blessed is he, says David, Psalm. 41.1.
that considers the poor and needy, the Lord shall deliver him in the time
of trouble. Consider what I say, and the Lord give you a ^ight understanding in
all things, and fill your hearts full of all knowledge, that ye may abound in
every good, unto the glory of God the Father: to whom with the Son and the
holy Ghost, etc.

Laus omnis soli Deo.
THE THIRD CHAPTER.
LECTVRE XLVIII.
PHILIP. 3. Verse. 1.2. Moreover, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord. It grieueth
me not to write the same things unto you, and for you it is a sure etc.
THe holy Apostle having in the first chapter of this Epistle, first signified
his good mind toward the Philippians by retaining them in perfect memory, by
his longing after them all from the very heart root in Jesus Christ, and by
his praying for them, and having afterward exhorted them that they should not
shrink for his imprisonment, because thereby the Gospel was confirmed and not
diminished: In the second Chapter as we have heard, he first exhorted them unto
humility, that putting apart all contention and vain glory, they would have
even the same mind that was in Christ Jesus, who being God humbled himself to
be man, and became obedient to the death, even the death of the Cross, and was
therefore highly exalted etc. 2. Having grounded certain exhortations upon
that example of Christ his humility and obedience, as 1. That they would run
forward in that race of righteousness wherein God had freely placed them
through Jesus Christ, making an end of their salvation with fear and
trembling; and then that they would do all things with their neighbors
without murmuring and reasonings, that they might be blameless and pure, and
the sons of God etc. The Apostle I say having grounded these exhortations
upon that example of Christ his humility and obedience. 2. For their comfort
and confirmation against certain false Apostles crept in amongst them, he
both promised to send Timothy shortly unto them, and likewise that himself
would shortly after that come unto them, and besides sent their Minister,
Epaphroditus presently unto them. Now in this 3. Chapter the Apostle
instructs the Philippians in the things wherein the false Apostles labored
to seduce them, and so armeth the Philippians against them till his coming
unto them by confuting that false doctrine which they delivered. The doctrine
which the false Apostles delivered was, that not Christ alone, and faith in his
name, but circumcision also and the works of the law were necessary unto
justification, and salvation. Which doctrine the Apostle does at large confute
in the Epistle to the Galathians, because they had suffered themselves to be
seduced and bewitched by it. But here, because the Philippians had manfully
withstood it, and given it no place amongst them, the Apostle very briefly
confuteth it, and proves that our righteousness is only by Christ, and faith
in his name, not at all by the works of the Law. The principal parts of this
Chap^er are three: 1. He exhorts them to beware of false Teachers, verse 2.
and instructs them in that truth which the false Apostles gainesay, verse. 3.
2. The Apostle proposes himself as an imbracer of that truth touching man's
righteousness which they were to embrace, a verse. 4. ad 15. Lastly, he
exhorts them to embrace and hold fast the same truth with him, and to walk
as they have him for an ensample, from verse. 15. to the end of the Chapter. Now
before he come to the handling of any of these principal parts, 1. He sets
down this exhortation, rejoice in the Lord, as a conclusion of that which went
before, and as a ground of that which follows. 2. He excuses h^mselfe for
writing now the same things by epistle which before he had taught them by word
of mouth. That the exhortation is set down partly by way of conclusion of that
which he had spoken before, may appear by the entrance unto it, in that he
says, Moreover etc. For it is as if the Apostle had thus said: hitherto ye
have been full of heaviness partly for my bonds and imprisonment, Phil. 1.12.14.
and partly for Epaphroditus your minister his sickness Now for my bonds, they,
^s I have told you, have turned rather to the furthering of the Gospel,
inasmuch as many of the brethren in the Lord are boldned through my bonds to
speak the word, and now so it is that I am in good hope shortly to be
delivered from my bonds, and to come unto you. Again, for Epaphroditus God has
had mercy upon him, and now he is returned unto you in good and perfect health.
What therefore now remains my brethren, but that ye be glad and rejoice in
the Lord, in the Lord I say whom before I have described unto you, in that Lord
who being in the form of God thought it no robbery to be equal with God, yet
made himself of no reputation, and took on him the form of a servant, etc.
Rejoice, for that there is no other cause but that ye should rejoice, but
rejoice in the Lord who became man for you, died for your sins, rose again
for your justification, sets at the right hand of God to make request for
you, unto whom every knee in that day shall bow, and confess that he is the
Lord, rejoice in him. Again, it is partly set down as a ground of that which
follows; as if the Apostle should thus have said; I have already as in a
glass presented unto your view the great mystery of godliness, even God
manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, 1 Timothy 3.16.
seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and
received up into glory. He it is, and he alone it is that is made of God unto
you wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption that he
that rejoices might rejoice in him. Rejoice therefore in him, and beware of
such as teach you to rejoice in any thing but in him. Thus ye see how this
exhortation is partly a conclusion of that which went before, and partly a
ground and foundation of that which follows. The excuse which follows, is
to meet with that conceit which the Philippians happily might have upon his
often admonition. First by word, and now by writing, to beware of false
Apostles. For thus the Apostle thought they might conceive, and think with
themselves; you have often when you were with us admonished us of false
Apostles and Teachers, when you taught us and preached unto us Christ Jesus you
ceased not to warn us to beware of such as would seek to seduce us from that
truth which you taught us; and we have been diligent so to do, neither have
we given place to any of their doctrines: And therefore you needed not to have
troubled your self; this admonition needed not to us, The Apostle therefore to
meet with this tells them, that for him it is no grief or trouble to him at
all to write the same things unto them which before he had taught them by word
of mouth, and for them he tells them that it is a sure and a safe thing that
they be often admonished of false Teachers, that so they may be the more wary
of them. Thus much for the understanding of these words. Now before we proceed
any farther, let us see what observations we may gather hence. For our use and
instruction.

The 1. thing which here I note is the manner how the Apostle does exhort the
Philippians, which is in most mild, and kind, and good sort, speaking unto
them as unto his brethren, yea calling them his brethren: not that they were
his brethren naturally according to the flesh by carnal generation, but his
brethren in Christ, begotten in one womb of the Church the spouse of Christ,
unto one God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and father of us all, by one
immortal seed the word of God, through one spirit whereinto we are all
baptized, borne by spiritual generation not of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. Exhorting then the Philippians whom
he had begotten in the faith unto Christ by his ministry, he speaks unto
them as unto his brethren in Christ most mildly, and kindly, and lovingly. So
we see he does in the second Chapter and twelfth verse, where exhorting them to
humility and obedience, and to finish their salvation with fear and
trembling, he speaks thus unto them, wherefore my beloved, as ye have
always obeyed etc. So in the next Chapter he joins both these together, and
a great deal more, and says, Therefore my brethren, beloved and longed for,
my joy and my crown etc. Most mild and loving exhortations. And wherefore
uses he such mildness in his exhortations unto them? No doubt the rather to
win them to hearken unto him and unto that whereto he exhorts them. For as
sharp and bitter words often stirs up striefe and anger, so a soft tongue,
mild and loving speeches much avail to effect that which a man desires. Here
then is a lesson for us whom God has set apart unto the holy work of his
ministry, that we should not only be careful to instruct them that hear us
in the wholesome words of truth, but that a meekness also of spirit we should
exhort them unto the things that belong unto their peace. A thing practiced by
Christ himself, and practiced likewise by the Apostles of Jesus Christ, as by
many places in the new Testament it may easily appear. Here then happily you
will say unto me, how is it then that many of you are so sharp and eager in
speech? how is it that ye follow not the practice of Christ, and of his
Apostles? We are indeed sometimes sharp, we come sometimes with a rod, as
the Apostle speaks, yea sometimes we bring an axe with us, and lay it to the
root of the tree to cut it down, that it may be cast into the fire, sometimes
we pluck up, and root out, and throw down, sometimes we strike, and wound,
and kill, and herein we follow the practice of Christ, and of his Apostles.
Would it not seem a sharp speech unto you, if we should lift up our voices, and
cry, Mat. 12.34. Ioh. 8.44.
O generation of vipers, how can ye speak good things when ye are evil? or
if ^e should say, ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your
father ye will do: or if we should say, ye fools, Luc. 11 40.42.43. etc.
did not he that made that which is without, make that which is within also?
or if we should come with woe upon woe unto such and such men. And yet speaking
thus we should speak no otherwise then our Savior Christ did. Did not the
Apostle likewise use sharp peaches unto the Galathians, when he said unto
them, Galat. 3.1.3.
O foolish Galathians, who has bewitched you that ye should not obey the
truth? are ye so foolish that after ye have begun in the spirit, ye would
now be made perfect by the flesh? And did not James likewise use great sharpnes
and boldness of speech against richmen, saying, Iam. 5.1.2.3.4.5.6.
Go to now ye rich men, weep and houle for your miseries that shall come upon
you etc. ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and in wantones: ye have
nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter: ye have condemned and killed
the just, and he has not resisted you, therefore we be sometimes somewhat
rough and sharp ye see we do not therein swerve from the rule and practice of
Christ, or his Apostles. Eccles. 3.1.3.
To all things (says the Preacher) there is an appointed time, and a time to
every purpose under the heaven. A time to slay, and a time to heal; a time to
break down, and a time to build etc. So I say there is a time to be rough
and sharp, and there is a time to be mild and gentle; there is a time to
strike and wound, and there is a time to comfort and to heal. The same God
that came in a soft and still voice unto Eliah, 1 Reg. 19.12. Number. 16.32.
Leuit. 10.2.
and not in the earthquake, not in the fire, came unto Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram in the earthquake, and unto Nadab and Abihu in the fire, and the one
sort were devoured by the earthquake, and the other sort by the fire. When men
are hardened in sin and will not be awaked out of the dead-sleepe whereinto
they are fallen, when men stop their ears at the voice of the charmer charm
he never so wisely, and will not hearken and obey; when men come to that height
of impiety that either they say with the fool in their hearts, there is no
God, or else make the question whether there be knowledge in the most high,
when the fruits of ungodliness and vn^^ghteousnesse, I say not begin to
shoot out their heads, and to shake their lips, but to swarm like the
grasshoppers in Egypt, then I trow it is a time to be sharp, to speak out of
mount Sinai in thunder and in lightening, to denounce the threatenings of the
law, and the judgments of Gods mouth against all ungodliness and iniquity,
and to lay the axe unto the very root of the tree to strike, and wound, and to
kill sin if it be possible. Again, when the soul is afflicted and brought
low through any plague or trouble, when the sorrowful heart shrinketh in the
way and groneth under the burden of his sin, when men begin to loath and
detest those wicked ways wherein they have walked, and to long and thirst
after the things that belong unto their peace, then it is as a time to come in
the spirit of meekness, to speak comfortably unto the heart, to raise up them
that are fallen with all kind speeches, and in all loving manner to lead them
on a long besides the water of comfort. As therefore the times do require so
we come with a rod, or in the spirit of meekness, and because commonly in
our congregations there be both some such as need to be wounded, and again
some such as need to be healed, therefore it is that in our Sermons we do
both sharply reprove, and mildly exhort. The sinner that goes on in the
wickedness of his way, and runs headlong into many and noisome lusts, we
sharply reprove, that we may reclaim him from the wickedness of his way, and
that we may pull him as a brand out of the fire lest he should perish in the
day of Christ. But such as are grieved because they are out of the right way,
and grope after it if happily they might find it, them we restore with the
spirit of meekness, we pour oil into their wounds, with all mildness we
exhort them, and we minister what word of comfort we can unto them. Nay
whatsoever sharpness at any time we do use, yet still we exhort you with all
mildness, whether it be that we exhort you to continue in the grace wherein
ye stand, and to hold fast your hope unto the end, or to turn from the
wickedness of your way, and to make straight steps unto your feet, that
that which is halting may be healed. And if the heart^ of our people might be
healed only by applying gentle medicines without cutting and launcing their
sores, only by pouring, supplying oil without pouring vinegar into their
wounds, why should any man think that we would use sharpness of speech? Nay
it would be our souls joy if our meditations for the things that we bring unto
you might be wholly and only set and settled on the sweet comforts of the
Gospel, that all our speeches unto you might be of the mercies of God unto us
in Christ Jesus. Our desire is to present you pure and blameless, not having
spot or wrinckle, or any such thing, in that day. Having this desire, if any of
our sheep wander and go astray bear with us if with the good sheep heard we
sometimes use the hook, nay if sometime^ we set our dog after them, and
pinch them to bring them in again. But above all things have care that we may
still speak unto you as unto our brethren, sons of one father with us,
children of one womb with us, baptized by one spirit into one body with us,
continuing in one fellowship of Gods Saints with us, and walking with us by one
rule in the same way unto our Country and City which is above, where Christ
which is our head has taken possession for us. Let us walk and talk as
brethren, and let us proceed by one rule, that we may mind one thing. And
thus much of this observation. It follows.

Rejoice in the Lord] We have spoken already of the manner of the Apostle his
exhortation: Now in these words I note the matter of his exhortation, which is
to rejoice, but not so simply, but to rejoice in the Lord. The like exhortation
the Apostle also makes in the next chapter, where he says, Rejoice in the
Lord always, Phil. 4 4.
again I say, Rejoice. The like whereunto the Apostle also in another place
makes out of the Prophet, 2 Cor. 10.17 Jer. 9 24. 1 Th. 5.16.
where he says, Let him that rejoices, rejoice in the Lord. In the Epistle
to the Thessalonians he only says, Rejoice evermore; but the meaning is all
one with that in the next chapter, Rejoice in the Lord always. Hence then we may
observe what and wherein the Christian man's joy and rejoicing ought to be: his
joy and rejoicing is and ought to be in the Lord. To be glad, and to be merry,
and to rejoice, is a thing which the heart of man very much even naturally
desires, so that there needs no precept or exhortation at all that we
should rejoice: but what and wherein our rejoicing should be, is a matter very
well worthy our due and diligent consideration. Look abroad into the world,
and see; a man shall there see gladness of heart and rejoicing enough: but
what, and wherein? The rich and wealthy man he rejoices and cheereth his
heart in his wealth and riches, in his lands and possessions, in the glory of
his house, and in the store that he has. The strong man he glories and
rejoices in hi^ strength, the wise man in his wisdom, the great and
honorable man in his greatness and in his honor, the wanton in his
pleasures, the riotous person in his riotousnesse, and generally the wicked man
in his wickedness. Nay is it not with us as it was in the days of the Prophet
Esaias with Jerusalem? In the day that the Lord God of hosts calls unto weeping
and mourning, and to baldness, and girding with sackcloth, Esa. 22.12.13.
is there not joy and gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep, eating
flesh, and drinking wine, eating and drinking, for to morrow we shall die? Do
we not, as the Prophet Amos speaks, in this day wherein Gods judgments lie
so heavy upon us, and upon our whole land, do we not (I say) put far from
us the evil day, Amos 6.3.4.
and approach to the seat of iniquity, lying upon beds of Yuorie, and
stretching our selves upon our beds, eating the lambs of the flocks, and the
calves out of the stall, singing to the sound of the viole, 5.6.
drinking wine in boules, and anointing our selves with the chief ointments,
but no man almost remembering the affliction of Joseph? Yes surely every where
almost we may see men following their wonted pleasures, and rejoicing
themselves in their wonted delights, as if the hand of the Lord were not upon
us. But such carnal and worldly rejoicing is not good. Nay unto such as thus
rejoice, fixing their only joy and delight on the things of this world, and on
the vanities of this life, our Savior Christ pronounces a woe, saying, Woe be
to you that now laugh, Luke 6.25.
for ye shall wail and weep. This is the fearful judgment of God upon them
that rejoice in the flesh, and not in the spirit. Understand therefore that
there is a twofold joy and rejoicing; one in the flesh, another in the spirit;
one carnal and sensual, another spiritual and Christian; one in the world,
another in the Lord. The carnal and worldly rejoicing is, when putting far
from us the remembrance of the evil day, we rejoice more in the pleasures of
sin and the transitory things of this world, then we do in the things that
belong unto our peace. Such was the rejoicing of him that when he had pulled
down his barnes, and builded greater, Luke 12.18.19.
and therein laid all his fruits and his goods, said unto his soul, Soul thou
have much goods laid up for many years, live at ease, eat, drink, and take
thy pastime. And such is the rejoicing of men commonly at this day, as already
has been noted. And true it is which wise Solomon says, Foolishness is joy
to him that is destitute of understanding; that is, Pro. 15.21.
even wickedness and sin is a matter of mirth and delight to the wicked and
ungodly man. I^b 20.5.
But it is as true which Zophar says, That the rejoicing of the wicked is
short, and that the joy of hypocrites is but a moment.

Besides this carnal and worldly rejoicing, there is also a Christian and
spiritual rejoicing, which is, when setting our hearts on the Lord as on our
chiefest good, we so rejoice in the things of this life, as that we count
them all loss and dung in comparison of that rejoicing which we have in
Christ Jesus; when remembering the merciful goodness and loving kindness of
our good God, nothing can so much daunt us, but that our heart daunceth for
joy, and our souls are ravished with rejoicing thereat. Will thou then
rejoice, or know how and wherein to rejoice, O man that fear the Lord?
Rejoice in the Lord: rejoice in those spiritual blessings wherewithal God
has blessed thee in heavenly things in Christ Jesus: rejoice in thine election
in Christ Jesus unto eternal life before the foundation of the world: rejoice
in the workmanship of thy creation after Gods own image, in thy redemption by
the blood of Christ Jesus, when through disobedience thou had for ever cast
thy self away; in thine adoption through Jesus Christ into the number of the
sons of God; in thy reconciliation with God the Father by the intercession
and mediation of Christ Jesus; in thy vocation unto the knowledge of the truth
by the Gospel of Christ Jesus; in thine incorporation into the mystical body
of Christ Jesus by the powerful operation of the spirit; in thy justification
and free forgiveness of thy sins by faith in the blood of Christ Jesus; in
thy sanctification by the spirit of grace unto some measure of holiness and
righteousness in this life; in thy regeneration unto a lively hope in Christ
Jesus, and in the assured confidence of thy glorification after this life with
Jesus, who shall change thy vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body, etc. Herein is the Christian man's rejoicing, and here is matter
of rejoicing indeed. All rejoicing in all things in the world whatsoever, what
is it in comparison of this rejoicing? Surely as even now we heard out of Job,
it is short, and but a moment. Nay I say more, Whatsoever men imagine with
themselves, yet indeed there is no true joy, no sound rejoicing, but this
rejoicing in the Lord. Other joys in other things may happily for the time
somewhat affect us, and please our fancies, and tickle our outward senses, and
delight our outward man: but that that warmes the heart, that that cheeres the
soul, that that makes the inner man to pant and to leap for joy, that's the
joy in the holy Ghost, and rejoicing in the Lord. And this is it which sticks
by a man in his life, and in his death forsakes him not. Yea, when in the
throws and pangs of death he shall say of all other joys whatsoever, I have
no pleasure in them, then in this joy his soul shall rejoice, through this joy
he shall joyfully wrestle with death, and because of this joy he shall not
fear death, nor the grave, but desire to be loosed, and to be with Christ.
Let the carnal, and worldly, and sensual men therefore brag and boast as
much as they will, that they lead the only joyful and pleasant lives, and let
them object unto the godly Christian as much as they will, a lumpish, and
momish, and sour life, wherein he has no joy or pleasure at all, yet shall
the day come when they shall change their minds, and sigh for grife of mind,
Wisd. 5.3.
and say within themselves: These are they whom sometimes we had in derision,
and in a parable of reproach. 4.
We fools thought we had the world at will, and thought their life madness;
but how are they counted among the children of God, 5.
and their portion is among the Saints. Thus, I say, shall they say when they
shall perceive that the life which they thought the only joyful life, was
indeed the most miserable life. So that when the count is indeed truly cast,
we shall find that only the true Christian has sound joy of heart, and that
there is no sound rejoicing but this rejoicing in the Lord.

Yea but how shall we know this, that indeed we do rejoice in the Lord? For
we are inclined naturally to flatter our selves, and we will say that we
rejoice in the Lord and perhaps think so too, when indeed we do not. How
then shall we know that we do truly rejoice in the Lord? The wicked indeed,
whose hearts are set on other pleasures, wherein no true joys are to be found,
they know not what ^t means, yea it seems mere madness and foolishness
unto them. But for us thus we shall know that we rejoice in the Lord in whom
alone true joys are to be found. 1. Consider and see what longing and
thirsting there is in thee after the hearing, and reading, and meditating in
the holy word of life, what comfort and peace of conscience thy soul finds
in the holy word of life, how thy heart is enlarged when thou hear or
read the sweet promises of God in Christ Jesus, what a gladness unto thy
soul it is that Christ is made of God unto us wisdom, and righteousness,
and sanctification, and redemption, how steadfastly thou cleauest in thy heart
unto thy God, and how soule-rauisht thou art with the love of thy Christ by
meditation in the word; consider I say and see these things, and hereby thou
shall see whether thou do truly rejoice in the Lord. Ioh. 15.11.
These things, says our Savior Christ, I have spoken unto you that my joy
might remain in you, and that your joy might be full. If then thus we be
affected toward the word of Christ that we long and thirst thereafter even as
the chased heart after the water brooks, if we find in it such peace, and
comfort, and contentation of soul, if through it we believe in Christ though
we see him not, and in his promises, if we love him, and rejoice in him with
joy unspeakable and glorious, this is a certain effect, and so a sure proof
of our rejoicing in the Lord. Nay if we have a good measure of this rejoicing
in and through the word, though not such complement as we have spoken of, yet
even this is a sure argument of our rejoicing in the Lord; for then alone shall
this rejoicing be fully perfect when we shall see him face to face, and when
we shall know even as we are known, not in part only.

Another effect of this rejoicing in the Lord is, that it causes us to rejoice
in tribulations, in afflictions, in tentations, even in death, and in the
panges and pains thereof. Consider then and see how thou art affected in the
day of thy trouble, what comfort thou find in thy soul when in the world
thou do suffer afflictions, what joy thou find in thine inner man when
thine outward man is compassed about with sorrows; consider I say and see these
things, and thereby thou shall also see whether indeed and truly thou do
rejoice in the Lord: for as the Apostle says, by Christ we rejoice in
tribulations, knowing that tribulation brings forth patience, Romans 5 3.
and patience experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed. If
then when we suffer afflictions in the world, we can be of good comfort
because our Christ has overcome the world; if when we are reviled and
persecu^ed, and all manne^ of evil words are spoken against us falsely for
Christ his sake, we can rejoice and be glad for that reward that is laid up
for us in heaven; if in the sorrows of death we can patiently wait for the
Lord, and gladly desire to be loosed, and to be with Christ, this is a
certain effect, and so a sure proof of our rejoicing in the Lord: for
therefore are we not over come of sorrows in the midst of troubles, because
of that our rejoicing in the Lord which is within us, and which no man can take
from us. A third effect of thi^ rejoicing in the Lord is, that it causes us to
count all things loss and dung in comparison of Christ, so that we seize him
and possess him not of a part alone of our rejoicing, but of our whole
rejoicing, which is the effect spoken of in this chapter, as hereafter we
shall perceive. Consider then and see whether thy rejoicing be entire in thy
Christ, whether thou can find any sound joy but in thy Christ, whether thou
stand so fast as that nothing shall take away any part of thy rejoicing in thy
Christ, and give it to any other: consider, I say, and see these things, and
thereby also thou shall see whether thou reioycest truly in the Lord. When many
of Christ his Disciples went back, he said unto the twelve, Will ye also go
away? John 6.67 68.
Then Simon Peter answered him, Master to whom shall we go? Thou have the
words of eternal life. If then we whosoever rejoice in other things, yet we
rejoice in Christ Jesus, if we cleave steadfastly unto him, knowing that there
is no sound joy without him, if we make him both the deskant and the dittie of
our song, and the whole matter of our rejoicing, this is also a certain effect
and sure proof of our rejoicing in the Lord, for by our rejoicing in him we
die unto all other joys, knowing that there is no sound joy but in him.

Let us remember what great things he has done for us, and what cause we have
to rejoice in his holy name. He that gave him to us, and him to death for us,
he has together with him given us all things also. Let us therefore rejoice in
him, and let our rejoicing in him show it self by our rejoicing in and through
the word, by our rejoicing in all our tribula^ions and afflictions, and by
dying unto all other joys which are without him. In him is sound joy, and in
him is all joy; if we believe in him we will rejoice in him, if we rejoice
joyce in him we shall not fear death, but when death comes we shall desire to
be loosed, and to be with Christ.

LECTVRE XLIX.
PHILIP. 3. Verse. 1.2. It grieueth me not to write the same things unto you,
and for you it is a safe thing. Beware of dogs, beware etc.
IT grieueth me not etc.] The Apostle thought that thus the Philippians might
conceive and think with themselves: when you were with us and taught us, and
preached unto us Christ Jesus, you ceased not to warn us of f^lse teachers,
such as would seek to seduce us from that truth which you taught us, and we
have been diligent so to do, neither have we given place to any of their
doctrinea. And therefore you needed not to have troubled your self, this
admonition needed not to us. In these words therefore the Apostle meets with
this, and excuses the matter, and tells them, that for him it was no grief
or trouble at all to him to write the same things unto them which before he had
taught them by word of mouth; and for them he tells them that it was a sure
and safe thing for them to be often admonished of false teachers, that so they
might be the more wary of them. Now before we proceed any farther, let us
see what observations we may gather hence for our use and instruction.

1. In that the Apostle beats so often upon that which he thought was so good,
and so profitable for them to hear, urging and pressing even the self same
things both by word and also by writing. Hence we that are Ministers of the
Gospel may learn this lesson, not to be grieved to teach them that hear us
often the same things, but as we perceive the things whereof we speak to be
good and profitable to them that hear us, so to go over them, and over them,
and not to leave them till they may make some good impression in them There
must be precept upon precept, as the Prophet speaks, Esaias 28.10
precept upon precept, line unto line, line unto line, there a little, and there
a little: we must tell them one thing oftentimes, and beat upon the same thing
so long till at length they may catch some hold of it. For that which we
commonly say, a good tale may be twice or thrice told, is most true in this
work of the Minister, where that can never be too much taught, which can never
be too well learned. And as we have our Apostle Paul for a notable example
herein to imitate, so have we Mos^s, and the Prophets, and other of the
Apostles likewise. In Moses, the Passover, the heavenly Manna, the Rock in
the wilderness, the brazen serpent, those manifold ceremonies, and sacrifices
of the law; what were they else but so many repetitions as it were, and
ingemminations of one and the same lesson to be learned by the Jews touching
Christ Jesus that lamb of God, whom alone they did all prefigure? look
likewise into all the Prophets, and see what all of them say in all their
prophecies, and what each of them say in their several prophecies. Do not all
the Prophets in all their prophecies beat wonderfully much upon these two
points, the cursed idolatry of the Jews, and their vain confidence in man
and in the arm of flesh? And do not each of them in their several
prophecies, Esaias in his prophecy, Jeremy in his prophecy etc. very often and
much bear upon these very points, urging them and pressing them sometimes by
threatenings, and sometimes by promises, as if they would never give over till
they should beat the consideration of these things into their brains. I have
protested (says the Lord by his Prophet) unto your fathers when I brought them
up out of the land of Egypt unto this day, I^r. 11.7.8.
rising early and protesting, saying, obey my voice: nevertheless they would
not obey, nor incline their ear etc. 35.15.
And again by the same Prophet he says, I have sent unto you all my servants
the Prophets, rising up early and sending them, saying, return now every man
from his evil way, and amend your works, and go not after other Gods to
serve them, and ye shall dwell in the land which I have given unto you, and to
your fathers, but ye would not incline your ear, nor obey me. Whereby it does
appear that all the Lord his servants, even all his Prophets were sent always
almost with one lesson unto the rebellious people of the Jews. So likewise the
Apostle Peter, Though (says he) ye have knowledge, 2 Pet. 1.12.
and be stablished in the present truth, he means the truth which he then
presently delivered unto them, yet (says he) I will not be negligent to put
you always in remembrance of these things, he means the same things whereof
then he put them in mind. Whereby he signifies that men even well grounded
and well stablished in the truth cannot be too often told, and too much put in
mind of such things as are good and profitable for their use and instruction.
Have we such patterns as Moses, and the Prophets, and the Apostles for
imitation in this point? Let us then, when we fall upon a point good and
profitable for them that hear us, let us I say, press it, and beat upon it,
let us come to it again and again, and let us not give it over, till we have
made (if it be possible) some impression of it.

Yea but this will be too too tedious and wearisome unto our auditorie, so
often to be plodding upon one thing, so much to be pressing the same thing be
it never so good. They must be delighted with variety, and great diversity of
matter, or else they will be quickly weary in hearing of us. Here it is
indeed: so dainty are the ears of our auditorie that they cannot away with it
to hear the same things so often. They must have novelties, they must have
variety of matter though when they have heard they cannot make any account of
that they have heard. Yea to such daintiness is our auditorie grown, Number.
11.5.
that if we feed them only with Manna, only with the holy word of life, the
heavenly food of our souls, they will quickly grow to loath it, Number. 11.6.
and to long and greedily to lust after such fish and flesh as they were wont
to have even in Egypt, nay if they may have but cucumbers, and pepons, and
leekes, and onyons, and garlike such as they had in Egypt, they had rather have
it then still to feed upon this dry Manna. So irksome are the same things
unto our auditorie, be they never so good, and so desirous are they to hear
diverse things, though nothing so good and profitable unto them. In regard
therefore of them we must not so often speak of the same things, because they
like it not, as not either needful, or not profitable for them. Hear then (I
beseech you) what our holy Apostle says for your instruction in this point.
For you (says he) it is a sure thing, a safe and good course for you, that ye
be often told of the same things. See then the odds between your conceit, and
the Apostle his resolution. To hear often of the same things is a tedious
thing to you: but the Apostle thinks it a very sure and safe thing for you.
You must allwaies have variety and that ye think best for you: but the
Apostle thinks it good for you to be often put in mind of the same things.
The reasons why it is good for you often to hear the same things are these. 1.
By hearing the same things often your dull and inexpert understandings are much
helped: For thus the things which happily at the first seemed hard to be
understood, and which you were not able to comprehend and conceive do
afterward become plain and easy unto you. And this is the reason why
sometimes we do so long stand a teaching the same lesson unto them that are
young cholers in the doctrine of faith, and inexpert in the word of
righteousness. 2 By hearing the same things often you are stirred up both unto
greater carefullnesse, and likewise unto greater wariness then otherwise
happily ye would. For if the things be such as you should learn and follow
after, ye ^ill quickly see that they much concern you, because they are so
often beaten upon, and therefore ye will be careful to lay them up in your
hearts, and to practice them in your lives. And this was the reason why the
Apostle Peter was so diligent to put them (unto whom he wrote) in mind of the
^^me thi^^s, even that the more diligent they saw him to put them in mind of
the same things, they might be the more careful to harken to those things
whereof he so often put them in mind. Again if the things be such as you
should beware and avoid, this often speaking of them will make you the more
wary of them, because ye will easily conjecture that surely the danger is
great when the caueats are so often and so carefully given. And this was the
reason why our Apostle first when he was with them by word of mouth, and now
again by writing ceased not to warn the Philippians of false teachers, even
that the more careful they saw the Apostle to give them warning of false
teachers, they might be so much the more wary of them. As then it ought not to
grieve us to speak the same things often unto you, so let it not be wearisome
unto you to hear the same things often of us. You see the Apostle says it is
a sure thing, and a good thing for you, and ye hear the reasons why it is
good for you. Let this suffice to moderate that over great niceness and
daintiness that is in some, and that such an ouer-itching humor that is in
some after variety that they cannot at all away with it to hear the same
things often. When the things are of necessary moment and behoof for you, let
it not be tedious unto to you to hear of them again, and again; and when
things are so carefully and so often suggested unto you, above all things take
heed that ye harken unto the things so suggested, lest that come upon you
which is mentioned in the place of Esaias before alleged, that is, lest when
there has been precept upon precept, precept upon precept, line unto line,
line unto line, there a little, and there a little, and yet ye would not hear,
afterward it come to pass by the just judgment of God, that there be precept
upon precept, precept upon precept, line unto line, line unto line, there a
little, and there a little, but then hearing you shall hear and not understand,
and seeing ye shall see and not perceive. For it is a just thing with God,
that if ye will not hear when the book of God is so wide opened unto you,
and the same things so often gone over and over, afterward the word be unto
you as the words of a book that is sealed up, that is, altogether
unprofitable, or else that it be quite taken from you and given unto them that
will hearken and obey. Let it therefore neither grieve them that speak to
speak the same things often when they are good and profitable, neither let it
seem tedious and wearisome unto you that hear to hear the same things often
when they are such; and above all things hearken unto such things so often
suggested, lest the things so often spoken unto you turn unto your farther
judgment. Now let us see what it was that the Apostle thought it not amiss
for himself so often to speak of, and a sure thing for them so often to hear
of: it was the taking heed of false teachers, such as would seek to seduce
them from that truth of Christ Jesus which he had taught them. And this is the
exhortation or admonition which now follows, after this excuse of the Apostle
for himself.

Beware of dogs etc.] This is the first principal part which we observed in
this chapter, which in brief is an exhortation or admonition to beware of
false teachers; and especially the Apostle gives his caveat of those false
Apostles which were then crept in amongst them, as the article used in the
original does show; who taught that not Christ alone and faith in his name,
but circumcision also, and the works of the law were necessary to
justification and salvation. These false teachers who taught this erroneous and
false doctrine, the Apostle here notes by the name of dogs, of false
teachers, and of the concision. He calls them dogs in respect of certain bad
qualities wherein they did resemble dogs. 1. In respect of their snarling and
barking, because as dogs they barked at him, and snarled at his doctrine, and
that as much without reason as the dog that barks not upon reason, but upon
custom. 1 Sa. 16.9.
And so we see Abishai called Shimei a dog in respect of his causeles barking
against David. 2. In respect of their greediness, because as dogs they minded
only their bellies, making (as afterward he says) their belly their God. And
so we see the Prophet called blind watchmen, and dumb dogs. Esaias 56.11
greedy dogs which could never have enough. 3. In respect of their
absurdnesse, because as the dog returns to his vomit, so they of Jews
being made Christians returned again unto their old Iudaisme, not teaching
Christ purely, but making a mixture of Iudaisme and Christianity. Again, he
calls them evil workers, 1. in respect of the works which they urged,
because by preaching the necessity of works unto salvation, and joining them
with Christ as workers together with him of our salvation, they made those
works which in themselves were not evil, evil works. For those works which
as they are done according to the law are good, by this addition of necessity,
that not Christ alone, but they also are necessary, as causes, unto salvation,
are made evil works. 2. In respect of the evil mind wherewith they urged
these works, because they urged them in hatred of him, and to cross that
which he had taught touching the sole sufficiency of Christ his righteousness
unto salvation. 3. In respect of their unfaithful working in the Lord his
vineyard, because together with good seed they did sow tares in the Lord his
field, joining with Christ the works of the law in the work of our salvation.
Lastly, he calls them the concision, 1. by allusion unto circumcision which
they urged as necessary to salvation, Act. 15.1.
saying as it is in the Acts, Except ye be circumcised after the manner of
Moses ye cannot be saved. 2. Because by urging circumcision they did indeed cut
the seamlesse coat of Christ, and rent the unity of the Church, which had now
received the circumcision of Christ through baptism, and had left off that
ceremony of the law. 3. Because by urging circumcision they showed themselves
to be only cut in the fore-skinnes of their flesh, but not to be circumcised
in the heart, by putting off the sinful body of the flesh through the
circumcision of Christ. Thus the Apostle upon these causes and respects notes
those false Teachers which were crept in amongst the Philippians, and of these
he warns them again and again, even three times, to beware.

Now touching the observations hence to be gathered, here 1. I note that the
Apostle speaks unto the Philippians in general, that they should beware of
false Teachers. Whence I observe that not Clergy men alone, as they call them,
but even all the faithful children of God may and ought to try and judge by
the Scriptures whether their Teachers and Preachers doctrine be true, and so to
reject whatsoever they find not proved by the Scriptures, or agreeable to the
Scriptures. For how should the Philippians beware of false Teachers? they
should examine and try their doctrine, and receive that which was agreeable to
that which he had taught them, and reject that which was not agreeable
thereunto. So we read it registered to the perpetual commendation of the men
of Berea, Act. 17.11.
that they searched the Scriptures to try whether those things which Paul
preached unto them were so as he preached. For they having received the
Scriptures in credit before, were so to accept of those things which Paul
preached unto them if they were consonant to the holy Scriptures, according to
that of the same Apostle, Gal. 1.9.
If any man preach unto you otherwise then that ye have received, let him be
accursed; then that ye have received, 1. Then that which God had promised
before by his Prophets in the holy Scriptures, as the same Apostle speaks.
And as the men of Berea did, Romans 1.2.
so we read he willed the Thessalonians to do, where he said unto them, try
all things, 1 These. 5.21
and keep that which is good: where it is plain by verse. 12. that he speaks
not only to the Pastors, but also to the flock. So the Apostle John in his
Epistle unto the faithful dispersed Jews says, dearly beloved, believe not
every spirit, 1 Ioh. 4.1.
but try the spirits whether they are of God: for many false Prophets are gone
out into the world. Where the Apostle delivers a general doctrine that
concerns every one of the faithful as he will avoid the seducing and
deceits of false Teachers, which is that every man should try by such rules as
the Scripture sets down who is a true or false Teacher, which is true or
false doctrine. And therefore we see that the Apostle rebukes the Galathians
very sharply, because they had given place unto false Apostles which corrupted
the pure doctrine of Christ, Gal. 3.1.
and had suffered themselves to be seduced by them. By which his sharp
reproof of them, he plainly shows that they should have tried and examined
the doctrine which those false Apostles brought by that which he had taught
them, and so rejected that which was not agreeable unto wholesome doctrine. And
what else mean those often admonitions in the Prophets unto all the Jews to
beware of false Prophets: Ier. 23.16.
hear not, says Jeremy, the words of the Prophets that prophecy unto you,
and teach you vanity: they speak the vision out of their own heart, and not
out of the mouth of the Lord, hear them not. How then? Esa. 8.20.
what is to be done? Esaias tells thee: To the law, and to the testimony: if
they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in
them. This then is to be done, when the false Prophets and Teachers speak unto
you hear them not, so as to rest on what they say, but so hear them as that
ye examine them by the law and by the testimony; and if they speak not
according to this word surely they have no knowledge, but are blind leaders of
them, and so account of them. Thus then both by the commendable example of the
men of Berea, and by the precept of the Apostles, John, and our Apostles, and
by the sharp reproof of the Galathians, and by the warrant of the Prophets,
it does and may appear that even all the faithful children of God may and
ought to try and judge by the Scriptures whether their teachers doctrine be
true, and so to reject whatsoever they find not agreeable to the Scriptures.

Yea but it will be said, that this were to make the sheep judges of their
shepherds, and the people to control their Ministers. No, not so: but the
people must heart their Ministers, and obey them, and be ordered by them, which
they will the more cheerfully do, when by searching the Scriptures they shall
find their Minister and Teachers doctrine to be the doctrine of the holy
Ghost, and not the invention or tradition of men. If the teachers bring not the
truth thus their errors will indeed be descried, and no reason that when they
bring not the truth their doctrine should be received as sound and good. But if
they bring the truth, by this search of the scriptures the truth which they
bring is with the greater lacritie reverenced and embraced, and themselves the
more honored and esteemed. Learn ye then, men and brethren, to make this use
of this doctrine: 1. To beware of such as teach you otherwise then now we have
taught you. Beware of such as will tell you that ye are not to meddle with the
sense of the Scripture, or to judge of such doctrine as ye hear whether it be
true or false, but ye are only to try the spirits by taking knowledge of
them to whom God has given the gift of discerning spirits, and by obeying the
Church, to whom Christ has given the spirit of truth, and this Church, say
they, is the Church of Rome. By this that ye have heard ye see that such are
false Teachers deceiving and being deceived. 2. Learn hence to be diligent in
re^ding, and in hearing the Scriptures, that so ye may be able to try the
spirits. Ioh. 5.39.
In the Scriptures, as says our Savior, we think to have eternal life; and
by meditating therein we shall easily skill of those that would lead us out of
the right way that guides to eternal life. Let us therefore exercise our
selves in the doctrine of the Gospel of Jesus Christ which we have received,
and let us mark them diligently which cause division and offenses contrary to
the doctrine which we have learned, and let us avoid them, yea if any come unto
us and bring not this doctrine, 2 Ioh. 10.
let us not receive him, nor bid him God speed, let us have no familiarity
with him, but let us abandon all fellowshippe with him.

The 2. thing which here I note, is the Apostles often iteration of this caveat
unto the Philippians, admonishing them aga^ne and again, even three times to
beware of false Teachers. Whence we may observe how needful a matter it is for
us to take heed of false Teachers, which seek to seduce us from that doctrine
which we have learned in the Gospel of Christ Jesus. Which thing as this
often iteration of this caveat may confirm unto us, so this circumstance also
even in this matter, that the Apostle having often before by word of mouth
warned them of false Teachers, yet adventured the reproof if they should blame
him for warning them again by writing. Again, when our Apostle took his last
farewell of seeing the Ephesians any more, how carefully did he warn them of
false Teachers? Take heed, says he, Act. 20.28 29.31.
unto your selves etc. For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous
wolves etc. Therefore watch and remember that by the space of three years I
ceased not to warn every one both night and day with tears. He begins with,
take heed unto your selves; he ends with, watch and remember etc. as if this
taking heed of false Teachers were a thing most needful for them to be
diligent in. And our Savior Christ, Mar. 8.15.
Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the leaven of
Herod. Where willing his Disciples to beware of the contagious doctrine of
those that labored to subvert his Gospel, the word of our salvation, he
satisfies not himself with saying take heed, or, beware, but for the better
impression of his caveat he joins both together, and says, take heed and
beware. In which places the very careful admonitions of our Savior Christ,
and of our Apostle, expressed by so many ingeminations, sometimes of beware,
beware, beware; some times of take heed, watch, and remember; sometimes of take
heed and beware do most evidently show what a needful thing it is for us to
take diligent heed of false Teachers, least any of us be seduced by their
enticing speeches from that doctrine which we have learned in the Gospel of
Christ Jesus. And sure it is a thing no less needful for us now then at any
time heretofore it has been to beware of false Teachers. For have we not now
many every where which creep into houses, 2 Timothy 3.6.
and lead captive simple women laden with sins, and led with diverse lusts?
have we not now many every where which compass sea and land to make one of
their profession, Math. 23.15.
so to make him twofold more the child of hell then they themselves are? have
we not now many every where by whom the way of truth is evil spoken of, and
such as with fained words would make merchandise of your souls? have we not
now men arising even of our own selves, and speaking perverse things to draw
disciples after them? yes, my brethren, Rome and Rhemes swear many, and send
them unto us as to draw us from our allegiance unto our Sovereign, so to
corrupt our sincere minds with their poisoned doctrines. And these wander up
and down secretly and in corners, speaking evil of the way of truth, and
leading back again as many as they can unto the abominations of Egypt. Again
others there are arising of our selves, who whether seduced by others, or
through malecontentednesse, or by the just judgment of God blinded that they
cannot see the light, or howsoever else bewitched; but many others are even
arising of our selves who privily sow cursed tares in this field of the Lord,
who first closely slander the truth, and the most godly and Christian
professors thereof, and then afterward closing in farther with you, draw you on
by little and little till at length be drunk with the cup of their
fornications. Many such, I say, there are amongst us, and therefore very
needful it is for us to take heed and beware of them.

Yea, but how shall we know them? they profess Christ, and the same
Apostolic Creed with us, they admit the Canonical Scriptures as we do, they
say they condemn idolatry and superstition as we do, how then shall we know
them? They come indeed in sheep clothing, but inwardly they are ravening
wolves, by their fruits ye shall know them. They may well be called, as these
false Teachers among the Philippians, dogs, evil workers, the concision. For
my 3. note therefore and observation from these words, I will briefly hence
gather certain notes whereby ye may know and discern false Teachers.

LECTVRE L.
PHILIP. 3. Verse. 2.3. Beware of Dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the
concision. For we are the circumcision, which worship God in the spirit etc.
IN this exhortation or caveat, in that the Apostle notes these false Teachers
which were crept in amongst the Philippians by the name of dogs, of evil
workers, and of the concision. I observe certain notes whereby to descry and
discern false Teachers, even such as it is very needful for us to take heed
of, and to beware.

1. Therefore it is a note of false Teachers ever like dogs to be barking and
snarling against the truth, and against the professors thereof. For this they
take of dogs, even upon no reason to be barking, and they think the field
half won if they can fasten any slander upon the truth, or upon those that
have been or are chief professors thereof. If this in this place of our
Apostle be not happily enough to satisfy some touching this note of false
Teachers, the Apostle Peter also gives the very same note of false Teachers,
where he says, That as bruit beasts led with sensuality, 2 Pet. 2.12
and made to be taken and destroyed, they speak evil of those things which
they know not, even of the way of truth which they know not, and of the
Prof^ssors thereof whom they cannot brook. Such were those false Teachers that
troubled the Church of Corinth, both calling into doubt a chief article of our
faith, the resurrection of the dead, and likewise speaking very contemptibly of
the Apostle Paul himself, traducing him unto the people as one rude in speech,
and one that had no gifts of knowledge or of wisdom, as we may plainly see
by his first Epistle to the Corinthians. Mark then I beseech you who now at
this day they are that speak evil of the way of truth, and of the Professors
thereof. Who are they now that tell you that the Scripture contains not all
things necessary to be believed to salvation? that tell you that the holy
Scriptures, though truly translated into vulgar tongues, may not be read
indifferently of all men, for fear of great harm that may ensue thereupon?
Who are they now that tell you that the reading of the Scriptures is the very
b^ne of religion, and virtue, and good life among us? Do not these speak evil
of the way of truth, even of the holy word of truth? Again who are they now
that fill their mouths with as bitter words and odious speeches as out of
their malicious hearts they can against Luther, Calvin, Martyn, Beza, and the
like? Who are they now that speak so contemptibly against the Ministers of the
Gospel, as that they fill your ears with all man's of evil sayings against
them? Whosoever ever they be that thus speak evil of the truth, and of the
Professors thereof, they have a mark of false Teachers. Mark them therefore
diligently, and beware, and take heed of them.

A second note of false teachers it is, like dogs principally to respect
their bellies, and more to serve their own bellies then the Lord Jesus Christ:
for this they take of dogs, to be so ravenous and greedy for the belly, as
that through covetousness with fained words they make merchandise of men's
souls. This note of false teachers our Apostle also gives in the epistle to
the Romans, here having exhorted the Romans to beware of false Apostles and
Teachers, he gives them this note to know them by: They that are such, says
he, Romans 16.18
serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, and with fair speech
and flattering deceive the hearts of the simple. They serve their own bellies,
that is, they seek their own gain, and respect their own advantage in their
profession of religion. And the Apostle Peter likewise gives the same note of
them, where he says that they have hearts exercised with covetousness, 2 Pet.
2.14 3.
through covetousness making merchandise of men's souls. Such a one was
Balaam, of whom the Apostle Peter says in the same chapter, that he loved the
wages of unrighteousness. Such were those of whom Esaias speaks, Esa 56.11.
that they were greedy dogs, which could never have enough. Such were these
among the Philippians, whose God (as the Apostle says) was their belly. Mark
then who now at this day they are that through covetousness would make
merchandise of your souls. Who are they now that set on sale the forgiveness
of your sins, and the kingdom of heaven for money? Who are they now that
under color of long prayers devour widows houses? that for such or such
lands, such or such sums of money, such or such relief unto such or such
places, will promise you to say so many prayers for so many days or years for
you or for your friends? Who are they now that make gain god^inesse, and do
all that they do in deed and an truth for the maintenance of their state, and
of their bellies? Erasmus when he was asked by Fred^ricke Duke of SAXONY his
judgment of Luther, said that there were two great faults of his: one that he
meddled with the Popes Crown, another that he meddled with the Monks belly.
Erasmus his meaning was, that those two things they were most of all careful
for, and therefore could not endure the meddling with them. Do not such like
dogs serve their bellies, and through covetousness make merchandise of you?
Whosoever they be that do so, they have a mark of false teachers. Mark them
therefore, and take heed of them. Beware of dogs, of barking and greedy
dogs. My next two notes I gather from that that these false teachers are
called evil workers.

A third note therefore of false teachers it is, so to teach the necessity of
works unto salvation, as to make them joint workers with Christ of our
salvation, as if our salvation were not by Christ alone, but by the works of
the Law also. True it is that we must walk in those good works which God has
ordained us to walk in, ^p^. 2.10.
or else we cannot be saved: but ye^ by grace are we saved through faith, 8.9.
not of works, lest any man should boast himself. To teach therefore that our
works are any part of that righteousness whereby we are justified or saved,
is a note of false teachers. Which thing also our Apostle witnesses in another
place, Gal. 5.4.
where he says that such make the grace of God of none effect. Such were those
that had bewitched the Galatians, whose doctrine in his epistle unto them he
does at large confute, and shows that we are justified only by grace
through faith in Jesus Christ, and not by the works of the Law. Such also were
those that were crept in amongst these Philippians, whom in this chapter he
confuteth, showing that Christ alone is our righteousness, and that we have
no righteousness of our own at all by any works of the Law. Mark then who
now at this day they are that teach man's righteousness or salvation to be of
his works. Who are they now that tell you that we are made righteous before
God not by faith alone in Christ his blood, but by works also? Who are they
now that tell you that not by Christ his merits alone, but by the merit of our
own works also we gain heaven, and that not to our selves alone, but to
others also? Who a^e ^hey now that tell you that together with Christ good
works must be joined, as workers together with him of our iust^fication and
salvation? Whosoever they be that do so, they have a mark of false teachers.
Mark them therefore, and take heed of them. Beware of them: they are evil
works making those works which as they are done according to the Law, are
good works, by this perverse doctrine evil works.

A fourth note of false teachers it is, like unto unfaithful workmen in the
Lord his vineyard, to teach for doctrines men's precepts, and traditions of men.
For this false teachers take of evil and unfaithful workers in the Lord his
vineyard, that either in stead of the word, or at least together with the pure
seed of the word, they sow men's precepts, and traditions of men. Our Savior
notes it in the envious man, that he sowed tares among the wheat: Mat. 13.28
Mar 7 7.
and it is notable in all his brood. Such were those Scribes and Pharisees that
we read of in the Gospel, of whom it is said, that they taught for doctrines
the commandments of men. Whereupon our Savior told them that they worshipped
him in vain. Mark then who now at this day do thus resemble unfaithful
workmen in the Lord his vineyard. Who are they now that teach you to do a
great number of things for the doing whereof there is no rule at all in the
Scriptures? Who are they now that fill your ears with traditions of the
Apostles, as they say, and traditions of the Church, as they say, making them
even of equal authority with the writings of the Apostles? Who are they now
that teach you to believe otherwise then ye are warranted by the Scriptures,
the rule of faith? Who are they now that mingle with the pure seed of Gods
word the chafe of man's brain, and give equal authority to the written word,
and to unwritten traditions? Do not such show themselves to be of the brood of
the envious man? Whosoever they be that do so, they have a mark of false
teachers. Mark them therefore, and take heed of them. Beware of them: they are
evil workers, working unfaithfully in the Lord his vineyard.

Now from this also, that these false teachers among the Philippians were
called the concision, arise two notes whereby to discern false teachers.

A fifth note therefore of false teachers it is, like unto these of the
concision to cause division and offenses contrary to the doctrine of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, and to cut themselves from the unity of the Church:
for this they take of the concision, that as they cut themselves from the
unity of the Church, and caused division in the Church, by urging the
circumcision of the flesh, which the Church had done with; so commonly false
teachers rent the unity of the Church, and cause divisions by teaching other
doctrine then the spirit of God has taught the Church to receive. This note of
false teachers our Apostle also gives elsewhere, where he says, Mark them
diligently which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which
ye have learned, Romans 16.17
and avoid them. Such were those false Apostles and teachers which troubled the
Church of Corinth after Paul had planted it, who by their ambition brought in
such factions, and schisms, and dissensions into the Church, 1 Cor. 1.11.
that the house of Cloe a virtuous and zealous woman advertised the Apostle
thereof. Mark then who now at this day they are that cause division and
offenses in the Church. Who are they now that labor and plot, and cast all the
ways they can devise to set us all every way by the ears together? Who are
they now that cast seditious libels amongst us, whereby to s^irre us up unto
all practices of hostility against the State? Who are they now that secretly
and in every corner labor to disgrace us, and the doctrine which we teach, and
to lesson you with other doctrine contrary to that ye have received and
learned? Do not these whosoever they be cause division, and contention, and
offenses? Whosoever they be that do so, they have a mark of false teachers.
Mark them therefore and take heed of them. Beware of them: they resemble these
of the concision.

The last note which for this time I observe of false teachers is, like unto
these of the concision, to glory and brag of false titles which nothing
belong unto them. For this they take of these of the concision, that as they
gloried falsely in the circumcision, as anon we shall hear, so commonly false
teachers glory much in the titles, and in the things wherein they have no right
at all to glory. This note also of false teachers the Apostle Peter gives,
where he says of them that they speak swelling words of vanity. 2 P^t 2.18
Matt. 24 5
Such are those of whom our Savior Christ says, Many shall come in my name,
saying I am Christ, and shall deceive many. Mark then who now at this day they
are that deceive the world with vain titles, and shows of names whereunto
they can lay no just claim. Who are they now that come in the name and title
of the Society of Jesus, and deceive many? Who are they now that color all
their superstitious errors with the goodly title of the doctrine of the Church?
Who are they now that mask themselves under that gay title of holy Catholics?
Who are they now that have still in their mouths the Church, the Church, as if
they and none but they were the Church of Christ? Do not these whosoever they
be, brag of great titles which nothing belong unto them? Whosoever they be
that do so, they have a mark of false teachers. Mark them therefore, and
take heed of them. Beware of them: they resemble these of the concision.

Many other notes there are whereby false teachers may easily be descried and
discerned, and which happily might be further gathered even from this caveat of
our Apostle in this place. But these are such as seemed unto me most naturally
to offer themselves to be observed from these names wherewithal our Apostle
brandeth these false teachers. If any desire to have them manifested by further
notes, let him read 2 Pet. 2. where they are at large notified. By these ye
may in part descrie them; and those that are branded with any of these marks,
take heed of them: for howsoever happily some may be branded with some one of
these marks, who yet will wind himself out of the number of false teachers,
yet will he not shift it, but that he has some one mark of a false teacher.
But above all things take heed and beware of them upon whom the most of these,
or all these no^es do fall most justly. They will, I know, tell you that they
love the truth, that they abhor idolatry, that they embrace the Apostolic
faith, that with all reverence they receive the Scriptures, that they honor
religion, and that they detest superstition. They will tell you of their
devotion in prayer, of their contempt of riches, of their continency in life,
of their abstinencie in meats and drinks, of their works of charity, etc.
But whatsoever they tell you, by these notes that I have told you, ye shall
know what they are. And when ye know them, take heed and beware of them. For
though they come unto you in sheep clothing, yet inwardly they are ravening
wolves. Beware of barking dogs which bark against the truth, and the
professors thereof: and beware of greedy dogs, which through covetousness
make merchandise of your souls. Beware of such workers as make their works
ioynt-workers with Christ of out salvation: and beware of such workers as work
unfaithfully in the Lord his vineyard, mingling with the pure seed of Gods
word the chafe of man's brain. Beware of such as resemble the concision in
renting the unity of the Church, and in causing division and offenses contrary
to the doctrine which ye have learned in the Gospel of Jesus Christ: and
beware of such as resemble the concision in bragging of false titles which
nothing belong unto them. And let these things suffice to be noted from this
exhortation or caveat. Now follows a particular instruction of the
Philippians touching circumcision truly so called, in these words, For we are,
etc.

For we are the circumcision, etc.] We have heard how the Apostle in his
caveat noted the false teachers which urged circumcision as necessary to
salvation, by the title of the concision, saying, Beware of the concision. Now
in these words the Apostle gives the reason why he called them the concision,
For we, says he, are the circumcision. As if he should have said, They are
not the circumcision, though they glory therein: but rather they are the
concision, and we are the circumcision, the true circumcision. Now this he
proves thus: We worship God in the spirit, therefore we are the
circumcision. And again, that they worship God in the spirit he proves thus:
We rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh; therefore we
worship God in the spirit. So that the connection of the points is this: They
are the concision, not the circumcision: the proof is this, We are the
circumcision, therefore they are not the circumsion. Again, We are the
circumcision: the proof is this, we worship God in the spirit; therefore we
are the circumcision. Again, we worship God in the spirit: the proof is this,
we rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh; therefore we
worship God in the spirit. To gather the whole reason into one sum, the
Apostle here proves that the false Apostles which were among the Philippians,
and which gloried in their circumcision, were the concision, and not the
circumcision, by an argument drawn from the nature of true circumcision, thus:
They which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no
confidence in the flesh, they are the circumcision, they are truly circumcised.
But we worship God in the spirit, etc. Therefore, etc. This is the form of the
Apostle his proceeding and discourse in this place. Now touching the words, and
the meaning of them.

1. It is said, we are the circumcision, where the meaning of the Apostle is
this, we are circumcised with the true circumcision. Romans 2.28.29.
There is then (as the Apostle shows) a twofold circumcision; one outward in
the flesh, which was a cutting of the foreskin of the flesh, instituted by God
for a sign of the covenant which was made between him and Abraham: Genesis 17.11.
another of the heart, in the spirit, which is a cutting of from the heart of
all carnal affections, whereby we might be hindered in the spiritual service
of God, and in our rejoicing in Jesus Christ, whereof Moses makes mention
where he says, The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, Deuteronomy. 30.6.
and the heart of thy seed, that thou may love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may live. That carnal
circumcision was that wherein the false Apostles gloried, and of which they
told the Philippians, that except they were so circumcised they could not be
saved. But that being a ceremony, which when Christ came was abolished, the
Apostle says plainly, that that is no circumcision which is outward in the
flesh: Romans 2.28.
nay he says farther unto the Galathians, Gal. 5.2.
that if they be circumcised Christ shall profit them nothing. And therefore
the Apostle calls them the concision, because they cut and rent the peace of
the Church by urging that as necessary to salvation, which was abolished, and
was now not only unprofitable but hurtful. The other circumcision which is of
the heart, in the spirit, made without hands, by putting of the sinful body
of the flesh through the circumcision of Christ, that is he circumcision
wherein the Apostle glories, and says, we are the circumcision,.i. we are
circumcised with the true circumcision, that which is outward in the flesh
being no circumcision. Again, where it is added, which worship God in the
spirit; by worshipping God in the spirit, he means the spiritual worshipping
of God: as if he should have said, we are the circumcision which worship God
spiritually, not after the outward ceremonies of the law, but in the spirit of
our mind lifting up our souls unto him, and rejoicing in his holy name.
Again, where he says, that they rejoice in Jesus Christ, and have no
confidence in the flesh, he opposes the one against the other, and both
signifies that the confidence of their salvation is only in Christ Jesus, not
in any outward thing, either circumcision of the flesh, or what outward thing
else soever, and withal implies that they that have confidence in the
circumcision of the flesh, or in any outward thing whatsoever, and not only in
Christ Jesus, they indeed rejoice not in Christ Jesus as in the borne of their
salvation. It is then in brief as if the Apostle should thus have said: I have
warned you to beware of the concision, and do ye beware of the concision. The
reason is: for they who glory that they are the circumcision are not the
circumcision, but the concision, and we are the circumcision, we are
circumcised with the true circumcision, we I say which worship God not after
the outward ceremonies of the law, but in the spirit, and in truth, and which
renouncing all confidence of our salvation in the flesh, or in any outword
thing, do only rejoice in Christ Jesus as in the horn of our salvation. Thus
ye see the purpose of the Apostle in this place, what he proves, how he
proves it, and the meaning of the words. Now let us see what we may observe
hence for our use and instruction.

1. Here I note the Apostle his elegant allusion between concision and
circumcision, where he calls himself and the Philippians the circumcision,
and the false teachers the concision, by way of allusion unto circumcision
whe^eof they boasted in vain. The like allusions we have diverse times in holy
scriptures, Esa. 5.7.
as in Esaias; The Lord (says the Prophet) looked for judgment, but behold
oppression; the allusion is plain in the Hebrew between mishpat and m^shpach:
and again, for righteousness, but behold a crying, where the allusion is as
plain between (...) and (...). Also in the new Testament, as in the Epistle
to the Romans, Romans 12.3.
where it is said, I say unto you that no man understand above that which is
meet to understand, but that every man understand according to sobriety, where
in the original the allusion is notable between (...) and (...), and (...).
Diverse the like might be produced both out of the old Testament and likewise
the new: but let these for this time suffice. Hence I make this observation,
that it is not unlawful for the Ministers and teachers of the word sometimes
to use allusions, and elegancies of speech: for we see that the Holy Ghost by
using them sometimes has sanctified the use of them. But yet great moderation
and discretion is to be used therein, lest if we grow to take too great a
felicity and pleasure therein, we fall into such a ryming vain and curious
affectation as is unbeseeming the majesty of the word, and the gravity of the
Minister of the word. That rule of the Apostle is by us diligently to be kept,
that no jesting, or vain, or light, or foolish speech proceed cut of our
mouths, Ephesians. 4.29.
but only that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace
unto the hearers. From this observation ye for your use may learn, not
hastily to judge, or presently to condemn such Ministers and Preachers of the
word as sometimes use allusions, and other elegancies of speech: for ye see
the Holy Ghost does not altogether avoid them. And albeit ordinarily the most
plain and the most familiar form of words be far the best for you, and the
most to be accepted by you, yet sometimes such an allusion, or such an
elegancie of speech so graceth the speech, as that both it best likes you, and
likewise makes the best impression in you. In a word, both in the speaker
moderation is required that such allusions or elegancies be not too often used,
and in the hearer likewise judgment is required, that such allusions or
elegancies be not too rashly condemned.

2. It is to be noted that the Apostle says, for we are the circumcision. For
thereby both the Apostle denies that circumcision which is made with hands,
and which is outward in the flesh to be truly circumcision: and likewise
affirms that spiritual circumcision: which is made without hands by the
spirit in the heart by purging thence all evil affections to be truly
circumcision; so that not they which are circumcised with carnal circumcision
are the circumcision, but they only which are circumcised with spiritual
circumcision are the circumcision. Whence first I observe, that as all other
ceremonies and sacrifices of the law, so likewise the circumcision of the flesh
had then an end when Christ came in the flesh, so that the use of them
afterward was not only unprofitable, but hurtful. For albeit it be said both
of circumcision and of other ceremonies, Genesis 17.13. Ex. 12.14.31.16.
and sacrifices of the law that they were to continue for ever, yet that is so
to be understood as that the term of their continuance was Christ his coming
in the flesh: for they being only shadows of good things to come, when Christ
which was the body figured by those shadows came they had an end, and were
abolished, as the Apostle shows at large in the Epistle to the Hebrews. And
albeit there were not wanting both of the Jews, and of the Ebionits and
Cerinthians that in the Apostles time joined circumcision with Christ, Act.
15.1.28.
and urged it as necessary to salvation, yet we see that the Apostles thought
it not meet to burden the Gentiles with circumcision, or with the law: nay the
Apostle plainly tells the Galathians, Gal. 5.2.
that if they be circumcised Christ shall profit them nothing: 4.
and again, that whosoever are justified by the law they are fallen from
grace. In both which places the Apostle shows that to join with Christ
circumcision, or the law, as things necessary to salvation is not only
unprofitable, but also hurtful. Yea now that Christ Jesus is come in the
flesh, in him neither circumcision avails any thing, Gal. 5.6.6.15.
nor uncircumcision, but only a new creature, regenerated by faith which
works by love.

Yea but here the question happily will be asked touching circumcision, why it
was abolished, seeing it was a seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11.
as the Apostle witnesses. If it had been a seal of the righteousness of
the law, it might very well have been thought that when the claim of
righteousness by the law ceased, then the seal thereof should likewise be
abolished. But being the seal of the righteousness of faith, it may seem that
the righteousness of faith remaining the seal thereof should not be
abolished. I answer, 1. out of the Apostle, that he does not simply say, that
circumcision was a seal of the righteousness of faith, but of the
righteousness of the faith which Abraham had when he was uncircumcised. Now
what was the righteousness of his faith? Surely other then that which is now
our righteousness of faith. For unto us it is accounted for righteousness
that we believe in Jesus Christ already come in the flesh, and this is our
righteousness of faith. But unto him it was accounted for righteousness that
he believed in the promised seed which should afterward come in the flesh,
and this was his righteousness of faith. Right therefore it was that when the
promised seed which he believed came in the flesh, the seal of this
righteousness of his faith should be abolished; even as the seals also of the
righteousness of our faith shall be abolished at his second coming unto
judgment, when all things shall be accomplished, and we shall see him face to
face, even as he is. Again, unto the very question it self, why circumcision
was abolished, I answer that it was most needful, Gal. 5.3.
because every man that is circumcised, is bound (as says the Apostle) to
keep the whole law. Whereupon else where the Apostle calls circumcision a
bondage, Gal. 2.4.4.4.5.
in which bondage they were kept until faith came. But when the fulness of time
was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, and made under the law,
that he might redeem all which were under the law: and he took all the
ceremonies and rites that were against us out of the way, and fastened them on
his cross. Thus then ye see the abolishing as of all the ceremonies, and
rites, and sacrifices of the law, so of carnal circumcision after that faith
came, that is, after that we began to believe in Christ Jesus manifested in the
flesh. I know not whether I speak so plainly of these things as that ye do
conceive me, neither know I how to speak more plainly. Consider how they
arise from the place we now handle, and they will be so much the more easy to
be understood.

If now ye ask me whether circumcision be quite and utterly now abolished, so
that nothing thereof remains? I answer that the ceremony of the circumcision
of the flesh is utterly abolished, so that nothing of the ceremony now
remains: But that which was morally signified thereby, to ^it, regeneration,
and the circumcision of the heart from all evil and wicked affections, that is
that which when the ceremony was in use was most accepted, and that still
remains: and this is that which I should now secondly have observed from
these words, if the time had given leave.

LECTVRE LI.
PHILIP. 3. Verse. 3. For we are the circumcision, which worship God in the
spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.
IF now again ye ask me whether Circumcision be quite and utterly so
abolished as that nothing thereof remains? I answer that the circumcision of
the flesh is quite and utterly abolished, so that since faith came, that is,
since we began to believe in Christ manifested in the flesh, justified in the
spirit, and received up into glory, nothing at all of that ceremony remains.
But even then when the ceremony was in use, both this and likewise all other
ceremonies of the law had besides the ceremony a moral use and signification
unto that people of the Jews, which was far and incomparably more accepted
with God then was the ceremony it self whatsoever it was. This we may
plainly see and perceive by those manifold increpations so often used in the
writings of the Prophets, when observing the ceremony commanded, the Jews
neglected that moral use thereof which they should especially have regarded.
Esaias 1.11.
I am full (says the Lord) of the burnt offering of rams, and of the fat of
fed beasts; and I desire not the blood of bullockes, nor of lambs, nor of
goats. Bring no mo oblations in vain, 13.
incense is an abomination to me etc. Again, Amos 5.21
in another place he says, I hate and abhor your feast days, and I will not
smell in your solemn assemblies: though ye offer me burnt offerings, and meat
offerings I will not accept them, neither will I regard the peace offerings of
your fat beasts. Amos 5.22
What then? Did not the Lord desire the blood of bullockes, nor of lambs, nor
of goats? Did he not regard burnt offerings, peace offerings, and meat
offerings? Were the sabboths, and new moons, and feast days such things as in
which he took no pleasure at all? No doubt but the Lord had commanded all
these things whereof the Prophets here speak, in his law given by the hand of
Moses, as might easily be proved out of the books of Numbers, and Leuiticus.
And this was it that the hypocritical Jews stood upon with the Prophets,
saying, that they kept the law of God duly because they observed the outward
ceremonies and sacrifices commanded in the law. But this was that that the Lord
by his Prophets reproved in them, that they neglected that moral use of those
things which they should principally have regarded. They stayed themselves in
the outward worship of God, and looked not unto the inward worship of him; they
observed the naked ceremony, but they regarded not mercy and judgment, piety
and obedience, faith and repentance. These things they should have done, and
not have left the other undone. The ceremony should not have been neglected
by them, but that inward and more holy worship whereunto by the ceremony they
were led should have been principally regarded by them. For in this the Lord
had more pleasure then in all burnt offerings and sacrifices what soever: as it
iS said, 1 Sa. 15.22
to obey is better then sacrifice, and to hearken is better then the fat of
Rams. And again the Lord says by his Prophet, Hos. 6.6.
I desired mercy and not sacrifice, and the knowledge of God more then burnt
offerings. Thus then it is plain, both that the outward ceremonies had a
moral and more spiritual use, and likewise that this was more accepted with
God, even then when the ceremony was in use, then was the ceremony though
commanded.

Now as it was in other ceremonies of the law, so was it in this circumcision
of the flesh, that it had a moral use and signification, the regard whereof
was far more accepted with God then was the observation of the ceremony it
self. The moral use and signification thereof was, to put them in mind of
the circumcision of the heart, that thence they might purge all wicked and
carnal affections, such as any way were like to cross and hinder their
spiritual service and worship of God. And as in other ceremonies, when the
ceremony was abolished yet the moral use thereof still remained, so likewise
in this, when the outward circumcision of the flesh was abolished, yet the
inward circumcision of the heart which was morally signified by the outward
ceremony still remained; so that as they then were, so still we are to
circumcise the fore-skinnes of our hearts, by cutting away from thence all
carnal affections, and ungodly lusts which fight against the soul. And this
was that circumcision wherein our Apostle gloried, when he said, we are the
circumcision.

Hence then 3. I observe what that circumcision is which yet remains, and
wherein we may and ought to glory and rejoice. The circumcision which yet
remains, if ye will have it in one word, is our regeneration, the washing of
the new birth, Tit. 3.5.
and the renewing of the holy Ghost, as the Apostle speaks. If ye would have a
larger description of it, it is, as this place of our Apostle makes manifest,
a cutting away from the heart of all carnal affections, whereby we might be
hindered in the spiritual service of God, and in our rejoicing in Christ Jesus,
so that being thus circumcised we worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in
Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh, or in any outward thing
whatsoever. This is most commonly called the circumcision of the heart; both by
Moses where he says, De^t 10.16
Circumcise the fore skin of your heart, and harden your necks no more. And
by the Prophet Jeremy, where he says unto the men of Judah, and Inhabitants
of Jerusalem, Be circumcised to the Lord, Ier. 4.4. Ro^. 2 29.
and take away the foreskinnes of your hearts: And by our Apostle Paul where he
says, that the circumcision is of the heart, in the spirit, not in the letter.
Neither is it called circumcision of the heart by way of exclusion of
circumcision from other parts of man. For there is also mention of the
circumcision of the ears, Act. 7.51.
as where Steven says, Ye stifnecked and of uncircumcised hearts, and ears,
i. which will not hear when God speaks unto you: and also of the circumcision
of the lips, as where Moses said unto the Lord, Behold I am of uncircumcised
lips; Exodus 6.30
i. I am not abl^ to speak unto Pharaoh, being barbarous and rude in speech.
There is then not only circumcision of the heart in the will and
understanding, when all carnal affections are purged thence, but there is also
circumcision of the lips, when our speech is such as that it ministers grace
unto the hearers; and also circumcision of the ears, when we open our ears
unto the Lord speaking unto us, and willingly and even greed^ly harken after
those things which belong unto our peace. But yet commonly I think both these
are comprehended in the circumcision of the heart, so that by the circumcision
of the heart, the circumcision of the ears, and of the lips likewise is
understood. It is called also spiritual circumcision, because it is made
without hands, by the spirit of almighty God, Col. 2.11. Deuteronomy. 30.6.
as witnesses Moses, where he says, the Lord thy God will circumcise thine
heart, and the heart of thy seed, that thou may love the Lord thy God with
all thine heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may live. Whereupon the
Apostle says, Romans 2.29.
that the praise of it is not of men, but of God. It is called also by the
Apostle, the circumcision of Christ, because made by the spirit of Christ,
which does illuminate our vuderstanding, renew our will, Col. 2.11.
sanctify our affections, and work in us all holy desires to die unto sin,
and to live unto God in righteousness and true holiness. This circumcision
then of Christ, this circumcision of the heart, this spiritual circumcision
which is made without hands by the finger of the spirit, illuminating our
understandings, renewing our wills, purging our carnal affections, crucifying
in us the old man, and quickening us in our inner man, in the spirit of our
mind, this is the true circumcision, and this is that circumcision wherewith
the Apostle rejoiced that he was circumcised, and unless we be circumcised
with this circumcision we have no cause of reioicing. For that which the
Apostle says of carnal circumcision, Gal. 5.2.
If ye be circumcised Christ shall profit you nothing, is quite otherwise in
this spiritual circumcision. For unless we be thus circumcised Christ shall
profit us nothing; according to that of our Savior, Job. 3.5.
Except a man be borne of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God: Except a man be borne of water and of the spirit, i. unless
he be borne again by the spirit, unless he be circumcised with the
circumcision of Christ by putting off the sinful body of the flesh, and
becoming a new creature, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God, he has no
portion among the sons of God. So that that holds still, if we be not
circumcised we belong not to the covenant. But if we be circumcised with this
circumcision of Christ, then may we rejoice, knowing that we are the sons of
God, and partakers of the covenant of promise. Then look what was the
preferment of the Jew above all other people, that is our preferment above the
sons of men, and look what was the profit of circumcision unto the Jew,
that and more is the profit of circumcision unto us. For thus we are the
circumcision, and not they, we are that peculiar people of the Jews, and not
they, Romans 2.28.29.
inasmuch as now he is not a Jew which is one outward, neither now is that
circumcision which is outward in the flesh, but he is a Jew which is one
within, and the circumcision is of the heart in the spirit, not in the letter,
whose praise is not of men, but of God.

Let this, men and brethren, teach us to descend into our selves and see
whether we be circumcised or uncircumcised, whether we can with the Apostle
truly say, that we are the circumcision, that we are circumcised with the
true circumcision. Do we worship the Lord in the spirit with holy worship not
after the foolish fancies of man's brain? Do we rejoice in Christ Jesus as in
the horn of our salvation, and renounce all confidence in all outward things
whatsoever? Are our understandings instructed in the things which are
spiritually discerned? Are our affections inclined to the rule of Gods spirit?
Are our desires bent to the things that belong unto our peace? Are we purged
from all carnal affections, and ungodly desires? Are our lips feign when we
sing unto our God? and are our tongues glad when we talk of his righteousness
and salvation? Do we refrain our feet from every evil path? and do we give
our members as weapons of righteousness unto God to serve him in
righteousness and in holiness? If the spirit do witness those things unto
our spirits, then let us know that we are circumcised with the true
circumcision, so that we may say with the Apostle, We are the circumcision.
For this is the work of the spirit thus to consecrate us to his holy worship,
thus to settle our rejoicing on Christ Jesus, and on him alone, thus to teach
us his will, thus to sanctify our desires, thus to purge and cleanse us from
inordinate affections, thus to make us vessels holy unto the Lord, and thus to
guide our feet in to the way of peace. And working thus in us he does
circumcise us with circumcision made without hands making us ne creatures. But
if we worship the Lord, so that we bow both to him and Baal, if we trust to
be saved by our works, or by any thing but only by Christ Jesus, and faith in
his blood, if the Gospel be yet hid unto us so that we cannot savor or
perceive the things of the spirit of God, if our affections be so inordinate as
that we be full of striefe, envy, hatred, malice, wrath, contentions,
backbitings, whispering, swelling, and discord, if our desires be so unbridled
as that we run wholly after the pleasures of the flesh, and never mind the
things of the spirit; if as yet we will be every one more loath then other to
talk of matters of religion, of things belonging to our salvation, of the
mercies of God in Christ Jesus, and the like; but will strain no courtesy at
all to talk filthily, and uncleanly, and unseemly, and scoffingly, and
irreligiously, if as yet either we will not open our ears to hear the voice
of the charmer charm he never so wisely, or else will grinne and gnash our
teeth at him that shall roundly knock at the door of our hearts to rowse us
out of the dead sleep of sin whereinto we are fallen; if I say things stand
thus with us, are we not of uncircumcised hearts, and lips, and ears? yes my
brethren if it be thus whatsoever we say, or what show soever we make, yet are
we of uncircumcised hearts, lips, and ears. For therefore is our understanding
full of darkness, our will and desires perverse and crooked, and our
affections inordinate, because the Lord by his spirit has not circumcised our
hearts; therefore are our mouths filled not with talk of such things as
belong unto our peace, but with corrupt communication, and jesting, and
taunting, and profane talking, because the Lord by his spirit has not
circumcised our lips; and therefore are our ears open unto every wicked
profanation of Gods name, and every bad suggestion of our neighbors, rather
then unto the word of our salvation, because the Lord by his spirit has not
circumcised our ears. In one word, are we and walk we as children of
disobedience? it is because the Lord has not yet regenerated us by his holy
spirit, because we yet are not circumcised with the circumcision of Christ. Let
every man therefore descend into his own heart, and as he does find himself,
by thus searching his heart, and his reins to be circumcised, or
uncircumcised, so let him think himself to be received into the covenant, or
yet to be a stranger from the covenant of promise. And he that is circumcised,
let him not gather his uncircumcision: i. as now I expound it, let him not
defile himself with the corruptions which are in the world through lust, but
having escaped from the filthiness of the world, let him give his members
servants unto righteousness in holiness, and worship the Lord with holy
worship. But he that has walked either 40 or 4. years in the wilderness of
this life, and is not yet circumcised, let him know that even that person that
is not circumcised, that man that is not regenerated by the Lord his spirit,
even he shall be cut off from the Lord his people, and shall have none
inheritance among the Saints of God. Unto such therefore I say as the Lord by
his Prophet says to the men of Judah, and to Jerusalem, Ierem. 4 4
break up the fallow ground of your hearts, and some not among the thorns: be
circumcised to the Lord, and take away the fore-skins of your hearts, least the
Lord his wrath come forth like fire, and burn that none can quench it,
because of the wickedness of your inventions: And with the Prophet Hosea, I
say farther, Hos. 10.12.
sow to your selves in righteousness, reap after the measure of mercy,
break up your fallow ground: for it is time to seek the Lord till he come and
rain righteousness upon you. Weed out al impiety and wicked affections from
your hearts, put off the sinful body of the flesh, 1 Cor. 15.50 Ap^c. 20.6.
and be renewed in the spirit of your minds. For this I say unto you that flesh
and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God. Blessed and holy is he that has
his part in the first resurrection, i. by the power of God his spirit
regenerating him, rises from sin wherein he was dead unto newness and
holiness of life: for on such the second death has no power. And let this
suffice to be spoken touching both the carnal, and likewise the spiritual
circumcision by occasion of these words, we are the circumcision. It follows.

Which worship God in the spirit] By this and the rest that follows is
described, as I told you who are circumcised with spiritual circumcision, even
they which worship God spiritually etc. so that having spoken of spiritual
circumcision we have spoken in a generality both of this, and the rest that
follows. Yet it will not be amiss somewhat more particularly, yet as briefly
as we can, to speak by occasion of these words of the spiritual worship of
God. There is no people so far without God in this world, Jew, or Gentile,
Turk, or other, but that both they know there is a God, and likewise think
they worship him with true worship. But how a great many nations and
languages should either know the true God, or truly worship him, it can
scarce be imagined, seeing they want the holy word of life, where alone we both
clearly know him, and likewise how to worship him. Nay how should not they most
grossly err touching the true worship of God, seeing where the word is there
are so many errors touching the true and spiritual worship of God. Witness
those manifold will-worshippes of God which men have devised unto themselves,
and for which they have no warrant at all in the word: such as are forbidding
of marriage, and forbidding of meats to some men at all times, and to all men
at sometimes under pretense of holy religion, and devout service of God. But
for our instruction in this point, let us hence observe that not only in the
spirit of our mind purified by the spirit to serve him in holiness and in
righteousness, but that if we will not err in the performance of true and
spiritual worship unto our God, we must proceed by this rule of reioicing
in Christ Jesus, inasmuch as by rejoicing in Christ Jesus we worship God
spiritually. For what is there required in our spiritual worship of God which
by our rejoicing in Christ Jesus is not performed unto him? Is it not our
spiritual worship of God to love him, to put our trust in him, to fear him,
to pray unto him, to obey him, and to glorify him both in our bodies, and in
our spirits? And are not all these things performed unto him by our rejoicing
in Christ Jesus? We rejoice in Christ Jesus, knowing that in him we are
beloved: and therefore we love God who we know does love us in Christ Jesus.
Again, we rejoice in Christ Jesus, knowing that in him all the promises of God
are yea, and Amen; and therefore we believe in God and put our trust in his
name who we know for his sake makes good all his promises unto us. Again we
rejoice in Christ Jesus, knowing that by him an atonement and reconciliation is
made between God and us: and therefore we fear God whose wrath we know is now
appeased toward us by the mediation of Christ Jesus. Again, we rejoice in
Christ Jesus knowing that by him we may go boldly unto the throne of grace: and
therefore we pour out our prayers unto God who we know gives us whatsoever
we ask by faith in his name. Again, we rejoice in Christ Jesus knowing that
through Christ we are able to do all things: and therefore we obey God who
we know strengthens us in Christ to do all things that he requires of us.
Again, we rejoice in Christ Jesus knowing that he is made of God unto us
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption: and therefore
we glorify GOD both in our bodies and in our spirits, who we know has given
us his son, and together with him has given us all things also. So that
through the rejoicing which we have in Christ Jesus we worship God spiritually
with all holy worship of love, of faith, of fear, of prayer, of obedience, and
of glorifying his name both in our bodies and in our spirits. Yea and whosoever
has not this rejoicing in Christ Jesus it is impossible that he should worship
God with this spiritual and holy worship. For how shall he love GOD that is
not persuaded of the love of God toward him in Christ Jesus? how shall he
believe in God and put his trust in his name, that knows not that all his
promises are yea and Amen, most certain and sure in Christ Jesus? How shall
he fear God as a dutiful child that assures not himself of his
reconciliation with God by the death and intercession of Christ Jesus? How
shall he pray unto. God in faith that knows not that his prayers shall be
accepted and heard in Christ Jesus, that offers our prayers unto God, and
makes continual intercession for us? How shall he obey God in that which he
commands that knows nor that God in Christ Jesus does enable him to do that
which he commands? How shall he glorify God in his body, or in his spirit,
that knows not what great mercies God has vouchsafed unto us through Christ
Jesus? So that unless we can rejoice in Christ Jesus even because we know
all these things we cannot possibly worship God with spiritual worship.

Will you then, men and brethren, have a direction for your spiritual
worshipping of God? Surely it is needful, Ioh. 4.24.
for God is a spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and
in truth. Let this then be your direction: Rejoice in Christ Jesus; rejoice in
him, because ye are beloved in him, and then surely ye will love God who
loves you in Christ Jesus. Rejoice in Christ, because in him all Gods promises
are made good and performed unto you, and then surely ye will believe in God,
and put your trust in him, who keeps promise, and suffers not his truth to
fail for ever. Rejoice in Christ, because by him ye have received the
atonement, and then surely ye will fear God, whose wrath was appeased by the
reconciliation of Christ Jesus. Rejoice in Christ, because through him your
prayers are accepted and heard with God, and then surely ye will power out your
prayers unto God, who gives you whatsoever ye ask in faith in his name.
Rejoice in Christ, because in him ye are made able to do all things, and then
surely ye will obey God, who strengthens you in Christ to do all things.
Rejoice in Christ, because by him ye are redeemed, and saved, and by the power
of his spirit sanctified, and then surely ye will glorify God both in your
bodies, and in your spirits, who with Christ his Son gives you all things
both for this life present, and likewise for that that is to come. So that
there cannot be a better direction for our spiritual worship of God, then to
rejoice in Christ Jesus, because by our reioicing which we have in Christ Jesus
we are enflamed to love God, to believe in him, to put our trust in him, to
fear him, to pray unto him to obey him, and to glorify him both in our bodies
and in our spirits, which is our spiritual worshipping of God. Whence it is
also easy to guess why it is that we fail so much in the spiritual
worshipping of God, which is even hence, because we fail in our rejoicing in
Christ Jesus.

For our better instruction in which point of our rejoicing in Christ Jesus,
let us in the next place hence observe, that to rejoice in Christ Jesus, is not
only to repose our whole trust and confidence in him, as in the horn of our
salvation, to make our boast of him, and to tell of all the wondrous works
that he has done for us with gladness, but withal to renounce all
confidence in the flesh, and in any outward thing whatsoever. For these are
things which cannot stand together, reioicing in Christ Jesus, and reposing our
confidence in any outward thing whatsoever: for if we rejoice in Christ Jesus,
then we repose the whole confidence of our salvation, and every part thereof
upon him, and him alone; and if we repose our whole, or any part of the
confidence of our salvation on any outward thing, and not on Christ Jesus
alone, then we do not indeed rejoice in Christ Jesus. This the Apostle plainly
shows, Gal. 5.4.
where he says, that whosoever are justified by the Law, they are fallen from
grace; that is, whosoever seek for their righteousness by the works of the
Law, or hope to be saved by them, they are fallen from grace, Christ profits
them nothing. Let them look unto this, that trust unto their merits, to be
saved by them. Surely the conclusion from this place of our Apostle lies very
hard upon them. For hence thus I gather: They that have confidence of their
salvation by their merits, or by any outward thing whatsoever, and not only by
Christ Jesus, they rejoice not in Christ Jesus: They that rejoice not in Christ
Jesus, they worship not God in the spirit: They that worship not God in the
spirit, they are not circumcised with the true and spiritual circumcision:
Ergo, they that have confidence of their salvation by their merits, they are
not circumcised with the true and spiritual circumcision. Where in my
judgment the conclusion is as inevitable as hard. If they answer that the
Apostle makes no mention of the merit of works, and therefore nothing can
hence be concluded against the merit of works; I answer again, that by the
name of flesh in this place of our Apostle is understood not only the
circumcision of the flesh, or other ceremonies of the Law, but all the works
of the Law, all man's merits whatsoever, even all outward things whatsoever.
Which is plain by the antithesis and opposition in this place between Christ
and the flesh, and likewise by that that follows in the Apostle. For first,
where he says, We rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the
flesh, in that he denies that they have any confidence in the flesh, what else
is his meaning, but that they have no confidence in any thing but only in
Christ Jesus, so reioicing in him, as that they put their whole confidence in
him. Again, when he shows afterward what he means by the flesh, he
speaks not only of the circumcision of the flesh, but of his tribe, of his
stock, of his religion, of his zeal; yea and lest he should seem to leave
out any thing without Christ wherein he had any confidence, he speaks
expressly of all things without Christ, that for Christ he counts all things
loss. So that the conclusion (though most hard) will not be avoided, but that
they that trust to be saved by their merits are not circumcised with the true
and spiritual circumcision, but are as yet strangers from the covenant of
promise, and have no inheritance among the sons of God.

Let us therefore, men and brethren, renounce all confidence in any thing
without Christ whatsoever, and let us trust only in the merits of Christ Jesus.
He alone is made of God unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption: he has purchased us with his own blood: he is
set for ever at the right hand of the throne of God to make intercession for
us; and through him alone we receive all the blessing, that we have either for
this life, or that that is to come. Let us therefore rejoice in him, and not in
any thing without him. He that believes in him, believes in him that sent
him; and he that loves him, loves him that sent him; and he that obeys
him, obeys him that sent him; and he that glorifieth him, glorifieth him that
sent him. Let us therefore worship him with all holy worship, and so shall we
worship God in the spirit, and so shall we be able truly to say with the
Apostle, We are the circumcision, which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice
in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.

Circumcise (O Lord) we beseech thee the foreskinnes of our hearts with the
finger of thy holy spirit, that we may worship thee in spirit and in truth, and
that we may rejoice in thy Son Christ Jesus as in the horn of our salvation,
renouncing all confidence in any thing without him whatsoever. O Lord purge us
daily more and more from all inordinate affections, and unbridled desires,
which any way may draw us from thee, or hinder us in thy service: renew in us
right spirits, that we may worship thee, not after the fond devices of our
own brain, but in spirit and in truth, after the rule of thy holy word; and
so sanctify us with thy holy spirit, that abandoning all worldly confidence
whatsoever, we may wholly and only rejoice in thy Son Christ Jesus for ever.

LECTVRE LII.
PHILIP. 3. Verse. 4.5.6. Though I might also have confidence in the flesh. If
any other men thinks that he has whereof he might trust.
NOw the Apostle in these words proposes unto them his own example, as an
embrace of that truth touching man's righteousness and salvation which they
were to embrace and follow, from this verse to the fifteenth. And first he
shows that he for his part reposeth no trust or confidence of his
righteousness or salvation in the circumcision of the flesh, or in the works
of the Law, or in any thing without Christ whatsoever; and then that Christ
alone is all his righteousness, and the horn of his salvation. In these
verses that I have read unto you the Apostle first shows that if he would or
thought it meet to rejoice in the flesh, he had as good cause so to do, nay
better cause so to do then any of them that reioiced in the flesh had. 2. He
shows that albeit he might have as good confidence in the flesh as the best,
yet he now counted of all those things not only as unprofitable, but as
hurtful, verse 7.8. Whereby the Apostle both represseth the insolency of those
false teachers that boasted so much, and yet had not so much cause as he had
of boasting touching the flesh; and likewise lets the Philippians see that
seeing he having such prerogatives above others touching the flesh, yet
counted all things without Christ even but dung and loss, they also should do
so, and therefore should not regard whatsoever those false teachers told them
of circumcision, or of the works of the Law. In general therefore first the
Apostle shows, that if he would have confidence in the flesh, he has cause
enough, so that he might if he would have confidence in the flesh, in these
words, Though I might, etc. Secondly he shows that he has more cause to trust
in the flesh then any of those false teachers have, in these words, If any
other, etc. Thirdly, he proves his two former assertions by a particular
recital of certain things wherein he might rejoice, in some of which he was
not ^nferiour to the best, as in circumcision, being circumcised ^he eighth
day; in kindred, being of the kindred of Israel; in ^ribe, being of the tribe
of Benjamin; in ancientnesse of stock and lineage, being an Hebrew of the
Hebrews; and in profession, being a Pharisie: and in others he was before the
best, as ^n zeal, having persecuted the Church, and in righteousness, which
is in the Law, being unrebukable. Thus ye see the ^orme of the Apostle his
proceeding, and the division of these word, into their branches. Now touching
the meaning of them in more particular sort.

First, in the first general proposition, where he says, though I might,
etc. the Apostle meets with an objection which happily the false teachers
might have made against ^^m; and it is as if he should thus have said: Though I
say that (...) rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh,
^et let no man say that it is because I have no cause of confi^ence in the
flesh; for I have cause enough: so that if I would I might not only as a
Christian have my whole confidence Christ, but also as a Jew, have confidence
in the flesh. Secondly, where he says in the next general proposition, If any
other man, etc. the Apostle not ambitiously, but being forced thereunto by the
ambition of others, compares himself not only with those false teachers, but
even with the best of the Jews; and for cause of having confidence in the
flesh if he would, he prefers himself before the best of them. For it is
as if he should thus have said: If any, I say not only of those dogs and
evil workers, but if any other even of the best of the Jews, think that he
have cause of confidence in the flesh, that is, in any outward thing without
Christ, I might have more cause of confidence in outward things if I would,
then he whatsoever he be. Thirdly, where he says in the particular recital of
those things wherein he might if he would rejoice, that he was circumcised the
eighth day, the Apostle sets down his first prerogative common to him with
other of the Jews. He was circumcised, he means in the foreskinne of his
flesh, therefore no Gentile; the eighth day, therefore he was no proselyte,
but a natural Jew: for the proselytes, which were those that being Gentiles
embraced the Jewish religion, they were circumcised after their conversion unto
Iudaisme; but all the Jews were by the Law circumcised the eighth day. So then
he was no Gentile or proselyte, but a natural Jew, being circumcised the
eighth day. His second prerogative common to him with other of the Jews
likewise, was that he was of the kindred of Israel, that is, not borne of
parents that were proselytes, and only converted unto Jews, but of parents
which were natural Jews, even of the seed of Jacob. A prerogative which the
Jews stood much upon that they were descended of Jacob who was called Israel,
because he prevailed with God. His third prerogative wherein he was above many
of the Jews, was that he was of the tribe of Benjamin: which his tribe he
mentions, both for the dignity of his tribe, as being the tribe whence Saul
the first King of Israel was; as also farther to show himself an Israelite,
whose custom it was to reckon their tribe. His fourth prerogative wherein he
yet more excelled many of the Jews, was that he was an Ebrew of the Ebrewes:
whereby he argues the ancientnes of his stock and lineage, Genesis 14.13.10.21.25.
as being continued from Abraham called the Ebrew, or from Eber of whom the
Jews were called Ebrewes, which was before the confusion of tongues at the
building of Babel. His fifth prerogative, wherein he yet more excelled the most
of the Jews, was that he was by the law,.i. by sect and profession a Pharisie,
Act. 26.5.
the sect it self being thought the most strait sect of the Jewish religion,
and they more holy, and also more learned in the scriptures then men of other
sects. His sixth prerogative, wherein he passed all the rest of the Jews, was
his zeal, which was so fervent and outragiously hot that he persecuted the
Church of God extremely, or as it is in the Acts, unto death, Gal. 1.13. Act.
22.4.26.10, 11.
binding and delivering into prison both men and women; punishing them
throughout all the synagogues, compelling them to blaspheme, and giving his
sentence when they were put to death. The last prerogative here mentioned,
wherein also he passed all the rest of the Jews, was that touching the
righteousness which is in the law, that is, which consists in the outward
observation of those things which the law commanded, he was unrebukable, to
wit before men; so precisely walking in all the commandments and ordinances of
the law as that no man could reprove him, as it is also said of Zacharias and
Elizabeth. Luke 1.6.
This I take to be the meaning of the Apostle thus far. Now let us see what
may be observed hence for our use and instruction.

1. Here I note the manifold and great arguments which the Apostle had of
confidence and rejoicing in the flesh, even so many and so great, that he might
not only compare with the best of the Jews, but all his prerogatives
considered, he might more rejoice in such outward things then might any of the
best of them. For look wherein any of the best of them might rejoice, whether
it were in circumcision, or in nobleness of race, or in ancient descent, or in
dignity of tribe, or in profiting in the Jewish religion, therein might he
also rejoice; and then for zeal, he was much more zealous of the traditions of
his fathers then were any of the rest, being even mad in zeal against the
Christians; and likewise for holiness of life, and religious observation of
the law, he walked so well and so precisely, as that no man could except
against him, or reprove him for any thing that way.

Hence then I observe the wonderful wisdom of our good God, in his most wise
disposing and ordering of all thing, for the behoof and benefit of his Church.
For to the end that he might bring the Jews from that vain confidence which
they had in the flesh, and from that ouer-weening conceit which they had of
their own righteousness by the works of the law, unto confidence in Christ
Jesus, and unto that righteousness which is of God through faith, to the end
(I say) that he might bring the Jews from those outward things of the flesh
unto the inward knowledge of Christ Jesus, he raised up to this purpose this
holy Apostle, that he being a manfully furnished with all prerogatives in all
such outward things as they rejoiced in, might both be of greater authority
with them, and likewise have the greater possibility to draw them from works
unto grace, from the law unto Christ. For if it had been so, that he had
persuaded them to renounce all confidence in the flesh, and to rejoice only in
Christ Jesus, having himself no cause of confidence in the flesh, they might
happily lightly have esteemed him, and thought that because himself had
nothing touching the flesh whereof to rejoice, therefore he envied them, and
persuaded them to renounce all confidence in the flesh. But when now they
should see that he that thus persuaded them was one that had greater cause of
confidence in the flesh then had the best of them, they must needs likewise see
that surely his persuasions proceeded from a certain and sound judgment, and
not from any conceited opinion, or hateful envy. So we see that to teach men
that pleasures, and sumptuous buildings, and riches, and possessions, and the
like were all but vanity and vexation of the spirit, he stirred up Solomon,
who having had his fill of all kind of pleasures which either his eye, Eccles.
2.
or his heart could desire, and having built goodly houses, and great works,
and having gathered great riches and treasures, and gotten large possessions
above all that were before him in Jerusalem, was so fit to teach that lesson,
that he saying of all those things that they were but vanity and vexation of
the spirit, the truth thereof might the rather be believed. So likewise when
the Church had sat now a long time in the darkness of Romish Egypt, and had
been bewitched as with many other gross errors, so with this of justification
by works, and merits of their own making, we see that to purge the Church of
these pestilent diseases, he raised up not many years ago in Germany that
reverend Luther, who having been a long time more pharisaicall and zealous in
those monkish ways and doctrines then the common sort of his order; and having
lived, as Erasmus witnesses, Epist. lib. 5. Melan. l. 6. Wolsac.
so that none of all his enemies could ever charge him with any note of just
reprehension, might so much the rather prevail with the Church to draw them
from those dreams and dregs of superstition and idolatry wherein they were
drowned. And thus oftentimes it seems good to the wisdom of our God, to the
end that he may the rather draw his people either from errors in opinion, or
corruptions in life, to raise up of themselves some such as have as deeply
been drencht in those errors which they maintain, and delighted as much in
those follies which they follow, as they themselves; that when they shall
disclaim such and such errors, or renounce such and such follies, the rest may
the rather hearken unto them, and be induced by them to disclaim their errors,
and to renounce their follies. Whence I make this double use.

1. This may teach them whom it has pleased the Lord to reclaim from error in
opinion, or folly in life, to consider why the Lord has thus in mercy dealt
with them, and accordingly to perform such duties unto the Lord as are
required of them. Art thou then called out of the darkness of Romish Egypt
unto the glorious light of the Gospel of Jesus Christ? Art thou freed from the
bondage of that Romish Pharaoh into the glorious liberty of the sons of God
by the day star arising in thine heart? It is a great mercy of the Lord unto
thee thus to deliver thy soul from death, and thy feet from sliding. But
consider thou whether the Lord has not also in wisdom done this, that thou
having been nusled up in their superstitious errors, and as egerly maintained
them as they, should now labor to draw them out of darkness into light, and
from vain confidence in the flesh to rejoice in Christ Jesus. What do thou
know but that the Lord therefore suffered thee for a while to sit in darkness
and in the shadow of death, that when afterward the day star should ^rise in
thine heart, thou might both labor the more with them, and likewise be in
the better possibility to prevail with hem. Follow thou therefore the example
of this holy Apostle, and labor to weyne them as from other their errors, so
from confidence in their works, and in merits of their own making, that they
may rejoice wholly in Christ Jesus, and only put their trust in his name.
Again, have thou haunted with vain persons, and been delighted in the
company of the wicked; have thou run with a thief when thou saw him, and
been partaker with the adulterers; have thou given thy money unto usury, or
taken reward against the innocent; have thine hands wrought, or thy feet run
unto, or thy thought devised, or thy heart consented unto this or that sin or
iniquity; and has the Lord now reclaimed thee? It is a great mercy of the
Lord no doubt unto thee. But consider thou whether the Lord has not also in
wisdom done this, that thou might draw them with whom sometimes thou
sortedst thy self unto a reformation of their ways. What know thou but
that he has reclaimed thee from such and such inordinate ways, that having
walked with them thou might be the means of reforming them. As it has
pleased the Lord therefore to reclaim every man from any error in opinion, or
folly in life, so let him labor to reform such errors, or follies in them
whom he knows to be entangled with them: ever remembering that of our Savior
unto Peter, when thou art converted strengthen thy brethren: Luke 22.32.
and likewise that, that he which converteth a sinner from going astray out of
his way, Iam. 5.20.
saves a soul from death, and hides a multitude of sins.

2. This may teach them that are as yet holden with any error in opinion, or
folly in life, to hearken unto those whom the Lord has raised even of
themselves to admonish them of their errors, or of their follies. For thus they
should consider with themselves: He was so affected as now I am, and had as
great skill, and will to maintain those things which now he does oppugn, as I
have, and if the Lord have now revealed unto him that which as yet he has kept
hid from mine eyes, who am I that I should not hearken unto him? Again, he was
so delighted as now I am, and did run after such sins and iniquities as he
now speaks against, as now I do, and if the Lord have now so lightened his
eyes that he both sees the folly of his own ways, and calls me from the
like, why should I not receive instruction from him? Thus (I say) they should
consider, and cause their ears to hearken unto wisdom, and incline their
heart unto understanding. Pro. 2.2.
But what do they? Forsooth if such a one as was wrapped in their errors would
now draw them from their errors, they disdain him the most of all other, and
they cry away with the Apostata, away with the reuolter, we will not hear him,
our soul loatheth him. And might not the Jews even with the very same reason
have dealt so with the Apostle, and so cried after him. Again, if such a one
as was delighted in their follies whatsoever, would now draw them from their
follies, do they not by and by say, Oh sir, how long have you been of this
mind? Are you so quickly become so precise that now you cannot brook these
things? Not long since you were as we are, and ere long happily will be again,
in the mean time you may talk where you may be heard: but we will walk in
our old ways. And might not the Jews even with the very same reason have said
thus to the Apostle? Surely they that send away such as arising of themselves
seek to reclaim them from their errors or their follies with such answers,
they do therein justify the Jews, neither suffer they the consideration of
this wisdom of our God (wh^reof we have spoken) to sink into their hearts.
Well, let us cons^der it, and as it does or may concern us so make these uses
of it.

2. Here I note that the Apostle to repress the insolency of those that
boasted in outward things without Christ, spares not to speak of such
prerogatives as he had touching the flesh, and in such to prefer himself
before the best of them. Whence I observe that in some cases the children of
God may stand upon their own commendation, and are not to spare to speak of
such blessings outward or inward as the Lord has bestowed upon them above
their brethren. Our holy Apostle we see did it very often. In the lattet to the
Corinthians chap. 11. 2 Cor. 11.
we see how largely he speaks of the excellency of his ministry, of his
gifts of knowledge, of his diligence in his office, of the nobleness of his
birth, of the auncientnes of his stock, of his patience, of his constancy, of
his manifold sufferings for Christ his sake: 12.
and in chap. 12. of his visions, and revelations which were showed him of the
Lord. So likewise in the Epistle to the Galathians, Galat. 1.2.
we see how he magnifieth his office and Apostleship, standing upon it that he
was in nothing inferior to the chief Apostles, but withstood Peter the Apostle
of the Jews to his face. Where also he boasts of his profiting in the Jewish
religion above many of his companions, 1.14.
and of his zealousnes of the traditions of his fathers. Act. 22.26.
Like places unto these we have in the Acts, where we see the like practice of
the Apostle. But was it that moved the Apostle hereunto? Was it ambition, and
vain affectation of his own praises that moved him? No surely: he was (as
himself often says) even compelled thereunto, partly to repress the
insolences of those that labored to undermine his authority; and partly to
quit and clear himself of such false caui lations as were laid against him;
and partly to confirm such weak brethren, as such arguments of commendation
might somewhat prevail with. Thus then we see that the children of God
warranted by the example of the Apostle may speak even freely of such
blessings as the Lord in mercy toward them has bestowed upon them above
others of their brethren. But may they in every case, and upon every occasion
break forth into their own praises? No certainly they may not, but only in
some cases. As 1. when they are so vilified, and disgraced, and
discountenanced, their authority so impeached, their gifts so nullified, their
persons so contemned, as that thereby not only themselves are justly offended,
but Gods name likewise dishonored, then may they even boast themselves of such
mercies outward or inward as the Lord has vouchsafed unto them. So our Apostle
did when the false Apostles labored to disgrace him with the Corinthians, and
the Galathians, as having no authority, no gifts of knowledge, or eloquence.
2. When they see that the proud insolency of their adversaries that exalt
themselves against the knowledge of God cannot otherwise be repressed So our
Apostle did when the false Apostles did so insolently brag as if they had all
knowledge, and all wisdom, and all understanding. 3. When they which otherwise
should give them that testimony which is due unto them, do it not, the glory
of God requiring it, then may they break out into their own praise. And this
our Apostle shows to be one cause why he boasted himself, where he says, 2
Cor. 12.11
I was a fool to have boasted my self; but ye have compelled me: for I ought
to have been commended of you. Because therefore the Corinthians gave him not
that testimony which was due unto him, therefore he was compelled to boast
himself. 4. When they see that their boasting may make for the edification of
the Church of Christ Jesus, then may they boast themselves. So our Apostle here
boasts himself, as to repress thereby the insolency of the false teachers,
so partly to teach the Philippians, that seeing he, having such prerogatives
above others touching the flesh, yet counted all those things but even dung and
loss, they also by his example should do so. In all these cases the children
of God may and ought to speak and even to glory and boast of such blessings as
God has bestowed upon them above their brethren. Touching this whole point I
give these two caueats: first, that they do not hunt after occasions and
opportunities to praise themselves, but that then only they do so when they
are even driven and compelled so to do by such occasions as now we have spoken
of, or the like: secondly, that when they praise themselves being compelled
thereunto, they do it not in affectation of their own praise, but for the
praise and glory of almighty GOD.

Here then let not any proud Pharisie, or any ambitious Di^trephes shrowde
himself under the covert of the Apostle, as if his example might serve to him
for any defense of his ambition, or pharisaicall contempt of others. Let not
that man of sin hereupon exalt himself above all that is called God, or that
is worshipped. All such proud, and vain, and ambitious spirits as vainly
glory in their pedigree, in their honor, in their riches, in their wisdom, in
their holiness, in their zeal, or the like, they savor not of Paul's spirit,
but rather of Lucifers spirit. Whosoever otherwise boast themselves then being
compelled thereunto, whosoever otherwise break out into their own praises
then only unto the praise and glory of God, they may well talk of Paul's
boasting, but they know not what it means; and as much may be said for the
proud contemning Pharisie as can be said for such men. Luke 18.11.
Beware therefore of ambition and vainglory: for it shuts from God, as
witnesses our Savior, where he says unto the Jews, I^h. 5.44.
how can ye believe which receive honor one of another, and seek not the
honor that comes of God alone? Let us therefore speak with gladness of the
blessings which the Lord has vouchsafed unto us, and if need be, let us glory
and boast of them; but ever remembering that which is written, he that
rejoices, 1 Cor. 1.31.
let him rejoice in the Lord. To glory in the mercies of the Lord toward us,
affecting our own praise and glory is pharisaicall, hypocritical and wicked;
but in some cases so to do to the praise and glory of God is both lawful and
very requisite. I will end this point if in one word I shall answer one doubt,
which is, how the Apostle should reckon it amongst his external praises and
arguments of confidence in the flesh, that he persecuted the Church of God.
This no doubt was a great and grievous sin to persecute the Church of God: as
our Apostle acknowledges, where he says, I was a blasphemer, 1 Timothy 1.13.
and a persecutor, and an oppressor, but I was received to mercy. But we must
remember that the Apostle had to do with those that would seem to be very
zealous of the law. He mentions therefore his persecution of the Church only
to prove that he was as zealous of the law as the best of them. Which zeal
they highly accounted of, as also he did before his conversion, though now he
condemned it. In respect therefore of them, and likewise in respect of his own
opinion before his conversion, his so fervent zeal that he persecuted the
Church of God is reckoned amongst his praises. And the same is likewise to be
said of all the rest, as hereafter we shall show.

3. Here I note that the Apostle to prove that he might have confidence in the
flesh if he would as well as the best, reckons whatsoever outward things the
Jews most stood upon, or could indeed be stood upon, as circumcision, great
kindred, ancient continuance therein, even from Abra^am the Ebrew, nobleness of
Tribe, religiousnesse of profession, feruencie of zeal, and most precise
observation of the commandments and ordinances of the law. Whence I observe
that to have confidence in any outward thing without Christ whatsoever is to
have confidence in the flesh. This is proved, because whatsoever outward thing
without Christ is termed flesh both here, as this discourse proves, and else
where in the very like form of speech, as where the Apostle says, 2 Cor.
11.18.
seeing that many rejoice after the flesh, I will rejoice also. Now what are
the things that here he rejoices in? Surely many of them the selfsame things
that here the Apostle speaks of, and besides other things also, as hunger,
thirst, cold, nakedness, stripes, imprisonment, stoning, persecution, and the
like, all which he comprehends in the name of flesh, affirming that he
rejoices in the flesh when he rejoices in these things. As then to rejoice
in any outward thing without CHRIST is to rejoice in the flesh, so likewise to
have confidence in any outward thing without Christ is to have confidence in
the flesh.

Let this then teach us not to have confidence in any outward thing whatsoever
without Christ. Thou art bapt^zed: it is well: so was Simon Magus. Act. 8.13. 1
Pet. 3.21.
It is not the putting away of the filth of the body that saves us, but in
that a good conscience makes request to God. Thou have eaten at the Lord his
table: it is well: so no doubt did Judas. He that eats and drinks worthily
is made one with CHRIST and CHRIST with him; but he that eats and drinks
unworthily eats and drinks his own damnation. 1 Cor. 11.29.
Thou art borne of holy and godly Parents: it is well: so were ISMAEL and ESAV:
They which are the children of the flesh, Romans 9.8.
are not the children o^ God, but the children of the promise are counted for
the seed. Thou art of an holy profession: It is well: so was Dema^, Holiness
of profession commends not unto God, but an heart purified by faith which
works through love. Thou distributest to the poor, and do many good
things: it is well: Mat. 19 20 1 Cor. 13.3.
so did the Pharisees, and the young man in the Gospel. Though I feed the
poor with all my goods, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not
love, it profits me nothing. In a word, there is nothing under heaven without
Christ that does profit us, so that we should rejoice, or have confidence in
it: Act 4.12.
for among men there is given none other name under heaven whereby we must be
saved, but only by the name of Christ Jesus. Let us therefore trust perfectly
on the grace that is brought unto us by the revelation of Christ Jesus, and let
us have no confidence in any outward thing without Christ whatsoever, no not in
the outward action of receiving the sacrament of baptism or of the Lord his
supper. For if we have, then have we confidence in the flesh, and if we have
confidence in the flesh, we rejoice not in Christ Jesus; and if we rejoice not
in Christ Jesus, we worship not God in the spirit; and if we worship not God in
the spirit, we are not circumcised with the true circumcision, and if we be not
circumcised with the true circumcision, we belong not to the covenant of grace.

O Lord bless thy word unto us which now we have heard with our outward ears.
Such of us as it has pleased thee to reclaim from any error in opinion, or
folly in life, make us careful of reforming such errors and follies in others:
and such of us as are yet holden with any error or folly we beseech thee so to
frame us after thy will that we may hearken unto wisdom, and incline our
hearts to understanding. Remove far from us all vain affectation of our own
praises, and open our mouths to set forth thy praises so often as shall be
meet for thy glory. Weyne us O Lord from all confidence in any outward thing
whatsoever, and settle all our confidence in thy self, and on thy son Christ
Jesus, to whom etc.

LECTVRE LIII.
PHILIP. 3. Verse. 7.8. But the things that were vantage unto me, the same I
counted loss for Christ his sake. Yea doubtless I think all things loss
etc.
But the things etc.] In these words the Apostle goes forward, and shows,
that albeit he had as good cause, and greater of confidence and rejoicing in
the flesh, and in things without Christ then had either those false Teachers,
or the best of the Jews whatsoever, yet now since the knowledge of Christ
Jesus, and his righteousness was revealed unto him, he counted of all those
outward things in respect of any confidence or rejoicing in them, not only as
unprofitable, but as hurtful. In these two verses therefore 1. the Apostle in
general shows that howsoever sometimes he had made great reckoning of his
vnrebukable walking in the Law of God, and of those outward things wherein the
Jews gloried, yet after that he came to the knowledge of Christ Jesus, he
changed his mind so far, that he counted them then not only unprofitable,
but also hurtful for Christ his sake; and this he does verse. 7.2 showing his
resolute continuance in the same mind which first he had when he came to the
knowledge of Christ Jesus, he does principally amplify, and more specially
explicate that which he had said before in the latter part of the 7. verse; and
this he does verse 8. The first ye see is a comparison between the Apostle his
judgment before his knowledge of Christ, and after his knowledge of Christ,
for the same things which seemed a vantage unto him before he knew Christ,
afterward he counted loss for Christ his sake. The second is principally an
amplification, or more special explication of the latter part of the
comparison, where in he goes over and over the same terms there used, but
sometimes with some diversity for the farther and better openig of them. For
where as verse 7. he had said, the same I counted loss for Christ his sake,
verse 8. he repeateth the same to the same purpose thrice, but with some
amplification, and likewise with some alteration in the form and phrase of
speech; as 1. thus I think all things loss for the excellent knowledge sake
of Christ Jesus my Lord: again thus, for Christ I have counted all things
loss; lastly thus, I do judge all things to be dung, that I may win Christ.
So that ye see the eight verse is especially an amplification, or more special
explication of the later part of the comparison in verse seven. Now from this
general division, and explication of these words, let us descend unto a more
particular examination of the meaning of them.

1. Therefore where the Apostle says in the comparison, but the things etc.]
by the things which seemed vantage unto him he means all the things before
reckoned, but especially his righteousness by the law: these as he says
seemed unto him; when? to wit, before he knew Christ; what seemed they unto
him? vantage; i. again so meritoriously profitable, as wherein he might repose
the confidence of his salvation. Again when he says, the same I counted
losse] he means that after he began to know Christ he counted those same
things not only unprofitable, but also hurtful, for Christ his sake] i. as
the Apostle in the next verse expounds it, for the excellent knowledge sake of
Christ Jesus, or for the winning of Christ, because confidence in those things
were hindrances hereof. So that it is as if the Apostle had thus said: My
circumcision, my kindred, my tribe, my ancient descent from Abraham the Hebrew,
my profession, my zeal, my righteousness in the law were great things, and
things which were in my judgment before I knew Christ so meritoriously
profitable, as that I thought I might repose the confidence of my salvation in
them. But the things, even these great things that were in my judgment to me
before I knew Christ adua^^age, i. so meritoriously profitable as that I
thought I might repose the confidence of my salvation in them; the same things
I counted after that once I began to know Christ, loss: i. not only no
advantage, but disadvantage, and hurtful for Christ his sake, i. for the
attaining unto the perfect knowledge of Christ Jesus, because confidence in
those things is an hinderance unto the knowledge and winning of Christ Jesus.
And did I when first I began to know Christ count those things not only
unprofitable, but hurtful, which before my conversion seemed unto me so
profitable as that I might repose the confidence of my salvation in them? And
do not I so still? yes doubtless: I am not at all altered in my judgment,
but the more that I grow in the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, the more
that I know not his person alone, but the infinite treasures of wisdom,
righteousness, and salvation that are hid in him, the more do I think, not
only all those things wherein I had confidence before I believed, but
absolutely all things, even all my works since I believed, to be but loss and
hindrances to the attaining of the perfect knowledge of Christ Jesus; for whom,
i. for knowing of whom to my comfort, and to repose my whole confidence in him,
I have counted all things loss, as being drawn by confidence in them from
confidence in Christ Jesus: yea and more then so I do judge not only all
things, wherein I rejoiced before I believed, but even all my works
whatsoever, and whenever done to be dung, even stark naught, and worse then
naught, to this end that I may win Christ, i. that I may be more and more
near joined unto him, the cloak of whose righteousness I know to be the more
near at hand to cover me, the more naked that I am in my self in my own
judgment. Not to trouble you longer with the opening of these words, in brief
the Apostle here teaches the Philippians by his own example not to repose any
confidence of their salvation in any their works done either before, or after
their justification, but only in Christ Jesus. The reason is, because all
works done either before, or after justification are in comparison of Christ,
and of any confidence to be reposed in them, but loss and dung. And let thi^
suffice to be spoken touching the meaning of these words. Now let us see what
observations we may gather hence for our farther use and instruction.

1. In that the Apostle says, the things that were vantage unto me etc. I note
the great diversity of Paul's judgment before his conversion, and after his
conversion unto Christ for the things that seemed vantage unto him before his
conversion unto Christ, the same things after his conversion he counted loss
unto him for Christ his sake. Whence I observe the great alteration and change
which the spirit of God works in the heart and understanding of him whom he
vouchsa^eth to bring to the knowledge of God in Christ Jesus. For until such
time as the dayspring from on high do visit us, and the day star of the
sun of righteousness arise in our hearts, such blindness, darkness, and
ignorance possess our understandings, as that we neither do nor can perceive
the things of the spirit of God, but both we think and speak good of evil,
and evil of Good, and judge that to be vantage which is loss, and that to be
loss which is vantage. This is plain by that of the Apostle where he says, 1
Cor. 2.14
that the natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God; for they
are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. Where by the natural man he means the man whose
heart and understanding the Lord has not yet lightened by his holy spirit, who
as yet is not brought unto the true knowledge of Christ; and of him he says,
that he neither does, nor can perceive the things of the spirit of God; nay
more then that, that the things of Gods spirit are mere foolishness unto him.
Yea so it fares ordinarily with the natural man that he puts darkness for
light, and light for darkness, bitter for sweet, and sweet for sour. And
if any be more careful of his ways then the rest, so that he can say with the
Pharisie I am not as other men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers; I fast twi^^
in the week, I give tithes of all that ever I possess; if he be ciuilly
honest, merciful, and liberal; if he be just toward others, sober in
himself, and so precisely careful of his ways as that he be vnrebukable
before men, hereon he sets his rest, and stands upon it that these things are
such an advantage unto him, as that God should do him great wrong ^f he
should not save him for these things. But tell him that all these, and all the
like things are but as a staff of reed, on which if he lean it will break
into shiuers, and hurt him; tell him that Christ Jesus is the only rock of
salvation unto all them that put their trust in him, that there is no other
name given under heaven whereby we can be saved but only by the name of Christ
Jesus, and that if he will be saved he must repose all confidence in him, and
renounce all confidence in his works, or in any thing without Christ
whatsoever, hereat he will stand amassed, and with Festus he will say to him
that shall tell him thus, thou art besides thy self, much learning does make
thee mad. Thus it fares with us all before such time as we be renewed in the
spirit of our minds, either we take pleasure in unrighteousness, or else we
repose too much confidence in our supposed righteousness, and for the wisdom
of God we all count it mere foolishness and madness. But so soon as the
Lord vouchsafes by his spirit to circumcise us with the true circumcision of
Christ, so soon as the Lord gives us a new heart, and puts a new spirit within
us, then we begin to abandon the delights in the flesh, and to savor the
things of the spirit, then the case begins to be altered, and we to be
quite of another judgment. For then our eyes which were before dim and shut
up, being opened and cleared, and the foggie mists of blindness, darkness,
and ignorance which covered our understandings, being expelled, then we begin
to condemn our former ways, then we begin to count the things loss which
before seemed a vantage unto us, and then we begin to hearken unto the things
that belong unto our peace. So that whereas before we had confidence in the
flesh, now we renounce all confidence in the flesh, and rejoice only in Christ
Jesus, whereas before we pleased our selves much in things which we willed and
did; now we see that in us, i. in our flesh dwells no good thing, but that
God only works in us both the will and the deed even of his good pleasure,
whereas before we counted the wisdom of God foolishness, now we see that
our own wisdom is foolishness, and that only the wisdom of God is true
wisdom For when the Lord has put his spirit within us, then we walk in his
statutes, and keep his judgments, and do them: Eze. 36.27
but before we do not: Deuteronomy. 30.6 3.
when he has circumcised our hearts, thee we love the Lord our God with all
our heart, and with all our soul; before we do not: and as our Apostle here
says, when we are circumcised with the true circumcision, that is, when we are
regenerated by God his holy spirit, then we rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have
no confidence in the flesh; but before we have confidence in the flesh, and
rejoice not in Christ Jesus. A great change, and a good change, because from
the worse unto the better.

Let this then teach us to bend the knees of our souls unto the Lord our God
for the grace of his holy spirit, that the bright beams of his spirit shining
into our hearts, all mists of blindness, darkness, and ignorance, may be
expelled thence, and we brought both unto the perfect knowledge and obedience
of Christ Jesus. For if he guide us, we wander not; if he instruct us, we
err not; if he command the light of the glorious Gospel to shine unto us,
then is our darkness turned into light. But otherwise our foolish hearts are
full of darkness, otherwise we err and wander out of the right way wherein
we should walk, and lay hold on error in stead of truth, and embrace folly
in stead of wisdom: for it is the spirit alone that leads us into all truth,
Ioh. 16.13. 1 Cor. 12.3.
and directs us unto all wisdom; and but by the spirit no man can say that
Jesus is the Lord. Let us therefore always pray for the light of Gods spirit,
that it shining in our hearts, our darkness may be turned into light, our feet
may be guided into the way of peace, and our eyes may be opened to see the
mysteries of Gods will, and the wondrous things of his Law.

Secondly, in that the Apostle after that he began to know Christ, counted
those things no vantage, but loss, which before he knew Christ seemed vantage
unto him; I observe, that such works as we do before we be justified by
faith in Christ Jesus, seem they never so good, yet they are no vantage unto
us, either unto justification, or unto salvation. For what were the things that
seemed vantage unto the Apostle before he knew Christ? Was not one of them, and
whereof he made special account, his unrebukable walking in all the
commandments and ordinances of the Law, his works done according to the Law?
The verse immediately before shows that he counted that one of his chief
prerogatives. And yet he counted these works done according to the Law before
he believed, no vantage at all unto him for his justification or salvation by
Christ Jesus. Now if the Apostle so judged of his works done according to the
Law before he believed, this may be a sure proof unto us, that such works as
are done before grace and faith in Christ Jesus, seem they never so good, yet
they are no vantage unto us either unto our justification, or unto our
salvation. Well they may have a show and semblance of vantage unto us, but
indeed they are no vantage unto us, either to prepare us to the grace of
justification, or to move the Lord to show mercy on us, and save us: for
without faith it is impossible to please God; Heb. 11.6. Joh. 17.3.
and without the knowledge of Christ there is no salvation: for this is
eternal life, to know God, and him whom he has sent, Jesus Christ. So that
our works done before we believe, and before we be brought to the knowledge of
Christ Jesus, cannot be any way any merit why we should be justified, or why we
should be saved.

Let this then teach us to beware of such deceivers as tell us that such
works, though they suffice not to salvation, yet are acceptable preparatiues
to the grace of justification, and such as move God to mercy. For if they were
such preparatiues, or if they did move God to mercy, how should they not be
some advantage unto us? which the Apostle here plainly denies. They talk I
know of Cornelius his prayers and almesdeeds, Act. 10.4.
as if they had been works done before faith, and yet acceptable with God.
But the text it self in that place is sufficient to confute them: for there it
is said, that he was a devout man, 2.
and one that feared God with all his household, and gave much alms to the
people, and prayed unto God continually. All evident arguments, that as a true
proselyte he believed in the Messiah, howsoever he was not yet baptized, nor
perfectly instructed. So that his prayers and his almesdeeds were not
preparations and dispositions unto faith and justification, but they were the
fruits of his faith and justification already begun. Of the like validity
are whatsoever arguments they bring to this purpose. Howsoever therefore they
tell you that works done before faith or justification are acceptable unto
God, or dispositions unto grace, or motives unto mercy, or merits in
congruitie, or whatsoever other advantage, yet ye see that the Apostle is
clear in the point, that all the prerogatives that any man has, and all the
good works that any man does before he know Christ, they are no vantage to him
at all to justification or salvation. Yea further know, that they who make
other account of such works, thereby show that indeed as yet they do not
truly know Christ: for this is a plain testimony that as yet they are not
come unto the true knowledge of Jesus Christ, if as yet they count such works
to be a vantage unto grace, or life. Hearken therefore not unto them, neither
give ye any place unto their error.

It follows that hence also I should observe, that such works are not only
no vantage, but loss for Christ his sake. But the general in the verse
following comprehending this particular, I have thought good only to speak of
it in the general, and so to conclude the point touching works.

Thirdly therefore, in that the Apostle says in the next verse, Yea doubtless
I think all things but loss, etc. and do judge them to be dung, etc. I
observe that generally all our works done according to the Law, whether before
or after faith and justification, seem they never so good, by reposing any
confidence of salvation in them, are not only no vantage, but loss, yea but
dung, such as were far more meet that we should be purged of them, then that
we should repose any confidence in them. For that generally all works are
here to be understood, it is plain by the Apostle in this place: first,
because having spoken in the former verse of works done before faith and
justification, here he uses a more general word, comprising both those and
what works else soever; as if he had said, yea doubtless, now that I am
grown up in further knowledge of Christ Jesus, I now think not only things
which either I had or did before I knew Christ, but even all things generally,
even all my works whatsoever, and whenever done, to be but loss for the
excellent knowledge etc. to be but dung, that I might win Christ. Secondly,
because the Apostle says, that he does judge all things to be dung, that he
might now win Christ. He had already won Christ; but his meaning is, that to
the end he might more and more win him, to the end that he might more and
more nearly be joined unto him, he counted all his own righteousness even
which now he had by any present works of his, to be but loss, to be but dung.
So that all works done either before or after that we be justified by faith,
are here meant. What then? are all our works whatsoever, and whenever done,
simply to be judged loss and dung? No surely, not in respect of the substance
of the works that are done: for fasting, prayers, almesdeeds, righteousness,
judgment, mercy, and the like fruits of faith, are good works, and pleasing
unto God, both commanded and rewarded by him. But both these and whatsoever our
best works are to be judged loss, and even dung, that is, in comparison of
the excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus, and of that righteousness which we
have by faith in him: for what are all things in the world in comparison of the
excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus? or what is man's righteousness, that it
should be compared unto the righteousness of Christ Jesus? Christ is our life,
Col. 3.4. Ioh. 17.3.
and to know him as he is revealed by the light of his glorious Gospel, is
everlasting life. What shall we then compare unto this excellent knowledge?
Nay let us not esteem to know any thing ^^ue Jesus Christ, and him crucified:
in comparison of this knowledge let all things in the world seem loss and
even dung unto us. Likewise what is man's righteousness in comparison of his
righteousness? Surely as darkness in respect of the Sun in his brightness:
for it is as himself, white and ruddie, and wholly delectable, without
blemish, without spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing: and what else is our ^est
righteousness but as the menstruous clothes of a woman? full of filthiness,
and slurried with much uncleanness. So that in comparison of Christ his
righteousness it may well be counted loss, and compared unto dung, fit for
nothing bu^ the dunghill. Secondly, in respect of any confidence to be^ reposed
in them, all our very best works generally whatsoever are but loss, but dung.
The reason is, because confidence in them stays us from that confidence which
we ought to have in Christ Jesus: for the more that we rejoice and secure our
selves in our own righteousness which is by works, the less we care for
coming unto Christ to be clad with his righteousness. Witness the Apostle,
where showing the cause of the ruin of the Jews, Romans 10 3.
he says that they being ignorant of the righteousness of God, and going
about to stablish their own righteousness, submitted not themselves unto the
righteousness of God. Whence it is plain, that to sooth up our selves in a
conceit of our own righteousness, is the very way to stay us from seeking the
righteousness of God in Christ Jesus. And what else means that of our
Savior unto the Pharisees, where he tells them that the Publicans and
harlots shall go before them into the kingdom of God? Matt. 21 31.
The meaning is not, that the wicked and lewd life of the Publicans and harlots
did more commend them unto God, then did the religious and strict life of the
Pharisees; but thereby our Savior gives them to understand, that because of
their conceit and confidence in their own righteousness, they were further
from the kingdom of God then were the greatest sinners that were so that there
was more hope of the greatest sinners that were that they would sooner come to
repentance, and sooner come unto him, then would they that had confidence in
their own works, and in their own righteousness. The more confidence then
that we have in our own works, and in our own righteousness, the more
strangers we are from Christ and his righteousness. If we cleave wholly to
our works, as thinking to be justified or saved by them, we are wholly
separated from Christ Jesus, and have no part in that salvation which is by
grace through faith in his name: or if we clea^^ in part unto our works, then
do we diminish the glory of Christ Jesus. Nay I say more, if we cleave in
part unto our works, we have no part in Christ, or in salvation by him. Which
(I take it) is plain by that of our Apostle, verse 3. of this chapter, where
he says, We rejoice in Christ Jesus, a^^ have no confidence in the flesh: as
if he should have said, If we^ should have confidence in the flesh, then should
we not rejoice in Christ Jesus. The conclusion then must needs be, that all
our works by reposing confidence in them, how good soever they seem to be,
are indeed loss and hurtful unto us. For what more hurtful then to withhold
us from coming unto Christ? unto these of the Apostle let me add a 3.
respect, wherein also even all our works generally are but loss and dung,
which is in respect of the quality of our works in themselves. For if our best
works should be weighed in the balance of the sanctuary, they would be found
too light: if they should be examined after the strict rule of Gods justice
they would make us lift up our voices with David, and say, Psa. 143.2.
enter not into judgment with thy servant o Lord, for in thy sight shall no
man living be justified. Job. 14.4.
For who can bring a clean thing out of filthiness? there is not one that can
do it. How good therefore, how righteous, and holy soever we be, yet must we
know that all our righteousness is but as filthy clouts out of the Prophet.
Es. 64.6.
Whether therefore we compare our works, and our righteousness by works with
the knowledge of Christ, and the righteousness which we have by faith in his
name, or whether we respect the reposing of any part of our confidence in them,
or whether we respect our works in themselves if they should be examined by
the Law of God: we see that they are no vantage, but loss, and as the Apostle
terms them, dung. Which doctrine how true, and likewise how necessary it is,
the Apostle his insisting and beating upon it does evidently show. For ye see
that the three several repetitions hereof takes up this whole verse almost.

What then? do we condemn good works? do we make this account of them that
so we may banish them out of the country? So some tell you: but most untruly.
For in all places we exhort all men that they abound in every good work, and
we give all encouragement thereunto. We tell you that good works are the way
which God has ordained that we should walk in unto heaven, and that without
holiness of life no man shall see the Lord; we tell you that God commands
them, that God rewards them, that God is well pleased with them, and that
they are truly good works, though they be not perfectly good works: yea we
tell you that they are accounted unto us as perfectly good, because whatsoever
imperfection is in them is for Christ his sake covered, and not imputed unto
us. Thus we have learned, and therefore thus we tell you. Also we tell you
that ye are not to repose any confidence of your salvation in them, but all in
Christ Jesus, that they are to be counted but loss and dung in comparison of
the excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus, and of his righteousness, that our
works be they never so good do not make us righteous before God, that we are
saved not of works, but by grace through faith in Christ Jesus, and that none
of all our works can abide the severity of Gods judgment, much less merit
any grace at Gods hands. Thus also we have learned, and therefore thus also we
tell you. And do we condemn good works, because we teach you the truth
touching good works? We desire and we pray that ye may abound in all
knowledge, and in every good work; but we are jealous that ye should not grow
to an ouerwening conceit of them. Good works must be done, but we must not
trust to be justified or saved by them, because that honor only belongs
unto God.

Let this teach us to renounce all confidence in our own works, and in our
own righteousness whatsoever, and to beware of them that tell us that our
works are meritorious and worthy of heaven. For if we flatter our selves with
a proud and pharisaicall conceit of our own righteousness by our works, Luc.
18.14.
we shall depart home justified as the Pharisie. W^ must therefore come unto
Christ, as the Publican, confessing our own unrighteousness, and
acknowledging our own nakedness in our selves if we will be clothed with the
long white robe of his righteousness. For he fills the hung^e with good
things, but sends away the rich empty. He came not to call or to clothe the
righteous in their own conce^^, but he justifies the wicked, and clotheth the
naked. For he respects the humble and lowly, but for the proud he beholds
them a far off. Let us therefore humble our selves in our selves, and only
rejoice in Christ Jesus. If we do any thing that is good, it is not of our
selves, but only from grace; and if we receive a reward for any good that we
do, it is not for the merit of the work, but of the mercy of the Lord: for
we must still hold that rule of our Savior, that when we have done all that
we can, yet must we say, Luc. 17.10.
we are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our duty to do.
Now unprofitable servants what merit they? Or, they which only do their duty,
what merit they? Surely other merit of any works we know none, but of death. If
therefore we will be made righteous before God, let us renounce all merit of
grace by our own works, all confidence in our own righceousnes. Let us
abound in every good work: but for righteousness, and salvation let us run
unto our Christ, 1 Cor. 1.30.
for he is made of God unto us wisdom, and righteousness, sanctification,
and redemption. Let us be ready to do good, and to distribute, and to procure
things honest both before God and men, and let us assure our selves that a
cup of cold water given in Christ his name shall not lose his reward. But let
no man say in his heart, or think with himself that it is for his
righteousness and the merit of his works. For if he so justify himself, the
Lord shall condemn him, and judge him wicked. To cease to do evil, to learn
to do well, to seek judgment, to relieve the oppressed, to judge the
fatherless, to defend the widow, to fast, to watch, to pray, to be just,
merciful, and liberal, to feed the hungry with our morsells, to cloth the
naked with our fleece, to comfort the sick, and to help the troubled in their
distress, are all good works, odours that smell sweet, sacrifices acceptable
and pleasant unto God. Let our faith work by such love, and let our knowledge
be filled with such fruits of righteousness. Such works God accepts well
at our hands, though he do not accept us for our works, but only in his
well-beloued son Christ Jesus. In a word, let us always be occupied in
doing that which is good, but let us not repose any confidence of our salvation
at all in any good that we do.

The last thing which I observe is the reason why the Apostle counted all
outward things whatsoever but loss and dung, which was for Christ his sake,
for the excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus, that he might win Christ, and
that he might be found in him etc. Here was his vantage, here was his gain,
here was his merit, and for the gaining of this pearl he would willingly sell
or loose all that ever he had. But I must defer to speak of this point at
this time.

O Lord our God grant unto us we humbly beseech thee, the grace of thy holy
spirit, that the bright beams thereof shining into our hearts all mysts of
blindness, darkness, and ignorance may be expelled thence, and we enabled to
see the mysteries of thy will, and the wondrous things of thy law. Humble us o
Lord in our selves, we humbly beseech thee, that we seeing and knowing our own
unworthiness and unrighteousness, may sue from our selves, unto thee, and in
thee may find rest unto our souls. Increase o Lord our knowledge in thee, and
our obedience unto thee, that our knowledge being filled with the fruits of
righteousness, and our faith working by love we may be known truly to
belong unto thee.

LECTVRE LIVE.
PHILIP. 3. Verse. 9. And that I may be found in him, that is, not having mine
own righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through etc.
IT remains now that we see what it was that the Apostle counted vantage
unto him, for which he counted all things else in the world but loss and
dung. It was the excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus his Lord that he counted
vantage unto him, for which he counted all things else but loss and dung. For
the excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus, that he might win him, and that he
might be found in him, he thought all things loss, and judged all things to
be dung. Where 1. let us see what is meant by the excellent knowledge of
Christ Jesus. 2. How all things else are to be judged loss for the excellent
knowledge sake of Christ Jesus. 3. What the excellency and vantage is of the
excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus.

Touching the 1. we must understand that there is a threefold knowledge of
Christ: One by the law in the old Testament; another by the Gospel in the new
Testament, and a third in heaven, when we shall see him face to face. In the
law Christ was figured by the heavenly Manna, by the Rock in the wilderness,
by the brazen Serpent, by the paschall lamb, by the rites, and ceremonies, and
sacrifices of the law. Of his coming Jacob spoke in the blessing of Judah,
Genesis 49.10. and Balaam likewise in his prophecy of the great prosperity that
should come unto Israel, Number. 24.17. Of his incarnation, and birth of a virgin
Esaias prophesied, Esaias 7.14. Of his conception by the holy Ghost Daniel is
thought to have prophesied, Dan. 9.24. Of the place of his birth Micah
prophesied, Micah 5.2. Of his kingdom and government Esaias prophesied, Esaias
9.6.7. Of his preaching and office as he was a Prophet Esaias also prophesied,
Esaias 61.1.2.3. Of his infirmities and sorrows, and of his oblation and
sacrifice of himself as he was our Priest Esaias likewise prophesied, Es. 53.
Yea so full fraught with arguments touching Christ were both the books of
Moses, and the writings of the Prophets, especially of Esaias, that in this
respect it may be well said, as I think, Gal 3.24.
that the Law was a schoolmasters to bring us unto Christ. So that ye see
Christ might be known by the Law in the old Testament. But this knowledge of
Christ is compared by the Apostle Peter, unto a light, or candle that shines
in a dark place. 2 Pet. 1.19
An obscure knowledge it is, and such as in comparison of the knowledge of
Christ by the Gospel, is as darkness in comparison of light The second
knowledge then of Christ is by the Gospel of Christ in the new Testament,
where we see plainly that fulfilled which before was prophesied of Christ
Jesus. There we know not his person only, that he is the everlasting son of
the Father, that he is both God and man, that he is very God of very God,
begotten before all worlds, and that he is very man of the substance of his
mother, borne in the world; perfect God, and perfect man, subsisting of a
reasonable soul, and humane flesh: but there also we know that he came from
the bosom of his father for us, that he made himself of no reputation, and
took on him the form of a servant for us, that in infirmities, and sorrows,
and sufferings, and affections, and passions of the mind, and in all things he
was like unto us, sin only excepted, that he might be merciful unto us, that
he humbled himself, and became obedient unto the death, even the death of the
Cross for us, that he overcame the powers of death, and rose again, and
ascended into heaven for us, that he has paid the price for our sins, and
freed us from the bondage of sin, death, and the Devil, that he as our
Priest lives for ever, and sits at the right hand of his father to make
continual intercession for us, that he as our King continually protecteth, and
preserves us, that he as our Prophet by his word, the word of our salvation
teaches us, that in him we are accepted and beloved, that for him Gods
blessings are showred down upon us, that he is made of God unto us wisdom,
and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, that there is no
condemnation unto them that are in Christ Jesus, and that by faith in him, we
are made one with him, and he with us: all this and much more touching Christ
we know by the glorious light of the Gospel which has shined in our hearts. ^
Pet. 1.19.
And this is that knowledge which the Apostle here calls the excellent
knowledge of Christ Jesus. Excellent indeed above all other knowledge, and
excellent even as much as our life and salvation is worth. And this knowledge
of Christ is compared by the Apostle Peter unto the day star. An excellent
knowledge, and such as is so much more glorious then the knowledge of Christ by
the law, as is the light and brightness of the day star more glorious then
the light and brightness of a candle. The third knowledge of Christ is in
heaven, when we shall see him face to face, which is the most excellent
knowledge of Christ of all the rest. For then shall we see him as he is, then
shall we enjoy the continual fruition of his presence, then shall we see the
name written upon his thigh, The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; then shall
that knowledge which is now only in part be fully perfited. And this knowledge
of Christ is compared unto the Sun in her brightness, and is as much more
excellent then the second, as the second is then the first. Now the knowledge
of Christ Jesus of which the Apostle here speaks, is not this last, nor the
first knowledge of Christ, but the second, which he calls excellent, both in
it self, and in respect of his first knowledge of Christ. For he had before a
general and obscure dark knowledge of Christ by the books of Moses, and the
writings of the Apostles, being brought up at the feet of Gamaliel: but that
was nothing in respect of this: this was the excellent knowledge, and for this
excellent knowledge sake he counted both his former knowledge, and all things
else to be but loss and dunge.

Now how all things are to be judged loss and dunge for the excellent
knowledge sake of Christ Jesus, that is in the next place to be considered.
Birth, kindred, nobility, wealth, learning, knowledge, holiness of life,
righteousness, temperance, sobriety, and the like; even all outward things, and
all our works whatsoever, are all to be judged loss and dunge for the
excellent knowledge sake of Christ Jesus. What then? Must we renounce birth,
kindred, nobility, and the like? Must we make away our wealth and riches, and
vow a voluntary poverty? Must we remit all care of learning and knowledge,
and in stead thereof embrace ignorance? Must we leave of to follow after
holiness of life, righteousness, temperance, sobriety, and the like? Must we
cease from good works, if we will be partakers of the excellent knowledge of
Christ Jesus? No such matter. Paul needed not to renounce his tribe, his
kindred, his noble parentage, neither was he to grow dissolute, or negligent in
the observation of the commandments and ordinances of the law, that he might
come to the knowledge of Christ. His circumcision was commanded, his tribe and
kindred were worthy prerogatives, and his works done according to the law were
very commendable. He was not therefore simply to renounce, or clearly to
abjure all those things, but only to renounce all confidence in these things,
if he would be a Christian. Right so it is to be said generally. Is any man
noble and great by birth and parentage? So were many godly kings of Israel and
Judah. But therein we may not secure our selves, as if therefore we needed to
fear no evil. Is any man rich and wealthy? So was Abraham, and Lot: but if
riches increase, let no man set his heart upon them, let no man trust in
uncertain riches. Is any man holy, righteous, which fears God, and abounds
in every good work? So were the Saints of God, therefore renowned in the holy
scriptures: and let him that is such be such still. He that is holy let him be
holy still, and he that is righteous let him be righteous still. Yea let every
man labor and strive still more and more to increase in all knowledge and
understanding in every good thing, and in every good work. But let no man
rejoice, or put any confidence of his salvation in these things, but as it is
written, He that rejoices let him rejoice in the Lord. How then are all these
outward things to be judged loss and dunge? Certainly not in respect of the
substance of the things, or of the good works which are done: For the things
such as we have spoken of, as honor, riches, wisdom, learning, knowledge, and
the like are the good gifts and blessings of the Lord thankfully to be enjoyed
and used to his glory: and likewise good works are commanded, and rewarded by
God, and are well-pleasing in his sight, as the Apostle witnesses where he
says, Heb. 13.16.
To do good and to distribute forget not; for with such sacrifice God is
pleased. It is not then in respect of the substance of these outward things,
that they are to be judged to be loss and dunge: but they are to be judged
loss and dung in respect of any confidence to be reposed in them: for better
it is that we wanted them, then that we should repose any trust or confidence
in them. For besides that they are as a staff of reed, on which if a man
lean it will break into shiuers, and hurt him, confidence in them does stay
us and hinder us from coming unto Christ, and reposing that confidence in him
which we ought to have in him. Which is plainly proved by that of the Apostle,
and that of our Savior which I mentioned the last day. For the Apostle makes
this the reason why the Jews submitted not themselves unto the righteousness
of God, because they went about to stablish their own righteousness. Romans
10.3.
They (says he) being ignorant of the righteousness of God, and going about to
stablish their own righteousness, submitted not themselves to the
righteousness of God. What was the cause of their blindness and ignorance of
the righteousness of God? What was the cause why they submitted not themselves
unto the righteousness of God? Here it was, they went about to stablish their
own righteousness: they had a great conceit of their own works done
according to the Law; they thought themselves righteous by them, and therefore
they cared not for coming unto Christ, nor sought not after the righteousness
of God in him. And this was the very cause why our Savior told the Pharisees,
that the Publicans, and the harlots should go before them into the kingdom of
God. The Pharisees had a proud conceit, Mat 21.31.
and a very great confidence in their own righteousness; insomuch that they
justified themselves above all other men. And therefore our Savior hereby gives
them to understand that they are farther from the kingdom of God then the
greatest sinners that are; because there is more hope of the greatest sinners
that are that they will sooner come to Christ, and sooner to repentance than
those that have such a conceit of their works, and such a confidence in their
own righteousness by the works of the law. Such an enemy unto Christ is
confidence in any outward thing without Christ. It stays us from coming unto
Christ, from the knowledge of Christ, and from confidence in Christ Jesus: for
if we secure our selves, and rest our selves in our selves we come not unto
Christ, coming not unto him we know him not, knowing him not we repose not the
confidence of our salvation in him. In respect therefore of any confidence to
be reposed in them, we must judge them loss and dunge. This quality of
confidence in them, of trust to be made righteous by them is that that the
Apostle disputes against, and that that we must quite renounce. Touching all
outward things therefore without Christ whatsoever I say unto you, set not your
hearts upon them, secure not your selves in them, set not your affections upon
them, repose no confidence in them. Wealth, honor, strength, wisdom,
knowledge, righteousness, and holiness are the good gifts and blessings of
the Lord; enjoy them thankfully, and use them to the honor and glory of our
God: but be not puffed up with any conceit of merit or confidence in these
things. For ho^soeuer they might happily seem sometimes vantage vnt^ you, yet
if ye become to the true knowledge of Christ Jesus ye must judge them to be
loss and dunge in respect of any confidence to be reposed in them. Abound then
in every goo^ work to the glory of almighty God, but repose no confidenc^ of
your salvation at all in any good that ye do, but only in Christ Jesus.

2. They are to be judged loss and dunge in comparison of the excellent
knowledge of Christ Jesus. For such is the excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus,
that to gain that we should sell all that ever we have, nay if we loose all
that ever we have we should not care if we gain that. The man ye know that is
tossed and turmoyled with the troublesome storms of the seas, when it comes to
that that either he must wrack and never come unto the haven, or else he must
disburden his ship of her lading, he quickly makes his choice, and casts all
into the sea, and counts all but loss in comparison of his life. So we see in
Paul's dangerous voyage toward Rome, when he and they that were with him were
tossed with an exceeding tempest, Act. 27.18.19.
they lightened the ship, and cast out with their own hands the tackling of the
ship, choosing rather to lose all their wares, and all that was in the ship,
then to lose their lives. So we in comparison of this excellent knowledge of
Christ Jesus, whom to know is life everlasting, must account of nothing that we
have in the world, but in each comparison of all other things with this we must
count them all but loss in comparison of this; yea we must make this account
that it is better for us utterly to be despoiled and deprived of all things,
then of this one thing, the knowledge of Christ Jesus. Nay we must go farther
then the mariner or merchant: for he casts out his wares, because he had
rather live though poorly, then perish with his wares in the waters: but he is
so far from contemning his wares or his wealth* that when he comes unto the
haven he sorrows for his wealth perished in the waters. But we must contemn
all other things, and count them not only as loss, but as dung, and most vile
and abject in comparison of the excellent knowledge of Christ; and when we
have lost all things if ^ee have this excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus, we
^ust still so rejoice herein as that we make no other ^count of all other
things than trash and naught. Albe^ therefore it be not always needful quite
and utterly to ^spossesse our selves of all outward things that we may come ^o
the excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus, yet must we be ^us affected both
toward the one and the other, as that we ^oth more care for this than for all
things else, and con^emne and count all things else but dunge in comparison ^f
this.

Which account that we may the rather make, let us in the ^hird place see what
the excellency, and the vantage is of the ^nowledge of Christ Jesus. Pro.
31.29.
Many daughters have done vertu^^y, says Solomon describing the conditions of
a virtuous and godly woman, but thou surmountest them all. So I say of
^nowledge, many knowledges of many things are most ex^ellent, and of rare
commendation, and to be sought after more than the most precious things else
whatsoever: but the knowledge of Christ Jesus far excels, and far
surmoun^eth them all. This our Savior Christ plainly witnesses, where he
says unto his Disciples, Verily I say unto you, Mat. 13.17
that ma^y Prophets and righteous men have desired to see those things which
ye see, and have not seen them, and to hear those things which ye hear and
have not heard them. The Prophets and other holy men of God had seen long
before in the spirit, and by faith those things which the Disciples then saw:
for it is said that Abraham saw Christ his day and rejoiced; Joh. 8.56.
he saw it a far of with the eyes of faith, and rejoiced. But our Savior
far prefers the sight and hearing of him which now his Disciples had after
his coming in the flesh, before that which the Prophets and other holy men of
God had of him before his coming in the flesh. Which plainly shows that the
knowledge of Christ Jesus by the light of the glorious Gospel far excels
that knowledge in the old Testament, and much more all knowledge else
whatsoever. Much to the same purpose is that testimony of our Savior touching
John Baptist, where he makes him the greatest of them that went before him,
Mat. 11.11
but the least in the kingdom of heaven to (...) greater then he was. Whereas
the meaning is, that the preaching of John Baptist was much better and clearer
tha^ the preaching of the Prophets, because he pointed at the lamb of God now
ready to be offered up as a sacrifice forth^ sins of the whole world: and yet
the preaching and message o^ every Minister in the new Testament is better and
clearer the^ the preaching and message of John Baptist, because that by their
message and ministry the knowledge of Jesus Christ (...) better and more
clearly opened. Yea, and that which ye^ more commends the excellency of the
knowledge o^ Christ Jesus, is that the Angels themselves desire to behold this
mystery of man's redemption and salvation by Christ Jesus, which yet they see
not but we see into by the knowledge of Christ Jesus revealed in his glorious
Gospel. What shall I speak of those manifold titles given hereunto in the new
Testament, as that it is called the mystery of God, the mystery of the
kingdom of God, the mystery of Christ, the mystery of God the Father and of
Christ, the mystery kept secret from the beginning of the world etc. All which
do wonderfully commend the excellency of this knowledge, being made known
unto none, but unto whom the Father does reveal it by his spirit: For no man
knows the Son but the Father, and he to whom the Father does reveal him by
his spirit. Mat. 11.27
I will not farther stand to amplify the excellency of this knowledge, either
by speaking of that ignorance which is opposite unto this knowledge, or by
comparing of this knowledge with any other knowledge whatsoever. Through the
ignorance of this knowledge of Christ Jesus are the Gentiles strangers from the
life of God. Ephesians. 4.18.
Excellent then is this knowledge whereby we live in God, and God in us.
Again, the knowledge of God in the old Testament in comparison of this
knowledge by the Gospel in the new Testament is but as darkness in comparison
of the light. For as Moses showed the law, the Jews eyes were not lightened but
blinded, but by the light of the Gospel all darkness is driven from our eyes,
as the Apostle shows. 2 Cor. 3.
What then is any knowledge that it should be compared with the excellent
knowledge of Christ Jesus? Not therefore to compare it with any, as being
incomparably beyond all, even in it self ye see it is most excellent, desired
of the Prophets and holy Patriarchs, desired of the holy Angels, and revealed
unto none but unto whom the Father does reveal it by his holy spirit. But most
excellent it is to be judged by us in respect of that vantage which it is unto
us.

What is then the vantage of the knowledge of Christ Jesus unto us? Surely even
as much as our life and salvation is worth. For this is eternal life, says
our Savior in his prayer unto his Father, to know thee to be the only very
God, Ioh. 17.5.
and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. Where the meaning is, that the knowledge
of Christ Jesus enters us into the possession of eternal life. For this we
must know that howsoever we have a name that we live, yet indeed in respect of
the life of God we are dead, until such time as God that commanded the light
to shine out of darkness shine in our hearts, and bring us by the light of the
glorious Gospel unto the knowledge of Christ Jesus: and then when we come unto
the knowledge of Christ Jesus by the illumination of Gods spirit, then we take
entrance of the possession of eternal life. Which I take it our Savior Christ
also signifies where he says, Verily, verily I say unto you, the hour shall
come, and now is, Joh. 5.25.
when the dead shall hear the voice of the son of God, and they that hear
it shall live. For when he says, the dead shall hear the voice of the son
of God, he means that before such time as we hear the voice of the son of
God, whereby we come unto the true knowledge of him, we are dead spiritually,
we live not the life of God. And again when he says, that they that hear it
shall live, his meaning is that then only we begin to live the life of God,
and to take possession of eternal life when we hear his voice, and thereby
come to the true knowledge of him. A notable vantage that this knowledge of
Christ Jesus brings unto us. But what knowledge of Christ Jesus is it that is
this advantage unto us? Not the knowledge of his person only, but what he is
made of God unto us, which I called before the second knowledge of Christ. To
know that he was borne, lived and died for us, to know that he is our wisdom,
and righteousness, our sanctification and redemption, to kno^ the virtue of
his death and resurrection, to know that he is the reconciliation for our
sins, that he is the salvation of our souls, that by him, and for him we
have and receive all the good blessings of God, whether belonging to this life,
on that that is to come, to know that in him are hid all the treasures of
wisdom, and knowledge, and salvation, so that having him we have all riches,
and wanting him, whatsoever riches we seem to have, we have nothing, thus to
know him is a vantage unto us: for if we thus know him, we believe in him, we
love, and we keep his commandments; and herein is life, and without this is
nothing else but death.

Is this then the excellency, and is this the vantage of the knowledge of
Christ Jesus? what diligence should this stir us up unto after the means
whereby we may come unto this knowledge of Jesus Christ? what reverence and
attention should it work in us when the mystery of this knowledge is opened
unto us by the ministry of his servants? And yet behold how where the light
of this knowledge shines most clearly, men do yet love darkness better than
light? It may be spoken to the shame of this whole Town, it may be spoken to
the shame of a great many of this congregation, that they love darkness better
than light, that they had rather lie drowned in the ignorance of Christ Jesus,
than be taught in the knowledge of Christ Jesus; for what frequenting is there
by them of those places where they should be taught in this knowledge? Three or
four Sermons may commonly be heard weekly. Of so many thousands as are in
this Town, how many hundreths, nay how many scores come to hear them weekly,
nay come to hear any of them weekly? If it should be said as it was to
Abraham at the destruction of Sodom, if there be fifty religious men within
the City that hearken unto my voice, and thirst after the word of their
Salvation as the Heart thirsts after the Brooks, if 45, if 30, if 20, if 10, I
will spare it and remove from it my sore plagues of famine, and sickness,
would we not think it a hard matter if so many should not be found in this
City, which might well be as Goshen, where there should be light though
darkness were round about it? I say not that so many cannot be found: for I
do not know so much. But this I say, that too few such there are to be found
amongst us. In this congregation what slacknesse, and negligence is therein a
great many either of frequenting other places, or this? Beloved the holy
Patriarchs, and the Prophets desired that knowledge of Jesus Christ, which now
ye may have: and care ye not for it? yea the Angels do even yet desire to
look into it, and will ye not? what is the matter? does this word of your
salvation distaste in your mouths? do ye not relish it? It is a token that
ye are sick; and ye had need to look unto it: for the sickness is unto
death, even unto the second death: Have ye surfeited of it, and had too much of
it? quaisie stomachs, and quickly surcharged. Soon we have too much of that
whereof we can never have enough. When our Savior had told the woman of
Samaria, that whosoever should drink of the water that he gave him, should
never be more a thirst; sir (says she) give me of the water that I may not
thirst nor come hither to draw. Joh. 4.14.15.
Beloved we have told you that the word which we bring unto you is the word of
life, the word of your Salvation, the word of your reconciliation: and yet what
slacknesse and negligence is there in coming to the hearing of this word? few
there are that come to beg this heavenly Manna, few that come to take it when
we reach it out unto them. Beloved, again we tell you, that the knowledge of
Christ Jesus, wherein our hearts desire is to instruct you, is your entrance
into the possession of eternal life and Salvation, it is as much as your life
and Salvation is worth: will you live the life of God in this life and for ever
in the life to come? come then, and learn to know Christ Jesus: come and
learn to know what great things he has done for you, and what duty again
he does require of you. If you be rich in this knowledge ye are rich indeed; if
ye be instructed in this knowledge, ye are learned indeed; if ye be mighty in
this knowledge, ye are mighty indeed: If ye have this, ye want nothing; if ye
want this, ye have nothing. O ye that will be rich and wealthy, seek after
these riches; ye that will be wise and learned, seek after this learning; ye
that will be great and mighty, seek to be mighty in this knowledge.
Whatsoever other wealth and riches ye have, whatsoever other wisdom or
learning, whatsoever other might or power, all things are but loss and dung in
comparison of the excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus: know him, and know all
things; know not him, and know nothing. As therefore ye love your salvation in
Christ Jesus, so labor to come unto, and to grow up in the knowledge of Christ
Jesus. To know him is life eternal, not to know him is death eternal. Why
will ye die, when by the power of him ye may live? If ye know not, ye shall
die, but know and live. One word of that which is added.

Of Christ Jesus my Lord.] What does the Apostle mean to call Jesus Christ his
Lord? Was he his Lord alone? Was he not their Lord also to whom he wrote? Why
does he not say of Jesus Christ our Lord? If he had lived now, and spoken
thus, he should have had many such questions as these, and he should have
been sure of many sharp censures for thus appropriating this title of Jesus
Christ the Lord unto himself. But thus he spoke in the vehemency of his
affection. And if he had now lived, would he have spoken otherwise? No,
though he had been called Puritan for his pains. I observe it the rather, to
note what a strange humor we are now grown unto: for if any man shall now
say; Forsake me not O Lord my God, Be merciful unto me O Lord my God, I
thank my God for his mercies, I think all things loss for the excellent
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, is he not nicked in the head by and by, and
noted for such a man? Yea now it is almost come to pass that let a man be
religious, devout in prayer, reverent in hearing the word, careful to meditate
thereon afterward, one that fears an oath, one that cannot patiently hear
corrupt communication, one that will not run into the same excess with
others, a Puritan I warrant him. A pitiful case, that a man speaking as the
holy Ghost speaks, and doing as all men are commanded to do, should be
branded with an odd and odious name. I wish that we would all of us both frame
our speeches as the Holy Ghost has taught us, and our actions as the Holy
Ghost has commanded us more than we do. If any shall seem unto himself pure
and holy, the Lord shall judge him wicked and impure. But let every one of us
study to be pure and holy in all our words, and in all our works: and let
every one of us labor by all means to have this testimony sealed unto our
souls that Jesus Christ is our Lord.

O Lord our God we humbly thank thee for that knowledge of thy Son which thou
have already vouchsafed unto us. Vouchsafe we beseech thee to increase in us
this knowledge daily more and more. Open our dime eyes we beseech thee, that we
may daily more and more see the excellency, and the vantage of this knowledge,
that so we may daily more and more grow up in all love thereof: Purge us we
beseech thee of all such affections as may be any hindrances hereunto, that so
growing up daily more and more in thee, at length we may reign with thee in
the kingdom of thy son Christ Jesus for ever.

LECTVRE LV.
PHILIP. 3. Verse 9. And that I may be found in him, i. not having mine own
righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, etc.
NOw the Apostle goes on, beating still upon the same reason why he counts
all his works whatsoever and whenever done, and all outward things
whatsoever to be but loss and dung. I do judge them, says he, to be dung,
even contemptible and loathsome, being so far from being loath to lose them,
as that I despise and loath them: why? that I may win Christ, that is, that I
may have the fruition and the possession of Christ in this life by faith, and
that I may be found in him in that last and great day: how found in him? to
wit, not having mine own righteousness, not clothed with mine own
righteousness, which is of the Law, that is, by the observation and works of
the Law, but being clothed with that righteousness which is not through
works, but through the faith of Christ, even the righteousness which is of
God through faith, that is, which God does impute* unto me through faith in
Christ Jesus. So that ye see the Apostle still runs upon Christ, Christ,
Christ; for Christ, for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ, that he may
win Christ, that he may be found in Christ: he thinks all his works, all
things absolutely to be loss, and judges them to be dung. I judge them to be
dung. Here he plainly renounceth all confidence in all things without Christ
whatsoever, and plainly disclaimeth all vantage, all merit, all righteousness
by his works. That I may win Christ: Here is the cause why he disclaimes all
righteousness by his works, because otherwise he could not win Christ; for
he does it that he may win Christ, and may be found in him. This also is a
part of the cause why he disclaimes all righteousness by his works, because
otherwise he could not be found in Christ in that day. Why not? What is it to
be found in Christ? The Apostle shows that to be found in Christ, is to be
found not clothed with his own righteousness which is by the works of the
Law, but clothed with that righteousness which is Christ's, and only ours
through faith in Christ, even that righteousness which God does impute unto us
through faith in his name. So that he that will be found in Christ in that day,
must disclaim his own righteousness, and renounce it as dung and
rottenness, and must cleave only unto the righteousness of Christ Jesus,
which God does impute unto him through faith in him. The sum then of that
which the Apostle tells the Philippians in these words, is, that he now at this
present in the state wherein he now stands, does judge all things, even his
very best present works, to be so far from any part of his righteousness,
as that he judges them to be dung, even vile and contemptible, so that he
does disclaim all righteousness by them, that he may win Christ, that is,
that he may be more and more nearly incorporated into him, and possessed of
his righteousness by faith, and that he may be found in that last and great
day not in Moses, but in Christ, that is, not having his own righteousness
which is of the Law, as his garment to stand before the Lord withal, but
having that righteousness to be clothed with which is indeed Christ's, and his
through the faith of Christ, even that righteousness which God does impute
unto him through faith in Christ his name. This, I say, I take to be the sum
of that which the Apostle tells the Philippians in these words.

So that ye see here is first a disclaiming of his own righteousness by
works, in that he judges them to be dung: 2. A reason why he so judges
them, and so disclaimes them, that he may win Christ, and may be found in
him: thirdly, an explication what it is to be found in Christ, by a distinction
of righteousness, into his own, and Christ's, where he says, not having mine
own, etc. Now let us see what observations may hence be gathered.

First, it is not unworthy our noting, that the Apostle goes over and over
these points so often, as if he could never satisfy himself with disclaiming
all righteousness by any works, and proclaiming Christ alone to be all his
righteousness. In the former verse he disclaimeth all his works done before
his conversion, as no vantage, but loss unto him, and makes Christ all his
vantage either for righteousness or salvation. In this verse three several
times he disclaimeth all his works generally, whether done before or after his
conversion, as touching any righteousness by them; and again so many times
avouches in effect Christ Jesus alone to be all his righteousness. Whence I
observe both the difficulty, and the necessity of enforcing these points. A
difficult and hard matter it is when we have done any thing well, when we have
walked faithfully in our calling, when we have releiued the oppressed, judged
the father-lesse, defended the widow, when we have humbled our selves in
prayer, chastened our selves with fasting, absteined from the delights of the
world, or pleasures of the flesh etc. a difficult and hard matter, I say, it is
herein not to please our selves, not somewhat to be puffed up with these
things, not to have some conceit of merit and righteousness by these things. A
difficult matter to persuade us that these things are no vantage unto us unto
justification or salvation. A difficult matter to persuade us that these things
are but loss and dung, things vile and contemptible. And yet necessary it is
that we be thus persuaded of these and the like things as touching any
confidence of our righteousness or salvation by them, and that we count Christ
alone all our righteousness, and the horn of our salvation. And therefore the
Apostle knowing both the difficulty, and yet the necessity of persuading
this, beats upon it twice, thrice, often, that he did thus and thus, and
therefore the Philippians should do so.

This should teach us with great diligence to observe and mark the things that
are so much and so often beaten upon, as things which either we are dull to
comprehend, or unwilling to yield unto, and yet things which are as most
certain for their truth, so most necessary for their use: for albeit all the
things in the whole book of God be of such importance as that they are most
worthy of our due meditation and diligent observation, as able to make us wise
unto salvation, yet when things are so much urged, and so often beaten upon, we
are to think that it is not without great cause that they are so pressed, and
therefore that they are with greater attention and heedfulnesse to be marked by
us. As therefore we are with all diligence to observe whatsoever is written,
because all things are written for our learning, so let us with all diligence
observe the things so often urged. It may be that they are so often urged
because of our dullness to comprehend them, it may be because of our
unwillingness to yield unto them, it may be because of the unfeigned assent
that we should yield unto the truth of them, it may be because of the
necessary use that there is of them. Surely they are not so much urged without
great and urgent cause. And so for these points here beaten upon, let us
assure our selves both that it is most true that our works are no part of our
righteousness, but Christ our whole righteousness, and that it necessarily
behooves us to be thoroughly persuaded thereof. How good soever therefore our
works seem unto us, and how difficult soever it be to persuade us that our
very best works are to be judged but loss and dung, yet seeing the Apostle so
often tells us that he judged so of his best works, let there be the same mind
in us that was in him, and let us judge so to.

2. In that the Apostle says, and do judge them to be dunge, I note the
Apostles present judgment of his present works. He now at this present in the
state wherein he now stands does judge all things even his very best present
works to be so far from being any part of his righteousness, as that he
judges them to be dung, even vile and contemptible, so full of pollution and
uncleanness as that there is no reckoning to be made of them in respect of any
righteousness by them, but rather they are to be contemned as uncleanness.
Whence I observe that our very best works, such as are wrought after our
knowledge of Christ Jesus, and faith in his name, are no part of that
righteousness whereby we are accounted righteous before God. Great difference
I know there is between the works which go before, and the works which
follow after faith. For those are evil, these are good works, those proceed
from an impure heart, these from an heart purified by faith, those cannot
please God, these are pleasing and acceptable unto God, those are in justice
rewarded with death, these are in mercy rewarded with life, those, even the
very best of them have the nature of sin, and are wholly unholy, these are in
part holy, and may truly be called our inherent righteousness. But for any
part in that righteousness whereby we are made righteous before God even these
works which are the fruits of faith, they have no part at all in it. They
cannot hide or put away our sins, they cannot endure the severity of Gods
judgment: here they must give place, here they are to be judged loss and
dung. The reason then why our very best works are no part of our
righteousness before God is, because that in every such view and examination
of them they are to be judged loss, and even dung. So the Apostle counted such
works as he did even then when he wrote these things: and therefore much more
are we to make the same account of whatsoever good works we do after that our
hearts be purified by faith in Christ Jesus.

The exception which is taken against this doctrine from this place by some is
this, they say the Apostle does not here speak of such works as he did after
he believed, but only of such works as he did before he believed, before his
conversion unto Christ; and therefore that hence nothing can be gathered
against justification by works done after faith in Christ Jesus. But how
peruersly they falsify the meaning of the Apostle your selves may easily judge
by that which already has been spoken. For the Apostle having spoken in the
former verse of such works as he did before he believed, affirming of them
that howsoever they seemed vantage unto him before his conversion unto Christ,
yet afterward he counted them no vantage, but loss for Christ his sake; does
in this verse speak not only of them, but of all his works generally
whatsoever and whenever done, saying, yea doubtless I think all things but
loss etc. It cannot be denied, but that he spoke in the former verse of such
works as he did before he believed. And when he adds unto that this general
term, yea doubtless I think all things but loss, does he speak only of such
works as he did before? Nay having spoken before of works only done before
faith, in this general tearm^ he includes all works both done before and
after faith, and judges them all to be but loss and dung. Again, as he said
before that when once he came to the knowledge of Christ Jesus he counted those
things loss which before seemed vantage unto him; so now he says in the
present that he does think all things but loss, that he does judge all
things to be dung. Which cannot otherwise be meant then of his present opinion
and judgment touching such works as now presently he did. Neither can it be
said that is his present judgment indeed, but of such works only as he did
before he believed. For it is, as himself says, his present judgment as of
such works, so of all works generally, the general term being therefore
added to comprise not only those which he had spoken of before, but all
others also. For reply unto which answer they cry out upon us for blasphemy,
and a^ke question upon question to make some show that they justly charge us
with blasphemy. For whereas we say that good works done after faith are here
meant by the Apostle, and are judged by him to be but loss and dung, they ask
whether we call the fruits of the spirit dung? whether Paul gloried of dung
when he said, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, 2 Timothy 4.
I have kept the faith; from henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness which the just judge shall give me in that day? What crown of
righteousness is due unto dung? what just judge will vouchsafe to give a
crown unto dung? what thanks we owe unto God for creating us in Christ Jesus
unto good works if they be nothing else but dung? And for conclusion they say
that if the good works of the faithful be but loss and dung, then are not
good works to be done or liked, but to be disliked and neglected. Thus they
triumph in their iuglings, and make a show as if all they spoke were Gospel,
and whosoever said otherwise did nothing else but blaspheme. But will ye see
how they deceive the world with a vain show of words wherein there is no
substance. All this fair flourish which they make is quickly beaten down by
that one distinction whereof I have often told you, and whereof they are not
ignorant. In good works therefore we must understand that there are 2. things
to be respected; the one their substance, the other their quality. The
substance of the work I call the action it self, is judging the fatherless,
relieuing the oppressed, defending the widow, feeding the hungry, and the
like. The quality of the work I call the confidence which men have to be made
righteous before God, and to be saved by such works. Now these works I say
according to their substance are good, as to judge the fatherless, to relieve
the oppressed, to defend the widow, to feed the hungry and the like, are good
works, holy works, works commanded by God, and works rewarded by him. But
in respect of any confidence to be justified before God by them or the like, or
to be saved by them, they are to be judged but loss and dung, because, as it
is written, he that rejoices must rejoice in the Lord, which being so, the
answer to their demands is as possible, as they think it impossible, i. most
easy.

1. Therefore where they ask, whether we call the fruits of the spirit dung?
we answer, no. But we say that those good works which according to the
substance of the action are the fruits of the spirit are in respect of any
merit, or confidence to be reposed in them of righteousness or salvation by
them to be judged loss and dung. Secondly, where they ask whether Paul
gloried of dung, when he said, I have fought a good fight etc. we answer no.
He glories in his faithfulness and constancy in the work of his ministry,
not as putting any confidence of his righteousness or salvation in them: (for
so they should be but dung) but because he knew that his labor should not be
in vain in the Lord. Thirdly, where they ask, what crown of righteousness
is due unto dung? we answer, none: for the crown of righteousness is due
unto our good works, not as they are from us, but as they are the work of
Gods spirit in us, neither so for any merit in them, but only for his promise
sake, who both works in us, and crowns his one works in us. Fourthly,
where they ask, what just judge will vouchsafe to give a crown unto dung? we
answer, none will do it: But the most righteous judge, the Lord of heaven and
earth, because he is righteous and keeps promise for ever, gives a crown
unto our good works, not as they are dung, not as they are poisoned tempered
with that quality of confidence in them, but as they are the work of his
spirit in us. 5. Where they ask, what thanks we owe unto God for creating us
unto good works, if they be nothing else but dung? we answer that it is their
shameful abusing of the world to say that we judge the^ to be nothing else but
dung. In respect of that quality we say that they are to be judged loss and
dung, but in respect of their substance we say that they are good, and that we
are to glorify God by walking in such good works as he has ordained us to
walk in. Lastly, where they say, that if the good works of the faithful be
but loss and dung, then are not good works to be done or liked, but to be
disliked and neglected, we say the same. But who are they that say that the
good works of the faithful are nothing else but loss and dung? Because we do
not inuest them into the glory of Christ Jesus, because we do not make them
any part of our righteousness before God, because we stand not upon any merit
of salvation by them, do we therefore say that they are nothing else but loss
and dung? Thus indeed they bear the world in hand, and thus they lead captive
many poor and ignorant souls into many grievous and noisome errors. But mark
men and brethren what it is that we say: we say that good works in respect of
the substance of the action are good works, a sweet smelling odor, a sacrifice
acceptable and pleasing unto God, and such as God has ordained us to walk in
unto life and salvation; only in respect of any merit or confidence of
righteousness or salvation we say they are to be judged but loss and dung.
See then and judge between us and them, whether we say simply that they are
but loss and dung. These are they that with fained words make merchandise of
your souls, whose judgment long agone is not far of, and whose damnation
sleeps not. By this judge of the rest, and as they deserve in this, so let
them be credited in the rest. By the circumstance of the place ye see the
necessary collection of the Doctrine delivered, and how the gaine-sayers do
falsify the meaning of the Apostle.

Let this then serve to instruct us in the true use of good works. They are
the way which God has ordained that we should walk in to the glory of his
name, and to the salvation of our own souls: as both that exhortation of our
Savior proves, where it is said, Matt. 5.16.
let your light so shine before men that they may see your good works, and
glorify your father which is in heaven; and likewise that saying of the
Apostle, where he says, that we are the workeman-ship of God created unto good
works, ^ph. 2.10.
which he has ordained that we should walk in them. But they are no part of
that righteousness whereby we are made righteous before God. 1 Cor. 1.30 1
Ioh. 1.7.
For Christ alone it is that is made of God unto us wisdom, and
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption: it is the blood of Christ Jesus
that cleanses us from all sin. Esa. 64 6.
Our very best works, and all our righteousness (as the Prophet witnesses)
is but as filthy clouts: and touching them, when we have done all that we can,
we must say, as our Savior wills us, we are unprofitable servants; Luke
17.10.
we have done that which was our duty to do. Heb. 12.14.
Let us therefore walk before the Lord in holiness and in righteousness all
the days of our life. For without holiness of life no man shall see the Lord.
But let no man be puffed up with any conceit of his own righteousness by his
holiness: for if he justify himself, his own mouth shall condemn him, Job
9 20.
and if he say that he is perfect, the Lord shall judge him wicked. Our good
works are the fruits of our faith, and the effects of our justification by
faith, declaring and testifying that we are justified before God. Let us
therefore abound in every good work that we may have the testimony of our
faith, and of our justification sealed up unto our souls. But let us not so
please our selves in all the good that we do as that we count our selves
righteous thereby: Jam 3.2.2.10.
for in many things we sin all: and he that fails in one point of the law,
he is guilty of all. If we will be righteous before God, we must lay away all
Pharisaicall conceit of our own righteousness by works, and in stead thereof
we must take up the prayer of the poor Publican, Luk 18.13.
and cry, O God be merciful unto me a sinner. And of this let us assure our
selves that the more holy, and the better that any man is, the more readily he
confesses his sins unto the Lord, and acknowledges his unrighteousness in his
sight. It is most damnable pride that makes us rush into part with Christ, and
to part stakes with him. Let us therefore with the Apostle make Christ all our
righteousness, and account our own righteousness which is by works to be but
loss and dung, and no vantage at all either unto justification, or salvation.

Thirdly, in that the Appostle says, that he judges them to be dung that he
may win Christ: I note the reason why he judges all things to be dung, which
is, that he might win Christ, as if he should say, that unless he judged all
things to be dung, he could not win Christ, he could not be thoroughly
engraffed into Christ to be partaker of his righteousness. Whence I observe
that either we must disclaim all righteousness by any works of our own, or
else we cannot be pertakers of the righteousness of Christ Jesus, either we
must judge our own works whatsoever to be loss and dung, or else we cannot
win Christ. This also the Apostle shows in another place, where he says,
that unto him that works not, Romans 4.5.
but believes in him that justifies the ungodly his faith is counted for his
righteousness: to him that works not.i. to him that depends not on his
works, to him that stands not upon the merits of his works, to him that
make not his works his righteousness, to him his faith is counted for
righteousness. But to him that works, the wages is not counted by favor,
but by debt: to him that works, that is to him that depends on his works,
that stands upon the merit of his works, and thinks to be justified by
them, his wages is not counted by favor, but by debt, and is not justified by
grace through faith. Who then are justified by faith? even they that disclaim
righteousness by works. And who are they that are not justified by grace
through faith? even they that stand upon their righteousness by their works.
Will thou be pertaker of Christ his righteousness by faith? thou must
disclaim all righteousness by thy works. Will thou stand upon thy
righteousness by thy works? thou can not be pertaker of the righteousness
of Christ by faith: For there is no communion or fellowship betwixt them, but
as the Apostle says of the election of the Jews, so I say of our
justification by the righteousness of Christ Jesus: if we be pertakers of
Christ his righteousness, if we be justified by grace, Romans 11.6.
then not of works, or else were grace no more grace; but if of works, it is
no more grace, or else were work no more work. We must therefore disclaim
all righteousness by works, if we will lay any claim unto righteousness by
Christ, we must judge all our works to be loss and dung if we will win
Christ.

Let this then teach us to beat down every thought and every imagination of
our hearts that exalts it self against God, and to bring into captivity
every thought unto the obedience of Christ. Let us not think of the best
works that we do above that is meet, neither let us bear our selves upon
them above that we ought. Let us be filled with the fruits of righteousness,
but let us not think them any part of our righ^eousnesse before God. If we
will be righteous before God, we must be clothed with Christ his
righteousness. We cannot lay any claim unto Christ his righteousness,
unless we will disclaim our own righteousness. Let us therefore humble our
selves before God, let us acknowledge our selves to be sinners, and the best
things that we do to be so full of pollutions and imperfections, that they
cannot possibly abide the trial of Gods judgment. And seeing we cannot win
Christ, and be partakers of his righteousness, unless we judge all things
without him to be but loss and dung, let us with the Apostle judge them to be
dung, that we may win Christ; let us disclaim all righteousness by them,
that we may be clad with the righteousness of Christ. So shall our
unrighteousness be hid, and our sins covered, and whatsoever imperfection is
in us, it shall not be imputed unto us.

Fourthly, in that he adds, and may be found in him, I note that another
branch of his reason why he judges all things, and so all his works to be
dung, is, that he might be found in Christ, that is, that when God shall come
to judge both the quick and the dead, and inquiry shall be made what every
man has done in his body, he may be found in Christ, not in Moses, not in the
flesh, not in any thing but in Christ. Whence I observe, that either we must
renounce all confidence in our own righteousness, and judge even our very
best works in that respect to be but loss and dung, or else w^ shall not be
found in Christ in that last and great day. For that which our Savior Christ
spoke in the days of his flesh unto his Disciples then present with him, has
now also his use to this our purpose. Mat. 16.24
If any man, says he, will follow me, let him forsake himself, and take up
his cross, and follow me. Let him forsake himself, Luk 14.33.
that is, let him forsake all that he has, as Luke expounds it, all outward
prerogatives touching the flesh. In which place he signifies, that he that
would be his disciple must put off all carnal affections, and renounce all
carnal confidence, and so rejoice in him alone, as that no cross, nor any
thing shall take his rejoicing from him. And even so, he that will be found in
Christ in that day, he must so rejoice in Christ alone, as that he have
confidence in nothing else, but judge them all to be loss and dung. Otherwise
as well might he be Christ his disciple, which did not forsake all, as he may
be found in Christ in that day, which does no^ judge all his works to be
loss and dung in respect of any righteousness by them.

Let this also be another motive unto us to disclaim all righteousness by our
works: for as there is no righteousness by faith unto him that claims
righteousness by his works, as before we heard; so is there no salvation in
that day unto him that reposeth any confidence of his righteousness in his
works. There is no condemnation, says the Apostle, Romans 8.1.
to them that are in Christ Jesus. Which as it is true in this life, that they
that are ingrafted into him by faith, are freed from the Law of sin, and of
death, and so of condemnation; so is it true that they that shall be found in
Christ Jesus in that day, shall be freed from the sentence of condemnation.
That therefore we may be found in him, and so freed from condemnation in that
day, let us with the Apostle judge even our best works ^o be but loss and
dung, and disclaim all righteousness by our works. And surely this has so
prevailed with many great maintainers of justification by works, that when
death has ^ummoned their judgment and appearance, they have dis^laimed all
their own works, and all righteousness by them, and with heart and voice
desired to be found in Christ in that ^ay. I should now show how we may be
found in Christ in that day.

O Lord our God, open our eyes we beseech thee, that we ^ay daily more and
more see and behold those infinite trea^ures of righteousness and salvation
which are laid up for us in ^hy Son Christ Jesus. As thou have vouchsafed to
make him unto us righteousness and salvation, so give us an heart to
ac^nowledge him our whole righteousness, and the horn of ^ur salvation, that
disclaiming all righteousness by any works ^f our own, we may daily more and
more grow up in thy ^onne, and in that last and great day may be found in him.

LECTVRE LVI.
PHILIP. 3. Verse 9. Not having mine own righteousness which is of the law,
but that which is through the faith of Christ, even the righteosnesse, etc.
NOw the Apostle goes forward, and having made this one branch of his reason
why he judged all his works generally to be dung, that he might he found in
Christ in that day, now he explicateth that phrase and manner of speech, and
shows what it is to be found in Christ in that day, which is, to be found not
having his own righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through
the faith of Christ, etc. Why then does the Apostle judge all things to be
dung? He does so, that he may be found in Christ in that day. Yea but what
needed him so to judge for this* Could he not be found in Christ in that day,
unless he should judge all things to be dung? No, he could not: for to be
found in Christ, is to be found not having his own righteousness which is of
the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, etc. If therefore he
would be found in Christ, he must put off all confidence in his own
righteousness, and judge it to be dung, and rejoice only i^ the
righteousness of Christ Jesus. Thus ye see the reason an^ the meaning of the
Apostles speech in general.

Now to open these words yet a little more particularly, ye^ see the Apostle
here speaks of two sorts of righteousness; the one his own, the other
Christ's. His own righteousness he calls that righteousness which is of the
Law, that i, which arises from the observation of the commandments and
ordinances of the Law, even from the performance of those things which God in
his holy Law requires. Christ's righteousness he calls that righteousness
which is through the faith of Christ, that is, that righteousness which being
properly inherent in Christ, is imputed unto him through faith in him, even the
righteousness which is of God through faith, that is, that righteousness
which God does impute unto him because he believes in him, and in him whom he
has sent, Christ Jesus. His own righteousness, which is commonly called man's
inherent righteousness, ye see he describes by the Law, that is, by the
observation of those things which God requires in his Law, not only
ceremonial, or judicial, but moral also: for so he said before, that he was
unrebukable before men touching the righteousness which is in the Law, that
is, which the whole Law required. Christ's righteousness, which is commonly
called man's imputed righteousness, ye see he describes by faith, which is
the instrument whereby we take hold of this righteousness, by Christ, in whom
alone this righteousness is inherent, and by God, who of his own mercy
imputes Christ his righteousness unto us through faith. This righteousness
he says is through the faith of Christ, therefore not ours, but as by faith
in Christ we take hold of it: through the faith of Christ therefore not by the
works of the Law; through the fait^ (...) Christ, therefore not inherent in us.
Again, this righteousness he says is of God through faith, therefore not of
the law through works: of God through faith, therefore the gift of God unto
him that believes in him that justifies the ungodly: of God through faith,
therefore not inherent in us, but only imputed unto us. Again, he says not
of this, that it is his, as he said of the other, but of this he says, that it
is through the faith of Christ, even of God through faith, therefore it is
another righteousness, the righteousness of Christ by his perfect obedience
unto the Law, even unto death, which being only inherent in him, God in mercy
imputes unto us through faith in Christ Jesus, whereby we lay hold on that
righteousness which he has fulfilled in us, and for us. Now then when the
Apostle signifies that he would be found in that day not having his own
righteousness, but Christ's, his meaning is not that he would be found in that
day without all holiness or righteousness of his own, but he would be
found not having his own righteousness, as to be judged by his own
righteousness: he would not be judged by his own righteousness, but he would
be clothed with Christ's righteousness to be judged by it. The sum then of
all in brief is this. It is as if the Apostle had thus said: I do now judge
all things, even all my works whatsoever, to be dung, that I may win Christ
by faith, to be partaker of his righteousness, and that I may be found in that
last and great day, when enquitie shall be made into every man's works, not in
Moses, b^t in Christ, that is, that I may be found not having mine o^ne
righteousness, which is by the observation of the commandments and ordinances
of the Law, a^ to be judged of the Lord by that righteousness, but that I may
be found in that righteousness which is in^eed only inherent in Christ, and
which God does impute unto me through faith in Christ Jesus, that my sins
being covered by his righteousness, I may be judged by it. This I take to be
the Apostles meaning in these words. Now let us see what observations may hence
be gathered for our use.

Not having, etc.] Where first I note the antithesis and opposition that is
between the righteousness of worke^ by the Law, and the righteousness of
Christ through faith: which two the Apostle does so carefully and diligently
sever the one from the other, as that thereby he plainly shows that there can
be no confusion or mixture of the one with the other. The like opposition
betwixt these two sorts of righteousness, and like separation of the one from
the other, our Apostle has in his epistle to the Romans. Where showing the
cause of the ruin of the Jews, Romans 10.3.
he says, that they being ignorant of the righteousness of God, and going
about to stablish their own righteousness, submitted not themselves unto the
righteousness of God. And afterward he describes out of Moses the
righteousness which is of the Law thus, that the man which does these things,
shall live thereby; and then he shows what the righteousness of faith is.
Gal. 2.16.
So likewise in his epistle to the Galathians, Know (says the Apostle) that a
man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus
Christ. 5.4.5.
And again, Whosoever are justified by the Law, ye are fallen from grace: For
we through the spirit wait for the hope of righteousness through says. Many
such like places more might be produced where these two sorts of righteousness
are so opposed the one unto the other, and so distinguished and severed the one
from the other, as that thence it is most plain that there is no communion or
fellowship of the one with the other.

Whence I observe, that if justification be by the righteousness of works,
then is it not by the righteousness of faith; and if it be by the
righteousness of faith, then is it not by the righteousness of works. Thus
also our Apostle upon the same ground reasons in his epistle to the Romans:
Romans 3.20.21.27.
for having in the third chapter plainly distinguished righteousness by the
works of the Law, and righteousness of God by the faith of Jesus Christ, and
opposed rejoicing in the one unto rejoicing in the other, in the next chapter
he takes up the example of Abraham the father of the faithful, and proving
that Abraham was justified by faith, and not by works, he begins his
disputation thus: If Abraham (says he) were justified by works, he has
wherein to rejoice, but not with God; he has wherein to rejoice, to wit, with
men, but not with God Which is in effect as if he should have said, If Abraham
were justified by works, then was he not justified by faith. Again, that
place in the eleventh chapter to the Romans is plain to this purpose, where it
is said, If it be of grace, Romans 11.6.
it is no more of works, or else were grace no more grace: but if it be of
works, it is no more grace, or else were work no more work. For albeit the
Apostles speech there be of the election of the Jews, and not of the matter of
justification, yet the Apostles reason being drawn from the nature of grace,
and works, it holds as well in the one as in the other, even generally: for
speak of election, speak of justification, speak of salvation, or the like,
still it holds; If it be of grace, it is no more of works, or el^e were
grace no more grace: but if it be of works, etc. For if it be of grace,
whether it be righteousness, or salvation, or whatsoever it be, it is given
freely: but if it be of works, then is i^ given not by favor or freely, but
by debt, the nature of grace and the nature of work enforcing either of them
so much. The reason why if our righteousness be of works, it is not of faith,
and if it be of faith, it is not of works, is because the one of these
excludes the other: Gal. 5.4.
for as the Apostle says, Whosoever are justified by the Law, ye are fallen
from grace. As if he^ should have said, Justification by the Law excludes
justification by grace. Romans 3 27.
And again the Apostle says, that our rejoicing is excluded by the Law of
faith. As if he should have said, we are justified by faith, and that excludes
all our rejoicing in any righteousness by our works. So that ye see plainly
that if our justification be by the righteousness of works, then is it not by
the righteousness of faith; and if it be by the righteousness of faith, then
is it not by the righteousness of works.

This may serve to instruct and to arm us against their damnable error, that
tell us that we are justified and accounted righteous before God partly by
faith in Christ Jesus, and partly by our good works done here in the body. For
if they may be thus mixed, as they tell us, the one with the other, if our
righteousness before God may be both by faith, and by works, then why does
the Apostle so oppose the one against the other? why does he always so
carefully sever the one from the other? why would he be found in that day not
having his own righteousness, but only the righteousness which is through
the faith of Christ? why may not righteousness be counted both by favor, and
by debt? why may not righteousness be before God both by grace and by works?
why should our reioicing be excluded by the law of faith? For what else are all
these things but so many invincible arguments that we cannot be justified
before God both by faith and by works? Shifts I know they have whereby they
deceive themselves, and many other unstable souls, whom they lead into the
same pernicious errors with themselves. But let us hearken what the spirit
says; neither let us couple together the things which the spirit has sundred.
If the spirit have told us, that the wages is not counted both by favor and by
debt, that righteousness is not both by grace and by works, let it suffice us
that the spirit has said so, and only let us seek ^hether it be by grace or
by works that we are counted righteous before God.

Secondly, I note that the Apostle would be found in that last and great day
not having his own righteousness which is of the Law, that is, not having
that righteousness which is his by the performance of those things which the
Law required, as his cloak to be covered withal when he shall stand in the
judgment, and in the congregation of the righteous. For that the Apostle
expounds to be the righteousness of the Law, which is by performance of the
works of the Law, according as it is said, Romans 10.5 Romans 3.27.
The man that does these things shall live thereby. Whereupon it is also called
the Law of works, the Law which commands those works, by the observation
whereof a man is called righteous. The Apostle would be found not having this
righteousness which is by the works of the Law. What then? would he be found
in that day without any good works, without all holiness of life, without all
righteousness by the Law? Was it his desire to be found a sinner in that day?
Did he think it would be better for him if he should be found unrighteous,
then if he should be found righteous in that day? No such matter. Nay when he
was now ready to be offered up upon the sacrifice and service of their faith
whom he had won unto the faith, when the time of his departing out of the
body was at hand, he rejoiced that he had fought a good fight, that he had
finished his course, that he had kept the faith. And when he labored in the
work of his ministry more abundantly then all the rest, he had respect unto
his rejoicing in the day of Christ, that he had not run in vain, nor
labored in vain. He knew that the sentence in that day would pass thus,
Ma^t. 25.34.35.36.37.38. etc.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you from
the foundations of the world: for I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, etc.
And again, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, etc. He knew that
his watchings, his fastings, his stripes, his imprisonments, his perils, his
labors, his care of all the Churches, should not be in vain in the Lord. He
desired therefore (no doubt) to be found in that day filled with the fruits of
righteousness, and abounding in every good work: he desired (no doubt) in
that day to hear that voice, Mat. 25.21
It is well done good servant and faithful: thou have been faithful in
little, I will make thee ruler ^uer much: enter into thy masters joy. How then
would he be found not having his own righteousness which is of the law? 1.
for righteousness by the ceremonial law he cared not at all for that, he
judged that simply to be but loss, to be but dung. 2. for righteousness by the
moral law, by the observation of the duties commanded in the first and second
table touching the love of God, and of his neighbor, he judged that also to be
dung in respect of any merit if he should be judged by it. He would therefore
be found in that day not having his own righteousness which is of the Law, even
of the law moral, as to be judged of the Lord by it, by the merit of it. He
would have righteousness, and holiness, and good works in that day, that in
the judgment he might receive reward according to them; but he would not have
them to be judged by them in that day, to offer them in that day unto Christ as
a due desert of his Masters joy, to receive his sentence for them in that day.

Having then before seen that we cannot be accounted righteous before God both
by faith, and by works, both by the righteousness of Christ, and by our own
righteousness; hence I observe that our own righteousness by works is no part
of that righteousness whereby we are accounted righteous before God. For if it
were, how should we desire with the Apostle to be found in the day of Christ
not having our own righteousness? An argument indeed impregnable, yet do
those evil workers make a show of answer hereunto. Rhemenses in hunc locum.
They say the Apostle in this place and elsewhere calls that a man's own
justice which he chalengeth by the worke^ of the law, or nature, without the
grace of Christ; and therefore nothing can hence be concluded against that
righteousness which is by works after grace. But what a shift this is rather
then an answer was showed the last day. For that by man's own righteousness he
means that righteousness which man chalengeth by such works as he spoke of
imediately before, themselves will gran^; and that he spoke before as of works
done before faith, and without the grace of Christ, verse. 7. so of all works
generally whatsoever, verse. 8. I showed both by the general term there used
which must needs comprehend more then he had spoken of before, and likewise by
that he says, that he does now at this present judge all things to be dung,
which cannot otherwise be meant then of his present judgment touching such
works as now presently he did. Again, why should not the Apostle by man's own
righteousness mean that whole righteousness which is in man by works
whenever done, whether before or after faith, whether without or with the
grace of Christ? Does that righteousness which is in us by works done after
faith by grace any way present us righteous before God, so that we should
desire to be found having it to be judged by it? Shall any thing that is
unclean enter into his presence? Or can any man bring a clean thing out of
filthiness? is there any man that being assisted, and prevented, and followed
with the grace of Gods spirit does good, and sins not? Is it not so with the
best man that lives under the cope of heaven, that if the Lord would dispute
with him he could not answer him one thing of a thousand? Is man's best
righteousness better then Esaias confesses of his and the rest of the Churches,
is it not as filthy clouts? Surely all his works whatsoever done in the body
of his flesh are so poluted with the contagion of the ^esh as that they are not
able to endure the severity of Gods judgment: but that he had need with the
Prophet David to ^ift up his voice, and to pray, Psa. 143.2.
Enter not into judgment with thy ^eruant O Lord, for in thy sight shall no
man living be justified. Is ^hen even that righteousness which is in us by
works done by grace after faith so full of imperfections, so full of
vnclean^esse by reason of the contagion of our flesh, as that we should desire
not to be judged by it? why then should not the Apostle by man's own
righteousness in this place mean that righteousness which is in us by works
done by grace after ^aith? The circumstance of the place proving it, and
nothing being able to be brought aginst it, it is to be concluded that by man^
own righteousness is here meant even that righteousness which is by works
after grace. See then that we should desire with the Apostle to be found in
the day of Christ not having our own righteousness, and seeing all our own
righteousness by any works whatsoever is so full of ^mperfection and
uncleanness by reason of the contagion of our flesh as that we should desire
not to be judged by it, hence I take it, it is clear that our own
righteousness is no part of that righteousness whereby we are accounted righteous
before God.

This may teach us how to desire to be found in that day having, or not having
our own righteousness, which is by our works. We are to desire to be found
in that day filled with the fruits of righteousness, and abounding in every
good work, full of holiness toward God, and righteousness toward men,
because then we shall receive the things which are donein our body according to
that we have done whether it be good or evil. The wicked and they that forgate
God, and would not walk in his ways, howsoever they cry unto the mountains
fall on us, and unto the rocks cover us, and hide us from the presence of him
that sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, yet shall the hand
of the Lord find them out, and as he shall find them he shall judge them; he
shall recompense them according to the wickedness of their ways, and they
shall be turned into hell. But if then we shall be found to have hated
iniquity, to have followed after peace, holiness, and righteousness, to have
had our conversation honest etc. The most righteous Judge both of heaven and
earth he will pass by our sins and iniquities, and in his great mercy
toward us he will reward us according to the good that we have done; not
respecting the merit of our works, but because he is merciful, and keeps
promise for ever, nor suffering our labor to be in vain in the Lord. We are
therefore to desire to be found in that day not without holiness of life, or
good-worke^, but having such righteousness of our own that in the judgment the
Lord in mercy may reward us according to it, and not according to our sins.
But we are to desire to be found in that day not having our own righteousness
to be judged by it, or to receive reward for it, or according to the merit and
worth of it. For albeit it shall be rewarded, yet shall not the reward be given
for it; and albeit the reward shall be given according to it, yet not for the
merit of the work, but only for his promise and mercies sake who accepts
that graciously which is his, and pardons that graciously which is amiss.
For all that ever we do, or all that ever we suffer is not worthy of that glory
which shall be showed unto us. But with the Prophet David we must turn our voice
unto the Lord, and say even of our best righteousness, If thou O Lord
straightly mark what is amiss, even in the best thing that we do, O Lord who
shall stand?

The; thing which I note is, that the Apostle would be found in that last and
great day having that righteousness which is through the faith of Christ etc.
he would be clothed in that day with Christ his righteousness imputed unto him
by God through faith, that he might be judged by it, and receive his reward
according to the merit of it. This righteousness is sometimes called the
righteousness of faith, because by faith in Christ we are made partakers of
this righteousness; sometime the righteousness of God, because it is the mere
gift of God, who does impute it unto us through faith in Christ; sometimes the
righteousness of Christ, because it is his, and only inherent in him. He
would be found in that day having this righteousness. Hence then I observe,
that the righteousness whereby we are accounted righteous before God is the
righteousness of Christ, or of faith, or of God, which soever ye will make it.
This also the Apostle has every where: Romans 3.24.25.
We are justified freely by grace through the redemption that is in Christ
Jesus, whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his
blood. Again, Gal. 2.16.3.11.
know that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of
Jesus Christ. Again, that no man is justified, says the Apostle, by the Law,
Ephesians. 2.8.9.
it is evident, for the just shall live by faith. And again, by grace are ye
saved through faith; and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God, not of
works, lest any man should boast himself. Yea every where almost the holy
Ghost witnesses that we are accounted righteous before God, not for our own
works or deserts, but only by grace through faith for the merit and obedience
of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus. This then is our righteousness before God,
that God through faith in Christ Jesus imputes not our sins unto us, but
imputes Christ his righteousness unto us, reckoning the righteousness of his
obedience unto the Law unto us, as if we had fulfilled the righteousness of
the Law in our flesh, and for the merits of his sufferings wiping all our
sins out of his sight and remembrance. So that Christ his righteousness
alone is our righteousness before God, which because God does impute unto us
freely by his grace through faith, therefore the Apostle says, it is God that
justifies. God then justifies, his grace only moves him, not any of our
works: Christ, and his righteousness is the righteousness whereby we are
justified, faith is the instrument whereby only we are made partakers of his
righteousness.

I know that there are dogs which bark against this truth, affirming that
the righteousness whereby we are justified, is not only imputed unto us, but
inherent in us. But this one place may serve to descrie this their madness. It
is of God imputed by him unto us, therefore not inherent in us. It is through
faith, therefore not inherent in us. It is through the faith of Christ,
therefore really inherent only in Christ. It is not our own, but only by
faith in Christ, therefore not really inherent in us. If they urge the Apostle
James his authority to prove that the righteousness whereby we are justified
is inherent in us, because he says that a man is justified by works: we
answer that the Apostle there speaks not of that righteousness whereby man
is made righteous before God, but only shows that by a man's works he is
known and declared to be justified by faith; so that the Apostle makes not
works in that place the causes, but only the fruits and effects of
justification. If they reply that it is a sufficient proof that we are
justified by works, because we are justified by faith which is a work; we
answer that justification is attributed to faith, because of Christ, and his
righteousness which it receives, not because it is a work of ours. For as it
is a work of ours, so it is not without some doubting, but is imperfect, as
also our knowledge, and love are, and so justification is not attributed unto
it, but only as it takes hold upon Christ Jesus, and his righteousness which
is our perfect righteousness. Whatsoever therefore they say, let us know that
the righteousness whereby we are accounted righteous before God is only
inherent in Christ Jesus, and is not ours but only by imputation, inasmuch as
God does impute it unto v^ through faith in Christ Jesus.

Let this teach us to beware of such Deceivers as tell us that we are not
justified before God by Christ his righteousness alone, but by works also.
Romans 8.1.
And seeing it is Christ his righteousness alone whereby we are made righteous
before God, let us rejoice in Christ Jesus alone; and let us judge all our best
works whatsoever to be dung, that we may be found in that day, not having our
own righteousness etc. Why should it be thought injurious unto man to give
all the glory of our righteousness or salvation unto Christ Jesus? Why should
it not rather be thought injurious unto Christ Jesus to give any part of our
righteousness or salvation unto man's works or merits? Too much cannot be taken
from man, neither can too much be given unto Christ, for he is all in all unto
us, our wisdom and righteousness, our sanctification and redemption: he is
the reconciliation for our sins; by him, and through him, and for him we have
all that we have; and under heaven there is no name given whereby we may be
saved but only by the name of Christ Jesus. Let us therefore give unto him
that which is due unto him, and let not man rob him of his honor. Let us
follow after peace, and holiness, and righteousness, and every good work; and
let us know that thi^ labor shall not be in vain unto us in the Lord. But let
us know that it is God alone that justifies us by grace through faith, not
imputing our sins but Christ his righteousness unto us, and so making his
righteousness ours, as our sins were made his, to wit, by imputation only.

To knit up the last observation in a word, will you know how to be found in
Christ in that day? A matter worthy your knowledge. For there shall be no
condemnation unto them that then shall be found in him If then we will be
found in Christ in that day we must be found righteous to be judged by it. And
thus far the matter goes hard with us all, being all of us full of
unrighteousness and ungodliness. What is then the righteousness wherein we
must be found to be judged by it in that day? Not our own: for that would
sink us deep: but the righteousness of Christ Jesus. How shall we be found it
this righteousness in that day? If we renounce all confidence in our own
righteousness as loss and dung, and trust perfectly on the grace of God that
is brought unto us by the revelation of Jesus Christ. Let this then be our
comfort that we shall not be judged in that day by our own righteousness, but
by the righteousness of Christ Jesus, whose whole obedience in suffering
death, and fulfilling of the Law shall be the covering of our sins, and the
cloak of our righteousness. And let it teach us to judge all our works in
respect of that righteousness whereby we are made righteous before God to be but
loss and dung, that we may be found in Christ, not having our own etc.

O Lord our God as thou have vouchsafed to instruct us in our true
righteousness, so vouchsafe by a true and lively faith in thy son Christ
Jesus to make us partakers of that righteousness. Judge not O Lord in that day
by our own righteousness, which is full of unrighteousness and uncleanness,
but passing by our sins and our iniquities, accept the righteousness of thy
son Christ Jesus for our unrighteousness, that we being clothed with his
righteousness may be of the number of those unto whom it shall be said, Come ye
blessed of my Father, etc.

LECTVRE LVII.
PHILIP. 3. Verse. 10. That I may know him, and the virtue of his resurrection,
etc,
NOw the Apostle goes forward, and shows other reasons why he renounced all
his own merits as loss and dung, and rejoiced only in Christ Jesus, 1. as we
have heard he did so, that he might gain the righteousness of Christ by
faith: that was the first and principal gain that he reckoned upon by doing
so. 2. He did so for other advantages that he reckoned upon by doing so: as ^.
he did so that he might know Christ: 3. That he might know the virtue of his
resurrection: 4. That he might know the fellowshippe of his afflictions, and
be made conformable unto his death: 5. That he might attain unto the
resurrection of the dead. What is the reason then why the Apostle having cause
of confidence and rejoicing in the flesh, and in things without Christ, does
renounce all things without Christ, and rejoice only in Christ Jesus? The
reason is, because reioicing in the flesh, and in things without Christ is
unprofitable, and hurtful; and contrariwise the renouncing of all things
without Christ, and rejoicing only in Christ Jesus is most profitable. Why,
what profit comes thereby? 1. Christ's righteousness which is by faith: 2. The
knowledge of Christ: 3. The knowledge of the virtue of his resurrection: 4. The
knowledge of the fellowshippe of his afflictions etc. 5. The attaining unto the
resurrection of the dead. All these vantages the Apostle reckoned upon to
follow his renouncing of all things without Christ, and his rejoicing only in
Christ Jesus. For so he says, that he judges all things loss and dung that
he may win Christ, and may be found in him etc. as if these things could not
be unless he should do so. All which vantages do so follow the renouncing of
all confidence in the flesh, and rejoicing only in Christ Jesus, as that these
four last do issue and spring out of the first. For being justified by faith
in Christ Jesus, we know Christ, we know the virtue of his resurrection etc.
These being fruits issuing and growing out of that righteousness which is
through the faith of Christ. Thus much for the general drift and meaning of
these words.

Now for the more particular opening of these words, we must know, that by the
knowledge of Christ is here meant not such a knowledge as whereby we are able to
talk of Christ, of his birth, of his life, of his doctrine, of his death and
passion etc. but such a knowledge as whereby we feel and prove in our selves,
and in our own souls that he is indeed our redemption, our reconciliation,
our salvation, and whatsoever else we have heard, or read, or believed of him
in the Scriptures: not a contemplative and knowing knowledge of Christ, but a
lively and experimental knowledge of Christ in our own souls. Again, by the
virtue of Christ his resurrection the Apostle means that regeneration; i.
that dying unto sin, and living unto righteousness which is wrought in us by
the power of his resurrection. 3. By the fellowshippe of Christ his
afflictions, the Apostle means that partaking which Gods Saints have with
Christ, of his afflictions for the glory of Christ, and the good of the
Church, and their own conformity unto the death of Christ. Lastly, by
attaining unto the resurrection of the dead, the Apostle means that eternal
weight of glory in the heavens which only they obtain that in this life know
Christ by experience in their own souls, and by the power of his death and
resurrection die unto sin, and live unto righteousness, and constantly
endure such afflictions as the Saints of God are partakers of, that so they may
be conformable unto the death of Christ, who was consecrated through
afflictions. The sum of all is this, the Apostle tells the Philippians, that
he has no confidence in his merits or works, but only rejoices in Christ
Jesus, that so he may be justified before God by Christ his righteousness; and
that being justified by his righteousness through faith in his name, he may
know Christ by a lively feeling of him in his own soul, and may by the power
of his resurrection die unto sin, and live unto righteousness, and may
constantly with Gods Saints suffer such afflictions as Christ has suffered,
and may be made conformable unto Christ his death, and at length may be
received into that glory which is prepared to be showed in the resurrection of
the just. Thus then ye see that both these are the fruits of the
righteousness of faith, and that both the righteousness of faith, and these
fruits issuing out of it are all vantages which the Apostle counts he has hy
renouncing all confidence in the flesh, and rejoicing only in Christ Jesus.
Now let us see what observations we may gather hence for our use.

That I may know him] This is one end wherefore the Apostle would be found in
Christ having his righteousness through faith, and consequently wherefore he
renounced all his own merits and works, and only rejoiced in Christ Jesus,
even that he might know Christ. For why judged he his own righteousness to be
but loss and dunge? That he might win Christ, and be found in him not having
his own righteousness, but the righteousness of Christ through faith. And why
would he be found in Christ his righteousness through faith? that he might
know Christ. This is the fruit of the righteousness of faith, and both of them
are vantages which follow the renouncing of all confidence in the flesh, and
the rejoicing in Christ Jesus. But what? Did not Paul know Christ? Had he
preached Christ so many years, and yet knew not Christ? Had he planted so many
Churches in the faith of Christ, and yet knew he not Christ? For answer
hereunto; (to omit that knowledge which is by vision in heaven, when we shall
see him face to face) we must understand that there are two sorts of knowledge
of Christ here on earth: the one, a contemplative and knowing knowledge,.i.
such a knowledge as whereby we know that Christ is the only begotten son of
God, that he was sent into the world to save sinners, that he was crucified,
that he died, that he was buried, that he was declared mightily to be the son
of God by his resurrection from the dead, that he was highly exalted, and had a
name given him above every name etc, and whatsoever else the scriptures of God
do story of him. Such a knowledge of Christ was that which the Samaritans had
by the saying of the woman, which testified of him, saying, Ioh. 4.39.
he has told me all that ever I did: and such a knowledge the Physician has
of his physic, and the virtue thereof by relation of others, and by reading
in his books. The other knowledge of Christ is an experimental and feeling
knowledge of Christ, whereby we feel and know in our own souls that he is
such a one as the scriptures describe him to be, that he is made of God unto us
wisdom, and righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, that he died for
our sins, and rose again for our justification. Such a knowledge of Christ
was that which the Samaritans had when they had heard Christ themselves, 42.
and so knew that this was indeed the Christ, the Savior of the world: and
such a knowledge of Salomons wisdom and prosperity the Queen of Sheba had
when she had seen it with her eyes, and heard it with her ears; and such a
knowledge the Physician has of his physic, and of the virtue thereof, when
he has had experience of it in himself. Now when the question is here asked,
whether Paul did not know Christ, because he says, that I may know Christ, we
must understand that the Apostle does not here speak of the former sort of the
knowledge of Christ: for it is out of all question that he that had preached
Christ among the Gentiles so many years, that had planted so many Churches in
the faith of Christ knew whatsoever the scriptures of God did witness of
Christ. But the Apostle here speaks of that experimental and feeling
knowledge of Christ, whereby we feel and know in our own souls that such as
the scriptures describe him to be such he is unto us. What then? Had not the
Apostle this experimental and feeling knowledge of Christ? It is not to be
doubted but that this holy and elect vessel of God had this same feeling
knowledge of Christ Jesus. How then would he be found having the righteousness
of Christ which is through faith, that he might know Christ? It is not simply
meant that he would be so found that he might have that feeling knowledge of
Christ, but that he might grow up daily more and more with all godly increasing
in that feeling knowledge of Christ. He would be found righteous with the
righteousness which is of God through faith, that he may daily grow up with
all godly increasing in this feeling knowledge of Christ.

Whence first I observe what knowledge of Christ it is which all Christians
should principally long and thirst after: and that is, that they may know
Christ with such a feeling knowledge as that they feel and know by experience
in their own souls the infinite treasures of wisdom, and knowledge, and
salvation that are hid in him for them: for this is the saving knowledge of
Christ to know him not only to be a Savior, but to be our Savior. Many there
are that know Christ to be the son of God, to be the Savior of the world, to
have paid the price of man's sins by his one oblation of himself, and to be
he that is appointed judge both of the quick and dead in that day. Many there
are that can and do speak of his praises in the great congregation, that
preach unto others the infinite treasures of wisdom, and knowledge, and
salvation that are hid in him, that talk of his salvation from day to day,
that speak as if they had all knowledge, and understanding, and knew Christ as
well as the best. Many I say such there are, and I wish that the number of them
were far greater then it is. But yet here is not all that knowledge of Christ
that we should long and thirst after. For thus far many come, whose knowledge
is nothing else but the increasing of their judgment and condemnation: as the
Apostle plainly witnesses where he says, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.
that it is impossible for them which were once lightened, and had tasted of
the heavenly gift etc: and likewise the Apostle Peter where he says, that if
they that have once escaped from the filthiness of the world through the
knowledge of the Lord, and of the Savior Jesus Christ be yet again tangled
therein, and overcome, their latter end is worse then the beginning. By both
which places it is plain that men may have a good measure of the knowledge of
Christ, whose end notwithstanding is death and damnation. We must therefore
long and thirst after a farther knowledge of Christ. This is the saving
knowledge of Christ Jesus, that we know that we are the sons of God, that he
died for our sins, and rose again for our justification, that he is made of
God unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption,
that he is the reconciliation for our sins, that he sits at the right hand
of God to make request for us; that an inheritance immortal, and undefiled,
and that fades not away is reserved in heaven for us. To have such a feeling
knowledge of him, as that by our own experience in our souls we find in our
selves the fruits of his sufferings, the comforts of his promises, the riches
of his mercies, knowing by the testimony of the spirit witnessing unto our
spirit, that what righteousness he has fulfilled for his children he has
fulfilled for us, what benefits of salvation he has purchased for his children
he has purchased for us, what promises he has made unto his children belong
unto us, what joys he has prepared for his children are reserved for us, this
is that knowledge which passes all knowledge, this is that knowledge which is
that saving knowledge, and this is that knowledge which we must long and thirst
after. 1 Ioh. 3.14.
By this knowledge it is that John says, We know that we are translated from
death unto life, because we love the brethren: 5.15.
and again, We know that he hears us in whatsoever we ask, and we know that
we have the petitions that we desire of him: 19.20.
and again, We know that we are of God, we know that the son of God is come,
and has given us a mind to know him which is true. How knew the Apostle these
things? He felt the comforts of these things in his own soul, his own heart
did leap within him rejoicing at these things.

O my brethren try and examine your hearts how many of you have this knowledge
of Christ, and withal see and consider with your selves what a longing and
thirsting desire you should have after this knowledge of Christ. The knowledge
of Christ Jesus even by hearing, and by reading, and by faith is (as not long
since we heard) the most excellent knowledge that is: but this experimental
knowledge of Christ, to know by experience in our own souls that he is such
as by the word we believe him to be, this is the most sweet and most
comfortable knowledge, even so sweet and so comfortable as passes all
understanding. If ye have this knowledge of Christ, ye are already entered in
part into those joys which are reserved in heaven for you. If ye have it not,
o thirst after it, and give your souls no rest till ye come unto this
knowledge of Christ. Give all diligence unto the reading and hearing of the
word of life, and pray always with all manner of prayer and supplication in
the spirit that ye may know Christ with a feeling knowledge, and with a sweet
experience in your own souls that whatsoever ye have heard and believed of
him is most true.

The second thing which here I note is, from what root this experimental and
feeling knowledge of Christ issues and springs, and that is, from the
righteousness of faith. For so we are to understand this knowledge of Christ
to be a vantage following the renouncing of our own righteousness, and
rejoicing in the righteousness of Christ by faith, as that this vantage
springs from the righteousness of faith. Hence then I observe that only
they know Christ by this experimental knowledge, who being justified by faith,
do by a true and lively faith happly the righteousness and obedience of
Christ Jesus unto themselves. For then do we begin to have this feeling
knowledge of Christ in our own souls, when by faith we lay hold on the
righteousness of Christ Jesus to be justified thereby; and the more sure hold
that we lay by the hand of faith on the righteousness of Christ Jesus, the
more we grow up in this feeling knowledge of Christ Jesus. We believe, says
Peter unto Christ, Joh. 6.69.
and know that thou art the Christ the Son of the living God. We believe,
says he, and know, as if he should have said, we believe, and in our own
souls by the testimony of the spirit witnessing it to our spirit we know that
thou art the Christ the son of the living God. Faith then in Christ Jesus is
the root whence this feeling knowledge of Christ comes, and the more
steadfastly we believe, the greater feeling of this knowledge does the spirit of
God work within our souls. Many of us I fear me want this feeling knowledge
of Christ, many of us that say and think that we know him, know him not by
experience in our own souls; many of us that have heard and read of him, know
not that he is made of God unto us wisdom, or righteousness, sanctification,
or redemption; many of us know not what treasures of wisdom, or knowledge, or
salvation are laid up in him for us; many of us I fear me feel not in our
selves the sweetness of Christ, the fruits of his sufferings, the comforts of
his promises, the riches of his mercies; many of us I fear me only know
Christ as we hear of Christ, and read of Christ, but know him not by his
comfortable presence in our own souls. And what is the cause of all this?
Surely we have no root in our selves; we want that true and lively faith
whence such knowledge should spring. We deceive our selves, flattering our
selves, and saying, we believe in Christ, we know Christ, when as we neither
believe in him, nor know him. A smattering faith, and a smattering knowledge of
Christ we have: but a justifying faith, or saving knowledge we have none. Is
then a justifying faith the root whence a feeling and saving knowledge does
spring?

Let this then teach us to use with all religious reverence those means which
the Lord has ordained for the begetting, and increasing of faith in us, that
we may believe, and know, and growing in faith we may grow also in the
knowledge of Christ Jesus. Let us with reverence hearken unto the word
preached, and celebrate the holy Sacraments, two ordinary means which the
Lord vs^th thereby to beget, and to increase faith in us. For faith comes by
hearing, as the Apostle witnesses where he says, Faith is by hearing, and
hearing by the word of God. To. 10.17.
Seeing therefore we cannot know Christ unless we believe in him, and seeing
we cannot believe in him unless we hear his word preached, that we may
believe in him, and know him, let us willingly flock as doves unto the
windows unto the house of the Lord to hear the word preached. Again, as by
the word preached, so likewise by the use of the Sacraments the Lord as by
means strengthens and increases our faith in us. In the Lords Supper the
bread is broken for us, given to us, we take it, and eat it, and digest it, and
it is made one substance with us: the wine likewise is powered out for us, given
unto us, we take it, and drink it, and it is made one with us. All which rites
and actions what else are they but so many pledges and seals for the
strengthening and increasing of our faith in the benefits of our salvation
pu^chased by the death and passion of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus. The
bread that is broken for us in that Supper, and the wine that is powered out for
us, they are so sure pledges unto us that Christ his body was broken for us,
and his blood shed for us as that we ought as steadfastly to believe the one by
faith, as we clearly see the other with our eyes. So likewise the bread and
the wine that are given unto us by the Minister in the Supper, they are so sure
pledges unto us that Christ by his Spirit gives us his body, and his blood
even then in the supper, as that we ought as steadfastly to believe the one by
faith, as we clearly see the other with our eyes. So likewise the bread which
with the hand of our body we take, and eat, and the wine which with the hand
of our body we take and drink are so sure pledges unto us that by faith our
souls do feed upon the body and blood of Christ, as that we ought as
steadfastly to believe the one by faith, as we clearly see the other with our
eyes. Lastly, the bread and wine which being digested are turned into our
substance, and made one with us, and we with them are so sure seals unto us
that by a mystical union and spiritual conjunction we are made one with
Christ, and Christ with us, members of his body, flesh of his flesh, and bone
of his bones, as that we ought as steadfastly to believe this by faith, as we
perfectly know that by sense. Such are the helps which we have by this holy
sacrament of the Lords Supper for the strengthening and increasing of our faith.
Many things ye see here are fully to assure our faith that we should not
doubt, but as surely as we receive the bread and wine into our bodies to become
wholly ours, so withal our soul receives Christ together with his passion
and righteousness to be wholly ours, as surely as if we had wrought them in
our own persons. Yea such assurance our faith grows unto by the use of this
holy Supper, as that now we know by the powerful operation of Gods holy spirit
within us that God is in us indeed, and that now Christ is ours, and we
Christ's, and that together with Christ we have all things, even all the
benefits of our salvation. And the more that our faith is strengthened hereby,
the more also is this feeling knowledge of Christ increased in us, so that
together with the growth of our faith there is a growth of this knowledge.
Seeing therefore this knowledge of Christ grows as our faith in Christ
grows, and seeing our faith is so strengthened and increased by the holy use
of this holy Supper, let us so often as we are called unto this holy table
prepare our selves with all holy reverence and fear to the celebration of
these holy mysteries. Great is the benefit that here we do receive if we eat
of this bread, and drink of this cup worthily: for then we eat spiritually the
flesh of Christ, and drink his blood; then we dwell in Christ, and Christ in
us, we are one with Christ and Christ with us, and these things are so sensibly
represented unto our eyes and taste, as that our faith is fully assured
thereof; so that henceforth we know by the working of the spirit that Christ is
ours, together with whatsoever is his. But if we present our selves at these
holy mysteries without due preparation and examination of our selves, we have
no such benefit, but rather we are guilty of the body and blood of our Lord
and Savior. Prove therefore your selves whether you are in the faith, whether
ye feel your hearts assured by the spirit of God that the punishment of your
sins is fully discharged in Christ, and that whatsoever Christ has done
pertains not only to others, but even to you also. If you believe these
things, and know these things, though it be not without some doubts, and
without some imperfections, behold by the use of this Supper your weak faith,
and imperfect knowledge shall be strengthened and increased. But if as yet ye
have no such faith in Christ, no such knowledge of Christ, then may ye not
presume to present your selves at this holy table. The use of this Supper is
for the confirmation and strengthening of our faith, it is not for the begetting
of faith in us, but that being begotten by the word, is by the word and the use
of the Sacrament thus confirmed.

The last thing which hence I observe is, that if we will have this
experimental knowledge of Christ in our own souls by faith in Christ Jesus,
then must we renounce all confidence in our own merits and in our own
righteousness whatsoever. For wherefore is it that men trust in their own
merits, and in their own righteousness? Wherefore is it that men make
reckoning to be justified and saved by the worth of their own works?
Wherefore is it that men grow to a pharisaicall pride and conceit of
themselves, as if they had somewhat in themselves that might abide the trial?
Surely it is because of the want of this feeling knowledge of Christ: They
never felt in their own souls the sweetness of Christ, the comforts of
Christ, the treasures of Christ. They know not by experience in their own
souls that Christ is all in all unto them: they know not what Christ is made
of God unto his children. They have a knowledge of Christ, but the knowledge of
Christ has not seized upon their souls; and therefore they do not know the
full sweetness of Christ, and the full worth of Christ. For if they knew in
their own souls that Christ were made of God unto them wisdom, and
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, they would only rejoice in
Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. But therefore they rejoice
in the flesh, and have confidence in their own works, and in their own
righteousness, because they know not Christ. If therefore we will know Christ
with a saving knowledge, and a feeling knowledge of him in our selves, we must
utterly renounce all confidence in our own merits, and all trust in our own
righteousness whatsoever.

What shall we say then unto them that stand upon the merit and worth of their
own works, and of their own righteousness? Surely even thereby they show that
howsoever they say they know Christ, yet they have not this experimental
knowledge of him in their own souls: for if they had, they would know such
infinite treasures of all spiritual graces to be hid in him as that they would
mind nothing without him. To conclude this point therefore, let these trust in
their merits, let those follow their vain delights and pleasures, let these
seek after riches, let those spend their whole time in the study of humane
knowledge: but let us study to know Christ. If we have this feeling knowledge
of him in our own souls, then come poverty, come sickness, come famine, come
sword, come persecution, come affliction, come adversity, come what cross can
come, our soul notwithstanding all these is at quiet rest, and in him we have
comfort enough against all these. In him because we know him, we know that
treasures enough; and comforts enough are hid for us whatsoever trouble or
adversity we find in the world. Let us therefore study to know him, and
because faith is the root of this knowledge, let us use with all religious
reverence those means whereby faith is either wrought, or confirmed. And
because confidence in our own merits and righteousness is an enemy to this
knowledge, let us renounce all such confidence, and rejoice only in Christ
Jesus that we may know him etc.

LECTVRE LVIII.
PHILIP. 3. Verse 10. And the virtue of his resurrection, and the fellowship of
his afflictions etc.
THat I may know him, and the vertue] That is, and that I may know the virtue
of his resurrection,.i. that I may daily more and more feel in my self the
virtue of Christ his death and resurrection,.i. that I may daily more and more
die unto sin, and live unto righteousness by the power of the spirit which
raised up Christ Jesus from the dead. For by resurrection in this place I
understand both Christ his death and resurrection: and by the virtue of Christ
his death and resurrection, I understand not that power whereby Christ overcame
death, and rose again from the dead, but that regeneration, that dying unto
sin, and living unto righteousness which the Holy Ghost works in us by the
power of Christ his death, and resurrection. The third vantage then which the
Apostle reckons upon by disclaiming al righteousness by his own works, and
rejoicing only in Christ Jesus is, that hereby he shall know the virtue of
Christ his resurrection in himself, whereby he shall daily more and more die
unto sin, and live unto righteousness, which virtue of his resurrection he
greatly desired to know, and which otherwise he could not know. So that it is
as if the Apostle had thus said: I do judge all my own works whatsoever to
be but dung, and quite renounce all confidence in my own righteousness, to
the end that being justified by the righteousness of Christ through faith in
him, I may know, and daily more and more feel in my se^^e by the powerful
operation of the Holy Ghost the virtue of Christ his death and resurrection,
whereby I may die unto sin, and live unto God in righteousness and true
holiness. Thus much for the sense. Now for the observations.

And that I may know the virtue.] Here first I note the Apostles great desire
to know and to feel in himself by the work of the holy Ghost the virtue of
Christ his death and resurrection. He reckoned this knowledge amongst the
chief vantages which he had in Christ Jesus, and for this vantage sake he made
no reckoning at all of his own righteousness by any works that he had
wrought. Such a longing and thirsting desire he had to know the virtue of
Christ his death and resurrection. He knew Christ his death and resurrection,
that he died, and was buried, and that he rose again the third day; but he
desired to know the virtue of his death and resurrection. He knew likewise this
virtue of Christ his death, that thereby he had vanquished sin, death, and
the devil, and this virtue of his resurrection, that thereby he had purchased
for him righteousness, life, and everlasting salvation: but he desired to know
and to feel in himself the death of sin by the virtue of his death, and the
life of righteousness and holiness by the virtue of his resurrection. This
virtue also of Christ his death and resurrection he knew, in that he felt in
himself by the power of the spirit a dying unto sin, and a living unto
righteousness: but he desired to feel this virtue of his death and
resurrection in himself daily more and more, that he might daily more and
more die in the old man, and be quickened in the new man, that in every combat
between the flesh and the spirit, the flesh might daily more and more be
subdued to the spirit.

Whence I observe, what a vehement and earnest desire there should be in us all
to know and to feel in our selves the virtue of Christ his death and
resurrection, and in whom there is some feeling thereof, to know and to feel
it in themselves daily more and more. We all of us know that Christ died for
our sins, and that he rose again for the full accomplishment of our
justification: we know that by the power of his death we are delivered from
the first and from the second death, from the death of sin in this life, and
from the death of damnation for sin after this life, and that by the power of
his resurrection we have our part both in the first and in the second
resurrection, in the first resurrection from sin unto righteousness, and in
the second resurrection from the power of the grave unto life everlasting. We
know that we are buried with Christ by baptism into his death, that like as
he was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we also should
walk in newness of life. We know that if we be grafted with Christ to the
similitude of his death, dying unto sin by the power of his death, even so
we shall be to the similitude of his resurrection, living unto God by the
power of his resurrection. These things (I say) we know, at least we should
know, and I wish that they were far better and more known then they are. But
there is a further knowledge of the virtue of Christ his death and
resurrection, which in our souls we must long and thirst after. This is the
virtue of Christ his death and resurrection that we must long and thirst after,
to know and to feel in our selves the death of sin, and the life of God, to
know and to feel in our selves that the strength of sin is abated in our
flesh, and that the life of God is renewed in the spirit of our mind, to know
and to feel in our selves a loathing of sin, and a love of righteousness,
to know and to feel in our selves a mortification of the flesh with the
affections and the lusts, and a quickening in our spirit by the fruits of the
spirit, to know and to feel in our selves that delight which sometimes we
took in unrighteousness, in uncleanness, in covetousness, in pride, in
cruelty, in contention, or the like sins, to be cooled, and a desire to live
righteously, and soberly, and godly in this present world, to be kindled in
us. For hereby we know in our selves the virtue of Christ his death and
resurrection, if we feel in our selves this mortification of the old man, and
this quickening in our inner man: when his death works the death of sin in
us, when his resurrection works the life of God in us, then we know in our
selves the virtue of his death and resurrection. The sacrament hereof is the
sacrament of baptism: for when we are baptized, we are baptized into the
similitude of his death, that like as he died once for sin, so we should ever
die unto sin, and into the similitude of his resurrection, that like as he
rose from the dead, so we which were dead in sin should not henceforth serve
sin, but live unto God in righteousness and true holiness. Even our
baptism does witness unto us, that so many of us as are baptized into Christ
Jesus, we should die unto sin, and live unto God in righteousness and true
holiness. Which death unto sin, and life unto God, seeing the holy spirit of
God does work in us by the power of Christ his death and resurrection, how
should we not most earnestly desire to know and to feel in our selves the
virtue of Christ his death and resurrection?

But do we desire to know and to feel in our selves the virtue of Christ his
death and resurrection? Do we with our Apostle in this place reckon this
knowledge amongst our chiefest vantages? Nay alas we know it not, neither care
we to know it: for what dying unto sin and living unto God is there amongst
us? In whom is the strength of sin abated, and the life of God renewed in the
spirit of his mind? Does the Atheist leave his Atheism, and embrace
godliness? Does the covetous person leave off to set his affection on the
things which are on the earth, and set his affection on the things which are
above? Does the cruel oppressor leave off to grind the faces of the poor,
and begin to be merciful? Does the usurer leave off to lend his money upon
usury, and begin to lend freely? Does the swearer leave off to swear, and
begin to fear an oath? Does the filthy whore-monger and adulterer leave off
his uncleanness, and begin to live chastely? Does the contentious person
leave off to brawle and contend with his neighbor, and begin to love
quietness? Does the drunkard leave his drunkenness, and begin to live
soberly? etc. Does any profane and wicked person leave off his profaneness
and wickedness, and begin to live righteously and godly in this present
world? Nay so far are we from dying unto sin, and living unto God, that
contrariwise we live unto sin in sin, and we are dead in respect of the
life of God. If we would deny it, yet do the judgments of God testify it
unto our faces. Has not the sword been shaken against us by the hand of a
cruel and merciless enemy now a long time? Has there not been cleanness
of teeth in all our cities, scarceness of bread in all our places, even a
great dearth and famine throughout this whole land now a long time? Has not
grievous sickness and mortality, great plagues and strange diseases taken
away many thousands of our people? And is not the hand of the Lord still
stretched out against us? Do not dearth and famine on one hand, and sickness
and mortality on another hand, still devour our people? And are not these the
messengers of Gods fierce wrath against us for our sins? Yes certainly even
for our sins and iniquities are all these things come upon us. And because he
has smitten us, and we are not healed, because he has laid his punishing
hand upon us, and we have not turned from the wickedness of our ways unto
him, therefore his wrath is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out
still. No man knows the virtue of Christ his death, or cares to know it, but
every man walks after the ways of his own heart, and drinks iniquity
like water. No man knows the virtue of Christ his resurrection, or cares to
know it, but every man in stead of rising up unto holiness of life, rises up
to eat, drink, and play, and therefore does the hand of God lie still so
heavy upon us. O my brethren, at length let us follow the counsel of the
Apostle, let us morti^^e our earthly members, fornication, uncleanness, the
inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness which is
idolatry, and let us bring forth the fruits of the spirit. Let us crucify the
flesh with the affections and the lusts, and walk in the spirit: Let us put
off the old man which is corrupt through the deceivable lusts, and let us put
on the new man which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness.
For this let us all know, that whosoever in this life dies not this death
which is unto sin, no man shall deliver his soul from the hand of the second
death after this life: and whosoever has not his part in the first
resurrection, which is from sin unto righteousness, he shall have no part in
the second resurrection, which is unto glory and life everlasting. And such as
do know and feel in themselves the virtue of Christ his death and
resurrection, them I exhort in the bowels of Christ Jesus, that with the
Apostle they desire and labor to know and to feel this virtue in themselves
daily more and more. Stand fast against all the assaults of the devil, and
quit your selves like men: embrace holiness, and follow after righteousness.
While ye live, the flesh will rebel against the spirit, but strive daily more
and more to subdue the flesh unto the spirit. Consider with your selves with
all godly care what sin it is that most does haunt you, covetousness, or
licentiousness, or pride, or hatred, or swearing, or lying, or the like, and
fight against that, labor daily more and more against that, seek daily more
and more to crush that in the head. Again, consider with your selves what good
thing ye are too dull and slack unto, hearing of the word, or liberality to
the poor, or patience in adversity, or the like, and labor daily more and
more unto that, follow daily more and more after that, seek daily more and
more after that. In a word, stir up every good grace of God in you, and
refrain your feet from every evil path, that ye may know and feel in your
selves the virtue of Christ his death and resurrection, and do this daily more
and more, that ye may feel in your selves this virtue daily more and more.

The second thing which here I note, is, from what root this knowledge of the
virtue of Christ his death and resurrection issues and springs, and that is,
from the righteousness of faith: for still we must remember that these four
last vantages whereof the Apostle speaks, do so follow the renouncing of all
our own works, and the reioicing only in Christ Jesus, as that they all issue
from the first vantage that we have thereby, namely from the righteousness of
Christ through faith. Whence I observe, that only they that are justified by
the righteousness of Christ through faith, do feel in themselves by the
powerful operation of the holy Ghost the virtue of Christ his death and
resurrection, whereby they die unto sin, and live unto God in righteousness
and true holiness. And to this the Apostle seems to give witness, where he
says, that our hearts are purified by faith: Act. 15.9.
for it is as if he should have said, we are purified and purged from dead
works to serve the living God: but how is it? It is by faith in Christ Jesus.
So that the Apostles meaning is, that only they that are justified by faith in
Christ Jesus, are purged from dead works to serve the living God. For if this
purification be by faith, then only they that have faith are thus purged. So
our Savior also says, Ioh. 15.4.
As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the vine, no
more can ye except ye abide in me. Whence it is most plain, that they only
that are ingrafted into Christ Jesus by a true and lively faith in him, whereby
they take hold of his righteousness, bring forth the fruits of the spirit,
dying unto sin, and living unto God in newness and holiness.

Why is it then that there is so little knowledge amongst us of the virtue of
Christ his death and resurrection? The reason is, only the faithful children
of God know it. The rest they have no root in themselves, they want that true
and lively faith whence such knowledge should spring. Let this then serve to
rowse us out of the dead sleep of sin, and to awake us unto righteousness.
That the death and resurrection of Christ work no better upon us, that we
subdue not the flesh unto the spirit, that we serve sin, and give not our
members servants unto righteousness in holiness, it is a plain argument of
the want of faith in us. And therefore our Savior made it an argument against
Judas that he believed not, because he would betray him. Ioh. 6.64.
But there are some of you, says our Savior, that believe not: For (says the
Evangelist) Jesus knew from the beginning who they were that believed not, and
who should betray him. Where the argument is that Judas had a traitorous heart,
therefore he believed not. In like manner let us make the argument against our
selves: Our hearts are set on mischief, we drink iniquity like water, we
die not unto sin, but we suffer sin to reign in our mortal bodies, we
live not unto God in righteousness, but we give our members servants unto
unrighteousness; we feel no virtue at all of Christ his death or
resurrection in our selves, therefore we believe not. The conclusion is hard;
but if it be altered, the premises must be altered. Let us cease to do
evil, and learn to do well; let us die unto sin, and live unto God; let us
mortify our earthly members, and be filled with the fruits of righteousness,
and then shall we have a good testimony unto our selves of our righteousness
by faith. In a word, justification which is by faith, and regeneration which is
by the spirit killing our old man, and quickening our new man are so linked the
one with the other, as that they are affirmed, and denied both together. For if
we be justified by faith, then are we regenerate by the spirit, and if we be
regenerate by the spirit, then are we justified by faith: And again, unless
we be justified by faith we are not regenerate by the spirit, and unless we
be regenerated by the spirit, we are not justified by faith. As therefore we
desire to have our justification by faith sealed unto our souls, so let us
desire to know and to feel in our selves the virtue of Christ his death and
resurrection, by dying unto sin, and living unto God in righteousness and
true holiness. It follows.

And the fellowshippe of his afflictions etc.] This is the next vantage which
the Apostle reckons upon by renouncing all his own works as loss and dung,
and rejoicing only in Christ Jesus, the knowledge in himself of Christ his
afflictions, even such as he did suffer in the days of his flesh, and such as
he does daily suffer in his members. And the reason he adds why he would know
in himself the fellowship of Christ his afflictions, namely so to be made
conformable unto Christ his death. It is then as if the Apostle should have
said, I make no reckoning of mine own righteousness by works, but my desire
is, that being justified by the righteousness of Christ through faith, in such
afflictions as Christ suffered in his own person for the glory of God and the
good of his Church, and such as still he suffers in his members for his own
glory, and the good of his Church. I may have fellowship and be partakers with
them, because I desire to be made comformable unto Christ his death, i. like
unto Christ who is dead, and through many afflictions is entered into his
kingdom. What then? did the Apostle desire outward afflictions in his body?
yea he counted it a great vantage to suffer afflictions such as Christ had
suffered in his own person, and such as he did suffer in his members, for the
glory of Christ, and the good of his Church.

Hence then I observe that affliction and trouble for Christ his sake, and the
good of his Church should not seem grievous unto God his children, but rather
they should count it a vantage unto them to be afflicted for his sake. Thus the
holy Ghost almost every where teaches us. Mat. 5.12.
Rejoice, says our Savior, and be glad when men revile you, and persecute
you, and speak all manner of evil sayings against you for my sake falsely. And
the Apostle James, Iam. 1.2.
Count it exceeding joy when ye fall into tentations. i. afflictions and
tribulations whereby ye are tempted. And the Apostle Peter, Think it not
strange concerning the fiery trial, 1 Pet. 4.13
which is among you to prove you, but rejoice, inasmuch as you are partakers of
Christ his sufferings etc. And lest the holy Ghost should seem without all
reason to will us to rejoice in afflictions, and to count them vantage unto us,
he has set do^ne many reasons why afflictions should not daunt us, or seem
grievous, but rather joyous unto us. As 1. affliction has been always the lot
of Gods children. It began we see even with Abell, Genesis 4 8.
whom his brother Caine slew. Jacob, and Joseph, the children of Israel,
David, Job, the Prophets, the Apostles of Christ what afflictions suffered
they? Rejoice, says our Savior, when they persecute you: for so persecuted
they the Prophets which were before you: yea such persecutions and affliction^
both Patriarchs, and Prophets, and Apostles, and all the holy men of God have
suffered. 2. Afflictions are profitable instruments which God uses thereby to
draw us to the obedience of his will. Hos. 5.15.
For so says the Lord by his Prophet, In their affliction they will seek me
diligently. Ier. 31.18.
So says Jeremy, that before the Lord corrected and chastised him by
afflictions he was a^ untamed calfe. Ps. 119.67 71.
And David, before I was afflicted I went wrong, but now I keep thy word: And
again, it is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I may learn thy
statutes. 3. Afflictions are a token of Gods love and favor toward us. For as
the Apostle says. Heb. 12.6.
Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and he scourges every son that he
receives. Sometimes we wander astray out of the right way wherein we should
walk, and then as a good shepherd he sends his dog after us to pinch us, and
to rank us in our right order again. 4. Afflictions make w^ like unto Christ,
as both the Apostle shows here, and in the Epistle to the Romans, Romans 8.29.
for as Esaias had prophesied of him, so he was full of sorrows: he wanted no
sorrows, but he was full of sorrows. 5. The afflictions of Gods children they
are Christ his afflictions: whereinsoeuer they suffer he suffers ^th them.
And therefore when Saul persecuted them that ^lled upon his name he called unto
him from heaven, say^ng, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? because he
persecuted ^is children he counted that he persecuted him. 6. It pleases ^he
Lord through afflictions to bring his children unto the ^ingdome. For it is
ordained that through many afflictions ^e should enter the kingdom. No
chastising, Heb. 12.11
says the Apo^tle, for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous, but
afterward (...) brings the quiet fruit of righteousness unto them which are
^ereby exercised. And again Peter speaking to this purpose ^aith, Wherein ye
rejoice, 1 Pet. 1.6.7.4.13.
though now for a season ye are in heaui^esse, that the trial of your faith
being made much more precious ^hen gold that perishes, though it be tried with
fire, may be found unto your praise, and honor, and glory, at the appearing
of Jesus Christ. These and many more reasons the holy Ghost com^endeth unto us
in the holy Scriptures wherefore we should ^eioyce in afflictions, and why we
should count them a van^age unto us.

Art thou then afflicted and brought low through any op^ression, through any
cross or trouble? There has no ten^ation taken thee, but such as appertains
to the children of God: If thou belong unto him he thus afflicts thee that he
may keep thee in obedience unto his will, that he may try thy faith and thy
patience, that thou may know his love toward thee, that thou may be made
like unto him, and that after thou have suffered with him thou may also
reign with him. Wheat by the flaile is purged from the chafe, flower by the
seiue is purged from the branne, and gold by the fire ^s purged from the
dross. If we will be good wheat for the Lord his barn, the flaile must go
over us, and we must be winowed. If we will be fine flower we must be boulted
and sifted: if we will be pure gold we must be purged in the fire. Only let
our care be that we suffer not as evil doers, but as Christians for Christ his
sake, and for the good of his Church

O Lord as thou have by the death of thy Son destroyed the death of sin,
and by his. etc.

LECTVRE LIX.
PHILIP. 3. Verse. 10.11. And the fellowshippe of his afflictions, and be made
conformable to his death, if by any means I may attain etc.
OH, but thou will say that thine afflictions, thy troubles, and thy sorrows
are exceeding great and unsupportable. Look upon Jobs afflictions in his
goods, in his children, in his own person. He had 7000. sheep, and 3000.
Camels, and 500. yoke of oxen, and 500. she asses: and of all these he was
quickly deprived, some the Shebeans, some the Chaldeans took away violently,
and some the fire of God consumed and burnt. He had also seven sons, and
three daughters, and a very great family: and these all were slain at once by
the fall of a house. Himself likewise was smitten with sore boyles from the
sole of his foot unto his crown, so that he sat down in the ashes, and
took a potsheard to scrape himself withal. His wife which should have been
his helper, bid him blaspheame God and die. His friends which should have
comforted him increased his sorrows; so that every way he was most grievously
afflicted. Compare now then thine afflictions and sorrows with his, and see
what comparison there is betwixt them for greatness and grieuousnesse. And if
the Lord blessed his last days more then the first in goods, and in children,
and in every good blessing; then let not thy great affliction trouble thee, but
hope thou in the Lord, and abide patiently on him, and he shall make thy way to
prosper. Again, look upon Christ, persecuted Christ, even from his birth,
forced to fly even then into Egypt for fear of Herod; tempted Christ, by the
Devil in the wilderness; poor Christ, not having a hou^e to put his head in;
betrayed Christ, by the hands of one of his own Disciples; afflicted Christ,
so that his sweat was like drops of blood, trickling down to the ground;
punished Christ, so that he cried, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me;
crucified Christ, even between two thieves. What are thine afflictions, and thy
sorrows in comparison of thy Christ's? He has seasoned all thine afflictions
and thy sorrows with his, so that be they never so great thou should not be
troubled therewith. Oh, but they come so thick upon thee one on the neck of
another that thou art not able to look up. What? come they thicker upon thee
then upon Jacob the Patriarch? Of whom we read, first that he fled to Laban
least his brother Esau should kill him; when he was with Laban he dealt ill
with him, and changed his wages ten times; when he went from Laban, Laban
pursued him, and if the Lord had not forbid him would surely have hurt him;
when he had escaped Laban, then he was again in great danger by his brother
Esau; when he had escaped that danger, then his daughter Dinah was ravished,
and his sons Simeon and Levy slew the Shechemites, and brought him into
great danger there; when he went from thence, his wife Rahel in the way died in
travel; soon after Reuben his eldest son went up unto his fathers bed, and
lay with Bilhah his fathers concubine. Could sorrows well come thicker upon a
man? Jobs sorrows likewise how thick came they upon him? A messenger came to
Job, and said, the oxen were plowing, Job. 1.14.
and the asses feeding in their places etc. to verse. 20 Anon after this he was
smitten with sore boyles in his own person as we have heard: when he was so
his wife came and spoke as we have heard; and then after her came his miserable
comforters. If thy sorrows then come thick upon thee, thou see that nothing
does befall thee but such as appertains to the children of God. Tarry thou
therefore the Lords leisure, be strong, and he shall comfort thine heart. Oh,
but thou have waited long, and yet do find no case. What, longer then David
waited for the kingdom of Israel after that he was anointed King over Israel
by Samuel? After he was anointed by Samuel, he waited in great affliction,
persecution, and peril many years before he reigned over Judah, and after
that he waited seven years and a half before he rigned over Israel. Have
thou waited longer then Christ himself did? He was full of sorrows all his
life long. Thou may not prescribe God a time, thou must in patience possess
thy soul. Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning.
And what if it come not the next morning? what if it come not the next week?
the next month; the next year? nay what if thy days be consumed with
mourning? O in the morning when his glory shall appear thou shall be glad and
rejoice. For the present thy faith and thy patience is exercised, and for the
present it is grievous, but afterward it brings the quiet fruit of
righteousness unto thee that art exercised thereby. Oh, but thou will say,
what comfort can I have in the mean time seeing he afflicts me as the
wicked, and makes no difference between me and the wicked? Oh, but thou art
much deceived. He afflicts thee, and he afflicts the wicked, and it may be
with like afflictions, but yet not in like sort. He afflicts thee as a
father, him as a judge, thee in mercy and in love, him in anger and
displeasure, thee for thy correction and chastisement, him for a plague and
punishment. He chastises thee with rods, but he wounds him with the swords
of an enemy: thou by thy corrections art kept in a child-like awe, he in a
slavish fear; the effect of thine afflictions is, reformation of things past,
and obedience afterward to thy good; but the effect of his is hardness of
heart, and rebellion against the highest; the end of thine is joy everlasting,
the end of his is woe everlasting. Though therefore your afflictions seem to
be like, yet is the whole course of them altogether unlike, in the beginning,
in the manner, in the use, in the effect, and in the end. What then though
thine afflictions be great? It is a token that he has given thee great grace
and strength to stand. For he will not suffer his to be tempted above that they
be able, 1 Cor. 10.13.
but will even give the issue with the tentation that they may be able to bear
it. What though thine afflictions be many? It is that, as gold purified seven
times in the fire, thou may be found more precious at the appearing of Jesus
Christ; what though thou have waited long? It is that thy patience may have her
perfect work, and that thou may be perfect, and entire, lacking nothing. What
though there be no odds unto thine outward sense between thy sufferings and
the wicked? It is that thou may grow out of love with that restless and
wretched life, and may long after that life where there shall be no more
death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor pain, but life without death, joy without
sorrow, rest without crying, and pleasure without pain.

If this will not serve to make thee brook thine afflictions be they great, or
many, or whatsoever they be, then consider these points Christianly and with a
wise heart. 1. Consider what thou have deserved if the Lord should deal with
thee in weight and measure. Are thine afflictions and thy troubles proportioned
to the desert of thy sins? Nay if he should dispute with thee thou could
not answer him one thing of a thousand: if he would straightly mark thine
iniquities, thou were not able to stand when he is angry. No sin that thou
committest in the whole course of thy life, but the wages of it is death, even
everlasting death both of body and soul without the Lords special mercy. What
are then thine afflictions unto that that thou have deserved? 2. Consider how
light and momentanie thine afflictions are. For what if they be for a year?
what if for twenty? what if for thy whole life? when the Lord had punished his
people with 70. years captivity, for a moment, says he, Es. 54.8.
in mine anger I hid my face from thee for a little season, but with
everlasting love have I had compassion on thee. Seventy years captivity it
was but a little while, a moment in comparison of his everlasting love. Even so
the afflictions that thou suffer, if they be for seventy, if for a 100.
years, what is this in comparison of eternity? Who would make account of
taking very bitter potions, and very sharp physic for three or four days
together, in hope of health for ever after? What then if thy potions, if thy
physic, if thine afflictions be for 70. or 100. years? It is not so much as
three or four days, nor so much as three or four hours, nay nothing in
comparison of eternity. And therefore the Apostle very well calls the
afflictions of this life light and momentanie afflictions in respect of that
eternal weight of ^^ory reserved for them that stand fast unto the end. 3. 2
Cor. 4.17 Heb. 12.11
Consider what fruit in the end follows thine afflictions. They bring, says
the Apostle, the quiet fruit of righteousness unto them that are thereby
exercised. And in another place he says that they cause unto us a far most
excellent, 2 Cor. 4.17.
and an eternal we^^ of glory. Which is not so to be understood as if by our
afflictions we did merit an eternal weight of glory. Fo^^ count, says the
Apostle in an other place, Romans 8.18.
that the afflictions of this present time are not worthy of the glory that
shall be showed v ^o us: but his meaning is that God in mercy rewards the
light and momentanie afflictions of this life, with an eternal weight of
glory, afflictions wi^h glory, light afflictions with a weight of glory, moment
any afflictions with eternal glory, light and momentanie afflictions with an
eternal weight of glory.

Let not afflictions then daunt us, but let us rather without Apostle desire to
know in our selves the fellowship of Christ his afflictions, Pro. 3.12
and let us count them a vantage unto us. For the Lord corrects him whom he
loves, even as the father do^^ the child in whom he delights. Heb. 12.8.
And if we be without correction, whereof all are partakers, then are we
bastards, and not sons. The finest clothe ye know which a man wears next
unto his skin will sometimes be nastie and slurried, and then it must be
beaten, and washed, and wrung, and if yet it be not clean, then to it again,
and beat it, and wash it, and wring it till it be clean, and fit to be worn
next the skin: but a sackcloth, or haire-cloth we care not how black it be,
neither do we wash or wring it. Beloved we are so near unto Christ, as that
we are not next unto his skin, but we are flesh of his flesh, and bone of
his bones. And therefore to purge us and to make us clean he washes us, and
he wringeth us with afflictions. Sackcloth and haire-cloth be it as black as
it will he cares not for the whiting and cleansing of it, because it shall
never come near unto his skin. He takes no pleasure in it, and therefore
he regards not the cleansing of it. Let us not therefore be troubled at
afflictions. They are nothing proportionable to that we deserve; they are but
light and momentanie whatsoever they are, and in the end they cause unto us a
far most excellent, and an eternal weight of glory. Let us therefore endure
with patience, and let patience have h^^ perfect work, that we may be perfect
and entire, lacking nothing. For if we endure chastening, Heb. 12.7. Job. 5.17.
God offers himself unto us as unto sons: and blessed is he whom God
corrects. It follows.

And be made conformable etc.] Or as Beza reads it, whiles I am made
conformable unto his death, i. unto Christ being dead: and so the sense is
this; I judge all things without Christ to be dung, as for other vantages, so
for this, that whilst I am made like to the image of Christ that is dead, by
sufferings, I may know and feel in my self the fellowshippe of Christ his
afflictions, such as he suffered in his person, and does now suffer in hi^
members. Here then I note two reasons why the Apostle reckoned affli^tions a
vantage unto him; 1. Because in afflictions he had fellowshippe with Christ. 2.
Because by afflictions he was made like unto Christ. Whence I gather these two
obseru^tions: 1. That in afflictions we have fellowshippe with Christ. 2. That
afflictions make us like unto Christ. For the first, that in our afflictions we
have fellowship ^ith Christ it is plain, both because he suffered the like
afflictions before us, and because in all our afflictions he suffers with us.
For what affliction is it that we suffer? Is it poverty, persecution, hunger;
agony in soul, punishment in body? Are we reviled, slandered, mocked, tempted
by the Devil? Does the wicked band themselves against us, unjustly accuse us,
unjustly condemn us, unjustly put us to death? Are they of thine household
thine enemies? do they that eat bread at table with thee lift up their heels
against thee, and betray thee into the hands of the wicked and ungodly? All
this way our Savior Christ has walked before us: he has drunk of all these
cups, and has seasoned them unto us. Neither did he only suffer these and
the like afflictions before us, but as the head with the members still he
suffers these and the like afflictions with us. How many, how great, how
above measure were Paul's troubles by sea, by land, of friends, of enemies, in
body, in spirit? yet calls he them all the afflictions of Christ, because in
them all Christ suffered with him. Lazarus likewise in all his poverty,
sickness, sores, griefs, and miseries suffered nothing wherein Christ was not
partaker of his grief. And if all the pains and miseries of that patient Job
were now upon any of us, we should feel nothing which Christ felt not with us.
For can any member of the body suffer, and not the head suffer with it? Nay so
long as this mystery is which is for ever, that Christ is the head, and we the
body, so long if the body, or any member of the body be hurt, shall Christ
which is the head be touched with the point of it.

O what a great comfort must this needs be unto all the children of God: here
is a notable seasoning of all our afflictions. If we be poor, sick,
persecuted, imprisoned, banished, whipped etc. in every cross that we bear
the love of Christ is sealed unto us, in every suffering that we suffer Christ
suffers with us. As therefore the Apostle exhorts, Let us rejoice in all
our sufferings, 1 Pet. 4.13
inasmuch as we are partakers of Chr^^^ his sufferings. 2 Cor. 4.10.
For as Paul says, If we suffer with Christ, we shall also reign with Christ,
and if we bear about in our bodies the dying of the Lord Jesus, the life also
of Jesus shall be made manifest in our mortal bodies.

My 2. observation was, that afflictions do make us like unto Christ. He was
consecrated the Prince of our salvation through afflictions. For taking our
nature upon him he filled it with the fullness of miseries, with all sorrows of
flesh, with all anguish of mind, with persecution, with death, with sin, with
condemnation, Romans 8.29.
with hell: And those whom God has foreknowne he has also predestinate to be
made like unto the image of his son, like unto him in many afflictions, that
at the last they may be like unto him in eternal glory. Do sorrows then come
thick upon us? the more the better, because the moethe liker unto Christ, who
was full of sorrows, as Esaias had prophesied of him. Do we in agonies and
bitterness of sorrows descend into hell? Christ has also descended, and
herein we are like unto him. If God have given unto us poverty, cold,
nakedness, and much affliction, if we feel many troubles to rest upon us, if
we feel that greatest trouble of an affrighted soul, and a mind oppressed,
let us think with our selves; how good is God unto us, thus to make the image
of his only begotten son to shine in us, that we carrying his image in us
may die with him, and also reign with him in the due time which he has
appointed. Let us look into all that ever we have, even into what thing soever
pleases us best, ^to our goods, lands, possessions, buildings, riches, honor,
^ealth, favor, authority, friendship, wife, children, and the ^ke, in all
these things we cannot behold the lively image of Christ, nor by any of these
things are we made like unto Christ. Affliction and troubles, humiliations and
crosses, ^hese are the things that make us like unto CHRIST, and ^he greater
that our afflictions are the liker we are unto Christ.

Let this then teach us with patience to bear whatsoever ^rosse do befall us.
We are full of grief, but we are chasti^ed of the Lord, because we should not
be condemned with ^he world; we die with Christ, but because we should live
with him; we suffer with Christ, but because we should reign with him; we
weep with Christ, but because that Christ should wipe all tears from our
eyes; we are afflicted on eue^y side with Christ, but because we should be like
unto him in all afflictions, and so be glorified with him in the day of glory.
Let us therefore run with patience the race that is set before (...), looking
unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, who for ^he^y that was set
before him, endured the cross, and despised the shame, and is set at the right
hand of the throne of God. Let us approve our selves in much patience, in
afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in prisons, in tumults,
in labors, and let us commit our souls unto God in well-doing, as unto a
faithful Creator. Yea let us rejoice in afflictions, inasmuch as they are a
vantage unto us, inasmuch as in our afflictions we have fellowship with Christ,
inasmuch as afflictions make us like unto Christ.

Now if the question be asked, whether, seeing afflictions are such a vantage
unto us as that therein we have fellowship with Christ, and thereby we are made
like unto Christ, whether I say we are to wish and desire afflictions and
crosses: I answer that we are to wish them, if by that means we may attain
unto the resurrection of the dead. For we are to wish, and we are to judge all
things without Christ to be but dung, that we may attain unto the resurrection
of the dead. If therefore by the means of affliction, or by any means we may
attain unto the resurrection of the dead, we are to w^^ that means whatsoever
it be. We are not therefore simply to wish for afflictions and crosses, being
corrections and chastisements for our sins, but if the will of God be so that
w^ suffer afflictions, we are to rejoice inasmuch as we are partaker of Christ
his sufferings, and thereby made like unto Christ and we are to wish, if by
that or any means we may attain unto the resurrection of the dead. When
therefore the Apostle says here, if by any means, this (if) implies not any
doubting in the Apostle, but an earnest desire in the Apostle to attain to the
resurrection of the dead. When he adds if by any means, he implies that the
fellowship of Christ his afflictions is not the only means whereby we attain
unto the resurrection of the dead, but some without persecution at all, some
not without persecution, but without effusion or their blood, and some by
martyrdom attain to the resurrection of the dead. Now the Apostle signifies,
that it is al one to him, if by any means, the first, second, or third, he may
attain to the resurrection of the dead. Lastly, by the resurrection of the
dead, the Apostle means the glorious resurrection of the Saints un to life
everlasting. It is then as if the Apostle had said, I do judge all things
without Christ to be but dung, that I may win Christ, that I may know Christ,
and the virtue of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his afflictions, and
that I may attain to the glorious resurrection of the Saints, if by any
means, or desiring by any means, affliction, or any means to attain and
come unto the glorious resurrection of the Saints, whereby they are raised unto
glory, and life, and immortality. Now for the notes.

1. For the note of doubting which hence our adversaries would gather, we shall
have occasion to speak of it in the next verse, by occasion of those words, if
that I may.

2. I note, that albeit all the Saints of God attain to the glorious
resurrection of the dead by the resurrection of Christ Jesus from the dead: for
he was made the first fruits of them that sleep: 1 Cor. 15.20
and his resurrection is a sure pledge of our resurrection; yet do not all the
Saints of God attain to the resurrection of the dead by the same means. For
some have attained to the resurrection of the dead without any persecuti^n that
we read of; as that good old Simeon that took our Sa^iour in his arms, and
praised God, and said, Luke 2.28.29.
Lord now let ^ou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word etc.
Like^ise Zacharias, and Elizabeth, and Anna, and others. Others ^aue attained
to the resurrection of the dead not without per^cu^ion and manifold
afflictions, but yet without martyr^ome and effusion of their blood, as Jacob,
David, and diverse others. And others have attained to the resurrection of the
^ead, but not without martyrdom, and cruel effusion of their blood, as many
of the Prophets, John Baptist, Steven, ^ames, Paul, Peter, and diverse others.
All which were Saints ^f God, and all which died in the Lord, and all of them
no ^oubt wished, as Paul did, to attain to the resurrection of the ^ead, if by
any means they might attain to the resurrection ^f the dead.

Whence I observe, 1. that the way unto the heavenly Ieru^lem is not only by
violent death inflicted by the hand of ^he cruel and bloody persecutor, but
that very many also are ^athered unto their fathers in peace, and so sleep in
the Lord. ^or as it is a blessing given unto Gods children, not only to
^eleeue in Christ, but to suffer even death for his sake, and so ^o enter into
glory; so it is also a blessing given unto Gods children to go to their grave
in peace, and so to be received unto the everlasting habitationss. So it was
reckoned unto Abraham for a blessing that he died in a good age, an old man,
Genesis 25.8.
and of great years, and was gathered to his people. So it was ^eckoned unto
David for a blessing, that he died in a good age, 1 Chronicles 29.28. 2 Reg. 22.20.
^ull of days, riches and honor. So unto Josiah, that he was put in^o his
grave in peace: and generally to go to the grave in peace ^s a blessing of God
upon his children. And therefore gross and absurd was their error, who
thinking martyrdom the only means to attain unto the resurrection of the
dead, vo^untarily offered themselves as it were to the knife of the but^her.
Only this, if the will of the Lord be so, that by a vio^ent death we shall
glorify his name, we are patiently to sub^it our selves unto his will: to
which purpose is my second observation hence.

Secondly, hence I observe that if we will attain unto the glorious
resurrection of the Saints that are dead and die in the Lord, if we will be
partakers with Christ in his glory, then must we not refuse to drink of the
same cup that he has drunk, we must not refuse to be partakers with him in
his af^^^ctions, but if by that means we may attain unto the re^^rrection of
the dead, we must patiently endure it. For (as s^^th the Apostle) if we have
had the fathers of our bodies which corrected us, Heb. 12.9.
and we gave them reverence, should we not much rather be in subjection unto
the father of spirits that we may live? For they verily for a few days
chastened us after their own plea^ure, 10.
but he chasteneth us for our profit, that we may be partakers of (...)
holiness. Act. 14.22.
We must through many afflictions (says the Holy Ghost) enter into the
kingdom of God. If therefore the Lord will that we come by the cross unto the
crown, let us take up our cross and follow Christ. I use no other arguments
to move you hereunto then we have already spoken of: they are a vantage unto
us: in them all Christ suffers with us; they make us like unto Christ,
therefore let us not refuse the chastening of the Lord, whereby he offers
himself unto us as unto sons, and let us rejoice, inasmuch as we are
partakers of Christ his sufferings.

My last observation hence is, that the glorious resurrection unto life
everlasting is the mark whereat we are always to aim in the whole course of
our life. 1 Cor. 15.14.30.32.19.
If the dead be not raised again, then is our preaching in vain, and your
faith is also vain, says the Apostle; and again, if the dead be not raised
again, why are we in ieopardie every hour? and again, if I have fought with
beasts at Ephesus after the manner of men, what aduantageth it me, if the dead
be not raised up? and again, if in this life only we have hope in Christ, then
are we of all men the most miserable. All which albeit they be brought to prove
the resurrection o^ the dead, yet do they likewise show that the Apostle in
his preaching, and in his suffering, and in all that he did ever respected the
resurrection of the dead. And so we ought in all things evermore to aim at the
resurrection of the dead. And this ought to make us both do all things
cheerfully, and suffer all things willingly, knowing that there shall be a
glorious resurrection of the just, and that we shall receive reward through
the mercies of God in Christ Jesus for whatsoever good we have done, and for
whatsoever tentation we have suffered in the resurrection of the just.

LECTVRE LX.
PHILIP. 3. Verse 12. Not as though I had already attained unto it, but one
thing I do, I forget that which is behind, and endeavor my self, etc.
THus we have heard how the Apostle for the confutation of those false
Teachers that were crept in among the Philippians, has instructed them by his
own example in the point touching man's righteousness before God, namely that
they were not to repose any confidence in their own righteousness which is by
works, but to repose all their confidence in the righteousness of Christ,
which is through faith: for he judged all his own works to be but loss and
dung in respect of any righteousness before God, and he rejoiced only in
Christ Jesus, that he might win Christ, that he might know Christ, and the
virtue of his resurrection, etc. and therefore the Philippians were to do so
too, and we so too.

Now the Apostle goes forward, and as before by his own example he taught
them what to think of man's righteousness before God, so now by his own example
he teaches them still to labor to increase in the way of godliness, and in
the knowledge of Christ Jesus, and of the virtue of his resurrection, etc. And
he takes occasion so to do upon that which he had said before: for he had
said before, that he thought all things loss for the excellent knowledge sake
of Christ Jesus, and that he judged all things to be dung that he might win
Christ, that he might know Christ, etc. Now hereupon happily it might be
thought that he was grown to an excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus, he was
perfect in the knowledge of Christ Jesus. Did he take such pleasure and comfort
in the knowledge of Christ Jesus, that for it he thought all things loss and
dung? Here was perfection indeed, he was come to the races end, he needed no
more. No, no, says the Apostle; for all this I am but in the way, I have not
yet attained to the perfect knowledge of Christ, I am not perfect in the
knowledge of Christ, I follow and labor after it with all maine and might that
I have, I am entered the lists, I am in the way, and I never look behind me,
but still I go forward; and albeit I be not at my races end, yet still I am
looking toward the mark that is set before me, and I make toward the mark
as hard as ever I can. Thus the Apostle by his own example sets an edge on
them to run forward in the race that they had begun in Christ Jesus, and to
labor still to increase in the knowledge of Christ Jesus. Which he did the
rather because of those false Teachers that were amongst them, that told them
that they knew Christ well enough, and that they were come to great perfection
in the knowledge of Christ Jesus, in that they know him to be the Messiah, to
be God and man, to be the reconciliation for the sins of the whole world: and
now they were to look to the observation and keeping of Moses Law, and to
join it unto Christ, so to be made righteous before God. Because of these (I
say) the Apostle having taught them that not any thing is to be joined unto
Christ to be made righteous by it, does now stir them up by his own example
to labor continually to increase in the knowledge of Christ Jesus. Thus much
for the general scope and meaning of these words.

Now let us yet a little more particularly examine these words. Not (says the
Apostle) as though I had already attained to it: to it, to what? to the perfect
knowledge of Christ: for the Apostle had said before, that he thought all
things loss for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ, and that he judged
them to be dung that he might win Christ, that he might know Christ, etc. and
hereupon it might be thought that he had already attained to the perfect
knowledge of Christ, and of the virtue of his resurrection, etc. whereby he
might attain to the resurrection of the dead. But no, says the Apostle, I
judge all things to be dung, that I may know Christ; not as though I had
already attained to the perfect knowledge of Christ. Again, it is to be
observed that he says, not as though I had already, or, not as though I had
now attained to it: whereby the Apostle signifies, that as now his state
stands, he has not attained to the perfect knowledge of Christ. He adds,
either were now perfect, to wit, in the knowledge of Christ, and so of the
virtue of his resurrection, etc. He adds, but I follow, (...).
where the word does not simply signify to follow, but to follow as the
persecutor that will not rest till he have him whom he persecuteth, or to
follow as the runner that will not rest till he come to the goles end. By this
then he signifies how greedily and incessantly he pursues after the perfect
knowledge of Christ, having it as it were in chase. I follow, says he, if I
may comprehend that, that is, desiring to catch hold of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus, even as I also am comprehended of Christ Jesus, that is, even as Christ
Jesus has caught hold on me: that is, desiring that as Christ has perfectly
caught hold of me by his gracious mercy toward me, so I may ^atch hold of
the knowledge of Christ Jesus perfectly by the like his gracious mercy toward
me. And so I read in this place, not as it is in our Bibles, for whose sake,
but even as, (...).
the phrase which the Apostle uses suffering it, and the scope of the Apostle
leading unto it. It is then as if the Apostle should have said, I thank my God
I know Christ, and the virtue of his resurrection, etc. and I take great
comfort and pleasure in the knowledge of Christ, and I think all things but
loss for this excellent knowledge sake; not as though I had now attained unto
this knowledge perfectly, or were now as I am now Paul, aged, and taught by God
in the ways of God, perfect in the knowledge of Christ; nay I now know him
only in part, but I follow this knowledge even with eagre and incessant
pursuit, desiring that I may comprehend and catch hold of the knowledge of
Christ Jesus, even as perfectly, and in the like mercy that he has
comprehended and caught hold of me. This I take to be the true meaning of
these words, and it is not my meaning now or at any time to trouble you with
varieties and diversities o^ expositions.

In these words then I note these points: first, the Apostles acknowledgement
of his own imperfection, in these words, not as though, etc. secondly, the
Apostles eagre pursuit after perfection, in these words, but I follow, etc. Now
let us see what observations we may gather hence for our use and instruction.

Not as though, etc.] Here you see that the Apostle acknowledges that as yet
he had not attained to the full knowledge of Christ, to a thorow-feeling of
the virtue of Christ his death and resurrection in himself, to a perfect
fellowship of Christ his afflictions. He labored to attain to the
resurrection of the dead in glory, by communicating with Christ in his
afflictions, by dying unto sin, and living unto God through the power of
Christ his death and resurrection, by knowing Christ with a feeling knowledge
of him in his own soul. But he says that he has not yet perfectly attained
unto these things whereby he might attain unto the resurrection of the dead.
And he amplifieth it by this particle Now, saying that now be had not attained
unto these things, now that he had shaken off all impediments and hindrances
unto perfection in these things, now that he had renounced all confidence in
his own works, and in all things without Christ, now that he labored to
attain to the knowledge of Christ in his own soul, to the knowledge of the
virtue of Christ his resurrection, to the knowledge of the fellowship of Christ
his afflictions in himself, if by any means he might attain to the
resurrection of the dead, yet not as yet he had attained to the full knowledge
of Christ in himself, to a thorow-feeling of the virtue of Christ his
resurrection in himself, to a perfect fellowship of Christ his afflictions.

My observation hence is, that all the faithful children of God, how
plentifully soever endowed with the knowledge of Christ, the hatred of sin,
the love of righteousness the fellowship of Christ his afflictions, yet only
know Christ in this life in part, only die unto sin, and live unto God, and
are partakers of Christ his afflictions in part, not one that perfectly knows
Christ, that perfectly feels the virtue of Christ his death and resurrection
in himself, that is perfectly partaker of Christ his afflictions. For is it
not a good reason? Paul that holy Apostle of Christ Jesus, that chosen vessel
of God to bear Christ his name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and the
children of Israel, aged Paul, that had begotten many in the faith and
knowledge of Christ Jesus, that had now long borne in his body the dying of
Christ Jesus, that had his conversation in heaven, that had suffered more then
all the rest, he (I say) knew Christ, and the virtue of his resurrection, and
the fellowship of his afflictions only in part, not perfectly, therefore none
of all the faithful children of God in this life either knows Christ, or dies
to sin, or lives to God, or is conformed by afflictions and sufferings unto
Christ his death perfectly, but only in part. Yes surely the reason holds most
strongly, Paul's prerogatives being not any way inferior to any of the best and
most faithful children of God. Now the reason why in this life our knowledge,
our love, our faith, our death unto sin, our life unto God, our whole
obedience, all our righteousness, all our holiness is in part only, why these
things in this life are not perfect in any of the children of God, the reason
(I say) is because our regeneration and sanctification in this life are not
perfect, we are not perfectly renewed in the spirit of our minds, God gives
unto us the spirit by measure: Joh. 3 34. Romans 12.3.
for unto Christ alone has God given the spirit without measure, but unto
every one of us he has given the spirit by measure. He is made of God unto
us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification: in him dwells all the
fullness of these things plentifully; and of his fullness we all receive, not
fullness of his fullness, but of his fullness of the spirit and all spiritual
graces we receive as it were the first fruits of the spirit and of all
spiritual graces, wherewith then only we shall be filled, when mortality
shall put on immortality, and when corruption shall put on incorruption. Which
the Apostle also witnesses, where he says, 1 Cor. 13.12
that now we see through a glass darkly, but then shall we see face to face:
now we know in part, but then shall we know even as we are known: no^ in
this life in part and imperfectly, and then only when we shall see Christ
face to face, shall we know him perfectly. For when that which is perfect is
come, then shall that which is in part be abolished, but not before. Neither is
it only so in our knowledge, but in our faith, in our love, even in our whole
obedience. Paul himself while he lives shall have messenger of Satan to buffet
him, he shall have pricks in the flesh, and he shall feel a law in his
members rebelling against the law of his mind, and leading him captive unto
the law of sin which is in his members.

Here then first is notably confuted that imaginary perfection which some
dream that the children of God may have in this life. This holy Apostle
attained not unto the perfection either of the knowledge of Christ, or of
obedience unto his will: what perfection then can there be in any of Gods
children in this life? They say that no man indeed can attain to that
absolute perfection either of that knowledge, or of that righteousness which
shall be in heaven, but that they may attain unto such perfection as is
required in this life. As if either God might not require of us in this life
such perfection as he gave unto us in our creation, or as if where such
remnants of sin and ignorance are as stick fast unto us, there could be such
perfection. Gal. 3.22.
For I demand, has God concluded all under sin? The Apostle Paul says so;
and John likewise says, 1 Ioh. 1.8.
that if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is
not in us. What perfection then where there is such transgression? Again, did
not God create us after his own image in righteousness and true holiness,
without sin, or ignorance, or any such thing? It is clear, and cannot be
denied? And what was our perfection then? Now that ignorance has blinded us,
and sin has defiled us, have we such perfection now? Or may not God require
such perfection of us now in this life? How did we lose it? Was it (...) by
our own default? And may not then God require it of v^ True it is, he cannot
have it of us because we have lost it. B^ because we have lost it, should we
not have it? Yes surely we have lost it, but we should have it, and therefore
he may require it of us: we should have it, but we have lost it, therefore is
the punishment due unto us for it. True it is, we are often exhorted to be
perfect, but those exhortations only show unto us what perfection should be in
us, not what perfection is in us. Yea the whole Law is a perfect rule not of
that we do, but of that we should do, and of that which God may require of
us. All our perfection is only in Christ Jesus, who has perfectly fulfilled
that which we should, but could not, and for whose sake all our imperfections
are covered, and not imputed unto us. He is our perfection, we are full of
imperfections, and in his perfection are all our imperfections ^id and covered.

Again, here is a notable comfort for all such of Gods children as feel in
themselves any imperfections, any wants ^f those things after which their soul
longs. The blessed Apostle had not now when he wrote these things attained to
^he perfection of the knowledge of Christ, of the virtue of his ^esurrection,
or of the fellowship of his afflictions. Why art ^hou then troubled, and why is
thy soul disquieted within he for such imperfections as thou feel in thy
self? Thou ^nowest not thy Christ as thy soul desires: thou find not ^at
sweetness of his word in thy self that thou should: ^ou feel not thy
flesh so subdued unto the spirit as it should ^e: thou do not walk in that
obedience unto thy God that thou should: thou art not so zealous in all holy
duties (...) thou should be: thou do not take such pleasure in the ^ings
that belong unto thy peace as thou should do. None (...) all the children of
God that come not far short of that ^ey should in all these things: and the
more holy that they ^e, the more they see their wants. How often does David ^ay
unto the Lord to teach him his statutes, Psalm 119.
to open his eyes at he may see the wondrous things of his Law, to stablish his
lord in him, to incline his heart unto his testimonies, and not ^to
covetousness, to quicken him in his righteousness? ^eade the 119. Psalm,
where thou shall find that that holy ^ophet has even powered out his soul in
many such prayers. (...) but thou do not only feel in thy self the want
of such ^rfections as thou should have, but thou feel such imperfections
as thou should not have. Thou art dull, and sluggish, and heavy and, and
lumpish; there is no edge in thee unto the things that belong unto thy peace.
Do thou know and feel in thy self these imperfections? This same is a
piece of thy perfection, to see, and know, and acknowledge thine imperfections.
Luk 18.11 12 13
The proud Pharisie he talks of nothing but his perfections: it is the poor
Publican that feels his imperfections, and that not daring therefore to lift
up so much as his eyes to heaven, strikes his breast, saying, O God be merciful
unto me a sinner. And what is it that makes thee feel thine imperfections? It
is the life of God in thee that makes thee that thou see thy dullness, and
lumpishnesse, and that thou can not abide it, but grieuest at it. Them that
are dead in their sins thou see to go on in the wickedness of their
ways, neither are they ever touched with any remorse or feeling of their wants
and imperfections. Yea David so long as he lay dead as it were in that sin
which he had committed in the matter of Vriah, he never felt any remorse. But
when on^^ the life of God began to awake in him by the word of Nathan, then
he said, I have sinned against the Lord. This then, that thou feel and
acknowledgest thine imperfections, (...) token of the life of God in thee. The
greatest imperfection that the young man in the Gospel had, was the great
conce^^ which he had of his perfection. All these commandments, says he, Mat.
19.20
I have observed from my youth up, what lack I yet? He could not see any
imperfection in himself till Christ bade himself all that he had, and give to
the poor, etc. and then he saw it, but the text says nothing of his
acknowledging it with remorse for it. To stand then upon our perfection is our
greatest imperfection, and to see and acknowledge our imperfection with
remorse, is a great point of our perfection.

Let not then thine imperfections dismay thee. It is well that thou feel
them; it is a point of thy perfection, and it is a token of the life of God in
thee, and if thou feltst them nor, thy disease were a great deal more
dangerous. O but therefore thou art troubled because thou feel thine
imperfections more then thou wast wont. O but comfort thy self rather in those
mercies that thou wast wont to find: for he that has begun a good work in
thee, Phil. 1.6.
will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ. He is immutable, and so is
his love immutable: for whom he loves once, he loves unto the end. Ioh. 13 1.
It was David's case, as himself witnesses, where he thus says, I ca^^ed to
remembrance my song in the night, Psalm. 77.6.
I communed with mine own heart, and my spirit searched diligently. 7.
Will the Lord a^sent himself for ever, and will he show no more favor? Is
his mercy clean gone for ever? Does h^s promise fail for ever more? 8.
Has God forgotten to be merciful? 9.
has he shut up his tender mercies in displeasure? Where the Prophet shows
how he was wont to praise the Lord in the night season for his loving mercies.
But now the Lord had seemed to shut up his tender mercies in displeasure. And
this he says in the next verse was his death, even the want of the feeling of
Gods goodness he says was his death: 10.
yet (says h^) I remembered the years of the right hand of the most high.
Where he signifies that he recovered himself by remembering the former times
wherein God had manifested his goodness toward him. Let not then thy present
want disquiet thee, but comfort thy self in the remembrance of his former
goodness toward thee. Though he seem for a little to hide his face from
thee, yet will he not leave nor forsake thee, but in his good time he will
perfect his good work in thee.

But I follow] Here I note the Apostles eager pursuit after perfection. He had
not yet attained unto it, but he followed as eagerly after it, as the
persecutor who will not rest till he have him whom he persecuteth; or as the
runner, who will not rest till he come at his goales end. He was so desirous to
grow daily more and more in the knowledge of Christ, and of the virtue of his
resurrection etc, that he shook of all impediments and letts which might
hinder him in that course, and labored daily more and more in all things to
grow up into him, which is the head, that is Christ. Whence I observe a
necessary duty for all Christians, which is that they labor daily more and
more to grow up in the knowledge of Christ, in obedience to his will, in
holiness and righteousness, and in all things to aim evermore at the mark
of perfection. And to this purpose are those often exhortations, Be ye perfect,
as your father which is in heaven is perfect. Mat. 5.48. 2 Cor. 13.11 Jam. 1.4.
My brethren, be ye perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind etc. Let
patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect, and entire, lacking
nothing. All which and the like places show what we ought to stri^e unto, even
unto the perfection of God. Christians may not stand at a stay, but they must
grow forward from grace unto grace, from virtue to virtue, from strength to
strength till they become perfect men in Christ Jesus. 2 Pet. 3.18.
Grow (says the Apostle) in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ: Ephesians. 4.15.16.
and to the Ephesians, Let us follow the truth in love, and in all things grow
up into him which is the head, that is Christ, by whom all the body being
coupled and knit together by every joint for the furniture thereof receives
increase of the body unto the edifying of it self in love. Col. 1.10.
And for the Colossians the Apostle prayed, that they might increase in the
knowledge of God. Yea every where almost the Holy Ghost urges this spiritual
growth in all the children of God in all spiritual graces in heavenly things.

Here then first they are justly to be reproved that either care not at all to
know Christ, and the virtue of his resurrection etc: or if they have a little
knowledge content themselves with that, and never thirst to increase with the
increasing of God. Too too many such careless and carnal Christians there be,
as know not, nor care to know the things that belong unto their peace. They
follow, and they eagerly follow: but what? honors, riches, pleasures, worldly
commodities: they follow not with the Apostle the knowledge of Christ etc: they
care not for God, neither is God in all their thoughts. Other too too careless
Christians likewise there be, that thinking they have some knowledge content
themselves with that, and greatly seek not after more. And therefore they come
not at Church, they come not at Sermons, or now and then when they list: some
of them know as much as the Preacher can tell them; and some of them know as
much as will serve their turn. But they know nothing as they ought to know,
unless their knowledge work in them a thirsting desire after more knowledge:
for hereby shall we know that we know Christ, if we eagerly long in our souls
to have this knowledge of Christ daily more and more increased in us. If then
we will have this testimony unto our own souls that we have attained unto
some knowledge of Christ, let us labor with the Apostle, that we may
comprehend and catch hold of the knowledge of Christ Jesus, as perfectly as he
has comprehended and caught hold of us, if we belong unto him. Let us labor
daily more and more to grow from grace to grace, from strength to strength,
from knowledge to knowledge, till we come unto the measure of the age of the
fulness of Christ.

Again, here is another notable comfort for such of Gods children as are
troubled with the consideration of their imperfections. Thou feel thine
imperfections: it is well. Do thou long in thy soul after perfection?
Desire thou to be fulfilled with the knowledge of Gods will in all wisdom,
and spiritual understanding? Would thou gladly grow up in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus? Does the consideration of thine
imperfections set thee unto God in prayer, unto him that he will disburden thee
of thy wants, that he will show forth the light of his loving countenance unto
thee, and that he will guide thy feet into the way of peace? All the world
could not set thee in a better course to perfection. It is the way that the
Apostle has chalked before thee: who having not attained unto perfection,
acknowledged it, and followed after it. Let not thine imperfections then
trouble thee: None of Gods children but they have their imperfections. If thou
(though in great imperfection) follow toward the mark for the price of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus, thou have great cause of comfort.

LECTVRE LXI.
PHILIP. 3. Verse 12.13. But I follow if I may comprehend that even as I am
comprehended of Christ Jesus. Brethren I count not my self that I have
atteined.
NOw in that the Apostle says, but I follow if I may comprehend, hence our
adversaries take a proof of that uncomfortable doctrine o^ doubting of our
salvation; as also from that in the former verse, where he says, if by a^^
means etc. For (say they) if S. Paul ceased not to labor still, as though he
were not sure to come unto the mark without continual endeavor, what security
may we poor sinners have of salvation by only faith? And i^ S. Paul followed
if he might comprehend, as though he were not sure to comprehend, what
security may we poor sinne^ have that we shall comprehend? No indeed poor
wretches, and the poorer and wretcheder for your doubting, if ye gather thus
from these and the like places, ye can have little security of your salvation.
S. Paul ceased not to labor and endeavor still unto the mark; does it follow
hereupon that he was not sure to come to the mark? 2 Reg. 20.
When Hezechias was so sore sick, was he not sure that he should be restored
to health? Yes he had the Lord his word for it by his Prophet, and for a
farther confirmation of his faith he had a sign to assure it: and yet he
ceased not to use the means that God had ordained for the recovery of his
health. Our Apostle in that dangerous voyage toward Rome, Act. 27.23.24.
was he not sure that both he and all his company should be saved from the
peril of the waters? Yes the Angel of God had assured him both of his own
life, and of all theirs that sailed with him: yet he ceased not to use all
means that they might all come safe to land. So for his salvation in the day
of Christ, he knew and was sure that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, Romans 8.38.39.
^or powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor ^^^th, nor
any other creature should be able to separate him from ^^e love of God in
Christ Jesus: Yet he ceased not, as here we ^^e, to labor and endeavor still
unto the mark, he labored ^e^iring by any means to attain unto the
resurrection of the ^ead. And so generally we say that all the faithful
children ^f God are and may be by faith in Jesus Christ sure of their
salua^^on: Yet we say that they are to labor to attain to the know^edge of
Christ, and of the virtue of his resurrection etc, whereby ^hey may attain unto
the resurrection of the dead. For we ^oe not reach or promise security of
salvation by only faith, ^ut unto those that labor in their calling, and are
fruitful in ^ood works. Which may serve to acquit us of that careless
^ecuritie, and presumptuous certainty which they say we teach ^en. We know that
as God has ordained the end, so he has ^rdained the means unto the end. And
therefore we teach, ^oth that the children of God may and are to ground the
cer^ainety of their salvation upon the sweet promises of God in Christ Jesus,
wherein there can be no vain presumption; and that they are to labor and
endeavor by walking in such good works as God in Christ Jesus has ordained
them unto, to ^aue a sure testimony unto themselves of their salvation, which
must needs banish careless security. O but they could ^e as sure of their
salvation, as we think our selves, if it were ^pecially revealed unto them by
God, as Ezechias his health unto him, and Paul's safety unto him. I demand
then, have ^hey no assurance from God of their salvation? No marvel ^hen that
they doubt of their salvation. But we are sure of ^ur salvation, Romans 8.16.17.
because the spirit of God does witness unto our spi^^^ that we are the sons
of God; and if sons, then also heirs, ^uen the heirs of God, and heirs
annexed with Christ. So that we have two witnesses to assure us of our
salvation, Gods spirit, and our own spirit, certified by the spirit of God.
Yea but why does the Apostle say, if I may comprehend, if he were sure to
comprehend, and come unto the mark. This (if) argues a doubting. Not so, but
some difficulty in the thing which he ^arnestly wishes, as also it often
signifies. I magnify (says the Apostle) mine office, To. 11.13.14
to try it by any means I might procure the^ of my flesh to follow them, and
might save some of them. Does the Apostle doubt of saving some of the Jew, by
his ministry because he says, if I might save some of them? No, but thereby
he signifies his earnest desire to do it, and the difficulty of doing it.
Act. 8.22.
Again, Pray God (says Peter unto Simon Mag^^) that if it be possible the
thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven thee. Does the Apostle doubt of Gods
mercies to him if he could repent, because he says, if it be possible etc. No,
but the^eby he gives him to understand of the difficulty of obtaining pardon
for that sin, that so he might see the wickedness of his sin. So the
Apostle here says, that he labors if by (...) means he may attain etc,
and that he follows if he may comprehend, not that he doubts of attaining
to the glorious resurrection of the dead, or of comprehending; but thereby he
signifies his earnest desire to attain unto it, and withal the difficulty
of attaining unto it. 2 Timothy 2.5.
For as the Apostle says (...) where, No man is crowned except he strive
lawfully,.i. except he do and endure whatsoever is to be done and suffered
until he come to his races end. He must devour all difficulties that will
have the crown in that day. And these difficulties increased the Apostle his
desire, so that he labored if he might attain, and followed if he might
comprehend. Th^^ then ye see that this place makes nothing for that
uncomfortable doubting of our salvation which they labor to persuade.

Nay, to speak in one word unto the whole point, the whole stream of the
scriptures makes against this doubting, and for the certainty of our
salvation. Job 19.25.26.27.
I am sure (says Job) the my redeemer lives, and he shall stand he last on
the earth; and though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet shall I see
God in my flesh; whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and
non^ other for me. 2 Timothy 4.8.
So Paul, Henceforth (says he) is laid up for me^ the crown of
righteousness, which the Lord shall give me at th^^ day, and not to me only,
but unto all them also that love his appearing. What? To him only? Nay (says
he) but to all them also that love his appearing. Mark then the ground
whereupon he builds the certainety of salvation: even upon that ground which is
common to him with all the faithful, the ^^ue of God in Christ Jesus. So that
by the power of the same ^^rit, and upon the same ground that Job, and Paul
assured ^^emselues of their salvation, may all the faithful children of ^od
assure themselves of their salvation. Again, does not ^e holy Ghost define
Faith to be the ground of things which are ^^ped for, the evidence of things
that are not seen, a full assurance, (...) assurance without wavering, the
anchor of the soul both sure ^^d steadfast? It is clear. And is it not as
clear that we may ^^rtainely know that we have faith? Rhem. in 2 Cor. 13.5.
The Rhemists themselves (...) knowledge it upon that place of the Apostle,
Prove your ^^^ues whether ye are in the faith. And may we not then as^^e our
selves of our salvation? Verily, verily, Joh. 5.24.
says our Saui^^r Christ, he that hears my word, and believes in him that
(...) me has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, (...)
has passed from death unto life. Where everlasting salua^^^n is assured unto
him that believes, as surely as if he were ^eady in full possession of it. Yea
everlasting salvation is ^sured unto him that loves the brethren, as surely as
if he ^ere already in full possession of it, as S. John witnesses, 1 Ioh. 3.14.
where (...) says, we know that we are translated from death unto life,
be^^use we love the brethren. Infinite almost are the places which ^^ainely
show that we may and ought to assure our selves of ^^r salvation.

I grant that even the best of Gods children oftentimes do ^^gger, and waver,
and doubt, and have diverse spices and ^^arkles of infidelity, and distrust
arising in their hearts. For (...) long as we live both our knowledge, and our
love, and ^^r faith, and our hope, and the best graces that we have are ^nely
in part, and imperfect: our knowledge not without ^^me mixture of ignorance,
our love not without some mix^^re of hatred, our faith not without some mixture
of infide^^tie, our hope not without some mixture of distrust. But this (...)
it that we teach, that the children of God may and ought (...) assure
themselves of their salvation. Indeed if we look upon our selves, our own
works, and our own worthiness, ^e may justly doubt of our salvation, having
in our selves de^^rued everlasting damnation: But the ground and foundation of
the certainety of our hope is the sure promise of Go^ in Christ Jesus, who has
promised in his word eternal l^^^ to all them that believe in his name. We
look not on o^^ selves, but we look on him that has promised, even as
Abraham did whose faith we are to follow: of whom it is said, th^^ he neither
did consider his own body which was now dead, Romans 4.19.
being (...) most an hundredth years old, neither the deadness of Sarahs
(...), neither did he doubt of the promise through unbelief (w^^^^ note by the
way how doubting is termed unbelief, 20.
) but (...) strengthened in the faith, and gave glory to God, being fu^y assured
that he which had promised, 21.
was also able to do it. He then being faithful which has promised salvation
to all them that believe in his name, we may and ought to be sure of our
salvation. To conclude therefore this point, beware lest at any time (...) be
deceived by such as out of this, or the like places of scripture would persuade
you that ye ought to doubt of your salvation. Neither this, nor any other place
makes for it, but the whole course of Scripture makes against it. Let us
without Apostle labor if by any means we may attain etc. and let (...)
follow if we may comprehend, not doubting of it, but running through all
difficulties even with all eagrenesse. Let us (...) lawfully, and as we ought
to do that we may be crowned: and let us keep fast the profession of our hope
without wa^ering, because he is faithful that has promised.

Now in that he adds, if I may comprehend even as I (...) comprehended of
Christ Jesus, the Apostle signifies his earn^^^ desire to come unto the
perfect knowledge of Christ Jesus, that he may know fully even all the riches
of wisdom, and knowledge, and righteousness, and salvation that are hid^^^
him. For he says that he follows and earnestly laboure^^ (...) comprehend
the knowledge of Christ Jesus, even as he (...) comprehended and known of
Christ Jesus, which is mo^^ perfectly. Psalm. 139.1.2.3.12.14.15.
For he knows his downe-sitting, and vprising, he v^derstandeth his thoughts
a far of: he is about his path, and a^^^ his bed, and spieth out all his
ways; there is not a word a (...) tongue but he knows it wholly: he has
possessed his reins, and c^^^red him in his mothers womb: his eyes did see
him when he wa^ (...) without form, and in his book were all his members
written (...) day by day were fashioned when as yet there was none of them. ^he
climb up into heaven, if he lie down in hell, if he take ^e wings of the
morning, and remain in the uttermost parts (...) the sea, if he say the
darkness shall hide him, still he know^^h him altogether. Yea he sanctifies
him throughout, in spirit, ^^d soul, and body, and so likewise knows him
throughout, ^^en most perfectly. And even such a perfect knowledge ^ould he have
of Christ Jesus, that he might be able to com^^ehend with all Saints what is
the breadth, and length, and depth, (...) height of him, and that he might know
the love of Christ which ^^asseth knowledge, that so he might be filled with
all fullness of ^od. Whence all Christians are lessoned, to labor and strive
(...) the whole course of their life unto perfection, unto perfe^tion in the
knowledge of Christ, unto perfection in obedi^nce unto Christ, unto the
perfection of mortification in their earthly members by the virtue of Christ
his death, and unto the perfection of holiness and righteousness by ^he
virtue of Christ his resurrection. True it is that we cannot attain unto
perfection in any of these things, in ^he knowledge of Christ, or in obedience
unto his will, ^r in dying unto sin, or in living unto God. The Apostle ^ould
not; and how then should we, being compassed with no fewer infirmities then he
was, and being strength^ned with no more powerful assistance of the spirit
then he was? But yet we are to labor that our understandings may be perfectly
instructed in all wisdom and spiritual ^nderstanding, that our wills may be
perfectly conformed unto Gods will, that our affections and the lusts of our
flesh may be perfectly subdued unto the spirit, and that we may be perfectly
renewed in the spirit of our minds. So we are exhorted when it is said, Mat.
5.48.
Be ye perfect as your Father which is in heaven is perfect: and again, when
it is said, Be ye holy, for I am holy; 1 Pet. 1.15.
be ye holy even in all manner of conversation. And to the same purpose it is
said, That every man that has hope in JESUS CHRIST purges himself, even as
he is pure. 1 Ioh. 3.3.
In all which places the Holy Ghost does not show unto us what perfection, or
holiness, or purity is in us, even the best of us, but that we should labor
and strive unto this that we may (...) perfect as God is perfect, holy as God is
holy, pure as God i^ pure. The reason is, because God has chosen us in Chr^^^
Jesus that we should be holy and without blame before him i^ lo^^* We must not
therefore stand at a stay, Ephesians. 1.4.
or think it enough that we are before many of our brethren in knowledge,
(...) righteousness, or holiness, but as it is said of Christ Jesus (...) he
increased in wisdom, and stature, and in favor with God (...) men; so we must
increase and grow daily from knowledge (...) knowledge, from strength unto
strength, from grace unto gr^^^ until we become perfect men in Christ Jesus.

But is it not with us as it was with the stiff-necked Jews? Moses and the
Prophets ceased not to teach them out of the law what they should do, but they
would not hearken (...) obey: now the Ministers of Christ Jesus, and dispensers
of holy mysteries teach us out of the Law, and Prophets, out of the holy word
of life what we should do; but who do^^ hear or obey? If we should seek one
by one to find the count, should we find one man of a thousand that followe^^
after perfection in the knowledge of Christ, and obedience to his will, or that
hungreth in his soul to grow from grace to grace till he be fulfilled with
knowledge of his will is all wisdom, and spiritual understanding? We grow
indeed^, and we grow to perfection: but thus, we grow from bad to worse, and we
come to perfection in sin and wickedness Men never more skillful to deceive,
to oppress, to circumuent one another, and under the hypocritical show of
holiness to practice all kind of wickedness. He that was unjust is unjust
still, and he that was filthy is filthy still: he that stole steals more, he
that gave his money upon usury gives more: Yea he that went up with us unto
the house of God he will go up no more, he that feared an oath will now swear
lustily, and he that seemed to make some conscience of his ways is now quite
turned out of the way. So that our growing is from bad to worse, and which is
worse, from better to worse. Insomuch that the Lord may seem to have dealt
with us as he dealt with those of whom the Apostle writes to the Romans, Romans
1.28.
as we have not regarded to know God, so he has delivered us up unto a
reprobate mind. We have despised the riches (...) his bountifulness, and
patience, and long suffering, not ^^^ng that the bountifulness of God leads
us to repentance, Romans 2.4.
^^d therefore he has given us up to the hardness of our heart, that ^^erour
heart which cannot repent we might heap unto our selves ^ath against the day
of wrath, 5.
and of the declaration of the just ^dgement of God. Or if there be any of us
that go not thus ^^ckward as we have said, yet how many of us is there that
go^^h forward, and increases with the increasing of God? It ^^y be that some
of us think we have some knowledge of Christ, that we walk in some obedience
unto his will, that ^e are not unjust, adulterers, swearers, extortioners as
others, ^^d that we are before many of our brethren for many good ^^aces. But
do we not even sit us down, and content our ^^lues with that we have, and
never seek for more? Or if we ^^ke with the young man in the Gospel, what
lack I yet, Mat. 19.20
is it ^ot as he did, thinking that all is well, we need no more? Why ^^se is
it that we will not come unto the house of God to hear ^is word? The cry is
incessantly taken up, Ho, Esa. 55.1.
every one that ^^rsteth, come ye to the waters, and ye that have no silver,
come, ^^y, and eat. But we will not hear the voice of the charmer charm (...)
never so wisely. We know Christ well enough, or else we ^ould be sorry. Again,
why else is it that we come no faster ^^rward in the practice of denying
ungodliness and worldly ^^sts, and living soberly, and righteously, and godly
in this ^resent world? We hear the retrait from sin and wicked^esse, and the
alarm unto holiness and righteousness often ^^unding in our ears: but we
think they are things that do ^ot concern us, we post over such things to
such and such ^^en, we would willingly mend if we knew any thing amiss, and in
the mean time we wish that we may keep our selves as ^e are. Thus if we do
not go backward, yet we do not ^oe forward. But let us know that not to
increase in the know^edge of Christ is to decrease, and not to go forward in
the ^way of godliness is to go backward. Yea whatsoever con^eit we have of
our knowledge, and of our obedience, we are ^^rre from either if we do not
desire and long in our very ^oules to increase and grow forward in either. If
we know Christ, our hearts will be enflamed daily more and more (...) increase
in the knowledge of Christ, and if we have begun^^ truly to obey Christ, we
will go forward and make an end (...) our salvation with fear and trembling.
For hereby we know that we know Christ, and walk in his fear, if we feel in
our selves a longing desire to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord
and Savior Christ Jesus.

So many of us therefore as desire to have this testimon^^^ unto our own
souls that we know Christ in some measure, and that we are truly partakers of
the grace of Christ, let (...) follow after perfection, and let us grow from
grace to gr^^^ and from knowledge to knowledge till we come unto the measure
of the age of the fullness of Christ. Let us neither quench the spirit to go
backward, nor be weary of well doing to stand at a stay, but let us labor to
increase in every good grace of God with the increasing of God. As we grow
(...) years so let us labor to grow in grace, and as we grow in other
knowledge so let us strive to grow in the knowledge of Christ Jesus. If we
follow after perfection, though it be in great imperfection, it is the work
of God, and accepted with God. And if the consideration of our Imperfections
set (...) unto God by earnest prayer unto him that he will perfit^^ praise in
our weakness, and increase the graces of his holy spirit in us, it is a sure
token unto us of our spiritual growth in Christ Jesus. Whatsoever therefore
our imperfection be (...) not that trouble us. If we have not already attained
unto it, or be already perfect, let us with our Apostle follow if we may
comprehend it, even as we are comprehended of Christ Jesus: and as the Apostle
Peter in the end of his latter Epistle exhorts them unto whom he wrote, 2
Pet. 3.18.
Let us growing in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Christ
Jesus. It follows.

Brethren I count] That which follows in these two (...) verses is in
substance the very same with that in the form^ verse, amplified by a continual
allegory taken from the ^^ner of them that run in a race, but consisting of
the same members, to wit, an acknowledgement of his own imperfection in the
knowledge of Christ, and a signification of his ^agre pursuit after perfection.
The former member here is in substance the same with the former member of the
former verse. Only a loving compellation of them by the name of brethren is
here added, brethren, I count not; and the manner of speech is somewhat here
altered, in that he says, I count not my self that I have attained to it.

In that he calls them brethren, I note the Apostles kind dealing with the
Philippians to win them from that error ^herewith they were somewhat
entangled, though not bewitched and seduced by the false Teachers. Whence I
observe a necessary duty of a good Minister, which is to win them that are
falling into any error from their error by the spirit of meekness. Brethren,
says the Apostle, Gal. 6.1.
if any man be fallen by occasion into any fault, ye which are spiritual,
restore such a one with the spirit of meekness. The same course is to be taken
with them that are falling into any error. They are not to be soothed up or
flatered in their error, but they are to be reclaimed with all kindness and
mildness. As therefore is the man and his fault, so is he to be dealt withal.
Pro. 17.10.26.3.
A reproof enters more unto him that has understanding, then an hundredth
stripes into a fool. Gods children therefore are gently to be dealt withal,
but a rod belongs to the fools back. Some wounds must have wine, some oil,
some wine and oil powered into them. And therefore the Apostle had learned
sometime to come with a rod, and sometimes in the spirit of meekness,
sometimes beseeching by the tender mercies of God, and sometimes delivering
unto Satan, sometimes with beloved Brethren, and sometimes with foolish
Galatians. Let not therefore this ^or the like places deceive any to think
that God is only in the soft and still voice of brethren; but let every
Minister of Christ learn when to reprove sharply, and when to deal more
mildly, and as he sees it expedient so let him come with a rod, or in the
spirit of meekness. But I have had occasion heretofore, and shall have
hereafter to speak of this point.

Again that he says, I count not my self etc. I note the Apostles most wise
taxing of the Philippians as having suffered themselves somewhat to be
persuaded that they had already atteined to the perfect knowledge of Christ,
and were now to join unto it the works of the law. For he does not say unto
them, they among you that count themselves that they have attained to
perfection in the knowledge of Christ they are shamefully deceived; But, says
he, I your Apostle, by wh^^ ye were brought to the knowledge and obedience of
Christ, I count not my self to have attained to the perfect knowledge of
Christ; so gently admonishing them that they that count themselves perfect take
heed that they do not deceive themselves: whence I observe the wisdom that
is required in noting of faults, which is, that faults are not always to be
noted plainly by their names, but sometimes they are only wisely to be
insinuated. When the scholar has a good opinion of himself, and thinks that
he knows all things, the Master does not always repress his arrogancy by
telling him that he does not know many things whereof he vainly boasts,
but sometimes he says unto him, well I count not my self that I have attained
to the knowledge of all things, and so by his own example brings his scholar
to a more modest conce^^ of himself. Even so the Minister of Christ Jesus
laboring to repress such faults as do arise is not always plainly to
direct his speech unto them that offend, and barely to note their faults, but
sometimes he is only to propose himself as a pattern whereby they may
reform themselves. And herein is great wisdom in the minister required, to
know when plainly to note, and when only to insinuate such faults as are to
be reformed. And this wisdom they want that either censure all men, and all
faults alike, or note them and their faults more sharply, whom, and whose
faults they should touch with more mildness. And how much this wisdom is
wanting might easily be showed, if I might in this place as fitly speak of it
as there is just and great occasion to speak of it. But because it does not
much concern you unto wh^^ my speech is wholly directed I pass it over, and
proceed unto the next point.

LECTVRE LXII.
PHILIP. 3. Verse. 13.14. Brethren, I count not my self that I have attained to
it; but one thing I do, I forget that which is behind etc.
NOw to omit other notes which hence happily might be made, ye see that this of
our Apostle here is in substance the very same with the former member of the
former verse. Brethren I count not etc. The substance of which speech is an
acknowledgement of his want of perfe^tion in the knowledge of Christ, and of
the virtue of his ^esurrection etc. whereby he might attain to the glorious
resurrection of the dead. But why does the Apostle again ^ome unto the same
point, why does he again in culcate his ^mperfection in the knowledge of
Christ, and of the virtue ^f his resurrection? It was no doubt to beat out of
the Phi^ppians their conceit of perfection in the knowledge of Christ, and to
let them see what a matter of moment it was to ac^nowledge their want of
perfection in the knowledge of Christ. So the faithful people of God to beat
out all trust ^n themselves, and to show how much they thought it did concern
them so to do, cry and say, not unto us, and again, Psalm. 115.1
not unto us o Lord, but unto thy name give the praise. So the Prophet to beat
out that stupidity and blockish carelessness which ^en have of the goodness
and wonderful works of the Lord, and to let them see how much it behooves
them to observe the loving kindness of the Lord, says, Psalm. 107.
O that men would ^raise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the wonders
that he ^ath for the children of men; And again, O that men would praise ^he
Lord etc. and so four several times in that Psalm.

Hence then I observe, that the children of God are at no ^and to entertain
any conceit of any perfection in themselves ^ither in the knowledge of Christ,
or in obedience unto his will, but by all means to cast down every such
imagination, and meekely to acknowledge their imperfection. 1 Cor. 8.
It was the fault of the Corinthians, that they had such a conceit of their
perfection in the knowledge of Christ, that presuming there upon they durst to
be present at idolatrous sacrifices, and to eat of things sacrificed unto
Idols. They, they knew Christ well enough: they knew that there was but one
God, and that an Idol was nothing: they knew that they had a christian
liberty in things indifferent, and therefore they would use it at all times,
and in all places. And it was the fault of the Pharisees, often reproved in them
by our Savior, that they had such an opinion of their own holiness and
righteousness that they despised other, as appears by that parable of the
Pharisie, and the Publicane. And it is a fault plainly condemned by our
Savior where he says, Luc. 18.9.
that he came not to call the righteous but the sinners to repentance. Where
he calls them righteous that trusted in themselves that they were righteous;
Mat. 9.13.
them he came not to call: they were whole, they needed not the Physician; they
were perfect, they needed none to supply their want. Esa. 5.21.
And a woe is pronounced unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and
prudent in their own sight; i. That please themselves in their own wisdom,
and in their own knowledge, as if they had all knowledge and all
understanding. It is not then for the children of God to flatter themselves
with any conceit of any perfection in themselves either in knowledge, or in
holiness and righteousness, or any such thing. For besides that all such
conceit is so condemned as we have showed, see the inconveniences which
follows (...) which makes it to be condemned. For 1. whom it possesses it
makes them to presume of that which they have above that is meet, so that in
confidence thereof they do many things which they should not. Which appears
both by the example of the Corinthians of whom we spoke even now, whom the
conceit of their knowledge so puffed up that thereupon they presumed to be
present at idolatrous sacrifices, and to eat of things sacrificed unto idols:
and it is likewise apparent by the example of all these Heretics which at all
times have troubled the Church. For whence else did spring all their heresies,
but from this that they in an opinion of their own knowledge would not submit
themselves unto the judgment of the Church, but broched such untruths as
seemed unto them to be truths. 2. It makes them that they seek not that which
they should have, and that they disdain to be taught, as appears plainly
by the Pharisees. For they because of that opinion which they had of their own
righteousness never sought the righteousness of Christ; and they disdained to
be taught either of Christ, or of any others. Insomuch that when he that was
borne blind showed plainly by the miracle which Christ had wrought on him
that he was God, they said unto him, thou art altogether borne in sins, Joh.
9.34.
and do thou teach us? And hereupon it is I take it that Solomon says of
such men: See thou a man wise in his own conceit? Pro. 26.12.
^here is more hope of a fool then of him. More hope of a fool ^hen of him?
Why? because the fool will rather be won to hearken unto instruction, and to
receive understanding then will he. And therefore we see that when many of the
common people came unto Christ, and believed in him, Ioh. 7.31.48.49.
none of the chief Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed in him: does any of the
Rulers, or of the Pharisees believe in him? but this people which know not the
Law are cursed. I doubt not but that many more inconveniences do follow this
conceit of perfection in knowledge, or righteousness, or any such thing. But
by this which has been spoken it may appear how unmeet it is for the
children of God to grow to any such conceit or opinion of themselves.

This may teach us to cast down every imagination of any such conceited
perfection, and meekely to acknowledge our wants and imperfections. For this is
it that is pleasing and acceptable unto God, as it is written, 1 Pet. 5.5.
God resists the proud and highly conceited, and gives grace to the humble,
that are mean and weak in their own eyes: And this is it which makes the way
unto perfection both in knowledge, and in righteousness, as it is written, I
said, I will confess my sins unto the Lord, Psalm. 32.6.
and so thou forgauest the wickedness of my sin: Lo, how the acknowledgement
of our unrighteousness brings on the cloak of righteousness: and so the
begging of wisdom and knowledge in a feeling of the want of these things, is
that which does obtain wisdom and knowledge, Iam. 1.5.
as it is written, If any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God, which gives
to all men liberally, and reproacheth no men, and it shall be given him. Which
albeit it be first and principally meant of wisdom to endure patiently
afflictions, yet may it well be understood of all wisdom and knowledge
generally, the want whereof who so feels, and asks it, he receives it: for
who is he that receives knowledge, and righteousness, and every good thing?
He that asks; Matt. 7.7.
for so it is written, Ask, and it shall be given you: for whosoever asks
receives. First asking, and then receiving: first we must become beggars, and
then God gives. Now who is he that asks and beggeth, but he that feels
his wants and imperfections? The whole (as we noted before) never seeks the
Physician; and he that thinks he has enough of any thing, does never ask
after more. It is the acknowledgement of our wants and imperfections that makes
us run to the Lord, and ask, and beg of him that we want, and asking we
receive, acknowledging our wants he supplies our wants, and so by opening our
imperfections a way is made for us unto perfection.

I wish we had all of us learned to cast down every imagination of conceited
perfection in the knowledge of Christ, and to acknowledge in the spirit of
meekness that we have not yet attained unto such perfection, but that we
might well in some things submit our judgments unto others. Amongst the
Prophets and Preachers of the word this were to be wished, that in the practice
of this lesson we would be precedents unto others, that we would beat down
every high conceit of knowledge in our selves, that we would submit our
selves, and that we speak unto the judgment of the Prophets, that we would
not easily and hastily broach abroad every thing that we seem unto our selves
to know, that we would not presume to understand above that is meet to
understand, that we would not by our knowledge destroy the faith, or wound the
weak conscience of any, and that we would not set on sale as it were our
knowledge unto the vain curiosity of an^ itching humor whatsoever. Pity it
were that we should wedde our selves in liking of any opinion whereof it may
^ustly be doubted whether it be sound, that we should count (...) a
disparagement unto us to yield in any thing that we have ^^ken a liking unto,
that we should strive by our skill and ^nowledge to defend every thing that
we have said, because ^ee have said it, and think our selves able to defend
it. If any ^ans knowledge thus puff him up, he knows nothing yet ^s he ought
to know: but, as it is written, Romans 1.22.
they that profess ^hemselues thus to be wise, they become fools. Yea it were
to ^e wished that generally we would suppress this great conceit ^^at we have
of our knowledge of Christ: for what do we ^ay? Knowledge, knowledge, never
more knowledge of Christ: we know enough; men never knew more, and never ^ued
worse. But see how we deceive our selves. Did men ^euer live worse? This is an
argument that men never knew ^sse: for he that says I know him, 1 Ioh. 2.4.
and keeps not his commande^ents, is a lier, and the truth is not in him. To
know Christ is ^ot to be able to talk of Christ, and to have this
contempla^^ue and knowing knowledge, whereby we are able to dis^ourse what the
Scriptures do witness of him: but to know ^im is to have such a feeling and
sweet experience of him, and ^is mercies unto us in our own souls, as that it
both works (...) us all godly comfort, and stirs us up unto all holy
obedi^nce. See then, ye that say, never more knowledge, but never worse
living. There has been (I doubt not) as bad li^ing, and as little knowledge
as now there is. But see whether any more knowledge now then needs. Our want of
obedi^nce argues our want of knowledge. We have not yet attai^ed to perfection
in either, but we had need to mend both. and if we will grow in obedience,
let us cast away all imagi^ation of knowledge enough, and let us grow daily
more and ^ore in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ ^n a word,
conceit of perfection in the knowledge of Christ ^akes us presume too much of
that we have, and makes that ^ee seek not that we should have: therefore let
us cast down ^uery imagination of any such conceited perfection, and let ^s
meekely acknowledge our wants and imperfections. And ^et this suffice to be
spoken touching this first member, wherein the Apostle repeateth his
acknowledgement of h^^ want of perfection in the knowledge of Christ, and of
the virtue of his resurrection.

But one thing I do, etc.] In these words the Apostle repeateth the
signification of his incessant and earnest following after that perfection
which before he said he had not yet attained unto; which was the latter member
of the former verse. The manner of speech which here he uses is borrowed from
the qualities of them that run in a race. And he remembers three especial
qualities of runners, whereby he makes proof of his incessant and earnest
following after the perfection of the knowledge of Christ. The first is, that
they never look back to mark how much ground they have already run: the
second is, that they still keep their eyes upon the mark that is before them,
and still run toward it: the third is, that they still remember for what
prise they run, and therefore so run that they may obtain the prise. In
all which qualities the Apostle professes that he matched the best runners in
his Christian race: for as runners never look behind them, so he says that
he did not only never look back at the things behind him, but he quite
forgot all th^^ was past, so far was he from thinking of any merit for ought
that he had done, were it never so good. Again, as runs have always their
eye upon the mark before them, and still run toward it, so he says that
he did endeavor himself unto that which was before, still laboring as if he
would every foot stretch out his arms to catch hold of the mark, and that he
still followed toward the mark, never intermitting his course, but if he fell,
up again, and to it. Lastly, as runners make haste unto the mark for the
prise that they may obtain, so he says that he ceased not running toward
the mark for the prise of immortality with Christ in the heavens by God which
had called him in Christ Jesus. So that yea se^ the Apostle here signifies his
most eagre pursuit without intermission after perfection in the knowledge of
Christ, which only he should have in the heavens, when after his race in th^^
life ended he should reign with him for ever and ever. No^ let us see what we
may hence observe for our instruction (...) our Christian race unto perfection,
and immortality in the ^eauens.

And first it is not unworthy the noting, that the Apostle ^assing from the one
member unto the other, says, But one ^^ing I do: whereby he implies thus
much, that having not ^ee attained unto perfection, he thought it a very
necessary thing for him to follow after it with all diligence, and without ^ll
intermission. One thing I do, and that one thing I count ^ecessary. What is
that? I forget that which is behind, etc. ^o know Christ perfectly that is my
labor, and the prise for which I run. Whence I observe that there is one
thing ne^essary for all Christians, which is, that acknowledging our ^^ant of
perfection in the knowledge of Christ, we still run ^orward from perfection
to perfection, till we become perfect ^h^n in Christ Jesus. For this we must
know, that our whole ^ife is a way and race wherein we must walk and run
from ^mperfection toward perfection, and that in the whole race ^f our life it
is not for us to look back, or to stand still, but one thing is necessary,
even that we still run toward per^ection, which is the mark set only at
our races end. The necessity of this one thing our Savior showed, when he
said unto Martha, Martha, Martha, Luke 10.41.42.39.
thou art careful and troubled about many things: but one thing is needful;
Mary has chosen the better part. Why? What had Mary chosen? She troubled not
her self with other matters, but she sat her down at Jesus feet, and heard
his preaching. Mary sat down, and Martha ran up and down, being cumbred
about much serving: but yet Mary ran in the Christian race when she sat her
down at Jesus feet, and heard his preaching. She followed after the knowledge
of Christ, and of that our Savior said, that one thing was needful.

But how needful this one thing is, not many of us consider. Many Marthaes,
but not many Mary's. Many of us are troubled about many things: we have many
irons in the fire, much business to occupy our heads withal, many guests to
look unto, a great family to care for, indeed so much we have to do, that if
Jesus be preaching in his Minister, we cannot come to hear him. Not many of
us that with Mary will leave all our other business if Jesus be preaching in
his Minister, and come and hear him For to note this by the way, ye may not
imagine that Mary was any idle huswife, or that she sequestered her self
wholly from all things of the world, and gave her self only to reading, and
hearing of the word preached; but this was her commendation, that when Jesus
came unto their house, and being come began to preach, she would not lose
the opportunity, but straightway left all her other business, and sat her
down at Jesus feet, and heard his preaching. And this was the one thing that
was needful, that when he was preaching, she should come and hear him, Other
things she might do at other times, but now she was to do this. But not
many of us consider this: for when Jesus comes into our houses almost in his
Ministers preaching, so that if we will but come out of our doors to hear
him, we may sit down at his feet, and hear his preaching, yet we cannot
attend it; either we have no leisure, or else we have no list. Some of us
look back unto the things of the world, others of us stand, and love to stand
in the market all the day idle, others of us think that we have run well,
and that we may now well breathe, at least a while; but the smallest some of us
run still forward, and grow from grace to grace. Well, let us at length with
our Apostle count our selves that we have not attained to that we should, and
this one thing which is needful let us do, let us forget that which is
behind.

I forget, etc.] Here I note the Apostles running in his Christian race after
that one thing which was needful, whereunto he had not yet attained, and
therein the manner how be did run in his Christian race. Like a good runner
he ran and never looked behind him, nay he forgot that which was behind, he
never minded or thought of any thing that was behind him, of any thing that he
had done. Yea indeed, forgot he all both the good and the bad things which he
had done? Psalm. 51.3. Gal. 1.13.
David did not so: for he said that his sin was ever before him; yea and
himself often speaks of his persecution of the Church. True indeed, and good
it is that we should not forget our sins against our God: for the
remembrance of our sins is both good to humble us, and to represent unto us
Gods mercies toward us. It was not then the sins which he had done which he
forgot, but he forgot even all the ^od things that he had done, lest by taking
too great plea^^re in the remembrance of them, he should not follow so ^^rd
toward the mark as he ought. Yea but if he forgot all ^e good things that he
had done, how does he so often re^ember them in diverse his epistles? I have,
says he, Rom 15.17
whereof may rejoice in Christ Jesus in those things which pertain to God. and
then he speaks of the obedience of the Gentiles by his ^inisterie, and of his
diligence in preaching where Christ had ^ot been named, etc. And again: 1
Cor. 15.10.
His grace (says he) in me ^s not in vain, but I labored more abundantly
then they all. and in his latter epistle he showed himself so little
forgetful (...) them, 2 Cor. 11.
that he makes a large bedrowle of such things as he ^^d suffered for Christ
his sake. True indeed, he forgot them ^ot, when the remembrance of them did
make for the glory ^f Christ Jesus, or the necessary defense o^ his ministry
and ^postleship: but he forgot them in respect of any such use as ^e false
teachers taught to make of such things. He was not ^^oud of them, he
challenged no perfection by them, he repo^^d no confidence in them, he did not
think of any merit by ^^em, but in these respects he quite forgot them, lest
by such ^^membrance of them he should be hindered in the race that ^e was
running. Thus then ye how see how the Apostle running (...) his race did
forget that which was behind.

And hence I observe, that in the Christian race which we ^e to run, we are
not to look back on the pleasures of ^e flesh, or the things of the world, or
any good that we have ^one, to repose any confidence therein, but we are quite
to ^orget every thing which any way may hinder us in our race ^owards the mark
that is set before us. For as our Savior ^^ith, No man that puts his hand
to the plough, ^
and looks ^^cke, is apt to the kingdom of God. Remember Lots wife: she
^^rned back, and was turned into a pillar of salt. Remember the ^hildren of
Israel: Number. 1
they turned back in their hearts after the ^esh-pots of Egypt, and they were
overthrown in the wilder^esse. Are ye so foolish, says the Apostle to the
Galatians, G^^
that after ye have begun in the spirit, ye would now be made perf ct by
the flesh? 2 Pet. 2.20 21.
It had been better (says Peter) not to have known the way of
righteousness, then after we have known it to turn^ away from the holy
commandment. The reason is given by the same Apostle: For if after we have
escaped from the filthiness of the world through the knowledge of the Lord,
and of the Savior Jesus Christ, we be yet again tangled therein, and
overcome, the latter end is worse then the beginning. Being then in the race of
the spirit, we may not look back unto the flesh; and having tasted of the
good word of God, we may not turn away from the holy commandment, lest a
worse thing come unto us. Now then will ye know who they are that look back,
and turn aside out of the right way wherein they should walk? Surely all they
that set their affections on the things which are on the earth, and not on the
things which are above: for having given our names unto God in our Baptism, we
have renounced the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, the pride of life,
the things of the world, the devil, and all his works. If then we shall
suffer our selves to be snared with any of these, we look back: yea if we
love father or mother, if we love wife or children more then Christ, we look
back: ye^ (...) we repose any confidence in any good that we have done, or in
any cross that we have suffered, we look back, we do not forget that
which is behind: for so says our Savior, He that loves father or mother,
Matt. 10.37.
son or daughter more then me, i^ not worthy of me. Not worthy of him? Why?
Because when he should look forward unto Christ, he looks back unto these.
Rom 9.32.
And the Apostle says that Israel attained not unto the Law of righteousness,
because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the Law;
that is, because they looked not straight forward with the eyes of faith unto
Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, but looked back upon the merits of
their works to be made righteous thereby. They reposed the confidence of their
righteousness in the works of the Law, and therein looked back unto the Law,
when they should have looked forward by faith unto Christ. So that if we
repose any confidence in our works, like ill runners we look^ back.

What shall we say then unto those merit-mongers that look to gain heaven by
the merit of their works? They ^^ke pleasure in such works as they have done;
they are as ^uch in love with them as ever Samson was with Delilah, Judge. 16.
they (...) their life in the lap of their works, and rejoice in them in the
crown of their life. Judge then how they run in ^e Christian race, whether
they have forgotten all behind ^em, whether they look not back unto that
which is be^^nde. You will easily judge, and ye will easily see, that because
^ey sleep on the knees of their works, as of their Delilah, ^^d lay their
life in the lap of their works, they are very ^^e to be betrayed into the
hands of their cruel enemies, the ^euill and his Angels, and to have far
less comfort of their ^e then ever had Samson.

What shall we say likewise unto those that with Demas em^^ace this present
world, and incline their hearts unto coue^^usnesse, which is idolatry? Unto
those that live at ease in ^^on, and eat, and drink, and fill themselves with
pleasures, ^retching themselves upon their beds, rising up to play, sing^^g to
the sound of the Viole, inuenting to themselves instru^ents of music, and in
a word so living as if they thought ^^at either now they must take their
pleasure, or else they ^ust never have it? Are not all these badde runners?
Have ^hese forgotten that which is behind? Do they not look ^acke? The point
is easily answered, it is a clear case. Yea ^any bad runners there are in the
Christian race, even so ma^y as there are lookers back unto honor, wealth,
pleasure, ^rofit, ease, favor, and whatsoever the world esteems of. As for
us, men and brethren, let us so run that we may ob^aine: and therefore let
us cast away every thing that presses ^owne, and the sin that hangs so
fast on, let us abandon ^uery thing which may hinder us in our race, let us not
look ^acke unto honors, riches, pleasures, profits, or the like, which may
cause us either to turn back, or to stand still, but ^et us with the Apostle
forget that which is behind, and en^euour our selves unto that which is before.

LECTVRE LXIII.
PHILIP. 3. Verse 14. And endeavor my self unto that which is before (...)
follow hard toward the mark, for the prise of the high calling, etc.
(...).
THere are also two other notable qualities o^ runners, whereby the Apostles
makes proof of his incessant running in his Christian ra^^. The former is,
that good runners keep their eyes still upon the mark before them, and run
hard toward it. In this quality also the Apostle professes that he marched
(...) the best runners, in the words following, when he says th^^ he
endeavored himself unto that etc. And I endeavor my self etc. (...).
] The word which the Apostle here uses when he says that he endeavored
himself, signifies that as good ren^^^ when they come near unto the mark
stretch out their head, and hands, and whole body to take hold of them that
run with them, or of the mark that is before them, so he in his whole race
so labored unto that which was before, as if he were still stretching out his
arms to take hold of it. The word * likewise which he uses in the next phrase
of speech where he says that he followed hard toward the mark, signifies
that he followed as one that would not leave till he had that which he
followed, but if he fell he would up again and to it, and not give over, no
more than the persecuter does till he have him whom he persecuteth. That which
is before whereunto he endeavors himself, that which is the mark toward
which he follows, is Christ Jesus, the excellent and perfect knowledge of whom
is such that he calls him his mark, that is, that whereon his eyes were wholly
and only set in the whole course of his Christian race. As therefore the
Apostle before professed that in his Christian race he never looked back, but
forgot that which was behind, so now he profes^^^h that still he ran
forward, so laboring in his whole race ^o that which was before, as if he were
still stretching out (...) body to take hold of it, and so following as one
that ^^uld never give over, but if he fell, would up and to it ^^ine, still
pressing toward the mark, Christ Jesus, on ^^om, as on his mark, his eyes
were wholly and only set in (...) whole course of his Christian race.

Whence I observe that in the Christian race which we are (...) run, we are
not to stand still, or to give over, but with all ^^ernesse, and all
perseverance still to press toward the ^^rke that is set before us at our
races end. For who is he that ^^^taineth the crown, but he that strives
lawfully, bearing ^^brunts, and running through all difficulties without
shrink^^^? As it is written, 1 Timothy 2.5.
No man is crowned except he strive as he ^^ght to do, fighting a good fight,
and finishing his course. And ^^o is he that shall be saved, but he that
holds out a con^^t course unto the end? as it is written, Mat. 10 22 Ap^c.
2.26.27.
He that endures ^o the end he shall be saved. And again, He that over
comes ^^d keeps my works unto the end, to him will I give power over
^^ions, and he shall rule them with a rod of iron, and as the ves^^ of a potter
shall they be broken. And in whom does God ^ell as in his holy house, but in
them that keep fast the pro^^ion of their hope unto the end? as it is written,
We are Gods ^^se, if we hold fast the confidence, Heb. 3.6.
and the rejoicing of our hope ^to the end. And hereupon are those often
exhortations in ^^ly scripture: 2 Timothy 3.14
Continue thou in the things that thou have lear^^d, and art persuaded thereof
etc. And again, Pass the time (...) your dwelling here in fear. 1 Pet. 1.17.
He does not measure the ac^unt of our obedience unto God by days, or months,
or ^^ares, but pass (says he) the time of your dwelling here, even ^^e whole
race of your life with fear, making an end of your ^^^uation with fear and
trembling. Heb. 3.12.14.
And again the Apostle (...) the Hebrews, Take heed, brethren, lest at any
time there be ^any of you an evil heart, and unfaithful, to depart away from
the ^^ing God. For (says he) we are made partakers of Christ, if we ^^epe sure
unto the end the beginning wherewith we are vpholden. ^ea the Apostles never
ceased to exhort all to continue in the ^ace of God, and with purpose of heart
to cleave unto the Lord. Act. 13.43.11.23.
If then we will hearken unto the exhortation of the Holy Ghost, if we will
obtain the crown and be saved, we may not faint or give over in our Christian
race, but we must hol^ out unto the end. To enter the lists of this race, and
to begi^ well is somewhat, but to small purpose unless by continuance in
well-doing we do approve our running. Judas may ser^^ for example, whom it
little profited that he had run (...) because afterward he went astray from
that ministration an^ Apostleship which he had obtained with the rest of the
Apostles, and purchased unto himself a field with the reward o^ iniquity.
Ezekiel. 18.24
For as the Prophet says, so is it most true, If the righteous man shall
forsake his righteousness, the Lord will also forget the righteousness that
he has done: and the cause is most (...) why our sins should be imputed unto
us, if at any time we should faint and fall in the way. Having then begun well,
an^ in the spirit, our care must be to continue our course, n^^ standing still
like unto those idle ones reproved in the gospel, Mat. 20.6.
or giving over to run, but still following hard toward the mark. It may be
that running we may stumble, and fall: (...) Peter did, Matt 26. 2 Cor. 12.7.
Mat. 26.56
when he denied his master; as Paul did, when a prick was given him in the
flesh, the messenger of Satan to before him; and as all the Disciples did, when
they forsook Christ and fled: but what must we do? we must up again, and
too^; we must break of our sins by righteousness, and our iniquities by
mercifulness: yea if with the Church of Ephes^^ we have left our first love,
Apoc. 2.5.
we must remember from whence we ar^ fallen, and repent, and do the first
works. We have a saying, that it is no shame to take a fall, but it is a shame
to lie still. I cannot say that in this Christian race it is no shame to take a
fall: for our falls by sinning against our God should make us for shame to
cover our faces: but when we are fallen into any sin to lie still and sleep
in sin, and to give over running in our Christian race, this will turn to
our utter shame and confusion. If therefore in running we fall, yet must we v^
again, and run as if our strength were renewed by our fa^^ We may not be
weary of well-doing, but by continuance^^ well-doing we must run on the race
that is set before us, knowing that in due season we shall reap if we faint
not. Gal. 6.9.
Add unto that reason which has been mentioned, that only perseue^ance unto
the end has the promise of the crown of righteousness and salvation; this
also, that God measures not his gifts unto us by months or years, but his
mercy and his ^oue toward us endure for ever. If he then be a loving Lord unto
us, who will not change his favor toward us for ever, ^e may not serve him by
count of days, but to the last hour ^e must be faithful. A perfect God must
have a perfect ser^ant, an everlasting God a perpetual servant; and if we fall
^t the last, we are fallen from him, and not he from us, and our ^ondemnation
is of our selves.

This then should teach us, to shake of all such impedi^ents as either clog us
that we cannot run, or cause us to ^reake of when we should continue running.
Those that ^^eepe through adversity should be as though they wept not; those
that rejoice through prosperity should be as though ^hey rejoiced not; those
that have wives as though they had ^one, those that buy as though they
possessed not, and they that use this world as though they used it not.
Poverty, nor ^iches, honor, nor dishonor, evil report, nor good report should
take such hold of us as that they should stay us from ^unning that race that is
set before us, but through all these ^e should run as if there were no such
burden upon us. He that is to run in a race will not gird on him his armor,
but ^ather he will strip himself, and turn himself almost naked. ^uen sow
in our Christian race should either strip our selves ^s it were, and utterly
shake of all such things as ordinarily are ^^upediments in this race, or they
should be as if they were ^haken of, no troublers of us in our race.

But how far otherwise is it with us? Every thing almost makes us sit down
and quite give over running. If riches ^ncrease we sit us down, and set our
hearts upon them, and ^here is an end of our race. If poverty do befall us
we sit (...), down, and either murmr and repine against the Lord, or else
fall to robbing and stealing, and such other unlawful means to relieve our
state, and there is an end of our race. If honor, and authority, and credit
amongst men grow upon us, we sit us down, and devise with our selves how we
may best maintain our state, our place, our calling, and our credit and there
is an end of our race. If we be disgraced, or suffer any kind of wrong we sit
us down, and bethink our selves how we may be revenged of him that has done
us this wrong, or this dishonor, and there is an end of our race. If by the
mercy of God through painful study we have atteined to some knowledge we sit
us down, and consider what reward we may justly look for our learning, and
we seek, and labor, and post after that, and there is an end of our race.
Thus every thing almost makes us sit down, and quite give over running. But
(men and brethren) let there be in us the same mind that was in our Apostle.
Let us endeavor unto that which is before, and let us follow hard toward the
mark. If we continue in the word of the Lord, and walk in his ways we are
Christ his disciples. (...) 31.
Let us therefore continue in the grace of God, and with purpose of heart
cleave steadfastly unto the Lord. The ambitious man he does not so much think
of his present honor, as his mind runs upon a plus vltra, he looks still
forward, and gladly he would be higher. The covetous man likewise he does not
so much think what riches he has, as his mind runs upon more, more, and
still he looks forward after more and more. Shall they still look forward
toward these vain and transitory things, and so thirst after them that the
more of them they have the more they run after them; and shall not we much
more look forward toward the mark that is set before us in our Christian
race, and the ne^rer that we come to it run the faster unto it? Let the
children of light learn this wisdom of the children of this generation, to
follow hard toward the mark that is set before them. Let us so run that we
may obtain: and let us never be weary of well-doing: for in due season we
shall reap if we faint not. Blessed is he that continues unto the end, for he
shall be saved.

The second thing which hence I observe is, what mark we must propose unto our
selves in running our Christian race unto which we must endeavor, toward which
we must follow, and which we must always have in our eyes, and that i^ Christ
Jesus, that we may perfectly know him, whom to know is life everlasting. On
Christ Jesus must our eyes always be set, and on the perfect knowledge of him
must our desire be settled. For he is the way, the truth, and the life: the way,
Joh. 14.6.
therefore we must begin in him, continue in him, and end in him, walking by
him unto him: He is the truth, we must still therefore look toward him if we
will not be deceived: He ^s the life, we must therefore run unto him if we
will not ^leepe in death. He is Alpha, and Omega, the beginning, and ^he
ending, in regard both of the being, and of the power, and ^f the actions, and
of the dispositions of all creatures, so that ^s of him, and through him, and
for him are all things, so unto him and his glory are all things to be
referred. And see that great reason there is to move us to look still toward
^im as the mark toward which we are to follow as hard as we ^an. For does not
he still look toward us, and call upon us, ^rying and saying, Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that are weary and la^en, and I will ease you? Does he
not stand still stretching out ^is arms, as always most ready to receive us
if we will come unto him? Nay does he not oftentimes when we are turning ^ut of
the right way wherein we should walk, hook us in ^gaine with his rod and his
staff, and lead us as it were by the and unto himself? Yea such is the loving
kindness of our ^weet Savior, that he will have us to run after him, and he
^ill draw us that we may run after him; that he will have us ^o follow hard
toward him as our mark, and he will guide v^ (...) our way which leads unto
him; that he will have us to ^ake speed to come unto him, and he will enlarge
our hearts that we may run the way of his commandments, and so ^ome unto
him. Such is the mark set at the end of our Chri^tian race, not a dead mark
which helps the runner nothing in his race, but drawing us unto himself,
that where he (...) there we may be also. This was the mark that the Apostle
^anne at, and this is the mark that we should run at, to ^now him perfitly,
and the virtue of his resurrection etc, ^hereby we might attain to the
resurrection etc.

Here then we learn why it is that so few run as they ought in the Christian
race. The most part of men have an other mark that they run at. Some run
at riches, some at honors, some at pleasures, some at ease, some at skill and
knowledge in the things that are done under the Sun, and on these things are
their eyes set, and their minds wholly bent. But the least sum make Christ
Jesus the mark whereat they run; to know him is the thing whereon the fewest
minds are bent: He is farthest out of light, and farthest out of mind with
the most men. Not running then a^ the right mark, how can we but run amiss?
Beloved, ye see what the mark is whereat we should aim in the whole course
of our life. Let the children of this world prick at their several marks as
they list; but let us follow hard toward the mark Christ Jesus. He is that
mark whereat if we be Christians we should aim in our whole race. Let our
eyes be still set, and our minds always bent upon him. If we walk toward
him he will direct our goings in his paths (...) for his own names sake. A
better mark we cannot have, and another mark we ought not to have. There is
no running, if we run as we ought, but to him; neither any running to him,
but by him. Let us therefore by him run unto him, and in all things let us
still look unto him. The race is well run when at the races end we come to
such a mark; and well may we run through cold and nakedness, through stripes
and imprisonments, and all kind of difficulties to come to such a mark:
whereunto we can no sooner come, but straight we have the prize for which we
run, even glory and immortality in the highest heavens. Let us therefore so
run that we may obtain, let us run till we come unto the mark, that we
may obtain the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. And let this
suffice to be spoken touching the second quality of runners.

The third quality of runners whereby the Apostle makes proof of his
incessant running in his Christian race, is this, that runners keeping in mind
the price for which they run, make haste unto the mark for the price that
they may obtain. In this also the Apostle professes that he matched even the
best runners, in the last words when he says, that (...) followed hard toward
the mark for the price of etc. In which words by the price is signified that
inheritance immortal and undefiled which is reserved in heaven for us; and it
is called ^e price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, because it (...)
the glory of Gods children whereunto God from on high ^^th called us in Christ
Jesus. As therefore the Apostle before ^rofessed that he ran and looked not
back to that which was ^ehinde, and that he ran and gave not over to follow
that ^hereon his eyes were always set; so now he professes that ^e ran and
hastened his running for to obtain the price of ^^ory and immortality in the
heavens, whereunto he was ^^lled by God in Christ Jesus. All sufficient
proofs that the ^postle came apace as he that desired to obtain.

Hence then I observe, that life everlasting and glory in the ^eauens is the
price and reward of our holy and constant run^ing in our Christian race. Which
our Savior signifies ^hen unto them that endure hatred, persecution, and
contu^elies for his sake he says, Rejoice and be glad, Mat. 5.12.
for great is your ^^ward in heaven. Our Apostle likewise shows the same,
^here he says, Romans 2.6, 7.
that God will reward every man according to his ^orkes; to them which by
continuance in well-doing seek glory, ^^d honor, and immortality, eternal
life. Col. 3.23.24.
And to the Colossians ^^so, where speaking unto servants he says, whatsoever
ye do, ^e it heartily as to the Lord, knowing that of the Lord ye shall
re^^iue the reward of the inheritance. All which places, and many ^ther which
might be produced to the like purpose, do ^lainely show, that eternal life is
the reward of our holy ^alking with God in such good works as he has ordained
^^at we should walk in them. A notable price to run for, and a notable
encouragement unto the runner. For can we ^unne for a better price then for
eternal life in the heavens? Or can a better reward for our encouragement in
our Chri^^ian race be given us than eternal life in the heavens? How should
not this make us to provoke one another unto love, and good works? How should
not this make us run the ^ace of a holy life, breaking through all
impediments, and ^ot intermitting our course unto the end?

But here we must know that though we run for this prize, ^et this prize is not
given us for the merit of our running, and though this prize be the reward of
our running, yet do we not merit this reward for our running. Romans 9.16.
For it is not in him the wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that
shows mercy. The Lord in mercy has set down this prize of our running, and
in the like mercy gives it unto him that runs out unto the mark, but not
for the merit of his running. This one place at this time may serve for a full
proof of this point. The Apostle ran for the prize, but it was for the prize
of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. He does not say for the prize that
was due unto him; albeit it was due unto him, though not for his merits sake,
yet for the promise sake made in mercy: but he ran for the prize of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus. Which in that it was the prize of the high
calling of God, it is plain that it is given in mercy by him that has called
us in mercy, and likewise in that it is the prize etc. in Christ Jesus, it is
plain that it is given in merc^^ through Christ Jesus, in whom only we are
called unto glory and life everlasting. It is ordained then that we should
run for this prize: for no man obtains it but he that runs for it, and
therefore the Apostle ran for it: but it is the prize of our high calling to
be the sons of God, given us in mercy by God that has called us in mercy,
and given (...) in Christ Jesus by God that has called us in Christ Jesus to
be partakers of his glory.

Here then behold and wonder at the loving kindness of our God. We must run
and we shall be very well rewarded. For if we run, albeit we can merit nothing
by our running, because when we have done what we can we are but unprofitable
servants, yet in mercy will he give us an everlasting crown of glory. A good
reward for a mean service performed but meanly by him that runs the best.
And therefore the greater the goodness of our God who gives such reward in
mercy where there wants all merit. The mercy of our God should stir up
our thankfulness unto our God, and the great reward which in mercy he does give
should make (...) run the way of his commandementes. Romans 8.18.
All that ever we can do or suffer is not worthy of that glory which shall be
showed unto us. Yet if we suffer willingly for Christ his sake and do the
works of our calling, he will in mercy give unto us an incorruptible crown of
glory. Let our mouths there^^re be filled with his praise and honor all the
day long who ^^ere there wants merit shows such mercy. And if du^, or love
cannot prevail with us, yet let this inestimable ^^ward persuade us to run
the way of his commande^entes. In a word we know that our labor shall not be
in ^ine in the Lord. Let us therefore abound in every good ^orke, and let us
run with patience the race that is set be^^re us.

The next and last thing which hence I observe, is that as ^od has chosen us
in Christ Jesus, so has he called us in christ Jesus. Ephesians. 1.4.
The former appears by the Epistle to the E^^esians; the later by this place
of our Apostle, and many o^^ers. Yea Christ Jesus alone it is in whom and for
whom ^^d has blessed us with all spiritual blessing in heavenly things, 3.
(...) the Apostle both speaks there, and manifestly shows ^oth there, and
elsewhere. For in him are we predestinate, (...) him are we chosen, in him are
we called, in him are we a^^pted, in him are we justified, in him are we
sanctified, and (...) him through hope are we glorified, and in him are all ^e
promises made unto us both of the life present, and of ^at that is to come. If
we had been called in Peter, or in ^aule, or in Moses, then might we have
believed in them, and looked unto them as unto the mark that is set before us.
^ut now that we are called in Christ Jesus, we are to believe in ^^m, and
always to look toward him in the whole course ^f our life. In him we have
all things, and in him shall our ^^y be made perfect.

Let this then teach us to rejoice only in Christ Jesus, in whom only we are
called, and in whom only we are ^lessed. In our selves we are nothing else
but bondslaues of ^atan, Children of wrath, a naughty and crooked nation,
vn^ble altogether to think, or speak, or do any thing that is ^ood,
abominable, disobedient, unto every good work re^robate, and not only near
unto cursing, but cursed. But in ^ur Christ Jesus we are freede from sin and
condemnation, and made the servants of righteousness and heirs of salvation,
^^d in him we are called unto that high calling to be the sons of God, and have
all the priueledges that belong unto the sons of God. Let us therefore
rejoice in him alwaie, let our songs be made ever of him and daily let us
praise him. Let us judge whatsoever is best to be but dung for the excellent
knowledge sake of him, and let us in all things grow up in him etc.

LECTVRE LXIV.
PHILIP. 3. Verse. 15.16. Let us therefore as many as be perfect be th^^ ^^ded:
and if ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal etc.
NOw the Apostle having thus in particular told the Philippians what he thought
of Christ, and likewise of all things without Christ, (...) goes from the
particular unto the general and exhorts that this truth which he ha^^
professed may be generally received, and approved. And if any of them will not
happily presently receive this truth, yet he signifies his hope that God will
afterward reveal it to them that they may embrace it wi^h him, and in the
mean time till God reveal it and make it known unto them, he exhorts that
such grounds of the truth as already they had might with one accord be received
and maintained. This I take to be the general meaning of these words in these
two verses. Now let us yet a little more particularly sift and examine the
meaning of them.

Let us, says the Apostle etc.] This speech, ye see, is exhortatiue in that
he says, let us be thus minded; and ye see like wise that the exhortation is
made by way of conclusion from the particular example of the Apostle unto the
Philippi^^^^ general, in that he says, Let us therefore as many as be
perfe^^; and ye see that it is to bring over his own private example unto a
general doctrine in that he says, Let us therefore as many ^^s be perfect be
thus minded. Let us therefore: therefore, why? even because I your Apostle by
whom ye have believed am ^hus minded as I have told you, let us therefore as
many as be perfect be thus minded. Thus minded? How? to renounce all
confidence in the flesh, to judge all our own righteousness by works
whatsoever to be but dung, to rejoice only in Christ Jesus, and his
righteousness which is through faith, to thirst after the knowledge of Christ,
and of the virtue of his resurrection, and acknowledging our want of perfection
in the knowledge of Christ, incessantly to run forward in the Christian race
unto perfection forgetting that which is behind, and endeavoring our selves
unto that which is before, and following hard toward the mark for the prize
of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, let us be thus minded, even as many
of us as be perfect. Yea, but who were those? were there any such? Did not the
Apostle immediately before deny that he was perfect? How then does he now say,
let us as many as be perfect etc. We must understand that the Apostle does not
here speak of any that were perfect indeed either in knowledge, or in
obedience, but he speaks partly unto those that thought they were perfect,
and partly unto those that by their holy walking showed that they were in the
way to perfection, that both they that thought themselves perfect, and they
likewise that by their holy walking showed plainly that they were in a better
way to perfection than others, would think as he did touching the points
before mentioned, and controuersed betwixt him and the false Teachers. Yea but
is not his exhortation generally unto all? Why then does he require it of them
that be perfect? His exhortation is indeed general unto all that all would
think as he did touching the points mentioned before from verse 3. to this
15. But lest any man should think that he spoke especially unto the vulgar
sort of men, and prescribed this rule only unto those that were babes in
Christ, therefore he shows precisely that this is a rule which whosoever
among them thought himself to be, or were more perfect than others ought to
keep, even to be so minded as Paul was in the things mentioned above. And
besides it was not so needful to speak unto them by name as it were that knew
and acknowledged their own wants, that they should not think themselves
perfect, as to them that either thought themselves, or were thought of others
to be perfect. Unto them principally as by name the admonition was most
needful that they should be so minded as Paul was, as in the rest of the
points, so in the acknowledgement of their own imperfection, and in the
pursuit after perfection. It follows.

And if ye be otherwise minded etc.] This shows that the Apostle thought or
rather knew that he should not be able to persuade all to be of the same mind
with him in the things mentioned, but that some through the suggestions of the
false Teachers would think otherwise then he thought of those points. Yet see
how kindly he deals with those, If, says he, ye be otherwise minded so that
ye do not yet think as I your Apostle do of these points, even of Christian
perfection, but rather are of another judgment, yet I doubt not but as God
has begun to reveal his son Jesus Christ unto you by my preaching, so he
will also in his good time reveal and make known unto you this same thing
wherein ye now dissent in judgment from me, and will not suffer you to be
holden of this error; he will I doubt not in his good time by the ministry of
his servants through the powerful operation of the holy spirit open the dim
eyes of your dark understanding, that ye may see both that ye err in this
wherein ye dissent from me, and that this is the truth whereunto I now exhort
you. To gather then the sum of the Apostles meaning in these words, it is as
much as if the Apostle had thus said: I am thus minded, as I have told you,
touching mine own righteousness which is by works, touching the righteousness
of Christ which is through faith, and touching Christian perfection in
general. Let us therefore even all of us, not only those which are but babes
in Christ, or of the vulgar sort, but even as many as either think our selves,
or are thought by others to be perfect be thus minded as I am touching these
points: and if any of you dissent in judgment from me, and do not think as
I do touching Christian perfection. God will, no doubt, in his good time by
the ministry of his servants through the powerful working of the holy Ghost
open the dim eyes of your dark understanding, that ye may see both your own
error in dissenting from me, and the truth of that whereunto I exhort you.
Which being the Apostles meaning, as I take it, in this verse, now let us see
what observation we may gather hence for our use and instruction.

1. Therefore in the Apostles exhortation when he says, let ^s as many as be
perfect be thus minded, I note that as many as follow after Christian
perfection are to be so minded touching works, and touching Christ as the
Apostle was; inasmuch as they are not perfect that think themselves already
perfect either in the knowledge of Christ, or in holy obedience, but they
rather that acknowledging that they have not yet attained unto perfection, do
renounce all things without Christ, rejoice only in Christ, and feeling a sense
of the knowledge of Christ, and of the virtue of his resurrection in
themselves, labor daily more and more to grow with all spiritual growth
therein in certain hope of the prize of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus. Hence then I observe what Christian perfection is, namely a gift of the
holy Ghost whereby we renounce the flesh, rejoice in Christ, and have such a
sense of the knowledge of Christ, and of the virtue of his resurrection in our
selves, that acknowledging our want of perfection therein we labor to grow and
increase daily more and more therein, and so incessantly run after perfection
in them, that as good runners we forget that which is behind, and endeavor our
selves to that which is before, and follow hard toward the mark for the prize
of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. So that unto Christian perfection
there are four things necessarily requisite. The first whereof is,
justification by the righteousness of Christ imputed to us through faith
without works. For so only are we perfect if we be found in Christ Jesus, not
having our own righteousness which is by works, but that which is through the
faith of Christ, even the righteousness of God through faith. And therefore
the Apostle tells the Colossians in the next Epistle, that he and Timothy
preached and taught every man in all wisdom, Col. 1.28.2.10.
that they might present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. And in the next
Chapter he tells them that they are complete in Christ, in whom dwells all
the fullness of the godhead bodily. Both which places plainly show that were
perfect; but how? not in our selves, but in Christ Jesus. And in him only are
we perfect, because only being in him no^ our sins, but Christ his
righteousness is imputed unto v^ and because all perfection is originally in
him, and is only derived unto us as we are in him. Being then in him our s^nne
and imperfections are hid and covered, being in him his righteousness and
obedience are imputed and reckoned unto us, and being in him that perfection
which originally is in him is derived unto us, and so only are our
imperfections covered, his righteousness imputed, and his perfection derived
unto us as we are in him. For if any man be not in him he is cast out as a
branch and withers. Ioh. 15.6.
This then is necessarily requisite unto Christian perfection that we be in
Christ Jesus, not having our own righteousness by works, but his
righteousness by faith. And from this as from the fountain do all those
other things which are necessary unto Christian perfection issue and spring.

The 2. thing necessarily requisite unto Christian perfect^on is our
regeneration and sanctification by the spirit of God, for so only are we
perfect if by the power of the quickening spirit working on our souls and
spirits we have a feeling knowledge of Christ Jesus in our own souls, and do
feel in our selves a dying unto sin and a living unto righteousness by the
virtue of Christ his death and resurrection. And therefore the holy Ghost
exhorting us often to be perfect, does also exhort us to cleanse our selves
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 13.11 7.1.
and to grow up unto full holiness in the fear of God; to mortify the deeds
of the flesh, and to be renewed in the spirit of our minds. And why? No doubt
one cause is, because otherwise we cannot be as he exhorts us to be, perfect.
For what perfection can there be where there is no dying unto sin which is
our bane and imperfection, and no living a holiness and righteousness, which is
the only way unto perfection? Our sins do make a separation between us and
our ^od in whom alone we are perfect, Es. 59.2.
and it is the spirit of san^ification whereby we are engraffed into Christ
Jesus, in whom only we are perfect. This then is also requisite unto ^hristian
perfection, that we feel in our selves a mortificati^ of the old man, and a
quickening of the new man through ^^e power of the spirit by the virtue of
Christ his death and ^^surrection.

The third thing necessarily requisite unto Christian per^^ction is a feeling
and acknowledgement of our own imper^^ction both in knowledge, and in
obedience: for so only do ^^e grow unto Christian perfection, if in an holy
feeling of ^^r wants and imperfections we pour out our complaints unto our
God, and acknowledge our wants unto the Lord. It ^as the conceit of their
perfect knowledge, that made the ^orinthians that they knew nothing as they
ought to know: and it was the conceit of their own perfect righteousness ^^at
made the Pharisees that they never sought the true perfect ^^ghteousnesse of
Christ Jesus. But David having said, 2 Sa^. 12.13
I have ^^ned against the Lord, Luc. 18.14.
streight-way the Prophet Nathan said unto him, the Lord also has put away thy
sin: And the Publi^ane having smitten his breast, and said, O God be
merciful unto me a sinner, the holy Ghost gives him this testimony that ^e
d^parted to his house justified rather then the Pharsie, or if we ^^ke the
sense of the place, he departed home to his house iu^^ified, and not the
Pharisie. Luc. 23 41.42.43.
And the Thief upon the cross ^auing first confessed and said, we are indeed
righteously here, ^^r we receive things worthy of that we have done; and
afterward ^raied and said, Lord remember me when thou come into thy
^ingdome, by and by Jesus said unto him, verily I say unto thee (...) day shall
thou be with me in Paradise. And generally this is ^rue, that only they follow
Christ who deny themselves, on^y they come unto God who feel their wants in
themselves, ^nely they seek unto God who are confounded in themselves, and
consequently only they come unto Christian perfection those hearts are touched
with the feeling of their imperfe^tions. This then is also requisite unto
Christian perfection that in an holy feeling of our own wants we acknowledge
our imperfection in every grace of God.

The 4. thing necessarily requisite unto Christian perfection is, an earnest
endeavor and constant care to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord
and Savior Christ Jesus. For so only are we perfect in some degree if we
follow hard after perfection, and if with an enflamed desire after the good
things of God we labor to increase daily more and more in all holiness and
righteousness. And therefore the Apostle exhorts saying, Heb. 12.14. (...).
Follow hard, for so the word signifies, fol^^^ hard after peace with all men,
and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. Where the Apostle does
not limit his exhortation by any circumstance of time, but follow in thy
nonage, follow in thy ripe age, follow in thine old age, still follow; for
still it is said unto thee, follow hard after peace and holiness. And why?
even because none ouertaketh but he that follo^eth. Mat. 5.6.
And our Savior pronounces a blessing upon the hea^ (...) them that hunger
and thirst after righteousness. Which shewe^^ that where there is this fervent
desire to grow up in godliness, and this hungring and thirsting in our souls
after the things that belong unto our peace there is a blessing upon the hea^
of every one that does so. And why did our Apostle follow hard that he might
comprehend even as he was comprehended of Christ Jesus, but because they only
at length attain unto perfection who in the mean time follow hard after it.
This then is also requisite unto Christian perfection that we labor to grow
up in godliness, and to increase in all manner holy conversation. That all
these things are necessarily requisite unto Christian perfection this general
exhortation inferred by way of conclusion upon the things mentioned in the
particular example of our Apostle shows most plainly; as also that in these
things alone does Christian perfection consist, unless any man will take upon
him more exactly to describe it than the Apostle has done.

Hence then we may learn to descrie the notable grossness of that Monkish
perfection which our adversaries tell us so much of. Luc. 18.21.
For ask our adversaries, or ask a Monk whether he be perfect, he rubs no
more at his answer then the young man in the Gospel did, but he, he is
perfect, and why should any man ask the question whether he be perfect. And
(...) proof hereof he will tell you, that besides keeping of ^ods
commandments, whereunto we are all bound both (...) precept, and likewise by
promise in our baptism, besides ^is he has vowed chastity, poverty,
obedience, pilgrimage, ^fficient badges of his perfection. He meddles not with
the ^ings of this life, nay he cares not for them, nay he has forken all to
follow Christ. The Pharisie that is no extortioner, (...) unjust man, no
adulterer, that fasts twice in the week, that ^ues tithe of all that ever he
possesses, is no body unto him. ^he young man that had kept all the
commandments from ^s youth is no body unto him. He has wholly sequestered
^mselfe unto contemplation, and given himself unto God, (...) that the least
thing that he does, even his sitting, his stan^ing, his eating, his sleeping,
even the least thing that he does (...) better and more acceptable unto God
then the best works ^ther of the first or second table, which the faithful
being ^aried do perform. Thus does he boast of his perfection, (...) if he
were the man, and none but he, that were dear in ^ods sight, and that were
worthy to rest in his holy tabernacle. ^ut how far wide is he of the true and
Christian perfection ^deed? It is not the righteousness of Christ Jesus that
he ^ands upon, but upon his own righteousness by his own ^oly and unspotted
life. He does not cast down himself in ^y sense and feeling of his own wants
and imperfections, ^t he dares to stand and to show himself in the presence
of ^e most high. He does not daily more and more die unto ^nne, and live unto
God, but he is as dead unto sin, and li^ing unto God, as if he were already
in the bosom of God. ^ee does not endeavor to run forward from perfection to
^erfection, but he has already attained unto that whereat ^ther men are to
run. So that as it is said of some, Romans 1.22.
that when ^hey professed themselves to be wise, they became fools, so may it
^e said of these, that when they profess themselves to be per^ect, they show
plainly that they are void of all Christian per^ction, at least if the Apostles
description of Christian per^ection may prevail before theirs: for by the
Apostles de^cription it is clear that indeed they are not come unto any
perfection in the school of Christ, but are quite void of all Christian
perfection.

The second use which we may make of the former observation, is, that thence we
may learn to try what perfection we are grown unto in the school of Christ.
For do we rejoice only in Christ Jesus, renouncing all our own
righteousness which is by works, and quietly reposing our selves in his
righteousness through faith in his blood? Do we feel in our selves a dying
unto sin, and a living unto God in righteousness through the virtue of
Christ his death and resurrection, by the power of the spirit regenerating us
unto a lively hope in Christ Jesus? Do we in our souls feel and from our
hearts acknowledge our regeneration and our sanctification by the contagion of
the flesh to be so imperfect, as that we find in our selves many wants and
many imperfections? Do we labor and endeavor to grow in grace and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to be perfect as he is perfect,
to be holy as he is holy, and to proceed from strength to strength until we
become perfect men in Christ Jesus? Here is the substance of that perfection
which o^^ good God requires of us in this life. If it be thus with us, we may
assure our selves that we have well profited in the school of Christ, and that
we are grown unto very good perfection. There was a time indeed when it was
said unto us, This do, and thou shall live; and again, Cursed is every one
that continues not in all things that are written in the book of the law to
do them and in this time there was no perfection but in the perfect fulfilling
of the whole Law of God; so that all of us were under the curse, and all of us
were in thrall unto that mortal enemy of mankind the devil, because it was
impossible for us to fulfill the Law of God. But when it pleased the
everlasting King of glory in infinite mercy toward us to send his own Son
in the similitude of sinful man for sin to condemn sin in the flesh, then
this thrall unto Satan, this curse of the Law, this yoke of the Law which
neither we nor our fathers were able to bear, was taken from our shoulders:
for that which the Law required of us, but which was impossible for us to
perform, Romans 8.3.
that Christ Jesus himself fulfilled in our flesh, that the righteousness of
the Law might be fulfilled in us which walk not after the flesh, but after the
spirit And now if by faith we put on Christ Jesus and his righteousness, and
by the virtue of his resurrection die unto sin, and live unto righteousness,
and acknowledging our own wants and imperfections, do study and endeavor
daily more and more to live righteously, and soberly, and godly in this present
world, this is the perfection which Christ requires of us.

A blessed sending of such a Son, and a blessed birth of so sweet a Savior,
worthy to be celebrated by a perpetual remembrance for ever. The sending of
him unto us was the greatest token that ever was of God the Fathers love
toward us; and his coming into the world in the similitude of sinful flesh
was the ioyfullest coming that ever was; so joyful, that an Angel from
heaven brought the tidings thereof, and therein of great joy that should be to
all people; that a multitude of heavenly soldiers praised God thereat, and
said, Glory be to God in the high heavens, and peace in earth, and toward men
good will; that certain wise men came then from the East Country to worship
him; that the shepherds when they had seen the babe with his mother,
published abroad the thing that was told them by the Angel of that child;
that Simeon taking him in his arms, praised God and said, Lord now let
thou thy servant depart in peace, etc. and that Anna spoke of him to all that
looked for redemption in Jerusalem. Of which most ^oyfull birth we at this
time do celebrate a most joyful remembrance, and should so celebrate it even
as these holy Saints of God did, not in excess of banqueting and feasting,
not in immoderate gaming and sporting, not in idleness or wantonness, but in
honoring of his name, in singing unto him praise and thanksgiving, and in
telling of his salvation from day to day. So did they celebrate his birth as
we have heard, and so should we celebrate the remembrance of his birth. All
other celebration is rather an heathenish imitation then any religious
observation. Let us therefore as at all other times, so at this time sound out
his praises in the midst of the great congregation, who having fulfilled that
for us in his flesh which we could not, does now require of us no more then he
gives us: for he requires of us perfection, and he gives us perfection, not
an absolute perfection, but such as he requires of us in this life.

To come then again unto our point, will we try how we have profited in the
school of Christ, and unto what perfection we are grown? Sift the points and
see. If we have faith in Christ Jesus, whereby we take hold of his
righteous^esse, if we feel in our selves the virtue of Christ his death and
resurrection by the death of sin, and the life of righteousness, if in heart
and voice through a Christian feeling thereof we acknowledge our own
imperfection, and if thereupon we labor to increase in holiness and
righteousness with all godly increasing, then have we well profited in the
school of Christ, and then are we grown unto good perfection. For, as I told
you before, this is the substance of that perfection which God requires of us
in this life. Howbeit, this withal we must note, that there be degrees in
this perfection: for when by Gods mercy we are come so far, that the spirit
bears witness unto our spirit, that in some measure we have attained unto
all these points of Christian perfection, yet may we not here stand still, but
we must go forward from grace unto grace. Until we come unto the mark at
our races end we must run forward, and daily grow from perfection to
perfection. We must labor daily to increase in faith, that we may daily more
and more be established in the righteousness of Christ. We must daily subdue
the flesh unto the spirit, that we may daily more and more be begotten by the
spirit unto a more lively hope in Christ Jesus. We must daily cast down our
selves before the Lord, that he may daily more and more lift us up. We must
daily follow hard toward the mark, that we may be daily more and more holy
in all manner of conversation. And therefore it is that we do so often
communicate at the Lords Table, namely that our faith and obedience may by
degrees be daily more and more strengthened and increased. There needs but once
entering into the Church by the Sacrament of Baptism; but being entered into the
Church, our souls must be often fed and nourished unto everlasting life by the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper. And faith is at once begotten in us by the
ministry of the word, but both our faith and our obedience must be often and
confirmed increased both by the ministry of the word, and by the holy use of
the Lords Supper. By an holy ^nstitution therefore of the Lord we do often
come unto this ^oly Table, that so often as we eat of this bread and drink ^f
this cup, we may so often both renew the remembrance of Christ his blessed
death and passion, and so often have our weak faith helped and strengthened.
For a^ herein we con^inue the remembrance of that his blessed death and passion
^ntill his coming again, so have we hereby a sure pledge and full assurance
of our incorporation into the body of Christ Jesus to be made one with him, and
he with us. But before we come unto this holy Table, it is necessary if we will
^aue our faith helped and strengthened thereby, that we duly and diligently
examine our selves, and in all holy reverence ^repare our selves thereunto. We
must prove our selves, as ^he Apostle wills, whether we are in the faith,
that is, whether we believe that the punishment of our sins is fully
dis^harged in Christ Jesus, and that whatsoever salvation he has ^urchased for
his children belongs even to us also. For this ^aith we must have before we
come hither, our coming hi^her being not to have this faith wrought in us, but
to have this which already we do believe more fully assured unto our ^oules
and consciences. Again, we must try and search in ^ur own souls what
contrition and sorrow of heart there is ^n us for our sins past, what
detestation and loathing of ^inne we find in our selves, and what purpose and
resolution of heart there is in us to forsake our old ways, and in the ^hole
course of our life hereafter to conform our selves unto Gods will set down in
his holy word. For unless these things be in us, we are no meet guests for
this holy and heavenly Table. We must also search and see whether we be in
peace and ^oue with all men: for if thou bring thy gift unto the Altar, Mat.
5.23 24
and there remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, there thou must
leave thine offering, and go, and first be reconciled unto ^hy brother, and
then come and offer thy gift. If having thus examined our selves we come unto
this holy Table, then here we have sealed unto us our communion with Christ,
then here we have assured unto us all the benefits of Christ his death and
passion. That therefore hereby we may receive all holy increase of our faith,
let us with all holy reverence come at this time unto this Table. And in the
whole course of our life let us labor by degrees to proceed from perfection to
perfection. Let us daily stir up every good grace of God in us, that seeking
by continuance in well-doing, honor, and glory, and immortality, we may in
the end receive the prise of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. And to
conclude with this of our Apostle, let us as many as would be perfect be th^^
minded as our Apostle was touching our justification, touching our
regeneration, touching the acknowledgement of our imperfection, and touching an
holy pursuit after perfection.

LECTVRE LXV.
PHILIP. 3. Verse 15.16. And if ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal it
unto you. Nevertheless in that whereunto we are come, etc.
NOw follows the second point, where the Apostle signifies his hope that God
would reveal this truth which he had professed unto them, which as yet were
otherwise minded then he was, in these words, And (...) ye be otherwise
minded, etc.

And if ye be otherwise, etc.] This shows that the Apostle thought, or
rather knew that he should not be able to persuade all to be of the same
mind with him in the things before mentioned, but that some through the
suggestions of the false teachers that were amongst them would think otherwise
then he thought of those points. Yet see how kindly the Apostle deals with
those: If (says he) ye be otherwise minded, so that ye do not think as I
your Apostle do of works, of Christ, of perfection in the knowledge of
Christ, but rather ^^re of another judgment, yet I doubt not but as God has
begun to reveal his Son Jesus Christ unto you by my ^reaching, so he will
also in his good time reveal and make known unto you this same thing wherein
ye now dissent in judgment from me, and will not suffer you to be holden of
^his error: he will (I doubt not) by the ministry of his servants through
the powerful operation of the holy spirit open the divine eyes of your dark
understanding, that ye may see both that ye err in this wherein ye dissent
from me, and that this is the truth whereunto I now exhort you. This I take to
be the true meaning of these words. Now let us see what hence we may learn,
and so we will proceed unto that which follows in the next verse.

And if ye be otherwise minded, etc.] Ambrose one of the ancient Fathers
reads these words thus, And if ye shall be otherwise minded, God also has
revealed it, and understands them as if the Apostle had thus said, If ye
shall think of any more then I have put you in mind of, know that it is by
revelation from God. Which sense and reading if it were true, might indeed
help well to boulster out such humane traditions and superstitious ceremonies
as the Church is burdened and pestered withal. But this sense and reading as
well because it may seem to patronage such unwritten verities, and unsavory
ceremonies, as also for that it is altogether different from the words and
meaning of the Apostle, is utterly to be rejected. For first the Apostle does
not say, if you shall be, but if ye be otherwise minded. Again, the Apostle
does not say, God has revealed it, but God shall or will reveal it unto you.
And lastly, when the Apostle says, If ye be otherwise minded, his meaning is
not that if they think more then he has put them in mind of, but his
meaning is, that if they think not as he does touching the points mentioned,
but differ from him in judgment, yet God will also reveal this truth unto
them as he has done other truths.

My note hence in brief is, that we are to take heed how we take things upon
the credit of the ancient Fathers. The Lord is greatly to be blessed for them,
and it is with all thankfulness to be acknowledged that they by their godly
labors have greatly profited Gods Church. But yet their words, and the senses
which they give of the Scriptures, are to be weighed in the balance of the
Sanctuary, and to be examined according to the Scriptures, For this by
examination we shall find, that diverse times they miss the meaning of the
holy Ghost, and sometimes they plainly alter the words of the holy Ghost. This
place gives evident witness unto both, where both the words are so altered,
and the meaning so missed by this holy Father, as that in both he swarueth from
the holy Ghost, as before was evidently showed. The more to blame they th^^
take a Fathers word for warrant good enough, and think their plea good if in
the exposition of a Scripture, or debating of a question, they have the
suffrage and liking of one or two Fathers.

The second thing which I note is the manner how the Apostle deals with such
of the Philippians as differed from him in judgment even in these points of
righteousness and salvation He does not by and by despair of them, or reject
them as heretics, or thunder our sharp threatenings against them, but in all
mildness of spirit signifies his hope that God will reveal their error unto
them, that they which now are otherwise minded then he is, may be of the same
mind that he is. But withal we must note what manner men they were with whom
the Apostle dealt thus kindly. They were no such men as wilfully opposed
themselves against the truth, or such as were so utterly bewitched that they
would not obey the truth, but such as having not long since embraced the truth
by his preaching, were now a little seduced, and drawn aside by such false
teachers as were crept in amongst them.

Whence I observe that we are for a time to bear with the ignorance of our
weak brethren, and to retain a good hope of them though they do not wholly
subscribe unto that truth which we embrace. This also our Apostle teaches us
to do where he says, Romans 15.1.
We which are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to
please our selves: we which are strong in knowledge, in faith, in hope, or any
good grace of God ought ^o bear with such of our brethren as do yet come
short of us ^n any such grace; neither ought we so to please our selves ^herein
as to be puffed up in our selves, and to contemn others, ^ut being lowly in our
own eyes we are to hope that God will ^ake their darkness to be light, and
supply what wants in their weakness. And much to the same purpose is that
his ex^ortation, where he says, Brethren, Gal. 6.1.
if a man be fallen by occa^ion into any fault, ye which are spiritual,
restore such a one with ^he spirit of meekness: if a man be fallen by occasion
of his ^lesh, of the world, of the Devil, or of any instrument of Sa^an into
any fault either of doctrine, or of manners, ye which ^re spiritual, ye
which are more strongly sustained by the spirit of God, restore such a one with
the spirit of meekness, and labor to bring him unto that truth in doctrine,
or holiness of life from which he was fallen. Which shows that we are not to
give over for forlorn those that are holden with some error, but rather that
we are for a time to bear with them, and to hope that the Lord will bring them
unto the ^nowledge of the truth. And see what great reason there is to move us
hereunto. Did we not all sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death? Were we
not all ignorant of the ways of God, and of the things that belong unto our
peace? Yes surely until the day star, even the sun of righteousness arose
in our hearts, our minds were full of darkness, and the way of truth we knew
not. For as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 2.14.
The natural man (whose understanding is not yet cleared by Gods spirit,
perceives not the things of the spirit of God, but they are foolishness unto
him. Has then the Lord in his great mercy toward me made my darkness to be
light, and brought me to the knowledge of his truth, and shut him as yet up in
darkness and in ignorance? Or, has the Lord brought us both to the knowledge
of his truth, and has he suffered him by occasion to fall from the way of
truth, and sustained me by the strength of his holy spirit? And shall I in
either of these cases insult over him, contemn or disdeine him, determine, or
judge rashly of him to be a forlorn man, an Atheist, a reprobate? Or am I not
rather, bending the knees of my soul unto the Lord for his mercies toward me,
to hope that in his good time he will lighten his understanding that was shut
up in ignorance, or raise him up again that was fallen, and in the mean time
to bear with the ignorance of the one, and the error of the other? Yes my
brethren, so long as their ignorance of the truth is untainted with cankred
malice against the truth, we may hope that the Lord will call them at the sixth
or ninth or some good hour, and reveal his holy truth unto them, and in the
mean time we are to bear with them, and to support one another through love.
And for this cause, the holy Apostles, when the word which they preached was
unto them that heard them as water powered upon a stone, yet ceased not to
instruct them with all patience, hoping that God would reveal the things unto
them which as yet were h^^ from their eyes.

This then should teach us not to despair of them unto whom the Lord has not
yet revealed some part of his truth, nor to withhold from them such wholesome
instructions and admonitions as may draw them from that ignorance or error
wherewith they are holden, but in all godly sort to labor with them, proving
if at any time God will open their eyes that they may turn from darkness unto
light, from the power of Satan unto God. The Minister is after the example of
our Apostle to instruct with all patience them that be ignorant, and them that
be contrarily minded in that truth of Christ Jesus which he has learned, and
to deal with them to be like minded as he is; and if they be otherwise minded,
yet to labor with them, and to hope that God will reveal the truth unto them.
Others likewise whose eyes the Lord has opened to know things that are
spiritually discerned, should labor to draw them on unto the same truth with
them. And therefore besides other duties which they should perform unto them,
when they go up unto the house of the Lord, they should say unto them as they
in Esaias, Esaias 2.3.
Come let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of
Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths; come let
us go to the Church, come neighbor, come friend let us go to the Sermon, and
there we shall hear what the Lord will say unto us, and there we shall be
instructed in the truth or Christ Jesus. But what do we? We think it well if
we come ^ur selves, and indeed I wish all would do so; but though we now our
neighbor ignorant, yet do we not either privately ^lke with him, or say unto
him, come let us go to Sermon: which certainly is a defect in us. For true
zeal takes that ^f the fire, that the truly zealous man would have all like
unto himself, and the more he has profited in the know^edge of the truth, the
more will his heart be inflamed to ^raw others out of ignorance unto the
knowledge of the same truth with him. And what do we know but that God has
^rdeined us by this or that holy course to be the means to ^ring this or that
man unto the knowledge of the truth? Let ^s not therefore despair of doing
good with our weak and ^gnorant brother, but let us hope so long as there is
any hope, ^^at the Lord will reveal his truth unto him; and in the ^eane time
let us bear with his ignorance, and labor by all ^eanes to bring him to the
same mind that is in us touching ^he truth of Christ Jesus. And this withal
let us weigh: is ^here any of our alliance, or acquaintance, or knowledge whose
eyes the Lord has so opened that he sees the truth in diverse mysteries of the
faith, but yet some things are hid from ^is eyes? let this be an encouragement
of our hope that the Lord will also reveal these things unto him. For great
hope we may conceive, as we see here our Apostle likewise does that he which
has begun to reveal the truth in diverse mysteries of the faith unto them,
will also in his good time reveal these things unto them, which as yet are hid
from their eyes. Times we may not prescribe unto the Lord, for he calls not
all his children to the knowledge of his Son at one hour, but some at the
third, some at the sixth, some at the ninth, some ^t one, some at another
hour, as unto his heavenly wisdom seems most meet, and his truth he does
reveal unto his children not all at once, but here a little and there a little
as seems best unto him. But yet we may hope that unto such as love not
darkness better than light, unto such as do not oppose themselves against the
truth, the Lord that commands the light to shine out of darkness will in his
good time shine in their hearts, and reveal his truth unto them so far as
shall be necessary for them. Though therefore now they do not embrace the
same truth altogether with us, yet let us hope that the Lord will also reveal
this unto them wherein they now dissent from us, and let us labor with them to
the purpose according to that measure of grace that is given unto us.

The third thing which I note is, that the Apostle says, (...) ye be
otherwise minded God shall reveal it: Whereby the Apostle shows that he
could only preach unto them, but it is God that reuealeth his truth unto them.
If they were otherwise minded than he was, he could not do withal, his office
was to teach the truth, he could not open their eyes that they might see the
truth, but that must be let alone unto the Lord for ever, who alone reuealeth
when he will that truth where^^ we were happily long before instructed. Whence
I observe, that in the work of the ministry the Ministers of Christ do only
dispense the mysteries and secrets of God, but it is God that reuealeth them
unto us, opening our eyes that we may see the wondrous things of his law. And
therefore it is said that when Peter had preached unto Cornelius, Act. 10.44.
and them that we^^ with him, the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the
^^ra. And again it is said that when Paul preached near unto Philippi unto
certain women that were come together, 16.13.14.
the Lord opened the heart of Lydia, that she attended unto the things that
Paul spoke. And often when the Apostles had preached it is said, that the Holy
Ghost fell on them that heard, and they believed. Whereby is meant that they
preached, but the Holy Ghost revealed, and so their preaching was effectual as
the Holy Ghost wrought with it in the hearts of them that were ordained unto
salvation. And to this agrees that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.6.7.
where he says, I have planted, and Apollos watered, but God gave the increase:
and, neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that watreth, but God
that gives the increase. The Ministers like Gods husbandmen they sow the
seed, even the immortal seed of his word in the fallow ground of men's
hearts, but it is the Lord that gives the early and the latter rain, whereby
it grows up and brings forth fruit in some thirty, in some sixty, in some
an hundredth fold. The Ministers of Christ they are they by whom we do ^eleeue,
and by whom we do obey: but it is the Lord that (...) the powerful working of
his holy spirit together with the lord causes us to believe, and to obey. This
honor the lord takes unto himself, saying, Eze 36.25.
I will power out clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean, yea, from all
your filthiness, ^^d from all your idols will I cleanse you: 26.
a new heart also will I ^ue you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I
will take away ^e stony heart out of your body, and I will give you an heart
of ^^sh; and I will put my spirit within you, 27.
and cause you to walk in ^y statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and
do them: this honor (I say) the Lord takes to himself, and this honor ^e
will not give to any other. But here happily you will ^ke me, if the Ministers
of Christ only preach the word, and the Lord reserve this power only to
himself to beget (...) by the word; if the Ministers of Christ only teach ^s
the way of truth, and the spirit alone lead us into all ^^uth, 1 Cor. 4.15. 1 Timothy 4.16.
how then does the Apostle say unto the Corin^^ians, I have begotten you
through the Gospel? and how does ^e say unto Timothy, Take heed unto thy
self, and unto lear^^ng; continue therein: for in doing this thou shall both
save thy ^^lfe, and them that hear thee? Whereunto I answer, that the ^^ing,
which properly belong unto God are oftentimes in the ^criptures attributed unto
Gods Ministers, because they are ^^struments which God uses, and whereby God
works. So ^n the places alleged, I (says the Apostle) have begotten you
through the Gospel; the Apostle because the Lord used him as ^is instrument to
beget the Corinthians in Christ Jesus, therefor takes that unto himself
which the Apostle James shew^^th properly to belong unto God, where he says,
Iam. 1.1^.
that God of ^is own will begat us with the word of truth, that we should be
as ^he first fruits of his creatures. And in the other place, where ^he Apostle
says to Timothy, In so doing, thou shall save both ^hy self, and them that
hear thee; there power of saving, Hosea 13.4.
which ^oth only properly belong unto the Lord (for it is he that ^aueth, and
none besides him) is given unto Timothy, because ^ee was ordained the Minister
of Christ, whom he would use ^n granting repentance unto salvation. Many like
places might be brought, where that which properly belongs unto God is
attributed unto Gods Minister, because of the powerful operation of Gods
spirit by his ministry. But by this already spoken ye see what in the work
of the ministry God does, and what man does. Man preaches the truth b^^ God
only reuealeth the truth: man sows the mortal seed of the word, but God
only makes it to grow and fractifie: men speaks the wonders of the law, but
God only opens our eyes that we may see the wondrous things o^ his law.

This then should teach you so to think of us as of the Ministers of Christ,
and disposers of the secrets of God, b^ to depend upon the Lord for the
revelation of those holy mysteries which we bring unto you. We can only speak
unto your ears, but it is the Lord that must work in your hearts: we can
only beat upon the outward sense, but he it is that must open the eyes of your
understanding: we can only bring the word of salvation unto you, but he it is
that by his blessing upon it must make it the word of salvation unto you. And
therefore when you come unto the house of God ye should remember to sanctify
your selves, and as the Preacher exhorts, When ye enter into the house of
God ye should take heed unto your feet, Eccl. 4.17.
ye should take heed with what affection, with what devotion, with what
religious desire ye come to hear the word of the Lord. Ye should not not
come hither as to an ordinary meeting, or to a place where ye can be well
content to bestow an hour, but ye should come hither prepared with all holy
reverence, with souls thirsting after the word of your salvation, and with
hearts and eyes lift up unto the Lord, that he will bless the preaching of
the word unto you, that he by his spirit will so work together with his word,
that it may be unto you the savor of life unto life, that he will incline
your hearts to hearken what the Spirit says and that he will open your eyes
that ye may see the wondrous things of his law. And then surely ye should
wrestle well, and should not depart without a blessing. For though we be but
men that speak unto you, whose breath is in our nostrils, and though it be
not in us to ^e grace or understanding to our hearers, yet are we ^e Ministers
of Christ by whom ye believe; we are as (...) were the conduits through whom
the spirit and the gra^^s of the spirit are conueighed unto you; and we are his
^mbassadors by whom he opens and declares his ^^ly will unto you. Yea into
such a communion has ^ee joined us with him, Act. 5.3.
that when Ananias had lied vn^^ Peter, he asked him why he had lied unto the
Holy Ghost? and that our Savior says, Luc. 10.16.
He that hears you hears ^^e. To conclude this point, we do pray you in
christ his stead, as though God did beseech you through (...); and whatsoever
good grace is wrought in you, it is ^od that works the same in you through
our ministe^^e. Be ye therefore diligent to frequent holy exercises, ^repare
your selves with all holy reverence thereunto, ^ray unto the Lord that he will
bless his holy ordinance unto you; hearken unto the word, not as the word of
^an, but as it is indeed as the word of God, and receive ^ith meekness the
word that is graffed in you, which is ^ble to save your souls. For thus the
Lord reuealeth his ^^uth, and his will unto his children; neither are we now to
^ooke for any other revelations but such as the Lord manife^teth in and by the
word.

Now remains the third point to be handled, where the Apostle exhorts that
in the mean time till God reveal that truth which he has professed unto
them, such grounds of the truth as already they had might with one accord be
retained and maintained; which he does in these words, nevertheless in that
whereunto we are come etc.

LECTVRE LXVI.
PHILIP. 3. Verse. 16. Nevertheless in that whereunto we are come. Let (...)
proceed by one rule, and let us mind one thing.
Nevertheless in that etc.] In which words the Apostle exhorts that in the
mean time till God reveal unto the Philippians that truth which he has
professed, such grounds of the truth as already they had received might with
one accord be retained and maintained. This is the general scope and meaning
of the Apostle in these words. But it will not happily be amiss for the better
understanding of them to unfold and open the meaning of them yet a little more
particularly. They depend, as ye see, upon that which went before. For the
Apostle having before exhorted the Philippians to be so minded as he was in
the points before mentioned, had also said, and if ye be otherwise minded, God
shall also reveal it. Now says he, nevertheless (...) that whereunto we are
come, as if he should have said, but in the mean time till God reveal this
truth unto you wherein ye now dissent from me, in that whereunto we are come,
i. for so far as we are come, for such grounds of the truth, for such
articles of the faith and Christian religion as already we do generally
embrace and agree upon, let us proceed in them by one rule, and let us mind
one thing. The word which the Apostle uses when he says, (...).
let us proceed by one rule, is a military word, borrowed from the marching
of soldiers unto the battle, whose manner it is to keep their rank, and
without any outraying to march along after the prescript rule of their
General, or Leader. So that it is as if the Apostle had thus said unto them,
let us for so far as we are come, like unto good soldiers which turn not
aside, but march on along after the prescript rule of their General, so let us
walk without turning aside to the right-had, or to the left hand after that
one rule, let us believe and live as we are directed by ^^^t one rule of his
word under whose banner we do fight; (...) us so far as we are come walk as
Christ Jesus has taught (...) in his holy word. The same phrase of speech is
used to the ^^e purpose, where it is said, Gal. 6.16.
as many as walk according to this ^^e, i. As many as make this word of truth,
this Gospel of ^^rist Jesus now preached and taught unto you the rule and
^^are of their faith, and life, from which they will not swerve, ^^turne aside
to the right hand or to the left, peace shall be ^^on them, and mercy, and
upon the Israel of God. Let us ^^^ceede by one rule, and let us mind one
thing] i. Let there be (...) dissentions amongst us, but let us be knit
together in one ^^nde, and in one judgment, being of like affection one
to^^rds another in Christ Jesus. (...).
For so the phrase of speech ^^re used signifies, to be of one mind, of one
judgment, of ^^e affection one toward another so that nothing be done
^^rough contention amongst us, as it plainly appears both (...) the 2. verse
of the 2. Chapter of this Epistle, and by diverse ^^her places where the same
phrase is used. The sum of all ^^s if the Apostle had thus said: God will in
his good time ^^eale his truth unto them that be as yet otherwise minded ^^an
I am. But in the mean time till God reveal it, let us (...) such grounds of
the truth as already we agree upon, pro^^ede both in faith, and in life as we
are directed by that one ^^le of his word under whose banner we fight, not
turning a^^^e from it to the right hand, or to the left hand, and let us (...)
knit together in one mind, and in one judgment, so that ^^thing be done
through contention among us. This I take (...) be the simple and plain meaning
of these words. Now let (...) see what profitable notes we may gather hence for
our own ^^e and instruction.

The 1. thing which hence I note is, touching the cause of ^issensions in the
Church of God, whence it is that there are ^^ch dissensions and divisions in
the Church of God, whereby ^^e unity and peace of the Church is rent a sunder
and bro^en. Not to search farther into the causes thereof than this ^^e
scripture gives occasion, out of this Scripture I note 3. ^auses of the
dissensions in the Church of God. The 1. is, because we do not with patience
expect and wait till God (...) his good time reveal unto us that truth which
as yet is hid (...) from our eyes. For such oftentimes is our inconsiderate
hea^ ^^dinesse, that if we seem unto our selves to apprehend this (...) that
point of doctrine through the suggestions and persuasions of this or that man,
by and by we adventure the defense and maintenance thereof, though I^^l have
preached, though the Church of God have believed otherwise. We look (...) what
it is that the Church has received, but what it is that (...) have
apprehended, or if we do, rather we strive to bring the Church to that which
we have apprehended, than we (...) yield unto that which the Church indeed
has received; (...) howsoever that we teach may hazard the peace and quite of
the Church, yet will we not stay our selves, and expect^^ God may farther
reveal his holy truth unto us. And (...) has been heretofore, and is at this
day one great cause of division and dissension in the Church. I might instance
i^ diverse heresies wherewith the Church has been troubled and which have in
part been caused because the auth^^ thereof would not wait till God should
reveal the truth vn^^ them. If that ancient father Tertullian had waited till
God had revealed unto him that truth which afterward he did ^^ueale unto him,
he had not been so tainted with the errors o^ the Millenaries, and the
Montanists as he was, neither ha^ troubled the Church therewith so much as he
did. And i^ some at this day that trouble the peace of the Church with their
strange doctrine would both pray unto the Lord for the revelation of his truth,
and patiently wait till the Lord should reveal his truth unto them, we should
be more free from disensions than we are.

The 2. cause of the dissensions in the Church of God, (...) because we do not
proceed by one rule in that whereun^^ we are come. For such oftentimes is our
vntowardlinesse, that in the general grounds of Christian religion where^^ we
do agree we will be slinging out of rank, and not proceed by that one rule of
his word under whose banner we do^ fight. In the primitive Church all the
Churches of Chr^^^ were come unto that, that they believed the resurrection of
the dead, and that they acknowledged justification by the ^^ghteousnesse of
Christ, yet then they proceeded not by one ^^le in these things, but some
denied the resurrection of the ^ead of which sort were Hymeneus and Philetus, 2 Timothy 2.17
and some ^ught that unto Christ there must be joined the works of ^^e Law to
be made righteous before God. Whereupon fol^^wed then great dissensions in the
Church. In the reformed Churches of Christ at this day generally we are come to
this, ^^at we profess that predestination unto life is not by fore^^ght of
faith or works, but by the alone good pleasure of al^ightie God; that the
children of God cannot finally fall ^om faith or grace; that the children of
God may and ought (...) assure themselves of their salvation; that it is not in
man to ^ue himself if he will; that Christ has freed us from the of hell by
suffering the pains of hell for us. And if ^e shall not proceed by one rule
in these things, but one ^^ape out from another, what else can follow but great
dissensions in our Churches? And is it not a cause of many dissensi^ns betwixt
the Romish Church and us that we do not both ^roceede by one rule in that
whereunto we are come? We ^re come to this that we agree in the Articles of
the Christian ^aith, that we both believe in the Trinity, that we both
be^eeue one Catholic and Apostolic Church, that we both ^cknowledge one
Baptism for the remission of sins, that ^e both look for the resurrection
of the dead, and the life ^f the world to come. And yet what dissensions
betwixt us and them even about these things? And why? because they do not
proceed by one rule of the holy word of life with us, but ^hey fly out into
Traditions, Councels, Fathers, Decretals, Constitutions, and Legends, and keep
no order with us in marching along after the prescript rule of our General
Christ jesus.

The 3. cause of the dissensions in the Church of God is, because we do not
all mind one thing. For such oftentimes ^s our waywardness that when in the
substance of the doctrine we agree with the Church, yet will we pick a
quarrel either at the Professors of the truth, or at some ceremony, or at
some defect in the discipline of the Church whereby we will make a schism in
the Church. What a stir made Corah, Dathan and Abiram in the congregation of
Israel? And whence was it? They could not abide Moses and Aaron, but took
exceptions against them saying, Number. 16.3.
Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation is holy, every one of
them, and the Lord is among them: wherefore then lift ye up your selves above
the congregation of the Lord? What contentions likewise were there in the
Church of Corinth, and how did they one swell against another? 1 Cor.
1.12.11.4.21.
And whence was it? One held of Paul, another of Apollos, another of Cephas,
another of Christ, one would pray and prophecy bare-headed, another with his
head covered, and when they came unto the Lords supper one was hungry, and
another was drunken. This distraction in mind and judgment bredde among them
so great dissensions, as that it may seem to have been one special cause why
the Apostle wrote the former Epistle to the Corinthians, even to repress their
dissensions caused by their distractions in mind, and i^ judgment. And this
at this day is the cause why the Brownists and Baroists separate themselves
from our assemblies, and making a schism and division will not present
themselves in our congregations. They do not charge us with corruption of
doctrine, but because of some things in some ceremonies, and in our outward
discipline they cannot, they say, be of one mind with us, and therefore they
break out from us. Thus ye see what the causes of the dissensions in the
Church of God are, at least such as this place of Scripture seems unto me to
point at. The 1. because in things that are not yet revealed unto us we do not
with patience expect and wait till God in his good time reveal unto us that
truth which as yet is hid from our eyes. The 2. because in things that are
revealed unto us we do not proceed by that one ru^e of his word under whose
banner we fight, but fling out some of us unto traditions, decretals,
constitutions, legends, and the like. The 3. because we do not mind one
thing, but are too ready to fall at odds, and through contention to make a
schism, and to rent the seamlesse coat of Christ.

The 2. thing which hence I note is, touching the remedies of the dissensions
in the Church of God, at least of such dissensions as spring from these causes
before mentioned. The ^medies according to the number of the causes are three,
^^h sore requiring a salve, and each cause of dissension stan^ng in need of a
remedy against it. The 1. remedy against ^^^sensions caused by not waiting
till God reveal things not (...) revealed, is when any truth is not yet
revealed unto us ^^h patience to wait till God in his good time reveal his
^^ly truth unto us. For this we know that he who prayed thus to his Father,
Sanctify them with thy truth, thy word is truth, Ioh. 17.17.
^d was heard in the things which he praid for, will reveal (...) truth unto
us so far as shall be necessary for us. But in the ^^an time either we
should so speak of the things that are not ^^ealed unto us as submiting that we
speak unto the iudge^ent of the Prophets, as the Apostle wills, 1 Cor. 14.32.
or else we should ^ld our peace, and hearken unto him unto whom God has
^ealed his truth, as the same Apostle wills in the same ^ace, saying, If any
thing be revealed to another that sits by, 30.
(...) the first hold his peace. A rule to the practice whereof the ^postle
seems unto me to exhort where he says, Romans 12.3
Let no man ^esume to understand above that which is meet to understand, but
(...) him understand according to sobriety, as God has dealt to eue^ man the
measure of faith. For he which will seem to vnder^and before it be revealed
unto him, how does he understand ^^cording to sobriety? how does he not
understand above ^^at which is meet to understand? But the Apostle would ^aue
every man to understand according to sobriety, and no ^an to understand above
that which is meet to understand, and consequently would have all men with
patience to wait ^ll God shall reveal that unto them which as yet is hid from
their eyes. In the practice of which rule if we would be as ^arefull as we
are skillful in the knowledge of it many of us, ^he Church should be freed from
dissensions wherewith it is ^roubled. As many of us therefore as love the peace
of Sion, ^n the things that are not yet revealed unto us let us with pa^ience
expect till God in his good time reveal them unto us, and in the mean time
let us either submit that we speak unto ^he judgment of the Prophets, or else
let us hold our peace and hearken unto them unto whom God has revealed his
truth.

The second remedy against dissensions caused by not proceeding by one rule in
the things revealed, is, in the things that are revealed and generally agreed
upon amongst us, to proceed by one rule, even that one rule which God has
prescribed us in his word, and not to decline from that either to the right
hand or to the left. Gal. 6.16.
For, as the Apostle says, as may as walk according to this rule, peace shall
be upon them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Whence it is clear that
so we have peace both with God and amongst our selves, if we walk according
to the rule set down by the Prophets and Apostles. For that is the rule which
he speaks of, and whereof he had said before, 1.9.
If any man preach unto you otherwise then that ye ha^^ received, let him be
accursed. So that as the Lord commanded Joshua, Ios. 1.7.
we may not depart or turn away from it to the right h^^^ or to the left. To
this purpose also is that of our Apostle, where he says, Romans 16.17
I beseech you brethren mark them diligently which cause division and offenses
contrary to the doctrine that ye have learned. In which place the Apostle would
have the Romans constantly to hold fast that doctrine which they had learned,
signifying withal that they should not want those that would labor to cause
division and offenses amongst them. But thus they should avoid them, if they
would continue in the things that they had learned. Whence it appears that it
is a notable way to avoid divisions and dissensions, to believe and live after
the rule of the word. By which rule if our adversaries would have proceeded
with us, they should not by their division have so much troubled the Church; or
if yet they would proceed by this rule with us, many dissensions wherewith the
Church is troubled might easily be appeased. And if amongst our selves and in
our own Churches we would proceed by this one rule, and not leap out unto
conueniences, Christian policies, danger of innouations, and the like,
whatsoever blemishes almost we have by any dissensions amongst us might quickly
be wiped out. As many of us therefore as love the peace of Sion, let us in the
things that are revealed unto us proceed by one rule, even that one rule which
God has prescribed unto us in his holy word, and let us not turn away from it
to the right hand or to the left, and so shall peace be within our walls, and
plenteousnesse within her palaces, so ^ll we see Jerusalem in prosperity all
her life long.

The third remedy against dissensions caused by distraction (...) mind and
judgment, is, all to mind one thing, to be knit ^gether in one mind and
judgment. A remedy which the ^postle often prescribes to repress such
dissensions as arose (...) the Churches that he had planted. I beseech you
brethren, 1 Cor. 1.10.
^ith he, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak ^e thing,
and that there be no dissensions among you; but be ye ^it together in one
mind, and in one judgment. He would have ^o disagreeing in words amongst
them, because that ingen^ers dissension of mind, and so repugnancie of
judgment, which is the mother of schism and heresy. In a word, he ^ould
have no dissensions amongst them, and therefore he ^ould have them all speak
one thing, he would have them ^it together in one mind, and in one judgment.
And as ^ere he beseeches the Corinthians by the name of Christ Jesus that they
mind one thing, so in the epistle to the Romans he ^aketh a most earnest
prayer unto God for them, that they ^ight be like minded one toward another.
Now, says he, ^he God of patience and consolation give you that ye be like
minded ^e toward another, according to Christ Jesus, Romans 15.5.6.
that ye with one ^inde and with one mouth may praise God, even the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ. So necessary he thought the consent of minds and
judgments, and such a notable remedy he ^hought it to be against all
divisions and dissensions, that he powers out this most earnest prayer unto
the Lord, that he ^ould work in them this consent of minds and judgments,
that they might mind one thing. Where withal it is to be noted, that he
prays that they be like minded one toward another according to Christ Jesus:
as also in this next chapter ^he prays Euodias, and beseeches Syntiche,
Phil. 4.2.
that they be of one accord in the Lord. For otherwise if we be like minded,
but not according to Christ Jesus, if we be of one accord, but not in the Lord,
our consent is not an unity, but a conspiracy, such as was the consent of the
high Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees when they condemned our blessed Savior,
and of the people of the Jews, when all the multitude cried at once, saying,
Crucify him, crucify him, away with him, and deliver to (...) Barabbas; and
of that last Council held at Trent, when so many things were so
Antichristianly concluded against the true, ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic
faith. If then as we have one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father
of all, which is above all, and through all, and in us all, so we would be
like minded one toward another according to Christ Jesus, dissensions were
easily banished if they were, and easily kept out if they were not. Which rule
if we had kept, or could keep so well as we should, they whose dissension^
are so notoriously known between their Franciscans and Dominicans, their
Thomists and Scotists, their Canonists and Divines, should not be able to twit
us so much with our dissensions as they do: neither should the Brownists and
Baroists have been such an offense as they have been, if in that whereunto
we are come they had been of one accord with us in the Lord. As many of us
therefore as love the peace of Sion, let us be knit together in one mind, and
in one judgment in the Lord, let us speak one thing, and let us be of like
affection one toward another. So shall the peace of our Jerusalem be as the
light of the Sun, and her prosperity as the noone day. Let us by all means
avoid all dissensions and divisions, and endeavor to keep the unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace. And therefore in the things that are not yet
revealed unto us, let us with patience wait till God in his good time reveal
them unto us; let us in the things that are revealed unto us proceed by one
rule, that one rule of Gods word, not declining from it to the right hand, or
to the left, and let us be like minded one toward another according to Christ
Jesus, that with one mind and one mouth we may praise God, even the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ. So, and so alone shall we build, that neither hammer,
nor axe, nor any tool of iron shall be heard in the Lords house whiles it is
in building. And thus much of the remedies.

The third thing which I note, is, that the Apostle says, i^ that whereunto
we are come let us proceed by one rule, etc. which shows, that howsoever one
came short of another, yet he would have every one of them so far as they
were come to go forward, and as in marching against the enemy the stronger to
encourage the weaker, and the weaker to rank with the stronger, and both to
proceed by one rule of their great General Christ Jesus. Whence I observe,
that neither they that are weaker then others in faith, in knowledge, or in
obedience, are to be discouraged, or to sit them down because they are weak,
nor they that are stronger then others in faith, in knowledge, or in obedience,
are to be puffed up in themselves, or to contemn them that are weaker because
they are stronger, but every man is according to the measure of grace that is
given him to walk by that rule which God has prescribed him, and one to help
another in fighting a good fight, and finishing their course. All of us are
ranked to run, and billed to fight, albeit unto all of us be not given like
speed to run, or like strength to fight, and all of us must run and fight,
though we cannot run with the speediest, or fight with the strongest. And
shall we either be discouraged and sit down because we cannot match with the
best, or swell and disdain because we are not as others, but as good as the
best? It is as if the foot should be dismayed and deny to go because it is
not the head; and as if the head should disdain to direct the steps because it
is above the foot. The father of the child that was possessed with a dumb
spirit, saw (no doubt) his own weakness to be great when our Savior said
unto him, If thou can believe, Mar. 9.23.
all things are possible to him that believes. Yet he fainted not, but holding
on a good course he said, Lord I believe, help mine unbelief. 24.
And our holy Apostle knew right well how strong he was in the spirit, and how
he abounded in the graces of the spirit: yet he disdained not to become as
weak unto the weak, 1 Cor. 9.22.
that he might win the weak, and gain them unto Christ. And both these
marched in their rank, and fought well, inasmuch as the weak fainted not
because he was weak, nor he that was strong disdained not the weak because
he was strong.

Let no man therefore be discouraged or faint because he is weak and unable to
run with the foremost. Some in marching forward must be before, and some
behind. Let not him that is behind faint, but march forward. Let him march
after the rule prescribed him by his General, let his word be a lantern unto
his feet, and a light unto his paths, to direct his going in the way of his
commandments. To have strength to run with the foremost is a great grace of
God, and to be sought after by all manner prayer and supplication in the
spirit. But if thou walk forward in that weakness of thine according to the
measure of grace that is given thee by the rule which thy God has prescribed
thee, this shall bring thee peace at the last, and guide thee unto the haven
where thou would be. Let not thine heart therefore be troubled nor fear.
In what weakness soever it is that thou walk, bless thy God that has set
thee in the way, and proceed as he gives grace in the way.

LECTVRE LXVII.
PHILIP. 3. Verse 17. Brethren, be followers of me, and look on them which
walk so as ye have us for an ensample. For many walk etc.
NOw the Apostle goes forward, and having before proposed his own example
unto the Philippians, thereby both to instruct their understanding in matters
of doctrine, and likewise to stir them up unto all holy desires in the whole
course of their life, now he exhorts them to follow his example, and the
example of such as he is, that in him they may have a pattern to rectify
their judgments in the truth, and to follow after Christian perfection in all
holy conversation of their life. Here then first we have the Apostles
exhortation unto the Philippians; secondly, certain reasons to move them to
hearken unto his exhortation. The exhortation in these words, Brethren, etc.
The reasons in the verses following unto the end of the chapter. His
exhortation consists of two parts: first, that the Philippians would be
followers of him; (...).
neither does the word simply signify followers, but that they would be
followers together of him. Which may have a double meaning, either that they
would all with one mind, and with one heart jointly together follow his
example, or else that as other Churches which he had planted in the faith
followed his example, so ^hey likewise together with them would follow his
example Howsoever that be meant, it is clear that the Apostle would have the
Philippians to look at him, and as they had heard him to be minded, and seen
him to walk, so he would have them to follow him in wholesomenesse of
doctrine, and integrity of life. He knew that examples, as ordinarily they
are wont to do with men, might much prevail with them. Lest therefore they
should happily be drawn away by the exam^ples of the false teachers, having it
may be a greater show of holiness in their life then they had soundness of
judgment in the truth, he draws them unto his own example, and exhorts
them to be followers of him. The second part of his exhortation is, that they
would follow the example of them that were like unto him, being so minded
toward the truth as he was, and walking so in holy conversation of life as he
did. For unto the former part of his exhortation, that they should be followers
of him, there might happily exception be taken, that he was much absent from
them, that he was now in prison, that it was hard to tie them to the imitation
of one man, to one man's example. He does not therefore tie them to the
imitation of himself alone, but having exhorted them to be followers of him,
he says, (...).
and look on them with a diligent eye unto them, as unto the mark whereat ye
shoot, which walk so, so soundly grounded in the truth, and so earnestly
endeavoring after Christian perfection in this life, as ye have us for an
ensample, in whose doctrine is nothing but pure, in whose life is nothing but
holy. So that he allows them to follow the example of other then himself, but
with all he does not leave it unto their choice to follow whom they will, but
marks them out what manner of men they should choose for examples to follow,
namely such as were like him, and such as of whom they might truly say, he
walk; so he embraces the same truth, and orders his whole life as our
Apostle did. The sum then of his exhortation is as i^ he had thus said,
Brethren, ye have heard and know how I am minded toward the truth, and how I
follow hard toward perfection in my life. Be ye followers of me in both
these things, and walk so as ye have me for an ensample Neither do I tie
you only to my self to follow me, but look who they are that walk so,
showing themselves an ensample of good works, with vncorrupt doctrine, with
gravity, integrity, and with the wholesome word which cannot be reproved, as
ye have me for an ensample; and look diligently on them, and follow them as
they follow me, and both of us Christ. Which being the meaning of these words
in this exhortation, let us now further see what notes we may gather hence for
our use and instruction.

The first thing which I note is, that the Apostle would have the Philippians
to follow the example not of whomsoever each man in his private fancy did best
like of, but of him, and of such others as walked so as they had him for an
ensample Whence I observe, that in the course of our Christian walking we are
to follow the example of such as by their holy walking show plainly that they
have been brought up in the school of Christ, and that they are the faithful
children of God. An ordinary thing it is for men to look at the example of
others, and so to walk as they have others for example: for the example of
others going before us is a great inducement unto us to do the like, whether
the thing be good or evil. We see the manifold examples of holy men mentioned
in the holy word of God, even so many and so diverse, as that whether we look
for direction in the general course of Christianity, or in the particular
calling wherein we are placed, we cannot want multitude of examples to direct
us. And wherefore has the holy Ghost set them down but for our use, that we
might so walk as we have then: for examples: For, Romans 15.4.
as the Apostle says, whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written
for our learning. The Prince in Josiah, the Counselor in Hushai, the rich man
in Abraham, the poor man in the Shunamite, the great Officers of great men in
the ^unuch of Candaces the Queen of Ethiopia, Act. 17.
the captive in ^aniel and the three children, the banished in Joseph, the
affli^^ed in body or goods in Job, the soldier in Cornelius, the mer^hant in
those merchants that help to build the walls of Ieru^^lem, the artificer in
those that wrought in the work of the ^emple, the husbandman and those that
are occupied about ^^ttell, in Noah and the Patriarchs, women in Sara and those
^^at are mentioned in the Acts, the Magistrate in Moses and ^osua, the
Ministers of Christ in the Apostles of Christ, have ^otable examples after
which they may walk, and be directed (...) their several Christian duties. No
course of life, no state of ^alling, no condition of either sex, but may have
examples in ^^e word for all holy direction in every holy course. And if ^ee
look even into our own times wherein we live, we shall ^ot hear of that
duty enjoined unto us, but we shall hear (...) see those that have to their
high praise both with God and ^en performed it before us. This then we must
know, that ^^ese examples both old and new are in this manner set before ^ur
eyes to the end that we might be lead thereby unto those Christian duties
which the Lord our God requires at our ^ands which make profession of his
glorious Gospel. For of his we may be sure, that if the multitude of holy
examples ^herewith we are beset, shall not prevail with us to do the ^^ke,
they shall assuredly be so many witnesses against us to ^he increasing of our
condemnation.

Now herewithall we must note, that the life of such holy ^aints of God as
either have lived before us, or do now pre^ently live with us is not, nor may
be any certain or perpetu^ll rule unto us of religion, piety, or Christian
life. For none ^f all the Saints of God, were they never so holy, never so
^eare in Gods sight, but they have had their blemishes in their ^^ues budding
out of that natural corruption which they ^rew from the loins of our first
Parents. Noah that preacher ^f righteousness is noted for drunkenesse: lust
Lot with in^est: Abraham the father of the faithful with lying: Isaac the ^eed
promised by God with the same fault: Jacob that wrested ^ith God and prevailed
with the same fault: Joseph preserved from many dangers by Gods providence with
profane swearing: Moses unto whom God spoke face to face with murmuring: David
a man after Gods own heart with murder and adultery: Peter with denying his
Master Christ: Paul with boasting of his revelations: James and John with
ambition: and the like is to be said of all other the Saints of God: none that
may not justly be noted with some blemish in their life: so that none of all
their examples may be unto us the rule of our life. Only the word which is a
lantern unto our fee^e and a light unto our steps is the rule of our life.
All examples of men if they be looked into will be found too crooked to make a
straight-rule. Only the example of Christ Jesus both God and man is without
all exception a perfect example, all whose actions are our instructions, and
whose whole life is a through direction for our whole life.

In the imitation then and following of the Saints of God, to make an holy use
thereof, we must observe these rules. 1. That we do not otherwise follow the
example of them then they follow the example of Christ. So the Apostle teaches
us where he says, 1 Cor. 11.1.
be ye followers of me even as I am of Christ. I^ then Paul be exalted through
the abundance of Revelations, whereas Christ has taught us to be meek and
lowly in heart; or if Peter deny his Master whereas Christ has told us that
whosoever denies him before men he will also deny him before his father which
is in heaven, here we must leave Peter and Paul, and follow our Master Christ.
Him we must always follow, and Peter and Paul, and other of Gods Saints as
they follow him, but not otherwise. If they be fervent in love as Christ was,
meek and lowly in heart as Christ was, patient in trouble as Christ was, ready
to forgive as Christ was, be earnest in prayer as Christ was, if they go about
his business that sent them as Christ did, in these and the like wherein they
follow Christ we are to follow them. The 2. rule to be observed in the
imitation of the Saints of God, that we follo^ them no in things peculiarly
belonging unto them, but in the things which they did as Christians. For so to
follow Christ Jesus himself in the things which peculiarly belong unto
himself were very absurd; as to follow him in fasting forty days and forty
nights, in walking upon the seas, in causing ^e surging waves to cease with his
word, in cleansing the Lea^ers, raising the dead, and the like whereby he
showed himself to be the true Messiah. And so likewise to follow Abra^am in
offering up of his son Isaac, to follow Moses in smi^^ng the stony rock
that waters may run in dry places, to ^^llow the Apostles in preaching from
city to city and not to ^^ttle in any one place were an imitation so foolish as
that it ^ould want all ground of reason and warrantize. And therefor when
James and John said unto Christ, will thou that we ^ommand that fire come
down from heaven as Elias did? Luc. 9.54.55.
Christ rebuked them and said, ye know not of what spirit ye are: (...) if he
should have said, Elias did so indeed, but ye are not ^erein to follow Elias.
We are therefore to observe what they ^id by peculiar office, authority, or
commandment, and ^ot to labor to follow them therein, and what they did
gene^ally as Christians, and therein to follow them as they fol^ow Christ.

The 3. rule to be observed in the imitation of the Saints ^f God is, that in
earnest desire to be like unto them we resem^le as near as we can such holy
actions of faith toward God, and love toward all Saints as they were most
renowned for. For to eat and drink, to talk and walk, to borow and lend,
and the like which nature teaches are no actions of imitation, but to love one
another as David and Jonathan did, to redeem our own peace and quietness
with some loss as Abraham did, to be faithful in the Lords house as Moses
was, ^o cloth the naked, to feed the hungry, to judge the fatherless and widow
as Job did, to delight in the Law of the Lord, and to exercise our selves
therein day and night as David did, to serve the Lord with fasting and prayer
as Anna did, to sit down at Jesus feet and hear his preaching as Mary did, to
restore with vantage that which was taken by forged cauillation as Zaccheus
did, these and such like are the actions wherein we should earnestly desire to
resemble the Saints of God as near as we can. And if we mark it, in the
places where we are precisely exhorted to follow the example of the Saints of
God we are exhorted to follow them in these and the like things, as in
believing that faith is imputed unto us for righteousness as it was to
Abraham, Romans 4.23 1 Cor 4.16.11.1. 2 These. 3.8.
in suffering affliction for Christ his sake, in not seeking private profit,
but the profit of many that they may be saved, in laboring carefully, and not
walking inordinately, in following after perfection Christianly, and embracing
the truth zealously as in this place of our Apostle. More rules I doubt not
might be noted, but these being observed we shall make an holy use of following
the example of the Saints of God in the whole course of our life.

But if we do consider what holy use we make of such examples of the Saints of
God as either have been or are, it will appear that many of us make little or
no benefit at all of them. For not to speak of great Princes, and Counselors,
whom it were to be wished that they were like unto good Josias, and faithful
Hushai, our rich men do they not more resemble that rich man in the Gospel,
that was clothed richly, and fared delicately every day, but never regarded
poor Lazarus that lay at his gate full of sores begging some crummes that fell
from his table, Luc. 16.
then Abraham? The poorer sort do they not more resemble those four Lepers
that first entered into one Tent and spoiled it, 2 Reg. 7.8.
and then into another and spoiled it, then the good Shunemite? Our Artificers
and Tradesmen do they not more resemble Demetrius and his company mentioned in
the Acts that made more account of their gain, Act. 19.24
and of their bellies then of Paul, of the Preacher, or of the preaching of the
word, then those that wrought in the work of the Temple? Our Contrymen and
they that are occupied about their cattle and their grounds, do they not more
resemble those that could not discern between their right hand and their
left hand, that had no knowledge in the ways of God, Jonah. 4.11.
or the things that belonged unto their peace, then Noah, or the Patriarchs?
Our Magistrates do they not more resemble those of whom Solomon speaks, Pro.
29.2.
that when they rise up men hide themselves, when they bear rule the people
sigh, then Moses, or Joshua? Our Ministers do not they resemble more those, of
whom the Apostle says, that they sought their own, Phil. 2.21.
and not that which was Jesus Christ's, than the Apostles of Christ? Surely so
it fares with too too many that they are more like the worst then the best.
For if it be so ^^at happily we do look at the examples of the Saints of ^od,
what do we? For examples of the Saints of God menti^ned in the word of God,
either we say that they are only to ^e wondered at but not to be imitated, or
else we follow them (...) the things wherein we ought not. If Samson say, Iud.
15.11.
as they did ^^to me so have I done unto them, by and by we persuade our ^^lues
that we may lawfully be revenged of our enemies. If ^lisha curse them that
mock him even unto the death, 2 Reg. 2.24.
and tearing (...) pieces by bears, by and by we think we have a good defense
^r us if we curse those that wrong us even unto hell. And if Moses or Jeremy
draw back the shoulder when the Lord calls ^^em, by and by we think we may be
excused if we do not ^^waies hearken when the Lord does call us to this or
that ^utie. And so likewise in the rest: either we think them on^^ to be
admired but not to be imitated, or if we do imitate ^^em it is either in the
things that we should not, or as we ^ould not, only looking unto some thing
which they did, ^^t not considering the manner, or the cause, or some other
^^rcumstance of doing that they did, or that they sinned in ^^at they did.

Again for examples of such of Gods Saints as live among ^s, and whose
practice we may see daily before our eyes when ^^e are told of them, we scorn
that their actions should be residents for us to follow; yea such is our
corruption that of^entimes we are not ashamed to say, do such and such men
^^uour such a godly work, further such an holy action, coun^enance such a
religious exercise, we will hinder it, we will ^rosse it, we will crush it, or
else we will take the foil: nay to ^et them see and know how little we care to
be like them, does ^^a^ king when there should be mourning for the heavy hand
^f God upon us grieve them, does swearing, and profaning ^f the Lords day
grieve them, we will do these things the rather to despise them. If they be
men fearing God, eschewing ^ui^l, and doing the thing that is good we will have
some ex^eption against them wherefore we will not follow their ex^mple And
commonly we will brand them with the name of ^ustere and precise men, and then
will we be so far from following their example as that we will both cross
what good they intend if we can, and besides we will grieve them either by our
selves or others as much as we can. This is the use that generally we make
either of old or new examples, past or present.

But beloved it should be far otherwise as already we have heard. Yea a great
cause it should be unto us of thankfulness unto our God for his great mercy
toward us, in that he has vouchsafed to beset us with so many old and new
examples of his holy Saints, whereby we might be drawn to walk in such an
holy course as they walked. Let us therefore be thankful unto our God for
them, and to testify our thankfulness let us always remember them, and in
our lives follow the holy practice of them. For, for that purpose were they
written which are commended in holy Scripture unto us. And as I told you let us
be sure of this that if the multitude of holy examples past and present
wherewith we are compassed shall not prevail with us to be followers of them,
they shall most undoubtedly be so many witnesses against us to the increasing
of our just condemnation. Thus much of this note.

The 2. thing which I note is from the person of him that exhorted the
Philippians, which was Paul their Apostle, who had taught them the truth in
Christ Jesus, and had wa^ked in all holy conversation amongst them. Whence I
observe that the Ministers of Christ are not only to teach the truth of Christ
Jesus with vncorrupt doctrine, with gravity, integrity, and with the wholesome
word which cannot be reproved, but withal to be such examples unto their
flocks as that they may say with the Apostle, Be ye followers of me, and of
such (...) walk so as ye have me for an example. This our Apostle required of
Timothy, 1. Tim. 4.12
where he said unto him, Let no man despise thy youth, but be unto them that
believe an ensample in word, in conversation, in love, in spirit, in faith, and
in pureness. And likewise of Titus where he said, Tit. 2.7.8.
above all things show thy self an ensample of good works with vncorrupt
doctrine, with gravity, integr^^^ and with the wholesome word which cannot be
reproved, that he which withstandeth may be ashamed, having nothing concerning
yo^ to speak evil of. And that which the Apostle required of Ti^othy and
Titus, and in them of all the Ministers of Christ, ^^at the Apostle requires
of all, where he says, 1 Pet. 5.2.3.
feed the flock (...) God which depends upon you, caring for it not by
constraint but ^illingly, not for filthy lucre but of a ready mind, not as
though ye ^ere Lords over Gods heritage, but that ye may be ensamples to the
^^^cke. And this the very names given unto them in the holy ^cripture requires
of them, in that they are called a city set (...) a hill, that is looked unto
far and near, lights that must ^ine before men by good works, shepherds
that must feed (...) the word, and by example, guides that must direct by the
^holesome word of truth, and by holiness of life, watchmen ^^at must not fail
to give warning both by doctrine, and by ^fe etc. Yea the diversity of the
dispositions of their flock re^uireth this of them. For though Lydia attend
unto the ^^ings which Paul speaks, and hearing believes, though ^^me receive
instruction by hearing the holy word of life, yet ^ust they generally be drawn
on both by the wholesome lord, and by example of an holy life, or else they
will profit ^ut little, or nothing at all. For so it is generally that the
Mi^isters life and behavior is regarded as much, if not more, as ^^is
doctrine. And does not reason it self require, that as the ^nowledge of Gods
will is first revealed unto them, and by their ministry unto the people, so
they should be the first and most forward in the execution of every Christian
duty, (...) the end that it may appear that they teach others no ^ourse of
life, but that which they themselves do with all care^^lnesse walk in? yes
surely, both precept, and the names ^iuen unto them, and the nature of them
that are to be instru^ted, and reason it self requires this of Christ his
Ministers that they feed the flock of God which depends on them ^oth by the
holy word of truth, and likewise by holy exam^le of life. And doing thus, their
example of life of all others that live with us ought to be followed. The
sheep of ^ll others ought to hear their Pastors voice, and they that are ^o
be led in the way are to follow of all others them that are ^ppointed to be
their Guides, when their shepherds and their Guides shine as holy lights
before them, and hold out the word of life unto them.

Exception I know will easily be taken, and I wi^h it might not justly be
taken, but it will be excepted and said, that if Ministers were such as now we
speak of, ye would follo^ them, and walk as ye had them for an ensample. But
how few such Ministers be there? How many be there that are both wicked in
life, and unable to teach? How many be there of those that do teach that
though they can speak smoothly and finely, as they think, yet do more hurt by
their lewd and wicked example of life in one year, then their doctrine (...)
do good in their whole life? True it is, the complaint is too just of too
many: and better it had been they had been stifled in their cradles then thus
they should have opened men^ mouths against them to the scandal of their
calling. For though they shall say in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy name: for I let the lewd and unlearned beasts go, and leave
them to their judgment that run before they be sent: though I say they shall
say in that day, Lord* Lord have we not prophesied and preached in thy name,
y^^ shall it be said unto them, Mat. 7.23.
I never knew you, depart from me, ye^ that work iniquity. Whatsoever they
preached, if they wrought iniquity, they shall not be able to stand in the
judgment, nor in the congregation of the righteous.

But, beloved, it stands you upon to look unto it ho^ just your exception is
against his life whose doctrine is sound. For oftentimes the Ministers of
Christ which teach the truth purely are charged to offend in example of life,
when as in truth their life is no way to be reproved. But admit that his life
be not answerable to his teaching: this should be no reason for thee to give
less credit or obedience to the doctrine of truth which he delivers. For our
Savior has taught thee to hearken unto him if he sit in Moses seat, Mat.
23.3.
and to do as he says, though thou may not do as he does, if he say well,
and do not accordingly. It is his doctrine not his life that thou must look
unto. O but thou will say why should I believe him, or do as he says when he
does clean contrary himself: surely that which he says is but for fashions
sake he knows some nearer way to heaven then he tells us of, else he would
never do clean contrary, and therefore th^^ ^ilt venture as well as he, and
do as he does how bad soever (...) be. Well, dally as thou list in a matter of
no dalliance. If ^hen he says well and does ill thou care not what he say, but
^o as he does, thy blood shall be required at his hands, but ^^ou shall die in
thy sins: and see thou what thou have gai^ed by thy dalliance. I wish indeed
that no such exception ^^uld justly be taken against the doctrine or life of
any in the ^inisterie. For certainly such as both by the wholesome lord, and
by an holy life preach unto the people be the holy Ministers whose labors are
found fruitful. But if their life (...) not agreeable to their teaching, do
ye take heed how ye ^eglect the word of salvation preached and taught unto you.
and they whomsoever the Lord has blessed with such Tea^^ers as go in and out
before them in soundness of doctrine, ^^d holiness of life, let them take
heed how they follow (...) their example, and hearken unto their voice. If ye
shall ^osely and cunningly seek their disturbance, to withdraw our selves from
the light and easy yoke of hearkening unto ^^em, and following them, your
judgment shall be just ^hatsoeuer it shall be. But blessed shall ye be if ye
hearken ^^to their voice, and so walk as ye have them for an ^^sample.

LECTVRE LXVIII.
PHILIP. 3. Verse. 18. For many walk of whom I have often told you, and now
tell you weeping, that they are the enemies (...) the cross of Christ.
NOw follow the reasons to move the Philippia^^ to hearken unto his
exhortation, which was to be followers of him, and to look on such as walked
so as they had him for an ensample.

For many walk etc.] This is the first reason which the Apostle uses to move
the Philippians to hearken unto his exhortation. His reason, ye see, is drawn
from a contrary example, and the danger that follows such walking as these
many use which he speaks of. Why then would the Apostle have the Philippians
to follow his example, and the example of such as walked as he did? Because
there were many ill walkers whose example if they followed they were to look
for the like end that is destined unto them, even damnation: such as were those
whom in the beginning of this Chapter he called dogs, evil workers, the
concision; whom he now again describes by five notes; As 1. th^^ they are
the enemies of the cross of Christ: 2. That their end is damnation: 3. That
their God is their belly: 4 That their glory is to their shame: 5. That they
mind earthly things. In that he says many walk, he signifies the more
danger of them because they are many. Again in that he says that he had
often told them of them, he signifies both his own continual care over
them, and the greatness of the danger by those evil walkers, which caused him
so often to tell them of them. Again, in that he now tells them of the^
weeping, he signifies both his own entire affection toward them, and
likewise his grief and sorrow of heart that either there should be any such
enemies of the Gospel to trouble them, or that they should give any ear unto
them. Again, in that he notes them to be the enemies of the Cross of Christ,
he signifies their corruption in doctrine, and in life. In doctrine, for that
by urging the necessity of circumcision and the works of the Law unto
righteousness and salvation, they made the cross of Christ to be of no
effect, and abolished the work of our redemption by Christ Jesus. For, Gal.
2.21.
as the Apostle says, if righteousness be by the Law, which these men taught,
then Christ died without cause. In life, for that they would not suffer
persecution for the cross of Christ, and therefore applied themselves to the
humor of the Jews, and preached unto them circumcision, and the law. In both
these then, that by their doctrine they detracted from the merits of Christ his
Cross, and redemption by his blood, and avoided to suffer persecution for the
cross of Christ, the smart whereof they felt that sincerely preached Christ
crucified, in both these I say they showed themselves to be enemies unto the
cross of Christ. Again, in that he notes their end or reward for the
recompense of such their walking to be damnation or destruction, he signifies
how needful it is for the Philippians if they fear their end to fear
likewise so to walk as they do, so to believe and live as they do. Again, in
that he notes their God to be their belly, he signifies what principally they
respected in preaching of Christ, namely their profit, their pleasure, and
their ease. They preached Christ, not sincerely, and purely, for Christ his
sake, but with reference to please others, and to seek their own good.
Inasmuch therefore as they were lovers of pleasure, of profit, of ease more
than lovers of good, the Apostle says that their God was their belly, that
being each man's God which he best loves. Again, in that he notes their glory
to be to their shame, he signifies either that they glory in those things as
in circumcision, and the ordinances of Moses whereof they ought rather to be
ashamed, as some think, or that the vain glory and estimation which they
seek after amongst men, neglecting the true glory of Christ Jesus shall turn
to their confusion and shame, as I rather think the words to be understood.
Lastly, in that he notes them to mind earthly things, he signifies their
study and delight, and all their affections to be set on honors, wealth,
friends, commodities, and the things which are on the earth, and not on the
things which are above. So that (...) we mark it, as in the whole there is a
general reason to move the Philippians to follow him, and such as he was,
because of many false Teachers which walk inordinately, so in each point of
this general reason as it is set down there is a several reason to the same
purpose. For why would he have them to follow his example, and the example of
such a^ he was? Because many walked to and fro: Which shows that they might
easily fall upon those which were bad being many, of whom he had told them
often, which shows as his care, so the greatness of the danger if they
should fall upon them and follow them, and of whom now when he wrote this
Epistle to them he told them weeping, which shows as his affection toward
them, so his grief that either there should be such, or that they should
hearken unto such, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ,
derogating from the merits of Christ his cross, and avoiding persecution for
the cross of Christ, whose end is damnation, which, may justly fear any from
following them, whose God is their belly, which shows that they seek their
own, and not that which is Jesus Christ's, whose glory is to their shame, which
shows the confusion that shall come upon that estimation which they see^e
after amongst men, which mind earthly things, which shows their worldly
minds and earthly cogitations. Every o^ which several points ought to stand
for a reason with the Philippians to move them to hearken to hi exhortation.
And now that we see the meaning and force of these words in this reason of the
Apostle, let us also see what notes we may gather hence for our own use and
instruction.

The first thing I note is, that the Apostle says, he told them often of
these enemies of the cross of Christ, whereof he now tells them. And so in
the beginning of this chapter, he said that it grieved him not to write the
same things unto them whereof before he had told them. And what was that? That
they should beware of dogs, of evil workers, of the concision. Whereby the
Apostle shows his own continual care over them, and likewise the greatness
of the danger by these enemies of the Gospel of Christ, which caused him so
often to tell them of them. Whence I observe the great care which ought to be
in the Pastor over the people committed to h s charge, once and again,
continually to warn and admonish them of such things as may be dangerous and
hu^tfull unto them. Our blessed Savior, the good shepherd, and great bishop
of our souls has by his own example taught us to do so: For as we read, he
ceased not to tell his Di^ciples of ravening wolves, of such as would deliver
them up to the councels, and would scourge them in their synagogues, of being
baptized with his baptism; he ceased not to ^arne them to beware of the
Scribes and Pharisees, to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, to take heed
and beware of co^etousnes. Our holy Apostle likewise as a follower of Christ
professes unto the Ephesians, A^t. 20.31.
that he ceased not to warn every one both night and day with tears, of
grievous wolves which after his departure would enter in amongst them, not
sparing the flock: and often he warns the Churches unto which he writes to
beware of division and dissension. Will they then that have the oversight of
any people walk as they have Christ, and our holy Apostle for an ensample. It
may not grieve them to te^l their people often of such kind of men, and such
manner things as may be dangerous and hurtful for them.

And this often beating upon the same thing, what ought it to teach you men and
brethren? Surely if we tell you often of some thing whereof we would have you
to take heed and beware, it may be an argument unto you that the greatness of
the danger, and the grieuousnesse of the sin causes us so often to urge it,
and to beat upon it. Do we then often tell you of profaning ^he Lords day, of
negligence in coming to this and the like places to hear the word of the
Lord, of giving your members weapons of unrighteousness unto sin, and the
like? Do we often warn you to beware of those that compass sea and land to
make one of their prof^ssi^n, and when he is made they make him twofold more
the chi^de of hell then they themselves are, of those that through
covetousness seek with fained words to make merchandise of your souls, of
those that live at ease in Sion, and put far from them all remembrance of the
evil day, and the like? Assure your selves the danger is great if ye do not
hearken, and the punishment of your sin lies at your door, if you reform
not that sin whatsoever it be whereof ye are so often told. Look well
therefore unto it whenever ye are often told of any thing to be reformed,
and think not with your selves that it is but a small matter, and that there
needs not half so much ado about it; but persuade your selves that it much
concerns you to redress it. And whether it be for any manner of thing to be
reformed, or for any kind of person to be avoided, defer not too long to
hearken to that which is told so often.

Again, this often telling you of the same thing to be reformed or avoided,
may put you in mind of that natural corruption which hangs so fast on you.
Much ado to bring us to the mortification of the old man, and though we be
told again and again of such sins as hold us captive at their own
pleasure, yet can we be content to put of from day to day, and with the
sluggard to say, yet a little sleep, a little slumber, (...). 6.10.
a little folding of the hands to sleep. But let us know that this is a part of
natural corruption to stand in need so often to be told, or not to hearken
when we are told so often. Let us therefore shake of this corruption, and
either let us not need so often to be told of any thing, or at least when we
are so often told, let us hearken and obey, and avoid or reform whatsoever it
is that we are warned and admonished of. For as it is the Pastors duty to tell
us of things to be reformed or avoided, so is it our duty to hearken and obey
when we are told; and this duty to tell us often of such things is imposed
upon the Pastor, because of the negligent performance of our duty to hearken
and obey when we are told. Let us therefore at all times give all diligence to
hearken unto the things that belong unto our peace, and to obey from the heart
that form of doctrine whereunto we are delivered to conform our selves
according unto it.

The second thing which I note is, that the Apostle says, that now at the
writing hereof he tells them weeping of these enemies of the cross of Christ.
Whereby the Apostle shows both his great affection toward the Philippians,
and his great grief that either there should be such, or that they should
hearken unto such. Whence I observe the great and godly affection which ought
to be in the Pastor toward his people, even so great that it should grieve
him, and even cause him to shed tears to see the enemies of the truth to
trouble his people, or to see his people drawn into any sin or error by any
that are otherwise then well and godly minded. For thus we testify generally
our affection unto the Church of God, if we be grieved to see it assaulted by
the Dragon, or the Dragon any way to prevail against it. We see how Samuel
mourned for Saul, 1 Sa. 15.35.
when by his disobedience he had provoked the Lord to anger against him. We see
how the Prophet Jeremy wished that his head were full of water, Jer. 9.1.
and his eyes a fountain of tears that he might weep day and night for the
slain of the daughter of his people: and how in another t^ee he cries, My
belly, my belly, 4.91.
I am pained even at the very ^^art, mine heart is troubled within me, I cannot
be still, for my soul has heard the sound of the trumpet, and the alarm of
the ^attell. We see how our blessed Savior beheld the City Jerusalem, and
wept for it, saying, Luc. 19.41.42.
O if thou had even known (...) the least in this thy day those things which
belong unto thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes. We see likewise
how our Apostle testifies of himself that in great affliction and anguish of
heart he wrote his former epistle to the Corinthians with many tears, 2 Cor.
2.4.
caused no doubt partly by their divisions and dissensions, and partly by that
incestuous person. And ^uch should be the zealous and ardent affection of all
faithful Pastors toward their people, and toward Gods Church, as that they
should be grieved at the heart for the wicked that trouble them, for the sins
that reign amongst them, and for the desolation that will follow if speedy
conversion and repentance prevent it not. Yea they should water and wash their
threatenings and their exhortations with their tears in token of their tender
affection, and great compassion toward their people, and toward the Church.

And should we (men and brethren) mourn for you, an^ should you give place to
the Devil, and to such his wicke^ instruments as seek to drown you in
perdition? should we (...) grieved at the heart for you, and should ye walk
on in the counsel of the ungodly, and stand in the way of sinners, an^ sit in
the seat of the scornful? should we be touched in (...) soul, that our
labor should be in vain amongst you, an^ should ye go on in the wickednsse
of your way, drinking iniquity like water, and drawing on sin with cord^ of
vanity as it were with cart-ropes? Nay beloved by th^^ ou^ duty learn ye
your duty. For if we ought to be thus affecte^ toward you, then bethink your
selves well how ye ough^ to be affected in your selves? Surely if it should
wring te^^ from our eyes to see you sort your selves with the wicked, and to
suffer your selves to be drawn away with their error, (...) should make you to
water your couch with tears, and to mingle your drink with weeping. If it
should touch us in ou^ souls to see you give your members weapons of
unrighteousness unto sin, and to serve sin in the lusts thereof, i^ should
fill your souls full of heaviness, and plunge you i^ sorrow of heart unto the
nethermost hell. If it should grieve us to see you after that ye have escaped
from the filthiness of the world through the knowledge of the Lord, and of the
Savior Jesus Christ, to be yet again entangled therein and overcome, it
should vex you even unto the death, and caus^ you to power out your souls unto
the Lord in the bitterness of your spirit. Whatsoever it is concerning you
should grieve us, should much more cause you to mourn in soul, and to be
troubled in your spirits. For what is it that does o^ should cause us to mourn
for you, and to be full of heaviness for you? Our desire is to present you
holy and unblameable in that day. And here is our grief that you suffer your
selves to be seduced by the world and wicked ones, and that our labor is in
vain amongst you. Consider then with your selves how ye ought to be grieved
in your selves, and take heed how ye be not grieved in your selves for the
things whereat your godly Pastors are grieved. It grieved no doubt then Noah
that preacher of righteousness that the Genesis 6.
people in his time so provoked the Lord to anger by their ^ruelty and
wickedness: but they regarded not his grief, and therefore the Lord brought
in the flood upon the world of the ungodly. Genesis 19.
Just Lot vexed his righteous soul with the ^ncleane conversation of the
wicked, and with their unlawful deeds: But they regarded it not, and when he
told them of ^o^^ judgments he seemed even to his sons in law as though he
had mocked: and therefore the Lord raind upon them fire and brimstone, and
destroyed them. Jeremiah was (...) great anguish of spirit for the rebellion of
the stiff-necked (...); but they regarded it not, therefore the Lord delivered
them into the will of their enemies, and they that hated them ^ee Lords over
them. Take heed then how ye regard it not when your Pastors are grieved on
your behalf: take ^^^de how ye make light of such sins as they grieve to
see ^ou defiled withal, but rather sorrow for them, that their sorrow may be
turned into joy, and your joy may be full, even ^oth yours and theirs. In their
joy over you ye have just ^^^e of rejoicing, and in their grief for you ye
have (...) cause of grief. Look therefore that they may re^oyce over you, for
that shall be your joy; and take heed that they may not mourn or grieve for
you, for that shall be your grief.

Again, hence I observe a notable comfort for the faithf^ll and painful
Ministers of Jesus Christ. Has he in all good conscience labored in the work
of the Lord, and does he not see the desired fruits of his labors? Paul the
great Apostle of Christ, mighty in the scriptures, and much renow^ed for many
great miracles which he wrought, yet labored (...) vain with many which he
taught, insomuch that the con^^deration of them with whom he labored so much
with so ^^^le profit made him weep and shed tears, as in this place. It may
not then seem strange unto us if our labor with many be in vain. But it
stands them upon that hear us to look unto it that our labor be not in
vain amongst them: for though they be not gathered, yet shall we be glorious
in the eyes of the Lord, and our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord: but
if they be not gathered they shall be scattered from the presence of the Lord,
and of the Lamb for eue^ more. Give therefore all diligence that we may
rejoice (...) the day of Christ, that we have not run in vain, nor l^boured
in vain amongst you; for that will be profitab^^ for you. Labor that we may
give accounts for you with io^ and not with grief; Heb. 13.17.
for that will be unprofitable for you. L^^ us have mutual joy one of
another, and let our joy be in the Lord.

The third thing which I note is, that the Apostle says, the many walk up and
down which are the enemies of the cross (...) Christ. Whereby the Apostle
signifies the great danger th^^ there was of them because they were many, for
that it would be hard for the Philippians not to light on some of them, and t^
be seduced by them, unless they should diligently look o^ him, and such as he
was. Whence I observe that it is not a^waies safe to follow a multitude, but
commonly rather dangerous. Mat. 7.13.
For many there are that go in at the wide gate, and walk^ in the broad way;
but it is dangerous to follow them, for the way leads to destruction. And
again our Savior has told us that many should come in his name, Mat. 24.5.
and deceive many. Yea commonly the multitude is the worst. What were the rest
of the old world besides Noah and his family? Ten had been bu^ a small number
of righteous men to have been found in the great City of Sodom: yet were not
ten found there. How often were all the multitude of the Israelites ready to
ston^ Moses and Aaron? But one Elias unto 450 of Baals Prophets but one Micah
unto 400 false Prophets. And how often does Paul complain that a great door
and effectual being opened unto him he had many adversaries, that there were
many which made merchandise of the word of God, many which were disobedient,
and vain talkers, and deceivers o^ minds? How often does John complain of
many Antichrists, many false Prophets? Nay in what age has not the little
flock of Christ lived in the midst of a naughty and crooked nation, beset
with a world of wickedness and wicked men? Where Christ has his Church, there
the Deuil^ has more then a chapel, even 500 synagogues, his instruments to
work his will so far as they can. So that if we follow the most we shall
commonly follow the worst.

A good hold then have they of it that make this to be one of the notes of
their Church. Christ calls his Church a little flock; and Esaias calls it a little
remnant; and Jeremy a small ^eede. But well may she stand on her multitude
that has made all nations drunken with the wine of the wrath of her
fornications, and so let her do till the smoke of her burning ascend. But why
or whence is it that we in our ordinary life stand so much upon the multitude?
What more common amongst us then to say, that we will do as the most do, we
will not single our selves from the rest, etc? Nay is not that profane and
wicked speech often heard amongst us, that it is good going with company
though it be to the Devil? But (beloved) our God has taught us another
lesson: Exodus 23.2.
Thou shall not (says he) follow a multitude to do evil, neither agree in a
controversy to decline after many to overthrow the truth. And our Apostle here
tells us, that many walk that are the enemies of the cross of Christ; but we
may not walk after them, but after him, and such as he is. For we are not to
look how many do walk thus and thus, but who walk as they should; not how
many walk in this or that way, but what the way is wherein they do walk. And
though all the rest bow the knee to Baal, yet we may not; though all the
nations of the earth fall down before the beast and worship, yet may not we.
What if in an election of an officer and magistrate, the rest, or far the
greater part, consent upon an unfit man, yet may not I. O but I shall make my
self odious if I single out my self from the rest, and prevail never a whit.
Yea but good Prophet Michaiah stood upon no such points, 1 Reg. 22.
but that though he should by standing single against 400 false prophets
become odious unto Ahab the King, and all the Prophets, and not prevail, yet
he spoke the truth. Here I have a good example, I must walk as I have him for
an ensample. And so generally let us not look how many do thus, or how we may
prevail if we single our selves, but let us do as we ought whatsoever come of
it, and howsoever all do otherwise. Et hoc sciamus, fortiorem esse qui pro
nobis est, quam qui contra nos sunt omnes. And this let us know, that he is
stronger who is for us, then all they who are against us.

LECTVRE LXIX.
PHILIP. 3. Verse 18.19. That they are the enemies of the cross of Christ,
whose end is damnation, whose God is their belly etc.
THus far we have already proceeded in this first reason of the Apostles
which he used to move the Philippians to follow him, and such as he was; for
many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you weeping etc.

Now follow the five notes whereby the Apostle describes these many walkers of
whom he had told them often, and now told them weeping. The first note whereby
he describes them is, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ. Which
branch of his reason might well stand for a sufficient reason with the
Philippians to move them not to walk after these, but to follow him, and to
walk so as they had him for an ensample. Now the Apostle calls them the
enemies of the cross of Christ in two respects. 1. Because by urging the
necessity of circumcision, and the works of the law unto righteousness and
salvation, they made the cross of Christ to be of none effect, and abolished
the work of our redemption by the blood of Christ Jesus. 2. Because they would
not suffer persecution for the cross of Christ, and therefore applied
themselves to the humor of the Jews, and preached unto them circumcision, and
the law. For thus both in doctrine, detracting from the merits of Christ his
cross, and redemption by his blood; and likewise in life, following after
carnal security, and avoiding persecution for Christ crucified, they showed
themselves to be enemies unto the cross of Christ.

Hence then I observe who they be that be the enemies of the cross of Christ,
namely they that in their doctrine detract from the merits of Christ his
cross, and the work of our redemption by the blood of Christ Jesus finished
upon the cross; and they likewise that in their life follow after carnal
delicacie, and fly persecution for the cross of Christ, for Christ crucified:
even both these sorts of men are enemies unto the cross of Christ. For
touching the first sort of men, must not they needs be counted the enemies of
the cross of Christ, that in their doctrine make the cross of Christ to be of
none effect? And do not they in their doctrine make the cross of Christ to be
of none effect, that teach righteousness, redemption, or salvation to be any
otherwise then by the only merits of Christ his cross, and faith in his
blood? The Apostle says, if righteousness be by the Law, that is, Gal. 2.21.
if we may be made righteous by any work which we can do according to the
law, by the fear of God, the love of God, the love of our neighbor, or any
thing commanded in the moral law of God, then Christ died without a cause, and
in vain. For to this end, as the Apostle shows, Romans 8.3.4.
God sent his Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned
sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in
us. Where the meaning is, that therefore Christ was sent to fulfill all
righteousness in our flesh, and to die for us, because we were unable to
fulfill the law to be made righteous by it, or to save our souls from death.
For if we had been able to purchase righteousness by our own works, or to
save our souls from death, then what needed Christ to have come in the flesh,
or to have died for us? It had been in vain, and unprofitable. They then that
teach righteousness to be by the law, or any thing that we can do, they make
the death of Christ, and his resurrection, his victory, his kingdom, his
glory, himself unprofitable, and of none effect, and so are enemies of the
cross of Christ. So again, the Apostle says, ye are abolished from Christ,
whosoever are justified by the law, Gal. 5.4.
ye are fallen from grace. Where the meaning is, that they are utterly void
of Christ, and not in the kingdom of grace, they abolish righteousness,
redemption, and salvation by Christ and have no part in the death and
resurrection of Christ, that seek to be made righteous, or to purchase
salvation by the works of the law. Whereupon again it follows, that they
that teach righteousness or salvation to be by the law, mak^ Christ
unprofitable, and abolish the merit of our redemption by his blood, and so in
their doctrine are enemies unto the cross of Christ.

Will ye then know who they are that are the enemies o^ the cross of Christ
at this day that ye may not follow them* or walk as they do? Mark then who
they are that in their doctrine are injurious to the cross of Christ. Who are
they that teach, that we are justified by our own works done according to the
law, and not by the alone righteousness of Christ Jesus which he finished upon
his cross? Who are they that teach that our sins are forgiven by bulls, and
pardons, and pilgrimages, and not by the alone blood of Christ Jesus? Who are
they that teach propitiatory sacrifices for the quick and the dead, other
then that one sacrifice of Christ Jesus once offered upon the cross, whereby
he has obtained eternal redemption for us? Who are they that teach invocation
unto, and intercession by Saints or Angels, or any other then him that by his
own blood has entered in once unto the holy place, and is set at the right
hand of God to make continual intercession for us? Mark who they be that be
such, and see whether that they be not the enemies of the cross of Christ,
whether any be so injurious unto the cross of Christ as they be. O but some
will say that these whom I now note be the only friends of the cross of
Christ. For do not they worship the cross of Christ even with holy worship?
Do not they set it in their temples, and in the high ways, and in every place
bow down unto it? Do not they adorn it with gold, and silver, and all costly
precious stones? Do not their great ones cause it in all celebritie and pomp
to be carried before them? Do they not at all times, when they come out of
their houses, when they come into the Churches, when they address themselves
almost unto any thing sign themselves with the sign of the cross in honor of
the cross of Christ? True it is, they whom I note do thus, and yet these be
they that be the enemies of the cross of Christ. For to do thus, and with
these foolish outward semblances and may-games to deceive the world, is not to
glory in the cross of Christ, or to be a friend of the cross of Christ; but
to teach Christ Jesus purely and sincerely, to give unto Christ crucified the
full and whole honor of our redemption, justification, and salvation which they
do not, this is to be a true friend of the cross of Christ: for this is to
believe and know Christ crucified. There was a time indeed when the cross of
Christ was most odious and opprobrious, and when to preach or believe in Christ
crucified was most ridiculous. And if these cross and gross idolaters had
lived then, it may well be thought that they would have been cross and gross
persecutors. But now when we glory in nothing more than to know Christ and him
crucified, in such pompous sort and vain gesticulations to celebrate the
cross, and to detract from the merits of Christ crucified, is to be injurious
unto the cross of Christ, to be an enemy of the cross of Christ. Yea what
else is such adoration and worship of the cross as they use, but most gross
and impious idolatry? Take heed therefore of such: mark well who they be.
Many such there be: but take heed and beware of them; for they are the enemies
etc.

Another sort of men likewise there are enemies unto the cross of Christ, and
those are such as in their life follow after carnal delicacies, and fly
persecution for the cross of Christ, for Christ crucified. Of such the Apostle
speaks, where he says, As many as desire to make a fair show in the flesh,
Gal. 6.12.
they constrain you to be circumcised, only because they would not suffer
persecution for the cross of Christ. In which place the Apostle shows the
cause why the false teachers preached and urged circumcision and the Law. And
this it was: The Jews still objected both unto our Savior Christ, and unto
his Apostles that they taught things contrary to the Law, and to the ordinances
of Moses: for so we see it was in the accusation of our Savior before his
arraignment, that he moved the people, Luc. 23.5.
teaching throughout all Judea, they meant strange doctrine, beginning at
Galile even to this place. It was likewise in the accusation of Stephen when he
was stoned to death, Act. 6.14.
that he preached that Jesus of Nazaret should change the ordinances which
Moses gave them. And for this they were ready to kill Paul, 21.28.
that he taught as they said all men every where against the Law. The false
teachers therefore seeing that the Jews stood upon Moses and the Law, and that
they persecuted them that preached Christ sincerely even to the death, joined
in their preaching of Christ circumcision, and the Law unto Christ, that so
applying themselves unto the humor of the Jews, they might avoid persecution
for the cross of Christ, or for preaching sincerely Christ crucified. And
these are they that the Apostle calls here the enemies of the cross of Christ,
because to please the humor of the Jews, to live at ease and pleasure, and to
avoid persecution, they made merchandise of the word of God, and preached
Christ not sincerely, but so as they might keep themselves without gunshot of
any danger.

Will ye then know what other enemies there be of the cross of Christ at
this day, that ye may beware also to walk as they do? Mark then who they
are that to avoid the danger which often follows upon the preaching of Christ
purely, fit themselves unto the humors of men, and so preach that they may
please, or at least not displease. Who are they that turn with every wind,
and rather then they will hazard life, goods, or name, will iumpe in religion
just with the King of what religion soever he be? Who are they that to avoid it
may be only supposed dangers, do betray the truth of Christ Jesus, sparing to
speak such things as they ought, and speaking such things as they ought not?
Who are they whose care and labor it is a great deal more to speak safely,
as they think, then to speak sincerely? Many such carnal Gospellers there
be, of whom that of our Savior Christ is truly affirmed, Mat. 12.30.
He that is not with me, is against me; and he that gathers not with me,
scatters. Mark them who they be, and take heed and beware of them. Walk
not after their example, for they are the enemies of the cross of Christ,
providing for their own security whatsoever become of the truth of Christ
Jesus.

The second thing which the Apostle notes in these many walkers of whom he had
told them often, and now told them weeping, is, that their end or reward for a
recompense of such their walking is damnation, or destruction, if God shall not
grant them grace unto repentance for such their evil walking. Which branch of
the Apostles reason in effect urges thus much, that if the Philippians feared
the end of those walkers, they should also fear to walk as they did, and
rather walk so as they had him for an ensample. And indeed this end, as also
the other properties after specified, rightly agree unto those enemies of the
cross of Christ before mentioned. Hence then I observe what the end is of
those that are enemies unto the cross of Christ, that make their God their
belly, that seek the praise of men, but not of God, that mind earthly
things, so that their delight and affections are set thereon, and generally of
such ungodly walkers as walk clean otherwise then we have Christ and his
holy Apostles and blessed servants for an ensample: their end is, as here the
Apostle says, damnation, unless the Lord grant them grace unto repentance. A
sentence which albeit I fear to pronounce, yet when and where the holy Ghost
leads me thereunto, I must speak, that the godly may stand in awe, and not
sin, and that the ungodly of the earth may tremble, and either reform the
wickedness of their ways, or else through the just judgment of God may smite
their knees one against another, and be drencht up in desperation. This then to
be the end of such the holy Ghost every where witnesses. Upon the ungodly,
says the Prophet, the Lord shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, Psalm. 11.7.
storm and tempest, this shall be their portion to drink. Tophet, says Esaias,
Esa. 30.33.
is prepared of old, it is even prepared for the King, if he be wicked, it is
made deep and large, the burning thereof is fire and much wood, the breath of
the Lord like a river of brimstone does kindle it. And in a vision John saw the
beast taken, Apoc. 19.20
and with him that false Prophet that wrought miracles before him, whereby he
deceived them that received the beasts mark, and them that worshipped his
image. And both these were cast alive into a lake of fire, burning with
brimstone. All which places, and many others which might be alleged to this
purpose, do evidently show what the end is of the wicked and ungodly of the
earth, be they Prince or subject, Pastor or people, seducers or seduced. Their
end is, they shall be rooted out at the last, and turned into hell, unless by
true and unfeigned repentance they prevent that judgment, the sentence whereof
can never be reuersed.

Whose end then ye fear, it behooves you carefully to look unto it that ye
walk not after their example. Consider well what has been said touching the
enemies of the cross of Christ, and mark well what shall be said touching
those whose God is their belly, whose glory is to their shame, which mind
earthly things. If by that which has been said ye can descrie who they be
that be the enemies of the cross of Christ, or if that which shall be said
shall any way design who they be whose God is their belly, whose glory is to
their shame, which mind earthly things, take heed and beware that ye walk
not as they do. For of this be ye sure, that the end of such is damnation and
destruction. And if the Cities about Sodom and Gomorrha suffered the vengeance
of eternal fire as well as Sodom and Gomorrha, Judge. 7.
because they in like manner as Sodom and Gomorrha did, committed and followed
strange flesh, then assure your selves that if ye shall walk as they that are
enemies to the cross of Christ, whose God is their belly, etc. ye shall also
drink of the same cup that they shall drink of, even of the wine of Gods
wrath. Take heed therefore lest at any time any of you be deceived by them,
and walk not in their steps if ye will not be partakers of their judgments.

The third thing which the Apostle notes in these inordinate walkers, is, that
their God is their belly: whereby the Apostle signifies that they preached
not Christ sincerely and purely for Christ his sake, but that they principally
respected in the preaching of Christ their profit, their pleasure, their ease,
being lovers of pleasures, of profit, of ease, more then lovers of God; and
therefore their belly, that is, their profit, their pleasure, their ease,
might well be called their God, that being each man's God which he loves and
likes best. And this branch also of the Apostles reason might well stand for a
sufficient argument with the Philippians to move them not to walk after these,
but to follow him, and to walk so as they had him for an ensample. Hence then
I observe another note of false teachers, after whose example we may not
walk: if their God be their belly, so that they care more to serve their own
bellies then the Lord Jesus Christ, they are false teachers, and we may not
follow them. This note of false teachers our Apostle also gives in his epistle
to the Romans, where having exhorted the Romans to beware of false Apostles and
teachers, he gives them this note to know them by, They that are such, says
he, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, that is, they
seek their own gain, and preach Christ with reference to please others, and
to seek their own ease, profit, and pleasure. The Apostle gives likewise the
same note of them, 2 Pet. 2.14 3.
where he says that they have hearts exercised with covetousness, through
covetousness making merchandise of men's souls. Such a one was Balaam, of whom
the Apostle Peter there says, that he loved the wages of unrighteousness.
Esa. 56.11.
Such were those whom Esaias called greedy dogs which could never have enough.
And such were those of whom the Apostle said before, that they sought their
own, Phil. 2 21.
and not that which was Jesus Christ's.

Will ye then know who they are at this day that by this note may be descried
to be false teachers, that knowing them ye may not follow them, nor walk as
they do? Mark then who they are that serve their own bellies more then the
Lord Jesus Christ. Who are they that through covetousness would make
merchandise of your souls, and speak evil of the way of truth? Who are they
that for money set on sale the forgiveness of sins, and the kingdom of
heaven? Who are they that under color of long prayers devour widows houses?
that for such and such lands, or sums of money, or relief to such and such
places, will promise so many prayers for so many days or years for you or
your friends? Who are they that to maintain their triple Crown maintain also
the wicked Stews? Who are they that make gain godliness, and do all that
ever they do in deed and in truth for the maintenance of their state, and of
their bellies? It is easily known who they be, and it is as easily hereby
discerned that they are false teachers whosoever they be. Take heed then and
beware of them: follow them not, neither walk as they do; for howsoever they
have God in their mouths, yet sound their hearts, and trace them in the paths
wherein they walk, it will be found that their God is their belly, if either
that be their God which they love best, or that be their belly which they
measure by their pleasure, profit, and ease.

But do they alone make their belly their God? Do not all they that more
seek their own then that which is Jesus Christ's make their belly their God?
Or are there not many carnal Gospellers that do so? How many are there that
intrude themselves into this holy calling, not with any purpose to work in the
Lord his vineyard, but only to feed upon the portion of the Levites? How many
are there that withdraw their shoulders from the burden as much and as often
as they can, and take as little pains in this work as they can, seeking more
their own ease then that which is Jesus Christ's? How many are there that being
bewitched with the love, and troubled with the cares of the world, are so
carefully occupied about the things of this life that they intend not the work
of the ministry, seeking more their own profit than that which is Jesus
Christ's? how many are there that preach Christ rather through strife and envy
than of good will, rather in hope of preferment for their pains, than of any
desire to gain them that hear them unto Christ, rather in any other respect
almost, than in an holly zeal of the glory of our God? Surely many such
carnal Gospellers there be whose God is indeed their belly, which like unto
the sons of Eli so turn aside after the love of their bellies, and of their
pleasures, that either they forget, or else care not for the law of their God.
But take heed and beware of them: for ye may not walk as they do.

Yea, generally they make their God their belly that either serve their bellies
when they should serve their God, or care more for the feeding of the belly
than for the knowledge of God, or so serve God as he does serve their bellies.
Look then well amongst you that none of you be such, as are then a looking to
your profits, or pleasures, or other things of this life when ye should be
looking unto the service of your God; that none of you be such as care more for
the things of this life, than for the knowledge of Gods will out of his holy
word; that none of you be such as measure your service unto the Lord by his
ministering unto you such things as are needful for the maintenance of this
life: for such do make their God their belly, either caring more for the
things of this life than for God, or else only so caring for God as they are
occasioned by the things of this life. A foul and gross Idolatry to make our
belly our God. And therefore let us take heed that neither we commit such
Idolatry, nor follow the example of such as commit such Idolatry.

The fourth thing which the Apostle notes in these inordinate walkers is, that
their glory is to their shame. Whereby the Apostle signifies that the vain
glory and estimation which they sought after amongst men, neglecting the true
glory of Christ Jesus, should turn to their confusion and shame. Which branch
also of the Apostles reason might well serve for a sufficient reason to move
the Philippians not to follow the example of these, but to follow him, and such
as walked so as they had him for an ensample. Hence then I observe another note
of false teachers and inordinate walkers, which is, vainly to seek after
glory and estimation amongst men, neglecting the glory of God, after whose
example we may not walk, for that their glory shall be turned into shame.
Ioh. 5.44.
How can ye believe which receive honor one of another (says our Savior) and
seek not the honor that comes of God alone? In which place is showed, that
this vain seeking after honor and glory amongst men is the very root of
infidelity. And therefore it is said of certain chief rulers that in a
generality believed in Christ because of the miracles which he did, but not
indeed truly believe, that they did not confess Christ. And the reason is
added, for they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God. Ioh. 12.43.
So that the ambitious seeking of praise amongst men, is the very bane in all
sorts of men both of faith, and of every fruit thereof. And a just thing it is
with God that they which seek the praise of men, and not of God have their
praise with men, but not with God, and that with God their glory be turned
into shame.

Will ye then know who by this note may be descried at this day to be false
teachers, that knowing them ye may not follow them, nor walk as they do.
Mark who they are that seek honor and glory amongst men, but seek not the
honor that comes of God alone: who is it that exalts himself against all
that is called God, or that is worshipped, sit as God in the temple of God, and
showing himself that he is God? Who is it that is araied with purple and
skarlet, and gilded with gold and precious stones, and pearls, and has a cup
of gold in her hand full of abominations, and filthiness of her fornication
where with she make all the Nations of the earth drunk? Who is it that
glorifieth her self, and lives in pleasure, and says in her heart, I sit
being a Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no mourning? And what shall
become of all this pomp and glory? Apoc. 18.8.
her plagues shall come at one day, death, and sorrow, and famine, and she
shall be burnt with fire; for strong is the Lord God which shall condemn her.
Take heed then and beware how ye follow this beast, or them that have received
the beasts mark. Their glory which they seek with men they have, but their
glory shall be turned into confusion and shame.

And I wish that they were the men alone that seek the praise of men, but not
of God. But are there not many carnal Gospellers that may be branded with that
mark? Are there not many that in a vain affectation of their own praise more
then Gods, study rather to speak unto the ear then unto the heart? Are there
not many whose preaching stands rather in the enticing speech of man's
wisdom, then in plain evidence of the spirit and of power? If there be any
that so vainly hunt after glory, surely their glory shall vanish as smoke and
shall wither as the green herb. Take heed therefore and beware of them: for
ye may not walk as they do.

The last thing which the Apostle notes in them, is, that they mind earthly
things, whereby the Apostle signifies that their study, and delight, and all
their affections were se^ on houses, wealth, friends, commodities, and the
things which are on earth, and not on the things which are above. Another note
of false teachers, and inordinate walkers. Mark then and see who they are that
are such, and walk not as they do, but follow the blessed Apostle, and such
as walk so as he did.

LECTVRE LXX.
PHILIP. 3. Verse. 19.20. Whose glory is to their shame, which mind earthly
things. But our conversation is in heaven.
WHose glory is to their shame.] This is the fourth thing which the Apostle
notes in these many and inordinate walkers of whom he had told them often, and
now told them weeping, that their glory is to their shame. Whereby the Apostle
signifies both their great vanity in seeking after honor and glory amongst
men, neglecting the true glory of Christ Jesus, and likewise the end that
should come of it, which is that it should turn to their confusion and shame.
They sought the praise of men in the vanity of their hearts, and not of God,
but their glory in the end should turn to their shame. Which one branch of the
Apostles reason might well serve for a sufficient reason to move the
Philippians not to follow the example of these, but to follow him, and such
others as walked so as they had him for an ensample. Hence then I observe
another note of inordinate walkers, whose example we may not follow if we
fear the reward of their walking: if they vainly seek after glory and
estimation amongst men, neglecting the glory and honor that comes of God
alone, they are inordinate walkers, and we may not walk after them, for that
the glory which such men seek shall be turned into shame. It is a general
rule prescribed unto all Christians, that in all things they should always
seek the glory of the Lord, by the Apostle, where he says, Whether ye eat,
or drink, or whatsoever ye do, 1 Cor. 10.31. Ephesians. 1.11.
do all to the glory of God. For, as he says in another place, we are chosen
in Christ, that we should be to the praise of his glory. Whereunto agrees
that of Peter, We are a chosen generation, 1 Pet. 2.9.
a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, that we should show
forth the virtues of him that has called us out of darkness into his
marvelous light. And a notable president hereof w^ have in the example of our
Savior, Ioh. 8.50.
who sought not his own praise, nor the praise of men, but the praise of him
that sen^ him. But as for seeking glory and estimation amongst men* the Apostle
has plainly forbid it, Gal. 5.26.
where he says, Let us not be desirous of vainglory provoking one another,
envying one another. 1 These. 2.4.5.6.
And in another place he protests against it saying, So we speak, not as
they which please men, but God, which tries our hearts, neither did we ever
use flattering words, as ye know, nor colored covetousness, God is record,
neither sought we praise of men, neither of you, nor of others. Yea and our
Savior has noted it to be a bitter root of infidelity, or at least a great
let to come unto God where he says, Joh. 5.44.
How can ye believe which receive honor one of another, and seek not the
honor that comes of God alone? how can ye believe, as if he should have
said it is almost impossible, surely it is a very great stop and hinderance
unto a man to come unto God. And the proof thereof we see in certain chief
Rulers of the Jews, Ioh. 12.42.43
of whom it is said, that they believed in Christ, which was true only in a
generality, but they did not confess him. And the reason is added, For they
loved the praise of men, more then the praise of God. Thus then we see that
generally we should in all things seek the glory of God, and not vain praise
and glory amongst men. So that the ambitious and vain seeking after honor and
glory amongst men, neglecting the glory of God, is a plain note in all sorts
of men of inordinate walking.

Now to descend from the generality unto some particularitie, did not this
note amongst others plainly descrie those false Teachers which in Paul's
absence seduced and bewitched those Churches which he had planted in the faith
of Christ Jesus, to be false Teachers? Their debasing and disgracing of Paul in
his absence, their curious affectation of eloquence, wisdom, knowledge, and
learning, as if they had all learning and all knowledge, and Paul none at all,
their vain ostentation that they had been conversant with the Apostles, and
that they followed their footsteps, saying that Paul had not seen Christ in
the flesh, nor had conuersed with the Apostles, their ambitious desire to
please the Jews, to creep into credit with them, and to work Paul out of
credit, their advancing and exalting of themselves above all others as if they
were, and none but they, what else was it but to seek their own praise, to
have honor of the Jews, and to be called of them Rabbi? and what else did it
but bewray them to be false Teachers? Which albeit the Apostle do not in
expressed terms utter, yet seems he unto me to implie so much ^hen he says,
1 Cor. 2.4.
That his preaching stood not in the intising speech of man's wisdom, but in
plain evidence of the spirit, and of power. And again when he says, 1 These.
2.4.
That he so spoke not as they that please men, but as God which tries the
hearts. For in both these places I take it is signified that they that preach
in the intising speech of man's wisdom, they that speak to please men to be
praised and had in honor of them, thereby bewray themselves to be false
Teachers. And it is a just thing with God that they which seek the praise of
men, and not of God, have their praise with men, but not with God, and that
with God their glory be turned into their own confusion and shame, if not in
this day in their own conscience, yet in that day when all faces shall gather
blackness before him. For then they shall see that all glory and honor is due
unto him, that all true glory comes from him, and then shall they be ashamed
that they sought not the honor that comes of him alone, and their shame
shall be their everlasting woe and confusion.

Will ye then know who by this note may be descried at this day to be false
Teachers, that knowing them ye may not follow them, nor walk as they do?
Mark who they are that seek honor and glory amongst men, but seek not the
honor and glory that comes of God alone. Who is it that stirs so much that
he troubles all for the chief sovereignty in earth over all persons in all
causes ecclesiastical and civil? Who is it that exalts himself against all
that is called God, or worshipped, sitting as God in the Temple of God, and
showing himself that he is God? Who is it that is arrayed with purple and
skarlet, and gilded with gold and precious stones, and pearls, and has a
cup of gold in her hand full of abominations and filthiness of her
fornication wherewith she makes all the nations of the earth drunk? Who is it
tha^ glorifieth her self, and lives in pleasure, and says in he^ heart I sit
being a Queen, and am no widow, and shall see n^ mourning? Mark I say, and
see whether this be not the false Prophet that works miracles before the
beast? Apo. 19.20.
Mark and see whose honor and glory it is that this false Prophet, and his
followers seek and hunt after, Gods, or their own? And if by this that has
been said ye can descrie who they be, th^^ take heed and beware of them. For
what shall become of all this pomp and glory which they so greedily seek
after? John says, Apoc. 18.8.
Her plagues shall come at one day, death, and sorrow, and famine, and she
shall be burnt with fire: for strong is the Lord which shall condemn her. And
our Apostle says, their glory shall be turned into shame, and their end shall
be damnation. Take heed therefore and beware of them; follow them not, lest if
ye be partakers in their sins, and be partakers also of their punishment.

Now I wish that this poison had crept no farther into the Church, and that
they were the men alone that seek the praise of men, and not of God. But are
there not some others that are tainted with this vice of vainglory? Are there
not some others that preach themselves rather then Jesus Christ? that in a
vain affectation of their own praise more then Gods, study rather to speak
unto the ear then unto the hart^ whose preaching stands rather in the
intising speech of man's wisdom, then in plain evidence of the spirit, and of
power? I wish there were no such: but if there be, ye may not be followers of
them. For the Gospel is not delivered unto us that we should thereby seek our
own praise and glory, or that the people should honor and magnify us which
are the Ministers thereof, but to the end that the benefit and the glory of
Christ might be preached and published, and that the Father might be glorified
for his mercy offered unto us in Christ his son, whom he has given us, and
together with him all things also. To conclude therefore this point in one
word, we are all of us that are Christians both Pastor and people in all things
to seek the glory of God, and not of men. For if we do otherwise, and seek
the glory of men and not of God, our glory shall be turned into shame.

The last thing which the Apostle notes in these many and inordinate walkers
of whom he had told them often, and ^ow told them weeping, is that they mind
earthly things. Whereby the Apostle signifies that their study, delight, and
^ll their affections were set on honors, wealth, friends, commodities, and the
things which are on earth, never minding ^he things which are above. And here
was the root of all the other evils. For why were they the enemies of the
cross of Christ? why was their belly their God? why sought they after
vainglory and estimation in the world, and not that honor that comes of
God alone? The reason was, they minded earthly things. This is a brief
comprehension of the rest, this being a certain ground of the rest, and the
rest being cer^aine notes of this. For as the cause why they were enemies to
the cross of Christ, why their God was their belly, why they sought glory with
men and not with God, was, because they minded earthly things, so these were
evident notes to convince them that they minded earthly things, for that they
were enemies to the cross of Christ, for that their God was their belly, and
that they sought after the praise of men, and not of God.

Hence then I observe the last note of inordinate walkers, which is indeed the
ground of all inordinate walking; and that is, the settling of the affections on
the things which are on earth, and resting in them as in the chiefest good. 1.
Tim. 6.10
The des^re of money, says the Apostle, is the root of all evil, which while
some lusted after they erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through
with many sorrows, That which the Apostle speaks in particular of this one
earthly desire of money, is also true in the general of all earthly desires.
For the minding and desire of all earthly things is the root of all evil,
whereon when men set their affections they err from the faith, and pierce
themselves through with many sorrows. So that as the Apostle reasons,
saying, 1 Cor. 3.3.
whereas there is among you envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not
carnal, and walk as men? so may I likewise reason, is there any error in
faith, or corruption in life, and is it not hence, for that they mind earthly
things? Judas that was numbered with the Apostles, and h^^ obtained fellowshippe
in that ministration, betrayed his M^ster Christ Jesus. What was the cause? He
bore the bag, a^^ he loved it too well: thirty pieces of silver were the reward
(...) his iniquity. Demas forsook Paul: what was the reason? H^ loved the
world, and embraced it. Those Ministers of t^^ Gospel, that the Apostle
speaks of in the former chapt^^ sought not that which was Jesus Christ's: and
what was the stop? they sought their own, their own pleasure, the own
profit, their own honor, their own ease, they mind earthly things. Neither
is it so only in the ministry, but g^nerally in all sorts of men this
minding of earthly thin^ chokes up every good thing, and inclines unto every
bad^ thing. Those chief Rulers of whom we spoke before confe^sed not Christ,
what was the cause? They loved the praise (...) men, more then the praise of
God. A good confession hindered by minding an earthly thing, the praise o^ men.
Demetrius likewise and his company raised a sedition tumult against Paul: what
was the cause? they thought th^^ by his preaching the silver Temples of Diana
which the^ made, and which brought great gains unto them, would be^ set at
naught. A wicked sedition raised through carnal an^ earthly minded men, whose
minds were so set upon the^ gains that for it they could not look toward
God, nor abide the Ministers of Christ his Gospel. And so it is generally,
wheresoever the affection is set on earthly things, ther^ their walking is
inordinate whether it be in Pastor, or in people. And therefore the Apostle
has most carefully every where admonished us not to mind earthly things:
Colos. 3.2.5.6.
Set no^ your affections on the things which are on the earth. And again
Mortify your members which are on the earth, fornication, uncleanness, the
inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness which is
idolatry, for the which things sakes the wrath of Go^ comes on the children
of disobedience. The like admonition^ are very usual in the holy Scriptures.

Mark then the Apostles rule. Ye may not walk after them which mind earthly
things; and therefore ye may no^ walk after them that be the enemies of the
cross of Christ. For for this cause they whom we have noted to be the enemies
of the cross of Christ, whose end we have noted to be their damnation, whose
God to be their belly, whose glory to be to their shame, for this cause I say
they were such because they minded earthly things. O but some will say that
these whom I noted to be such, are the only men, many of them, that sequestered
themselves from earthly things, and have no mind of earthly things. See then
whether that which has been said show not plainly that they are the enemies
of the cross of Christ, that their God is their belly, that they seek the
praise of men more then of God. For if they be such these are plain and
evident tokens that they do mind earthly things, whatsoever be said, and
whatsoever show be made to the contrary. Neither were it otherwise hard to
show by their whole practice, that their whole mind, and all their affections
are set on earthly things. But it shall not be needful. That which has been
said may serve to clear the point, and to be a sufficient caveat unto you that
ye do not walk after their example. And let this be set down for a general
rule, that we may not follow their example which mind earthly things.

Yet if our practice be looked into it will be found that generally we follow
them, and none else. For whereon else are our minds, our delight, our
affections set but on the things which are on earth? The rich man what minded
he but riches? the ambitious man what but honors? the voluptuous man what but
pleasures? the dainty man what but ease? the carnal man what but the flesh and
the lusts thereof? Generally our thoughts are earth creeping thoughts, our
desires earth-creeping desires, our actions earth smelling actions, our ways
earth-smelling ways. We think and care some of us how to live, some of us how
to live well. But how is that? to live at ease, to swim with pleasures, to
have wealth at our wills, and to leave the rest of our substance for our
children. And hence it is that the voice of unmercifulness toward the poor,
of deceit in buying and selling, of oppression of our brethren, of slandering
one another, and stealing one from another is heard in our streets. Hence it
is that there are divisions, and dissensions, emulations, strife, envying and
the like amongst us. Hence it is that wisdom cries without and utters her
voice in the streets, but no man hearkeneth nor receives instruction, even
because we mind earthl^ things, and set our affections thereon. But what
says our Apostle, 2 Timothy 2 4.
No man, says he, that warreth entangleth himself wit^ the affairs of this
life, because he would please him that has ch^sen him to be a soldier. Now we
are all of us, even so many a^ are baptized into the name of Christ Jesus,
billed soldiers to fight under his banner against every thing that exalts it
self against God. And our care should be in all things to pleas^ him that has
chosen us to be his soldiers. And for this caus^ we should not suffer our
selves to be entangled with the affaire^ of this life, so that we should set
our affections on the things which are on the earth. For it is the course of
military discipline, that having billed themselves to be soldiers they mind
no more household, or other ordinary affairs, but only their war. Right so
should it be in the course of ou^ Christian warfare, that having given our
names unto Christ to fight under his banner we should not henceforth mind^
earthly things, but still have close girt unto us the whole armor of God that
we may be able to resist in the evil day, and having finished all things stand
fast. The faithful Minister of the Gospel should not seek his own, but that
which is Jesus Christ's. The faithful Christian should weine himself from the
transitory things of this life, and at no hand set his affections on them.

Howbeit let no man so understand me as if I thought that we should not meddle
with the transitory things of this life, or have nothing at all to do with
earthly things. For no doubt we may meddle with them, and use them, and make a
godly use of them. The Patriarchs and Prophets, our blessed Savior, and his
holy Apostles as the Scriptures bear witness used them, and made an holy use
of them. Nay not only we may use them, and make an holy use of them, but we
must count them the good blessings of Almighty God, and we must take care to
use them to his glory. We may not lightly regard them, or wrechlesly neglect
them, but we must carefully hu^band them, and wisely employ them to our own
uses, and the good of Gods children. For therefore we have them that therewith
we may do good unto all, but especially unto those that are of the household of
faith: wealth, that we may help to supply the wants of our brethren, honor
and might, that we may help to lift the poor out of the mire, favor and
friendship, that so we may be the better able to relieve them that are
oppressed, all things needful and profitable for this life that therewith we
may do good unto those that be in need or necessity, and that thereby we may
glorify our Father which is in heaven. So then to take me as if I thought that
we may not meddle with, or use earthly things and temporal blessings, were to
mistake me. But this I say with the Apostle, that we must use them as though
we used them not, 1 Cor. 7.31.
namely so we must use them as that we be not entangled with them, nor mastered
by them. 2 Timothy 2.4.
We must not be entangled with the affairs of this life, as the Apostle
speaks. And as the Prophet says of riches that if they increase we may not
set our hearts upon them, Psalm. 62.10
so is it to be said in general of all earthly things, we may not set our
hearts upon them. We may not, Colos. 3.2.
as our Apostle says elsewhere, set our affections on things which are on the
earth: and as here our Apostle says, we may not mind earthly things to set our
study and our delight thereon. For if we do, then shall we be of those many
which the Apostle here speaks of, and whom he would that we should not
follow: yea, if we mind earthly things we shall fall into tentation and
snares, and into many foolish and noisome lusts which drown men in perdition
and destruction. Let us not therefore follow the example of them which mind
earthly things, let us not set our affections on the things which are on the
earth: let us use them, and let us labor to use them to Gods glory, but let us
not set our hearts upon them, nor suffer our selves to be entangled with them.
Let us give our hearts unto our God, let us set our affections on things which
are above, and let our conversation be in heaven, which is the next point to
be handled.

LECTVRE LXXI.
PHILIP. 3. Verse 20. But our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we
look for the Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ.
FOr our conuersation] This is the second reason which the Apostle uses to
move the Philippians to follow him, and such others as walk so as they have
him for an ensample. For so it is delivered in the original as a reason, for
our conversation etc: a reason, I say, not of that which immediately went
before, but a reason of his exhortation in verse. 17. where it is said,
brethren, be ye followers of me etc. yet so that the reason is drawn from
the antithesis of that which went immediately before. In these words then we
have the second reason of the Apostles former exhortation, drawn from the
antithesis of that which immediately went before. For as in the former reason he
showed that they were not to follow those false teachers which walked otherwise
then they had him for an ensample, both by their study, and by their end,
which was damnation; so now he shows that they are to follow him, and such
others as walk so as they have him for an ensample, both by the clean
contrary course of study, which he, and such as he is follow, and by the
contrary end, which is glorification. This then is the manner of the Apostles
proceeding: His exhortation is, brethren, be ye followers of me etc. His
reason is; for our conversation, or our City whereof we are citizens, is in
heaven, not in earth that we should mind earthly things, or make our God our
belly; but in heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior, even the Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom we look for another reward of our walking, then that
which the wicked have, even the glorification of our vile bodies by that his
powerful working whereby he is able to subdue etc.

In this reason then I note these three principal points showing themselves in
a threefold profession which the Apostle makes in the behalf of himself, and
such others as walked as he did. The first is a Christian profession of their
present conversation in these words, for our conversation etc. The second is a
Christian profession of their expectation of Christ's second coming to save
them, in these words, from whence also etc. The third is a Christian profession
of their certain hope of the glorification of their vile bodies by the
powerful working of Christ, in these words, who shall change our vile bodies
etc. Now touching their present conversation, the Apostle makes this Christian
profession, our conversation is in heaven: which is as if the Apostle should
have said, It is not so with us as with those false teachers newly mentioned:
For they as men of this world mind earthly things, and set their delight and
affections thereon: but we carry and behave our selves in this life as citizens
of the heavenly Jerusalem, setting our affections on the things which are
above. For so the words in the original are as if we should thus read; (...).
our City whereof we are citizens, and whereunto we have right, is in heaven.
So that his meaning is, that they carry and behave themselves, and so converse
here in this life as citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, minding that, and the
things which beseem that. Touching the second point, namely their expectation
of Christ his second coming to save them, the Apostle makes Christian
profession, when he says, from whence etc; which is as if our Apostle should
have said; a reason why our conversation is in heaven is, because from heaven
we certainly look and wait for the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, when
he shall come as a swift judge against all them that have made their belly
their God, but as our Savior to give us an inheritance among them that are
saved. In the last verse the Apostle makes a Christian profession of their
certain hope of their glorification, whereof more particularly hereafter. Now
let us see what observations we may gather hence for our own use and
instruction.

The first thing which I note is the Apostles christian profession which he
makes in the behalf of himself, and such others as walked so as he did
touching their present life and conversation, which is, that they carried and
behaved themselves in this life as citizens of heaven, setting their affections
on the things which are above. Whereof the Apostle makes profession to this
end, that hereby the Philippians might be induced to follow him, and such as he
was, that seeing their conversation to be such and so holy in comparison of
others* they might make their choice of following them, and have their
conversation such as they heard and law that theirs was. Hence then I observe
what the life and conversation of God children ought to be in this vale of
misery, and valley of tears: we should carry and behave our selves here as
pilgrims here on earth, and having our City in heaven, as citizens of the
heavenly Jerusalem, fixing our faith, hope, and love there, settling our
thoughts, desires, and affections there, having our hearts, minds, and wi^l^
there, and living under the laws that are given and kept there. This our
Apostle shows in the first chapter of this Epistle, where he exhorts the
Philippians, Phil. 1 27. (...)
saying, Only let your conversation be, as it becomes the Gospel of Christ.
Where the Apostle uses the word whence this word here used is derived: And the
exhortation implying a duty, it is as much in effect a^ if he had said, that
we ought so to walk as citizens of the Saints and of the kingdom of God,
holding on in that course which beseems the profession of the Gospel. 1 Pet.
1.15.
The like exhortation also the Apostle Peter makes, where he says, As he
which has called you is holy so be ye holy in all manner of conversation,
because it is written* be ye holy, for I am holy Which exhortation likewise
implying a duty, it appears that our conversation should be in all holiness
as becomes the Saints of God, and citizens of hi^ kingdom. But most plain
to this purpose is that of ou^ Apostle where he says, If ye be risen with
Christ, seek those things which are above, Colos. 3.1.2
where Christ sits at the right hand o^ God: set your affections on the
things which are above. For in this place the Apostle shows most plainly,
that if we be risen with Christ by the virtue of his resurrection, then we are
in mind and affection even while we are in the body to ascend up into heaven,
and even to dwell with him where he is at the right hand of God. And why should
it seem strange unto any, that even while we live here in the body we should
have our conversation in the heavens? Where should the body live but where the
head lives? If then Christ which is our head and our life be in heaven, we
also which are the members of his body should have our life in heaven where
Christ which is our life is? Again, where should the spouse love and like to
be, but where her well-beloved bridegroom is? Her heart and her soul should be
so knit unto him, as that where he is there should she be also. Nay our
Savior himself tells us, that where our treasure is there will our hearts be
also. Is then Christ in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge,
the treasure and joy of our souls? If he be, Matt. 6.21.
then where he is, there will our hearts be also.

In body it must needs be that we walk on earth amongst the sons of men
till our earthly house of this tabernacle be destroyed, and we be clothed with
our house from heaven. But here we have no abiding City: Heb. 13.14.
In token whereof we read that the holy Patriarchs dwelt in tents, counting
themselves only pilgrims upon earth, and as guests in an Inn for a night, and
looking for a City having a foundation whose builder and maker is God. Nay
what else is here but a vale of misery, and a valley of tears? How are we here
assaulted on every side with the world, the flesh, and the Devil? How do the
wicked and ungodly of the earth take secret counsel together against us,
saying, come let us root them out that they be no more a people, and that
their name may be no more had in remembrance? How do the lust of the flesh,
the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life swarm like grasshoppers upon the
face of the earth? How manifold are our necessities, infirmities, miseries,
distresses, perils, crosses, troubles, tentations, afflictions, losses,
griefs, and anguishes both in soul and in body while we are in the body?
Even such and so many that we have great reason with our Apostle to sigh whiles
we are in this tabernacle, and to desire to remove out of the body, 2 Cor.
5.4.8.
and to dwell with the Lord. Seeing then that here we are but pilgrims and
strangers, and have no abiding City; being that here is but a vale of misery,
and a valley of tears, we are not here to pitch the resting place of our
souls, but living here in the body we are in heart and sole, in mind and
affection to have our conversation in heaven. And that so much the rather,
because man that is borne of woman is but of short continuance here on earth,
Job 14.1.
and full of trouble and misery. For wherein should ye have joy, or peace, or
comfort in the Holy Ghost, nay how should he not be swallowed up of grief, and
sorrow, and vexation of the spirit, if in soul he should not ascend into
heaven and set his affections on the things which are above? For thus it is
that though our outward man be troubled, yet our inward man is comforted;
though in body we be afflicted and distressed on every side, yet in our souls
we have peace and joy of the Holy Ghost, even because our conversation is in
heaven, whence it is that we look not on the things which are seen, but on
the things which are not seen. This point might be farther enlarged. But by
this it does appear that the children of God ought in this life to have their
conversation in heaven, walking as citizens with the Saints, and of the
household of God. Will ye then see for your farther use and instruction what
manner persons ye ought to be in holy conversation and godliness, that living
in the body ye may be said to walk as citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem,
and to have your conversation in heaven?

1. If we will walk in this life as citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, and
approve our selves to have our conversation in heaven, we may not war after
the flesh, or suffer our selves to be entangled with the affairs of this life.
For these two, to mind earthly things, and to have the conversation in heaven,
are, as we see in this place, so opposed the one unto the other, that the one
is a plain note of inordinate walkers, and the other a sure token of our
adoption into the sons of God to be partakers of the inheritance among the
Saints. Whereupon it is that the Apostle plainly protests against the one,
but cheerfully professes the other. 2 Cor. 10.3.
Though (says he) we walk in the flesh, yet do we not war after the flesh.
And again, No man (says he) that warreth, he means to God in the spirit,
and therefore the vulgar interpreter puts it into the text, no man that warreth
entangleth himself with the affairs of this life, 2 Timothy 2.4.
because he would please him that has chosen him to be a soldier. And the
like is very usual. But see how cheerfully he professes in this place that
his conversation is in heaven; and in another place, that his house is from
heaven; and in other places, that he walks in the spirit, 2 Cor. 5.2.
and minds those things which are above. This one thing then must we care if
we will walk as citizens of heaven, that we walk not after the flesh, nor set
our affections on the earth, nor suffer our selves to be entangled with the
love of the world. 1 Ioh. 2.15.
For (as John says) if any man l^^e the world, or the things that are in the
world, the love of the Father is not in him. We must therefore so use the world
as though we used it not: And in no case we may so set our affections on any
thing in this life, that our soul should so cleave unto it as the soul of
Shechem unto Dinah the daughter of Jacob: Genesis 34 26.
for death will surely follow as it did upon Shechem.

2. If we will walk in this life as citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, and
approve our selves to have our conversation in heaven, we must so wrestle
against all tentations, and all assaults of the Devil, that having finished
all things we may stand fast. For so shall we indeed walk as citizens of the
household of God, if our case being as our Apostles was, we can say with our
Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.8.9.
we are afflicted on every side, yet are we not in distress, in poverty, but
not overcome of poverty, we are persecuted, but not forsaken, cast down, but
we perish not. Thus we make a good trial of our selves, and show plainly that
we walk not as men simply, but as men of God. For it cannot be that we should
not be tempted, and assaulted, that we should not have fightings without, and
terrors within, 2 Cor. 7.5.
as the Apostle professes he had. Nay if we be without such corrections,
whereof all Gods children are partakers, Heb. 12.8.
we are bastards, and no sons. But if we at such times shall take unto us the
whole armor of God, if we shall girde unto us the sword of the spirit which is
the word of God, as our blessed Savior for our example did, Matthew. 4.
we shall be sure to quit our selves like men, and to quench all the fiery
darts of the Devil. It may be indeed, that after ye have fled from us by
thus resisting him, he will again assault us. And so we see he did with our
blessed Savior in the place mentioned. He left him not with once or twice, but
again, and again, and again he tempted him. We must then as he did still
resist him, and still fight against him with the sword of the spirit. So shall
we fight with Michael, and Michael shall fight with us against the Dragon, Heb.
2.18.
and we shall prevail: for in that he was tempted, he is able, and will also
succor them that are tempted. This then must be another care that we must take
if we will walk as citizens of heaven, that in all tentations and troubles
whatsoever we may stand fast: for so shall we be good citizens indeed if
whatsoever battery be laid against us still we stand upon our guard, and hold
out every enemy.

3. If we will walk in this life as citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, and
approve our selves to have our conversation in heaven, we must yield our selves
to be guided and governed by the laws of that City, and to live in all
obedience under those laws which are given and kept there: for every citizen
is to be governed by the laws of his City, and to yield all obedience
thereunto. As then the Angels in heaven are always ready to obey and execute
his will, going when he bids, and returning when he calls; so we as
dutiful and obedient children should with all willingness and cheerefulnes
apply our selves unto his sacred will, never attempting any thing contrary
thereunto. For if when he sets it down as a law, that we fly that which is
evil, and do that which is good etc, we contrariwise fly that which is good,
and follow that which is evil; we are no more citizens, but plain rebels; we
have no conversation in heaven, but we plainly fight against heaven, and
against God. This then must be a third care that we must take if we will walk
as citizens of heaven, that we yield our selves to be governed by the laws of
that City, and live in all obedience under those laws which the King of
heaven has given, and commanded to be kept. Otherwise how can we say that our
conversation is in heaven, if we submit not our selves unto the laws, and
conform our lives unto the will of our father which is in heaven?

4. And lastly, if we will walk in this life as citizens of the heavenly
Jerusalem, and approve our selves to have our conversation in heaven, we must
in heart, in mind, and in soul ascend up thither, our thoughts, our desires,
and our affections must be settled there, our faith, hope, and love must be
roo^ed and grounded there. By faith we must always be looking unto Christ
Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, where he is set at the right hand
of the throne of God. In hope we must always wait for that inheritance
immortal, and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for us.
In love we must always be fast tied unto him who is love it self, whom we
have not seen, and yet love him, and in whom now, though we see him not, yet
do we believe, and rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious. Our affections
must always be set on the things which are above. Our desires must always
run on the things that belong unto our peace. Our thoughts must always be
musing of the judgments of his mouth. Our hearts must always be lift up unto
the Lord. Our souls must there always repose themselves where true joys are
to be found. And our minds must always be occupied in the meditation of those
joys which are prepared to be showed in the last time. For thus though we be
absent in body from the Lord, yet even whiles we are in the body, we are and
dwell with the Lord. And unless we thus be and dwell with the Lord, we cannot
say that our conversation is in heaven, no more then we can say that our hearts
cleave steadfastly unto the Lord, when they are set on riches, and on the
pleasures of this life.

Now then that ye see that ye ought to have our conversation in heaven, and
likewise how to walk to have your conversation in heaven, it behooves you,
men and brethren, to look unto it whether your conversation be such as it
ought, and whether it be where it ought to be. Look unto the earth how ye are
minded toward earthly things: look unto the tentations of this life how fast
ye stand against them: look unto the law and will of God how ye conform
your selves unto it: look unto the things which are above, how in heart and
soul ye are affected toward them, and hereby try whether ye can say with the
Apostle, our conversation is in heaven. If thou have so used the things of this
life, as that tho^ have not too too much loved the world, nor the things tha^
are in the world; if thou have manfully resisted the tentation^ of this life,
and overcome them; if in holy obedience tho^ have conformed thy life unto the
will of thy God; if being absent in body from the Lord, thy soul and thine
affections have been set on the things which are above, where true joys alone
are to be found, what a comfort may it be unto thy soul to have such a
testimony that thy life and conversation has been in heaven? O but here will
the good soul say, I mean the troubled and afflicted soul: True indeed, I
might be comforted if I found it thus with me: but thus it is with me; though I
have not wholly minded earthly things, yet have I minded them more then I
should; though I have withstood such tentations as have assaulted me, yet in
great weakness; though I have delighted in the law of the Lord, yet have I
often turned out of the way of his commandments; though I have affected the
things which are above, yet have mine affections been too much divided
between the things which are above, and the things which are on earth. Well,
let not thy soul be troubled nor fear. Do thou see, and know, and
acknowledge thus much? David says, that he confessed his sin unto the Lord,
Psalm. 32.5.
and so he forgave the punishment of his sin. Fear not then, but that he who
has opened thine eyes to see, and thy heart to acknowledge thy weakness and
imperfection, will pardon this weakness and imperfection whatsoever it is.
Again, feel thou some seeds, some beginnings of these things in thee? Who
is it that has sown, and begun these things in thee? Even that God that has
said, I will not fail thee nor forsake thee, and therefore will perform that
good work which he has begun in thee until the day of Jesus Christ, and
will cause those holy seeds to bring forth their fruit in due season. Yea
comfort thy self herein, if it be with thee as thou say, that thy
conversation has been in heaven. For art thou sorry that thou have more
minded earthly things then thou should? that tentations have so nighly
surprised thee? that thou have so often turned aside from the law of thy God?
that ^hine heart and affections of thy soul have been more divided twixt
heaven and earth then they should? And do thou de^i^e in thy soul daily
more and more to be weyned from ^^^nding earthly things, to be strengthened
against tentations, ^o be conformed in thy will unto Gods will, and to walk
with ^hy God with a perfect heart? This also is a sure token that ^hy
conversation is in heaven: for where the perfection of that which should be is
wanting, there an holy desire and affection unto that which should be is
accepted. If therefore in searching out thy heart and thy reins for the trial
of these points, thou find it to be with thee as thou say, thou have great
cause of comfort and joy in the spirit.

But if in trial it appear that as thou have lived in the flesh, so thou have
walked after the flesh, neglecting the Law of God, yielding thy self captive
unto the law of sin, setting thine affections on the things which are on
earth, and never minding the things which are above, then surely thou art a
stranger from the life of God, and the way that thou walk leads unto hell.
Look therefore well unto it, and let every man have that care of his ways,
that howsoever he live here in the body, yet in mind and affection he may
have his conversation in heaven. And to this end, weyne your selves daily more
and more from the love and care of these earthly things. He that weepeth
through adversity, 1 Cor. 7.30
let him be as though he wept not; he that rejoices through prosperity, let
him be as though he rejoiced not; he that buyeth, as though he possessed not;
he that uses this world, as though he used it not: 31.
for the fashion of this world goes away, and all things in the earth are but
mere vanity. Take unto your selves the whole armor of God, wrestle harder
and harder daily against all tentations and assaults of the Devil, fight a
good fight, stand fast, quit your selves like men, resist the Devil, and he
will fly from you. Conform your wills daily more and more unto Gods will,
yield your selves daily more and more to be governed by his laws, order your
steps so here in his ways, as having right into that City whereof also ye
shall have possession. And though ye live here in the flesh, yet ascend in
heart, in mind, and in soul into heaven, let your thoughts, and desires, and
affect^ons be settled there, your faith, your hope, and your lou^ let them be
rooted and grounded there. And then among^^ other benefits this shall not be
the least, that death shall no^ come hastily upon you, yea ye shall
chearefully think upon death, death shall be unto you an advantage, and when
the will of God is, ye shall desire to be loosed and to be wit^ Christ, to
remove out of the body, and to dwell with the Lord. For what is the cause why
we so fear death, why we^ are so loath to die? Here it is; because in the
days of our flesh we have not had our conversation in heaven. Our minde^ were
set upon earthly things, and therefore we are loath to part with them. We never
fought against any tentation, nay the strong man possessed us in such peace,
that we never knew what tentation meant, and therefore we know not where to
live better then here. We regarded not to submit our selves to the laws of God
to be governed by them, and therefore we shrink at death for fear of a
judgment. We never ascended into heaven in our hearts or souls, we never
raised our thoughts, our desires, or our affections so high, we never tasted
in our selves any sparkle of those joys which are prepared to be showed in the
last time, and therefore we long not after heaven, but we rather love to live
here on earth. These are the things (I say) that make us shrink at death, and
loath to die. Let us then hearken unto these words of exhortation, and let us
have our conversation in heaven. If we shall, then shall death be welcome unto
us, and we shall accept it as the end of our pilgrimage, and as the way to our
abiding City Jerusalem which is above, and unto Christ which is our life. For
the more we ascend while we are in the body, in our souls and spirits, in our
meditations and desires, in faith and hope into heaven, the more will we
desire to remove out of the body, that we may for ever dwell with the Lord, and
therefore we will the more cheerfully open unto death when he knockes at our
doors. I hear that the example of this our sister may be a good provocation
to stir you up unto these things: for they that were with her give her this
testimony, that in this time when the Lord had laid his hand upon her, she
quickly set apart all mind of earthly things, patiently ^^bmitted her self
unto the will of the Lord, willingly set her ^ections on the things which are
above, and desired nothing more then to hear and think of her Lord and God,
her Sa^iour and Redeemer. I beseech almighty God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that both her examp^e, and the words which ye have heard this day with
your outward ears, may so preua^le with you, that in this life ye may walk as
citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, having your conversation in heaven, weyning
your selves from the world, and the things that ^^e in the world, manfully
fighting against all tentations and assa^lts of the devil, conforming your
selves in all obedience unto the laws of his kingdom, and while ye live here
in the body climing up into heaven, that when death comes, and ye must remove
out of the body, ye may dwell for ever with the Lord, and be received into the
full possession of that inheri^ance immortal, and undefiled, which is reserved
in heaven for you.

LECTVRE LXXII.
PHILIP. 3 Verse 20.21. From whence also we look for the Savior, even the
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body, etc.
FRom whence.] This is the second Christian profession which the Apostle makes
in behalf of himself, and such others as walked as he did; and it is of their
expectation of Christ his second coming to save them. Which also yeelde^h a
reason why they have their conversation in heaven Our conversation, says the
Apostle, is in heaven. And why so? From heaven we certainly look and wait for
the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, when he shall come as a swi^^ Judge
against all them that have made their belly their Go^ but as our Savior to
give unto us an inheritance among the^ that are saved: therefore our
soule-conuersation is in heaven where now Christ is, and whence he shall come
in that day t^ save us. In that the Apostle says, from whence, he notes the
place whence Christ his second coming shall be, and consequently the place
where now he is according to his humanitie^ for there now he is whence at that
day he shall come, sittin^ now in glory at the right hand of the throne of God
in heaven, whence he shall also come in glory to judge both the quick and the
dead. Again, in that he says, from whence als^ we look for the Savior, he
signifies their patient expectation and waiting for the appearing of our Lord
Jesus Christ, when he shall appear the second time without sin unto
salvation (...) for Christ being then already descended from the bosom o^ his
Father, and having offered up himself without spot unto God to take away the
sins of such his chosen children a^ through faith in his blood have their
consciences purged from dead works to serve the living God; now they waited
and looked for the promise of his second coming, when he should come in the
clouds to be glorified in his Saints, but to render vengeance unto them that
know not God, nor obey the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Again, in that he
says, from whence also we look for the Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ,
he notes the person of him whose second coming from heaven in the clouds they
waited and looked for; which is the Lord Jesus Christ the Savior. The Lord,
who is to be feared, having all sovereign power given unto him in heaven and
in earth. The Lord Jesus, who is to be feared and loved, having laid down his
life for us to save us from our sins, and to free us from condemnation the
due desert of our sin. The Lord Jesus Christ, who is to be feared, loved, and
reverenced, having as our Priest reconciled us unto God, and as our Prophet
instructed us in the will of God. Unto all which the Apostle adds this, that
further he calls him the S^uiour, for that then in his second coming he
should not only save them and free them from sin and condemnation, which he
did at his first coming in his humility, but should ^^ue them and free them
from death and corruption, and ^ring them into the full possession of that
inheritance pur^hased in heaven for them. So that ye see the general point
^ere spoken of is Christ his second coming in glory: the ^articular points
are, the place whence the second coming shall be, the patient expectation and
waiting of the faithful ^or the second coming, and the person of him that
shall ^ome in this second coming which the faithful so look ^or. Now let us
see what notes and observations we may ga^her hence, whereof to make some
further use and instruction ^or our selves.

The first thing which I note is the Apostles Christian pro^ession which he
makes in the behalf of himself, and such others as walked so as he did
touching the place whence they waited for the appearing of our Lord Jesus
Christ. They loo^ed for the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ from heaven, ^here
they had set their affections, where they had their soule-conuersation. Hence
then I observe a ground of that point of an article of our faith, wherein we
believe that Christ shall come from heaven with glory to judge both the quick
and the dead. Whereunto also the Scriptures give witness often elsewhere; as
where the Angels told the Apostles, saying, Act. 1.11.
This Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come as ye have
seen him go into heaven: and again, where the Apostle says, that the Lord
shall descend from heaven with a shout, 1 The. 4.16
and with the voice of the Archangell, and with the trumpet of God: and again
where our Savior himself tells his disciples, Mat. 24.30
that the son of man shall come in the clouds of heaven with power and great
glory. But what needs further proof of this point? It is a thing which we
all believe and confess, that Christ being ascended into heaven where he
sits at the right hand of the throne of God, shall come again from heaven
in his appointed time with power and great glory, so that every eye shall see
him, yea even they which pierced him through, and shall render unto every man
according to that he has done, whether it be good or evil. The uses which we
are to make hereof are these.

First, to beware of such false teachers as tell us that the body of Christ is
not only in heaven, but in earth also, in every Kingdom, in every City, in
every parish, in every loaf, i^ every piece of bread and cup of wine where the
sacrament i^ received. For do we look that he shall come from heaven the
second time with power and great glory? And shall we^ not think that now he
is there whence then he shall come? True it is that Christ as he is God is
not in heaven alone, o^ limited unto any place, but fills all places, being
infinite and incomprehensible. But as he is man, so is he there alone whence
he shall appear the second time unto salvation: for so it is written, Act.
3.21.
that the heavens must contain him until the time that all things be
restored. And wat else is it but to destroy the nature of a true body, to say
that it may be in diverse places at one time? Let this for this time suffice
us: We look for Christ as he is man from heaven, therefore as he is man he
is in heaven: the heaven must contain him till all things be restored,
therefore he is alone in heaven: he has a true body, therefore he cannot be
in diverse places at once. Beware therefore of such deceivers, that ye give no
place unto their error, and trust perfectly that Christ sits at the right
hand of the throne of the majesty in heaven, having no corporal presence
elsewhere, and that from thence he shall come to render vengeance unto the
wicked, and to be glorified in his Saints.

Secondly, this should teach us to beware of such mockers as walk after their
lusts, and say, Where is the promise of his coming? The holy Ghost has said
it, that he shall come from heaven the second time with power and great glory.
And has he said it, Act. 1.7.
and shall it not come to pass? It is not for us to know the times and the
seasons which the Father has put in his own power. Mat. 24.36
Nay Christ himself says, Of that day and hour when he shall come know th no
man, no not the Angels in heaven, but God only. Nay Christ himself as he is
man knows it not. We know perfectly, 1 These. 5 2.
which is enough for us to know, that the day of the Lord shall come even as a
thief in the night. Now if the good man of the house knew at what watch the
thief would come, Matthew. 24 43.
he would surely watch for that time, but would be very secure for other times.
It is enough therefore for us to know that he shall come. And this, that we
know that he shall come, but know not the time when, should exercise our faith
and patience, bridle our curiosity, and contain us in the fear of God, in
godliness, and in all watchfulness at all times, lest he come upon us at
unawares, and find us without oil in our lamps, either beating our
fellow-seruants, or eating and drinking with the drunken, or running after
noisome lusts, and the foolish cares of this life. The Lord is not slack
concerning his promise, as some men count slacknesse, but is patient toward
us, 2 Pet. 3 9. Heb. 10.37
and would have all men to come to repentance. Yet a very little while, says
the Apostle, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry. Beware
therefore of such mockers as in scorn and derision say, Where is the promise
of his coming? Watch ye and pray continually, that ye may be counted worthy
to escape all the things that shall come to pass upon such mockers, and that
ye may stand before the son of man.

The third use which we are to make hereof, and whereat our Apostle especially
aims, is, that hence we should learn to have our conversation in heaven. For
do we look that the Savior shall come the second time from heaven? Great
reason then that we should have our conversation in heaven, that in heart,
mind, and soul, we should ascend thither, that our faith, hope, and love
should be rooted there, that our thoughts, desires, and affections should be
settled there. Had Daniel reason to open his windows toward Jerusalem, Dan.
6.10.
and to pray toward it three times a day, because of Gods promise unto his
people when they should pray toward that Temple? And is there not far greater
reason for us that we should always lift up our hearts unto the Lord, and
have our soule-conuersation in heaven, from whence we do look for our
blessed Savior? The children of light herein may learn a lesson of the
children of this world, and of the children of darkness: for where is the
merchants mind but where his goods are, and where he hopes for commodity?
where is the husbandmans heart but on his harvest, and where he looks for the
fruit of his labors? Where are the affections of the voluptuous or ambitious
man set, but where the things are which their soul most desires? Where else
then should the Christian man's conversation be but in heaven, from whenc^ we
look for the Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ? Let v^ not then with Ruben,
and Gad, and half the Tribe of Manasseh desire to tarry on this side Jordan
without the Land of promise, but let us go into the heavenly Canaan, and dwe^l
there, and walk as Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem. If we count that we
have our treasure in heaven, let us also have our hearts in heaven. Otherwise
we show plainly that we have not our treasure in heaven. Mat. 6 21.
For, as our Savior tells us, where our treasure is, there will our hearts be
also. There Christ is, thence we look for the Savior, therefore even while
we are at home in the body, let us have our soule-conuersation there in heaven
where he dwells, and whence we look for him.

The second thing which I note is in the person of the Apostle, and others like
unto himself. For here ye see that the Apostle in behalf of himself, and
such others as walked so as he did professes that they looked for the Savior,
even the Lord Jesus Christ, which their expectation plainly argued the fervent
desire, and earnest longing which they had for the appearing of Christ the
second time unto salvation. Whence I observe the gladsome expectation of the
faithful children of God for the second coming of Christ, when he shall come
in the clouds of heaven to judge both the quick and the dead. They look and
wait for it, their souls long after it, Romans 8.19.
and with lift up hearts and voices they cry, and say, How long Lord holy, and
true, come Lord Jesus, come quickly. It is said in the Epistle to the Romans
that the fervent desire of the creature waits when the sons of God shall be
revealed. The word signifies an earnest waiting of the creature, such as is
the waiting of them that are set in a watchtower to descrie, when the sons
of God shall be revealed; i. when it shall be manifestly known, not only unto
themselves by faith, but unto men and Angels that they are the sons of God. 1
Ioh. 3.2.
For, as John speaks, Now we are the sons of God, but yet it does not
appear what we shall be; and we know that when he shall appear, we shall be
like him: for we shall see him as he is. And, as our Apostle speaks, Colos.
3.3.
when Christ which is our life appears then shall we also appear with him in
glory. For then shall he change our vile body that it may be fashioned like
unto his glorious body. So that the time for which the creature waits is the
second coming of Christ. Does then the creature, even the heaven and the earth
which God created in the beginning wait with such a fervent desire that they
sit as it were in a watchtower continually beholding when Christ shall appear
the second time unto salvation? How great then and gladsome may we imagine the
expectation of the faithful children of God to be for the second coming of
Christ, when they shall not only be renewed, as the creature, but have a full
complement of everlasting blessedness? And therefore the Apostle adds, and
not only the creature, but we also, Romans 8.23.
yea we much more which have received the first fruits of the spirit, even we
do sigh in our selves waiting for the adoption, even the redemption of our
body; i. waiting for the consummation of our adoption and redemption, when we
shall fully possess our inheritance with the Saints in heaven. This the
Apostle commended in the Corinthians that they waited for the appearing of our
Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 1.7. 1 These. 1.10
And likewise in the Thessalonians that they looked for the son of the living
and true God from heaven. And this is a thing which should be commended in us
all. Tit. 2.12.13.
For the grace of God which brings salvation unto all men has appeared, and
teaches us that we should deny ungodliness, etc. looking for the blessed
hope and appearing of the glory of the almighty God, and of our Savior Jesus
Christ. Again, we, I say, much more, because the creature only waits that
it may not afterward be subject unto corruption, or vanity, but the faithful
that they may also judge the wicked, and reign with him for ever and ever.
Neither only does this comparison with the expectation of the creature, show
what the expectation of the faithful is for the second coming of Christ; but
much more will it appear if we shall compare it with the long wished, and
most desired first coming of Christ in the flesh to destroy sin in the
flesh. We read how greatly the Patriarchs, and Prophets, and holy Saints of
God in the old Testament desired, and longed for that seed of the woman, that
star of Jacob, that Prince of peace, that righteous branch, that Emmanuel.
Our blessed Savior himself testifies of Abraham that he rejoiced to see his
day, Ioh 8 56.
i the time wherein he came in the similitude of sinful flesh, and he saw it
says he, namely with the eye of faith, and was glad And in another place he
tells his Disciples that many Prophets, Luc. 10.24.
and Kings had desired to see those things which they saw and had not seen
them, to hear those things which they heard and had not heard them. And that
good old Simeon notably expressed his great desire which he had to see Christ
in the flesh, when taking him in his arms he praised God and said, Luc.
2.29.30.31.
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word: for
mine eyes have seen thy salvation etc. Was his first coming so much expected
and desired by them then, and shall we think that his second coming is not
much more desired by the faithful now? It was joyful no doubt to see him come
in the flesh; but shall it not be much more joyful to see him come in glory?
It was joyful to the shepherds, and to the wisemen of the East to see the
babe with Mary his mother, and Joseph: but shall it not be much more joyful to
see him attended upon with ten thousands of Saints and Angels? Joyful, to
have the earnest of our salvation; but shall not the inheritance of it be much
more joyful? Joyful, to have the sting of death, and the victory of the
grave taken away; but shall not the utter exemption from death and corruption
be much more joyful? Then shall the sheep be gathered into the fold never to
be in danger of the wolf, or of wandering: then shall the corn be gathered
into the barn never to be shaken with the wind, or mingled with the chafe
again: then shall there be a perpetual Sabbath and no work day after it; an
everlasting Iubile when all bondage shall cease: then shall all tears be wiped
from all eyes, no more sorrow, nor crying, nor pain shall be, but peace, and
gladness, and joy, such as eye has not seen, nor e^re heard, nor has entered
into the heart of man. This is the expectation of the faithful, which makes
them to look and long for the blessed appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. And
now see the reason why the faithful look and long for the appearing of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Now they are pilgrims, then they shall come to an abiding
city: now they are compassed with sorrows, then shall all tears be wiped
from their eyes: now they are in continual fight, then shall every enemy be
subdued unto them: now they are absent in body from Christ, then shall they
follow the Lamb whethersoeuer he goes: now they know, and love, and believe
in part, then that which is in part shall be abolished: now they walk by
faith, then shall they walk before the throne, and before the Lamb for
evermore: then shall be the day of their glorification, the day of their
redemption, the day of their salvation, the day of their absolute consummation
of all blessedness. This is the cause why their minds are ever running, their
thoughts ever musing, their eyes ever looking, their souls ever longing after
the second coming of Christ Jesus in glory. And for this cause they even
reach after it, crying with the souls under the altar, How long Lord, holy,
and true.

But as for the wicked and ungodly of the earth it is not so with them. They
do fear and tremble at the remembrance of it. If they do but hear of it
their countenance is changed, their thoughts are troubled, so that the joints
of their loins are loosed, and their knees smite one against another, as we
read of Belshazzar, Dan. 5.6.
when he saw the palm of the hand that wrote upon the wall. Yea so far are
they from looking and longing after that day, that either they wish it might
not be at all, or else that it might be deferred. And no marvel. For then
shall the Lord come as a swift judge against them, in flaming fire, rendering
vengeance unto them which shall be punished with everlasting perdition from
the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power: then shall the wrath
of the Lord so fiercely persecute them that they shall cry unto the mountains
and rocks, fall on us, and hide us from the presence of him that sits on
the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, for the great day of his wrath is
come, and who may stand? then shall they hear that fearful sentence
pronounced against them, depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which
is prepared for the Devil and his Angels: and then shall they be cast into
the lake of fire and brimstone where they shall be tormented even day and night
for evermore, not for 1000. or 100000. year, but for evermore. This is the
cause why they fear and tremble at every mention of that day: and for this
cause they wish they might never see it.

Examine then your selves, men and brethren, how ye stand affected toward the
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ at that day, whether ye look and long for
it, or ye tremble and fear at the mention of it. Esa. 3.18
Blessed are all they that wait for the Lord, says the Prophet, for unto them
that look for him shall he appear, Heb. 9.28.
as says the Apostle, the second time unto salvation. Is the message then of
Christ his second coming gladsome unto you? Is the remembrance of it joyful
unto you? It is a sure token unto you that ye belong unto Christ Jesus, and it
is a notable fruit and effect of your faith and hope in Christ Jesus. It may
be that some of you looking more upon your selves and your own sins then
upon Christ and the bowels of his mercies, and being more sharp and severe
toward your selves then quick-sighted to look toward Christ Jesus, may feel
some appalling in your selves, or at least not that cheerfulness in
expectation that should be. But let not your hearts be troubled nor fear. Ye
look not only upon your sins, or so on Christ as only a severe judge, and so
despair in your selves, and utterly abhor his coming, but ye look for
him, though not without hope, yet without that cheerefulnes which ye ought. In
this weakness the Lord will perfect his praise, and unto these beginnings he
will give a good issue. Only let my counsel be acceptable unto you: turn away
your eyes from your selves, and cast them upon Christ Jesus. He shall be your
judge that is your Savior. He has bid you look up, and lift up your heads,
for your redemption draws near: Joh. 5.24.
And he has said it, that he that belieueth in him has everlasting life, and
shall not come into condemnation, but has passed from death unto life. Tit.
2.13.
Wait therefore patiently and cheerfully for the Lord for the grace of God
which brings salvation to all etc.

The third and last thing which here I note, is in the person of him whom the
Apostle says that they look for from heaven, which is the Lord Jesus Christ
the Savior. Wherein I observe a reason both why we should walk in this like
as citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, having our conversation in heaven, and
why we should look and long for the second coming unto judgment. For why
should it seem strange unto any man that living here in the body we should
have our soule-conuersation in heaven? Is not our Lord and King mighty in
power to save and defend us, and to revenge us of our enemies in heaven? Is not
our Jesus, who not by the works of righteousness which we had done, but
according to his mercy has saved us by the washing of the new birth, and the
renewing of the holy Ghost, in heaven? Is not our Christ the Mediator of the new
Testament, that has reconciled us unto God, makes continual intercession for
us, and teaches us outwardly by his word, and inwardly by his spirit, in
heaven? Is not our Savior who in that day shall make up the full complement of
our salvation, in heaven? where then should our conversation be but in heaven?
where should the body be, but where the head is? where should the spouse be,
but where the bridegroom is? not one of us all but we are stung with fiery
Serpents, cursed sins, and noisome lusts which fight against the soul. If
we will be healed and live we must look up unto the brazen Serpent lift up
for that purpose. In heaven is our brazen Serpent even the Lord Jesus Christ.
We must therefore while we are in the body lift up our eyes unto him, and have
our soule-conuersation in heaven, if now we will be healed of our infirmities,
and if when we remove out of the body we will dwell with the Lord. And as this
should be a sufficient reason to move us to have our whole conversation in
heaven, so should it also move us to look and long for the second coming unto
judgment. For shall our Lord and King come, which shall tread down ^he Devil
and all enemies under his feet, and leading captivity captive shall make us
to triumph in the heavenly places? Shall our Jesus come then to be our judge
that first came to save his people from their sins? Shall our Christ come,
that offered himself upon the cross for us, and opened his fathers will unto
us? Shall our Savior come to save us from death and corruption by glory, which
first saved us from sin and condemnation by grace? What cause then have we
to hearken unto the counsel of James, Iam. 5.7.
exhorting to be patient unto the coming of the Lord, yea what cause to cry
with the souls under the Altar, Apoc. 6.10.22.20.
How long Lord, holy, and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on
them that dwell on the earth? Yea to cry with John, Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly. Unto this which has been taught the example of our brother lying
here before us may, as I hear, be a good provocation. My self knew him not,
and therefore I can say the less of him. But by the report of them that knew
him he was very studious, and for his time had profited well in the knowledge
of such Arts as he applied himself unto. He was also, as I hear, religiously
affected, and godly minded, having in good measure while he was in the body
his conversation in heaven. And in the time of his sickness willingly
submitted himself unto the will of his God, as one that looked for the blessed
hope, and appearing of the Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ in whom his
soul rejoiced, and in the merits of whose death and passion his heart was
comforted. The Lord grant that we may all live in his fear, and die in his
favor.

LECTVRE LXXIII.
PHILIP. 3. Verse. 2^. Who shall change our vile body that it may be fashioned
like unto his glorious body according to the working etc.
IT remains now that we proceed unto the third and last branch, where the
Apostle in the behalf of himself, and such others as walked as he did, makes
Christian profession of their certain hope of the glorification of their vile
bodies by the powerful working of Christ Jesus, set down in these words, who
shall change etc. They had their conversation in heaven, looking for the
Savior from heaven, even the Lord Jesus Christ; and from heaven they looked
for the Lord Jesus Christ, knowing that then he should change their vile
bodies and make them like unto his glorious body etc.

The general point then here spoken is the glorification of our vile bodies in
the day of Christ by the power of Christ. The particular circumstances which
here the Apostle notes are these, 1. who shall glorify us, namely the Lord
Jesus Christ who shall change etc. 2. What he shall glorify in us, namely our
bodies whose soule-conuersation has been in heaven. 3. the condition of our
bodies what now they are, namely bodies of vileness, baseness, and
abiectnesse, i. Vile, base, and abject bodies, subject to corruption, sin,
and all kind of vanity. 4. The time when he shall glorify our vile bodies,
namely in that day when he shall come in the clouds of heaven to judge both
the quick and the dead, which I note out of this that he says, who shall
change, to wit in that day when he shall come from whence they look for him.
5. The manner how he shall then glorify our vile bodies, namely not by
changing the substance of our bodies, in the form, or feature, or lineaments,
or members of them, but by changing our vile bodies,.i. our bodie^ which were
created of God holy and good, but are now de^^led with our vileness, by
changing these vile bodies, and fashioning them in quality like unto his own
glorious body, so that of mortal they become immotall, of corruptible
incorruptible, of natural spiritual, of weak glorious. 6. And lastly, the
means whereby he shall thus glorify our vile bodies, namely by that divine
power, and effectual working whereby he raised his own body from the grave,
and whereby he is able to do what he will, even to subdue all things unto
himself. These be the particular circumstances of this third branch of the
Apostles reason. Which noting of them in this sort that we have done, may serve
also for the explication and opening of the meaning of these words. Let us now
therefore see what profitable notes we may gather hence for our farther use and
instruction.

The first thing which I note is, who it is that shall change our vile bodies
that they may be fashioned like unto his glorious body: which is, the Lord
Jesus Christ. The observation then hence is, that after we have slept in the
dust Christ Jesus shall raise us again by his power, and make our vile bodies
like to his glorious body. He it is that being one God with the Father from
before all beginnings in the beginning of time created us, formed us, and made
us, and breathed into us the breath of life, and made us living souls. All
things (says John) was made by it, Ioh. 1.3.
namely by the incarnate word of God, by the everlasting Son of the Father,
and without it was made nothing that was made. And the Apostle says, that by
the Son of God were all things created which are in heaven and in earth, Col.
1.16.
things visible and invisible: by him (I say) not only as an instrument, but
as an efficient cause: For (as the Apostle says) of him, To. 11.36.
and through him, and for him are all things. He likewise it is that in the
fullness of time came into the world to redeem them which were under the law,
and to save his people from their sins. When the fulness of time was come,
(says the Apostle) God sent forth his Son made of a woman, Gal. 4.4.5.
and made under the law, that he might redeem them which were under the law.
And again, This is a true saying, 1 Timothy 1.15
and by all means worthy to be received, that Jesus Christ came into the world
to save sinners. And therefore was his name called Jesus, Mat. 1.21.
because he should save his people from their sins. He also it is that in the
end of times shall raise our bodies out of the dust, and make them like unto
his glorious body. Joh. 5.28.29.
For the hour shall come, (says John) in the which all that are in the graves
shall hear his voice; and they shall come forth that have done good unto the
resurrection of life, but they that have done evil unto the resurrection of
condemnation. And in the chapter following, 6.54.
Whosoever eats my flesh, says Christ, and drinks my blood, has eternal
life, and I will raise him up at the last day. And our Apostle in this place,
from heaven we look for the Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall
change our vile body etc. So that he that in the beginning of time created us
and made us, and in the fulness of time redeemed and saved us, shall also in
the end of time, raise us up out of the dust of death, and glorify us with
himself. Whereof also he gave us a sure testimony when he raised up himself
from the dead no more to return unto the grave: And therefore the Apostle
says, 2 Cor. 4.14.
He which has raised up the Lord Jesus shall raise us up also by Jesus, and
set us with the Saints.

Let this then serve to confirm and strengthen us in the point of our
resurrection and glorification. Christ Jesus has taken it upon him that he
will raise us up at the last day, and glorify us with himself. Let us then
lie down in peace, and commit that to him, and he shall bring it to pass. For
is the glory and strength of Israel as a man that he should lie? Has he said
it, and shall it not be done? Let the Sadduces deny the resurrection: Act.
17.18.
let the Philosophers and disputers of Athens mock at Paul when they hear him
preach the resurrection: let the profane Atheist scoff and jest at the
resurrection of the dead, and their glorification with the Saints, yet let us
with Martha know that our brethren and we shall rise at the last day. Mat. 9.25.
He that raised the Rulers daughter from death to life in the house: he that
raised the widows son from death unto life, as they were carrying him out to
be buried: Luc. 7.15.
he that raised up Lazarus from death unto life, Ioh. 11.44.
having laid four days in the grave, shall also raise us up, and shall change
our vile body that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body. Let us
therefore hold fast this hope unto the end without wavering, and let us lay
this upon Christ Jesus, who will surely do it, and will not fail.

The second thing which I note is, the time when Christ shall change our vile
bodies, and make them like unto his glorious body. The time is in that day when
the faithful look that he shall come in the clouds of heaven to judge both
the quick and the dead. Which I gather from this that he faith, who shall
change etc, joined with that he had said before, from whence also we look etc.
For the meaning is, that from heaven they look for the second coming of
Christ, who then in his second coming shall change etc. The observation then
hence is, that in the last day, when Christ shall come in the clouds of heaven
to judge the quick and the dead, then shall he raise up the bodies of them
that have slept in the dust, and glorify them with his own self. Which point
of the time of our second resurrection, and glorification of our bodies, the
Holy Ghost often precisely notes: as where it is said, The hour shall come in
the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice etc: Ioh. 5.28.6.54.
and again, where Christ says, I will raise him up at the last day: 1 Co.
15.23.51.52.
and again, where the Apostle says, that they that are of Christ, at his
coming shall rise again: and again where he says, we shall not all sleep,
but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye at the
last trumpet. All which places plainly show the time of the resurrection, and
of the glorification of our bodies to be in the last day at the second coming
of Christ unto judgment. In the mean time they shall sleep in the dust, and
make their beds in the grave, Job 17.14.
they shall say to corruption, thou art my father, and to the worm, thou art
my mother, and my sister.

This should teach us patiently with the faithful children of God to wait and
look for the second coming of Christ Jesus, yea even to long and reach after
it, because then these cracked and frail vessels shall be in better case then
now they be. Now they are vile, and rotten, and naught, but then shall they be
changed and made like unto Christ his glorious body; and then shall they be
united to the souls to receive that blessed inheritance which God the Father
of old has prepared, God the Son of late has purchased, and God the Holy
Ghost does daily seal in the hearts of Gods children. That is the time for our
full deliverance, our full redemption when al things shall be subdued under
him. And till that time after that death once destroy these bodies, the grave
shall be our house, and we shall make our bed in the dark.

The third thing which here I note is, what it is that Christ in that day shall
raise up again, and glorify, namely our vile body. Whence my first
observation is, that since sin entered into the world, and death by sin,
such is the condition of our bodies here that they be vile, subject to all
infirmities, miseries, mortality, corruption, and all kind of vanity. The
experience whereof is so common, and so well known unto us all, that it shall
not be needful to prove it unto any of us How many aches, infirmities,
diseases are we troubled withal in our bodies? What wounds, and swellings, and
sores full of all manner of corruption are our bodies subject unto? What
labors, what perils, what watchings, fastings, cold, nakedness,
imprisonments, how many kinds of death are they subject unto? How soon are
they cut down like grass? How soon do they wither as the green herb? How
soon do they return unto the dust whence they first came? Or what privilege
here have the bodies of them that come of noble houses, of honorable parents,
of the blood royal? None at all, but their bodies are as vile, as here the
Apostle means, as subject to diseases, as needing all helps for health, is
unable to endure labor, heat, cold, hunger, thirst, as unable to want sleep,
rest, food, apparel, as soon cut down by the hand of death, as soon
devoured by the worms, as soon turned unto the dust as the bodies of other
men. And therefore our bodies without exception in the holy scriptures are
called and likened unto grass, the flower of the field, to earthen vessels, to
earthly houses, to tabernacles, to dust and ^athe, etc. All flesh is as grass,
1 Pet. 1.24.
and all the glory of man is as the flower of grass: the grass withers, and
the flower falls away. Yea look what Jobs body was that all our bodies are,
if the Lord shall lay his hands upon them: Yea this shall be the state of our
bodies to be thus vile, as the Apostle speaks, till they be changed, and
made like unto his glorious body.

This should teach us to pluck down our sails, and to abate the great
daintiness of our bodies whereunto we are grown. Such silks and veluets, such
ruffes and lawnes, such frizling and painting, such chains, bracelets, and
rings, as now commonly we use, what else is it, but to cloth and adorn proud
rottenness? Such choice of meats, daintiness of fare, variety of dishes, as
in this heavy time of dearth and famine is some where used, what else is it but
to feed the never satisfied belly? Nay are not some grown so nice that they
may not suffer the wind to blow upon them, nor the sun to shine upon them?
Is it not for some so hot in summer, and again so cold in winter, that they
can find no time to come to hear even the holy word of God? And what else is
it that we do thus cherish but a vile body, subject to all kind of vanity?
The beginning whereof what is it but earth? the being whereof what is it but as
from the earth? the end whereof what is it but to the earth? And yet what
curiosity in clothing, and what daintiness in feeding this vile body? An
allowance there is, and meet there should be, that according to each man's
degree there be both costlinesse in clothing, and daintiness in feeding. But
in each degree there is such excess of decency, as that it may be thought
that no degree considers what a vile body it is that they cherish. How much
better were it that we should consider our selves, and that we should moderate
our selves in these things each man according to his degree? Let us therefore
whether we eat, or drink, or cloth our selves, remember that the bodies which
we cherish are but vile bodies, dust and ashes, even very rottenness, and
subject to all kind of vanity.

My second observation hence is, that Christ in the last day shall change our
bodies not our souls, and raise up our bodies not our souls. For our souls
in their very deliverance from the contagion of our bodies are purged and
cleansed from every spot of sin, and immediately translated into heaven, and
there abide till the last judgment. They die not, nor sleep, nor wander up
and down, as some do foolishly imagine, but being spiritual substances they
live and abide for ever, as well out of the body, as in the body. Which appear
as by the souls of the rich man and Lazarus, Luc. 16.23.
the one of which had immediately joy in Abraham's bosom, the other suffered woe
and torments in hell immediately; so does it also appear by that vision of
John, Apoc. 6.9.
where he saw the souls under the Altar etc: for there the present state
wherein they are after their departure out of their bodies until the last
judgment is described, namely that they are under the Altar,.i. that they
remain continually under the hand of our Lord Jesus, and that they be in
joyful rest under his custody and protection. Our souls then are not changed
or raised up in the last day, but our bodies; even as we make confession in our
Creed, when we believe the resurrection of the body: For therein we confess
that we believe that in that day when the Lord shall descend from heaven with a
shoute, and with the voice of the Archangell, and with the trumpet of God, he
shall raise again these selfsame bodies out of the dust of death, and unite
them unto our souls, that in soul and body we may live for ever with him in
heaven in the perfect state of blessedness.

Yea but does not the Preacher say, Eccl. 3.19.
that the condition of the children of men, and the condition of beasts are
even as one condition unto them? If then there be no resurrection of the bodies
of beasts after this life, how do we say that there is any resurrection of the
bodies of men? The meaning of the Preacher is, that man is not able by reason
and judgment to put a difference between the dying of man and beast, as by his
eye to judge otherwise of a man being dead, then of a beast being dead. But
neither he there speaks of man's estate after death, neither what we know by
the word of God touching the condition of man and of beast. For thence we know
that the spirit of man ascends upward when it leaves the body, and that the
spirit of the beast descends downward to the earth; and that the body of the
beast sleeps for ever in the dust, but the body of man shall be raised up at
the last day unto life everlasting in the heavens How then does the Apostle
say, 1 Co. 15.10.
that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God? There the meaning of
the Apostle is, that the natural body as it is now subject to sin and
corruption cannot inherit the kingdom of God, until it be glorified,
forasmuch as none unclean thing enters into it. This therefore is it that we
teach, Christ shall raise up our vile bodies in the last day, and make them
like unto his glorious body, and so possess us in soul and body of that
kingdom prepared for us from before all beginnings.

Here then is a notable comfort for all Gods children, that not only our
souls after this life ended shall go unto God that gave them, but our bodies
likewise in the last day shall be raised up again, and be made like unto
Christ his glorious body, that our souls and bodies being united together we
may live for ever with him in his kingdom of glory. For hereupon thus we may
resolve with our selves: What though I be afflicted and tormented? What though
my miseries be as many and grievous as Jobs were? What though I be racked,
torn in pieces with wild horses, my body cast to the birds of the air, to
the beast of the land, or to the fishes in the sea? I know that after this life
ended there will follow a joyful resurrection. Thus Job comforted himself
amidst all his extremities, Job. 19.25.26.27.
saying, I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand the last on
the earth; and though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet shall I see
God in my flesh, whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and
none other for me, though my reins be consumed within me. And so we read that
the Saints of God mentioned to the Hebrews comforted themselus: Heb. 11.35.
For when they were racked and tormented they would not be delivered: and why?
because they looked for a better resurrection. Whatsoever therefore trouble,
affliction, adversity, misery, death do befall us or our friends, let us
comfort our selves in this that there shall be an end of all troubles when all
tears shall be wiped from our eyes, and that there shall be a joyful
resurrection in the last day, and glorification of our mortal bodies.

My third observation hence is, that the resurrection of bodies unto
glorification is only of them whose soule-conuersation in this life is in
heaven. For albeit in the resurrection not only the sheep, but the goats, not
only they that have done good, but they that have done evil shall rise again
with their bodies, yet the one only unto everlasting joy and glory, the other
unto everlasting woe and misery. So says John, Ioh. 5.29.
They shall come forth that have done good unto the resurrection of life, and
they that have done evil unto the resurrection of condemnation. The same also
is most plain by that separation of the sheep from the goats in the last day,
where it is said, Matt. 25.
that the one shall stand at his right hand, the other at his left; that the
portion of the one shall be with the Saints of God in heaven, the portion of
the other with the devil and his Angels in hell; that the one shall go into
life eternal, the other into everlasting pain.

Whereof we are to make this use, that if we will have our part in the second
resurrection after this life unto glory, we must also have our part in the
first resurrection in this life unto grace. In this life we must rise from the
death of sin unto the life of God in righteousness and true holiness, if in
that day we will rise from the power of the grave unto life everlasting and
blessedness in the heavens. Apoc. 20.6.
For blessed and holy is he, yea only blessed and holy is he that has his part
in the first resurrection: for on such the second death has no power. Let us
therefore follow the counsel of Peter, let us amend our lives, Act. 3.19.
and turn unto the Lord, that our sins may be done away when the time of
refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. Let us in this life grow
up in grace, that in that day we may rise up in glory. Thus much of the third
point, viz. what Christ in that day shall raise and glorify.

The fourth thing which I note, is touching the manner how Christ shall in that
day glorify our vile bodies, namely by changing not the substance of our
bodies, but by changing our vile bodies and fashioning them in quality like
unto Christ his glorious body. Whence I observe what shall be the glorified
bodies of the Saints of God wherein at the hearing of his voice, and the sound
of the trumpet they shall rise in that day. And this it is: Our corruptible
bodies shall be raised up in incorruption, our mortal bodies shall be raised
up in immortality, our bodies which were vile carcases shall be raised up in
glory, our bodies which were weak shall be raised up in power, our bodies
which were natural, needing food, raiment, rest, sleep, physic, and the
like, shall be raised up spiritual, needing none of these things, but being as
the Angels of God exempt from all wants and infirmities of this life. Our
bodies in substance, in figure, in lineaments, and in members shall be the
selfsame that they were in this life, inasmuch as in these there was no
change by the sin of our first parents: but in such vile qualities as by
sin they were poisoned and infected with, they shall so be changed as has
been said. And this is the glorification of our bodies in that day. He that
shall come to be glorified in his Saints, shall thus change the vileness of
our bodies, and fashion them like unto his own glorious body. Of this
glorification Daniel speaks, where he says, Dan. 12.3.
that they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and
they that turn many unto righteousness shall shine as the stars for ever
and ever. Matt. 17.2
And a glimpse of it Peter, James and John saw when Christ was transfigured in
the mount before them. 1 Cor. 15.
And the Apostle at large shows the whole manner of it to the Corinthians.

First then hence we learn that the body of Christ is not so deified or
glorified, as that the essential properties of God are communicated to it, as
to be omnipotent, infinite, present every where, etc. For this being true, that
our bodies shall be made like unto his glorious body, then our bodies also
should then be omnipote^^, infinite, every where, etc. which no man will say.
They err therefore that maintain the body of Christ to be really present
every where.

Secondly, hence we may learn not to be dismayed at whatsoever sickness,
danger, or death. It may be that thus our bodies may be turned into the grave,
and that death have there dominion over us for a season: but in the last day
our bodies shall be taken out of the power of death, and made like unto Christ
his glorious body.

Thirdly, hence we may receive great comfort that we have such a Savior as
will thus change our vile bodies, and make them like unto his glorious body.
He will be a perfect Savior, and therefore as he receives our souls at their
depar^ure out of our bodies, to keep them safe under his custody ^and
protection, so will he also in the last day change our vile ^odies, and make
them like unto his glorious body, that so he may be a perfect Savior both of
our souls and bodies.

The fifth and last thing which from these words I note, is ^ouching the means
whereby Christ in that day shall glorify ^ur vile bodies. For here is the
doubt which the carnal man ^akes. He cannot see nor conceive how the bodies
which are ^urned into dust and ashes, which have been some torn in ^eeces by
the beasts of the land, some devoured by the fishes of the sea, some eaten up
by the fowls of the air, how they ^he same in substance should possibly be
raised up again and ^lorified. To meet then with this, my observation hence
is, that Christ by that divine power and effectual working ^hereby he raised
up his own body from the grave, and ^hereby he is able to do what he will,
even to subdue all things to himself, shall raise our bodies in that day, even
the ^el^e same in substance that we laid down, and shall glorify them.
Christ he is the first fruits of them that sleep, and by ^is resurrection he
has sanctified all the elect thereunto: and (...) according to the working of
his mighty power he raised ^imselfe from the dead, so by the same working of
his migh^ie power shall he also raise us up. It may be that this may ^eeme
impossible with men: Luke 18.27
but the things that are impossible ^ith men are possible with God. And why
should it seem so im^ossible? Can the potter make a new vessel of the same
lump (...) clay if the first fashion did dislike him? and is not God ^uch more
able out of our dust to raise again our dead bo^^es? Can the Goldsmith by his
Art sunder diverse metals ^ne from another, or the Alchymist draw one metal out
of ^^other? and is not God much more able to distinguish the ^ust of men's
bodies from the dust of beasts, and the dust of ^ne man's body from another, and
to draw out our bodies ^o^ whencesoeuer they lie? Was God able in the beginning
(...) create all things of nothing, and is he not much more able (...) make
every man's body at the resurrection of his own matter? Again, shall napkins
be brought from Paul's body, and diseases depart from them? shall the shadow of
Peter help the weak and sick? shall Elizeus his bones give life to a dead
corpse cast into his grave? and shall not Christ much more by his divine power
change these vile bodies, and make them like unto his glorious body? He that
doubts of his power, shall be drencht up of his majesty. Take this one
proof further from our daily experience. At night we lie down and sleep,
and in the morning we wake and rise up again. Our death what else is it but
as a sleep, and our resurrection what else but as it were an awaking again?
And as in the one it is, so in the other the mighty power of God shall be
seen, when by his power he shall raise us up out of the sleep of death, and
glorify us with himself in the kingdom of hi^ Father.

This then may serve us to meet with all doubts against this point of the
resurrection and glorification of our mortal and vile bodies. He which is
willing has also power to do it, and by his power he shall raise us up in
the last day, and shall change our vile bodies, that they may be fashioned like
unto his glorious body. We are not therefore to doubt of it, lest so we also
deny his power; but rather we are to comfort o^^ selves in this, that he who
by his power is able to subdue all things unto himself, will also by his power
raise up our bodies in the last day, and will change our vile bodies, that they
may be fashioned like unto his glorious body.

Laus omnis soli Deo.
THE FOVRTH CHAPTER.
LECTVRE LXXV.
PHILIP. 4. Verse 1. Therefore, my brethren, beloved and longed for, my joy and
my crown, so continue in the Lord, ye beloved.

2. I pray Euodias, and beseech Syntiche, etc.


MAny and notable, and most worthy our continual meditation, have bin the
points which we have heard by occasion of the things contained in the former
Chapter, as touching necessary watchfulness against false teachers, together
with certain marks of such, ver. 2.19; touching the true circumcision of the
Spirit, ver. 3; touching the vanity of all confidence and rejoicing in any
thing without Christ, ver. 4. to 9; touching justification by the alone
righteousness of Christ Jesus, through faith in his blood, v. 9; touching
sanctification, by some sense of the knowledge of Christ, and of the virtue of
his resurrection in our selves, etc. and by an holy acknowledgement of
imperfection, and pursuit after perfection, ver. 10. to 15; touching Christian
perfection, ver. 15; touching the sole rule of man's life ver. 16; touching an
holy imitation, v. 17; touching evil and ungodly walkers, ver. 18, 19;
touching an holy conversation, ver 20; touching the expectation of the
faithful for Christ his second coming, v. 20; touching the glorification of
our vile bodies in the day of Christ by the power of Christ, ver. 21; some of
which the Apostle purposely disputes, and others by occasion he touches. For
in that Chapter ye may remember that the Apostle instructs the Philippians
touching circumcision, and touching justification, and touching sanctification,
because of the false teachers which urged the circumcision of the flesh, and
justification by works, and told them that they knew Christ well enough. And
therefore, first he exhorts them to beware of such false teachers: secondly he
instructs them in the true circumcision of the Spirit: thirdly he tells them
what he in his own person thought of his own works, and of all the
privileges that he had without Christ; what he thought of the righteousness of
Christ through faith, what he thought of his knowledge of Christ, and how he
labored still after further knowledge of Christ, and further perfection then
as yet he had attained unto: fourthly he exhorts them to be of the same mind
with him in these things, and all to proceed by one rule of the word: fifthly
and lastly he exhorts them to follow him and such as he is, for that those
other deceivers that were amongst them, were both enemies to the truth, and had
earthly minds only; but he and such as walked as he did, had their
conversation in heaven, from whence they looked for the Savior, even the Lord
Jesus Christ, who should change their vile body, etc.

Now the Apostle in this Chapter concludes his Epistle with certain
exhortations, with signification of his joy in the Lord for their liberality
sent unto him in prison by their minister Epaphroditus, and with diverse
salutations to them, and from himself and them that were with him. His
exhortations are some of them general, and some of them particular, as we
shall see in the handling of the former part of this chapter. His first
exhortation in the first verse, ye see is general, wherein he exhorts the
Philippians in general unto perseverance in the faith of Christ Jesus, and the
practice of an holy life, as they have been taught, and as hitherto they had
done. His second exhortation in the second verse is particular, wherein he
exhorts two chief women amongst them, as it may seem to unity and concord,
either betwixt themselves, or betwixt them and the Church at Philippi. In the
first general exhortation I note, first the manner how the Apostle comes unto
his exhortation: secondly the kind and loving terms wherein he speaks unto
the Philippians before his exhortation: thirdly the exhortation it self.

Touching the manner how the Apostle comes unto his exhortation, it is by way of
conclusion upon that which before he had said, Therefore my brethren, etc. so
continue etc. And it is as if he had said, Seeing those of the concision among
you, which urge circumcision, and justification by works, are such evil
workers as ye have heard; and seeing our conversation is in heaven, from whence
we look for the Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change, etc.
therefore continue ye in the Lord so as ye have done, and as I have now taught
you to do by example in mine own person, and suffer not your selves to be
seduced by them that are enemies to the cross of Christ, whose end is, etc.
Thus the Apostle by way of conclusion from that which he had said before,
infers this general exhortation unto perseverance and continuance in the
Lord.

Now touching the kind and loving terms wherein he speaks unto the
Philippians, ye see he calls them his brethren, beloved, and longed for, his
joy, and his crown. In that he says unto them, My brethren, beloved, and
longed for, he shows his own kind affection toward them: and in that he
adds, my joy and my crown, he signifies their piety, wherein he was
comforted. To have said unto them only my brethren, as in the beginning of the
third Chapter; or only, my beloved, as Chap. 2. ver. 12. had betokened
abundantly his affection toward them: but in that, as not content with the
one, or both, he adds also a third argument of love, he thereby plainly
shows, what a large room they had in his heart. He calls them his brethren
in Christ, as begotten by one Spirit unto one God in one faith, through one
Gospel of Christ Jesus. He calls them his beloved, in the best bond of love,
the unity of the Spirit, through the embracing of the same truth of Christ
Jesus. And for that he says, that he longed for them, he showed it in 1. Chap.
where he says, that he longed after them all from the very heart root in
Christ Jesus, Phil. 1.8.
which was no doubt to strengthen them, and to bestow upon them some spiritual
comfort, because of those false teachers that troubled them. How could he more
show a kind and loving affection toward them? And as by these he shows his
affection toward them, so by those titles that follow, he shows again on the
other side, their great piety and godliness. For therefore does he call them
his joy, because of their fellowship, as himself speaks, which they had in
the Gospel with other Churches, 1.5.
from the first day that they had received the Gospel unto that present, which
was a sufficient matter of his rejoicing: and therefore does he call them his
crown, because their constancy and perseverance was now his glory among
other Churches, and should be the crown of his rejoicing in the day of Christ.
The speech is borrowed from them that for matters well achieved, in running,
wrestling, or the like, receive a crown of glory. And it argues their great
profit by his labors, for which he should receive a crown. Thus ye see what
these kind terms import, and in what sense the Apostle gives them unto the
Philippians.

The third thing which I noted, was the exhortation it self, which is, to
continue in the Lord, So continue in the Lord, ye beloved. The words precisely
are, So stand in the Lord: but the sense is very truly given, when it is said,
So continue in the Lord. For, to stand in grace, in faith, in the Spirit, in
the Lord, is usually in the new Testament, to continue in grace, in faith, in
the Spirit, Romans 5.2.
in the Lord. By Christ (says the Apostle) we have access through faith unto
this grace wherein we stand, that is, wherein we continue. 1. Cor. 16.13. Phil.
1.27.
Stand in the faith, says he in another place, that is, continue in the faith.
Let your conversation be, says he in the first chapter of this Epistle, as it
becomes the Gospel of Christ, that I may hear of your matters, that ye stand
in one spirit, that is, that ye continue in one spirit. And to the
Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 3.8.
Now (says the Apostle) are we alive if ye stand in the Lord, that is, if ye
continue in the Lord. So in this place, so stand in the Lord, that is, so
continue as they that keep their standing, without shrinking, fainting,
sliding, or starting aside. For the speech is borrowed from them that stand
upon their guard or watch, or in their rank wherein they are set. Now wherein
would he have them to stand and continue? Namely in the Lord, that is, in the
knowledge and in the faith of Christ Jesus, rooted and built in him, and
stablished in the faith. But what means he by this that he says, So continue
in the Lord? So, that is, as hitherto ye have done, and as now ye have been
taught by example in mine own person, renouncing all confidence in the flesh,
counting all man's righteousness by any works whatsoever, but loss and dung,
and rejoicing only in Christ Jesus; so continue and persevere in the Lord,
rooted and built in him, and stablished in the faith, do this ye beloved, in
the best bond of love. And let this be spoken touching the points of this
general exhortation, and the meaning of the words. Now let us gather hence
some notes for our further use.

The first thing which I note, is from the kind and loving terms wherein the
Apostle writes unto the Philippians. He exhorts them unto perseverance in the
knowledge and faith of Christ Jesus; but in such a tender and loving manner, as
that therein he bewrays a most kind and loving affection toward them, saying,
my brethren, beloved, and longed for, etc. And so in his second exhortation in
ver. 2. he prays Euodias, and beseeches Syntyche; and likewise in his third
exhortation in verse. 3. he beseeches his faithful yoke fellow. Whence I
observe a necessary duty for the Minister of the Gospel, which is, to be so
tenderly affected toward his people, as that in all kind and loving manner he
labor to win them unto that which is good, and to weane them from that which
is evil. His people should not be kept strait in his bowels, but should have a
large room in his heart; so that whether he write or speak unto them, it may
appear that it is out of his love and tender affection toward them. Thus our
Apostle professes in plain speech that he was affected toward the
Corinthians, where he says, O Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, our
heart is made large, 2. Cor. 6.11.
ye are not kept strait in us. And this affection both our Apostle and the rest
of the Apostles bewray always in all their Epistles, instructing them to whom
they wrote, as in the wholesome word of truth, so in all meekness of spirit,
and mildness of speech, Romans 12.1.
as from a love most unfeigned and Christian. I beseech you (says our Apostle
to the Romans) brethren, by the mercies of God: Iam. 1.19.
and in like sort in all his Epistles. James: My dear brethren, let every man
be swift to hear, slow to speak, and slow to wrath. 1. Pet. 2.11.
Peter: Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as pilgrims and stranger, abstain from
fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul. John: My babes, 1. Ioh. 2.1.
my little children, I write unto you, that ye sin not. And Jude: Ye beloved,
Jude 17.
remember the words which were spoken before of the Apostles of our Lord Jesus
Christ. These were their bowels of love toward their brethren in Christ; and
in such bowels of love should the Ministers of the Gospel after their example
deal with their people, exhorting them and admonishing them with all patience
and long suffering, and in all love unto them, leading them forth besides the
waters of comfort, which may spring up in them into everlasting life.

It may be that here some will say, O we should like this well if the Ministers
of the Gospel would do thus; but some of them are so sharp, that they seem
to forget that they are Ministers of the Gospel, at least they remember not
this duty. Why? because they are sharp, and come with a rod? Is it an
argument against the father of the body, that he loves not his child, because
he sometimes reproues him, and sometimes punishes him with the rod? Or is it
no argument against the father of the body, and shall it be an argument
against such fathers as beget you in Christ Jesus through the Gospel? Again,
did not those holy Apostles that came in such a spirit of meekness, as we have
heard, come also sometimes with a rod? The proofs are so pregnant, that I
think none will doubt of it, as neither of this, that their coming with a rod
was in great love. Again, did not the same God that came to Eliah only in a
soft and still voice, come unto Corah, Dathan and Abiram in the earthquake, and
unto Nadab and Abihu in the fire? Again, are there not in our congregations
some such as had need to be wounded, as well as some such as had need to be
healed? And if we love both, must we not bring with us both oil and vinegar?
Both sharpness and meekness in their due places are needful, and a wise
discretion in them both is most needful; and in both, the wise Minister
shows forth the bowels of his love. Indeed the terms of love are different,
when we come with a rod, and when we come in the spirit of meekness. Will ye
then that we come unto you in these terms of love which our Apostle here uses,
of my brethren, beloved, and longed for?

Here then is also a necessary duty for you, that ye be our joy and our
crown, that so unto the rest we may with the Apostle add these also, my joy
and my crown. Ye, by receiving the wholesome word of truth which is able to
save your souls, and by bringing forth the fruits thereof in a sober,
righteous and godly life in this present world, should be the matter of our
rejoicing over you in Christ Jesus. So was the elect Lady, unto whom John
wrote his second Epistle, as he witnesses, saying, I rejoiced greatly, 2. Ioh
4.
that I found of thy children walking in the truth, as we have received a
commandment of the Father. So was Gaius, unto whom John wrote his third
Epistle, as he witnesses, saying, I rejoiced greatly when the brethren came,
3. Ioh. 3.
and testified of the truth that is in thee, how thou walk in the truth. I
have no greater joy then this, 4.
to hear that my sons walk in verity. So was Philemon unto Paul, as he
witnesses, saying, Philem. 7.
We have great joy and consolation in thy love, because by thee the Saints are
comforted. And so was Timothy unto the same Apostle, the rejoicing of his
heart, because he continued in the things which he had learned. So herein
should ye fulfill our joy, that ye suffer the word of the Lord to dwell in you
plenteously, that ye and your children walk in the truth, as ye have been
taught in Christ Jesus; that your faith grows exceedingly, and that the love
of every one of you abounds toward another. And as thus ye should be our
joy, so should ye also be our crown. Ye, by your faith in Christ Jesus, and by
your love toward all Saints, and by your growing up in all things into him
which is your head, that is Christ, by the work of our ministry, should be
our glory in all places, and the crown of our rejoicing in the day of Christ
Jesus. So were the Thessalonians unto this our Apostle, as himself witnesses,
saying, What is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? 1 Thessalonians. 2.19.
are not you even it in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming?
Yes, ye are our glory and joy. And why so? 20.
Even because of their effectual faith, and diligent love, and patient hope in
the Lord, whereof he spoke in the first chapter. And so were these Philippians
also unto him, as here he witnesses: and why? Even because he had not run in
vain, nor labored in vain amongst them. And so ye should so abound in all
knowledge, and in all judgment, and be so filled with the fruits of
righteousness which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God, as
that ye might be the crown of our rejoicing in the day of Christ, that we have
not run in vain, nor labored in vain. Otherwise, if the more we love you,
the less we be loved of you again; if the more we labor amongst you and
admonish you, the more ye harden your hearts and despise us, even for our
works sake; if the more careful we are to inform your understandings in the
truth, the more ye stop your ears at the voy^^ of our charming, charm we
never so wisely; if the more we endeavor to beget you in the faith, and
present you before God blameless in that day, ye start aside like a broken
bow, and defile your selves with every hateful sin: to be short, if we spend
our strength in vain amongst you, and for nothing, then how can we rejoice in
you as in our joy and our crown? And if not so, then how can we come unto you
in these terms of love, my brethren, beloved, my little children, dearly
beloved? If ye be not joined with us in one faith, and in one hope in Christ
Jesus, how can we speak unto you as unto our brethren? If the love of God be
not in you indeed, how can we speak unto you as unto our beloved? If ye honor
not the Father, nor obey his holy will, how can we speak unto you as unto
little children? If ye desire not the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may
grow thereby, how shall we say that we long for you when we are absent from
you?

That therefore we may always come unto you in such terms of love as ye
desire, and as here our Apostle does unto the Philippians, let us not run in
vain, not labor in vain amongst you; but receive from us with all gladness
the word of salvation, which is able to save your souls. Be diligent to hear,
and careful afterward to meditate on the things which ye have heard, that as
good hearers ye may grow up in all godly knowledge of Gods will, and in all
holy obedience thereunto, and that ye may say with the Prophet, O Lord, I have
hid thy word within my heart, Psalm. 119.11.
that I might not sin against thee. Let the word of Christ dwell in you
plenteously in all wisdom, Philip 1.9.10
that ye may abound yet more and more in knowledge and in all judgment, that
ye may discern things that differ one from another, that ye may be pure, etc.
Follow after the truth in love, and in all things grow up into him which is the
head, (...) is, Christ; that as at this day we greatly rejoice to see the
forward and willing minds of many of you to come unto the house of God, and to
hear those things that belong unto your peace, so our joy may be fulfilled
daily more and more, and ye may be the crown of ^ur rejoicing in the presence
of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming. And if at any time we use sharpness
of speech, know this, that it is for their sakes that obey not the truth, that
we may reclaim them from wandering out of the right way wherein they should
walk. And if the hurts of our people may be healed only by applying gentle
medicines, without cutting and launcing their sores, only by pouring suppling
oil, without pouring vinegar into their wounds, let no man think that we will
use sharpness of speech. In a word, this is our desire, to present you pure
and blameless in that day, not having spot or wrinckle, or any such thing. Be
ye filled with knowledge and love, and the fruits of righteousness, that ye
may be our joy and crown, now, and in the day of Christ.

The second thing which I note, is the Apostles exhortation, together with the
reason thereof. His exhortation is, that the Philippians would stand and
continue without shrinking, fainting, sliding or starting aside, in the
knowledge and faith of Christ Jesus, rooted in him, and stablished in the
faith, so as hitherto they had done, and as now they had been taught by example
in his own person, renouncing all confidence in the flesh and in things
without Christ, and rejoicing only in Christ Jesus. The reason of this his
exhorta^ion unto this perseverance, is, because he would not have them
entangled with those evil workers of the concision which minded earthly
things, and whose end is damnation but would have them followers of him, and
such as he is, whose conversation is in heaven, etc. Therefore so continue, etc.

This exhortation then implying a duty for us, hence I observe a necessary
duty for all Gods children, which is, perseverance and continuance in the
faith and truth of Christ Jesus, so as we have been taught out of the Gospel
of Christ Jesus. A duty much, yet never too much urged, considering how many,
after they have put their hand unto the plough, look back; after they have
begun in the Spirit, John 15.4. 1. Cor. 16.13.
end in the flesh. Abide in me (says our Savior) and I in you. Stand fast in
the faith, says the Apostle to the Corinthians. ^. Tim. 3.14.
And unto Timothy, Continue (says he) thou in the things which thou have
learned, and art persuaded thereof, knowing of whom thou have learned them. And
of all the Apostles we read, that still they exhorted all the Churches every
where to continue in the grace of God, Acts 11.23.13.43.
and with full purpose of heart to cleave steadfastly unto the Lord. For what
shall it profit us to have tasted of the good word of God, and by the hearing
of the Gospel preached, to have come to some knowledge of the Lord, and of the
Savior Jesus Christ, if afterward with the Church of Ephesus we forsake our
first love, and make not an end of our salvation with fear and trembling? John
8.31.32.15.4.
If ye continue in my word, (says Christ to the Jews that believed in him) ye
are verily my Disciples, and shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you
free. But as the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the
Vine, no more can we, except we abide in Christ the Lord. Nay, if we continue
not in the Lord, and in the faith and knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, it is
a plain argument against us, that whatsoever show we make in the flesh, yet
indeed we never walked in the truth. So the Apostle Saint John plainly
argues, 1. John 2.19.
where he says, They went ou^ from us, but they were not of us: for if they
had been of us, they would have continued with us. But this comes to pass,
that it might appear that they are not all of us. Where ye see that
Apostataes, and such as fall away from the faith and from the truth of Christ
Jesus, are proved plainly to be hypocrites, and never indeed to have walked in
the truth, by this argumen, tbecause they continued not in the truth which they
had learned and received. As therefore the precept or exhortation both of our
Savior, and of our Apostle, requires this duty of us, that we continue in
the Lord, and in the faith and knowledge of Jesus Christ; so this also, that it
may appear that we were truly rooted in Christ Jesus, and that we walked in
the truth. And now see whether the same reason do not urge us unto this duty,
whereby the Apostle, then urged the Philippians thereunto: for are there not
now many that would separate us from Christ Jesus? Are there not now many evil
workers, that teach us to repose confidence in the merit of our works, and
not to rejoice only in Christ Jesus? many that teach justification to be by
our own righteousness, which is of the Law, and not by the alone
righteousness of Christ Jesus through faith? many that teach perfection of
sanctification in this life, otherwise then we are taught by the Gospel of
Christ Jesus? many that teach us to be otherwise minded touching the vantage
and merit of works, touching the righteousness of Christ through faith,
^ouching the perfection of sanctification in this life, then was ^his Apostle
of our Lord Jesus Christ? Yes, many such decei^ers there are, as heretofore we
have heard, creeping in every corner, and leading captive simple men and women
after their own lusts. And therefore the urging of this duty, ^uen for that
cause, is now necessary unto us, that Christi^ns at this day continue in the
Lord, and in the faith and ^nowledge of Jesus Christ, so as they have been
taught out of the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, and so as they ^aue
done by the illumination of the Spirit through the mi^isterie of the word.

A doubt or two will here happily be moved. First, whether it be in us to
continue in the Lord if we will, or it be ^holly and only from grace, without
any power of our ^wne? Whereunto I answer, John 6.44.
That as no man can come unto Christ, except the Father draw him, making him,
of unwilling, ^illing, by putting his holy Spirit into him; so no man can abide
and continue in him, but only by the grace of the same Spirit. Phil. 2.13.
For it is God that works in us both the will and the deed, even of his good
pleasure, of his own free grace, that he may be all in all, and that all the
glory of our salvation may be g^uen unto him alone. Why then does the Apostle
exhort us to continue in the Lord, if it be not in our own power, if we will,
being helped by grace, to continue in the Lord? Which is as if it should be
said, If the fruit and increase of the earth be wholly the blessing of the
Lord, then why does the husbandman manure and till his ground, and bestow such
pains and travel therein? Or, as if it should be said, If faith be wholly the
gift of God, then why are we so called upon to come and hear the word
preached? For as he gives corn, and wine, and oil, and all things else
needful for this life, but yet by such means as he has ordained thereunto;
and again, as faith is the gift of God alone, but yet given us by the means
of hearing the word preached: 1. Cor. 1.8.
so the Lord which confirms us unto the end, works in us this holy gift of
perseverance and continuing in him, but by such holy admonitions and
exhortations as he will have used to that purpose. For admonitions and
exhortations are not therefore used, to imply any power in our selves to do
the things we are exhorted unto, but because they are the means whereby God
works his good graces in us. And they do and may rather put us in mind of our
unableness, then of our ableness to do the things that we are exhorted; that
seeing we cannot of our selves will or do the things whereunto we are exhorted,
as, to come unto the Lord, to continue in the Lord, therefore we should fly
unto him, and pray unto him, that he would draw us unto him, that he would
confirm us unto the end, and that he would frame our wills according to his
blessed will, that we may by him do what his will is. To continue then in the
Lord, is the grace of Gods holy Spirit, and the exhortation thereunto is very
needful, both because it is the means whereby the Lord will work his grace
in us, and to set us unto the Lord, to beg that of him, which of our selves we
are no way able to do.

A second doubt also may be moved: Whether it can be, that such of Gods
children as are in the Lord, should not continue in the Lord? Whereunto I
answer, that such of Gods children as are graffed in the true olive, may for
some while seem like unto withered branches, the graces of Gods Spirit may for
a time decay in them, and lie smothered, so that they appear no more then the
fire under the ashes or imbers. So we may see in David, who having committed
murder and adultery, walked on a long time, and was never touched with any
remorse for such his grievous sins, so that for the time he might seem to be
as a withered branch. So we may see in Peter many eclipses of the graces of
Gods Spirit, when he dissuaded Christ his passion, when he denied Christ his
master, and that with an oath, when he fled from his Master, when he
dissembled for fear of them of the circumcision, and drew Barnabas also into
the like dissimulation, etc. So we may see in Demas, who for a time left Paul,
and embraced this present world, and yet afterward became again a
fellow-helper with Paul. In other holy persons the like may be showed, in whom
the graces of God have for a time decayed, and they been like to withered
branches. But they cannot finally fall from grace, but he that has begun a
good work in them, Phil. 1.6. Ioh. 10.28.
will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ. For has not he himself
said, I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither
shall any pluck them out of my band? My Father which gave them me, 29.
is greater then all, and none is able to take them out of my Fathers hand.
Has not he prayed for them whom the Father has given him, Ioh. 17.
that they may be one with him, that they may be kept from evil, that they may
be sanctified through the truth? And does not John say, that whosoever is borne
of God sins not; 1. Joh. 3.9.
namely that sin that is unto death, so that he fall away finally from God?
Men may have tasted of the good word of God, and come to some knowledge of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and yet fall way: but they that have truly tasted of the
powers of the world to come, shall be even as the mount Sion, which may not be
removed, but stands fast for ever. Why then does the Apostle exhort us to
continue in the Lord, if it be sure that we shall continue in the Lord? It is
to remove from us carnal security, and to teach us to depend on the Lord, by
whom we continue in his faith, fear and favor. To conclude this point
therefore, as the Apostle here speaks unto the Philippians, so say I unto
you, Continue in the Lord, even in the faith and knowledge of Jesus Christ, so
as ye have been taught in Christ Jesus. Let it never be said to you, as it was
to the Galatians, Ye did run well, who did let you, that ye did not obey the
truth? But as ye have begun to love and like the truth, so continue to walk in
the truth, that when Christ Jesus shall come in the clouds of heaven, ye may be
the crown of our rejoicing, and that ye may also appear with him in glory.

LECTVRE LXXVI.
PHILIP. 4. Verse 2. I pray Euodias and beseech Syntyche, that they be of one
accord in the Lord.

3. Yea I beseech thee faithful yoke fellow, etc.


NOw follow certain particular exhortations unto particular and private
persons, touching some discord fallen out amongst them. In the second verse his
request is unto Euodias and Syntyche, that they would be of one accord in the
Lord. What Euodias and Syntyche were it is not certain, neither are they
mentioned elsewhere in the Scripture. Like it is by this place, that they were
two women of good note, and such as had much stood with Paul at his first
planting of the Church at Philippi. But now it seems they were at odds,
whether the one with the other, or both with the rest of the Church; and
whether about matters of faith and religion, or about ordinary matters of
common life, it is not certain. This we see, the Apostle would gladly compose,
the strife, and therefore he exhorts them to be of one accord in the Lord,
that is, of one mind and one judgment in the things of the Lord, betwixt
themselves and with the Church. If we understand that they differed in matters
of faith and religion; or if we understand the words in general, of what
dissensions soever, then the exhortation is, that laying aside all debates and
dissensions, they would be of one accord in the Lord, that is, they would dwell
together in such unity as is pleasing to the Lord. I pray Euodias, and beseech
Syntyche, etc. It follows.

Yea, and I beseech thee, etc. In this verse the Apostles exhortation or
request is unto his faithful yoke fellow, that he would be a means to compose
the strifes of Euodias and Syntyche, with this reason implied, because they
were women which had labored with him when he preached the Gospel at
Philippi, nor with him only, but with Clement also, and with diverse others
which labored with him in the same work, whose names are written in the book
of life. What this faithful yoke fellow was whom he makes this request unto,
it is not certain. Much disputation there is who it should be. Like it is that
it was some special man that preached the Gospel purely and sincerely there
with him at Philippi. Him he requesteth to help those women, namely Euodias
and Syntyche: How to help them? Namely to order their matters, and to compose
their strifes whatsoever they were. And why should he do so? That which the
Apostle adds, seems to be added as a reason to move his faithful yokefellow
to help them, and to compose their strifes: for they labored with him in the
Gospel, that is, when the Gospel was first preached by him at Philippi, they
labored, yea and even strove, for so the word signifies, putting themselves
in hazard for the hearing of the Gospel preached, and for the defense of the
Gospel. For in the Acts mention is made of women, among whom was Lydia, that
came together to a place besides the river, Act. 16.13.
not daring as it may seem, to have their assemblies in the city of Philippi,
and there heard the word at Paul's mouth. These two women, it may seem, were
two of them, of whom the Apostle for that cause says, that they labored and
strove with him in the Gospel, he being willing to preach, and they desirous
to hear, when there was great danger for both, and they standing much in his
defense when he was much contradicted. Neither does he commend them to have
labored with him alone in the Gospel, but with Clement also, and with other
his fellow laborers, which labored with him in the work when the Gospel was
first preached at Philippi. Who this Clement was, it is not certain, as
neither who these his fellow laborers were. Silas, it is like by that place in
the Acts, was one. Ministers of the Gospel they were, which joined their
labors with Paul, to the gathering of the Church at Philippi, whose names
though they were not written by him in this Epistle, yet he says, that they
were written in the book of life. Whereby he means, that their life was as
certainly sealed up with God, as if their names had been written up in a book
to that purpose. For the speech is borrowed from the manner of them that bill
the names of them in a book, whom they have chosen into their service, whom
then they know to be theirs, because they have their names billed in a book.
So God knows who are his as certainly as if their names were written in a
book, and their life is as surely sealed with him, as if their names were
registered to that purpose. The sum then of the Apostles reason, is this:
these women for their labor with him and other his fellow laborers in the
Gospel, were worthy that he should do this for them, and therefore he requests
his faithful yoke fellow that he would help them, and compose the strifes which
were either betwixt themselves, or betwixt them and the Church there. And let
this suffice to be spoken touching the scope of these particular exhortations,
and the meaning of the words in them both. Now let us see what notes we may
gather hence for our further use.

First then in the person of Paul, I note his holy care, not only to instruct
and exhort the whole Church of Philippi in general, but likewise privately
such particular persons as he heard it was needful to instruct and exhort. For
here we see how after his general exhortation unto the Philippians, he comes
unto particular exhortations to private persons, Whence I observe a holy duty
of a good Minister, which is, not only publikly to teach and exhort, and
comfort his whole congregation in the Church, but also privately to labor with
particular persons so as shall be needful for them. If they need instruction,
to instruct them; exhortation, to exhort them consolation to comfort them;
correction, to reprove them; peacemaking, to compose their strifes; and every
way to labor with them as it shall appear to be needful for them. Examples
hereof we have in general in all the Apostles, of whom it is said, Act. 5.42.
that they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ daily in the Temple,
and from house to house. Ye see likewise not only John's general Epistle, but
his private Epistles also, one unto a certain Lady, and another unto one
Gaius; in either of which, as he thought it needful, he comforted them, and
exhorted them, and admonished them. And this our Apostle ye may see how he
taught both openly and throughout every house: how he reproved sins not only
in general, Act. 20.20.
1. Cor. 5.1. 2. Tim. 2.17.4.10.14.
but in particular noted the sins of the incestuous person, of Hy^enaeus and
Philetus, of Demas, of Alexander the copper-smith, etc: how he dealt with
Philemon in particular for Onesimus: how he comforted and admonished Timothy
and Titus in particular. And what else means that of the Apostle, where he
charge to be instant in season and out of season? 2. Tim. 4.2.
but that the Minister of the Gospel should at all times and in all places,
publicly and privately, generally and particularly, take every occasion to
profit Gods people, whether it be by teaching, by improuing, by rebuking, by
exhorting, or how else soever it shall seem needful or profitable. For if we
may but pull one brand out of the fire, if we may but convert one sinner from
going astray out of his way, if we may but instruct one man in righteousness
unto salvation, even by private and particular dealing with him, we shall not
lose our reward, but even he shall be our crown of rejoicing in the presence
of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming.

I wish they would at length remember this duty, who having their consciences
seared with an hot iron, vouchsafe not either publicly or privately to teach,
or exhort, or admonish the flock of God which depends on them. As public
with all, so private dealing with particulars will be seen to be needful, if
any man do but with half an eye look into the state of the people every
where. The ignorance in some, the wickedness in others, the iarres amongst
others in every place, show plainly how needful it is, unto public teaching
to add also particular admonitions and exhortations. But they that cannot be
drawn unto the one, namely to teach their people in their assemblies, it is
hardly to be hoped that they will deal with men in particular on the way, or
at the plough-taile, or at the anuil, or at the shop-boord, how needful soever
it be. This place serves not much to speak unto them, and therefore I let
them alone.

Secondly, in the person of Paul, I note his godly care to compose the strifes
of these two godly women Euodias and Syntyche. For there being a jar either
between themselves about some private matters, or between them and the Church
about some matter of religion, both himself exhorts them to be of one accord
in the Lord, and also he deals with his faithful yoke fellow to help to
order their matters, and to compose their strifes, commending them as worthy
that he should do this for them. Whence I observe a very commendable quality,
as in the Minister of Christ, so in every good Christian, which is, both by
themselves and by all the means that they can make, to take up such quarrels
as fall out among their brethren. It is registered unto the everlasting
commendation of Cloe, 1. Cor. 1.11.
and her house, that when great dissensions and contentions broke out in the
Church of Corinth, they being very desirous to have them stayed, and yet not
able to stay them, advertised Paul thereof, that he in his wisdom might take
some course to stay them. And our Apostle gives it for a precept unto Timothy,
2. Tim. 2.23.
to put away foolish and unlearned questions, knowing that they engender
strife. Where the meaning in general is, that he must be so careful to stay
all strife, that he must be careful to take away every thing which may be any
occasion of strife. And our Savior pronounces a blessing upon them that make
peace among their brethren, saying, Blessed are the peacemakers, Mat. 5 9.
for they shall be called the children of God. For God being the God of peace,
the more that we have peace amongst our selves, and the more that we study and
labor to make peace among others, the more like we are unto God, and the more
we show our selves to be the children of God. So that we see, that to make
peace and end strifes, is very commendable both with God and men.

This then first may teach us to beware how we do sow strife and dissension
betwixt man and man. For look how commendable a thing it is to make peace and
end strifes; so intolerable and odious a thing it is to blow the bellows of
discord amongst brethren and neighbors: and as they that make peace, do
thereby show themselves to be the children of God, with whom dwells peace; so
those seditious firebrarnds that delight to stir up strife among their
brethren, and to set men by the ears together, show plainly that they are the
sons of that wicked one who cannot abide that brethren should dwell together
in unity. Prou. 6.16.17 18
These six things (says Solomon) does the Lord hate, yea his soul abhors
seven, The haughty eyes, a lying tongue, hands that shed innocent blood, an
heart that imagines wicked enterprises, 19
feet that be swift in running to mischief, a false witness that speaks
lies, and him that raises up contentions among brethren. All these seven
things the Lord hates, yea his soul abhors the seventh as plain murder.
For what is murder if this be not, to rend in sunder the members of the same
body, by sowing debates and divisions amongst them; and so by braules, and
iarres, and quarrelling, to kill both the soul and the body? Prou. 17.14.
The beginning of contention, says the same Solomon, is as one that opens
the waters: so that he that blows the bellows of contention, and opens the
way unto strife amongst neighbors, is as he that by pulling up a sluice,
lets in the waters upon a country, and so drowneth the whole country:
which also shows that such make-bates are murderers.

Let them look unto this, which either by privy whisperings, or open
detractions, or any false suggestion whatsoever, either seek to make variance
where there is none, or where they perceive some little dislike, there add fire
unto heat, and set them as far at odds as they can. Of what root soever
they be that are such, they are the sons of Belial, and no less then
murderers. Prou. 22.10.
And therefore as Solomon gives advice touching the scorner, the like do I
touching such a contentious man; Cast out the scorner, says he; Cast out the
makebate, say I, and strife shall go out; cast out the makebate out of
company, country, commonwealth, city, house where thou dwell, so
contention and reproach shall cease. The truth ever will abide the light, and
fears not to speak with any man in the gate: but these are commonly
whisperers, and love rather to speak in the care then on the house top.
Suspect them therefore by their privy whispering, and when once thou know
them, for ever afterward be thou ware of them.

Secondly, this should teach us, not only to study to live in peace our
selves with all men, but farther, when others are at odds, Heb. 12.14.
to make peace between them. Follow peace with all men, says the Apostle to
the Hebrews. And the Apostle to the Romans, Romans 12.18.
If it be possible, as much as in you is, have peace with all men. And surely a
most blessed thing it is to see men to be of one accord in the Lord: witness
the Psalmist, where he says, Behold how good and joyful a thing it is, Psalm.
133.1.
brethren to dwell together in unity. But the servants of God are not only to
be peaceable themselves, but when either there are open iarres, or inclination
thereunto, they should labor by all means both by themselves and others to
set them at one. It was a good speech of Abraham unto Lot, Genesis 13.8.
when he said unto him, Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and
thee, neither between mine heardmen and thine heardmen; for we be brethren. In
imitation whereof, when strife is, or is like to be, we are to interpose our
selves, and to say, Let there be no strife, I pray you, between you; for ye
are brethren: ye are neigbours and friends; ye have one Lord, one faith, one
Baptism, and one hope of your vocation: be ye therefore one amongst your
selves: Let all bitterness, and anger, and wrath, crying, and evil speaking
be put away from you, with all maliciousness: and be ye courteous one toward
another, and tender hearted, forgiving one another, if either have a quarrel
against other, even as God for Christ's sake forgave you. Yea and as Paul said
to the Corinthians for going to law one with another, so are we to say unto
them that any way strive, Why rather suffer ye not wrong? why rather sustain
ye not harm, then fall at such quarrelling one with another? Thus, I say,
should we in hatred of strife, and love of peace, as peacemakers labor to
compose strifes, and to make peace where it is not.

But what commonly say we in such cases? One says, It were very well done to
take up their quarrels, and to make them friends. Another says, that he loves
not to meddle in other men's matters, and to make himself some business where
happly he shall have little thanks. Another sports himself at their
contentions, and says with himself; So, so, there goes the game. Another
happily shows his dislike of their iarres, and puts in a word to friend them,
and then he thinks he has done well. But not many in such cases deal both by
themselves and by others, and labor by all means to take up their quarrels,
that they may be of one accord in the Lord. Well, if when we were enemies unto
God, and God was angry with us to destroy us for ever, Christ Jesus the Son
of the everliving God had not come in the similitude of sinful flesh to make
peace between God and us, what had become of us? If God had not sent his
Son, and if he had not come to reconcile us unto God, our portion had been
with the devil and his angels in the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone for ever. Let us, men and brethren, be followers of Christ, let us
follow Abraham, and our Apostle. Let us not only labor to have peace with
God, and to be at peace one with another, but when we see that any variance
is, or is like to be between man and man, let us labor, as much as we can, to
set them at one. Let us hate strife and debate both in our selves and in
others, and let us love peace and agreement both in our selves and in others.
And then surely the God of peace shall be with us to bless us, and to give us
his peace, which passes all understanding. And let this be observed from the
person of Paul.

The next thing which I note, is in the persons of Euodias and Syntyche.
Wherein first I note the religious affection of these two virtuous women; for
by conference of this place with that in the Acts, it may appear, that when
the Gospel was first preached at Philippi, they not only gladly embraced the
Gospel, but stood much for the defense of the Gospel against them that
persecuted the truth of Christ Jesus, and often assembled themselves together
with other women without the town besides the river to pray, and to hear the
Word preached. Whereupon it is that the Apostle here says, that they labored
with him in the Gospel, nor with him only, but with Clement also, and with
other his fellow laborers in the work of the Ministry. Here then is a good
pattern for all women to look upon, that they be alike religiously affected
as these women were, and give like testimony thereof as they did. There is no
privilege unto them by their sex from this, but as all the rest of Gods
children, so they should embrace pure religion from their hearts, exercise
themselves in the law of their God day and night, and seek the Lord from the
ground of their hearts. Yea and such has been the mercy of the Lord toward
this sex, as that women in all ages have been worthily renowned for many
notable graces of Gods Spirit. 1. Pet. 3.6.
Sarahs obedience is set forth by Peter for an example for ever. The government
and victory of Deborah was not inferior to the government and victory of any
of the Judges of Israel. Judge. 4.
What shall I speak of Esters religious depending upon God when she hazarded
her self for the deliverance of her people? Ester 4.
of the Widows godly depending upon Gods providence, when in the great famine
she relieved Eliah with some of that little which she had? 1. Reg. 17.
Luke 2.37.
of Annaes continual abiding in the Temple, and serving God there with fasting
and prayer, night and day? It seems that the first that embraced religion in
Philippi, Acts 16.13.
were women. Neither have they only been religiously affected, and such as
feared God, and walked in his ways, but further many have mainly stood for
the defense of the Gospel, and hazarded their lives. Examples we have in
Priscilla, unto whom the Apostle gives this testimony, that for his life she
laid down her own neck: Romans 16.4.
and likewise in this place of Euodias and Syntyche, of whom ye see the Apostle
says, that they strove with him and others in the Gospel, that it might have
a free passage, and that they might speak the Word boldly. Seeing then that
these things are written for your learning, judge with your selves how
religiously ye ought to be affected toward the truth of Christ Jesus. Let
their examples stir up your holy minds, and let it not seem grievous unto
you with holy Mary to sit you down at Jesus foot, and hear him preaching in
his Ministers. Nay, let it not grieve you, boldly to stand in the defense of
the Gospel of Christ Jesus, and if the will of the Lord be so, to lay down
your lives for that truth which ye have learned and received in Christ Jesus.
If ye should look no further but unto examples of your own sex, ye might have
sufficient encitement hereunto. As therefore at this day ye do, so go forward
to receive with meekness that word which is able to save your souls. Let the
word of Christ dwell in you plenteously, and let your religious minds be known
unto all men.

Secondly, in the persons of Euodias and Syntyche, I note a breach and falling
out, either betwixt themselves, or betwixt them and the Church: For, in that he
exhorts them to be of one accord in the Lord, it is plain that there was a
breach and falling out. Whence I observe, that the children of God, how
religiously affected soever they be, yet so long as they live, are subject unto
their falls, and subject unto diverse disordered affections, as anger, discord,
and the like. We see how Peter and Barnabas were drawn on unto shrewd
dissimulation for fear of the Jews. Galat. 2.13.
We see how the love of the world drew on Demas to forsake Paul for a time, 2.
Tim. 4.10.
and to embrace it. We see how some have been almost seduced from the way of
truth by false teachers, as it is like these two women were, if the breach were
between them and the church. Again, we see such a heat and breach to have
fallen out between Paul and Barnabas, as that they parted companies, Acts
15.39.
the one going one way, and the other way: so that whom Satan had often sifted
and winowed before, now a very little matter and small occasion set them at
very great odds. And many such falls and disordered affections are the
children of God subject unto in this life, as might farther at large be proved.
The reason is, because though they be led by the Spirit, yet are they not
wholly guided by the Spirit, but sometimes they walk after the flesh, and not
after the Spirit.

Here then first, let the children of God learn to humble themselves, and to
walk before the Lord with fear and trembling. The manifold falls and
disordered affections whereunto they are subject, may keep them in a reverent
and sonne-like awe, that they presume not above that is meet; for by their
falls they may see what strength there is in themselves to stand, if the Lord
should not sustain and uphold them. As therefore the Apostle exhorts, so let
all of us make an end of our salvation with fear and trembling, fearing but
not doubting, because he is faithful which has promised; standing in awe but
sinning not, even standing in awe, lest we do sin and displease the Lord.

Secondly, hence we may learn, not presently sharply to censure men upon their
breaches, or upon their falls; for they are no other things then do befall the
children of God. Rather we are, if they be such as have made a good profession
of the truth, in such cases to help them, as here our Apostle speaks: first,
to labor to raise them, if they be fallen, and if they be at odds, to set
them at one, even because of their holy profession, lest the way of truth
should be evil spoken of: for that our Apostle makes the reason unto his
faithful yoke fellow, why he would have him to help these godly women, and to
set them at one, even because they were such as had striuen with him in the
Gospel.

LECTVRE LXXVII.
PHILIP. 4. Verse 3. Whose names are written in the book of life.

4. Rejoice in the Lord always, again I say, rejoice.


WE have heard the Apostles particular exhortations, first, unto Euodias and
Syntyche, verse 2. secondly, unto his faithful yoke fellow, verse 3. Unto
Euodias and Syntyche, that they would be of one accord in the Lord; unto his
faithful yoke fellow, that he would be a means to set them at one, because
they were such as for their labor with him and other his fellow laborers in
the Gospel, were worthy that he should do this for them.

One thing yet remains to be noted from the exhortation unto his faithful
yoke fellow, which is, the Apostles affirmation of his fellow laborers, that
their names were in the book of life. Whereby he means that their life was
as certainly sealed up with God, as if their names had been written in a book
to that purpose. For the better understanding of which phrase and manner of
speech; first, we are to know, that in the Scriptures there is mention made of
three books attributed unto God. One, the book of Gods providence; another
the book of Gods judgment; a third, the book of life. The book of Gods
providence, is his foreknowledge of all things before ever they were: And of
this the Psalmist speaks where he says, Psalm. 139.16.
Thine eyes did see me when I was without form: for in thy book were all
things written which in continuance were fashioned, when there was none of them
before. Where by the book of God is meant, his foreknowledge whereby he knew
all things from everlasting. The book of Gods judgment, is his knowledge of
all our thoughts, words, and works, which in the last day shall so clearly be
presented unto us, as if they were then read out of a book, and according to
which he shall then judge us: And of this John speaks where he says; I saw
the dead, Apocal. 20.12.
both great and small stand before God, and the books were opened, and the
dead were judged of those things which were written in the books according to
their works. Where by the books is meant that knowledge of all our thoughts,
words, and works which God in the last judgment shall present unto every man's
conscience, so clearly as if a man should open a book wherein they were all
written, and distinctly read them out of that book. The third book which is
called the book of life, even of eternal life, is the everlasting
foreknowledge of God, whereby he specially and particularly knew from
everlasting who are his, and by a special care preserves them unto life as
certainly, as if their names were registered in a book to that purpose. And of
this the holy Ghost makes often mention in holy Scripture: Exodus 32.32.
As in Exodus where Moses says unto God, If thou will not pardon their sin,
I pray thee race me out of the book which thou have written. In the Psalm,
where David in great anguish of spirit prays thus against his persecuters,
Psalm. 69.28.
Let them be put out of the book of life, neither let them be written with the
righteous. In Esaias, where the Prophet says, Esaias 4.3.
that he that shall remain in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even every one
that is written unto life in Jerusalem. In Ezechiel, EZech. 13.9. Dan, 1 2^1.
where it is called the writing of the house of Israel. In Daniel, where it is
said, At that time shall thy people be delivered, every one that shall be found
written in the book. In Luke, where our Savior bids his Disciples rejoice,
Luke 10.20.
because their names are written in heaven. In the Apocalypse, where it is said,
He that overcomes, Apocal. 3.5.
shall be clothed in white array, and I will not put out his name out of the
book of life. And again, Whosoever was not found written in the book of
life, 20.15.
was cast into the lake of fire. And again, Apocal. 21.27
where it is said, There shall enter into this City no unclean thing, neither
whosoever works abomination or lies, but they which are written in the Lambs
book of life. Thus ye see mention of three books attributed unto God in the
Scriptures, one of providence, another of judgment, and a third of life, which
here our Apostle speaks of.

Secondly, we are to know that no material book is properly attributed unto
God, as though he did write any thing in a book, but only by a borrowed
speech, borrowed from the manner or them that for their better remembrance of
things, write them in a book; so to imply, that God knows all things, and
that they are always had in remembrance before him, as if they were in a book.
And therefore we defined his book of providence, to be his foreknowledge of
all things before ever they were, whereby he knew them as well from everlasting,
as if they had been written in a book from everlasting. His book of judgment
likewise we defined to be, his knowledge of all our thoughts, words, and
works, which in the last judgment he shall present unto every man's
conscience, so clearly as if they were all read out of a book, and according
to which he shall then judge us. And lastly, the book of life we defined to
be, the everlasting foreknowledge of God, whereby he specially and
particularly knew who are his, and by a special and peculiar care preserves
them unto life as certainly as if their names were billed in a book, and
registered to be had in remembrance before him for ever. So that mention of such
books in the Scripture is not made in respect of God, as if he used, or needed
to use any book to any purpose; but for us, and for our understanding, that
we, by the manner which we see used amongst men, may the better conceive and
know, that God knew all things from everlasting, that in the last day all
things shall be naked in his sight, and that he knows all his by head, so
that he has a special care over them.

Those things thus noted, for the better understanding of the phrase and manner
of speech here used by the Apostle, let us now come a little nearer to the
opening of the meaning of these words. The speech of the Apostle is touching
his fellow laborers, which had labored with him in the Ministry, when the
Church was first planted at Philippi: Of whom he says, that their names were
in the book of life. Whereby he means, that they were of the number of those
whom God had chosen in Christ Jesus unto everlasting life, so that their life
was as surely sealed up with God, as if he had taken their particular names,
and written them in a book to remember them, and to give unto them that which
he had purposed from everlasting. This being the meaning, it remains now that
we see what observation we may gather hence for our further use.

But first a doubt is to be answered, touching some contradiction which may
seem to be between this of our Apostle here, and that of the same Apostle,
where it is said, that the Lord only knows who are his. 2. Tim. 2.19.
For if the Lord alone know who are his, as there it is, then how does he here
say of his fellow laborers, that their names were in the book of life, so
plainly setting it down as if he knew it? Whereunto I answer, That albeit the
Apostle in the place unto Timothy only say, The Lord knows who are his,
John 13.15.
as also our Savior himself in another place says, I know whom I have
chosen; yet in the truth of the thing it is true, that he alone knows who are
his, and that he alone knows whom he has chosen: as that place in the
Apocalypse makes more plain, where it is thus said, Apocal. 2.17.
To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the Manna that is hid, and will
give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man
knows saving he that receives it. For hereby it is signified, that no person
living knows who are renewed in Christ Jesus unto righteousness, and true
holiness, but God only, and the spirit of man which is in man. Thus then we
say, that God alone knows who are his, and whom he has chosen, absolutely,
and of himself; so that no man can absolutely and of himself say of another,
that he is the chosen of God, that his name is in the book of life. Yet may
the Lord, and sometimes does he reveal unto his children that which he alone,
absolutely, and of himself knows, as the revelations unto Abraham, Moses,
and the Prophets manifestly prove. And whether in that abundance of revelations
which the Lord showed unto our Apostle, 2. Cor. 12.7.
and whereof he speaks somewhere, he had likewise some revelation touching
the election of some, and the reprobation of others, I cannot affirm. Many are
of opinion that the election of some, and the reprobation of others were
revealed by God unto him. And so it may be, that the Lord who alone,
absolutely, and by himself, knew whether the names of those his
fellow-laborers were written in the book of life, revealed by his holy Spirit
unto our Apostle, that their names were written in the book of life.

But I rather think that here he thus spoke as he thought by the rule of
charity. For, what says the Apostle in another place of charity? 1. Cor.
13.7.
namely, that it believes all things, and hops all things: yea, and where it
sees certain fruits and effects of election and salvation, there it is
certainly to be persuaded of election and salvation. Our Apostle therefore
seeing how faithfully those his fellow laborers had labored in the work of
the Ministry with him, in the planting of the Church at Philippi, how
constantly they had walked in the truth, notwithstanding the great opposition
that was against them, how unblameably they had had their conversation amongst
men, in charity thus he judged, that their names were in the book of life.
And this may very well stand with the other, that the Lord only knows who
are his. For that which properly belongs unto the Lord, absolutely and by
himself to know whose names are in the book of life, that the Apostle
assumeth not to himself; but seeing the fruits of their election in their
lives, he by the rule of charity thus judges of their salvation, that
everlasting life was surely sealed up for them with God.

To come then unto my note, the thing which here I note, is the Apostles
charitable judgment of his fellow laborers in the Gospel of Christ Jesus. By
their fruits he judged that they were branches of the true vine; upon their
holy profession and constant endeavor to increase the kingdom of Christ Jesus,
he pronounces that their names were written in the book of life. Whence first
my observation in general is, that the children of God not only may and ought
certainly to be persuaded of their own salvation in Christ Jesus, but further,
that they are by the rule of charity to assure themselves of the salvation of
such of their brethren as walk in the truth, having their conversation honest.
For albeit this be most true, that not any can be so certain of any other man's
election or salvation as of his own, because he feels only in himself the
testimony of the Spirit witnessing unto his spirit that he is the son of God,
and because only in himself he knows his faith toward God, and his love
toward all Saints, not only by the outward fruits thereof, but like wise by
the inward motions thereof which he feels in his own soul: yet may the
children of God by such outward fruits and effects of their election as they
shall see in their brethren, according to the rule of charity judge that they
are the chosen children of God, and heirs of salvation. So we see that the
Apostle writing to the Romans, Corinthians, Ephesians, writes unto them as
Saints by calling, sanctified in Christ Jesus, chosen in him before the
foundation of the world, and predestined to be adopted through Jesus Christ
unto God. And why did he thus judge of them? Even because of their communion
with the Saints in the Gospel of Christ, because of the testification of their
faith, and of their love toward all Saints, whereby they showed themselves to
be partakers of the fatness of the true olive Christ Jesus. So Peter writing
unto the strangers that dwelt here and there throughout Pontus, Galatia,
Cappadocia, Asia and Bithynia, calls them the elect of God. And why? Even
because of their constant faith, constant love, and constant abiding in the
Church of Christ Jesus. So John calls them unto whom he wrote, the sons of
God: and the Lady unto whom he wrote, the elect Lady, because they continued
in the Church, and walked in the truth.

Do we then see in our brethren the outward fruits of an holy vocation, of
regeneration and sanctification? Do we see them make an holy profession of the
blessed truth of Christ Jesus, give good testimony of a sincere faith in
Christ Jesus, walk in holy obedience toward God, and love toward their
brethren, faithfully labor in the works of their calling, and denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, live soberly, and righteously, and godly in
this present world? Of such we may and are to persuade our selves that they are
reserved unto the same inheritance in heaven with us, and of them we may say,
that they are the sons of God, elect in Christ Jesus our Lord unto eternal
salvation, prepared to be showed in the last times. And besides this that the
holy Ghost by the mouth of the Apostles warranteth us hereunto, the rule also
of charity directs us so to do. For, as before we heard, Charity believes
all things, 1. Cor. 13.7.
charity hops all things. Which yet is not so to be understood, as if
charity were foolish, rashly to believe every thing that is told, and there to
hope where there is no cause of hope: for that the Wiseman makes a note of a
foolish man, Prou. 14.15.
where he thus says, The foolish will believe every thing. But so charity
believes all things and hops all things, as that it keeps it self within
the rule of piety, wisdom and religion. If the thing displease God, be
repugnant to the truth, be hurtful or disgraceful to any of Gods children,
charity believes it not, hops it not. But where there are good tokens of
Christianity, plain signs of a sincere faith, evident testimonies of an holy
obedience, there surely the rule of charity bids us believe and hope the best,
and there we may be bold to say, that they are the sons of God, that their
names are written in the book of life. And is it not our Saviors rule, that
we should judge of the tree by the fruit, for that a good tree brings not
forth evil fruit, Mat. 7.18.
nor an ill tree good fruit? If it bear grapes, will any man judge it to be a
thorn? if it bring forth figs, will any man judge it to be a thistle? Nay, by
the fruit the tree is known what it is; and if the fruit be good, it may
thereby be known that the tree is good. Right so, if we have our fruit in
righteousness and holiness, it may thereby be known, that we are the
branches of the true vine Christ Jesus. Whether then we look unto the example
of the Apostles, or unto the rule of charity, which the Apostles followed, or
unto that rule of Christ, to discern of the tree by the fruit, we see that
the children of God may not only persuade themselves of their own salvation
in Christ Jesus, but further also may certainly judge of the salvation of their
godly brethren.

Now see, viri, fratres, men and brethren, the great necessity that there is,
that we should be thus persuaded one of another, even so great, as that without
it, the bond of peace, love, and Christianity cannot be maintained. For how
can we love them, of whom we have no hope that they shall be heirs of the same
salvation with us? How can we have peace with them, of whom we are not
persuaded that they are at peace with God? How can we pray with them, and say,
Our Father which art in heaven, touching whom we doubt whether God be their
Father? How can we communicate in the Lords Supper with them, of whom we doubt
whether they be joined with us in the same communion of Saints? How can we live
with them as with our brethren and beloved, if we doubt whether they be within
the same covenant of grace with us? A shallow peace, and a shadow of love, and
a semblance of Christianity there may be, but such as under a color only
deceives, and has no soundness in it. It is this persuasion of our own
minds touching our brethren, that they are in one covenant of grace with us,
that they are members of the same mystical body of Christ Jesus with us, that
they are heirs of the same salvation with us; that through one God, one faith,
one baptism, one Gospel of Christ Jesus, they and we shall reign together in
one kingdom; it is this, I say, that linkes us in the true bond of peace,
love, and Christianity; and either this must be, or else that cannot be.

If then we desire to be knit together in the true bond of peace, love, and
Christianity, let us so walk that we may be thus persuaded one of another. As
we are called to the knowledge of the truth, so let us walk in the truth, and
let us keep fast the profession of our hope unto the end. Let us follow the
truth in love, and in all things grow up into him which is the head, yt is
Christ, rooted and built in him, and stablished in ye faith. Let our love one
toward another abound yet more and more, in all knowledge and in all
judgment. Let us have our conversation such as becomes the Saints of God, and
let us provide for things honest, not only before the Lord, but also before
men. Thus shall we have a sure seal unto our souls, thus shall we give a good
testimony unto others that we are the sons of God, and thus shall we be knit
together in one mind and in one judgment, that we may walk together in the
house of God as friends.

My next observation hence, is for the comfort of the Minister in particular.
The Apostle, ye see, upon the faithful labors of those that had labored with
him in the preaching of the Gospel at Philippi, pronounces that their names
were in the book of life. Whence I observe this for the comfort of the good
Minister of the Gospel of Christ Jesus: If he have faithfully and painfully
labored in the work of the Ministry, if he have in all good conscience
instructed and admonished his people, and endeavored to increase the kingdom
of Christ Jesus, his reward is with God, and his life is as surely sealed up
with God, as if his name were written in a book to that purpose. To which
purpose is that also of the Apostle, where he says, 1. Cor. 3.8.14.
Every man shall receive wages according to his labor. If any man's work that
he has built upon abide, he shall receive wages, which wages the Apostle
calls elsewhere a crown of righteousness, 2. Tim. 4.8.
which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give him at that day. Yea but what if
he labor all night, and catch nothing? What if he run in vain, and spend his
strength in vain and for nothing amongst his people? Esa. 49.4.5.
Yet is his judgment with the Lord, and his work with his God. Though Israel
be not gathered, yet shall he be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and his God
shall be his strength. So that howsoever his labor be in vain unto them, yet
shall it not be in vain in the Lord; though they be not taught, yet shall not
he lose his reward. For, because he has been faithful, Mat. 25.21.
he shall enter into his masters joy. A good comfort, after he have borne the
burden and heat of the day, to receive such a penie. But what part of this
comfort has he, that being set in the vineyard to dress it, neither hedgeth,
nor ditcheth, nor gathers out stones of it, nor planteth, nor waters, but
stands all the day idle in it? No more then the watchman that gives no
warning: Ezech. 3.18. Mat. 25.30.
no more then he that diggeth his talent in the earth. This comfort belongs
unto him alone that labors.

Now see then, men and brethren, what this should teach you. Is it so that the
Lord rewards him that faithfully labors in the vineyard with everlasting
life, but is angry with him that loytereth, even unto death? Behold then what
care the Lord has over you, and what duty ye owe unto him again. For
wherefore does he send out the laborers unto you? Wherefore does he so reward
the labors of them yt labor faithfully amongst you and admonish you? Wherefore
is he so angry with them that do not labor amongst you? Is it not for your
sakes, that ye may be prepared an holy people unto the Lord, that ye may be
instructed in righteousness unto salvation, and that no holy duty may be
neglected toward you? Consider then with your selves, what it is that the Lord
looks for from you; grapes, or wild grapes? It is judgment and
righteousness, mercy and truth, peace and love, integrity and holiness,
that he looks for, and that he requires for such his loving kindness toward
you, for such his continual care over you. And if these things be amongst you
and abound, then blessed shall ye be of the Lord, and ye shall eat of the
fruit of your ways. But if he look for judgment, and behold oppression; for
righteousness and behold a crying, for mercy and behold cruelty, for truth
and behold falsehood, for peace and behold discord, for love and behold hatred,
for integrity and behold dissimulation and hypocrisy, for holiness and
behold profaneness and all kind of iniquity; then what remains but a
removing of our candlestick out of his place? what, but a fearful looking for
of judgment, wherein shall be indignation and wrath unto them that disobey the
truth, and obey unrighteousness. Seeing therefore the Lord in his tender care
over us, sends forth laborers unto us, and so plentifully rewards their
holy labors amongst us; let us again with all care consider what he requires
of us for such his care over us, and in all obedience address our selves unto
that duty. His will is, that we should hearken unto the voice of them that
come in his Name, and he has in nothing so much delight, as when his word is
obeyed. His care over us in sending his Ministers unto us early and late, shall
be repayed by us with a good duty toward him, if we will hearken and obey.
Let us therefore hearken and obey, and so shall we reap unto our selves a good
reward. For he that plentifully rewards him that labors amongst us and
admonishes us, will also in like mercy reward us, if in us the fruits of his
labors grow up in righteousness and true holiness. And let this suffice to
be spoken by occasion of the Apostles affirmation touching his
fellow laborers, that their names are in the book of life.

LECTVRE LXXVIII.
PHILIP. 4. Verse. 4. Rejoice in the Lord always, and again, I say, rejoice.

5. Let your patient mind be known to all men. The Lord is at hand.


Having spoken before of the Apostles exhortation unto the Philippians in
general, and likewise of his two particular exhortations, the one unto Euodias
and Syntyche, the other unto his faithful yoke fellow: the last day we spent
that whole time in speaking of the Apostles affirmation touching his
fellow laborers, that their names were in the book of life, which the Apostle
adds unto ye end of his particular exhortation unto his faithful yoke fellow.

Now the Apostle having made these particular exhortations unto those godly
women Euodias and Syntyche, and unto his faithful yoke fellow in their
behalf, he goes from those particularities, and again makes sundry
exhortations unto all the Philippians. The words which I have read unto you, ye
see, are an exhortation unto the Philippians to rejoice in the Lord. Where, the
thing whereunto he exhorts, as ye see, is to rejoice. A thing which the
sensual man can quickly lay hold on, who loves to rejoice, and to cheer
himself in the days of his flesh; which yet might now seem unseasonable unto
the Philippians, who lived in the midst of a naughty and crooked nation, by
whom they were hated even for the truths sake which they professed. Mark
therefore wherein the Apostle would they should rejoice, namely in the Lord.
And here the sensual man that happily would catch hold when it is said, rejoice,
by and by when it is added, in the Lord, will let his hold go. But they that by
reason of the billows and waves of the troublesome sea of this world, cannot
brook the speech, when it is said rejoice, are to lay sure hold-fast upon it,
when it is added, rejoice in the Lord: which hold-fast once taken, that they
might for ever keep it sure, in the third place it is added, rejoice in the
Lord always, to note the constancy that should be in the Christian joy. O but
the Apostle was not well advised of his speech, to exhort them to rejoice in
the Lord always. Not well advised? Yes: Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I
say, rejoice in the Lord always. He repeateth it, to make the better
impression of a thing so needful. So that here we have the Apostles
exhortation to rejoice, but in the Lord; not with a momentany or flitting joy,
but always, both in weal and in woe; not unadvisedly delivered, or as a
matter of no moment, but doubled, as seriously delivered, and to be hearkened
unto. And let this suffice for a general view of the points of this
exhortation, and for the meaning of the words. Now let us see what notes arise
hence for our own use.

The first thing which I note in this exhortation, is, that the Apostle
exhorts the Philippians to rejoice in the Lord, allowing and persuading joy
and rejoicing, but so limiting it, that it be in the Lord, not only allowing
it as lawful, but persuading it as requisite that they should rejoice in the
Lord. Whence I observe what the Christian man's rejoicing is, wherein he may and
ought to rejoice: his rejoicing is, and may, and ought to be in the Lord. It is
a common and ordinary objection against them that from their souls desire to
be followers of the holy Apostle in a sincere embracing of the truth of Christ
Jesus, that they are melancholic men, sad and austere men, men which can abide
no mirth, which can away with no joy and rejoicing. But let them not deceive
you. Prou. 15.13.17.22. Eccl. 30.22.
We say with Solomon, that a joyful heart makes a cheerful countenance: and
again with the same, that a joyful heart causes good health: and with the
son of Sirach, that the joy of the heart is the life of man, and that a man's
gladness is the prolonging of his days. Psalm. 48.10.
And therefore often with David we say, Let mount Sion rejoice, and let the
daughters of Judah be glad. And again with the same David we say, 98.5.6.7.
Sing, rejoice, and give thanks, sing to the harp with a singing voice, with
shalmes also and sound of trumpets. And with the Apostle we exhort all men in
all places to rejoice evermore. 1. These. 5.16.
But here it is, not as the world teaches you, do we teach you to rejoice: and
therefore the world speaks all manner of evil sayings against us. For what is
the worlds rejoicing? The rich man he rejoices in his riches, and calls his
lands by his own name: the wise man he rejoices in his wisdom; the strong
man in his strength, the ambitious man in his glory and honor, the sensual
man in his filthy pleasures, the superstitious man in his superstitious ways;
the man that stands upon his merits, in the works of his own hands; and
generally worldly men in the ways of their own hearts, such as they do take
pleasure and delight in: yea foolishness (as Solomon says) is joy to him that
is destitute of understanding; Prou. 15.21.
that is, even sin and wickedness is a matter of mirth and delight to the
wicked and ungodly man. Now such rejoicing, we tell you, is not good; like unto
the rejoicing of him, Luc. 12.19.
that having said unto his soul, Soul, thou have much goods laid up in store
for many years, live at ease, eat, drink, and take thy pastime; heard it by
and by said unto him, Thou fool, 20.
this night will they fetch away thy soul from thee, and then whose shall
those things be which thou have provided? For as Zophar in Job says, The
rejoicing of the wicked is short, Job 20.5.
and the joy of hypocrites is but a moment: And our Savior pronounces a woe
upon such rejoicing, saying, Woe be to you that now laugh, Luke 6.25.
for ye shall weep and wail. And as our Apostle says of worldly sorrow that
it causes death; 2. Cor. 7.10.
so may it most truly be said of worldly rejoicing, that it causes death. Amos
6.4.
And therefore with Amos we lift up our voices against them that lie upon beds
of Iuorie, and stretch themselves upon their beds, and eat the lambs of the
flock, and the calves out of the stall, 5.
that sing to the sound of the violl, and invent to themselves instruments of
music, 6.
that drink wine in bolles, and annoint themselves with the best ointments,
and in the mean time are not sorry for the affliction of Joseph. And out of
Jeremy we exhort all men in all places, saying; Ierem. 9.23.
Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his
strength, neither the rich man glory in his riches. And out of David, Psa.
62.10.
If riches increase, let no man set his heart upon them. And thus we weane men
from this worldly rejoicing as much as we can.

What is then the rejoicing which we teach? As the Apostle says of sorrow, 2.
Cor. 7.10.
that there is a worldly sorrow which causes death, and a godly sorrow which
causes repentance unto salvation; so I say of rejoicing, that there is a
worldly rejoicing, when men take more pleasure in the vanities of this life and
the pleasures of sin, then in the things which belong unto their peace, which
causes death; and a godly rejoicing, when men rejoice in the Lord, so that
they put their whole confidence in him, and count all things loss and dung in
comparison of that rejoicing which they have in him, which causes confidence
unto salvation. The rejoicing then which we teach, is not the worldly rejoicing
which the world teaches, and which causes death; but the godly rejoicing which
causes confidence unto salvation. We say that ye may, and that ye ought to
rejoice in the Lord. So the holy Ghost often exhorts us to do, and so the
godly have always done. Be glad, O ye righteous, says David, and rejoice in
the Lord. Psalm. 32.12.
And again, Let Israel rejoice in him that made him, Psalm. 149.2.
and let the children of Sion be joyful in their King. Let him that rejoices
(says the Apostle out of the Prophet) rejoice in the Lord. 2. Cor. 1.31.
And in the former chapter; My brethren (says the Apostle) rejoice in the
Lord. Esaias 61.10.
So did the Church in Esaias, saying, I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, and my
soul shall be joyful in my God: for he has clothed me with the garments of
salvation, etc. So did Mary, saying, Luke 1.47.
My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior. So
Peter gives testimony to the strangers to whom he wrote, that they rejoiced
in the Lord, with joy unspeakable and glorious. 1. Pet. 1.8.
And so the godly have always rejoiced in the Lord, as in the only rock of
their defense, and strong God of their salvation.

And now see besides these exhortations and examples so to do, what great
cause we have to rejoice in the Lord, and how little cause there is to rejoice
in any thing else: for what have we that we have not from him? or what want we,
which if we have, he must not supply? Have we peace in all our quarters, and
plenteousnesse in all our houses? have we a blessing in the fruit of our body,
in the fruit of our ground, in the fruit of our cattle, in the increase of our
kine, and in our flocks of sheep? are our wives fruitful as the vine, and
our children like the Olive branches round about our tables? have we health,
strength, food, raiment, and other necessaries of this life? James 1.17.
And whence are all these things? Every good giving, and every perfect gift is
from above, and comes down from the Father of lights, with whom is no
variableness, neither shadowing by turning. But to come nearer unto the causes
of Christian rejoicing, Does the Spirit witness unto our spirit, that we are
the sons of God? Is the darkness of our understandings lightened, the
frowardness of our wills corrected, the corruption of our affections purged?
Do we feel in our selves the virtue of Christ his resurrection by the death of
sin, and the life of God in our selves? Are our souls fully assured of the
free forgiveness of our sins, by grace, through the redemption that is in
Christ Jesus? dare we go boldly unto the throne of grace, and cry Abba, which
is, Father? Do we know that Death shall not have dominion over us, and that
Hell shall never be able to prevail against us? Behold then, what cause we
have of our rejoicing in the Lord, for abundance of spiritual blessings in
heavenly things, for our election in Christ Jesus unto everlasting life before
the foundation of the world, for our creation in time after his own image in
righteousness and true holiness, for our redemption by the blood of Christ
Jesus, when we, through sin, had defaced the image wherein we were created,
and sold our selves as bond slaves unto Satan; for our vocation unto the
knowledge of the truth by the Gospel of Christ Jesus, for our adoption into the
glorious liberty of the sons of God, for our justification and tree
forgiveness of our sins by the blood of Christ Jesus, for our sanctification
by the Spirit of grace unto some measure of righteousness and holiness of
life, for our regeneration unto a lively hope in Christ Jesus, and for the
assured confidence which we have of our glorification after this life with
Christ Jesus, who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like
unto his glorious body, etc. All graces of Gods Spirit, and for them all such
matter of rejoicing in the Lord, as may make our hearts dance for joy, and may
ravish our souls with gladness.

And as we have all things from the Lord that we have, whether for the body or
for the soul, for this life present, or that that is to come; so, what is it
that we want which he does not supply? Want we riches? The Lord makes poor,
1. Sam. 2 7.
and makes rich: and he is rich unto all them that call upon him faithfully.
Want we preferment? Psalm. 75 6.
Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor yet from the
South: God is the Judge: he puts down one, and sets up another. Want we
wisdom? If any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God, James 1.5.
which gives unto all men liberally, and reprocheth no man, and it shall be
given him. Want we patience in troubles? That is the wisdom which James
specially speaks of in the place mentioned, wisdom patiently to endure
whatsoever God lays upon us, which ye see God liberally gives to them that
lack and ask. Want we comfort in our souls? God is the God of patience and
consolation, Romans 15.5.
which comfort us in all our troubles, and turns our heaviness into joy;
as also himself says, saying, I will turn their mourning into joy, Ierem.
31.13.
and will comfort them, and give them joy for their sorrows. Yea, whatsoever
it is that we want, it is the Lord that must supply our wants: He opens his
hand, and fills all things living with plenteousnes: Psalm. 145.16
such as he best knows to be most meet for them, and good for his glory.
84.11.
The Lord will give grace and glory, says the Psalmist in another place, and
no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly: no good thing
which he knows to be good for them, and also good for his glory. Have we
then whatsoever blessings we have from the Lord, and does the Lord supply
whatsoever we want, fo far forth as he sees it to be expedient for us, and
good for his own glory? See then what cause we have to rejoice in the Lord.

Yea, and what cause is there why we should rejoice in any thing but in the
Lord? Riches, honor, strength, beauty, and whatsoever else the world most
esteems of, what is it else but vanity, and vexation of the spirit? Amongst
other things most precious in the life of man, wisdom is more to be sought
after then gold and silver, and not to be weighed with precious stones;
righteousness most commends man unto man, and holiness most commends man
unto God. And yet what is our wisdom, what is our righteousness, what is our
holiness that we should rejoice in them? Be it that we have the wisdom of
Solomon, be it that we be as, righteous as Noah, Daniel, and Job; be it that we
be as holy as David, the holy Prophets and Apostles; yet for all this, if we
will come unto God, we must lay all these aside, and Christ Jesus he must be
our wisdom, and righteousness, and holiness. Whatsoever our wisdom be, it
will not lead us unto God; whatsoever our righteousness be, it will not
present us righteous before God; whatsoever our holiness be, we cannot stand
in it in the judgment before God. Nay, when we come unto God, we must renounce
our wisdom as foolishness, we must count our righteousness loss and dung,
we must abandon all conceit of holiness, as also we see our Apostle did: who
though he were of the kindred of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, an Ebrew of
the Ebrews, by profession a Pharisie, as zealous of the tradition of his
fathers as any, and as unrebukable touching the righteousness of the law as
any; yet when once he came to the knowledge of Christ, he counted all these
things as no vantage at all unto him, but loss and dung, for Christ his sake.
For herein is our rejoicing, that Christ is made of God unto us wisdom, 1.
Cor. 1.30.
and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, as it is written. Nay,
to go yet further, what are our faith, hope, and love that we should rejoice in
them? To be strong in faith, to be perfect in love, to be steadfast in hope, are
things for which we should pray always with all manner prayer and supplication
in the spirit. But if we shall rejoice and repose our confidence in the
strength of our faith, in the perfection of our love, in the steadfastness of
our hope, then we are abolished from Christ, and our rejoicing is not good. It
is Christ Jesus in whom we must believe, whom we must love, and in whom we must
hope. Our faith must be built upon him, our love must be grounded on him, our
hope must be stablished in him, and in him we must rejoice. Thus then we see
that we have not any thing to rejoice in without us, nor yet in our wisdom,
righteousness, or holiness, nor yet in our faith, hope, or love. We must
rejoice in the Lord, and in him it well becomes the Saints to be joyful.

Let me therefore in the bowels of Christ Jesus beseech you to rejoice, not as
the world does in the pleasures of sin, and the vanities of this life, but to
rejoice in the Lord the strong God of our salvation. Ye see the exhortations of
the holy Ghost, and the examples of godly men, and ye see what great cause we
have to rejoice in the Lord, and how little cause we have to rejoice in any
thing else. All rejoicing in the world, what is it in comparison of this
rejoicing in the Lord? It is as the morning cloud, or as the morning dew, it
vanishes away; or as it is in the place of Job, It is short, and but a moment.
Nay, in it only is true joy, and sound rejoicing. Other joys may for a while
please the outward sense, but the joy that quickens the heart, and cheeres the
soul, is the joy in the holy Ghost. Other rejoicing, the more it is, the worse
it is; but this, the more it is, the better it is; and the more we do rejoice
in the Lord, the more cause we shall find we have to rejoice in the Lord.
Rejoice therefore in the Lord always, and again I say, rejoice.

The second thing which I note in the Apostles exhortation is, that he exhorts
the Philippians to rejoice in the Lord, not for a day, or for a season, not by
fits, or when he makes his face to shine on them, but to rejoice in the Lord
always, as well in adversity, as in prosperity. Whence I observe the
constancy which is in Christian rejoicing, whereby it is known indeed to be
Christian. The constancy of our Christian rejoicing is, to rejoice in the Lord
always, as well when he seems to hide away his face from us, as when he makes
his face to shine upon us. This constancy of rejoicing, the Apostle exhorts
the Thessalonians unto, where he says unto them, Rejoice evermore. 1 Thessalonians.
5.16.
And herein is the trial of our joy, whether it be Christian indeed: for as it
is said of some hearers of the word, Luke 8.13.
that for a while they believe, but in time of tentation they go away: so may
it also be said of some that seem to rejoice in the Lord, that for a while
they seem to rejoice in the Lord, even as long so he showreth down the early
and the latter rain upon them, but in time of persecution, trouble, and
adversity, they hang down their heads, and murmr against the Lord. It
seems that Satan thought that Job would have been such an one, as appears
by these words, where he says unto God, Job 1.10.
Does he fear God for naught? And the same may be said of rejoicing, Have thou
not made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that he has on
every side? Thou have blessed the works of his hands, and his substance is
increased in the Land. 11.
But stretch out now thy hand, and touch all that he has, to see if he will
not blaspheme thee to thy face. But he was deceived in Job. Yet therein he
bewrayed a disease wherewith many sons of men are much tainted, which are
never known what they are until the Lord send them some adversity; for we
see many, that so long as they have all things at their desire, rejoice in the
Lord; who so much as they? specially, when their dishes are full furnished, O
then how well does it like them, to confess that he is good and gracious, and
bountiful! But if the Lord begin to handle them somewhat roughly, so that
things fall not out to their contentment, then their countenance is changed,
and they take the matter sore to heart. And if he proceed, and depriving them
of his blessings, afflict them in body or in goods, then they fall to murmr,
and oftentimes to blasphemies: which blasphemies, albeit some of them utter not
with their mouths, yet in their hearts repine they at the Lord, for such his
judgments upon them. Now these in trial prove plainly to be hypocrites, and
by trial it appears that their joy is not Christian, because it is not
constant, but ebbeth and flows according to the ebb and flood of adversity
and prosperity.

What shall we say then? when the Lord afflicts us with poverty, sickness,
and the like crosses; must we rejoice in the Lord? Yea verily: 1. Sam. 2.6.7.
for it is the Lord that kills and makes alive, that wounds and heals,
that brings to the grave, and raises up, that makes poor, and makes rich,
that brings low, and exalts. Amos 3.6.
There is no evil in the City which the Lord has not done: No evil, that
is, no cross or affliction, no plague or punishment which he sends not. And
whatsoever cross or affliction it is, unto his children it is but either a
probation, that the trial of their faith, being much more precious then gold
that perishes, may be found to their praise, and honor, and glory at the
appearing of Jesus Christ, such as was Jobs affliction; or else, it is a
fatherly correction, that being chastened of the Lord, 2. Sam. 12.14.
they may not be condemned with the world; such as was the death of David's
child for David's sin, and such as was the weakness, and sickness, and death
of many of the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11 30.
for eating and drinking unworthily at the Lords Table. Are then our crosses of
poverty, sickness, or whatsoever they be, from God? Then are they good, and
we are to rejoice in them. For all things fall out for the best, for those that
love and fear him. Are they for the trial of our faith? My brethren, says
James, James 1.2.
count it exceeding joy when ye fall into diverse tentations and trialls, etc.
Are they to correct and chastise us? If we endure chastening, Hebr. 12.7.
God offers himself unto us as unto sons, for whom he loves, he
chasteneth. O but sometimes he shuts us even up in despair and infidelity:
how shall we then rejoice in the Lord? I demand then: Do thou know it, and
loathe it, and long to be brought again into the glorious liberty of the
sons of God? Thou have good cause to rejoice in the Lord, for he has only
hid his face from thee for a while, that he may have mercy on thee for ever.
And what if thy faith or hope be but as a grain of Mustard seed? what if being
as it were covered under the ashes, they seem not to be? Christ Jesus is most
plentiful, to help them that are most weak: and he is all-sufficient, to
supply all wants. If any seed of God be there, in thy weakness he will
perfect his praise. Yea, but in that our Savior pronounces a blessing upon
them that mourn, Matt. 5.4.
it appears that we are not always to rejoice. Not so neither, for even then
when we sigh and mourn for the affliction we have in the world, we are to
rejoice in the Lord, and to be of good comfort in Christ Jesus, because he has
overcome the world; even then when we mourn through a sense of Gods
judgments, we are to rejoice in his tender mercies, that he deals not with us
after our deseruings; even then when we mourn in the body because of
affliction, we are to rejoice in our souls because of our strong consolation
in Christ Jesus, and because our light affliction in the body causes unto us a
far most excellent, and an eternal weight of glory. And therefore our Savior
in the same place where he says, Blessed are they that mourn, exhorts also
to rejoice and be glad in persecution, for that great is our reward in heaven.

Let this then teach us to take heed how we murmr against the Lord, for
poverty, sickness, or any cross whatsoever. They are from the Lord
whatsoever they be, and if we be his children, they are only either for the
trial of our faith and patience, that patience having her perfect work, we
may be perfect and entire, lacking nothing; or else, as a loving correction of
a merciful father, that we may be reclaimed from the wickedness of our ways.
And if we do not now rejoice in the Lord, when he seems thus to hide his face
from us, certainly, whatsoever show we made before of rejoicing in the Lord, we
played but the hypocrites. Howsoever therefore, looking unto our selves, unto
our sins, unto our infirmities, unto our afflictions, unto the world we may
sigh and mourn, yet let us rejoice in the Lord. We are not bid to rejoice in
our selves: Nay, in our selves we shall be sure to have cause enough of mourning.
We must therefore go out of our selves unto the Lord, and we must rejoice in
him. We must look unto him, and remember that he is good, and therefore
whatsoever he does is good; that he is Almighty, aod therefore can raise us
out of the dust of death, and set us with the Princes of the earth; that he is
merciful, and therefore will not suffer the rod of the ungodly to rest on the
lot of the righteous. And again, we must remember that he was poor, that we
might be made rich in him; that he was weak, that we might be made strong in
him; that he was tempted, that he might be able to succor them which are
tempted. What cause therefore soever of mourning there be in our selves, let us
look out of our selves, and let us rejoice in him always. If he bless us,
then we think and yield easily that we have cause to rejoice in the Lord: and
if he cross us with any plague or trouble, then we have also cause to rejoice
in him, because it is for our good, and his own glory. Rejoice therefore in
the Lord always.

LECTVRE LXXIX.
PHILIP. 4. Verse 4. Again, I say, rejoice.

5. Let your patient mind be known to all men. The Lord is at hand.


THese words are (as we heard the last day) an exhortation unto the Philippians
to rejoice, not as the world does, but to rejoice in the Lord; not with a
momentanie and flitting joy, but always, both in weal and in woe; not
unadvisedly made, or about a light and easy matter, but seriously made, and
about a matter very needful, and yet hard to be persuaded, and therefore
doubled, Again, I say, rejoice in the Lord always.

Now see how it pleases the Lord, that as the Apostle comes again and again
unto this holy exhortation, and leaves it not with once or twice, but even the
third time also exhorts them to rejoice in the Lord; so I should come unto
you again and again, even three several times with the same exhortation to
rejoice in the Lord. Again, says the Apostle, I say rejoice, even in the Lord
always, for that is to be added, and resumed to the former place. From which
doubling and redoubling of this exhortation, I observe both how needful and
withal how hard a matter it is to persuade this constant rejoicing in the
Lord, to rejoice in the Lord always. For to this end does the holy Ghost often
in the Scriptures use to double and redouble his speech, even to show both the
needfulnes of his speech, and the difficulty in respect of man of enforcing
his speech. In the Psalm, how often does the Prophet exhort the faithful unto
the praises of the Lord, even before all the people, that they and their
posterity might know them, Psalm. 107.
saying, O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and
declare the wonders that he does for the children of men! Even four several
times in that one Psalm. And wherefore? but to show how needful it was they
should do so, and how hardly men are drawn to do so. How often likewise does
our Savior exhort his disciples unto humility and meeknes? Mat. 11.29.
sometimes saying unto them, Learn of me that I am meek and lowly in heart;
sometimes telling them, that whosoever among them would be great, 20.26.
should be servant unto the rest; sometimes washing their feet, Ioh. 13.
etc. thereby to teach them humility. And wherefore does he so often beat
upon it, but to show how needful it was they should be humble and meek, and
likewise how hard a thing it is to draw men unto humility and meekness? How
often likewise does the holy Ghost exhort to the putting off of the old man,
and the putting on of the new man? No part of Scripture throughout the whole
Bible, wherein the holy Ghost does not speak much, though not happily in these
words, yet to this purpose. And wherefore else is it, but to imply both how
needful a matter it is to be persuaded, and how hard a matter it is to
persuade the mortification of the old man, and the quickening of the new man?
And to let other instances pass, in the point whereof we now speak, how often
does our Savior exhort to rejoice and be glad in persecution, Mat. 5.12.
because of the reward laid up for us by God in heaven; Luc. 10.20.
to rejoice because our names are written in heaven by the finger of Gods own
hand; Ioh. 16.33.
to be of good comfort, because he has overcome the world, that is, to rejoice
in the Lord? And wherefore, but to show how needful it is to rejoice in the
Lord, and how hard it is to persuade this rejoicing? So that by the usual
course of the Scripture it appears, that our Apostle doubling and redoubling
this his exhortation, thereby shows both how needful, and withal how hard a
matter it is to persuade this constant rejoicing in the Lord, to rejoice in the
Lord always: so needful, that it must be persuaded again and again, and
withal so hard to be persuaded, that it cannot be too much urged and beaten
upon.

But it will not be amiss yet a little more particularly to look into the
reasons why it is so needful to rejoice in the Lord always, and why we are so
hardly persuaded to rejoice in the Lord always. Who sees not, that
considers any thing, what mighty enemies we have always to fight withal,
the flesh within us to snare and deceive us, the world without us to fight and
wage war against us, and the devil ever seeking like a roaring Lion whom he
may devour? Who sees not, what fightings without, what terrors within, what
anguishes in the soul, what griefs in the body, what perils abroad, what
practices at home, what troubles we have on every side? When then Satan yt old
dragon casts out many floods of persecutions against us, when wicked men
cruelly, disdainfully, and despitefully speak against us; when lying,
slandering, and deceitful mouths are opened upon us; when we are mocked and
iested at, and had in derision of all them that are about us; when we are
afflicted, tormented, and made the worlds wonder; when the sorrows of death
compass us, and the floods of wickedness make us afraid, and the pains of
hell come even unto our soul: what is it that holds up our heads that we sink
not? how is it that we stand either not shaken, or if shaken, yet not cast
down? Is it not by our rejoicing which we have in Christ Jesus? Yes verily: we
lift up our eyes unto heaven, and we are of good comfort, because he has
overcome the world; we lift up our eyes unto the Lord, and we rejoice in him,
because he shall give a good end unto all our troubles, and shall wipe all
tears from our eyes. In David's troubles, he was all his stay, as himself
every where almost protests; and when the Apostles were persecuted, beaten,
and cast in prison, they rejoiced, because of their strong consolation in
Christ Jesus. And so it is with all the faithful children of God, whatsoever
floods do beat upon them, whatsoever causes of sorrow do overtake them, yet do
they stand and quail not, because of the rejoicing they have in Christ Jesus.
On this rock all the surges of the sea of this world are broken.

Again, when others of us are assaulted by that mighty Prince of darkness,
when we are tried by mockings and scourgings, by bonds and imprisonment; when
we feel the smart of loss, or hurt in body, goods or name; when the Beast of
Spain, and with him that false Prophet of Rome thunder out threatenings, and
imagine all kind of mischief against us; when the pains of death take hold of
us, and multitude of sorrows beset us round about, why is it that our hearts do
fail within us? how is it that we fall from our former love, and that fear
comes upon us as upon a woman in her travel? Is it not through our want of
rejoicing in the Lord! Yes verily: we feel not in our souls the treasures of
mercies that are hid for us in Christ Jesus, which should keep us standing
against all batteries and assaults whatsoever, and therefore we are not only
daunted and dismayed with these things, but are quite affright and utterly
overcome of them. If any one of Jobs afflictions lie upon us, we break out
into all the impatiencies that he did, but we cannot lay hold of any such
comforts as he did. If death seize upon son or daughter, or any dear unto
us, 2. Sam 18.33.
we break out into like outcries with David, saying, Absalon my son, my
son Absalon, would God I had died for thee, O Absalon my son, my son: but
though Ioab would, yet can he not comfort us as he did David. Est. 6.12.
If Haman do but fear the Kings displeasure, he hastes him home mourning, and
couers his head, and will not be comforted: and if Ahitophel do but see that
his counsel be not followed, 2. Sam. 17.23.
he saddles his ass, and rides home, and hangs himself. And this it is when
men have not their comfort in God, whatsoever do befall them in this life. If
this or that thwart them, by and by they are cast down. And why? even because
they have not learned to rejoice in the Lord always. Very needful then it is,
ye see, yt we rejoice in the Lord always, both because by our rejoicing which
we have in the Lord, we stand against whatsoever otherwise might quell us; and
because through the want thereof, it is that we fall and are utterly overcome
whenever storms arise, and troubles assault us.

And as thus it may appear how needful a thing it is that we rejoice in the
Lord always, so it may easily also be seen how hardly we are persuaded to
rejoice in the Lord always. Every man complains where his shoo pincheth him,
and every man lays his hand upon his sore. But very few in such cases when the
hand of the Lord is upon them, when they are humbled and brought low through
oppression, through any pl^gue or trouble, can be brought unto this, to rejoice
in the Lord. Nay tell one wicked and ungodly man when his troubles are
multiplied, and when his sorrows are increased, that he is to know that the
Lord his hand is in all these, that he is not to murmr against the Lord, but
to rejoice in the Lord; does he not say of them that thus speak unto him, that
they are mad? does he not with indignation ask, what cause he has to rejoice
in the Lord? does he not still cry out upon his crosses, and miseries, and
vexations, and pains? and does he not within a while belch out most impious
blasphemies? And hence it is that many with Judas in such cases fall to
despair, and that many with him become their own butchers. Yea ^et the
children of God themselves say, whether their afflictions and their sorrows do
not sometimes sink them so far, that their soul even almost refuses comfort
in the Lord: very few like unto Job that mirror of patience, who when they
hear of the loss of all their goods, and of their servants, and of the death
of their children, can be content to frame themselves to the will of God, and
say, Job 1.21.
Naked came I out of my ^others womb, and naked shall I return again: the
Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away: blessed be the name of the Lord
Or when they are smitten with sores and boiles, from the s^l^ of their foot to
the crown of their head, can with the sam^ Job comfort themselves, and say,
What? shall we receive good at the hands of God, and not receive evil? And yet
this most rare pattern of patience, into what sharp fits of impatiencie did
he sometimes break out, crying out in the bitterness of his soul, 3.3, 4.
etc.
and saying, Let the day perish wherein I was borne, and the night wherein it
was said. There is a man child conceived, etc. And thus it fares often with
the dear children of God, that they sink so far, that their soul almost
refuses comfort in the Lord. Their sense and feeling of their pain and
affliction, is sometimes so great, that they have almost no sense or feeling of
God. Which yet I do not so speak, as if the children of God might not be
touched with sorrow and heaviness for the crosses of this life: for no doubt
they may; but to show that sometimes they are so cast down with heaviness,
that it is a hard matter to rear them up again. For as Jobs friends disputed
against him, so they against themselves, that they are punished of God for
their sins and iniquities, and that therefore now he has shut up his loving
kindness in displeasure. And then they stand prying and looking into their
sins, and hardly can they be drawn to lift up their eyes unto the Lord, that
in him they may find comfort unto their souls. I will not stand upon the
further enlarging of this point. By this which has been spoken, ye see how
needful it is we should rejoice in the Lord always, and withal how hardly we
are persuaded to rejoice in the Lord always, and consequently upon what cause
the Apostle doubled and redoubled this his exhortation.

Now this may first instruct us in the merciful goodness of our God toward
us, who in things so needful for us, and whereunto we are so hardly drawn,
ceasseth not to stir up our dull minds, and again and again to call them to
our remembrance: Esa. 28.10.
Precept upon precept, precept upon precept, line unto line, line unto line,
here a little, and there a little. Even as young scholars are dealt withal, so
deals he with us, he goes over and over the same lesson with us, and gladly
he would beat it into us.

Secondly this may teach us our dullness to conceive, and slacknesse to embrace
the things that belong unto our peace. Such things must be doubled and
redoubled unto us, and ye^ we will not learn them; they must be often urged,
and much beaten upon, and yet we will not receive instruction. The Lord must
even draw us unto himself by his holy Spirit, and yet we will not run after
him; he must send his holy Prophets and Ministers unto us early and late, and
all little enough to stir up our dull minds.

Thirdly, this may teach us to hold fast that rejoicing which we have in Christ
Jesus. For is it so, that the holy Apostle does so often exhort us to rejoice
in the Lord always; is it so, that it is so needful for us to rejoice in the
Lord always, that only by our rejoicing in him, we stand fast against
whatsoever troubles and sorrows; and without it, we are quite affright and
utterly overcome of them; is it so, that we are so hardly drawn to rejoice in
the Lord always? How are we then to hold fast that rejoicing which we have in
Christ Jesus, even so fast, that nothing take it from us? Let us therefore
rejoice, but let us rejoice in the Lord, and let us rejoice in him always,
that so no man, nay that nothing take from us our rejoicing in him. A joyful
heart makes a cheerful countenance, and if the heart be joyful in the Lord,
it cheeres the heart and quickens the soul, howsoever the countenance be
appalled. Other joys in riches, in honors, in friends, in the vanities of
this life, and in the pleasures of sin, happily have their moment of time, and
their appearance of good: but their time is but only a moment, and their good
but only an appearance and outward semblance: only the rejoicing in the Lord,
is the true and sound rejoicing, and which causes good health unto the soul.
Let us therefore rejoice in the Lord, and let us rejoice in him always, not
only when he feeds us with the flower of wheat, but when he gives us
plenteousnesse of tears to drink. For whether he bless us or cross us, it is
for our good, and his glory, and therefore he is to be blessed in both. Yea,
and whatsoever crosses or sorows we suffer, let that remembrance of Christ his
blessed death and passion which this day we celebrate, be sufficient to cause
us to rejoice in the Lord. For what are all our sufferings or sorrows unto
those benefits of Christ his death and passion, whereof this day may put us in
mind, and which this day shall be sealed unto the souls of those which are
worthy communicants in this holy Supper? For when this is sealed unto our
souls in this holy Supper, that Christ died for us, that by his blood we
receive remission of our sins, that we are incorporated into his mystical
body, and made one with him and he with us; that he has obtained eternal
redemption for us, and that in Christ are treasured up for us all the benefits
of our salvation, even as surely as we are sure of the bread and wine which we
receive into our bodies at this Supper; what sorrows for any crosses should so
far sink us, but that we should recover our selves by our rejoicing which we
have in Christ Jesus? For though hell it self should open her mouth upon us,
though sorrow it self should seek to swallow us up quick, yet still here is
matter enough wherein to rejoice. Rejoice therefore in the Lord always, again I
say, rejoice. Thus much of this exhortation. It follows.

Let your patient mind, etc. This is also an exhortation unto the Philippians,
wherein the Apostle exhorts them not only to such a patience as is tried and
seen in bearing injuries and putting up wrongs, but generally unto such a
moderate, courteous, easy, and gentle behavior toward their neighbors and
brethren, as that they will rather lose of their right, then not live in peace
and unity with them. For so the word here used signifies, namely a moderation
of that by equity, which in rigor might be exacted. The word is sometimes
translated as if we should read thus in this place, Let your courteous mind,
etc. as in the Acts, Act. 24.4.
where Paul says unto Felix, I pray thee that thou would hear us of thy
courtesy a few words. And in the first Epistle of Peter, where he says,
Servants be subject to your masters with all fear, 1. Pet. 2.18.
not only to the good and courteous, but also to the froward. Sometimes it is
translated as if we should thus read, Let your gentle mind, etc. as in the
second Epistle to the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 10.1.
I beseech you by the meekness and gentleness of Christ; and in the first
Epistle to Timothy, where it is said that a Bishop must not be given to filthy
lucre, 1. Tim. 3.3.
but gentle. And sometimes again it is translated, as if we should thus read,
Let your soft mind, etc. as in the Epistle to Titus, where he wills Titus to
put his people in mind that they be no fighters, Tit. 3.2.
but soft, showing all meekness to all men. But it comes all to one, whether
we read, Let your patient, or your courteous, or your gentle, or your soft
mind be known unto all men. The thing which he exhorts them unto, is such a
mildness of their behavior, and moderation of their affections among their
neighbors and brethren, as that, for unities sake, they will rather lose of
their own, then strictly stand upon their right in matters of this life. And
this their mildness and moderation among their neighbors, he would have so
notorious and evident, that it might be known, and that to all men; not for
matter of ostentation and vainglory amongst men, but that holding out this
light to all men in their lives, they may be won unto the faith of Christ, and
the Name of God may be glorified. And because the Philippians might happily thus
object and say: Yea indeed, must we put up injuries, must we not stand upon our
right, but sometimes yield of our right; then shall we make a hand indeed, and
quickly be the meanest among men, and be trampled under feet, as the clay in
the streets. Therefore the Apostle adds, The Lord is at hand; as if he should
have said: Though they do abuse your patient mildness, and gentle moderation
of your affections, yet do ye hold on this good course, and possess your
souls in patience. For the Lord is at hand, even near, to avenge you of your
wrongs, and to repay you with glory. So that here we have an exhortation, and
a reason. The exhortation is to bring them to a gentle moderation of their
affections toward their brethren in matters of ordinary life. The reason is,
to prevent an objection. Now the^ that we see the meaning of the words, and the
special points, together with the purpose of the Apostle therein, let us
further see what we may observe hence for our own use.

The first thing which I note in the exhortation is, that the Apostle exhorts
the Philippians to a gentle moderation of their affections toward their
brethren in matters of ordinary life, so that for the keeping of unity
sometimes they yield of their right. Whence I observe a necessary rule for all
Christians, to be kept for ever in all their dealings with their neighbors,
which is, in matters of ordinary life, to use such moderation of their
affections, as that, for unities sake, they do not always strictly stand upon
their right, but sometimes yield of their right, and sit them down with the
loss, and patiently put up the wrong. A notable pattern of the practice of
this rule we have in Abraham, who in the strife that was between his heard-men
and Lots heard-men, Genesis 13.8.
and was like to be between him and Lot, resigned his own right to buy peace,
9.
saying unto Lot, I pray thee let there be no strife between thee and me, nor
between mine heard-men and thine heard-men; for we be brethren. Is not the
whole land before thee? depart I pray thee from me: if thou will take the left
hand, then I will go to the right: or if thou go to the right hand, then I will
go to the left. He was Lots elder, and his uncle, and every way his better,
yet he stood not upon these points, looking when Lot should come unto him, and
stoop to him, but in great mildness and patience he so moderates his
affections, as that he goes unto him, and moves the peace, and yields his own
right to have it. Another pattern hereof we have figured in that Parable in
the Gospel, Matthew. 18.24 27.
in the example of the King, who calling his servants to an account, and
finding one that owed him ten thousand talents, but had nothing to pay, forgave
him his debt. He stood not upon it, that so much he owed, and so much he should
pay, or else his body should rot in prison for it; but finding him poor, and
not able to pay, he remitted his right, and forgave him the debt. And thus
should we do in matters of ordinary life, and civil dealing one with another,
we should be kind and courteous one toward another, showing all meekenes and
mildness one toward another; we must not stand upon terms one with another,
but we must yield one unto another; we must sustain some loss one at another
hands, we must put up some wrongs one at another hands. I say in matters of
ordinary life, and civil dealing one with another. For in matters of faith
and religion, in matters belonging unto God, there we must not yield an inch to
any adversary of the truth, to turn any whit from the rule of the Word,
either to the right hand, or to the left. Here we must be at strife as Moses
was with Pharao, Exodus 10.28.
when he told him that they would have all their cattle with them, and that
they would not leave an hoof behind them. For here to yield a whit, is to
quench that zeal which ought to be in us toward the glory of our God. But in
matters of common life, there we should yield, and rather sustain loss and
wrong, then nourish iarres and quarrels.

But what is our practice? Ye know that in the parable of the servant that had
all his debt forgiven him, how meeting with his fellow that owed him an hundred
pence, he laid hands on him, and took him by the throat, saying, Matthew. 18.28.
Pay me that thou owe; and when he could not, he cast him into prison till he
should pay the debt. So we, if we think that we have right on our side, we
stand upon it: and what? who is he? shall we yield of our right? so we may be
counted fools indeed. Shall we sit down with the loss? Nay, we will have it
if he have it out of his belly. Shall we put up such a wrong? Nay then let them
abuse me at their pleasures. We are as good as they, we are their betters every
way; or though we be meaner then they, yet shall they not think to have us
under their girdles? we may not, we cannot, we will not suffer these and these
things. This is our practice, quite contrary to the rule before mentioned, and
to those good patterns before proposed. We make a jest of that of our Savior,
where he says, Whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, Matthew. 5.39.
turn to him the other also: and we say, whosoever gives me a blow, he shall
have two for it, or at least, he shall have as good as he brings. So far are
we from that mind to sustain any loss, or to put up any wrong. And hereupon
it is that we are so unpeaceable one with another, and so uncharitable one
toward another. Hereupon it is that there are such hart-burnings, grudgings,
iarres, debates, contentions, and divisions amongst us. Well, will we mend that
which is amiss, and put in practice the rule that has been given unto us? Let
us then observe these rules.

First, has our neighbor or brother some faults that are rather natural,
then punishable by the laws; as for example, is he somewhat proud, somewhat
covetous, somewhat hasty, and angry, somewhat superstitious? etc. Let us
learn to skill of his nature, and bear with it: Secondly, such words and
deeds as happily might have not the best construction, let us make the best of
them. Thirdly, such faults as are secret, or committed by infirmity, let us
not publish, but hide and cover them. Fourthly, if his fault be greater, and
such as justly may offend us, Matthew. 18.15.
let us go unto him, and tell him his fault between him and us alone; if he
hear us, we have won him: if he hear us not, then let us call unto us one or
two, and utter our whole griefs before them, that by their means that which
is amiss may be amended.

LECTVRE LXXX.
PHILIP. 4. Verse 5. Let your patient mind be known to all men. The Lord is
at hand.
THese words are, as we heard the last day, another exhortation unto the
Philippians, wherein the Apostle exhorts them, not only to such a patience
as is tried and seen in bearing injuries and putting up wrongs, but generally
to such mildness in their behavior, and moderation of their affections
amongst their neighbors and brethren, as that for unities sake they will
rather lose of their own, then strictly stand upon their right in matters of
ordinary life: for so the word here used by the Apostle signifies, namely a
moderation of that by equity, which in rigor might be exacted. Now this their
mildness and moderation among their brethren the Apostle would have so
conspicuous and evident, as that it might be known, and that to all men; not
for matter of ostentation and vainglory amongst men, but both that all men,
as occasions were offered, might have trial thereof in them; and that amongst
all men religion might thereby be increased, and the Name of God glorified: Let
your etc. That which follows, The Lord is at hand, is a reason of the
exhortation, added by the Apostle, to prevent an objection: for, the drift of
the Apostles exhortation unto them, aiming at this, that there should be such
moderation in them, as that they should not always stand upon their right, but
sometimes yield of their right, and patiently put up the loss or the wrong;
they might happily thus object and say, So should we make a hand indeed, and
quickly be the meanest among men, and be trampled under feet as the clay in the
streets. Therefore the Apostle adds, The Lord is at hand; as if he should
have said, Though they do abuse your patient mildness and gentle moderation
of your affections, yet do ye hold on a good course, in patience possess your
souls, and let your patient mind be known to all men: for the Lord is at
hand, even near to aid and help you, to avenge you of your wrongs, and to
repay you with glory in the Kingdom of glory.

The first thing which I noted in the exhortation was, that the Apostle
exhorts the Philippians to a gentle moderation of their affections toward
their brethren in matters of ordinary life, so that for the keeping of unity
sometimes they yield of their right. Whence I observed a necessary rule for
all Christians to be kept for ever in all their dealings with their neighbors;
which is, in matters of ordinary life to use such moderation of their
affections, as that for unities sake, they do not always strictly stand upon
their right, but sometimes yield of their right, and sit them down with the
loss, and patiently put up the wrong. Two notable patterns I showed you of the
practice of this rule: the one in Abraham, Genesis 13.
who being Lots elder, and uncle, and his better every way, stood not upon
these points, but went unto him, and moved the peace between them, and yielded
his own right to have it: the other in the king in the Gospel, who finding
his servant poor, and not able to pay the debt he owed him, Matthew. 18.
remitted his right, and forgave him his debt. Whose examples we ought to
follow in matters of ordinary life and civil dealing one with another, not
standing upon terms one with another, but yielding one unto another, showing
all meekness and mildenes one toward another, and putting up some loss and
some wrong one at another hands. But how quite contrary our practice is to
this rule, and to these good patterns I showed you. For if we think that we
have right, then we stand upon it, and thus we say with our selves: Shall we
yield of our right? so we may be begged for fools indeed. Shall we sit down
with the loss? Nay, we will have it if he have it out of his belly. Shall we
put up such a wrong? Nay, then let them abuse us at their pleasures. We are as
good as they, or, we are their betters every way; or, though we be meaner then
they, yet shall they not think to have us under their girdles; we may not, we
cannot, we will not suffer these and these things. And hereupon, to go now
forward in the point, hereupon, I say, it is that we are so unpeaceable one
with another, and so uncharitable one toward another: hereupon it is that
there are such heart-burnings, grudgings, iarres, debates, contentions, and
divisions amongst us: we cannot be gentle, and courteous, and kind one unto
another: we cannot yield one unto another, or bear one with another: we cannot
put up any loss or wrong one at another hands. The superior he disdaines to
yield in any thing unto his inferior, and he thinks it is a disparagement unto
him. The inferior he is loath to yield in any thing unto his superior, and he
thinks that if he yield an inch, the other will take an elle; if he yield in
any thing, the other will crow over him in all things. The equal, he cannot
brook it to yield unto his equal, and he thinks it is a debasing and
disgracing of himself, to put up any thing at his hands that is no better then
himself. Thus in superior, inferior, and equal, is wanting that patient,
gentle, courteous, and soft mind whereunto our Apostle exhorts; and in stead
of meekenes, gentleness, patience, moderation, and mildness one toward
another, are entertained murmurings, reasonings, heart-burnings, and unseemly
speaking and dealing one against another. This is utterly a fault amongst us.
Will we then mend that which is amiss, and put in practice the rule that has
bin given us, using in matters of ordinary life, such moderation of our
affections amongst our neighbors and brethren, as that for unities sake we
will pass by many faults and offenses, and sometimes yield of our right, and
sit us down with the loss, and put up the wrong? I am sure we should; and if
we will do so, we must observe these rules that follow.

First, has our neighbor or brother some faults that are rather natural then
punishable by the laws, as for example, is he some what proud, somewhat
covetous, somewhat hasty and angry, somewhat unsociable, somewhat suspicious?
etc. we must in such cases deal with him as David did with his eldest brother
Eliab. When David being sent of his father unto his brethren to the battle,
had showed his mislike, that none would undertake to fight with Goliath, Eliab
was very angry with David, and said, Why came thou down hither? 1. Sam.
17.28.
and with whom have thou left those few sheep in the wilderness? I know thy
pride and malice of thine heart, that thou art come down to see the battle.
Now what was David's reply unto these sharp speeches of his brother? He knew
his brethrens stomach against him, and therefore only said, What have I now
done? 29.
is there not a cause? and so departed. So we should learn to skill of the
nature of them with whom we live, and we should bear much with such faults as
these. To quit their pride with disdain, if they be proud; to be ever telling
them of their covetousness, if they be covetous; to put fuel unto the fire by
ministering occasions of anger, if they be hasty and angry; to increase their
jealousy by any preposterous dealing, if they be some what suspicious, is no
way for us to cure their faults, or to live with them in that Christian sort we
should. This is that which behooves us, if we will have our patient minds
known, we must bear with these and such like faults in our neighbors and
brethren, and spare oftentimes to speak or do that which their humor cannot
brook.

The second rule which we must observe is this; such words and deeds as happily
sometimes might have not the best construction or meaning, we must make the
best of them: for if when things are said or done which might be well meant,
and well taken, they be worse taken then they are meant, and rather the worst
then the best be made of them; shall we say of those men, that they are
patiently and gently minded? nay surely, this is rather an argument of an
exasperate mind, which had rather blow the bellows, then quench the fire,
rather make a breach where there were none, then make up a breach where there
were one. And therefore the Apostle puts such as take all things in the
evil part, Romans 1.29.
in the rank of them whom God had delivered up unto a reprobate mind. If then
we will have our patient mind known, and be commended for that moderation
which our Apostle here requires, we must not interpret such things as are
said or done, unto the worst, but when they may have a good meaning, we must
make the best of them: for so indeed do we show our selves to have a good
moderation in our selves, if when things in themselves are either doubtful, or
not altogether the best, yet we make the best of them, and rather so construe
them as they ought to be meant, then as they might be taken.

A third rule which we must observe is this: Such faults as are secret, or
committed by infirmity, we must not diuulgate and publish, but rather hide and
cover them. It is the saying of our blessed Savior, Matthew. 7.12.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, even so do ye to them: and it
implies this withal, that whatsoever we would not that men should do to us,
we should not do to them. Now then, who is it of us, that if we fall through
infirmity, if we run into any secret sin, would have it published in Gath,
or noysed in the streets of Ashkelon? James 3.2.
In many things we sin all: and he is the best that offends the least. But
who can brook him, that whatsoever fault he hears in the house, by and by
tells it on the house tops? or how shall he approve his moderation, and his
patient mind unto men, that whatsoever fault he knows of his neighbor or
brother, disperseth it abroad and makes it his common talk where he comes?
Nay, herein is our moderation and mildenes seen and approved, if when we know
any slip or fall of our neighbor, which happily many know not, we patiently
pass by it, and so bear it, that as much as in us lies, we bury it out of
the sight and speech of men. For as Peter says of love, 1. Pet. 4.8.
that it covers the multitude of sins; so it is true in this moderation and
patience whereof we speak, that it bears with and pardons many faults and
offenses of one man toward another, and likewise concealeth such faults and
offenses as secretly or through infirmity are committed against God. If then
we will approve our selves to have that patient mind which our Apostle here
requires, we must not publish whatsoever fault of our neighbor we he are or
know; but such faults as either are not commonly known abroad, or whereinto
he has fallen through infirmity, we must hide and cover them, and so bear
with them, as to bury them out of the sight and speech of men.

A fourth rule which we must observe, is this: when the faults of our neighbor
are such as that they may justly offend us, behouefull it is that we go unto
him, and tell him his fault between him and us alone; and if thus he hearken
not unto us, then to call unto us one or two more, that his fault being here
opened again, that which is amiss may be amended, and he in the best sort
that may be, may be reclaimed. Which rule is also the rule of our blessed
Savior touching private injuries and wrongs, where he says, Mat. 18.15.
If thy brother trespass against thee, he speaks of private trespasses and
wrongs: for such as are public, and to the offense of the Church, 1. Tim. 5.20.
the Apostle would have them rebuked openly; but if thy brother trespass
against thee privately, giving thee cause of offense, go and tell him his fault
between thee and him alone: if he hear thee, thou have won thy brother, and
as James speaks, have saved a soul from death; and he repenting, Iam. 5.20.
thou art to forgive him, as Christ in another place warns: and if he will
not vouchsafe to hear thee, Luc. 17.3.
to be sorry for his fault at thy private admonition, but rather increase his
stomach and stubburnnesse against thee, then take yet with thee one or two,
that by the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word may be confirmed.
Otherwise if neglecting this rule of our Savior, we shall upon such occasions
traduce him, or break out into intemperate heates against him, how shall our
patient mind be known unto men? For this is our patience and moderation, that
when we have so just cause of offense, we deal as mildly and quietly with our
neighbor as may be; first, privately conferring of things b^tweene our selves,
and then taking unto us one or two of our neighbors and friends which may
hear, and help to order things that are out of order. And if we will approve
our selves to have that patient mind which here our Apostle requires, we must
thus peaceably deal in matters wherein we have just cause of offense, and in
no sort traduce our neighbors or brethren, or break out into impatient heates
against them.

A fifth rule which we must observe, and the last which now I will note, is
this; generally in matters of this life we must remit of that which in rigor
might be done. For if we shall thus stand upon it, that this we may do by
right, and this the law will bear us out unto, what proof hereby shall we
make of our moderation and patient mind? Genesis 9.6.
The law says, Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. Now
who will commend the moderation of that Judge, that so often as blood is shed,
pronounces sentence of death, because in rigor of the words it may seem he
may do that, which indeed in ye equity of the law he may not? And so it fares
with us, if in matters of this or that quality betwixt us and our neighbors,
we shall always do that which in extremity of right it seems that we may,
and not moderate right by equity, who shall commend our moderation? If we have
the loss, we must sometimes sustain it; if we have the wrong, we must
sometimes put it up, and for peace and unities sake we must remit and yield of
our right, if we will have our moderation and patient mind to be known. More
rules might be added unto these, but let these for this time suffice.

And now I beseech you to think on these things, and in your lives one with
another to practice them, that so your moderate, and courteous, and soft, and
gentle, and patient mind may be known. Bear one with another in such faults
as are naturally in any of you, and spare sometimes to speak or do that which
another humor cannot brook: make not always the worst of such words or
deeds, as happily might have not the best construction and meaning, but rather
when in themselves they are either doubtful, or not altogether the best, make
the best of them, and so construe them, as they may be well meant rather then as
they might be il taken. Be not hasty to publish whatsoever fault of your
neighbor you hear or know, but such faults as either are not commonly known
abroad, or whereinto he has fallen through infirmity, hide and cover them,
and as much as in you is, bury them out of the sight and speech of men.
Traduce not one another, nor break out into inte^perate heates one against
another, but in matters wherein ye may have just occasion of offense one
against another, first privately expostulate your matters one with another; and
if amends do not follow, debate your matters one with another, in the hearing
of one or two of your neighbors and friends, which may hear and help to
order your matters. Be not auerse from sitting down sometimes with the loss,
and from putting up sometimes the wrong, but for the maintenance of peace and
concord one with another, remit and yield one unto another, that which in right
sometimes ye might have one of another, that so your patient mind may be known
unto all.

And why should I need in many words at this time to exhort you unto this
moderation one toward another? May not this day, may not that holy table
sufficiently exhort you here unto? For unless ye be patiently minded one
toward another, can ye either worthily celebrate those holy mysteries of
Christ his blessed death and passion, or thankfully celebrate this day in
remembrance of his resurrection? To celebrate these holy mysteries worthily, is
not to come hither as to an ordinary table, and here to eat and drink; but to
come hither prepared with all holy reverence, having examined our selves before
as touching our faith in Christ Jesus, whether by faith in Christ Jesus we
feel a full assurance in our souls of the forgiveness of our sins, and of
all other benefits of Christ his death and passion, which in this Supper we
desire for our further assurance to be sealed unto us; and touching our
repentance, whether we be truly grieved in our souls for our sins against
our God, and fully purpose hereafter to conform our selves unto the will of
God set down in his word: as touching, I say, our faith and repentance, so
touching our love, whether we love one another, so that as members of the same
body, we bear one with another, and help one another. For as faith and
repentance toward God, so this love also toward our neighbor is so
necessarily requisite, that otherwise we do not worthily celebrate these holy
mysteries. And therefore if we will be worthy partakers of this holy Supper,
as here we that are many, do all eat one bread, and drink of one cup, are all
confirmed in one faith, and nourished to grow up into one body, whereof Christ
is the head; so must we love one another, and as members of the same body,
bear one with another, and help one another. So that at this time the very
celebration of these holy mysteries, may sufficiently put us in mind of that
moderation and patient mind which ought to be in one of us toward another.
Neither that only, but this day also, wherein we celebrate the remembrance of
Christ his blessed resurrection, may sufficiently put us in mind hereof. For
has Christ loosed the bands of death, and by his resurrection from the dead,
triumphed over death, and mightily declared himself to be the Son of God?
Yes he has, and this day we celebrate the most joyful remembrance thereof.
And how should not thi^ put us in mind of rising from the death of sin vn^^
the (...) of God? Or how shall we think that we are risen (...) ^fe of God, if
there be not this moderation and p^ (...) in us one toward another? Since then
by the res^^rection of Christ as this day we are put in mind of our
r^^^^^ection from the death of sin unto the life of God, thereby also we are
put in mind of that moderation and patient mind which ought to be in one
toward another: let therefore the celebration of those holy mysteries of
Christ his death and passion, let the memorial of his blessed resurrection as
on this day, be sufficient to stir you up unto this moderation which our
Apostle here requires, and whereof hitherto we have spoken. And whosoever
finds himself to have failed herein heretofore, let him give all diligence
hereafter that his patient mind may be known unto all men.

The second thing which I note in this exhortation, is this, that the Apostle
would have this their moderation and mildness so conspicuous and evident, as
that it might be known, and that to all men: no doubt to this end, that all
men, as occasions were offered, might have trial of their moderation and
mildness, and that thereby religion among all men might be increased, and the
name of God, in whom they believed, glorified. Whence I observe the extent of
the moderation and mildness that ought to be in us, how far the practice
thereof is to reach, that they may have trial and experience thereof; namely,
not to them alone that use us kindly and gently, or to them alone which are
within, but to them also which are without, even unto all men is our patient
mind to be made known. For as our Savior says in somewhat another matter, If
ye love them which love you, what reward shall ye have? and if ye be friendly
to your brethren only, Math. 5.46.47.
what singular thing do ye? So may it well be said in this matter, if our
patient mind be only known unto them that use us with all mildnes and
gentleness, what singular thing do we? and if we moderate our affections, and
yield only unto them that yield unto us, what praise shall we have? Our
moderation then and patient mind is not to be restrained in the use thereof
unto these and these men, but it is to be shown unto all men with whom we
live, be they better or worse. So the Apostle speaking of charitable
beneficence, Gal. 6.10. Romans 12.18.
Let us do good (says he) while we have time unto all men. And again, Have
peace with all men. And generally the precept is, that we have our conversation
honest amongst all men. As lights therefore (for so we are called) we must
communicate the light that is in us unto all men, holding forth our lights of
gentleness, goodness, meeknes, temperancie, moderation, patience, etc. unto all
men: imitating therein our Father which is in heaven, Math. 5.45.
who makes his Sun to arise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain
on the just and unjust. And now why are we to use this moderation toward all
men, that our patient mind may be known unto all men? The reason is, that all
men seeing our moderation and mildness toward all men, may think the better
of the Religion which we profess, and the rather glorify the Lord of glory,
in whom we believe. For if they shall see unto wardlines and unkindness in one
of us toward another, quickly do they speak evil of the name of God, and of
the doctrine which we teach. And therefore the Apostle always exhorts all
sorts unto all holy duties: and why? that the name of God and his doctrine be
not evil spoken of: 1. Tim. 6.1. Tit. 2.5. Iam 2 7.
that the word of God be not evil spoken of: that the worthy Name, after which
they be named, be not blasphemed. But if they shall see moderation and
mildness, meekness, gentleness and patience in one of us toward an other,
we cannot better draw men unto the glory of our God, and to a good opinion of
our religion, and of the truth which we profess. And in this respect it is
that our blessed Savior thus exhorts all men, Mat. 5.16.
saying, Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven. And in the same respect
also it is, that the Apostle Peter exhorts, saying, Have your conversation
honest among the Gentiles, 1. Pet. 2.12.
that they which speak evil of you as of evil doers, may by your good works
which they shall see, glorify God in the day of the visitation. For an
ornament then of the truth which we profess, and for the glory of our God in
whom we believe, our patient mind is to be made known unto all men, not to our
brethren only, or such as use us kindly, but even to all men.

Here then first were to be reproved those braules and quarrels which fall out
amongst neighbors and brethren about matters of two pence, matters of nothing.
Our Apostle would have our moderation and patient mind known unto all men. How
is it then that neighbors and brethren will not one yield unto another, will
not one bear with another? One will have his right, and not yield a jot;
another will avenge his wrong, or else he will die for it; a third will bear
coals at no man's hands, but such as he brewes such shall he drink, and this
amongst neighbors and brethren. And how shall it be thought, that we will use
moderation toward all men, while such is our behavior toward our neighbors
and brethren? Whilst it is thus among our selves, we show plainly how little
heed we have taken unto this exhortation of the holy Ghost, and consequently
how little care we take, that ye name of God, and the truth which we profess,
be not evil spoken of.

Secondly, here were to be reproved such carnal exceptions as are commonly
taken against this exhortation. The holy Ghost says, Let your patient mind be
known unto all men. Unto all men, say we: this is an hard saying. Unto such as
use us kindly and courteously, great reason that our patient mind should be
known: but unto them that be ever ready to thwart and cross us, to wrong and
grieve us, to taunt and mock us, to revile and speak evil of us, what reason
that our patient mind should be known? Thus will we rather teach the holy
Ghost what to speak, then we will be taught by the holy Ghost what to do. But
such exceptions we must take heed of, if we will suffer our selves to be taught
by the ho holy Ghost, and as our Apostle wills, we must let our patient mind
be known unto all men without such exception of any.

Thirdly, hence we learn what we are to respect in the practice of every
Christian virtue, namely the glory of God, and the propagation of his truth.
For as our Savior says of alms, prayer, fasting, and the like, Math. 6.
that if they be done for the praise of men, then they have their praise, but
not with God; so may it be said of the practice of every Christian virtue, that
if therein we respect the praise of men, we have our praise, but not with God.
The thing that we must aim at in the practice of gentleness, goodness,
meekness, temperancie, moderation, patience, and other works of the Spirit in
us, is the glory of God, that men seeing these fruits of the Spirit in us,
they may be brought unto the same obedience and service of one God with us. And
thus it shall come to pass, that they who happily have said in their hearts,
there is no God, that they who cannot yet grow to the liking of the same truth
with us, shall say of us, Surely God is in you indeed, surely this is the way
of truth wherein ye do walk.

Let us therefore hearken unto the exhortation of our Apostle, and as he
exhorts let our patient mind be known unto all men. Let us not bangle and
wrangle one with another for every light matter, but let us bear one with
another, and yield one unto another. Let us not after the fancy of our own
reason abridge that which the holy Ghost enlarges, but let our moderation be
known to all, without exception of any. And let us in the practice both of
this and of every Christian virtue, aim at the glory of God, and the
furtherance of his holy truth which we profess. And as this day we profess by
our meeting at this holy Table, sound love and charity with all men, so at all
times let our moderation and patient mind be known unto all men.

LECTVRE LXXXI.
PHILIP. 4. Verse 5. The Lord is at hand.
THese words have been already noted to consist of an exhortation, and a reason
of the exhortation. The exhortation this, Let your patient mind, etc. The
reason this, The Lord is at hand. In the exhortation were noted, first the
thing whereunto the Apostle exhorts the Philippians: secondly the large scope
wherein the thing is to run. The thing whereunto the Apostle exhorts the
Philippians, is mildness in their behavior, and moderation of their
affections toward their neighbors and brethren, so that for unities sake they
would rather lose their own, then strictly stand upon their right in matters
of ordinary life. The large field wherein he would have this their mildness
and moderation to run, reaches unto all men, Let your patient mind be known
to all, etc.

The Lord is at hand. This reason, as I told you, is added to prevent an
objection. For the Apostle having exhorted the Philippians to such a mildness
and moderation, as that they should not always strictly stand upon their
right, but sometimes yield of their right, and patiently put up the loss and
the wrong; the Philippians might happily thus object and say, that so indeed
their case should be most miserable, and they should be trampled under feet as
clay in the streets. Therefore the Apostle adds, The Lord is at hand: as if
he should have said; Though they abuse your patient mildness and gentle
moderation of your affections, yet do ye hold on a good course, in patience
possess your souls, and let your patient mind be known unto all men: for the
Lord is at hand: otherwise indeed your case were hard, if the Lord were far
from you, and looked not at you, nor regarded you to help you in every time of
need, and to relieve you in every your wrongs: But the Lord is at hand. Now we
must understand that the Lord is said to be at hand, after diverse sorts in the
holy Scriptures. For sometimes he is said to be near, or at hand, in respect
of himself, of the presence of his deity and glorious majesty: as where the
Apostle says, Acts 17.27.
that he is not far from every one of us; for in him we live, and move, and
have our being. Thus himself says, that he fills heaven and earth: Ierem.
23.24.
and therefore is thus near unto whatsoever is in heaven or earth. Thus the
Prophet says, that he cannot convey himself out of his presence: For if he
climb up into heaven, there he is; Psalm. 139.7.8.9.10.
if he go down into hell, there he is: if he take the wings of the morning,
and dwell in the uttermost parts of the Sea, there also does his hand lead him;
if he say, the darkness shall cover him, even the night shall be light about
him. And thus he is near even unto all the world, unto his enemies, sitting in
the midst of them, seeing their devices, and laughing them to scorn; unto
all that have life, or being, communicating that unto them, which alone is
properly in himself, who is life, and whose name is I am. John 14.^. Exodus
3.14.
Again, the Lord is said to be near, or at hand, in respect of his grace, and
providence, and powerful working of his holy Spirit: as where the Prophet
says, Psalm. 145.18.
The Lord is near unto all that call upon him, yea to all that call upon him
in truth: he is near unto them to hear them, and to help them. And thus is
he peculiarly said to be near unto his children: not that he offers not this
special grace of coming near unto them, unto the wicked: for thus he says
unto them by his Prophet, Seek ye the Lord whiles he may be found, Esaias 55.6.
call ye upon him whiles he is near: that is, whiles he offers himself, and
his grace unto you, if ye will receive it. Nay more then so, sometimes he is so
near unto the wicked, that he lightens them with his holy Spirit, gives them a
taste of the heavenly gift, Hebr. 6.4.5.
of the good word of God, and of the powers of the world to come. But yet
because the wicked, some of them, refuse this grace when it is offered, and
some of them fall away from it when they have had a taste of it, therefore is
he peculiarly said to be near unto his children by his grace, and might, and
providence, and powerful working of his holy Spirit. Again, the Lord is said
sometimes to be near at hand, in respect of his last coming unto judgment,
when he shall come in bodily presence in the clouds of heaven, to judge both
the quick and the dead: James 5.8.
as where James says, Be patient and settle your hearts, for the coming of the
Lord draws near: and likewise where the Apostle says, Hebr. 10.37.
He that shall come will come, and will not tarry. In the first sense, the Lord
is at hand as well to the wicked as the godly, to give as well to the one as to
the other, life and being, and other good graces of his Spirit. In the second
sense, the Lord is at hand by his providence peculiarly to the godly, to save
and defend them, and to give the Spirit of sanctification unto them. In the
third sense also, the Lord is at hand, both to the wicked, and to the godly, to
render vengeance in flaming fire unto the wicked, and to crown the godly with
a crown of glory and immortality in the heavens. In the first sense I take
it, it is not here said, that the Lord is a^ hand, because that could be no
such special reason to move the Philippians unto mildn^sse and patience
toward all men, having no more comfort in it for the godly, then for the
wicked. But whether it be meant in the second or third sense, that the Lord is
at hand, the reason holds strongly, that they should in patience and mildnes
possess their souls, though happily their patience and mildness be much
abused. For be it that the reason why their patient mind should be known unto
all men, though their patience be much abused, be either this, because the Lord
is at hand to hear and help them when they are oppressed, to save and defend
them when they are wronged; or this, because the Lord is at hand to give unto
them a crown that have borne the cross, and to avenge them utterly of their
enemies; either of the reasons might be sufficient motives to persuade them to
let their patien^ mind be known unto all men. And whether of them to choose
the rather as more agreeable to the Apostles mind, I cannot peremptorily
affirm. Either of them may very we^ stand with the meaning of the Apostle in
this place. And therefore, we will see what profitable notes we may gather from
either of them, whereof we may make some use for our selves.

First then, admitting this to be the meaning of the Apostle in this place, the
Lord is at hand by his watchful providence over you, to hear and help you,
to save and defend you; I note that the Apostles reason to move the Philippians
unto a patient mildness, and gentle moderation toward all men, yea though
their patience and mildenes were much abused, is, because the Lord is at hand,
by his watchful providence over them, to hear and help them, to save and
defend them, when they are abused, oppressed, or afflicted. Whence I observe a
special motive, which may and ought to persuade us to possess our souls in
patience whenever we are abused, oppressed, or afflicted, namely the certain
persuasion hereof, that the Lord his providence always watches over us, to
behold our sufferings and our wrongs, to hear us when we call upon him in
truth, to rid and save us from the wrongful dealings of men, and to deliver us
in every needful time of trouble. If we be the Lord his inheritance, we must
look for it, to have many trialls of our patience and moderation by many
sufferings and wrongs. Genesis 31.
Jacob shall have his uncle Laban to deceive him, to change his wages ten
times, to persecute him, and if the Lord forbid him not, to kill him. Joseph
shall have his own brethren to hate him, Genesis 37.
to conspire against him to slay him, and if the Lord keep them from killing
him, to sell him into a strange Land to be a bond-seruant. The children of
Israel shall have a Pharao to weary them of their lives, by sore labor in
clay and brick, Exodus 1.
and in all work in the field, with all manner of cruel bondage; to command
to kill all their male children, and by all cruel oppression to labor to make
havoc of them. D^n. 3.
Daniels companions shall have some Chaldeans to devise mischief against them,
to accuse them to the King, and to get them thrown into the hot fiery
furnace. Daniel himself shall drink of the like cup. 6.
And generally, the Disciples of Christ, which we are if we continue in his
word, John 8.31.1^.33.
shall in the world have affliction to try their faith and their patience. The
gold shall go through the fire ere it be purified, and the wheat ere it be
made fine manchet for the Lord his own mouth, shall be beaten with the fla^le,
grownd in the mill, sifted, and have all the bran bowlted out of it. This is
the gate of the Lord, and the righteous shall enter into it; and this is the lot
of Gods inheritance to pass through the wilderness, and through the red Sea
to the promised land of Canaan. And in all this, what is the child of God to
do? Luke 21.19.
Even as our Savior wills him, by his patience he is to possess his soul:
and as our Apostle here exhorts, to make his patient mind to be known unto
all men.

O but in such causes of impatiencie, how should a man be patient? when open
foes malign him, fained friends abuse him, and troubles hedge him in on every
side; when no man bears with him, no man yields to him; but, the more he
yields and bears with others, the more he is abused and wronged by others;
what should persuade him to moderation and mildenes, to gentleness and patience?
Do we ask what? Do we know that the Lord his providence watches over us
always? Do we know that he will not leave us not forsake us, nor deliver us into
the will of our enemies? Do we know that all the hairs four head are numbered,
and that not one of them shall fall to the ground without our heavenly Fathers
will? Here then is, or should be, enough to persuade us to be patient and
moderate whenever we are abused, afflicted, or oppressed: the Lord is at
hand. The Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful, and gracious, slow to anger,
abundant in goodness and truth, reserving mercy for thousands, and not making
the wicked innocent, the most mighty God, unto whom al power is given in
heaven and in earth, who sits in heaven, and beholds the earth, and sees
whatsoever is done among the sons of men; our Lord by right of creation, in
that he made us of nothing when we were not; our Lord in the right of
redemption, in that when we were bondslaues under hell, death, and damnation,
he paid the ransom of our redemption, and freed us from the bondage of sin
and Satan; and our Lord in the right of sovereignty, to rule and govern us by
his Spirits to save and defend us under his wings; he is at hand, near about
our paths and about our beds, pitcheth his tents round about us, and gives his
Angels charge over us: he is at hand, near to behold our sufferings and our
wrongs, Exodus 3.9.
as himself says, I have seen, I have seen the affliction of my people
which is in Egypt, where^nto the Egyptians oppress them: Near to hear us
when we call upon him, as himself says, Call upon me in the day of trouble,
Psalm. 50.15.
and I will hear thee, and thou shall glorify me: Near to deliver us from
the wrongful dealings of men: and therefore the Prophet prays unto him, O
deliver me from the wrongful dealings of men, and give me not over unto mine
oppressors: Near to save us under his feathers in every needful time of
trouble; for so the Psalmist says, The Lord will be a defense for the
oppressed, Psalm. 9.9.
even a refuge in due time of trouble. Hereof Jacob had experience when Laban
persecuted him, in that the Lord curbed Laban, when he said unto him, Genes.
31.24.
Take heed that thou speak not to Jacob ought save good. Hereof Joseph had
experience in his danger by his brethren, in that the Lord first by Reuben
saved him that he was not slain; and after that he was sold, made him Ruler of
Pharaohs house, and of all his substance. Genes. 37.41.
Hereof the children of Israel had experience when Pharao oppressed the^, in
that the Lord, Exodus 3.
when their cry for their bondage came up unto him, delivered them out of the
house of bondage by the hands of Moses and Aaron. Hereof Daniel and his
companions had experience when they were traduced unto the king, in that the
Lord shut the mouths of the lions that they hurt not the one, Dan. 6.22.3.27.
and abated the heat of the fire that it had no power over the bodies of the
other. Hereof the Disciples of Christ had experience when they were cast into
prison, in that the Lord sent his Angel unto them, and delivered them out of
prison. Acts 5.19.
And hereof the children of God have continual experience, in that the Lord
helps them to right when they suffer wrong, feeds them when they are
hungry, Psalm. 146.
loses them when they are in prison, gives them sight when they are blind,
raises them when they are fallen, keeps them if they be strangers, relieueth
them if they be fatherless or widows, and makes all their beds in their
si^kenesse. And hereupon David resolved and said, Psalm. 3.6.27.3.23.4.
I will not be afraid though ten thousands of people beset me round about: nay,
though an host of men were laid against me, yet shall not mine heart be
afraid: nay, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death I will
fear no evil. And why? for thou art with me, says the Prophet: thou O Lord
art with me, and therefore, whosoever be against me, in what danger soever I
be, I will fear no evil. This then, to know that the Lord is with us, and
that he is always near at hand to hear us and to help us, should quiet us,
as of all fear, so of all perturbations of the mind, so that we should
patiently brook whatsoever might otherwise stir us unto impatiencie.

How is it then that upon every occasion we are so impatient, and have so
little hold of our selves? If any man thwart or cross us, if any man harm or
wrong us, if any man taunt or mock us, if any man revile or speak evil of
us, if any man offer us any hard measure in word or in deed, how do we bite
upon the bridle, and stomach the matter? One abuse must be quit with another,
one wrong with another, one mischief with another, or else we think we have
never played the men. But if we be falsely accused before the Judge, of theft,
murder, sedition, treason or the like; if we be wrongfully scourged,
imprisoned, racked, or tormented; if we be cruelly or deceitfully turned out of
house and home, lands and living, and all that we have: O how then are our
souls disquieted within us, and how do our hearts burnt within us till we be
avenged of such as have thus dealt with us? Here must revenge be sought by
blood, death, and if there be any further revenge then this.

And tell me I pray, what is the cause of such impatiencie in these and the
like cases, yea oftentimes when the Lord his hand is upon us in poverty,
sickness, and the like? Is it not even hence, because either we know not, or
remember not that the Lord is at hand? Yes verily, it is the ignorance, or
forgetfulness of the Lord, and of his provident watchfulness over us, that
makes us fret and fume, and like the dog run upon the bone that is cast at
us. We know not, or we remember not that vengeance is the Lords, and that he
has promised that he will repay and reward the wicked after their deserving:
and therefore forsooth, when we think there is cause, we will be disquieted,
we will kill and slay, and we will be avenged. For if we knew or remembered that
vengeance is the Lords, and that he will repay, we would patiently pass by the
contumelies and wrongs of men, and leave them to the Lord that judges
righteous judgment. We know not, or we remember not, that the Lord is near
unto all that call upon him in truth to hear and help us in all dangers, if we
patiently wait upon him, that we may be safe under his feathers; and therefore
forsooth when troubles assault us, or the sorrows of death compass us about,
we think we do well to be as impatient as Jonas was angry for his gourd. For
if we knew, or remembered, that he is at hand at every needful time of trouble
to help us, our souls would patiently wait upon the Lord until he should
help us. Either we think not of the Lord and of his watchful providence over
us to save and defend us, and to avenge our sufferings and wrongs; or carnally
we say, if the Lord be at hand, I wish I might know it, I wish I might hear
him, I wish I might see him, as if otherwise we could not discern of his being
near unto us; or if we be better taught, yet we think him not near if he do
not always hear and help when we wish and call. And therefore every small
thing and least trifle almost moves us, and disquiets us, and puts us out of
all patience.

Whatsoever therefore contumelies or disgraces are offered unto us, whatsoever
losses or wrongs we sustain, whatsoever troubles or tentations do assault us,
whatsoever malice or wickedness be practiced against us, let us know that the
Lord his providence watches over us to save and defend us, to take our matter
into his own hand, and to be avenged of our enemies. And therefore let us not
he discouraged, or disquieted, let us not fret or fume, or busy our heads with
thinking of revenge, but let us in our patience possess our souls, and let
our patient mind be known to all men. If we cannot by our moderation and
mildnes, by our gentleness and patience win them unto us that in word or deed
wrong us, but that they like unto wicked Iulians the more abuse us and wrong
us, yet the Lord is at hand to behold our sufferings and wrongs, and to take
our matter into his own hand. To bridle then our impatience let us think with
our selves; Are we evil entreated through tyrants? does our own familiar
friend lie ^n wait against us? do some imagine mischief for us, others whet
their tongues against us, and shoot out their arrows, even bitter words, and
do others practice what they can against us? Well, the Lord is at hand, he
sees and knows all things, he delivers us, and auengeth us of all that
rise up against us, when, and as it seems good unto him. He that keeps us
slumbereth not, nor sleeps; and therefore in our patience will we possess
our souls, reposing our selves under the covert of his wings. Thus if we shall
lift up our eyes unto the Lord, and persuade our selves of his being always
near at hand unto us by his watchful providence over us, we shall not only
not be troubled with these sharp fits of this hot ague of impatience upon
every accident or cross, but as men truly humbled in our selves, mortified
unto the world, and looking only unto the Lord, we shall in all mildness and
moderation make our patient mind known unto all men. And let this be spoken
of this observation from this meaning of these words.

Secondly, admitting this to be the meaning of the Apostle in this place, that
the Lord is at hand by his second coming in the flesh unto judgment to
requite our hard measures into their bosom that have ill meated unto us, and
to wipe all tears from our eyes, and give us rest with himself, I note that
the Apostles reason to move the Philippians unto a patient mildness and gentle
moderation toward all men, is because the Lord is at hand to break the
clouds, and to come unto judgment, to wipe all tears from their eyes, and to
recompense tribulation to all that have troubled them. And hence I observe
another special motive which may and ought to persuade us to possess our
souls in patience whenever we are abused, oppessed, or afflicted, namely,
the approaching of Christ his second coming into judgment, when he shall
recompense tribulation to them that trouble us, and to us which are troubled
rest with him. This motive also unto patience the Apostle James uses, James
5.7.8.
where he says, Be ye patient unto the coming of the Lord: Be ye patient and
settle your hearts: for the coming of the Lord draws near. And certainly if
we could and would remember this, that the coming of the Lord draws near, we
would be less provoked upon every occasion unto intemperate heates, and
whatsoever might happily seem enough to disquiet us, we would pass it over with
greater patience. For thus we should say with our selves: Has God given all
judgment unto his Son, and is he ready to come unto judgment? Is the time at
hand when he shall descend from heaven with a shoute, and with the voice of the
Archangell, and with the trumpet of God? when he shall show himself in flaming
fire, rendering vengeance unto them that know not God, nor obey the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ? when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to
be marvelous in all them that believe? Shall I then when I am abused or
wronged, be grieved and disquieted, or seek to be avenged? Nay, the time is at
hand when all wrongs shall be redressed by him that judges righteously: in the
mean time I will bear with patience what man does or says against me. Thus
by remembrance of the approaching of Christ his second coming unto judgment,
should our patient mind be known unto all men.

O but, will foolish man say, this has been said these fifteen hundred
years, that the Lord is at hand, and that his coming draws near, and yet
all things continue alike; how should this then still be a motive unto
patience? When this second coming shall be, I cannot say. Act. 1.7.
It is a thing which the Father has kept in his own power, and so peculiarly
reserved unto himself, as that of that day and hour knows no man, Mat.
24.36.
no not the Angels in heaven but God only, nay not Christ Jesus himself as he
is man knows it. And therefore they who labor in that point to design that
time, are therein more curious then wise. But has it been said these fifteen
hundred years, that the Lord is at hand, and that his coming draws near?
And did the holy Ghost who cannot lie, say then that it was near, and is it
now very near, even at our doors? 2. Pet. 3.9.
The Lord is patient toward us, and would have no man to perish, but would all
men to come to repentance, and therefore has hitherto deferred his coming. But
yet a very little while, Heb. 10.37.
and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. If fifteen hundred
years be past, the rest of the time appointed must needs be shorter, and so
the day and hour approach nearer. And what one sign foretold to go before his
second coming, is not already past, except it be that one of the calling of the
Jews? Let the exhortation then of our Apostle prevail with us, that our
patient mind be known to all men. Let us be meek and gentle, kind and
courteous one to another, yielding one unto another, and bearing one with
another: for the Lord is at hand, his coming, draws near, when he shall
give us rest with him, and avenge all our wrongs.

LECTVRE LXXXII.
PHILIP. 4. Verse 6. Be nothing careful, but in all things let your requests
be showed unto God in prayer and supplication, with giving of thanks.
WE have heard diverse exhortations of the Apostle unto the Philippians. His
last exhortation unto them in the former verse, was, that their moderate, and
gentle, and patient mind might be known unto all men. The reason, because the
Lord is at hand, not only according to the presence of his Deity and glorious
majesty, which fills heaven and earth, Ier. 23.24.
but at hand by his continual watchful providence over them to hear and
help them, to save and defend them, and at hand by his second coming in the
flesh unto judgment, to wipe all tears from their eyes, and to recompense
tribulation to all that trouble them.

Be nothing careful. In these words we have another exhortation unto the
Philippians; wherein the Apostle disswadeth one thing, persuades another
thing, and notes the consequence or effect which will follow upon both. The
thing which he disswadeth, is, too great carfulness for the things of this
life, and for the event of such things as commonly we take in hand and have to
deal withal, in these words, Be nothing careful. Where the word used by the
Apostle, signifies oftentimes a diffident carefulnes, such as distracteth the
mind sundry ways, and almost eats up a man; such as is the covetous man's
carefulnes, whose mind runs so still upon his matters, as that not daring
either to depend upon God, or the faithfulness of any man for the event of
them, his turmoiled thoughts are always busied about them. Which carefulnes
being an evil carefulnes, the Apostle disswadeth it, saying, be nothing
careful, that is, let it be far from you to be troubled with such worldly
and distrustful carfulness for any thing in this life, or for the event of
any thing that you have to deal withal. The thing which he persuades, is, in
all things to fly unto God by prayer, as depending wholly upon him, and
committing all their ways unto him. So that as he would not have them too
careful about any thing, so he would not have them careless in any thing, but
in all things to fly unto God, pouring out such prayers unto him as may be
accepted with him. Where first note the antithesis, in that the Apostle says,
Be careful for nothing, but in all things, etc. Secondly note the distribution
of prayer into his diverse kinds, Let your requests, or suites, or petitions,
there is the general; be showed unto God in prayer, and supplication, with
giving of thanks; prayer, supplication and thanksgiving, these be the kinds or
particulars comprehended under the general. By requests therefore is meant
generally whatsoever prayer is made unto God for the obtaining of that which is
good, or avoiding of that which is evil. By prayer is meant such prayer as we
power out unto God for blessings corporal or spiritual, temporal or
eternal. By supplication is meant such prayer as we make unto God for
preserving us from evils corporal or spiritual, temporal or eternal. By
giving of thanks is meant a thankful praising of God for benefits bestowed
upon us, or for our deliverance from evils. And all these are commonly in all
the prayers of the faithful, as wherein both they give thanks unto God for
blessings received, and preservation from evils; and also pray unto God for the
things which are good, and to be delivered from the things which are evil.
Thirdly, note this that the Apostle says, Let your requests be showed unto
God, or be made known unto God; not as if their requests, or any thing else
were not known unto God; but the meaning is, either that their requests should
be known by an approving knowledge unto God, so that they should be accepted
with him; or that their requests should be known, not unto men, as their
patient mind was to be known, but unto God. The thing then which he persuades
in effect is this, in all things whatsoever to depend upon God, and to fly
unto him by prayer, both pouring out acceptable prayers unto him for obtaining
of good things and deliverance from evil things, and giving him thanks for
blessings in good things and delirance from evil. The consequence or effect
which will follow upon both, the thing dissuaded and the thing persuaded, the
Apostle notes in the next verse, And the peace, etc. So that these words
divide themselves into these three branches: first a dehortation from a thing
which is evil, in these words, Be nothing careful; secondly, an exhortation
unto a thing which is good, in these words, But in all things, etc; thirdly, a
consequent or effect which will follow upon flying the evil and following the
good, in these words, And the peace. etc. Now let us see whit we may gather
hence for our use.

The first thing which I note, is the Apostles dehortation, wherein he
disswadeth the Philippians from all worldly and distrustful carefulnes for any
thing in this life, or the event of any thing that they have to deal withal.
Whence I observe a fault which we are by all means to take heed of and to
fly, namely, too too great carefulnes for the things of this life. We may not
in any wise so trouble our selves with turmoiling thoughts and cares for the
things of this life, or the event of any thing we have to deal withal, as if
we durst not depend upon God, or the faithfulness of any man, unless our own
cares also were continually employed about them. Carefulnes and diligence in
all our labors is requisite and necessary, but worldly and distrustful
carfulness for any thing is wretched and ungodly. For the better conceiving
therefore of this note, we are to understand that there are three sorts of
carefulnes: one godly and necessary; another worldly and wicked; and a third
mixed of both, neither simply godly, nor simply wicked, but mixed of both. A
godly carefulnes it is when we give all diligence to do the works of our
callings with all faithfulness, doing that which we should, and commending the
event unto God. And so far is it off, that this should be misliked or
forbidden here or elsewhere, that it is every where commanded, and by example
in the godly commended unto us. He that rules, says the Apostle, let him do
it with diligence. Romans 12.8. Ephesians. 4.3.
And again: Walk worthy of the vocation whereunto ye are called, endeavoring
to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. And to this purpose is
that of the Apostle, where he says, If there be any that provides not for his
own, 1. Tim. 5 8.
and namely for them of his household, he denies the faith, and is worse then
an infidel: and that, Study to show thy self approved unto God, 2. Tim. 3.15.
a workman that needs not to be ashamed. And as in these and many other like
places, this carefulnes is commanded, so is it often commended unto us in the
example of the godly. The Apostle witnesses this carfulness to have been in
himself, where he says, that he had the care of all the Churches; 2. Cor.
11.28. Colos. 2.1. 1 Thessalonians. 2.2.
that he had great fighting, or as some translate, great care for the
Colossians; that he spoke the Gospel of God unto the Thessalonians with much
striving, or care, as some translate. And the same Apostle commends this
carefulnes in Timothy toward the Philippians, who faithfully cared for their
matters; Philip. 2.20.
in Epaphras toward the Colossians, who in his prayers was always careful for
them; Col. 4.12. 2. Cor. 7.11.
and in the Corinthians, in whom their godly sorrow had wrought great care. And
generally this care is so necessarily requisite in the Prince for his people,
in the Pastor for his flock, in the householder for his household, and in every
man for himself, that either he must be thus careful, faithfully to do the
d^ties of his calling, whatsoever it be, and to leave the success of his
labors whatsoever unto the Lord, or else he cannot be godly.

Another carfulness there is, neither simply good, nor simply evil, but mixed
of both, namely when we are careful to do the duties of our calling, and
withal trouble our selves too much about the event of things, which we should
leave wholly to the Lord. And this carefulnes is good so far as it makes us
careful to do the duties of our calling. But in that hereby we trouble our
selves too much about the event of our labors and success of our business,
it is evil. For this is to be left unto the Lord, according to that of the
Prophet, Psalm. 37.5.
Commit thy way unto the Lord, and trust in him, and he shall bring it to
pass. We are to do that we ought by the duty of our place and calling, and
the Lord he must give the increase, the blessing, and the event, and we must
pray and wait for it from him. Otherwise howsoever our carfulness be about
that we ought, yet is it evil, because it is more employed thereabout then it
ought.

A third carefulnes there is, which is worldly, and arises of distrust in God,
which is when men are too too much careful of the things of this life, and of
the event of the things they have to deal withal, as that the thought thereof
troubles them day and night, causes their sleep to depart from their eyes,
and even eats them up alive. This is the carfulness which the Apostle here
forbids, not the first, nor the second, but so much as it is linked in with
this last about the event of things. So that as I said before, we may not in
any wise so trouble our selves with turmoyling thoughts and cares for the
things of this life, or the event of any thing we have to deal withal, as if
we durst not depend upon God, or the faithfulness of any man, unless our own
cares also be continually employed about them. This also our blessed Savior
forbids, Mat. 6.25.
where he says, Be not careful for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye
shall drink, nor yet for your body what ye shall put on. 1. Pet. 5.7.
And the Apostle Peter likewise, where he says, Cast all your care on him.
Psalm. 55.22.
And the Prophet also, where he says, Cast thy burden, or thy care upon the
Lord, and he shall nourish thee. As if the Prophet and the Apostle should have
said: Be ye nothing careful, but if there be any thing that troubles you, any
thing which may cause you to care, cast it off your self, and cast it upon the
Lord. Which carfulness if it were only thus forbidden by the holy Ghost, it
should be sufficient either for the not entertaining, or for the dislodging of
such a guest being entertained. But besides that it is forbidden, there are
many other reasons also why this overmuch carefulnes should utterly be
abandoned from among the sons of God. For first, whence arises this evil
among the sons of men of overmuch carking and caring for the things of this
life? Is it not from our ignorance or distrust of Gods providence and care over
us? Yes surely, either we know not that he can and will, or else we doubt
whether he can and will provide for us and ours when age, or poverty, or
sickness, or famine, or imprisonment, or banishment, or the like shall befall
us. And therefore we scratch and scrape together all that ever we can, lest
when either some of those things shall surprise us, or the charge of family and
children shall grow upon us, we should perish in the needful time of trouble.
And hereupon it is that our blessed Savior sets us unto the fowls of the
heaven, that by them we may be taught in the providence and care of God over
us. Behold (says he) the fowls of the heaven; Mat. 6.26.
for they sow not, neither reap, nor carry into the barnes, yet your heavenly
Father feeds them. Are not ye much better then they? As if he should have
said: Gods providence and care watches over the fowls of the heaven to feed
them, which yet are far meaner and baser creatures then your selves; how should
ye then seeing this, either not know, or doubt of Gods providence and care over
you? They sow not, nor reap, nor carry into the barnes, and yet God feeds
them; how should ye then seeing this, when ye have plowed and sown, commit the
rest unto the Lord, and without farther carking or caring, to trust surely that
he will feed you? Thus we see how our blessed Savior to beat down our
immoderate carefulnes, instructs us in Gods providence over us, and thereby
shows plainly that the root whence this unmeasurable carefulnes springs, is
ignorance or distrust in Gods providence over us. Secondly, to what use or
profit is our overmuch carking and caring for the things of this life? Is it
not in vain, and to no use at all? The Prophet tells us so, where he says,
Psalm. 127.2.
It is in vain for you to rise up early, and to lie down late, and to eat
the bread of carefulnes: as if he should have said, Early rising to work and
labor, going late to bed from work, all the care that we can take is in vain
and to no purpose, except the Lord give a blessing unto it. To which purpose
also is that of our blessed Savior, where he says, Which of you by taking
care, Mat. 6.27.
is able to add one cubite unto his stature? as if he should have said, As it
is in vain for him that is of a low stature to trouble his thoughts about the
adding of any thing unto his stature, because when he has taken as much care
that way as he can, yet he cannot add one cubit, or one hand breadth, or one
inch unto his stature; so is it in vain for any man to vex himself and trouble
his thoughts about the gathering of riches, or the event of his labors,
because when he has taken as much care as he can, yet not by his care are his
riches increased, but by the Lord his blessing, who makes poor and makes
rich; 1. Sam. 2.7.
nor by his care does his corn grow, his ships return from far countries,
or his labors prosper in any thing, but by the Lord only, who gives
increase, and a blessing unto every thing at his pleasure. And albeit it may
be, that some covetous misers and wretches of the world, may by fraud and
guile, or how else soever scrape and scratch more riches together then they
should, yet riches so gotten, are rather the beginning of poverty then of
riches. For, Eccles. 5.12.
as the Preacher says, Riches so gotten are reserved and heaped up to the
owners thereof for their evil. For either they are as a fretting canker unto
the rest, to bring the owners thereof unto poverty, or else they are gathered
for him that will scatter them. So that to be overmuch careful, is altogether
in vain and unprofitable. And thirdly, as it is vain and unprofitable, so is
it also pernicious and hurtful. For whiles our thoughts are running up and
down upon this or that matter, whiles we are troubled with cares here or
there, while the things of this life, and the event of things we deal withal
runs in our heads, and tosseth us to and fro as billows in the sea, we are
not only dispossessed of every good thought, and every good care, but if any
good thought or care be suggested unto us, it is quite choked by these worldly
cares of this life. This is clearly proved by that in the parable of the seed,
where it is said, Mar. 4.18.19.
that they that receive the seed among the thorns, are such as hear the word,
but the cares of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of
other things enter in and choke the word and it is unfruitful: the cares of
this world choke the word. Great reason then ye see, why we should abandon this
overmuch carfulness, because it is forbidden by the holy Ghost, because it
springs from the ignorance or distrust of Gods providence, because it is in
vain and unprofitable, and because it is pernicious and hurtful. Add also
hereunto, that the day has enough with his own grief, Matthew. 6.34.
as our Savior tells us: as if he should have said, The care that every day
brings with it, is enough to trouble our selves withal, though we do not
increase our present grief by the carfulness of this, how we may live in
time to come.

This then may teach us to moderate our cares, that they be not excessive and
unmeasurable. The prohibition of such carfulness is strait, the cause of it
is evil, the use of it is none, the hurt of it is great. Let us not therefore
suffer our selves to be turmoiled with such cares. Let such cares be left unto
the covetous worldling which has made the wedge of gold his god, which still
cries, Give, give, and never says he has enough, but the more he has, the
more he craves. Let him (for so he will) torment himself with such cares, let
his thoughts be troubled o^ his bed about joining house to house, and laying
ground to ground, about his ships at sea, his merchandise at home, his sheep
and oxen in the field; let his sleep depart from his eyes about his sales and
bargains, his gains and losses, his debts and improuements; let him be
distracted with cares as with wild horses, about the event of his business,
the success of his labors, the maintenance of wife and family: Let all his
days be sorrows, and his travel grief, and let his heart take no rest in
the night. For this is just the case of him that immoderately scrapes and
scratches, carkes and cares, perhaps for an unthrift, perhaps for a stranger,
perhaps for an enemy. He eats up, and wastes and consumes himself with care,
and oftentimes enioyes no pleasure of that he has. But let such care be far
from us, and if such cares have surprised any of us, let us shake them off, and
following the counsel of our Apostle, let us be careful for nothing.

What then! should we be idle, and careless, and let the world run as it
lists? should we do nothing, care for nothing, but leave all things, as they
say, to Fortune, and let every thing be as it be may, and fall out as it can?
Not so. We are not to be idle: no such thing spoken of in our Apostle; but we
are to labor and work every man in his calling. We are to care; for not every
care is forbidden here in our Apostle; but we are not to be overmuch careful
for any thing, so as the worldling cares, and kills himself with care. We
are not when we have done what we can and ought, to cast all care away, and to
leave all things, as they say, to the hazard, to fall out as they can; but the
event and success to leave unto God, always depending upon him, and flying
unto him by prayer, and supplication, and giving of thanks in all things, in
prosperity and adversity, praying for good things, praying against evil
things, giving of thanks for blessings received, and casting all our care upon
God who cares for us: for to this purpose I take this which follows in our
Apostle to be spoken, when he says, but in all, etc.

Whence I observe, that carfulness for the things of this life is so to be
abandoned, that yet we cast our care upon the Lord, doing that we ought, but
always depending upon him for the event and success, and flying unto him in
all things by prayer, and supplication, and giving of thanks. Man goes forth
to his work, Psalm. 104.23. Job. 5.7.
and to his labor until the evening, as the Psalmist speaks, and therein he
does well: for man is borne unto labor and travel as the sparks fly upward,
ever since it was said unto Adam; Genesis 3.19.
In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread. So that the Apostle
makes it a rule, that He that will not work, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10
shall not eat. But our care for a blessing upon our labors, for the success
and event of our labors, that must be committed unto the Lord, that must be
laid on him. So the Prophet wills, Psalm. 37.5.
where he says. Commit thy ways unto the Lord, and trust in him, and he shall
bring it to pass. And again, 55.22.
Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee, he will not suffer
the righteous to fall for ever. If there be any thing that troubles thee, or
that thou want, commit all the care thereof unto the Lord, and stay thy
self upon his providence, and undoubtedly thou shall not want. So our blessed
Savior, Matthew. 6.30.
If God so clothe the grass of the field which is to day, and to morrow is
cast into the oven, shall he not do much more unto you, O ye of little faith?
What must be the conclusion but this, Cast therefore your care upon him? And so
the Apostle Peter wills us, Cast all your care on God, for he cares for you.
1. Pet. 5.7.
This then must be our care, to do that we ought, and then to commit the
blessing of all unto the Lord. We may not carelessly fling off all care of our
matters, but we must carefully commend them unto God, and depend upon him for
his blessing upon them, and success unto them. In all things we must have this
care, by humble and hearty prayer to fly unto the Lord, to pray unto him for
the obtaining of such good things as we want, to pray unto him for deliverance
from evils, either now presently upon us, or which we fear may fall upon us,
and to give him thanks for such blessings as in the riches of his mercies he
has vouchsafed unto us. This care God requires of us, and this care the godly
have always had, as might largely have been proved, if time had given leave;
and this is the Christian and godly care which now I commend unto you,
faithfully to do the duties of your calling, committing your ways unto the
Lord, depending upon his providence always, and in all things flying unto him
by humble and hearty prayer, with giving of thanks.

Let this then first teach us, not to be idle, or careless in matters: for
this is not the thing forbidden, to labor, or to do the works of our calling,
but to be too too careful about that we do, or have to do: and though we may
not be too too careful about that we do, or have to do, yet may we not be
careless, or say as the manner of some is, let the world wag as it list, care
shall neither kill me, nor touch me. This carelessness beseems not the
children of God, but is a note of retchlesse persons, such as not only cast
all care away, but also all honesty, godliness, and goodness. As therefore
too much carfulness, so let this carelessness be far from every one of us.

Secondly, let this teach us so to labor and do all that we have to do, as
that still we depend upon the Lord his providence and care over us, and in all
things fly unto him by prayer, and supplication, with giving of thanks. It is
he that must bless our labors, and give a good end unto our business. We
only can do that we ought to do, and then commend both it and our selves unto
the Lord, in humble and hearty prayer. Which if it were so well thought of as
it should be, many of politic complots and devices might very well be spared:
for we plot, and devise, and cast, and wind up and down about this matter and
that matter, as if we by our maine wit would bring that to pass, which the
Lord otherwise either could not, or would not. Well, the best plot that I can
tell you of is this, faithfully do ye that which ye ought to do, pray unto the
Lord for his blessing upon it, and so commit it unto him, that he may do in it
what he will, and what seems best unto him. This I am sure is the best plot,
because the most Christian. Let this therefore be our Christian policy: let us
fear the Lord, and walk in his ways; let us do the duties of our calling,
whatsoever we have to do, let us labor therein as we ought, and let us pray
unto the Lord for his blessing upon it, let us commit it unto him, and then let
him do as he will.

LECTVRE LXXXIII.
PHILIP. 4. Verse 7. And the peace of God which passes all understanding,
shall preserve your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus.
THese words, as we have already heard, divide themselves into three branches:
first, a dehortation, in these words, Be nothing, etc. secondly, an
exhortation, in these, But in all things, etc. thirdly, a consequent or effect
which will follow upon both, in these, And the peace of God, etc.

Another thing there is which I would observe from the words of the exhortation
of our Apostle in this place. The chief scope and drift of his exhortation we
have already heard, which is, that the Philippians would cast their care on
God, and in all things run unto him by prayer, pouring out such prayers unto
him as may be accepted with him, for his blessing upon what they do and desire,
and for deliverance from such evils as presently they suffer, or fear to
follow. Where note that the Apostle would have their requests to be showed unto
God by prayer and supplication, so that withal there should be joined giving
of thanks. Whence I observe, that as prayer and supplication, so giving of
thanks also is a necessary service of God, a necessary duty of a Christian.
For, as there are many causes of our often approaching unto the throne of grace
by prayer and supplication for blessings in good things, and deliverance from
evil, so are there many causes of pouring out our souls before God in humble
praise and hearty thanksgiving for blessings in good things, and deliverance
from evil. Neither is there any whose wants or miseries urge them unto prayer
and supplication, which have not also such proofs of Gods mercies and loving
kindness toward them, as may and ought to provoke them unto thanksgiving.
Many are the blessings and graces for the body, for the soul, for this life
present, for that that is to come, which enforce our prayers unto God that we
may obtain them. Many are the evils touching the body, touching the soul,
touching this life present, touching that that is to come, which enforce our
supplications unto God that we may be delivered from them. And are there not as
many blessings and graces corporal and spiritual, temporal and eternal,
which the Lord has already vouchsafed unto us? as many evils corporal and
spiritual, temporal and eternal, from which the Lord has delivered us,
which should enforce our praise and thanksgiving unto God? Yes verily, but that
rather we look unto the things which we would have, then unto the things which
already we have received, we might as well see the one as the other. And
hereupon it is, that as well praise and thanksgiving are commanded by the holy
Ghost in the Scripture, as prayer and supplication, and that the godly in all
ages have poured out their souls before God as well in praise and
thanksgiving, as in prayer and supplication. I exhort (says the Apostle unto
Timothy) that first of all supplications, prayers, intercessions, 1. Tim. 2.1.
1 Thessalonians. 5.16 17.
and giving of thanks be made for all men. And to the Thessalonians, Pray
(says the Apostle) continually, and in all things give thanks. And look into
the practice of the godly in all ages. Jacob praying unto the Lord to be
delivered from the hand of his brother Esau, Genesis 32.10 11
first praised him for the riches of his mercies toward him. The Songs and
Psalms of thanksgiuings which Moses and the Israelites, Deborah and Barak,
Hannah and Marie, David and Iehosaphat made unto the Lord, are not unknown
unto them that have knowledge in the book of God. Paul likewise witnesses of
himself almost unto all the Churches he wrote unto, that still in his prayers
he gave thanks to God for them. And of him and Silas it is said, Acts 16.24.25.
that when they were cast into prison, and their feet made fast in the stocks,
they prayed and sung a psalm unto God. Nay, how often do we read that Christ's
own mouth was filled with the praises of God, giving thanks in his miracles
of feeding certain thousands with some few loaves and fishes, giving thanks
when he instituted the holy Supper, giving thanks because his Father had heard
him, giving thanks for opening those things unto Babes, which were hid from
the wise, and men of understanding? Generally this note has so well tuned at
all times in the mouths of all Gods children, that they have ever been ready
to give thanks unto him in all things, even as ready to offer unto the Lord the
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving for benefits and blessings received, as to
pour out their prayers unto him for such graces of his Spirit as they stood in
need of.

But is it so with us? Have our mouths been filled with the praises of the
Lord, and with thanksgiving unto our God? When our wants have enforced us to
prayers, have we remembered to praise the Lord for such mercies as we had
received? Or has not the Song of praise and thanksgiving been either as a
strange and dainty Song unto us which we could not tune, or as an harsh and
unpleasant Song wherein we have had no delight? Have we not been as those ten
Lepers, Luke 17.18.
which being cleansed, never returned to give God praise? When famine, or
sickness, or the sword are upon us and our Land, it may be that we will call
an assembly and fall down and kneel before the Lord our maker, and cry, and
say, Spare thy people, O Lord, and deliver us from this sickness, or famine,
or sword: it may be, I say, we will do so, though to too seldom we do so: But
when the Lord in mercy has removed any of these his plagues from us, what
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving do we offer up unto him? Let the year
1588 witness against us, at which time the invincible Army as they called it,
rose up to make war against us. When that mighty and cruel enemy was upon our
coasts, and in the sight of our Land displayed his banners against us, thinking
to devour us at once, and to swallow us up quick, then we called an holy
assembly, and humbled our selves before the Lord, and prayed vino him for
deliverance out of the hands of our cruel enemies. But when he had wrought a
mighty deliverance for us, even such a one as the world wondered at, and for
which we might very well take up that of the Prophet, and say, Psalm. 124.2.
If the Lord himself had not been on our ^ide, when those enemies rose up
against us, they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled
against us; 3.4.
the waters had drowned us, and the stream had gone over our soul, yea the
deep waters of the proud had gone over our soul: when, I say, the Lord had
wrought such a mighty deliverance for us, how many of us like unto good*
Iehosaphat and his people assembled our selves, either the fourth day after, or
at all after in the valley of Berachah or blessing, to give thanks unto the
Lord? in how many places did we meet together, to praise the Lord in the midst
of the great Congregation? whatsoeoer were done in other places, no such matter
here. We indeed of this place whence others should have all good example, are
so much afraid to seem forward in good things, that we are hardly or never
drawn unto it in time of common danger to fast and pray, or after deliverance
from such danger to praise and give thanks. Our prayers for Prince, for
people, for peace, for prosperity, for rain, for fair weather, in time of
famine, in time of war, in time of common sickness, and the like which we
use, are good, and very good. And were it not well that our requests were
showed unto God in prayer and supplication with giving of thanks? If every
man shall look into himself, we shall all of us find a great defect in our
selves this way. For if the hand of the Lord be any way upon us, then we call
upon him, and pray unto him; as for example, if we be sick, then we pour out
our requests unto God for health, and for deliverance from that pain wherein
we lie. But how many of us do then remember to praise the Lord, either for that
health which before the Lord gave unto us, or for other good graces and
blessings of the soul and of the body, wherewith even then we do abound? Nay
surely the pain of our sickness takes such hold on us, that only we
remember it, and pray to be delivered from it, forgetting the praises of the
Lord for other his mercies unto us. And afterward, when we are restored unto
health, how many of us do sing a new Song unto the Lord for it? We commend our
Physician, or such a potion that we took, or such a medicine that was applied,
or such a diet that we kept; but not many of us sing the praises of the Lord,
by whose only blessing upon those means we have recovered our health. I do
instance only in this one example. But the like is to be said of other
crosses. If we be in poverty, in imprisonment, in banishment; yea if our head,
or tooth, or toe do ache, and the like, we pour out our complaints before God,
and make our prayers unto him. But how seldom are our requests showed unto him
with giving of thanks?

I dispute not the point, whether together with our prayers and supplications
should always be joined praise and thanksgiving. Sure it is, that there is
none of us all, in any such need or necessity, in any such misery or
affliction, but we have many blessings of the Lord, for which we ought to be
thankful. So that as we have need to pray unto the Lord, so we have cause also
to give thanks unto the Lord even then when we pray. But this is it which I
urge, that as we are to pray unto the Lord for such things as we need, so we
are to give thanks unto the Lord for such blessings as we have received. For
this is true, that whatsoever it be that we ask, we are not worthy new
blessings and graces, unless we be thankful for the old. And this is as
true, that so our payers are accepted with God, as we are thankful unto God.
Our unthankfulness shuts out our prayers that they enter not into the ears
of the Lord God of hoasts. And amongst other our sins, in my judgment, our
unthankfulness is one great cause why the hand of the Lord now a long time
has been, and yet is so heavy upon us. Of late, even by the space of a twelve
month, he has given us great hope of removing one of his plagues of dearth
and famine from us by such seasonable seasons as he has granted unto us. But
have we sung songs of thanksgiving for this mercy of the Lord toward us? No
surely: and therefore now again he has filled the clouds with rain, and
threatens us with unseasonable weather. Let us therefore now at length return
from our unthankfulness, and sing new songs of praises unto the Lord. Whenever
we have need, let us pray unto the Lord, but withal let us remember the loving
mercies of the Lord toward us, and let us give him thanks for them. Otherwise
our requests will sooner turn into murmuring complaints, then unto acceptable
prayers. As therefore the Apostle exhorts the Colossians, so do I you,
Whatsoever ye do in word or deed, Coloss 3.17.
do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, etc. and as our Apostle here says, Let
your requests, etc.

And the peace of God, etc. This is the consequent or effect which will follow
upon it, if we hearken unto the exhortation. If we shall be too too careful
for nothing, but in all things fly unto God by prayer, giving him thanks for
blessings received, and pouring out our prayers and supplications unto him for
such things as are necessary: what then? then this will follow, the peace of
God which passes all understanding, shall preserve your hearts and minds in
Christ Jesus, that ye fall not away from Christ Jesus by any inordinate
affections, or wicked cogitations, through impatience or despair, but that ye
have a quiet mind and conscience in all things whatsoever do befall unto you.
Now for the more particular explication of these things, we must understand,
that where the Apostle says, the peace of God, he means not that peace which
is in God, and which is himself, but that peace which he communicates unto us.
Which yet is two fold: one, which signifies our reconciliation with God
through Christ, whereof the Angels spoke in their song, when they sung, Luc.
2.14.
Glory be to God on hie, and in earth peace; and whereof the Apostle speaks
when he says, that Christ came, Ephesians. 2.17.
and preached peace to them which were a far off, and to them which were
near. In both which places, by peace is meant our reconciliation with God
through Christ, and of this peace of God, the Apostle here speaks not.
Another peace there is which God communicates unto us, which is the peace and
quietness of our mind and conscience through our reconciliation with God by
Jesus Christ, whereof the Apostle speaks when he says, that being justified
by faith, Romans 5.1.
we have peace toward God, through Jesus Christ. Where by peace is meant that
quietness of mind and conscience which we have through our justification by
faith in Christ Jesus. And of this our Apostle here speaks, and says of it,
that it passes all understanding, that is, that this inward peace of our mind
and conscience, wrought in us by the power of the Spirit through our
reconciliation with God, and justification by faith in the blood of Christ
Jesus, is such a thing as all man's understanding cannot reach unto or
comprehend. This peace of God then, which thus far passes all reach of man's
understanding, the Apostle tells the Philippians if they hearken to his
exhortation, shall keep their hearts and minds, that is, their whole souls,
both the understanding and the sensitive part, in Christ Jesus, so that neither
through inordinate affections which are seated in the heart, nor through wicked
cogitations in the mind, they should fall away from the faith of Christ Jesus
in their heart, or from the knowledge of Christ Jesus in their mind. The sum
of all is this, that if they will hearken unto his exhortation, to be nothing
careful, but in all things to show their requests unto God in prayer and
supplication, with giving of thanks, then they shall have such a peace and
quietness of mind and conscience, as far passes all reach of man's
understanding, which shall keep their hearts and minds, even their whole souls
in Christ Jesus, so that they shall not fall from him, either through
inordinate affections, or wicked cogitations. I cannot stand upon the several
observations which were hence to be made; I will only point at some of them,
as time will give leave.

First then hence I observe, what the fruit or consequent is which follows
the laying aside of overmuch carefulnes, and the reposing of our selves in God
by prayer in all our matters. The consequent or fruit which follows upon it,
is, the peace of God, the peace which God gives unto our minds and consciences
to keep as with a garrison our hearts and minds in Christ Jesus. For whilst
we are choked with the cares of this life, and thoughts do boil within our
breasts as in a furnace of lead, whilst it is so that we cannot persuade our
selves to depend upon God for the event and success of our matters, unless
our own cares also be continually employed about them, what peace or quietness
can we have in our minds and consciences? The peace of our minds and
consciences indeed consists in our reconciliation with God through Christ, in
our justification by faith in the blood of Christ, as the Apostle witnesses in
the place before alleged, where he says, that being justified by faith, we
have peace toward God, Romans 5.1.
through our Lord Jesus Christ. But what reconciliation with God, where the
love of the world so swayeth, that his thoughts are altogether set upon it, his
cares are wholly employed about it? Iam. 4.4.
Know ye not (says James) that the amity of the world is the enmity of God?
Whosoever therefore makes himself a friend of the world, makes himself the
enemy of God. As good communion betwixt light and darkness, as good concord
betwixt Christ and Belial, as good agreement betwixt the temple of God and
idols, as betwixt the love of God and the love of the world. And therefore John
says, If any man love the world, 1. Ioh. 2.15.
the love of the Father is not in him. So that where there is this excessive
love of the world, as to carry all our cares and thoughts after it, it is a
sign that there is no reconciliation with God, and therefore no peace of
conscience. But if we shall lay aside all worldly and distrustful carefulnes,
and cast our care upon the Lord; if we shall walk as we ought, and commit our
ways unto the Lord; if we shall pray unto the Lord for his blessing upon that
we do, and depend on him for the event and success, hence will follow this
peace of God, this peace of conscience which God gives, which our Apostle here
speaks of. For albeit these things be not precisely the cause of our peace of
conscience, but our reconciliation with God, yet we see the promise of the holy
Ghost, that this peace shall follow these things, to keep our hearts and minds
in Christ Jesus. Which fruit to have followed that practice in the godly at
all times, might easily be proved, if time would give leave.

But for this time let us make this use hereof, to abandon overmuch
carfulness for any thing, in all things to fly unto God by prayer, to commit
all our ways unto him, and to depend upon him for all things we have to do or
deal withal For what is more to be desired of man in this world, then the
peace of God which passes all understanding? then to have our hearts and minds
kept in Christ Jesus? S^eing then this is the fruit which the Lord makes to
follow thereupon, let us hearken to the exhortation of our Apostle, let us be
nothing careful, but in all things, etc. and then the peace of God, etc.

Secondly, in that this peace is called the peace of God, hence I observe the
author of our peace of conscience, which is God through Christ. Whereunto the
Apostles give witness in every of their Epistles almost, when they pray for
grace and peace unto the Churches to which they write, from God the Father, and
from the Lord Jesus Christ, that is, from God who gives it in, through, and for
the Lord Jesus Christ. And hereupon it is that God is often called the God of
peace, because he is the author of our peace; and that Christ is called our
peace, because through him we have peace. And why is God said to be the author
of our peace through Christ? Even because by Christ he has reconciled us unto
himself; as the Apostle witnesses where he says, 2. Cor. 5.18.
that God has reconciled us unto himself by Jesus Christ. For God (says he)
was in Christ, and reconciled the world unto himself, not imputing their
sins unto them. This is it that makes our peace of conscience, even our
reconciliation with God; we know that Gods wrath is appeased toward us, that
the partition wall which was between God and us is broken down, that God has
received us into grace and favor through Jesus Christ his Son, and therefore
all is at peace within, our soul and conscience is quiet and free from all
fear and care. There is a peace of the world, when we are quiet and free from
troubles, wars, and the like: but what is this peace unto that other? Though
we want this outward peace, and have that inward peace, we have the greatest
peace and quietness that may be: but if there want this inward peace, what
outward peace soever there be, what peace is there? Surely where the want of
this peace of conscience is, there is already a torment of hell.

If then they of Tyrus and Sydon made so great account of that outward peace,
Act. 12.20.24.2.3.
that by all means they desired it of Herod: and if the Jews having obtained
great outward quietness through Felix, acknowledged it wholly, and in all places,
with all thanks; what prayers ought we to make unto our God for this inward
peace of conscience; and feeling it in our own souls and consciences, how
thankfully ought we to acknowledge it unto our God? Surely for this grace and
peace, we ought to offer up the calves of our lips in a sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, yea to give up our whole bodies a living sacrifice, holy and
acceptable unto God, which is our reasonable serving of God. Seeing then that
we have this peace of all peaces through our Lord Jesus Christ, let us
acknowledge it wholly, and in all places, with all thanks.

Thirdly, hence I observe the excellency of this inward peace of conscience
which God gives unto his children, it passes all reach of man's understanding.
For in man's reason and understanding, who more wretched then the children of
God? With whom is God more displeased then with his own children? They are
hated, reviled, persecuted, afflicted: they are scorned, imprisoned, banished,
and made the worlds wonder. So that as it was prophesied of Christ, that he
should be judged as plagued, and smitten of God, and humbled; so the world
judges of faithful Christians, that they are plagued and punished of God for
their sins and their iniquities. And they think they have good reason so to
judge. And if it be answered, that though their outward man be disquieted yet
in that they have peace of conscience, they have quietness enough: they cannot
skill of this, what this inward peace should be which should give them such
quietness. That a man when he is reviled should bless, when he is persecuted
should suffer it, when he is evil spoken of should pray, when he has nothing,
should be as if he possessed all things, when he may seem to have cause of
despair, should abound in hope, when he is in tribulation should rejoice in
tribulation, and all through the inward peace of their conscience by their
reconciliation with God, this is a thing which seems as absurd to them as any
thing can be, this knowledge is too wonderful and excellent for them, they
cannot attain it: it is without the compass of their understanding, they
cannot tell what to make of it. And therefore says our Savior unto his
disciples, Ioh. 14.27.
Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, not as the world gives,
give I unto you. Nay, the world knows not that peace which God gives unto
us, but calls that peace which indeed is no peace, crying, Peace, peace, when
their destruction hastes upon them.

Let this then teach Gods good children to joy and rejoice in that peace of
conscience which God has given them through Christ. It is a grace of God which
the wicked of the world feel not, nor know what it means, and which the
world neither can give, nor take away from us. If we have this we have all,
howsoever we seem to want all: and if we want this, we want all, howsoever we
seem to have all. If we have this peace within us, we have God with us, and
therefore howsoever the devil rage, and all the world say all manner of evil
sayings, and practice all manner of wickedness against us, yet herein we may
rejoice, and herein let us rejoice.

Lastly, hence I observe a testimony and a plain proof for the perseverance
of Gods children in the faith and knowledge of Christ Jesus. For the peace of
God shall keep their hearts and minds in Christ Jesus, as says the Apostle.
If we our selves were left unto our selves to keep our selves in Christ Jesus,
quickly might we fall from Christ, and depart away from our living God. But not
we our selves, but the peace of God and the God of peace shall keep us in
Christ I^s^s. How then shall he fall, that is thus kept from falling? Again,
if it were only said, that we are kept in Christ Jesus, the question might
happily be the greater; albeit it be in truth out of question, that he whom the
Lord keeps shall never fall: but it is said, that the peace of God shall
keep us as garrison soldiers keep their City from the invasion of any
enemy. So that the peace of God and the God of peace shall be unto us as a
garrison of soldiers to keep us in Christ Jesus, that we fall not away from
him. And being thus kept, how shall we fall? Again, what is it that not we our
selves but the peace of God shall keep, and that thus strongly? Is it our
body, or our goods? No, these are not the things wherein our salvation
consists. For though these perish, yet our salvation may be sure with our
God. But the peace of God shall preserve our hearts whereby we believe unto
salvation, and our minds, the subject of the knowledge of Christ Jesus, he
shall keep them in Christ Jesus, that we fall not from him. He shall preserve
our hearts free from inordinate affections, that we may trust perfectly on the
grace of God: he shall preserve our minds from wicked cogitations, that we may
abound in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ: he shall preserve even both
in Christ Jesus, that in neither we fall from him. For if either our hearts
only be sound, and our minds corrupt, then is our faith in vain; or if our
minds only be sound, and not our hearts, then our knowledge is in vain. But
he shall preserve even both in Christ Jesus, that neither there be zeal
without knowledge, nor knowledge without zeal, but that we abound and
continue. Shall then not our selves, but the peace of God preserve and keep as
strongly as may be, not our bodies or goods, but our hearts and minds in Christ
Jesus, that we fall not away from the faith and knowledge of Christ Jesus? And
is not here evidence enough for our perseverance in grace, if we be careful
for nothing, but in all things, etc? These things should and might have been
enlarged.

The comfort which hence may arise unto the godly, passes the tongue, or pen,
or understanding of any man. I must leave it unto the meditation of every godly
soul. Only with the Apostle now I say unto you, be nothing careful, etc. and
then assure your selves of the consequent, that the peace of God, etc.

LECTVRE LXXXIV.
PHILIP. 4. Verse 8. Furthermore, brethren, whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are
pure, etc.
BEsides certain particular exhortations unto some particular persons, we have
heard in this Chapter diverse exhortations unto the Philippians in general. One
unto perseverance, that they would so continue in the Lord, as they had been
taught in the Lord, verse. 1. Another unto a Christian joy, that they would
rejoice in the Lord always, ver. 4. Another unto a patient moderation in their
whole life and behavior, that their patient and gentle mind might be known
unto all men, ver. 5. And another to the laying aside of all worldly and
distrustful carfulness, and reposing of our selves in all things in God by
humble and hearty prayer with giving of thanks, ver. 6. Whereunto the Apostle
also joined the consequent or effect which should follow the abandoning of
worldly and distrustful carefulnes, and the reposing of our selves in God by
prayer; which is, that the peace of God which passes all understanding, shall
preserve our hearts, etc. His first exhortation unto perseverance was, lest
they should suffer themselves to be seduced and drawn from the truth which he
had taught them, by those false teachers which were crept in amongst them. His
second exhortation unto a Christian joy, was, lest they should suffer
themselves to be daunted or dismayed when persecution, or affliction, or any
other cross should befall them. His third exhortation unto a patient
moderation in their whole life and behavior, was, that all men seeing their
patient and gentle mind, might thereby the rather be brought to glorify God,
and to embrace the truth of the Gospel of Christ Jesus. His fourth exhortation
to the laying aside of too too worldly carfulness, and the reposing of our
selves in God by prayer with giving of thanks, was, to direct them in a
Christian course for all the things of this life, and the event of all things
they had to deal withal. His adjoining of the consequent or effect which will
follow upon it, was the rather to induce them to take that Christian course
whereunto he directed them.

Furthermore, whatsoever things be.) After such diverse exhortations of the
Apostle unto the Philippians, as we have heard, the Apostle now, for a general
conclusion of his exhortations, exhorts them generally unto whatsoever thing
is good in the life of man, that as they had been taught by word and by
example, so they would frame their lives to the rule of all holiness and
righteousness. Some general heads of things the Apostle points at, as
things true, things honest, things just, things pure, things worthy love,
things of good report; but, not standing upon any of them, he exhorts them to
think on, and to do whatsoever things are of any of these kinds, and
generally, whatsoever besides these is virtuous and commendable, which they had
either heard him teach, or seen him do: adding withal this promise thereunto,
that so the God of peace should be with them. When he says, Furthermore, it is
as if he had thus said, Not to stand upon farther particulars, which would be
too tedious, let me for a general conclusion of my exhortations at this time
unto you, only put you in mind of some general heads of Christian duties,
which I would have you to think on, and to do; and then beseech you besides to
think on, and to do whatsoever besides them has the commendation of any
virtue; and whatsoever is praiseworthy, even whatsoever ye have learned, and
received, and heard, and seen in me. First then, he commends unto them
whatsoever things are true, exhorting them to think on, and to do whatsoever
things are true; true in opinion, that they may be free from error; true in
word, that they may be free from leasing; true indeed, that they may be free
from all hypocrisy and dissimulation; whatsoever things are indeed any way
true, he would have them to think on them, and to do them. Secondly, he
commends unto them whatsoever things are honest, or as the word rather
signifies, whatsoever things do set them out with an holy gravity, exhorting
them to think on, and to do whatsoever things have in them a reverent and
comely gravity, that what things are grave and comely for their persons, they
may say and do; and such things as are light and unbeseeming them in attire, or
gesture, or word, or deed, they may fly and anoyd. Thirdly, he commends unto
them, whatsoever things are just, etc. exhorting them to think on, and to do,
whatsoever things are just, that every man may have his right of them, and that
which is due unto them, that no man may be def^auded by them, that as they
would have others to do unto them so they may do unto others. Fourthly, he
commends unto them whatsoever things are pure, exhorting them to think on,
and to do whatsoever things are pure, that in their lives they may be
unspotted, and in their words and deeds undefiled, being cleansed from all
filthiness of the flesh, and of the spirit. Fifthly, he commends unto them
whatsoever things pertain to love, or whatsoever things may make them lovely,
exhorting them to think on, and to do, whatsoever things may make them lovely,
and win them love and favor with all men, yet so with men, that with God
also. Sixthly, he commends unto them whatsoever things are of good report,
exhorting them to think on, and to do whatsoever things are of good report
amongst men, that by such things they may purchase to themselves a good report
amongst men, and be free from such speeches and censures as things of evil
report might easily bring upon them. Lastly, having thus pointed at these
general heads of Christian duty, generally he commends unto them,
whatsoever thing besides these has in it commendation of virtue or matter of
praise, exhorting them, that if besides these things already spoken of, there
be any virtue, that is, any thing which h^th in it commendation of virtue, or,
if there be any praise, or any thing praiseworthy with good men, they should
think on, even seriously and advisedly these things, letting those things of
ceremony to pass which the false teachers urged. Whereunto that he might the
rather persuade them; first, he tells them, that these things which now he
commends unto them, and whereunto now he exhorts them, are no new things,
such as they never knew nor heard of, but such as both they had learned by
hearing, and received by instruction, and heard at his mouth, and seen in him,
in the practice of his life: and therefore, as before he willed them to think
on them, so now he wills them to do them, that knowing them, and doing them,
they might have the full commendation of them. Secondly, he promises them,
that if thus they shall think on, and do these things whereunto he has
exhorted them, then the God of peace shall be with them, to give unto them the
peace of conscience, and a peaceable life amongst men, so far forth as may be
for his glory, and their good. This I take to be the meaning of these words.
The branches then into which they divide themselves, ye see, are an
exhortation, and two reasons or motives to enforce the exhortation. The
exhortation is, to think on, and to do, whatsoever things are true, etc. The
former motive to induce them hereunto is drawn from the things themselves
whereunto he exhorts them, which were no new things: but such as both they
had learned, and received, and heard, and seen in his own example. The latter
motive to induce them is a promise, that the God of peace shall be with them,
if they will think on, and do these things. Thus much of the meaning of these
words, and of the things therein contained. Now let us see what notes we may
gather hence for our further use and instruction.

First then, to begin with the most general, here I note, that if there be
any virtue, any praise, any thing that is good, any thing that is commendable,
the Apostle would have the Philippians seriously to think on it with
themselves, and diligently to practice it in their lives, whatsoever it be.
Whence I observe this note for us and for all Christians, that we all of us
ought to have our hearts set, and our frete pressed to follow whatsoever is good
and commendable amongst the sons of men. And this is plainly proved out of the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles. Thus says the Prophet David, Psalm.
34.14. 1. Pet. 3.11.
and out of him the Apostle Peter, Eschew evil, and do good, neither of them
insisting upon any particular good, but exhorting or commanding to do good,
even whatsoever is good and commendable. 1 Thessalonians. 5.15.
So our Apostle, Ever follow (says he) that which is good, both toward your
selves, and toward all men. Where the Apostle would have the Thessalonians so
far from recompensing evil for evil unto any man, that he would have them
forward and ready to do whatsoever is good unto all men. It is then ye see a
duty required of us, to follow whatsoever is good and commendable, Romans 12.17.
or as the Apostle speaks, to procure things honest in the sight of all men.
And if we must needs have motives to draw us on to this duty, because
otherwise we are too too dull and slow, behold what the Apostle says to this
purpose, Romans 2.10.
To every man (says he) that does good, shall be glory, and honor, and
peace. But what should other motive need then this, that whatsoever is good, is
only good by participation with God, who alone is good, as our Savior tells
us, Math. 19.1^.
truly, and properly, and of his own nature good? For if it be so, that
whatsoever is good, is only good by participation with God, from whom alone
comes every good giving and every perfect gift, James 1.17.
then surely unless we will in some sort renounce God, we must embrace and
follow whatsoever is good, every thing that is good, having the expressed image
of God in it, so far as it is good.

Only we must take heed, lest as the Serpent be guiled Eve, through his
subtlety, under a show and color of good, persuading her that that was good,
which indeed was evil; so the world or the devil deceive us under a show and
color of good, and persuade us that that is good which is not, that that is
praise-worthie which is not. For not that which the world judges to be good is
always good, but that only which the Lord allows for good in his word:
neither is that always praiseworthy which the world praises, but that only
which the Lord praises. It is good (says the world) to save a man's life,
though it be by a lie, or by perjury; and if a man frame himself to the
fashion of the world, the world praises him. But does the Lord either approve
him for good, Romans 3.8.12.2.
when he reproves them that do evil, that good may come thereof? or praise
the other, when he does by his Apostle tenderly beseech us not to fashion our
selves like unto the world? We must then look unto the thing whether it be good
and commendable, and such as the Lord approves for good and commendable. And
if it be, then whatsoever it be, we ought in our hearts to embrace it, in our
lives to practice it, and with eagre liking to follow after it. Neither let any
man thus say with himself, There are some good and commendable things which I
could like very well to think on and to do, but that they are in such request
and liking with the Papists, or with some that otherwise are profane and wicked
men. For whatsoever is good, in whomsoever it be, we are to love it, and to
like it. If wicked Balaam that loved the wages of unrighteousness, make his
prayer, and say, Let me die the death of the righteous, Number. 23.10.
and let my last end be like his: shall I refuse to use this prayer, because he
used it? Nay, if Simon Magus when he has sinned, Acts 8.24.
request the Apostles to pray unto the Lord for him, I will take this lesson
from him, to request the prayers of the faithful for me, when I have sinned
against my God. We may not communicate with any either in any superstition, or
in any unfruitful works of darkness. But whatsoever is good, if it be indeed
truly good, we are to think on it, and to do it; we are to love it and to like
it, and to make it a president for us to follow in whomsoever it be.

Let this then first teach us to abstain from all appearance of evil. For
thus we are to reason with our selves; Are we to think on, and to do
whatsoever is good and commendable? Then whatsoever is evil and blame-worthie,
we are not to think on, nor to do. That which is good, is only to busy all
our thoughts, and to take up all our actions: but whatsoever is evil, is not
once to enter into our thoughts, much less may it be the work of our hands.
The Prophet speaks of a generation of men that imagine mischief upon their
beds, and set themselves in no good way, Psalm. 36.4.
neither abhor any thing that is evil. It were well there were no such at
this day, whose inward thoughts are very wickedness, whose works are only
evil, whose ways tend wholly unto death. But generally this is true, that men
very well minded, yet smell of some caske or other: either they are covetous,
or proud, or ambitious, or unmerciful, or contentious, or partially affected,
or the like. We do not think on, and do whatsoever is good, we do not wash our
hands of whatsoever is evil, but one bad thing or other there is which so
haunts every one of us, that we always carry it in our bosom with us. Well,
we see whereon our thoughts should be set, and whereabout we should be
occupied: whatsoever is good, whatsoever is commendable, we should think on
that, and do that; and he that instructs us in this duty, withal does
imply, that whatsoever is evil, should not once enter our thoughts, much less
should be the trade of our way. Let us therefore follow that which is good, and
abstain from all appearance of evil; let us as many as fear the Lord depart
from iniquity, and let our souls delight in whatsoever is good and
commendable.

Secondly, let this teach us, wisely to consider our ways, what is indeed and
truly good and commendable. For not whatsoever thing seems unto us, or is
thought by others to be good and commendable are we exhorted here to think on,
and to do, but to think on, and to do whatsoever is indeed and truly good and
commendable. It is thought in some countries, nay I may say it is thought among
us (for unto a high degree of excess are we grown that way,) that to bowze
and carowse, to quaffe cup after cup, and to bear his drink well, is a very
commendable thing. Here then we are to look whether it be indeed commendable.
For if it be, then we are to do it by our Apostles rule in this place. But what
says the Spirit? Luke 21.34
Take heed (says our Savior) to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be
oppressed with surf^tting and drunkenness. The Apostle goes further, 1. Cor.
5.11.
and says, If any that is called a brother, be a drunkard, with such one eat
not. The Prophet goes yet further, and denounces a woe against drunkards,
saying, Esaias 5.11.
Woe to them that rise up early to follow drunkenness. And the Apostle opens
the woe thus, that they shall not inherit the kingdom of God. 1. Cor. 6 10.
O but thou can bear thy drink well, and there is thy commendation. Well,
yet see thy woe, Woe (says the Prophet) to them that are mighty to drink
wine, Esaias 5.22.
and to them that are strong to power in strong drink: If thou exceed in
drinking, thy sin is drunkenness, how well soever thou bear thy drink, and
a woe is unto thee. I instance only in this sin, because this sin has so
much dared to brave it self amongst us. But as in this, so in many other
things it may be found, that howsoever they be thought commendable, yet indeed
they are not. Let us therefore look unto the thing that seems unto us, or is
thought by others to be good and commendable; and if it be indeed such, so that
it have allowance from the Lord in his word to be such, then let us think on
it, and do it. But in any case let not the judgment of the world so sway with
us, as that upon the worlds word we think on, and do whatsoever seems good
and commendable unto it.

Thirdly, let this teach us to suppress that conceit of not following
something which is good, because it is in such request with them which
otherwise are not good. For whatsoever is good, if it be indeed good, in
whomsoever it be, we are to love it, and to like it, to think on it, and to do
it. What needs it to will any of us to take up a piece of gold, though it be
out of a dunghill? Howsoeeur therefore the man be superstitious, loose of
life, profane and wicked, yet if there be any good thing in him, let us not
disdain it, or refuse it because of him, but let us observe it, and think on
it, and do it. If there be any virtue, any praise, any thing that is good, any
thing that is commendable indeed, wheresoever it is, let not that cause us to
balke it, but let us think on it, and do it. And let this suffice for the
general, of thinking on, and doing whatsoever is good and commendable. Now
come we to the general heads of such good and commendable things as the
Apostle commends unto the Philippians.

Secondly, then here I note that the Apostle would have the Philippians
seriously to think on, with themselves, and diligently to practice in their
lives, whatsoever things are true. Whence I observe this note, for us, and for
all men, that whatsoever things are true, we are to think on them, and to do
them. Is it a truth in religion? We are to embrace it, and profess it; as we
see our Apostle was not disobedient to the heavenly vision which appeared to
him in the way, but having the eyes of his understanding opened by the Lords
Spirit, he straitway preached Christ in the synagogues, Acts 9.20.
and professed the truth in all integrity and simplicity. Is it a truth in
the words of our mouth? We ought every man to speak the truth unto his
neighbor, Zach. 8.16.
as Zachary wills saying: Speak every man the truth unto his neighbor; and
after him the Apostle saying, Cast off lying, Ephesians. 4.25.
and speak every man truth unto his neighbor. Is it a truth in our deeds and
in the ways of our life? We are to be as Nathaniels, John 1.47.
true Israelites in deed in whom is no guile, and not to make show of one
thing, and in truth to be another thing. Whatsoever truth it is, it ought to be
so precious unto us, as that with the Apostle we should say, 2. Cor. 13.8.
We cannot do any thing against the truth, but for the truth; we cannot hold of
error against the truth, we cannot lie to falsify the truth, we cannot
dissemble to make show of others then the truth is we are. Let this one reason
for this time serve to press this point. Christ is truth, as himself says,
John 14.6.
I am the way, the truth, and the life; and whatsoever he spoke was truth, and
for the truth, for no guile was ever found in his mouth: 1. Pet. 2.22.
we are the sons of him who is truth; that is, of God; we are redeemed by him
who is truth; that is, by God: we are regenerate and borne again by the Spirit
of truth, we are called to the knowledge of the truth, and so we shall dwell
with God for ever if we speak the truth from our heart. As then we will have
him who is true, and truth it self, to be our God, and our selves to be his
people and heirs of his kingdom, we are to think on, and to do whatsoever
things are true.

Are we then to think on, and to do whatsoever things are true? First, let
this teach us to take heed and beware of errors in religion, whereby the
truth of the Gospel of Christ Jesus is perverted. Whosoever says it, if it be
a truth, it is to be maintained; but if it be an error from the truth,
whosoever says it, it is to be rejected. If Fathers, Councels, Church, and all
say it, if it be an error, what is that to me? But if it be a truth, be it
Arrian, or Lutheran, or Papist, or Protestant that says it, what is that to
me? No authority may give warrant to an error, neither may any man's person or
profession prejudice a truth; but whatsoever is true, we are to think on it,
and do it; whatsoever is erroneous, we are not to think on it, nor to do it.
What shall we say then unto them that wholly build upon the Church, the Church,
and ever run on us with open mouths, the doctrine of the Church, the
doctrine of the Church; and this Church forsooth is the Church of Rome? What
shall we say unto them that having laid down and taught a truth, afterward
perceiving themselves therein to concur with Calvin, did therefore revoke it,
and turned the truth into an error? We say unto them as Esaias said unto the
Jews in his time: Esa. 8.19.20.
Should not a people enquire at their God? To the law, and to the testimony,
if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in
them. The thing that we ask, is, what is a truth according to the word, what
is an error from the word? not what the Church teaches, or what Calvin says.
If they can show that the things which their Church teaches are true, we
profess our willingness to embrace whatsoever things are true; and if Calvin
say the truth, why should they reject it because he says it? Learn you to
discern between truth and error; and look not so much who says it, as
whether it be true or erroneous that is said. If the Church, or some special
professors of the truth, agree upon a truth, it may very well sway with us.
But howsoever men say, a truth in religion is therefore to be received because
it is a truth, and an error therefore to be rejected because it is an error.
If it be a truth receive it, if an error reject it.

Again, are we to think on and to do whatsoever things are true? Let this
then teach us to put away lying out of our mouths. Whatsoever things are true,
we are to speak them in their due times and places: but whatsoever things are
lies and falsehoods, there is no time or place for the speaking of them. For all
lying is of the devil, and he is the father thereof. Ioh. 8.44.
And fearful is the judgment that lying draws on with it: for whosoever
(says John) works abomination or lies, Apoc. 21.27.22.15.
shall not ent^r into the heavenly Jerusalem: and again, Without shall be
dogs, and enchanters, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and
whosoever loves or makes lies. And therefore the holy Ghost very often very
carefully forbids it, saying, Lie not one to another, Coloss. 3.9. Ephesians. 4.25.
seeing that ye have put off the old man with his works: and again, Cast off
lying, etc. And yet see how men love rather to lie then to speak truly; as if
they had rather run with the devil, then walk in truth with God. One
desperately lies in despite of the truth, and boasts himself of his lying.
Another lies, hoping so to conceal his sins as he has fallen into, and so
adds iniquity to iniquity. Another lies, but it is forsooth in jest, and
he means no harm by his lying. And another lies, but it is forsooth greatly
for the behoof and good of his friend, or else he would not do it. Thus
lying, which the Lord so much hates, every where abounds. And though none
indeed can, yet some think they may plead pardon for their lying. The
desperate lier, it may be hops not for, nor reckons upon any pardon. He
has made a covenant with death, and with hell he is at agreement. And what
pardon he hops for, I know not, that to conceal his other faults and sins,
also lies. But if two sins be not to be bound together, because in one we
shall not be unpunished, then what hope of impunitie when unto other sins is
added also lying? Now for lying in jest, no man, I think, will say that it is
either a less fault, or more pardonable then an idle word: and yet we see our
blessed Savior tells us, Mat. 12.36.
that of every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof
at the day of judgment. And as for lying for the behoof and good of our
friend, the Apostle thereby plainly condemns it, in that we may not do evil,
by his rule, that good may come thereof. Romans 3.8.
So that we may not lie at all, for as much as no lie is of the truth. Some
kind of lying is less faulty then other, 1. Ioh. 2.21.
but no lie is of the truth, and we are to speak every man truth unto his
neighbor. Let us therefore cast off all lying, even all kind of lying. For the
lying lips are an abomination to the Lord; Prou. 12.22.19.5.
and their judgment sleeps not. For a false witness shall not be
unpunished, and he that speaks lies shall not escape. Let us speak the truth
every man one unto another; for we are members one of another. Let us speak
every man the truth from his heart, without mincing it, and speaking it by
halfes. The truth will bear out it self: speak therefore the truth, and shame
the devil. By speaking the truth we are like unto God, but by lying we are
like unto the devil. Whatsoever things therefore are true, let us think on
them, and do them.

Again, are we to think on and to do whatsoever things are true? Let this
then thirdly teach us to be that in truth which we would seem unto the world
to be, avoiding all hypocrisy and dissimulation. Would we seem unto the world
to be religious toward God, just in our dealing with men, chaste in our
bodies, harmless in our lives, merciful to the poor, despisers of the world,
etc? Let us be such in deed and in truth, not in word and in show only. For
the hypocrite, Job 13 16.
as says Job, shall not come before God. And therefore Peter wills us to lay
aside all maliciousnes, and all guile, and dissimulation. 1. Pet. 2.1.
But who hearkeneth or regards? How many at this day like unto Judas, seem
to kiss when indeed they do betray? How many at this day like unto Absalom,
make a show of inuiting their friends unto their table, when indeed their
meaning is, if not to kill them, yet to snare and entrap them? How many like
unto Ioab, seem to speak peaceably with their friend, when indeed their
purpose is to wound him? How many like unto the Jews that came to Nehemiah,
N^h. 6.19.
speak fair to a man's face, but speak their pleasure of him behind his
back, and seek what they can to thwart him, or to disgrace him, or to
discredit him? Yea who now more commonly defameth a man, exalts himself
against him, and imagines mischief for him, then his own companion, his
familiar friend, with whom he took sweet counsel together, and walked in the
house of God as friends; as it fell out with David? So little truth there is in
the ways and works of men, and so deep dissembling in their whole lives. So
that we may well take up that of the Prophet, The faithful are failed from
among the children of men. Psalm. 12.1.2.
Men speak deceitfully every one with his neighbor, they flatter with their
lips, and dissemble with their double heart. But the hypocrites hope shall
perish, his confidence also shall be cut off, Job. 8.13.
and his trust shall be as the house of a spider. Let us therefore hate all
hypocrisy and dissimulation: as we would seem to be, so let us be indeed such
as we ought to be; and whatsoever things are true in religion, in word or in
deed, let us think on them, and do them.

LECTVRE LXXXV.
PHILIP. 4. Verse 8. Whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, etc.
Whatsoever things are honest. Here is the second general head of that
Christian duty which the Apostle commends unto the Philippians, wherein he
exhorts them to think on, and to do whatsoever things may grace them with a
reverent and comely gravity, that their gravity in all things pertaining to
them being such as beseems their persons, they may so purchase unto
themselves reverence amongst men. For so I understand the word used by our
Apostle in this place. Whence I observe this lesson for us; that whatsoever
things beseem our persons, we are to do them, and that with such a comely
gravity as may win reverence unto our persons. This duty the Apostle
prescribes unto Titus, and in him unto all Ministers, where he says, Above
all things show thy self an example of good works, Tit. 2.7.
with vncorrupt doctrine, gravity, integrity, etc: where besides other
things, ye see, he requires in Titus, and so in other Ministers of the
Gospel, gravity, that is, such an outward grave carriage of themselves, as may
win reverence unto their persons. This duty he prescribes also to elder men
in the same Chapter, 2.
saying, that they ought to be sober, honest, etc: honest, that is, grave, even
with such a gravity as may join reverence to their persons. And this duty in
this place he prescribes even unto all, that we all labor unto such a
gravity as best beseems our persons whatsoever we be. Neither let any man
here so mistake me, as if I meant, that in any man there should be such an
austeritie that a man may hardly come to the sight or speech of him. For the
servant of God should be meek, and kind, and gentle, and courteous unto all
men, even as the Apostle exhorts, saying, Be ye courteous one unto another.
Ephesians. 4.3^.
But this is it I say, that in all men, according to their places and persons,
there ought to be a comely gravity, in some more, in some less, but in all
such as beseems them, and may join reverence to their persons.

This then should teach us to take heed and beware of such lightness as is any
way unbeseeming our persons; of lightness in our attire and apparel, of
lightness in our gate and gesture, of lightness in our talk and speech, of
lightness in our actions and deeds. For gravity in all these things is not more
beseeming, then any such lightness is utterly unbeseeming in any man. To see a
Minister wear this shagge and ruffian like hair, which is too too common
among all sorts of men; to see him turn himself into every cut, and every new
fashion of apparel that comes up, or to hear him bring into the pulpit riming
stuff and scurrile ieasts to move laughter: To see a Magistrate drinking and
carowsing among boon companions, or dancing about a may pole, or running into
such folly as he should restrain in others: To see an ancient matron mincing
her treadings, or tricking and trimming her self like unto one of the younger
sort, or any way wantonly carrying her self: to see a young woman full of talk, or
much abroad in the streets, or familiar with others then of her own sex: to
see a scholar courting young women, or frequenting tauernes, innes, or
alehouses, or sporting himself any way lasciuiously: generally to see a man
more garish in his attire and apparel, more nice in his gate and gesture, more
vain in his talk and speech, more vnreuerent in his actions and deeds then is
meet for his place and calling; how unbeseeming is it? how disgraceful is it
to their persons that offend any of these ways? Ecclus 19.28.
A man's garment, says the son of Sirach, and his excessive laughter, and his
going, declare what person he is. Lightness in these things, show that he is
light, and consequently his credit amongst men, and that worthily, is also
light. And yet how much do all sorts offend this way? Ministers and
Magistrates, ancient matrons and young women, scholars, and men generally? Unto
every of these, a reverence beseeming them is due; which yet they want, because
there wants in themselves that gravity which beseems their persons, and
whereby they should win reverence unto their persons. For here, in my judgment,
is one very great cause of that want of reverence which is every where. We
complain greatly, and not without just cause, of great want of reverence in
the younger sort toward their elders and their betters in their places: but
certainly here is one great cause of it, we our selves every man in his place,
walk not in that gravity that beseems our persons; we are not of that
discreet and seemly carriage which should win reverence unto us in our places:
but not considering our selves one way or other, we bewray that vanity, that
lightness, that foolishness, and oftentimes that boyishnesse in our selves,
which causes want of reverence, and brings contempt unto our persons. Well,
ye see our Apostle would have us to think on and to do whatsoever things are
grave, and decent, and beseeming our persons in our places. Let us hearken unto
our Apostle, and let us every man consider himself, and do that which is grave
and beseeming us in our places. Let us avoid both in our apparel, and in our
gesture, and in our talk, and in our deeds, whatsoever may bewray any kind of
lightness in us. So shall we do that which in this point we ought, and so
shall we recover that reverence which we have lost.

Whatsoever things are just. This is the third general head of that Christian
duty which the Apostle commends to the Philippians; wherein he exhorts
them to think on and to do whatsoever things are just, that every one may have
that which is right, and none may be defrauded of that which is due unto him.
For the Apostles speech here of just things, is meant (I take it) of things
which may be justly required of us, that such should be performed; not of
things which we may justly require of others; for such things we will exact
fast enough, though we be not exhorted thereunto. Hence then I observe this
lesson for us, That whatsoever things may justly be required of us, we are to
think on them and to do them. May the Lord justly require a duty of us, and
may the Prince justly require a duty of us? Mat. 22.21.
Give unto God those things which are Gods, and give unto Caesar those things
which are Caesar's. That obedience which is due unto the Lord, give unto him;
and that loyalty which is due unto the Prince, give unto him. May our
neighbor require a duty of us? The rule of our blessed Savior is general,
Mat. 7.12.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, even so do ye to them. And a
most absolute and rare example thereof we have in Job in Chap. 31. from verse
16. to 22. whence it is most plain, that what could be justly required of him
by his neighbor, he was not awanting in it. Are we masters? what the servants
may justly require of us, that we must think on and do; as it is written, Ye
masters, Col. 4.1.
do unto your servants that which is just and equal, knowing that ye have also
a master in heaven. Are we servants? what our masters may justly require of
us, that must we think on and do; as it is written, Servants, 3.22.
be obedient unto them that are your masters according to the flesh, in all
things, not with eye-seruice as men-pleasers, but in singleness of heart,
fearing God, etc. Are we husbands? what our wives may justly require of us,
that must we think on and do; as it is written, Husbands love your wives, 19.
and be not bitter unto them. Are we wives? what our husbands may justly
require of us, that must we think on and do; as it is written, 18.
Wives submit your selves unto your husbands, as it is comely in the Lord. Are
we fathers? Fathers, provoke not your children to anger, 21.20.
lest they be discouraged. Are we children? Children obey your parents in all
things, for that is welpleasing unto the Lord. Which also tutors and scholars
are to apply unto themselves. Do we owe any thing to any man? Owe nothing to
any man, Rom 13.8. Exodus 22.25.
but to love one another. Do we lend any money to any? If thou lend money to my
people, says the Lord, that is, to the poor with thee, thou shall not be as
an usurer to him, ye shall not oppress him with usury Are we Ecclesiastical
men, or temporal men, or military men, or scholasticall men, or public men,
or private men? Look what may be justly required of us by the laws of the
Church, or of the Common weal, or of arms, or of scholars, or of those
cities and places where we dwell and live, that we are to think on, and to do.
Generally, what men soever we be, what things soever may justly be required of
us by the law of nature or of nations, by the law of God or of man, we are to
think on them and to do them. And that for these reasons: first, because the
things are just in themselves; for otherwise they cannot justly be required of
us: but being just in themselves, we are to think on them, and to do them.
Secondly, because the things which may justly be required of us, do indeed make
us debtors unto them that may require them of us. For have we counsel,
wisdom, learning, strength, etc? We are debtors unto them that need these
things, and require them of us. And hereupon the Apostle said, Romans 1.14.
that he was debtor both to the Grecians and to the Barbarians, both to the
wise men and to the unwise: a debtor to bestow on them such spiritual gifts as
he had received of the Lord. Thirdly, because the things which are justly
required of us, may be for their good that require them. For we are to do good
unto all, Gal. 6.10.
as the Apostle exhorts, saying, Do good unto all, but especially unto them
that are of the household of faith. Being then that thereby we may do good,
whatsoever things may justly be required of us, we are to think on them, and
to do them.

This then should teach us in any case to beware of defrauding any of any thing
that is due unto him. 1 Thessalonians. 4.6.
Let no man, says the Apostle, oppress or defraud his brother in any matter.
But do we not defraud the Lord? defraud the Prince? defraud our neighbors and
brethren? Yes surely. And wherein do we defraud them? In that we give them not
that which is due unto them; in that we do not think on and do whatsoever
things they may justly require of us. For who is he that walks in that
obedience which the Lord most justly requires of him? Our manifold rebellions
against our God, and our wilful transgressions against his law, are too too
great evidence against us. I cannot speak of many things wherein we sin all
against our God. Give me leave to warn you at this time of o^e. Ye know how
earnestly the Lord requires of us the sanctifying of the Sabbath, and how
sharply he has punished the breach of that commandment, even by death, and
desolation of kingdoms. Yet how much do we profane it, as throughout the whole
year, so especially at this time of the year, by bringing in our may-poles, by
having our ales, by that most disorderly trunke-playing, by rifling, by
bowling, and diverse other kinds of gaming; by our ill customs of riding,
going, drinking, dancing, and many the like offensive things on that day? If we
must needs have these things, some of which are heathenish, and the rest no way
necessary and little better, yet let us spare the Lord his day, let us
consecrate that day, and therein our selves unto him. We have other sins too
many, though we do not add this unto them of profaning the Lord his day. Let
us remember what the Lord in this justly requires of us, and let us not
defraud him of this due. Again, how many villainous and traitorous wretches are
there, which give not unto their Prince that loyalty which she most justly
requires of them? Those most bloody treasons which her most unnatural
subjects have practiced against her, besides many others plotted by those
faithless and cruel monsters of Rome and Spain, from all which the Lord by a
most mighty hand has delivered her, and let us still pray unto our good God
that he will still keep her safe under his wings and deliver her; those
bloody treasons, I say, show how many have defrauded her of that which is most
due unto her. Come lower, and what end shall we make? How imperious are masters
over their servants, and how untrusty are servants toward their masters? How
bitter are the husbands sometimes toward their wives, and how undutiful are
they again toward their husbands? How cockering are parents of their
children, and how stubborn are children toward their parents? how negligent
are tutors? how dissolute are scholars? how careless are they that owe, to
repay that they owe? and how ready are they that lend to grate upon them to
whom they lend? How many men in the Ministry defraud their Churches of that
which is due unto them? and how many of the rest defraud the Commonwealth of
that which is due unto it? To speak all in one word, how few of all sorts
think on and do that which might justly be required of them? Well, ye see the
Apostle would have us to think on and to do whatsoever things may justly be
required of every one of us in our place. Let us therefore every one of us
consider our selves in our place, and let us see what thing it is that may
justly be required of us. Not one of us all but we shall find many things which
the Lord our God, which our sovereign Prince, which our neighbors and
brethren may justly require of us. Not one of us all, but we shall find many
things which by the law of Nature, by the law of Nations, by the law of God, by
the law of man, may justly be required of us. Let us therefore every one of us
think of these things, and let us all of us in our place do whatsoever may
justly be required of us. Let our care be not to defraud any, God or man,
Prince or people, neighbor or brother, one or other of that which is due unto
him, but whatsoever things are just let us think on them, and do them. So
shall we do that which we ought, and so shall the wrath of the Lord which is
kindled against us, be turned away from us. It follows:

Whatsoever things are pure. This is the fourth general head of that Christian
duty which the Apostle commends unto the Philippians; wherein he exhorts
them to think on, and to do whatsoever things are pure, that having their
conversation honest, holy, and harmless, they might be blameless, innocent,
and undefiled by any filthiness of sin. Whence I observe this lesson for us,
that whatsoever things are pure and clean from all filthiness of the flesh
and of the spirit, we are to think on them, and to do them. The Scribes and
Pharisees thought on and observed an outward purity, and cleanness of the
body; for they would not eat till first they had washed their hands. Mark 7.3.
Which outward cleanness of the body we do not mislike. But that is not the
thing intended. Matthew. 15.20
For, as our blessed Savior teaches, To eat with unwashed hands defiles not
the man. Our adversaries imagine that they think well on this point, a great
many of them, if they keep themselves single and unmarried, though then they
burn and wallow in all filthy lusts and pleasures. But the holy Ghost has
taught us that marriage is honorable, Hebr. 13.4.
and the bed undefiled. And therefore he has said unto all, without exception
of any, 1. Cor. 7.2.
To avoid fornication, let every man have his wife, and let every woman have
her husband. That outward cleanness then of the body in washing of the hands,
and the like, nor this abstinence from marriage are the pure things which we
are to think on and to do, but far other things.

We are to be pure in heart, having our hearts purified by faith. For by faith
God purifieth our hearts. Acts 15.9. Hebr. 9.14.
We are to be pure in our consciences, having our consciences purged from dead
works to serve the living God. We are to be pure in our tongue and talk, that
our speech may be to the use of edifying, Ephesians. 4.29.
and may minister grace unto the hearers. We are to be pure in our works and
deeds, that we may be blameless, Philip. 2.15.
and without rebuke for any thing that we do. We are to be pure in our bodies,
that our bodies may be fit temples for the holy Ghost to dwell in. For, 1. Cor.
6.19.
know ye not (says the Apostle) that your body is the temple of the holy
Ghost? To speak all in one word, we are to be pure in the whole man, both in
our utter and in our inner man, being cleansed from all filthiness both of the
flesh and of the spirit, 2. Cor. 7.1.
and growing up unto full holiness in the fear of God. This is that purity
which the Lord requires at our hands, even to be pure in our flesh and in our
spirit, in our soul and in our body, in our hearts and in our consciences, in
our words and in our deeds, that so we may be blameless and without rebuke.

What then? Am I come to teach you to be pure men and women? Dare I take upon
me to persuade you unto purity? Yea, even so beloved. As the Prophet says, so
say I unto you, Wash you, make you clean. Esaias 1.16. 1. Tim. 5.22.
And as our Apostle says unto Timothy, so say I unto you, Keep your selves
pure. And with our Apostle here, whatsoever things are pure think on them, and
do them. Yea, but this is a thing that cannot be: For none can say, I have made
my heart clean, Prouer. 21.9.
I am pure from sin. True indeed, yet are we still to endeavor our selves
unto it, and to labor after it. 1 Cor. 12.31. Hebr. 12 14.
We are to desire the best gifts; and we are to follow peace with all men, and
holiness: though in this life we cannot come unto them and comprehend them.
Otherwise that of our Savior should be in vain, Be ye perfect as your Father
which is in heaven is perfect. Matthew. 5.46.
This is a thing that cannot be, yet is it a thing that we must labor and
strive unto, both by prayer, and every holy course. So, howsoever we cannot be
pure, yet must we labor and strive unto it, both by prayer and every holy
course, that we may be pure both in body and in soul, even in our whole man,
until the coming of Christ Jesus.

This then should teach us to take heed and beware of whatsoever things may
defile us in our bodies or in our souls. The time was when they defiled
themselves that touched a dead corpse, or any thing that was unclean. But all
those things perished with the using. Now our blessed Savior has told us what
the things are that defile the man, and those are, Matthew. 15.19
evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false testimonies,
slanders: likewise covetousness, scurrile ieasting, corrupt communication, and
the like. And therefore the holy Ghost every where gives out caueats against
these things, admonishing always to take heed and beware of them. Ephesians. 4.29.
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouths, says the Apostle.
And yet, how do many of us defile our selves with filthy and unseemly talk?
It is a shameful thing unto chaste ears to hear what filthy ribauldries,
what bawdy talking, what uncomely ieasting, what lewd and wanton songs and
sonnets are used in many places both by men and women, old and young. They
remember not that their tongues were given them therewith to glorify the God
of heaven, but as if their tongues were their own to speak therewith what
they list, therewith they despite the Lord, offend their brethren, 1. Cor. 6.18.
and defile themselves. Again, Fly fornication (says the Apostle;) every sin
that a man does is without the body, but he that commits fornication
sins against his own body. And yet how do men defile their bodies in all
places with the filthiness of this sin? Know we not (beloved) that our
bodies are the members of Christ? or if we do, shall we take the members of
Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God forbid. Know we not that he
which coupleth himself with an harlot, is one body with her? And shall we
join our selves unto an harlot, and cut off our selves from the body of Christ
Jesus? God forbid. Know we not that our bodies are the temples of the holy
Ghost to dwell in? And shall we by following after strange flesh drive the holy
Ghost out of the temples of our bodies? 1. Cor. 3.17.
God forbid. If any man destroy the temple of God, him shall God destroy. Now
what do we else but destroy the temple of God, when we make our bodies a cage
of unclean birds, and of all hateful lusts and pleasures? It behooves
therefore every man to look into himself, how he suffers himself to be
defiled with this uncleanness, that he keep his body a pure virgin unto the
Lord. Again, 1. Pet. 4.15.
Let none of you (says the Apostle) suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or
as an evil doer, or as a busy body in other men's matters. And yet by killing,
and stealing, and robbing, and all manner of evil doing we break out, and as
the Prophet says, Hos. 4.2.
Blood touches blood. And indeed so little nowadayes do we thirst after
purity in all our ways, that we had even as leife be counted impure as pure.
Yea now we have taken it up for a scoff and reproach unto them that make any
conscience of their ways, that Forsooth they are pure men, and they are pure
women; and if any such happily tread a little awrie, then, These be the pure
men, these be the pure women. Thus instead of harkening unto the Apostles
exhortation we mock and reproach them that endeavor to keep themselves pure.
Well, ye see that our Apostle would have us to think on, and to do whatsoever
things are pure. Let us hearken unto the Apostle, and let us labor and strive
unto it, both by prayer, and every holy course, to be pure in body and in
soul, in word and in deed, and in our whole man. Let us abstain from
whatsoever things may any way defile us: Fornication, Ephesians. 5.3.4.
and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not once be named amongst us,
as it becomes Saints; neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting,
which are things not comely; but rather giving of thanks. Even whatsoever
things are pure, let us think on them, and do them. It follows.

Whatsoever things pertain to love: This is the fifth general head of that
Christian duty which the Apostle commends unto the Philippians, wherein he
exhorts them to think on, and to do whatsoever things are lovely, and may
procure them love and favor with all men. For so I understand the Apostle in
this place. Whence I observe this lesson for us, that whatsoever things may win
us love and favor amongst men, we are to think on them, and to do them. It is
said of our blessed Savior, that he increased in wisdom, and stature, Luke
2.52.
and in favor with God and men. And it cannot but be commendable in us, so to
carry our selves, as that we grow in love and favor amongst men. What then?
Are we to communicate with the idolatrous in their superstitions, with the
drunkards in their drunkenness, with the lascivious in their wantonness, with
the idle in their idleness, with the unthrifts in their unthriftiness, with
the factious in their factiousnesse, with the careless in their retchlesnesse,
with the carnal in their carnalitie, that we may win their love and favor?
The favor indeed of such is seldom won but so. But it is not so much the
love and favor of them, as the love and favor of the good and godly that we
are to seek. What then? Are we to soothe and flatter them, to speak that we
should not, that we may seek to please them; to spare to speak that we
should, lest we offend them; to hazard a good conscience, for the pleasing of
them; or every way to labor to creep into their favor? for thus sometimes
even their favor is won. Nay, neither are we thus to seek after the favor of
good men. But so we are to think on, and to do whatsoever things may win us
love and favor amongst men, as that the same things also may purchase us
favor with God: For otherwise if they be not acceptable unto God, howsoever
they might win us favor amongst men, we are not to think on them, nor to do
them. What then are the things which may win us favor with God and men? If
we put on tender mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long-suffering, patience, and temperance: if we be true in word and deed, just
in our dealings, helpefull to the poor, honest in our conversation, if we
honor the aged, seek not our own, but the wealth of others, etc. these are
things as pleasing unto God, so such as win the love and favor of all men,
not only the good and godly, but also the wicked and ungodly. These things
therefore we are to think on and to do. And so our Apostle wills, where he
says, Now therefore, Coloss. 3.12.
as the elect of God, holy and beloved, put on tender mercy, etc.

This should teach us to avoid the things which may bring upon us the hatred
and obloquy of men. Otherwise then the manner of some is, who purposely do some
things, that thereby they may spite and grieve some men. It is not the hatred
or displeasure of men that may withhold us from speaking, or doing that we
ought. But if to spite or grieve some man, we stick not to speak or do that
which may displease our God, then our judgment sleeps not. If we bring upon
our selves the hatred of men, and withal the displeasure of God, the burden
will be too heavy for us to bear. Let us therefore hearken unto the counsel
of our Apostle, and let us think on, and do whatsoever things may win us love
and favor with men, so that withal they be pleasing unto God. Let us avoid
whatsoever things may bring upon us the hatred or displeasure of men, specially
such as are displeasing unto God. Let us love and live so, that we may be loved
of God and man; even whatsoever things are lovely, let us think on them, and do
them.

LECTVRE LXXXV.
PHILIP. 4. Verse 8. Whatsoever things are of good report, think on these
things, and do these things,

9. Which ye have both learned, and received, etc.


THere is yet remaining another general head of Christian piety, which the
Apostle commends unto the Philippians, wherein he exhorts them to think
on, and to do whatsoever things are of good report amongst men, that by such
things they may win unto themselves a good name, and be well spoken and
reported of in the places where they live. Whence I observe this lesson for us,
that whatsoever things may purchase us a good report, or continue our good name
amongst the sons of men, we are to think on them, and to do them, that as
much as is possible we may hear well of all men. A good name (says Solomon)
makes the bones fat: Prouer. 15.30
that is, so comfort, and rejoices, and strengthens a man as good fare
which makes him fat and well liking; yea, A good name (says the same Solomon)
is to be chosen above great riches: 22.1. Eccles. 7.3. Eccl. 41.13.
yea, a good name is better then a good ointment. A good life (says the son
of Syrach) has the days numbered, but a good name endures for ever: it
continues with thee above a thousand treasures of gold. And therefore it is
that men are oftentimes as jealous of their good name and good report among men
as of their lives, and count themselves (after a sort) killed when their good
name is empaired, or called into question. To have then a good name, ye see,
and to be well reported of, is as much worth as gold; nay, as a thousand
treasures of gold; nay, as much worth as a man's life. Therefore the Apostle
exhorts to procure things honest before all men: Romans 12.17.
things honest, that is, things which may purchase us credit, and make us to
be well reported of amongst men: And our Apostle in this place, to think on,
and to do whatsoever things are of good report. Now then, what are the things
that make us well reported of amongst men? Surely, if it be said of us, that we
are men dealing faithfully, truly, justly and uprightly; living honestly,
soberly, purely and godly; walking wisely, modestly, peaceably, and lovingly
with our brethren, bearing things patiently as becomes the Saints of God; in a
word, having faith and a good conscience, and whatsoever things pertain to
virtue: if we be such men, these things will make us well reported of, and
either bring us to a good name if we had it not, or continue our good name if
we have it. For these are things of good report, both before the Lord, and also
before men.

Yea but this is great vanity, to seek after fame and good report among men,
that men may speak well, and report well of us. It is so indeed, if therein we
seek our own glory. For how good soever, how full of rare virtues soever the
things be that we do, if therein we seek our own glory, it is surely great
vanity. We must therefore know, that we are to think on, and to do the things
that are of good report, both before the Lord, and also before men, not for our
own glory, but for the glory of Christ Jesus in whom we believe, for the
glory of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, which we profess. We must have care
that we may be well spoken of, well reported of, not for any tickling vanity
of our own praises, but that the name of God, that the truth of Christ Jesus
might be well spoken of for our sakes. For it is an ornament and honor unto
the truth with men, if the professors of the truth be of good report amongst
men. And therefore our blessed Savior says, Let your light so shine before
men, Math. 5.16.
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
heaven. And our Apostle describing the office of a Minister, says, that he
must be well reported of, even of them that are without, 1. Tim. 3.7.
lest he fall into rebuke, indeed that the word of God be not evil spoken of.
And the Apostle Peter prescribing unto wives how they ought to order themselves
toward their husbands, says, that they are to be subject unto them; and why?
1. Pet. 3.1.2.
that even they which obey not the word, may without the word be won by the
conversation of the wives, while they behold their pure conversation which is
with fear. And to the some purpose he gives this general exhortation, Have
your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that they which speak evil of
you as of evil doers, 2.12.
may by your good works which they shall see, glorify God in the day of
visitation. To the end therefore that God may be glorified, and that the truth
which we profess may be well spoken of, we are to think on and to do
whatsoever things are of good report, whereby we may win or continue a good
name and report amongst men.

This then should teach us to take heed and beware of whatsoever things may
bring an evil report upon us; and the rather, for that the hurt thereof lights
not upon our selves alone, but upon the name of our God whereby we are called,
and upon the truth of our God which we profess. What ill reports Eli his
sons heard touching the offerings of the Lord, we all know, 1. Sam. 2 17.
as also how therefore men abhorred the offerings of the Lord. Their sin
which they committed was very great, and brought a very ill report upon them;
but hereby it is aggrauated, that it brought a dishonor upon the holy name of
God and the offerings of the Lord. And so must we reckon, that whatsoever ill
report we bring upon our selves by any evil that we do, it lights not on our
selves alone, but upon our God in whom we believe, and upon his truth which we
pr^fesse. And yet how careless are we of such things as bring ill reports upon
us? Factions, divisions and contentions, what ill reports do they bring upon
us, and upon the truth which we profess? And yet how is the corn ouergrowne
every where by these weeds and tares? Every one of us will post the name off
from one to another. The Brownists and Barrowists they make no division in the
Church; the ringleaders of factions, they make no factions in societies; the
firebrands of contention, they make no contention among neighbors and
brethren, but such, and such, and such. But yet the thing remains to our
great infamy; faction, division and contention, they grow up to our shame.
Again, usury (I think) will be confessed to be a thing of evil report: I am
sure the Lord has forbidden it, Leuit. 25.36.
even all usury or vantage, call it biting usury, or what else you will; and
that the Prophet Jeremy so lothed it, that he washed his hands clean of
either lending or borrowing upon usury; Ier. 15.10. Nehem. 5.
that Nehemiah swept it out from among the people as a great filthiness;
Ezech. 18.13.
and that Ezechiel condemns giving upon usury, or taking increase, by what
name soever you will call it. And yet how many professors of the truth hear
evil for this sin? and how ill does the truth it self hear for this sin?
I assure my self, that the adversaries of the truth offend a hundred fold more
this way, then do the professors of the truth. But being a thing of evil
report, I could wish that the professors of the truth would with Jeremy wash
their hands of this sin. I should instance in many other things of evil
report. But by these you will conjecture what is to be said of the rest. For
generally this I say, whatsoever the thing be, if it be of evil report, we are
not to think on it, not to do it, lest not only we, but the truth of Christ
Jesus hear evil for our sakes.

Yea but what if an evil report be brought upon us without a cause? What if we
be counted schismatic, factious, contentious, usurers, or the like, without
a cause? Without a cause? then no matter. If there be a cause of such report,
then we are to look unto it: but if not, we need not to be moved much at the
matter. Math. 5.11.
Nay, our Savior tells us, that we are blessed when men speak all manner of
evil against us for his sake falsely, and that we are to rejoice and be glad.
12. 2. Cor. 6.8.
In these cases we are to pass with the Apostle, by honor and dishonor, by
evil report and good report. We cannot stay men from reporting ill of us. Our
blessed Savior himself heard it said of himself, that he was a glutton, and
a drinker of wine, Luc. 7.34.
a friend of Publicans and sinners. What marvel if the world speak evil of
us, and like the Dragon cast out whole floods of evil reports upon us? But
this we are to look unto, that neither we think on, nor do any thing that may
bring an evil report upon us justly. For we hear what our Apostle says;
Whatsoever things are of good report, we are to think on them and to do them,
but whatsoever things are of evil report, we are not to think on them nor to
do them. Let us therefore carefully look unto the things whereon we set our
hearts, or whereunto we set our hands. Is it a thing of good report, which may
make us well spoken of amongst men? Let us then think on it and do it, that so
the truth which we profess may be well spoken of. But is it a thing of evil
report, which may make us ill spoken of? Let even this be enough to dissuade us
from thinking on it, or doing it, whatsoever it be, lest the way of truth be
evil spoken of. By things of good report, our God, and his truth, and our
selves shall have honor: but by things of evil report, our God, and his
truth, and our selves shall be dishonored. Let us therefore think on and do
whatsoever things may bring on us a good report, and avoid both the thought
and the deed of whatsoever may bring an ill report upon us.

The last thing which I note in this general conclusion of the Apostles
exhortations, or rather in the exhortation, is, that the Apostle would have the
Philippians to think on these things, and to do these things. For these two,
howsoever they be severed in place by our Apostle, yet are they to be joined in
the opening of these words, and in following of the Apostles exhortation. He
would therefore have the Philippians to think on these things, that is, to
enter into a diligent consideration of these things with themselves, and in
their hearts to love and affect them, and likewise to do these things, because
it would be to no great purpose, that in their hearts they should love and
affect these things, and enter into a serious consideration of them, unless
also they should practice them in their lives. Whence I observe this lesson for
us, that unto the performance of Christian piety and holy duty, it is not
enough to think on seriously with our selves, and in our hearts to love and
affect whatsoever things are true, etc. unless also in our outward actions we
follow whatsoever things are true, etc. Both in our hearts we must think on,
and love, and affect the things that are good; and in the words of our mouth,
in the works of our hands, and in the ways of our lives, we must show forth
the same. Heart and hand must go together. If the heart endite a good matter,
the tongue must be the pen of a ready writer: if the heart believe unto
righteousness, the tongue must confess unto salvation: and if the knowledge
of such things as accompany salvation be in the understanding, there must also
be an holy practice of such things in the life and conversation. And therefore
David prayed, Psalm. 19.14.
that both the meditations of his heart and the words of his mouth might be
acceptable in the sight of the Lord; no doubt, that both in his heart he might
think on, and with his mouth might speak, and in his life might practice those
things which were good and right in his eyes. And in another place he
professes, 119.
not only that he loves the law of the Lord, and meditateth therein
continually, but also that he keeps his commandments with his whole heart.
For as our blessed Savior says, Mat. 7.21.
Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven, but he that does the will of the Father which is in heaven: and as the
Apostle says, Not the hearers of the law are righteous before God, Romans 2.13.
but the doers of the law shall be justified: so is it likewise in this whereof
we now speak, that not every one that thinks on, or loves and affects the
things that are good, by and by performs the holy duties of Christian piety,
but he that shows forth his love in the holy practice of a Christian life and
conversation. Nay, indeed whatsoever profession we make, and howsoever we say
that we think on, and love and affect the best things, yet unless the fruit
thereof show it self in our outward actions, in our lives and conuersations,
in vain do we persuade our selves of Christian piety in our selves. For where
the Spirit works in the heart a serious cogitation, a true love and affection
unto whatsoever things are good, there also by the power and work of the same
Spirit the fruit of these things is seen in the practice of a holy life and
conversation: so that as we think on, and love, and affect the things that are
good, so we will be ready also to do and to practice that which is good.

Let this then teach us to take heed how we flatter our selves with a vain
persuasion of Christian piety and performance of holy duty, when indeed we
are far from it. Thou will say unto me, that thou think on the things that
are true, and holy, and just, etc. as much as any man does: but thou must say
it and prove it, or else howsoever thou perswadest thy self of thy performance
of a good Christian duty in that thou think on, and love, and affectest
the things that are good, yet thou deceiuest thy self. For say that thine
heart is set on, and that thou have a very good mind unto whatsoever things are
true; thou must also prove it by doing whatsoever things are true, by embracing
a truth in religion, by speaking the truth with thy mouth, and by being that in
truth, which thou would seem unto the world to be, or else thou deceiuest
thy self. Say that thou love and affectest whatsoever things are honest,
thou must also make proof of it by doing whatsoever becomes thy person in thy
place, with all decent gravity, or else thou deceiuest thy self. Say that
thine heart is set on whatsoever things are just; thou must make proof of it
by doing whatsoever things may be justly required of thee by God or man, or
else thou deceiuest thy self. Say that thine heart is set on whatsoever things
are pure; thou must also make proof of it by abstaining from all filthiness
of the flesh and of the spirit, or else thou deceiuest thy self. Say that
thine heart is set on whatsoever things are lovely; thou must also make proof
of it, by doing whatsoever may win thee love and favor with God and men, or
else thou deceiuest thy self. Say that thine heart is set on whatsoever things
are of good report; thou must also make proof of it by doing whatsoever may
make thee well reported of, and the truth for thy sake, or else thou deceiuest
thy self. Say that thine heart is set on whatsoever things are good and
commendable; thou must also make proof of it by doing whatsoever things are
good and commendable, and abstaining from the contrary, or else thou deceiuest
thy self. And therefore certainly a great many of us do deceive our selves.
For by our outward actions it appears how far otherwise we do then we
should, lying one unto another, doing things not seemly, defrauding others of
that is due unto them, defiling our own selves, grieuing one another, bringing
upon our selves evil reports, and following after that which is evil and
blame worthy. We would (it may be) serve God, but we do serve Mammon: we would
(it may be) seem religious, but we are covetous: we cry (it may be) in our
hearts, and with our mouths, Lord, Lord; but we do not the will of the Lord: we
would sit (it may be) at the right hand and left hand of Jesus in his kingdom,
but we cannot away with it to drink of his cup. In a word, we would make a
show of godliness, but we deny the power thereof; we would seem to profess
Jesus Christ, but we do turn the grace of God into wantonness. Thus we deceive
our selves while we do not both think on, and do the things that are good, and
such as accompany salvation. Let us therefore as many as fear the Lord, and
desire to walk in his ways, hearken unto our Apostle, and both think on and
do whatsoever things are true, etc. He that has made all, and is only worthy
of all, let him have all: heart and hand, thought and deed, word and work, let
all be employed in his service, let all be always bent unto whatsoever things
are true, etc. that still we think on them and do them.

Which ye have both learned, etc. This is the former reason which the Apostle
uses to enforce his exhortation unto the Philippians; and it is drawn, as ye
see, from the things whereunto he exhorts them, which were no new things,
such as they had not known or heard of, but which they had both learned, and
received, and heard, and seen in him. Where I note, that the things whereunto
he exhorts them, were such as they had both learned, and received, and heard,
and seen in him, and therefore such as both he might the better urge, and they
should the rather follow. Whence first I observe this lesson for the Minister
and teacher of the word, that if he will do good with his people, and prevail
with them unto every holy course, he must both teach them with the word of
truth and with example of life, that both they may hear and learn the truth
from his mouth, and likewise see the same expressed in his life. And therefore
our Apostle exhorts Timothy to be an example unto them that believe, in word
and in conversation; 1. Tim. 4.12.
in word, that from his mouth they might be instructed in the wholesome word of
truth; and in conversation, that in his life they might see that integrity
which becomes Saints. So likewise he exhorts Titus, Above all things to show
himself an example of good works, with vncorrupt doctrine, with gravity,
Tit. 2.7.8.
integrity, and with the wholesome word that cannot be reproved: so that he
would have him both to teach the truth soundly and sincerely, and in his life
to carry himself with all gravity and integrity, to be a pattern of good
works and holiness of life. And so the Apostle Peter exhorts all Ministers
to feed the flock of God which depends on them, 1. Pet. 5.2.3.
and to be examples to the flock; to feed them with the bread of God, the
wholesome word of truth, and to be examples unto them in all holiness of life.
Otherwise, whatsoever they build with the one hand, they pull down with the
other; and like unto the naughty cow, turn down with their foot all the
milk that they have yielded. For preach they never so well, labor they never
so painfully, be they never so eloquent and mighty in the Scriptures, if their
life be offensive, their teaching will be unprofitable. Nay, if their people
can once say unto them, Physician heal thy self; Thou that teach another,
teach thou not thy self? Thou that preachest, A man should not steal, Luc.
4.23. Romans 2.21.22.
do thou steal? Thou that say, A man should not commit adultery, do
thou commit adultery? Let them never look to prevail with them for any thing
that is good. O but the people should regard what their teachers say, not what
they do. True indeed; for so our Savior has said. But the teachers should be
careful, as of that they say, so of that they do, to lead their people in and
out, both in soundness of doctrine and in holiness of life. For as a woe is
unto them if any perish for want of feeding, so likewise if any perish by their
ill and naughty example of living.

Let the^ then look unto this, yt neither attend unto doctrine, nor give good
example of life unto others; and they also yt attend unto doctrine, but do more
harm by their example of life the^ they do good by their teaching; and they
also that having care that their life be not offensive, either do not, or
cannot teach their people ye things that belong unto their peace. The good
Minister of Christ should be able at all times to press his people unto the
things which they had learned, and received, and heard, and seen in him. He
that fails in either, doctrine or life, has his woe; how much more he that
fails in both?

Secondly, hence I observe this lesson for you that are hearers of the word,
that whatsoever good things ye have learned, received, heard, and seen in your
Ministers and teachers, those things ye should think on and do. For is there a
necessity laid upon us to preach the Gospel unto you, and is there not a
necessity laid upon you to hear the word of your salvation from our mouths?
Is there a woe unto us if we preach not the Gospel unto you, and is there not a
woe unto you if ye hear not the Gospel of us? Lies there a charge upon us to
be examples unto you of holiness of life, and integrity of conversation; and
lies there not a charge upon you to be followers of us in all holiness of
life and integrity of conversation? Yes beloved: if we be to bring the Gospel
of your salvation unto you, ye are to receive it of us: if we be to show you
all the counsel of God, ye are to hear it of us: if we be to go before you in
a sanctified life, ye are to follow us, and so to walk as ye have us for an
example. Heb. 13.8.
And therefore says the Apostle unto the Hebrews, Remember them which have
the oversight of you, which have declared unto you the word of God, whose faith
follow, considering what has been the end of their conversation. And our
Apostle in the Chapter before, Be ye followers (says he) of me, and look on
them which walk so, as ye have us for an example. Which of us would not
condemn that child that should not hearken to ye good counsel of his father?
or ye subject yt should contemn his Princes Ambassador? Beloved, we are your
fathers in Christ Jesus, to beget you by the immortal seed of ye word unto a
lively faith and hope in Christ Jesus. How ought ye then as dear children to
hearke^ unto your fathers instruction, and to walk as ye have us for an
example. We are ye Ambassadors of the King of kings and Lord of Lords, even of
Christ Jesus; sent unto you in his stead, to declare unto you the will of our
heavenly Father, and to beseech you to be reconciled unto God. How ought we
then to be received of you, and how ought our message to be entertained?

But do ye hearken unto us as unto your fathers in Christ Jesus? Do ye receive
us as the Ambassadors of Christ Jesus? Is our message entertained as sent from
Christ Jesus? I bear you record, some of you, that ye receive our message, and
hearken unto us gladly. But if all of you shall say that ye do so, then must I
say unto you as Samuel said unto Saul, when Saul told him, that he had
fulfilled the commandment; 1. Sam. 15.14.
What then (said he) means the bleating of the sheep in mine ears, and the
lowing of the oxen which I hear? So say I unto you, what means then the
gunning and drumming in mine ears? what means the Lording and Ladying which
I hear? If we come unto you, and speak unto you in our own name, hear us
not: but if we come unto you, and speak unto you in the name of the Lord, will
ye not hear us? If ye will not, it is not us, but it is the Lord that ye
refuse to hearken to and obey; as it is written, He that hears you hears
me, Luke 10 16.
and he that despises you despises me, says the Lord. We only, as the Lord
his watchmen, warn you of the wickedness of your ways: we only, as the
Ambassadors of Christ Jesus, pray ye that ye be reconciled unto God. If ye
hearken not sin lies at the door, indignation and wrath is unto them that
disobey the truth. Beloved, it is not yours, but you that we seek. It is not
out of the humor of one that can abide no pastime that we speak unto you, but
out of the desire of one that would have you blameless and pure, and the
sons of God without rebuke. In Christ's stead therefore I beseech you to leave
off these disordered sportings and meetings. The custom of them is heathenish,
the abuses of them great, and the inconveniences which follow them, many. Thus
ye have learned, and received, and heard; and therefore think not on them, nor
do them.

LECTVRE LXXXVII.
PHILIP. 4. Verse 9. And the God of peace shall be with you.

10. Now I rejoice also in the Lord greatly, that now at the last ye are
revived again to care, etc.


THE latter reason which the Apostle uses to enforce his exhortation,
remains now to be spoken of, which is a promise, that the God of peace shall
be with them, if they will think on these things, and do them. The thing then
that upon hearkening unto his exhortation is promised, is, the presence of the
only wise and everliving God, sometimes called the God of glory, in whom
only is the fullness of glory, and unto whom all glory is due; sometimes the
God of love, in whom only is true and perfect love, and who alone is for
himself to be loved; sometimes the God of comfort and consolation, in whom,
and by whom alone we have true comfort unto our souls; sometimes our peace,
which of Jews and Gentiles has made one body, and broken down the partition
wall which was between us and them; sometimes the King of peace, under the
covert of whose wings we live in peace; and sometimes the God of peace, as both
here, and often elsewhere. Now he is called the God of peace, both because of
our reconciliation which he has wrought by Jesus Christ: for so it is said, 2.
Cor. 5.18.
that he has reconciled us unto himself by Jesus Christ: and because of that
peace of conscience which he communicates unto us through our reconciliation
with him by Jesus Christ: Romans 5.1.
for so it is said, that being justified by faith, we have peace toward God
through our Lord Jesus Christ: and likewise because of that outward peace which
he gives us in the world, so far forth as is for his glory, and our good.
When then the Apostle says, that the God of peace shall be with them, the
fruit of Gods presence with them is thereby signified, in that he is called the
God of peace. For hereupon thus I understand this promise, that if they think
on, and do these things which he has commended unto them, then the God of
peace shall be with them to reconcile them unto himself, to give them peace of
conscience through their reconciliation with him, and to bless them with
outward peace in the world, so far forth as shall be for his glory, and
their good, so that the fruit of their innocence and piety shall be peace,
inward and outward, with God, in their souls, and in the world.

Where first, in that the Apostle, the rather to enforce his exhortation,
annexeth this merciful promise, that in so doing, the God of peace shall be
with them, I observe the great mercy of our God toward us, who to win us to
the performance of such Christian duties as we owe unto him and to our
brethren, does both in his own person, and in his Ministers, draw us
thereunto, by most sweet and loving promises. If we look into the work of
our creation at the beginning, we shall find that we were created, formed,
Esaias 43.7.
and made for the glory of God, that we might glorify him by doing his will,
and walking in his ways. If we look into the work of our recreation by Jesus
Christ, we shall find that we are treated in Christ Jesus unto good works,
Ephesians. 2.10.
which God has ordained that we should walk in them. If we look into the
written Law of God, we shall find, that whatsoever things are true etc. we
ought to think on them, and to do them. So that by the law of our creation, by
the law of our recreation, by the holy law of God we are to do whatsoever
Christian duty may justly be required of us by God, or man; and when we have
done all that we can in any of these things, we have done no more but that
which was our duty to do, Luke 17.10.
even that which, as we are Gods workmanship, we are bound to do. And yet such
is the mercy of our God, as that to bring us unto such Christian duties as we
are bound to perform, he makes many large and great promises, both by
himself, and by his Ministers. In Deuteronomy, Deuteronomy. 28.1. to 15.
If thou shall obey (says the Lord by Moses) the voice of the Lord thy God,
and observe and do all his commandments which I command thee this day, then
the Lord thy God will set thee on high above all the nations of the earth, and
all these blessings shall come on thee, and overtake thee, etc. To hearken unto
the voice of their God, and to obey his will, were things whereunto they were
bound, and which they were, upon their allegiance, to do. Yet behold by how
many and great promises of blessings he inuiteth them thereunto. Romans 2.7.
In our Apostle likewise, To them that by continuance in well doing seek
glory, and honor, and immortality, God shall reward eternal life. To
continue in well doing, is a duty whereunto we are bound. Galat. 3.10.
For so it is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things
which are written in the Book of the Law to do them: Yet behold, to provoke us
hereunto, a promise of eternal life. Quite otherwise then it is with us: for
which of us, to draw our servants to the performance of such duties as by their
places they are to do, allure them by promises? Nay, we require of them that
which is their duty to do, and look for it at their hands. But promises, they
are for children. But as in other things, so is it in this, God is not as man.
He has given us a Law to keep, and prescribed us duty, to observe, which we
his servants are to keep and observe, and the performance whereof he may
absolutely require of us. Yet does he not so, but by many promises of great
rewards he provoke us unto whatsoever he requires of us, as might be proved
by infinite testimonies out of the holy Scriptures.

This should serve to stir up our dull minds, and to make us follow hard
toward whatsoever holy duties, toward God, or toward man, are required of us.
That we must be allured by promises, argues our dull minds and unwilling to
the things that are good, unless we be even drawn unto them by promise of
reward. But in that we are allured by promises, let this stir us up to follow
after such holy duties as have such promises of reward from the Lord. If the
world do promise honor, there needs not any to spur the ambitious forward:
so is it with the sensual man, if the flesh do promise pleasures; and so is it
with the covetous, if the blowing of any wind do promise riches; they make
haste, and post apace after these things, and strive who should be the
foremost. Shall the promises of the world, of the flesh, or of any like thing
so stir up the ambitious, sensual, and covetous worldlings to run after
their vanities; and shall not the promises of the Lord stir up his children
to follow after such things as have such promises of reward from him? Shall the
words of wind and worse so prevail with them to run after, I say not after a
corruptible crown, but after worse then vanity; and shall not the word of the
Lord prevail with his children to run after such holy duties as bring with
them an incorruptible crown? It is a shame that the children of darkness
should thus ouergo the children of light in their generation. Let not the vain
promises of the world prevail more with them to draw them unto worldly
vanity, then the sure promises of the Lord with us to draw us unto Christian
piety. Let us not despise the mercy of the Lord, but, as dutiful children,
let us follow after that whereunto, by loving promises, he does so provoke us,
as parents are wont to do their children. If he only required it, we were to
do it. How ought we then to bestirre our selves when he promises great
blessings for doing that we should? Let us then hearken when he promises, and
surely wait for what he promises.

Secondly, from the thing promised, in that it is said that the God of peace
shall be with them, to give them peace outward and inward, with God, in their
souls, and in the world, if they will think on, and do those things whereunto
he exhorts them; I observe what the fruit of innocence, piety, and holy
walking with God and men is; the God of peace shall be with such as so walk to
give them his peace. Be perfect, (says the Apostle) be of good comfort, be of
one mind, 2. Cor. 13.11.
live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you. In which words
the Apostle in few words compriseth the sum of that Christian piety and duty
which he requires of the Corinthians; and withal shows that this fruit
shall follow upon the performance thereof, the God of love and peace shall be
with them, that his love being shed abroad in their hearts by the power of the
Spirit, they may be fulfilled with that peace which passes all understanding.
Will we then have the Lord to be present with us by his grace? Will we have the
God of peace to be with us to give us his peace? Then must we live soberly, and
righteously, and godly in this present world; and whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, etc. we must think
on them, and do them. For so the God of peace shall be with us if we walk with
God, and with men as we ought, thinking on and doing such things as are good,
and accompany salvation. Where withal we must know that this fruit of Gods
presence, this blessing of peace by the God of peace, follows not upon the
merit and worth of any performance of any Christian piety or duty which we can
think on or do: for, could we do more by much then we are able to do, yet
should we do but that only which is our duty to do, as before I told you. And
where nothing but duty is performed, what merit is there for the performance?
Nay, whatsoever good we do, or possibly can do, it is so polluted by the
filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit wherewithal we are defiled, that if
it be weighed, it will be found too light in it self to deserve any good at
the Lords hand. Not one straight line that we draw, but all our paths are
crooked, and all our righteousness is as filthy clouts: Esaias 64.6.
So that no merit but of death which is the due reward of sin. Romans 6.23.
How then is it that this fruit, of Gods presence, this blessing of peace by
the God of peace follows our performance of Christian piety? It is not of
merit, but according unto promise. For as in this place ye see, he has
promised such fruit to follow such holy walking. He then which has promised,
being not as man that he should lie, or as the son of man that he should
repent, but being faithful in his promise, gives such grace where there
wants merit, even because he has promised. And if we keep the condition,
the promise shall surely be fulfilled; if we think on and do these things
which we have heard and learned, then the God of peace shall surely be with us,
because he has so promised. Do I say, if we keep the condition, if we think
on, and do these things which we have heard and learned? Yea I say so: but here
see the mercy of God. He imposes a condition upon us, he requires a duty of
us, to think on, and do these things. And what, is it in us to keep the
condition? is it in us to think on, and do these things? Nay, our Apostle
plainly tells us, 2. Cor. 3.5.
that we are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing that is good, as
of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God. Ill enough we can think of our
selves: for in our selves all the imaginations of the thoughts of our hearts
are only evil continually: Genesis 6.5.
but we cannot think any thing that is good as of our selves. What, not
think? How then can we do the thing that is good? Our Apostle tells us, Phil.
2.13.
that it is God that works in us both the will and the deed, even of his good
pleasure: So that if we desire any thing that is good, or do any thing that is
good, it is God that works in us, both the good desire, and the good deed. To
the point then, the Lord imposes a condition upon us, and he alone enableth us
to the performance of the condition; he requires of us to think on, and to do
those things which are true, honest, just, etc. and he alone suggesteth unto us
both the thinking on, and the doing of these things; and he says unto us, If
ye walk in my Laws, etc. and be alone makes us to walk in his Laws, and
works in us whatsoever thing is good. So that when the Lord makes good his
promises unto us, and crowns us with rich graces according to his promise, he
only crowns and graceth his own works which he has wrought in us. Thus
then ye see, that so the God of peace shall be with us if we think on, and do
whatsoever things are true, etc. not that either the merit of our Christian and
holy walking procures that promise of the Lord, or that it is in us to
perform the condition, that so we may receive the promise. But it is the Lord
that works in us both to think on, and to do these things, and that binds
himself by promise to be with us, if we think on, and do these things: and
therefore, if we think on, and do these things, he will be with us, because he
has promised.

Hence then let us learn what shall be unto them that do do not think on, nor
do whatsoever things are true, etc. even whatsoever things they have learned,
and received, and seen in their Ministers and Teachers, namely this, The God
of peace shall not be with them. Esaias 48.22.
There is no peace (says the Lord) to the wicked. And again, The wicked
(says the Prophet) shall be turned into hell, Psalm 9.17.
and all the people that forget God. Now, who forget God, if not they that do
not think on and do the things that they have learned, and received, and
heard, and seen in Gods Ministers? Nay, it cannot be that the God of peace
should be with them that so neglect the things that belong to their peace. For
them that honor him he will honor, 1. Sam. 2.30.
and they that despise him shall be despised. Join light and darkness,
Christ and Belial; and then let the God of peace be with them that neglect the
things that belong unto their peace. And yet how many are there that will not
come to learn, and receive, and hear of us the things that belong unto their
peace? how many that never think on, or do the things that they have learned,
and received, and heard of us, the things that are true, honest? etc. The
absence of some (for the most part) from these our holy meetings, and the
dissolute negligence of others, which being present, are as if they were
absent, give too too plain testimony to the truth of that I say. O would we
have the God of peace to be with us! who is so desperately wicked that would
not? Here we see how we may have the God of peace to be with us, namely, if we
think on and do those things which we have learned, and received, and heard of
our teachers in Christ Jesus. But if either we shall oppose our selves unto
those things, as some do; or neglect to think on and do those things, as too
many do; or absent our selves from the hearing, and learning, and receiving of
those things, as others do, how shall the God of peace be with us? Nay, he
shall set himself against us, and in stead of peace with him and in our own
souls, he shall arm himself against us, and send trouble into our souls.
Let us therefore think on, and do whatsoever things are true, etc. even
whatsoever good things we have learned, and received, and heard, and seen in
our Ministers and Teachers: and let us take heed how either we oppose our
selves unto them, or neglect to think on, and do them, or absent our selves
from the hearing of them. If we do, the God of peace shall be with us to give
us his peace. but if not, he will set himself against us; and howsoever for a
time we sleep securely, yet shall he make us at war against our selves. Thus
far of this exhortation, and the reasons hereof.

Now rejoice I also, etc. After those sundry exhortations unto the Philippians
in the former part of this Chapter, whereof hitherto we have spoken, now
follows the latter part of the Chapter, wherein he gives thanks unto the
Philippians for that bountiful liberality which they sent unto him lying at
Rome in prison, by the hands of Epaphroditus their minister, therewith to
supply such things as he lacked. First therefore he signifies his rejoicing
for their great care for him, showed by the things which they sent him by their
minister, verse. 10. Secondly he signifies his reioying to be, not so much for
the gift they sent him, as for the fruit which thence redounded unto them,
from ver. 11. to 18. Thirdly he commends their liberality, and wishes the
recompense thereof into their bosom, verse. 18, 19. These be the general
points. First then he signifies (I say) his rejoicing for their great care for
him, when he says, Now rejoice I, etc. In that he says, I rejoice greatly, he
signifies the greatness of his rejoicing, that he was almost ravished with
joy for their care for him. In that he says, I rejoice greatly in the Lord, he
signifies that his joy was not carnal, or conceived upon the greatness of
the gift, but that the Lord by his Spirit had enlarged their hearts, and
wrought in them such a Christian care. In that he says, that now at the last
they were revived again to care for him, he implies that their care had for
some time slacked toward him. The word here used is borrowed from trees, which
seeming in Winter to be dead and withered, in the Spring grow green again;
and has in it this similitude, that as the trees which in Winter seemed to be
withered, flourish again in the Spring, so their care which for a time
languished and decayed, now again revived. In that lastly he says, that they
had been careful, etc. he excuses the slacknesse of their care for him, as
not proceeding from want of will, but from want of opportunity to send that
which they desired. In these words then I note these three branches: first, the
Apostles rejoicing for their care for him: secondly, the Philippians slacknesse
for some time to care for him: thirdly, the Apostles excuse of their slacknes
to care for him. This is the meaning of these words, and these be the branches
therein contained. Now let us see what observations we may gather hence,
whereof to make some use for our selves.

First then here I note the Apostles great thankfulness unto the Philippians for
their great care of him, whereof he gives them to wit, when he says, that he
rejoices greatly for their care for him. Whence I observe this lesson for all
Christians, that it becomes them to be thankful for benefits received, and to
show forth their thankfulness in word and in deed unto those of whom they have
received them. I speak not of thankfulness unto God, but of thankfulness unto
men, so beseeming all men, as that otherwise almost they forget to be men. Genesis
23.12.
When Ephron the Hittite would have given unto Abraham his field in Machpelah
to bury his dead there, how did Abraham bow unto him, and thank him? When
Boaz gave leave unto Ruth to gleane in the field, Ruth. 2.
how thankful unto him were both Naomi and Ruth? To omit others, our Apostle,
what thanks gives he unto Priscilla and Aquila for their constant cleaving
unto him? Romans 16.4.
Gal. 4.15.
How thankfully does he remember the Galatians sometimes exceeding great love
and kindness toward him? Philem. 5.
And how thankfully does he remember Philemont love toward all Saints?
Generally that of the Prophet is true even in this, Psalm. 33.1.
that it becomes well the just to be thankful, as unto the Lord for his
mercies, so unto man for such benefits as they have received of man. For thus
both he that receives, shall do that which might be expected; and he that
gives, shall have that wherewith he will be satisfied.

Let this then teach us to beware of unthankfulness. He that rewards evil for
good, Pro. 17.13.
evil shall not depart from his house. And what else does he that repayes good
turns with unthankfulness? Let unkind Laban be unthankful unto Jacob if he
will, and churlish Nabal unto David; but let it be far from the faithful to
be unthankful. Our Apostle sorts unthankful men with the worst men that be, 2.
Tim. 3.2.3.
as selfe-louers, covetous, boasters, proud, cursed speakers, men disobedient
to parents, unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers, etc. And yet
how many are there that would be loath to be reckoned among the worst, which are
as unthankful as the most? Whose fault soever it be, it is a foul fault, and
one that includes all. Let us beware of it, and let our thankful mind be known
to all, that any way deserve well of us.

Secondly, in that the Apostle says, that he rejoiced in the Lord greatly for
their care for him, I note, that the Apostles rejoicing was not so much for the
bountifulnes of their gift, but especially for that the Lord by his Spirit had
enlarged their hearts to a Christian care over him. Whence I observe this
lesson for us, that when any do relieve us being in prison, poverty, need,
sickness, or any other adversity, we are not so much to rejoice in the gift
by which we are relieved, but especially we ought to rejoice in the Lord for
that he has vouchsafed to touch their hearts with a godly feeling of our
wants, and a Christian care to supply our wants. Thankfulness unto them is
beseeming and requisite, as before we heard; but our special care should be to
lift up our eyes unto the Lord, and to rejoice in him. For he it is that
opens the bowels of compassion, and touches with a tender commiseration of
their poor and needy distressed brethren, the hearts of them that are
enriched with greater sufficiency. And therefore our Apostle in many of his
Epistles usually thanketh God as for their faith in Christ Jesus, so for their
love toward all Saints: Col. 1.3.4.
We give thanks to God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, says the
Apostle in the next Epistle, since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and
of your love toward all Saints. And he tells the Corinthians that their
liberality causes thanksgiving unto God, 2. Cor. 9.11.
God being therefore to be blessed, because he opens the Saints hearts to
relieve the necessities of the poor Saints.

First therefore let me beseech you, beloved, even in the bowels of Christ
Jesus, to give your poor and distressed brethren cause to rejoice in the Lord
greatly for your care over them. A godly and Christian care of late has been
taken by the whole States of the land assembled in Parliament for the provision
of the poor; and we are all of us to rejoice in the Lord greatly for it, that
he put into their mind such an holy care. Put ye now on tender mercy and
compassion, and let your care likewise be showed this way, by a cheerful
giving toward the relief of your poor brethren so much as shall be thought
meet for you, that the backs and bellies of your poor brethren may bless
you, and rejoice in the Lord for you. If ye shall find in your selves a willing
cheerfulness this way, know that it is the Lord that has opened your hearts,
and stirred up the bowels of compassion within you, and look whatsoever he
gives, the Lord shall recompense it into his bosom. Prou. 19.17.
For so it is written, He that has mercy on the poor, lends to the Lord,
and he will recompense him that which he has given. But if ye shall grudge to
set forward so good a work, and think every little too much that is required of
you to that purpose know that the Lord has yet hardened your hearts, and shut
up all bowels of compassion within you; and as now the poor cry, and ye hear
not, so the day shall come, wherein ye shall cry, 21.13.
and not be heard. For so it is written, He that stops his ears at the
crying of the poor, he shall also cry, and not be heard. As every man
therefore has received, so let him give, and that cheerfully: 2. Cor. 9.7.
For God loves a cheerful giver. So shall the loins of the poor bless you,
so shall they rejoice in the Lord greatly for you, and so shall the Lord make
all his graces to abound toward you.

Secondly, let me exhort them of the poorer sort, to learn to rejoice in the
Lord for the care which he stirs up in their brethren for them. It is too
too commonly seen in many of you, that as ye want the wealth of the world, so
ye want also the grace of God. Ye sit and beg alms and relief. If ye have it
not, ye murmr and grudge, oftentimes ye banne and curse: if ye have it, some
of you take it, and go your ways, and there is an end; others of you say some
formal words from the teeth forward: but who is he, or where is he that having
received relief, lifts up his eyes unto the Lord, and rejoices in him, for
that it has pleased him to work in their brethren such a Christian care over
them? Who is he or where is he, that being sent away without relief, lifts
up his eyes unto the Lord, and prays unto him, that it will please him to
increase their brethrens care over them, and to give them bowels of compassion
toward them, without murmuring or grudging at them? Thus should ye do, and
then surely the hearts of many that are yet hardened, would be opened toward
you. Learn therefore as to be thankful toward your brethren for their care
over you, so principally to thank the Lord and to rejoice in him for the care
which he stirs up in them for you. Learn to think on him, to bless him,
to rejoice in him more then any great many of you do. Look not only to the
relief which ye receive, but look unto the Lord, whose work it is to incline
men's hearts to relieve you. Thus shall he be well pleased, and thus shall he
incline men more and more to relieve you.

LECTVRE LXXXVIII.
PHILIP. 4. Verse 10. Now I rejoice in the Lord greatly, that now at the last
ye are revived again to care for me, wherein notwithstanding ye were careful,
but ye lacked opportunity.
THe next thing which I noted in these words, was the Philippians slacknesse to
care (for some time) for the Apostle. For in that he says, I rejoice, etc.
that now at last ye are revived, etc. he implies, that their care had for some
time slacked toward him; the word here used being borrowed from trees, which
seeming in Winter to be dead, flourish again in the Spring: and having in it
this similitude, that as trees which in Winter seem to be dead and withered,
flourish and grow green again in the Spring; so their care which for a time
languished and decayed, now again revived and quickened in them. Whence I
observe this lesson for our learning, that even in the faithful and dearest
children of God, love and charity, and other good graces of Gods Spirit, are
not always alike orient and eminent, not always alike manifest and apparent,
but sometimes they languish and decay, and are as if they were not. Gen 20.2.
2. Sam. 12.13.
Abraham the father of the faithful, sometimes lied, and spoke not the truth.
David a man after Gods own heart, after his murder and adultery, slept as it
were in the dust a great while, till Nathan awoke him. Peter, unto whom it was
said, Mat. 16.18.23.
Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church, had got a great
fall, when he heard it said unto him, Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an
offense unto me. The Church of Corinths light was so dimmed for some while,
that the Apostle doubted how to come unto them, 1 Cor. 4.21.
whether with a rod, or in love, and in the spirit of meekness. And the
Philippians care for the Apostle, was so for a while frozen and key-cold, that
they seemed quite to have forgotten him. So subject unto their infirmities are
both whole bodies, and the soundest parts even of the best bodies, so long as
they are clothed with the earthly house of this tabernacle. Not the best, but
feel such decays in themselves; not the best, but the best graces are so
eclipsed in them, that they which should be as trees planted by the rivers of
waters, bringing forth their fruit in due season, are sometimes as dead and
withered trees whose leaves are faded and their fruit perished; that their
faith which should work by love, is sometimes as fire under the ashes or
embers; that their charity which should always be fervent, is sometimes
ice-cold; that their obedience which should be with their whole heart, is
sometimes divided between God and the world: so that not the best but may
sometimes shrink in himself, and others doubt of him whether he belong to the
covenant, whether he be in the state of grace.

But it is a doubt which need not greatly trouble. For though the children of
God may sometimes seem to be as the wicked, yet are they not as the wicked.
The wicked are indeed like the heath in the wilderness, they are indeed corrupt
trees, and without fruit, twice dead, and plucked up by the roots. For though
some of them be, it may be, as the fig tree which Christ cursed, Mat. 21 19.
having leaves and shadows, and shows, of diverse good graces of Gods Spirit;
yet look well upon them, and consider them, and ye shall find that either they
have no fruit, or naughty fruit on them, wanting all sap and moisture of
Gods holy Spirit in them. But the children of God only seem for a time to be
as dead and withered trees, as does in Winter every fair and pleasant tree.
For though now their leaves be faded, yet do they afterward grow green again;
though now they bear no fruit, yet afterward they do; though now there seem
to be no sap or moisture in them, yet is there in the root, and afterward
shootes out; though now they be as dead, yet afterward they revive again.
Their faith and love are sometimes raked up as it were in the ashes; but
infidelity is bound up in the soul of the wicked, and hatred eats up the
bowels of their belly. Their charity i^ some times cold, and their obedience
full of defect; but the very bowels of the wicked are merciless cruelty, and
they sell themselves to work iniquity: or if there be any utter rine or
bark, to make semblance and show of a good tree, yet is there no sap or
moisture of Gods holy Spirit in them. Well they may have tasted of the good word
of God, and of the powers of the world to come, but it is but a taste that they
have gotten, and the fruit that follows it, is but a blossom. But the
children of God are taught by Gods Spirit; and howsoever for a time the Spirit
show not it self in them, yet does it afterward bud forth into the fruits of
true righteousness and holiness. To speak all in one word, the wicked revive
not after they seemed to be dead, because in truth they never lived; but the
children of God after that they seem to be dead unto the life of God, at last
revive again, and do their former works: and again, the wicked only for
some time seem to live, and at last show plainly that they are and always
were dead in sin; but the children of God only for some time seem to be
dead, and at last revive again unto the life of God, through the power of the
Spirit which was never quite quenched in them.

Here then is both a word of comfort unto the distressed, and a watch word
likewise unto all in general. A comfort it must needs be unto the afflicted
soul, that in the dearest children of God, the life of God is not always so
manifest, but that sometimes they seem to be dead, yet at last do revive
again, and do their former works. For why art thou so full of heaviness, O
thou distressed soul, and why are thy thoughts so troubled within thee? Art
thou even dead in respect of the life of God? Feel thou no warmth of the
Spirit within thee? Art thou cold in zeal, cold in prayer, cold in charity?
Have thou slacked that diligence which thou wast wont to use in the service of
thy God, in thy duty toward thy neighbors and brethren? Well, pluck up
thine heart, be not troubled nor fear. This is no other thing then sometimes
befalls even the dearest children of God: for sometimes even the best of them
feel it to be so with them. Only tell me this: did thou ever feel the life
of God and the warmth of his Spirit within thee? Had thou sometimes comfort
in the having of those graces, the want whereof does now disquiet and
discomfort thee? O what else? and there is thy grief that now thou find not
that comfort in them which thou wast wont to find. Well, be strong, and comfort
thine heart. For thy God at the last will revive thee. Thy God will stablish
the thing that he has wrought in thee; and he that has begun a good work in
thee, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ: for whom he loves once,
he loves unto the end. A cloud has for a while ouershadowed thee, and Satan
for a time by a mist has obscured thy light: but thy light shall break forth,
though not as the Sun in his brightness, yet so clear that the life of thy
God shall be manifest in thee.

Only let this watchword be unto thee, and unto all in general, that when you
feel such decays of the life of God in your selves, either by dullness unto
any duty, or slacknesse in any service, then ye stir up the grace of God in
you, and labor by prayer and every holy course, that the grace which seems
to be dead, may be revived in you. As therefore the Apostle exhorts, Ephesians.
5.14.
so say I unto you, Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, even
them that are dead in sin and iniquity, and Christ shall give thee light.
Shake off that drowsines which has seized upon you, and stir up every good
grace of God in you. Quench not the Spirit that is within you, but strive to
grow up in grace and every good gift of the Spirit. Is your love toward Gods
Saints abated in you? Romans 12.9.
Hearken to the Apostle, Be affectioned to love one another with brotherly love
and let your love be without dissimulation and pray always unto the strong God
of your salvation, that your love may abound daily toward all Saints. Yea,
whatsoever good grace is decayed in you, give all diligence that it may be
revived in you, and labor thereunto by all prayer and supplication in the
spirit.

The last thing which I noted in these words of the Apostle, was the Apostles
excuse of the Philippians slackenesse to care for him. For, in that he says,
Wherein notwithstanding ye were careful, but ye lacked opportunity: he
interprets their slacknesse to care for him to proceed, not from want of good
will toward him, but from want of opportunity to send unto him that which they
desired. Whence I observe this lesson for us, that we are not always sharply
to censure the languishing of our brethren in faith, love or other virtue; but
rather charitably to judge of them, and so much as in a good conscience we may,
to salve and excuse them by a kind and favorable interpretation. Not the best
but they have their infirmities, through which (sometimes) they so fall that
they seem almost to be dead, as already we have heard, both omitting to do
such things as they should do, and committing such things as they should not
do: but many causes there may be of such failing in the performance of
Christian duty. A defect there may be of zeal, yet proceeding rather from
fear of disturbing the peace of the Church, then from want of enflamed desire
to see the house of the Lord, wall and roof builded up in perfect beauty. A
defect there may be of charity, yet proceeding rather from want of opportunity
then from want of will to perform that duty. And so in other things, causes
sometimes may be presumed to be of such and such faults which may excuse the
faults. And therefore we are charitably to judge of the faults of our brethren,
and rather in charity presume of that excuse for them which may be alleged,
then by sharp censure to condemn them whom the Lord has not condemned.

Where yet we must have these caueats, first, that we deny not that to be
evil which is evil, that to be sin which is sin; as they do that deny
Abraham to have lied, when he said of Sarah, She is my sister: that deny Joseph
to have sworn when so often he protested unto his brethren by the life of
Pharaoh; that deny Peter to have sinned (at the least mortally) when Paul
withstood him to his face; and they likewise that say of pride, it is
cleanliness; of covetousness, it is thrift; of deceit and fraud, it is
wisdom; of hypocrisy, it is courteous humanity; of lascivious wantonness,
it is requisite cheerfulness, and the like. For this is not charitably to
bear with a fault, charity being, as not suspicious, so not foolish, to deny
that to be evil which is evil; neither is it to excuse, but only by a lie.
The second caveat is, that we do not farther excuse the faults and infirmities
of any then in a good conscience we may: For if through favor or affection, or
how else soever we do so, what good soever we shall do thereby unto others*
surely we shall do great wrong unto our own souls: and howsoever happily we
brook it for a time, Prou. 15.15.
yet in the end shall it sting like a Serpent. A good conscience is a
continual feast. But if in any man's behalf, or to any purpose we shall do
more then in a good conscience we may, the end thereof will be bitter as gall
and wormwood.

Here then are three sorts of men to be reproved and condemned; first, such as
upon every slip of their brethren, and every blemish wherewith they can be
tainted, are ready sharply to censure them, and by their censure to condemn
them whom the Lord has not condemned: Romans 14.4.
Who art thou (says the Apostle) that condemnest another man's servant? he
stands or falls to his own master. 2.1.
Yea, and in that that thou iudgest another, thou condemnest thy self: for
thou that iudgest, do even the same things, or the like that thou condemnest
in others. Let us not therefore be hasty to censure or condemn one another
for every fault, but let us bear one with another infirmities. Let us judge
of our brethren after the rule of charity, even as we would have others to
judge of us when we fall through infirmity. There is one that judges both
them and us; let us commit all judgment unto him that judges righteously; and
in the mean time, think rather the best, then the worst, as charity bids us,
then as our sense might lead us.

Secondly, here are to be reproved and condemned, such as with too too light
and slight terms pass over notorious and gross faults. For a generation of
men there is, that to the end forsooth that they may seem charitable in their
judgments toward their brethren, speak good of that which plainly is evil,
and interpret that unto the best which in plain evidence is sinful and
wicked. What? must charity be a fool? As she is not suspicious, so she is not
foolish; as she will not easily think the worst, so she will not suffer her
self to be abused. For if when a man should be present at the Sermon he be
ordinarily bowling, or carding, or drinking, must I in charity think that he
has necessary occasions of absence? Or when a man willingly and wittingly
runs himself upon the rocks by breaking the wholesome Laws of God, or of
man, am I uncharitable if I interpret not his actions unto the best? Nay
rather he misdeemeth of charity that so thinks: and this will commonly (if
it be marked) fall out to be true, that he that so urges a charitable
judgment touching such things, and such men as offend these and the like
ways, will be most uncharitable in his judgment touching the best men, and
the best things. As therefore we are not too sharply to censure the falls of
our brethren lest we offend against the rule of charity, so let us take heed
lest upon a foolish conceit of charity, we think well of that which indeed is
evil, and soothe them up in their sins whose sins were to be reproved. As
the Preacher says, Eccl. 7.18.19.
Be not thou just overmuch. And again, Be not thou wicked overmuch: so I say,
let us not too sharply censure the faults of our brethren: and again, let us
not too lightly pass over gross and notorious faults: let us keep the rule of
charity in judging our brethren: and again, let us not (to seem charitable)
think of gross faults as small or no faults: let us not condemn, where the
Lord has not condemned: and again, let us not acquit, where the Lord has
not acquitted.

Thirdly, here are to be reproved and condemned, such as (to excuse the faults
and offenses of others) say and do more then in a good conscience they may.
For, as I am not always to condemn those men that do such things, as wicked
and ungodly men, nor yet to acquit all those that do such things as good and
godly men; so neither am I to excuse one sort or other, further then in a good
conscience I may. Charity must rule me to excuse as I may, affection may not
overrule me to excuse more then I should. Albeit therefore to excuse the
faults of men may seem a very charitable fault, yet if in any respect we do
therein more then in a good conscience we may, our fault is inexcusable, and
our judgment sleeps not. Let us therefore go so far in the excuse of our
brethrens faults as in a good conscience we may, but no further. Let us be
ready to make the best of things we may, but let us ever remember to hold faith
and a good conscience. And let this suffice to be noted from the several
points in these words.

I speak not, etc. The Apostle having signified in the former verse, his great
rejoicing in the Lord, for the Philippians care over him, now signifies his
rejoicing to be, not so much for the present gift they sent him, because
therewith his want was supplied, as for their sakes, even for the fruit which
should redound thence unto them, which he does from the eleventh to the
eighteenth verse. First therefore (to meet with the suspicion of a covetous or
an abject mind,) he denies that he rejoiced so greatly for the gift, because
by it his want was supplied: and yields a reason thereof, even because he had
learned to be content with whatsoever state; which contentment of mind he
professes he has of Christ, verse. 11.12.13. Secondly, he tells them, that
notwithstanding he rejoice not in their gift, yet he commends their
liberality showed both now and at other times toward him, verse. 14.15.16.
Thirdly, he tells them, that the thing wherein he rejoices, is the fruit of
their gift, for that it shall further their reckoning, verse 17. These be
generally the points.

I speak not, etc. In these words, as I said, the Apostle to meet with the
suspicion of a covetous, or at least an abject mind, denies that he rejoiced
for their gift, as if before he had received it he had bin cast down through
want, or were not able to endure his want. For thus it might be objected and
said: Yea indeed, does this care for you so greatly rejoice you? Like enough
your heart was down before this help came unto you. No, no, says the
Apostle, I speak not this because of want, because my want is supplied, as if
before this supply came, I had been cast down through want, or were not able
to endure want. For I have learned in whatsoever state I am, etc. which is a
proof that it was not for the gift that he rejoiced, because his want was
supplied by it, but for some other thing.

Where I note, that the Apostle was neither dejected and cast down through
want, nor his affection much altered by the supply of his wants. Whence I
observe who they are whom want does not pinch to cast them down through
heaviness, namely, the children of God, who walk so as they have the Apostle
for an example. What? are not the children of God pinched with want? Was not
Abraham driven by famine out out of Canaan into Egypt? Was not Isaac driven by
famine from one place unto another? And was not the same lot unto all the
Patriarchs? Had our blessed Savior himself a house to put his head in? Were
not the holy Apostles tried, as by many other ways, so by want? Yes surely,
amongst other afflictions, want and penury is one, wherewith they that live
godly in Christ Jesus are sometimes pressed and pinched. But this is it, though
they be in want, yet they are not overcome of want: even as the Apostle says,
We are in poverty, 2. Cor. 4.8.
but not overcome of poverty. They look unto the Lord, and they rest in him;
they know that poverty and riches, even both these are from the Lord, who
makes poor and makes rich, and that all things work together for the best
unto those that love and fear the Lord. And therefore they hang not down
their heads, nor are casten down through heaviness, they murmr not at the
Lord, nor break out into impatience, but patie^tly depend upon that God that
commanded the ravens to feed his Prophet Elias, and that feeds the young
ravens that cry for want of food. They know that the Lord cares for them
though the world sees it not, and that he will supply their wants, so far as
he sees it good for them, and therefore they comfort and cheer themselves in
him.

Let this then teach us, not to look at men's wants, but how men are affected
through their wants. Poverty or riches are no certain arguments of the love
or of the hatred of God toward any. Both are mercies and blessings of the Lord
unto the godly, and both are plagues and snares unto the wicked. By poverty
and want the godly are oftentimes tried, to see whether they will blaspheme God
to his face; whether they will murmr against the Lord, whether they can be
content, as to receive good at the hand of God, so to receive evil; whether in
time of adversity they will go away from the Lord. By riches likewise the
godly are often tried, to see whether they will thereby grow proud, and forget
the Lord; whether they will, as good Stewards, use them to the glory of his
Name, and the good of their brethren; whether they will bear themselves as
enriched by him, and make him their chiefest treasure. Both these (I say) are
trialls unto the godly, that the trial of their faith may be found to their
praise, and honor, and glory at the appearing of Christ Jesus. Again,
poverty is often laid upon the wicked for a plague, as Solomon shows, where
he tells the Sluggard, Prou. 6.11.
that his poverty comes as one that trauelleth by the way, and his necessity
as an armed man: and riches are often given them as snares, as the Apostle
shows, where he says, that they that will be rich, 1. Tim. 6.9.
fall into tentation and snares, and into many foolish and noisome lusts which
drown men in perdition and destruction. Poverty then or riches, plenty or
want, are not the things that we are to look unto, for that these are common
to the wicked with the godly; but how they work upon men's affections, what
effects they have among the children of men. Does thy poverty and want make
thee hang down thy head, break thy heart through heaviness, cause thee to
murmr and grudge against thy God, drive thee to think of unlawful shifts
for the supply of thy wants? etc. then I stand in fear of thee, neither can I
comfort thee with any sweet promise of grace and mercy. But art thou cheared
in thy God notwithstanding thy penury and want, do thou wait upon him,
depend upon him, and endure patiently? Is it enough for thee that he can supply
thy wants if he will, and therefore then do meekly submit thy self unto his
will? Then surely thou art rich in Gods favor, and unto thee belongs an
inheritance among the Saints. Again, do riches lift thee up in pride above thy
brethren, set thee a running after noisome lusts and pleasures, choke the
word, and the graces of Gods Spirit within thee, and make thee to start aside
from thy God like a broken bow? then thy riches are a snare unto thee, and
they turn unto thy destruction: but if thou use them to Gods glory, the good
of thy brethren, and thine own only honest and godly comfort, then they are a
blessing unto thee, and a token of Gods favor. As then the Wise man says,
There is that gathers, and yet scatters; so I say, There is that wants,
and yet is rich, that is rich, and yet wants; that wants the worlds
superfluity, and yet is rich in Gods favor, and that is rich in worldly
wealth, but poor in Gods sight. As we bear or drowpe under our poverty, so
we are poor or rich in the Lord: and again, as we use or abuse our riches, so
we are poor or rich unto God. If then we be in want, let us not be cast down
with heaviness. but let us be cheerful in our God, who can supply what
wants if he will, and will if he see it good. If we have plenty, let us not
abuse it to riotousnesse and wantonness, but let us use it to Gods glory; so
shall our want be comfortable, and our riches a blessing unto us.

LECTVRE LXXXIX.
PHILIP. 4. Verse 11. For I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to
be content.

12. And I can be abased, and I can abound, etc.


NOw in these next verses following, the Apostle signifies his rejoicing to
be, not so much for the present gift it self which they sent him, as for the
fruit which thence should redound unto them: and in these words, I speak not,
etc. he denies that he rejoiced because his want was supplied by their gift,
as if before that supply came unto him, he had been cast down through
heaviness, or were not able to endure his want. Where, in that he was not cast
down through want, I observed who they are whom want does not pinch to cast
them down through heaviness; namely, the children of God who walk so as they
have the Apostle for an example. Not that the children of God are never pinched
with want, but though they be oft-times in want, yet are they never overcome of
want. For they look unto the Lord, and rest in him; they know that he makes
poor and makes rich, that he can supply their wants if he will, and that he
will, if he see it good: and therefore they drowpe not, they murmr not, but
they depend upon him, they comfort themselves in him. Which should teach us not
to look to men's wants or riches, but how these work on their affections, what
effects follow these in them. For poverty and riches, plenty and want, even
both these are common to the wicked with the godly, but they do not alike
affect them both. The wicked, through want, drowpe, and murmr, and fall to
all unlawful shifts, to supply their wants: but the godly are cheerful in
their God, waiting upon him, depending upon him, enduring patiently; holding it
enough that God can if he will, and will, if he see it good, supply their
wants. Again, through riches the wicked grow proud, run after their lusts
and pleasures, oppress their brethren, and forget their God; but the godly use
their riches to the glory of God, the good of their brethren, and their own
honest and lawful use and comfort. As therefore we bear or drowpe under our
wants, we are poor or rich in Gods favor: and again, as we use or abuse our
riches, we are poor or rich in Gods favor: and therefore, this is the thing
that we are to look at, how men are affected through their poverty or their
riches. Thus far we have already proceeded. It follows.

For I have learned, etc. This is the reason whereby the Apostle proves that
he spoke not because of want, that the supply of his want by their help, was
not the cause of his rejoicing, as if before that supply came, he had been cast
down through heaviness; but now that they had helped him he rejoiced. And his
reason stands thus: I have learned to be content with my own estate
whatsoever it be, therefore it is not the supply of my want by your gift that
causes my rejoicing, but another thing. I have learned. How had he learned? He
had learned out of the word, that he ought to be content with his estate
whatsouer it was. But he had learned by long experience to be content with his
own estate whatsoever it were: if he were in labors, in perils, in watchings,
in hunger and thirst in fastings, in cold and nakedness, experience had taught
him to be content with these things. Which he farther proves, by an
enumeration of diverse states, wherein he knew how to carry himself, and
therewith to be content. I can be abased, that is, if being in poverty and
want, I be contemned and debased, notwithstanding whatsoever excellent graces
of the Spirit I have, I know how to carry it, I can be content, and not droupe
the head: and I can abound, that is, if I abound in honor, wealth or favor, I
know how to carry it, I can be content, and not be proud. Every where, for time
and place, and in all things belonging to this life, I am instructed and
religiously taught (for so the word signifies) both to be full and to be
hungry, and to abound and to have want, and still I can be content with which
of these estates soever, and neither grow insolent through my better, nor be
cast down with heaviness through my meaner estate, nor relinquish my duty in
my calling whatsoever be my state. This I take to be the meaning of these
words. So that here we have a reason of his denial in the words immediately
before, and a confirmation of the reason, by an enumeration of diverse states
wherein he knew how to carry himself, and therewith to be content. Now let us
see what instructions we may gather hence for our further use and benefit.

The first thing which I note is from the reason of the Apostle, in that he
says, he has learned, in whatsoever state he is, therewith to be content.
Whence I observe a lesson very fit for us, and for all Christians to learn,
even to be content with our estate whatsoever it is. The Apostle had learned
this lesson by his own long experience: we have precept, and example, and
experience to teach us this lesson. 1. Tim. 6.6.7.8.
Godliness (says our Apostle) is great gain, if a man be content with that
he has. For we brought nothing into the world, and it is certain that we can
carry nothing out. Therefore when we have food and raiment, let us therewith
be content. Where first to the commendation of contentment, he shows it to be
the fruit of godliness. For as godliness has this honor to be the only
great gain of Christians; so has it this fruit, that the man that is godly,
is content with that he has. Secondly is set down the reason which might and
should make us to be content with that we have: For we brought nothing into the
world, etc. Thirdly is set down an exhortation unto contentment, which may and
ought to be unto us a precept, that when we have food and raiment, we should
therewith be content. To the like purpose is that part of our blessed Saviors
Sermon, Mat. 6.
where in earnest manner, and by many arguments he disswadeth us from
carfulness for food and raiment. For what else in effect is all that but a
precept to be content with that we have, and to depend upon the Lord his
providence for the rest? But if we had no precept or exhortation at all, the
very example of our Apostle might and should prevail with us. For so he had
taught us in the former Chapter, Phil. 3.17.
where he says, Brethren, be followers of me, and look on them which walk
so, as ye have us for an example. He then being content with his estate
whatsoever it was, we should look on him, and likewise be content with our
estate whatsoever it be. Whereunto might also the examples of our blessed
Savior, and of all that have lived godly in Christ Jesus, be added. For all
the godly were always content with whatsoever state they had; and if they were
not content, they were not godly; coffeehouse being as great an enemy unto
godliness as any. But what needs more to this purpose then the experience of
Gods children even at this day? For this, so many as fear the Lord, learn by
continual experience at this day, that be our feet pinched in the stocks
with Joseph, or suffer we famine with the holy Patriarks, or be we persecuted
by cruel tyrants with Eliah, or be we spoiled of all that ever we have by
thieves, or by fire with Job; or be we destitute of wealth, friends, and very
necessaries for the maintenance of this life; or tempted, afflicted and
tormented with the faithful children of God in the Primitive Church; yet still
the Lord cares for us, and by his will all these things happen unto us; and as
he sees it good, he delivers us out of all our troubles. I have been young,
says the Prophet David, Psalm. 37.25.
and now am old, yet never saw I the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging
their bread. In which place the Prophet brings in his own experience to show
that the righteous are not forsaken at any time of the Lord, though sometimes
they may seem to be forsaken; neither do their posterity beg their bread, as
driven to any exigent further then the Lord sees it to be for their good and
his own glory. And upon the like experience which the children of God find in
themselves, and see in others at this day, they may say the like. For though
sometimes they be afflicted on every side, yet are they never in distress, but
have a good issue; though sometimes they be in poverty, yet are they never
overcome of poverty; though sometimes they be persecuted, yet are they never
forsaken; though sometimes they be cast down, 2. Cor. 4.8.
yet they never perish, as says the Apostle of himself. Why should not then
even experience teach us this lesson, to be content with our estate whatsoever
it is?

But it may be it will be questioned what it is to be content? The word which
the Apostle here uses, properly signifies such a one as is so content with
that he has, as that he rests wholly in himself, neither needs any thing
of any other. And so only God himself is properly said to be content with that
he has, because he alone is all-sufficient having all things in himself, and
needing nothing from any other, being therefore only blessed and only
perfect. But here in this place, he is said to be content with that he has,
whose present estate wherein God has set him, whatsoever it is, does so
satisfy him, that albeit he need many things, be much pressed, troubled and
afflicted, yet he is contented, and patiently undergoes whatsoever the Lord
his will is. Whereas then by precept, and example, and experience, ye see, we
are taught to be content with our estate whatsoever it is, the meaning is, that
the present estate wherein God has set us, whatsoever it is, and whosoever we
be, ought so to suffice and satisfy us, that though in it we want many things,
yet with it we should be content. The reason is: first because it is the state,
be it poor or rich, wherein the Lord has set us; and therefore not to be
content with it, were to resist his will, and to become fighters against the
Almighty. Secondly, because howsoever we may seem to want things that are
needful for us, yet are we not forsaken of the Lord; and indeed howsoever the
world sees it not, nor cannot, yet do we want no manner of thing that is good
For that of the Prophet is always true, Psalm. 34.10.
The Lions lack and suffer hunger, but they which seek the Lord, shall want
nothing that is good; good for them, and good for his glory. Want we may many
temporal blessings, and yet we want nothing that is good, because the Lord
knows it to be good that we want them. Wanting then nothing that is good,
what reason but we should be content?

Should we then be content with our present estate, whatsoever it is? This then
should teach us to take heed and beware of covetousness, that monster of sins,
which makes us change our God, worship other gods, and fall down before a
wedge of gold, being therefore called idolatry. The covetous man he is never
content with that he has, but the more he has, the more stil^ he craves: his
desire is like unto hell, it is never filled, but with the horse leech still he
cries, Give, give; and like unto the grave, or the barren womb, or the earth
that still drinks in water, or the fire which the more fuel it has, the more
it is nourished; he never says. It is enough. If he have but a little, he
thinks he has not enough; if afterward he have more, yet he thinks he
has not enough; if after that he have more, yet he thinks of another enough,
and enough is always to come, though already he have more then enough. Yea if
with Ahab he have a kingdom, yet shall not poor Naboth be able to hold his
own by him, but his vineyard, even his only vineyard he must have, and he
will have. Many such there are which have enlarged their desires like hell,
which can never be content with that they have, whatsoever they have. Whereupon
are murmurings, contentions, mutinies, wars, thefts, and all unjust dealing,
and in a word all evil. 1. Tim. 6.10.
For covetousness (as the Apostle says) is the root of all evil, which while
men lust after, they err from the faith, and pierce themselves through by many
sorrows. We may not therefore be like unto these, but, hating covetousness, we
must be content with that portion which the Lord has given us, be it more or
less; with that state wherein he has set us, be it better or worse. It he see
it good to lift up our heads when we are low, he will; and again, if he bring
us down from on high, he does it because he sees it good. Howsoever therefore
it be with us, let us be content. Mat. 6.32.
Your heavenly Father (says our blessed Savior) knows that ye have need of
these things: and again, If ye which are evil can give good gifts unto your
children, 7.11.
how much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good gifts to them
that ask him? Does our heavenly Father know what we have need of? and will he
give us the things which we need? If then we need health, he will send it if it
be good for us: if we need wealth, he will send it if it be good for us: if we
need liberty, he will send it if it be good for us: if we need peace or love
in the world, he will give it if it be good for us; and generally whatsoever we
need, we shall have if he see it to be good for us. Let us not therefore with
the covetous worldling, never think we have enough; nor with the mal-contented
person, always mislike our present state whatsoever it is. He that opens his
hand, and fills all things living with plenteousnes, has enough for us
always in store, liberty enough, health enough, wealth enough, etc. to reach
out unto us if he see it good for us. Let our eyes therefore always wait upon
him, and let us learn in whatsoever state we are, therewith to be content.

The second thing which I note, is from the confirmation of the Apostles
reason, where he says, I can be abased, etc. For in that he says, I can be
abased, and I can abound, be full and hungry, etc. he speaks as well upon
experience in himself as he had found that he could do, as upon a religious
knowledge that he should do so. So that he had as well felt hunger and want,
and bin abased, as been full and abounded. Whence I observe, that the Lord in
bestowing his temporal blessings upon his children, does not always keep the
same course, but some he blesses with plenty and abundance, others he
exercises with penury and want, and unto others he gives experience of both.
Genesis 13.6.
Abraham and Lot were so rich in sheep and cattle, and so full of substance,
that the land could not bear them that they might dwell together. Ruth 2.1.
Boaz likewise was a man of great power, both for virtue, authority and
riches. 1. King 10.23.
Solomon exceeded in riches all the men that ever were before him or after him.
And to be silent in the rest, of that good convert Zacheus it is said, Luk 19.2.
that he was rich. Again, the widow was but poor, that threw but two mites
into the treasury, Mar. 12.42. Luke 16.20.
and yet cast in all that she had, even all her living. That lazer Lazarus, who
when he died was carried into Abraham's bosom, was a very poor beggar. Those
that wandered up and down in sheep skins and in goate-skins, Heb. 11.37.
being destitute, afflicted and tormented, that wandered in wildernesses and
mountains, and dens and caves of the earth, were no great men, it may well be
thought, in the world. Yea our blessed Savior says of himself, Mat. 8.20.
that the foxes had holes and the birds of the heaven had neasts, Job 1.3.
but the Son of man had not whereon to rest his head. And again, Job in his
time was the greatest man for substance and wealth of all the men of the East;
and likewise he was as bare and poor and distressed as the devil by Gods
permission could make him. Ester 2. and 8.
It is like that Mordecai and Ester in the land of their captivity had no
great abundance and plenty for a while; but after a while the Lord exalted
them both unto great honor and dignity, where they had all things at their
desire. Our Apostle says, 1. Cor. 4 11.12. etc.
both of himself and of others, that they did both hunger and thirst, and were
naked and buffetted, and had no certain dwelling place: that they labored,
working with their own hands: were reviled, persecuted, despised, and made as
the filth of the world, and the of scouring of all things; and yet what by
miracles which he wrought, diseases which he healed, and soule-conuersions
which by his ministry were wrought, he was often much honored, and many times
abounded. Thus the Lord ministers his temporal blessings as he will, to some
more, to some less, and to the same men at some times more, and at some times
less; even to all and at all times according to the good pleasure of his will.
In some of his children he will be glorified by their poverty and want, by
their crosses and afflictions, by their losses and disgraces: for in that in
these things he gives them a patient and contented, and cheerful mind, so
that they are not overcome of these things, nor cast down through heaviness
as the wicked, herein God is glorified. Again, in some of his children he will
be glorified by their wealth and riches, by their honor and preferments, by
their power and authority: for, in that in these things he so tempereth them,
that they use them to the glory of his name and the good of their brethren,
and not swell thereby, nor abuse them as the wicked do, herein he is glorified.
Again, in some of his children he will be glorified both in plenty and in
want, both in honor and in dishonor: for in that by these things he so
ballanceth them, that they run on an even course, and neither sink too low by
the one, nor are lifted too high by the other, herein also is he glorified.

Let this then first teach them that abound in wealth and greatness, these two
points: first, not to disdain their inferiors in wealth and greatness, as
too mean for them to have any dealing at all withal. For how mean soever they
be in the worlds account, and how destitute of all things soever they seem to
be, yet may they be as great in Gods favor, and abound as much in the graces
of Gods Spirit, as thou that have all things that thine heart can desire. And
yet what a great favor ordinarily it is for the inferior to be admitted to
the speech of his superior? Well, admitting you both to be alike great in Gods
favor, the difference which I find betwixt you is this, that if thou be the
greater and wealthier, thou have the greater account to make, which may not be
any cause unto thee to disdain thy brother. The second point is, that they use
their wealth and greatness to the glory of God and the good of their brethren.
For not the having, but the well using of our riches and authority, etc.
commends us unto God; and how much soever we have, if we use it not well that
which we have, it is no token to us of his grace and favor toward us. Nay, if
he give us riches and honor, etc. and not withal the grace to use them as we
should, they are unto us an occasion of falling, of falling from God, of
falling into idolatry, of falling into many foolish and noisome lusts, of
falling into all the snares of the devil. Have thou then wealth, honor,
authority, etc? They are the blessings of God bestowed upon thee, whosoever
thou art. But will thou know whether they be special favors bestowed upon
thee, as upon his dear child? Consider then how thou use them: for so they
are, and are not special favors upon thee. Whereon if we did so think as we
should, we would not so delight and set our hearts on them as we do, but we
would think of well using them a great deal more then we do. As many therefore
as God has blessed with these things, let them study to glorify the Lord by
them, that so they may have comfort in them, as in tokens of his special
favor toward them: and always remember to rejoice in the Lord, as in your
chiefest treasure.

Secondly, for such as are abased and in want, let this first be a comfort unto
them. For this, that they are abased and in want, that they are hungry,
thirsty, cold, naked, reviled, persecuted, and the like, is no token that God
has forsaken them, or shut up his loving kindness in displeasure toward
them. Nay, this is the cup that many of the best of Gods Saints have deeply
drunk on before them. Let them then comfort themselves in this, that thus they
are brought into the fellowship of the Saints of God. Be it then tribulation,
or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword, or all
these that press us, let them not be able to separate us from the love of God
in Christ Jesus our Lord, but in all these things let us be more then
conquerours through him that has loved us. Whatsoever we suffer or want in the
world, let us comfort our selves in this, that it is the beaten way wherein
many of Gods Saints have walked unto heaven. Secondly, let this teach them to
bridle their tongues in their talk of them that are great and wealthy. It is a
common fault with them of the meaner sort to say of them, that they have their
riches in this world, they have their honor here on earth. But we are to know,
that the Lord has them that belong unto him in both sorts of men, high and
low, rich and poor. Neither therefore let plenty be a prejudice to them that
abound; neither let want seem to privilege them that lack: but as every man
bears his want, and uses his abundance, so let him be thought to have his
portion among the righteous.

Thirdly, such as have experience both of plenty, and of want, let them hence
learn, not to stoop at the one, or stumble at the other. Let not their wants
dismay them, nor their abundance exalt them. The Lord gives, and the Lord
takes away; and his name is still to be blessed. Whether therefore we are
abased or abound, whether we be full or hungry; whether we abound or have
want, every where, and in all things we are to bless him, knowing that all
things are according to his will.

Now give me leave in one word to point at one other observation from these
words. In that he says, I can be abased, and likewise, I can abound etc. I
observe a notable pattern of great perfection in a Christian; for then we grow
to a notable perfection, when we can both be abased and abound, be full and
hungry, etc. and still be content with the one or the other without murmuring
or grudging. The philosophers and heathen writers have talked much of bearing
both adversity and prosperity patiently, and have set down good precepts for
walking constantly in them both, without drouping in adversity, or swelling in
prosperity. But let any man tell me of the best of them, that kept that
constant course in both, not danted with the one, nor puffed up with the other.
Nay in this degree of perfection, none of them can, but our Apostle must be the
pattern for us to follow after, that we may all of us say with the Apostle, I
can be abased, and I can abound, etc. Yea this is a thing which we should all
of us know by experience in our selves, that we can be abased, etc. and wherein
we should be instructed and taught as in a mystery of religion, to be abased,
and to abound, etc. for this is an holy point of Christian knowledge to know to
be abased, and to abound, to be content with either, and not to relinquish any
Christian duty for either.

But alas, how ignorant are all sorts of men herein? In the Clergy, what
ambitious seeking after the chiefest dignities? What heaping of livings one
upon another, benefice upon benefice, prebend upon prebend, and of benefices in
Commendam upon Bishoprics? In the Temporalty, what joining of house to house,
and laying of field to field? What prying and prowling into all kinds of
commodities? What thirsting and gaping still after more, more? And what is the
cause of all? We have not learned both to be full and to be hungry, both to
abound, and to have want. It may be, we can abound, but we cannot be abased: it
may be, we can be full, but we cannot be hungry: it may be, we can away with
plenty, but not with want. This pricks and pinches, and is as bitter unto us
as death: but have we learned to abound and to be full? Nay we know not when we
abound, or when we are full: and besides that, abundance and fullness makes us
wanton, and proud, and forgetful of such Christian duties as we ought to
perform, as might easily have been proved, if time had given leave.

Long we then in our souls to grow forward in a good degree of Christian
perfection? Let us learn both to be abased, and to abound, etc. Let not
abundance or plenty make us wanton, or proud, or forgetful of our Christian
duties: neither let penury and want make us murmr, or faint, or cast us down
through heaviness. Let us walk constantly in both, in both let us be content,
and in both walk in those holy ways which God has ordained us to walk in.
If we can once take out this lesson, it will bring with it such a Christian
perfection, that we shall not be to seek almost in any point of Christianity.
Let us therefore apply it, and as we grow either in wealth, or in want, let us
think on it, that daily more and more we may know to be abased, and to abound,
and that daily more and more we may be instructed, every where, and in all
things, both to be full, and to be hungry, to abound, and to have want.

LECTVRE XC.
PHILIP. 4. Verse 13. I am able to do all things through the help of Christ,
which strengthens me.

14. Notwithstanding ye have well done that ye did, etc.


I Am able to do all things, etc. We have heard what things the Apostle assumed
to himself, and they were great things; as that he had learned to be content
with his estate whatsoever it were, that he knew both to be abased, and to
abound; that every where, and in all things, he was instructed both to be full,
and to be hungry, both to abound and to have want. Now lest he should seem to
boast too much of himself, or to give others occasion of boasting themselves,
he gives the whole glory of all that he is able to do, in all the things that
he speaks of, unto Christ, that enableth him thereunto. For the better
understanding of which words, first it will be needful to clear them from
that sense whereunto some wrest them. For through the malice of Satan, no doubt,
either blinding the eyes of our Adversaries that they should not see the truth,
or hardening their hearts that they should pervert the ways of truth: these
words which by our Apostle are added (lest he should seem to boast too much of
himself) are wrested by our adversaries unto the greatest boast of man's
perfection that can be: these words wherein our Apostle gives all glory unto
Christ, are drawn by our Adversaries unto the glory of man, and his perfect
obedience. For, to prove that man in this life is able perfectly to fulfill the
Law of God, they allege this place as making to that purpose, where it is
said, I am able. So that they give this meaning of these words; I am able, not
only to be abased, and to abound, etc. but generally, I am able to do all
things, even all things that the Law requires, through the help of Christ
which strengthens me, is, if he help and strengthen me by his grace, that
what ability I want in my self, may be supplied by him. And hereupon they
conclude, that man regenerate is able, by the grace of Christ working together
with him and strengthening him, perfectly to fulfill the whole Law of God.
Whereby, how much they pervert the meaning of the Apostle in this place, we
shall easily perceive, if we look but a little into the doctrine which hence
they deliver. For who is he that is able to love the Lord his God with all his
heart, with all his soul, with all his mind, and his neighbor as himself?
And yet this the Law requires, Deuteronomy. 6.5.
saying, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all thy
soul, and with all thy might; and, Leuit. 19.15.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Again, who is he that is able to
continue in all things that are written in the Book of the Law to do them?
Deuteronomy. 27.26.
And yet the Law says, Cursed is every man that continues not in all things
that are written in the book of the Law to do them. Again, who is he that
does good and sins not? James 3.2. 1. John 1.8.
In many things (says James) we offend all. And John, If we say that we have
no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. And sin, we know,
is the transgression of the Law, 3 4.
so that whosoever sins transgresses also the Law. We know in part, 1. Cor.
13.9.
says the Apostle, we prophecy in part. Now, as is our knowledge, so is our
faith, our love, our obedience. For so long as we are clothed with the earthly
house of this tabernacle, as our knowledge is imperfect, so our faith, our
love, and our obedience are imperfect. Yea, in the very best of us there is
always a rebellion between the flesh and the spirit; and the better we are,
the sharper oftentimes will the combat be. Who is he then that is able in this
life perfectly to fulfill the Law of God? Unto Christ Jesus God gave the Spirit
without measure, and he was able perfectly to fulfill the whole Law of God, and
did fulfill it for us, that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in
us, and we might be made the righteousness of God in him. But unto us, I mean
even unto the most regenerate and sanctified man, the Spirit is given only by
measure, so that the flesh and the lusts thereof are not altogether mortified
and utterly tamed thereby, but oftentimes pricks they have in the flesh, and
messengers of Satan to buffet them. How far off then are the best from
perfectly fulfilling the whole law of God? Some indeed are said in the
Scriptures to have walked in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord
without reproof, as Zachary and Elizabeth; and others to have sought the Lord
with their whole heart, as those godly Kings, David, Asa, Josiah, etc. But we
must understand, that as Jeroboam and others are said, not to have followed the
Lord with their whole heart, because they made and worshipped other gods, so
those godly kings are said to have sought the Lord with their whole heart,
because they have the honor which was due unto God, to him alone: and that
Zachary and Elizabeth were only (in comparison of others) said to have
walked holily, and vnblamably before men. For if their ways should have bin
examined before the Lord, then that of the Prophet should have been found true,
In thy sight, O Lord, Psalm. 143.2.
shall no flesh living be justified; and well might that of Eliphaz unto Job
have bin said of them, What is man that he should be clean? Job 15.14.
and he that is borne of woman that he should be just? Behold, 15.
he found no steadfastness in his Saints, yea the heavens are not clean in his
sight: how much more is man abominable and filthy, 16.
which drinks iniquity like water? In a word, not any of the sons of men
that ever were since the fall of man, or are, were or are able to fulfill the
law of God, but only imperfectly, and not in any sort perfectly, otherwise
then by imputation. Christ his perfect obedience being imputed unto them
through faith, and that which is imperfect in their obedience, being covered,
and not imputed unto them through Christ. So that ye see the doctrine which
they deliver from these words, is quite repugnant unto the doctrine of the holy
Ghost throughout the whole Scripture. And therefore that cannot be the meaning
of these words which they do give.

Again, if the Rhemists had thought these words to have made any whit to that
purpose, it is very like they would not have failed to have given that note
hence. For we see how ready they are to wrest all places to the maintenance of
their erroneous opinions. So that they passing this place over with silence, it
is very like that they otherwise thought of the meaning of these words, then
others of their profession have done and do. Whether then we look unto the
doctrine which they gather from these words, quite repugnant unto the doctrine
of the holy Ghost throughout the whole Scripture, or unto the judgment of some
of themselves, as it may seem; it appears that the Apostles meaning is not,
as our Adversaries do imagine, that he was able of himself to do al things,
not only the things spoken of before, but all things generally which the Law
of God required, through the help of Christ which strengthened him, and gave
further strength and virtue unto his own strength and virtue.

What then is the Apostles meaning in these words? Surely this (as appears by
the tenor of them:) To clear himself of boasting himself touching the
things that he had spoke of, he renounceth all his own power and strength, as
if by his own power and strength he had been able to do those things, and he
attributes all unto the power and strength of Christ, saying, I am able to do
all things, even all the things that I have spoken of, that is, I can be
abased, and I can abound, etc. For so this universal speech is to be
restrained unto the subject and matter here spoken of, as usually it is in
other places of the Scripture: or if we will needs enlarge it further, then
thus, I am able to do all things, that is, all things that belong unto my duty
and calling. But how? by my own power or strength? No, but through Christ
which strengthens and enableth me. He does not say, through the help of
Christ, as it is in our English Bibles: albeit that also might be said, for
that he is often said to help us in the things wherein he alone works
altogether without us: but he says, I am able to do all things through Christ,
whose work wholly and only it is to strengthen me by his holy Spirit in my
inner man (for so the word seems here to signify) to do these things, even
to suffer adversity, and not be cast down through heaviness; and likewise to
enjoy prosperity, and not be puffed up with pride. This I take to be the
simple meaning of the Apostle here. Where I note these two points, first, that
the Apostle says, that he is able to do all those things; secondly, by whom it
is that he is able to do all things, even by Christ which etc.

In the first point, where the Apostle says, that he is able, etc. it is to be
noted that he says, I am able. He does not say, I was able, etc. for indeed
before he was called to the knowledge of God in Christ Jesus, he was not able
to do so* But he says, I am able, implying, that now that Christ dwells in
him by his holy Spirit, now that he is engrafted into Christ his body by the
washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the holy Ghost, he is able to do
all these things, to be abased, etc. Whence I observe this lesson for us, that
being regenerate by the Spirit of God, and engraffed into the true olive tree
Christ Jesus, we are able to be full and to be hungry, to abound and to have
want, and to do the things that are good. Before such time as we be borne
again of water and of the Spirit, and be made partakers of the root and
fatness of the true olive tree Christ Jesus, the very imaginations of the
thoughts of our hearts are only evil continually; our throats are open
sepulchers, our tongues are full of deceit, the poison of Aspes is under our
lips, our mouth is full of cursing and bitterness our feet are swift to
shed blood, destruction and calamity are in our ways, the way of peace we
know not, the fear of God is not before our eyes: and in one word, we are
wholly auerse from every thing that is good, and only inclined unto that
which is evil; being not grapes but thorns, not figs but thistles, not good
but ill trees, not lively but dead branches, not friends but enemies, not the
sons of God, but the children of wrath; not citizens, but aliants from the
commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of Promise. But being
renewed by the Spirit, our hard hearts are softened, our froward wills are
reformed, our dark minds are enlightened, our inordinate affections are
ordered, our wicked thoughts are bettered, and our whole man so made partaker
of the godly nature, that we fly the corruption which is in the world through
lust, and study to live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present
world. So that henceforth we are able to fly that which is evil, and to do
that which is good: which also those manifold exhortations in holy Scripture
imply, when we are exhorted to follow the truth in love, to mortify our
earthly members, to procure things honest before God and all men etc. For
albeit unto the wicked and unregenerate the Lord has not opened their eyes or
their cares that they can see the things that belong unto their peace, or
hearken unto instruction, and receive understanding: yet has he appointed thus
to stir up his children, and made them able to do the things whereunto they
are exhorted.

We do not then (as our adversaries falsely charge us) in the question of
Free Will, make men stocks and stones, such as in the things that are good, do
nothing at all. Ye see, we say, that being regenerate by the Spirit of God, we
are able to be abased, and to abound, etc. to do the things that belong unto
our peace, and such as accompany our salvation. As therefore the Apostle says
unto the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 4.3.
If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that be lost: so I say, If any man be
not able to do the thing that is good, it is the man unregenerate, in whom
Christ dwells not by the power of his Spirit. Here then is the point, not
whether we be able to do the things that are good, for that we hold; but
whether we be able by our own power and strength at all to do the things that
are good, by whom it is that we are able to do these things, which was the
second point that I noted in these words.

Touching the second point then, ye see the Apostle says, he was able to do
all things; but how? Through Christ which strengthened him. He was able, but
the power and strength whereby he was able, was whence? in any part from
himself? No, no such word; but from Christ, who dwelt in him by his Spirit,
and strengthened him so, that he could be abased, and he could abound, and
still be content with his estate. Whence I observe, that the power and strength
whereby we are able to do whatsoever thing is good, is not from our selves, but
from Christ, who by his holy Spirit so strengthens us in our inner man, that
we can be content with prosperity or adversity, and are enabled to do the
things that are good. And to this the holy Ghost gives witness in very many
places; 2. Cor. 3.5.
We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves, but
our sufficiency is of God. Where the Apostle does not deny that we are able
to think that is good; but he says, that we are not able of our selves as of
our selves, but only by God. So in this Epistle, It is God (says he) which
works in you both the will and the deed, even of his good pleasure. Where he
denies not that we are able to will or to do the thing that is good, but he
says that it is God that works in us both the will and the deed, of his good
pleasure. Not to trouble you with mo places to this purpose, by these ye see
that it is not of our selves but of God, that we think, will or do the things
that are good. We think the things that are good, but it is he that makes us
think the things that are good, by suggesting good cogitations into us by his
holy Spirit which dwells in us. We will and desire the things that are good,
but it is he that makes us will and desire the things that are good, by working
good motions and holy desires in us by his holy Spirit which he has given us.
We fly the things that are evil, and do the things that are good; but it is
he that makes us fly that which is evil, and do that is good, by ministering
strength unto us through the power of the Spirit in us. We know how to be
abased, and how to abound, how to be full, and how to be hungry, etc. but it
is God that enableth us hereunto by the strength of his holy Spirit which he
has given us. Without him we can do nothing, as himself tells us, Ioh. 15.5.
not think any part of a good thought, not will any part of a good desire, not
do any part of a good deed; so wholly is every good gift from him: but by him
we are able to do all things that our duty requires of us, though not in that
degree of perfection which we ought, by reason of the sin which hangs so
fast on us, yet so as he will be well pleased with us, and perfect his praise
in our weakness.

Here then first falls to the ground that error of theirs who maintain that
we are able to do the things that are good by our own power and strength,
being only helped by the grace of Christ. What is man yt he should desire to
part stakes with his Maker? Does not God work all in all? The Apostle says
so: and shall not he then have the glory of all? Have thou any good thing that
thou have not received of the Lord? The Apostle thinks not: why then
reioycest thou in it, as though thou had not received it? In Christ we have
all good things that we have, whether for this life present, or that that is to
come; and whatsoever good things we do, we are wholly enabled thereunto through
Christ which strengthens us. Let not us therefore set foot into any part of
his glory, but as it is written, Let him that rejoices, rejoice in the Lord.

Secondly, let this teach us what we are in our selves without Christ; not fit
for any thing that is good, not able to do a good deed, not able to will any
thing that is good, not able to think a good thought, content with no estate,
in adversity cast down with heaviness, in prosperity puffed up with pride, in
want comfortless, in abundance retchlesse, and much worse then thus. And yet
how ready are we to sooth up our selves, and how gladly do we hear the praises
of others for any thing that we say or do well? Nay rather then fail, we will
break out into our own praises; and worse then that, we will either shut him
out of all, unto whom all praise is due, or else enter upon a part with him. So
far in love are we with our selves, that we forget Christ, though without
Christ there be nothing to be loved in us. But let us learn to know what we
are in our selves, and let us be confounded in our selves; and for whatsoever
we say or do well, let him have the praise, unto whom all praise is due.

Thirdly, this should teach us in all things to glorify the name of Christ
Jesus, and to depend upon him. Are we persecuted, and yet faint not, in
poverty and not overcome of poverty, tempted and yet stand fast, any way
troubled and yet not dismayed? It is by Christ Jesus. Fly we any thing that is
evil? do we any thing that is good? It is by Christ Jesus. He knows what we
have need of, and he gives it: he knows that without him we can do nothing,
and therefore be strengthens us in all things. Sometimes his own arm
helps us, and sometimes he strengthens us sometimes to do, and sometimes to
suffer those things which otherwise we could not. How ought our mouths then to
be filled with his praises, and how ought we always to depend upon him? By him
we stand, and without him we fall. Let our songs therefore always be of him,
and let his praises be ever in our mouths for such mercies as we have of him,
and let us pray always with all manner prayer and supplication in the Spirit
for the strength of his Spirit.

Notwithstanding, etc. In these words the Apostle according to that wisdom
that was given unto him, most wisely commends the Philippians for their
liberality sent unto him. For the Apostle having before most peremptorily
signified his constancy both in adversity and prosperity, that through
Christ which strengthens him he could be content whether he were abased or
did abound; the Philippians might happily say, Then our liberality needed not,
you could have been as well without it as with it, and therefore we might very
well have spared both our labor and our liberality. No, no, says the Apostle
notwithstanding that through Christ which strengthens me, I can be content
whether I be full or hungry, yet ye have well done that ye have communicated
to mine affliction: ye have well done, because ye have done your duty, ye have
done that which Christ commands, ye have done that which has great
recompense of reward. But how did they communicate unto his affliction? We must
understand, that we may communicate unto the affliction of Gods Saints three
ways: first, Act. 16.28.
when we suffer the like afflictions that they do for Christ his sake, whether
it be at the same time, as Paul and Silas did; or at diverse times, as now the
Saints of God which suffer, and are persecuted for righteousness sake, as were
the Prophets and Apostles before. Secondly, when we are afflicted and mourn in
our selves for the affliction of Gods Saints, albeit we do not suffer in our
bodies with them. Thirdly, when we minister unto them what comfort we can in
words, and what help we can in deeds. And thus the Philippians communicated
unto Paul's afflictions lying now in prison, sending unto him their minister,
and with him such gifts as might supply his wants. And this is it for which the
Apostle in these words commends them. I can only point at such things as
were hence to be observed.

First in that the Apostle says, Notwithstanding that I am able to endure want
through Christ which strengthens me, yet ye have well done, etc. hence I
observe, that the constancy and patience, and contentment of Gods Saints,
ought not to be any stay unto us of performing Christian duty which we owe
unto them. And yet how willingly do we make every thing serve to us for an
excuse of slacking such duties as we ought to perform to Gods Saints? If they
be in prison, or if they be in any poverty and want, and bear it patiently
and cheerfully, we commend them; but neither by word we comfort them, nor by
other our help we relieve them. And why? They are cheerful enough, they need
not our comfort: though they want, yet they are content with that they have,
they beg not, and therefore we may spare our purse well enough. But our Apostle
tells us, that notwithstanding it be thus with them, yet we shall do well to
comfort them and to help them. Yea and surely it is the best done, that is
done unto them. For they by such their contentednes and chearfulnes, give good
testimony that they belong unto the covenant, that they are of the household of
faith: and we as we are to do good unto all, so especially unto them which are
of the household of faith.

Secondly, in that the Apostle says, they did well to communicate to his
affliction, I observe, that it is a good deed to comfort and to help the
Saints of God in their affliction and trouble. Romans 12.15.
And that it is so, appears both for that it is commanded as a duty,
practiced of the godly, and has with it great recompense of reward. Weep with
them that weep, says our Apostle. What is that? That is, let their
afflictions move you to compassion; and in token of your compassion, comfort
and help them in their affliction. The Apostle to the Hebrews opens it more
largely, Heb. 13.3.
where he says, Remember them that are in bonds, as if ye were bound with
them, and them that are in affliction, as if ye were also afflicted in the
body. Thus did the Apostle himself, as himself witnesses, where he says,
Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not? As if he
should have said, Besides mine own afflictions which befall my self in mine
own person, there is no other afflicted, but they touch me also with a
compassion with them, both to sorrow with them, and to help them as I can. And
see the recompense of reward that follows it, Come (shall Christ say) ye
blessed of my Father, inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundatione of the world; for I was an hungered and ye gave me meat, etc. Thus
the Lord in mercy, and for his promise sake, rewards them that comfort and
help his poor afflicted Saints in their affliction whatsoever it is. So that
we cannot doubt but that it is well done to communicate to the affliction of
Gods Saints by helping and comforting them.

It is then not well done not to communicate to their affliction. And yet who
remembers the affliction of Joseph? Many good laws and Acts we have for the
provision of the poor; I wish due execution of them. Beloved do we believe the
communion of Saints? It is an article of our belief, and we will be loath to be
tainted in any of them. As then we are joined in a fellowship with all Gods
Saints, so should we be touched with a feeling of such of their miseries as are
in any kind of affliction. They are bought with as dear a price as we are,
they are members of the same body with us. And shall the head in the natural
body stoop down unto the foot if it be pricked or hurt, to look unto it and
to help it, and shall not we look unto our poor brethren and distressed, and
help them? Surely if it be well done to communicate to their afflictions, then
it is not well done not to communicate to their afflictions; and if eternal
glory in the heavens be the recompense of their reward that communicate to the
affliction of Gods Saints, then what shall be their reward that do not? The
King, even our blessed Savior shall say unto them in that day, Depart from me
ye cursed into everlasting fire, Mat. 25.41.
which is prepared for the Devil and his Angels. For I was an hungered etc.
While we have therefore time let us do good unto all men, but specially unto
them which are of the household of faith. Let us not forget the misery of the
poor in their trouble. Blessed is he that considers the poor and needy,
the Lord shall deliver him in the needful time of trouble.

LECTVRE XCI.
PHILIP. 4. Verse 15. And ye Philippians know also that in the beginning of the
Gospel, when I departed from Macedonia, no Church communicated with me, etc.

16. For, even when I was in Thessalonica, ye sent once and afterward again
for my necessity.


ANd ye Philippians, etc. The Apostle having in the former verse commended the
Philippians for their liberality sent unto him lying now in prison at Rome, as
very well done so carefully to communicate unto his afflictions; in these two
next verses goes forward with the like commendation of their liberality even
since his first preaching of the Gospel unto them. First, by comparing them
with the rest of the Churches of Macedonia, verse 15. Secondly, by giving them
this testimony, that even when he was absent from them, and laboring with
other Churches, they ministered unto his necessity, not once, but once and
again. And lest by this his great commendation of their liberality he might
seem to look after a new benefit, verse 17. he tells them, that as his
rejoicing in the Lord, whereof he spoke before, was not for his own sake, or
for the supply of his want by their liberality; so neither this his
commendation of their liberality from the first unto the last, was for his
own sake, or that he desired a new gift of them, but both the one, and the
other was for their sakes, and that in both he regarded the fruit which might
further their reckoning. This I take to be the general purpose of the Apostle
in these words. Now come we unto a little more particular examination of them.

And ye: By this that he says, ye also, etc. he means that not only he, and
the other Churches of Macedonia, but they also knew this that he now speaks;
what? namely, that in the beginning of the Gospel, that is, at my first coming
into Macedonia, and preaching the Gospel unto you: for he speaks not simply
of the beginning of the Gospel, but of the beginning of the Gospel in that
country of Macedonia, whereof Philippi was the chief city, Act. 16.12.
and the first place that we read he preached in, in that country. This then,
says he, ye know, that at my first coming and preaching of the Gospel unto
you, when I departed from Macedonia, that I might preach in other countries
also, no Church of all the other Churches of Macedonia, neither Thessalonica,
nor Amphipolis, nor Apollonia, nor any of the rest, communicated with me
concerning the matter of giving and receiving, but ye only. Where first in that
he says, when he departed, etc. hence some gather that his manner was, where
first he preached the Gospel to take nothing of them till his departure from
them, and then to take of them sufficient for his journey to the next place,
and for his provision there till he should depart from them. Secondly, in that
he says, no Church communicated with him concerning the matter of giving, etc.
his meaning is, that whereas he had bestowed on the other Churches spiritual
things, he had not, as had been meet, received of them again temporal
things. The phrase of speech here used is borrowed from merchants or others
which have their books wherein they set down their layings out, and their
receiuings in, that when they make their counts there may be a proportion in
those things. So he means that between those other Churches of Macedonia and
him there should have been this proportion, that as he had ministered unto them
spiritual things, so they should have ministered unto him of their temporal
things. Thirdly, in that he says, but ye only, he commends them above the
rest of the Churches of Macedonia. In the next verse when he says, For when I
was in Thessalonica, he adds this farther to the commendation of the
Philippians for their liberality, that besides their liberality at his
departure from them, when he was in Thessalonica, the metrapolitan city of
Macedonia, and they had heard that he having passed through Amphipolis and
Apollonia, and being now in Thessalonica, none communicated unto him; they sent
unto him once and again while he was there to supply his necessity. In the
verse following, when he says, not that I desire, etc. his meaning is as he
said, verse 11. that he speaks not this, he commends them not thus, because
he now, or at any other time desired a gift of them so much for his own sake,
and for the supply of his own wants; but to signify the very true cause of
his rejoicing, verse 10. and the very true cause of this his commendation of
them, he says, but I desire the fruit, etc; whereby he signifies that the
principal thing which he regarded in their gifts and liberality, was the
fruit which should follow thereupon to further their reckoning, for that the
Lord in that day should reckon this to their vantage, and accept it for good
payment. The phrase of speech here used, is likewise borrowed from the
merchants counting book; for as in case of the debt of a great sum of money
unto a merchant, the more money that is noted in his book as paid, the more
his reckoning is furthered that paid it; so the Apostle signifies that the
more of their charitable works toward him were as it were noted in Gods book,
the more their reckoning was furthered with God, who reckoned that to their
fruit which they did unto him. So that the cause of his rejoicing, and
commending their liberality principally was, because of the fruit which thence
redounded unto them from God, who would recompense it in the heavens into their
bosoms, and accept it in mercy as some acquittance of their debt. This I take
to be the true meaning of these words. And now that we understand the meaning
of the Apostle in these words, let us see what profitable notes we may gather
hence for our farther use.

And ye Philippians. In that the Apostle says, that when he departed from
Macedonia, none of the other Churches of Macedonia, but the Philippians only,
communicated to his necessity, hence it may seem might be observed an example
of great ingratitude in those Churches, that withheld their temporal things
from the Apostle, when he had ministered unto them spiritual things. But I dare
not altogether so judge them, because of that notable testimony which our
Apostle gives unto them in the latter to the Corinthians. Where he proposes
their example unto the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 8.1.2.3.4.
thereby to stir them up to the relief of the poor Saints, and testifies,
that in their most extreme poverty they were richly liberal; that beyond their
power they were willing, and that they even pressed the Apostle to receive
their relief toward the poor Saints. A rare example of great piety, and very
tender compassion. So that I impute their not communicating unto the Apostles
necessity, at this time, rather unto forgetfulness, and some want of care for
this time (which was sometime the fault of the Philippians, as we heard before)
then unto ungratefulness, or any such notorious fault. The Apostles purpose I
take rather to be to commend the Philippians, then deeply to censure the other
churches.

In this then that he says, that when he departed from Macedonia, no church
etc. I note the thing for which he commends the Philippians above the other
churches of Macedonia; which was, the performance of that Christian duty
toward him, to minister unto him temporal things when he had bestowed on them
spiritual things. Whence I observe this lesson for us, that where spiritual
things are bestowed upon us, there we should minister temporal things; where
the Minister teaches us with the word, there we should make allowance of
maintenance unto him. Which point the Apostle proves at large in the former to
the Corinthians, and by many arguments: as first, by an argument taken from
Soldiers; 1. Cor. 9.7.
Who (says the Apostle) goes a warfare any time at his own cost? How much
more should they that fight the Lord his battles, fight them at the churches
cost? Secondly, by an argument taken from planters of Vines. Who (says the
Apostle) planteth a vineyard and eats not of the fruit thereof? How much more
should they that plant and work in the Lord his vineyard eat of the fruits of
their own labors: Thirdly, by an argument taken from them that are occupied
about cattle? Who (says the Apostle) feeds a flock, and eats not of the
milk of the flock? How much more should they that feed the Lord his flock
with the sincere milk of the word, be fed by them with temporal food:
Fourthly, by an argument taken from the testimony of Moses, where he says, 9.
Thou shall not muzzell the mouth of the ox that treads out the corn, for
that was the fashion in Palestina: how much less should their mouth be muzled,
maintenance be denied them that labor in the Lord his husbandry? Fifthly, by
comparing spiritual things with temporal things; 11.
If (says he) we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if
we reap your carnal things: that is, things necessary for the maintenance of
this life? Sixthly, by an argument taken from the allowance of the Priests of
the old Law: 13.
Do ye not know (says the Apostle) that they which minister about the holy
things, 14.
eat of the things of the Temple? and they which wait at the Altar, are
partakers of the Altar: so also has the Lord ordained, that they which preach
the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. Thus ye see a large proof of this
point in that one place by many arguments. Many other places there are pregnant
also to this purpose, Galat. 6.6.
as when it is said, Let him that is taught in the word, m^ke him that has
taught him partaker of all his goods: as also where it is said, 1. Tim. 5.17.
The Elders that rule well, are worthy of double honor, especially they which
labor in the word and doctrine: by which term of double honor, many do
understand reverence, and things necessary for the maintenance of this life.
The point is so clear, that to doubt of it, is to doubt of the truth of the
Scriptures, which in so many places give so evident testimony thereunto.

Which may serve to admonish many of us of a necessary duty wherein we use
great slacknes. Some of us can be very well content neither to be taught in the
word, not to give any maintenance to the Preachers of the word. And these are
men altogether senseless, without all feeling of God or godliness, in whose
hearts the day star of righteousness has not yet risen, that they should know
or thirst after the things that belong unto their peace. Others of us could be
better content a great deal to give something to stay the Ministry of the
word, that so we might continue in our ignorance, and sleep in our sins,
then to have the word preached unto us. And these are men, not sick, but dead
in sin, desperately wicked, and unto every good work, reprobate. Others of
us can be content to hearken to them that labor in the word and doctrine, and
that they should preach often, but care not how little to hear of allowance
toward their maintenance. If they speak of the Ministers duty, of the
assiduitie and diligence which they ought to use, of the necessity that lies
upon them to preach the Gospel, of the woe that is unto them if they do not
preach the Gospel, we like them well, and commend them much. But if they speak
of their own maintenance, of their allowance due on our parts unto them: what
say we then? Then forsooth they tell their own tales, they preach for
themselves. Math. 10.8.
Nay we can dispute very well against them out of the Scriptures in this point,
and tell them that freely they have received, and freely they must give, 2 Thessalonians. 3.8.
and that Paul labored with his own hands, because he would not be chargeable
to them whom he taught. But see how herein we deceive our selves. He that
says, Freely ye have received, freely give, does he not immediately after say,
that the workman is worthy of his meat? What then, does our blessed Savior
cross himself? God forbid. And yet either we must say so, or else that the
former words make nothing against the maintenance of Ministers, especially the
latter words being both so plain in themselves, and likewise alleged by the
Apostle for the Ministers maintenance. 1. Tim 5.18.
For the meaning then of those words; first I say, that they are to be
understood of working miracles; which gift, as the Lord freely bestowed on his
Apostles and Disciples for a time, for the better gaining of men unto the
faith, so he would have them freely showed forth upon men, that as Elizeus the
Prophet could by no means be wrought to receive any thing of Naaman the Syrian
for healing his leprousie, so whatsoever sickness they should heal,
whatsoever miracles they should work, they should not be wrought to take any
thing for it. Secondly, if any man shall contend that the words are to be
understood of the Lords work generally, that as freely they have received the
grace, so freely they do the work, then I expound the words by that of the
Apostle Peter, that they are to feed the flock of God which depends on
them, 1. Pet. 5.2.
caring for it not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of
a ready, mind. Surely it is no way the meaning of those words, that they that
labor in that holy work, should be debarred of wages for their labor.
Neither does the example of the Apostle (laboring with his own hands) at all
make against the maintenance of the Ministry by the Church. First, he
professes that he wrought with his hands, not for that he ought so to do (for
he proves that they ought to have ministered unto him) but that they might have
no exception against him. Secondly, the example of the Apostle herein is no way
to press us, for that he needed not, as we, to attend unto reading, but being
immediately taught of God, and furnished with all knowledge in the third
heaven, he was able at all times to teach the way of God perfectly, though he
wrought with labor and travel night and day. But we cannot intend manuarie
matters, and do the duties of our calling. Our duty is to attend unto reading
to exhortation, 1. Tim. 4.13.
and to doctrine; and the Church is to minister unto us necessary maintenance.
How cunningly therefore soever we think we can dispute against the maintenance
of the Minister by the Church, yet do we but deceive our selves therein. This
is true generally, that whatsoever we say or dispute, we will give as little to
his maintenance as may be, we will withhold from him as much as we can, we
think that well gotten that is saved from them, and we think every little too
much that they have.

Beloved, I have no cause but to persuade my self better things of many of
you. Only I speak how it fares commonly with men abroad. The peoples
readiness in all places to deceive their Ministers in all kind of their
tithes, is often spoken of unto us that have some farther experience therein
then what we have by hearsay. As for us, let it not be so with us, but let us
be ready to communicate unto him that has taught us in the word, that there be
no complaint of our not communicating concerning the matter of giving and
receiving. Every labourer is worthy of his wages. Let us not deny them unto
him that oftentimes steepes his labors with us in his own blood. Nay, let us
give them cheerfully unto him as unto him that watches for our souls. It is
but copper that we give for the purest gold. Let us not stand upon this
exchange, but let us offer it most willingly.

The second thing which I note in these words is, that the Apostle says, that
the Philippians only communicated with him concerning etc. They waited not to
see what the other Churches would do, whether they would give the Apostle ought
or no, or what they would give, or when they would give, but they bethought
themselves what they were in duty to do, and that they did, though they only
did it. Whence I observe this lesson for us, that look what is our duty to
do, that we are to do, though none join with us. If Noah should have looked
what the old world did, and have fashioned himself like unto them, he had been
like to have perished in the waters with them. But he looked what his God
required of him, and though none joined with him, Genes. 6.7.
yet he alone walked with the Lord, and therefore he alone was saved, when the
rest of the old world was drowned with the waters. Or if Lot should have looked
to the wicked conversation of the Sodomites, and defiled himself with their
unlawful deeds, he had been like to have been consumed in the fearful
burning of those sinful cities. 19.
But he looked to the Law of his God, and though none joined with him, yet he
alone walked in the ways of the Lord, and therefore when the city, and they
that were in it were destroyed, he was saved. Or if that Samaritane that was
cleansed with the other nine, should have stayed to wait what the other nine
would do, his leprosy might have taken hold of him again. But he considered
his own duty, and when he was healed, Luke 17.
he turned back, and with a loud voice praised God, and fell down at his
feet on his face, and gave him thanks: and therefore he was praised of the
Lord, and cleansed of his leprosy. All which examples show plainly unto us,
that we are not to look what others do, but what we are to do; and though all
the rest of the world bow the knee unto Baal, yet must we with Eliah look unto
the Lord our God, and serve him alone: whatsoever is our duty to do, that must
we do though we only do it. Though there be but few that strive to enter in at
the strait gate, yet must we strive to enter in at the strait gate: Luke 13.14.
Exodus 23.2.
neither may we follow a multitude to do evil. It is our duty that we must
look unto, and be there many or few, any or none besides our selves to join
with us, yet must we do that which our duty requires of us.

This may teach us to reform a great fault in our selves. We are none of us
grown to that height of impiety (I hope) that in a desperate mood we will
say, that we had rather go to hell with company, then go to heaven alone. But
this is a great fault with many of us. In matters of contribution unto any good
purpose, what do we say? No reason we should contribute alone, we will see what
others will do; if they contribute, we will; if they will not, we will not; and
saying thus, we think we say well; and if we add this, let others do, and in
proportion we will not be behind the best, then we think no man can say more,
or better. But thus still we depend upon the doing of others, whereas in doing
good we should one go before another, and rather strive to be examples unto
others, then stand upon the example of others. If we be the foremost, it may be
others will follow us; and if we be alone, it is better to walk in the way
alone, then out of the way with others. In matters likewise of election what do
we say? We would gladly bestow our voice on the best, but the most go another
way, and we can do no good by singling our selves from the rest, a note of
singularity we may bring upon our selves; if there were any possibility to do
good, we would bestow our voice as we should, but being none, we may not lose
our voice that way, but bestow it another way. Thus we look at the example of
others, and offend by the example of others, whereas rather by our example
others should be condemned which do not as we do. Beloved, let this be our
rule, to look what we should do, not what others do. Let us do that we ought,
though we alone do it, and let us fly the rest, how many soever follow it. Let
us by our example provoke others to do that is good, and if they do not follow
it, let their judgment be upon their own head. If we alone walk in the ways
of our duty, our reward is with our God, but their judgment sleeps not, that
either will not walk with us, or forsake us in the way.

In the next verse the Apostle gives this testimony unto the Philippians,
that when he was absent from them, when he was in Thessalonica, they sent their
liberality once and again unto him to relieve his necessity. Wherein first I
observe a notable pattern of that great care which ought to be in the people
for their Minister. The people should after the example of the Philippians, be
careful to inquire into the state of their Minister, and as they shall
understand him to need this or that help, this or that encouragement, so they
should be willing once and again, even as need is with all cheerfulness,
wherein soever they may to help them. But far otherwise is the practice with
us. If his living be small, and he such a one as labors painfully in the
word amongst us, yet will we not relieve him; and if we send once and again
unto him, it shall be when we have got some advantage against him, some that
may vex and trouble him, and either weary him of all, or turn him out of that
little that he has. His bareness and his want shall be his reproach amongst
us, but no cause of any holy care for him. It should not be thus, but as the
Philippians did, so should we do, even take all care for them that teach us in
the word.

Secondly, in the person of Paul, I note that it was Paul's necessity which
the Philippians sent once and again to relieve. Whence I observe, that even
the best Ministers of the Gospel of Christ Jesus are sometimes urged and
pressed with necessity. In Paul indeed it was less marvel, both because that
was the infancy of the church, and for that he always went about either
planting or stablishing the Churches, and settled himself in no certain place.
But now that the Church is stablished, and the Ministry settled, that now
sometimes the very best should be pressed with necessity, I know not well what
to say to it. It is certainly one of the shames and discredites of our
Clergy, that in many places the worthiest laborers want, and the veriest
loyterers abound. Some lights of the church have either nothing, or as little as
little may be: and again, some others, that either cannot, or will not do any
good in the Church at all, have living upon living, and dignity upon dignity
heaped upon them. Ye see the note which I should prosecute: but time will not
give me leave.

LECTVRE XCII.
PHILIP. 4. Verse 17. Not that I desire a gift, but I desire the fruit which
may further your reckoning.

18. Now I have received all etc.


NOt that I desire a gift etc. In these words the Apostle signifies the very
true cause of that his joy in the Lord, whereof he spoke before verse 10. and
the very true cause of this his commendation of their liberality in the two
verses next before. For, as before he signified in verse 11. that the
principal cause of his rejoicing was not because of his want, because his want
was supplied by their liberality; so now he signifies that the principal
commendation of their liberality was not for that he desired a new gift of
them, as some thereby might happily imagine; but the principal thing which he
regarded both in the one, and in the other, the principal cause both of his
rejoicing in the Lord for their care for him, and of his commendation of their
liberality both first and last toward him, was the fruit which followed
thereupon to further their reckoning in that day of the great account. But I
desire etc. The phrase of speech here used is borrowed from the Merchants
counting-bookes: for as in case of the debt of a great sum of money to a
Merchant, the more money that is noted in his book as paid, the more his
reckoning is furthered that paid it; so the Apostle hereby signifies, that
the more of their charitable works toward him, were noted, as it were, in
Gods book, the more their reckoning was furthered with God, who in the great
account should reckon that to their fruit and advantage, which they had done
to him. What was then the things which the Apostle principally desired, even
more then their gifts though he needed them? It was the fruit of their
liberality, that they might reap the fruit thereof with God. And what was
the fruit of their liberality? Namely, the furthering of their reckoning with
God in that day when they should give accounts of that they had done in their
flesh, whether it were good or evil; for the Apostle knew that this fruit
should follow their liberality toward him, that thereby their reckoning
should be furthered with God, who would reckon that upon their head to their
vantage that they had done to him. And this was it which principally caused the
Apostle to joy in their gifts and liberality. Thus much for the opening of the
meaning of these words. Now let us see what observations we may gather hence,
whereof to make some farther use for our selves.

Not that I desire a gift. The first thing which here I note is the Apostles
diligent care to clear things as he goes. In verse 10. of this Chapter the
Apostle signified his great rejoicing in the Lord for the Philippians great
care for him, showed by the things which they sent him by their minister
Epaphroditus. Whereupon lest it should be thought that before he received their
gift, he had been cast down through heaviness, or were not able to endure his
want, he cleares himself of all suspicion of any such abject mind, and tells
them in the next verse, that he spoke not because of want, that is, yt he
rejoiced not so much, because his want was supplied by their liberality, but
there was another matter in it. Again, in ver. 11.12. he signified that he
could be content with whatsoever state he were in, that he knew how to be
abased, and how to abound, that he was instructed both to be full, and to be
hungry, to abound and to have want. Whereupon lest he should seem to have
boasted himself too much of himself, as if by his own power and strength he
had been able to do all those things, he cleares himself of all such arrogant
presuming of his own strength, and tells them verse 13. that he is able to do
all those things: but how? by his own power and strength? No, but through
Christ which strengthened him. Again, the Apostle having said that through
Christ which strengthened him he could endure want, and he could be content
whether he were full or hungry, etc; hereupon it might be thought that he made
small account of their benefit, and could as well have been without it as with
it. He therefore cleares this point also, and tells them that notwithstanding he
could do all things through Christ, yet they had well done to communicate to
his affliction. Again in verses 15.16. he highly commended the Philippians for
their great liberality toward him even from the first unto the last, and
prefers them before all other Churches of Macedonia. Whereupon lest he
should seem to affect a new benefit, to desire a new gift, he cleares himself
of any such desire, and tells them plainly that he does not so commend them for
that he desires a gift of them. Thus, sometimes to clear the truth of
doctrine, sometimes to free himself from unjust suspicions, always to
rectify them that they do not misconceiue of things, evermore he cleares
matters as he goes. Whence I observe a good lesson for the Minister of the
Gospel of Christ Jesus, which is, that he give all diligence in his teaching so
to clear things as he goes, as that his people may not misconceiue any thing
either touching the truth, or touching himself. He is to be jealous of both,
even with a godly jealousy; of the truth, that no speech of his may cause them
to err touching the truth; that he speak not any thing against the truth, but
for the truth; that in all simplicity and plainness he deliver the truth; or
if at any time he speak something which may be mistaken, yet he so clear it
before he leave it, as that there need to be no doubt of it. Of himself, that
no speech slip him, nor any action pass him whereby he may be noted of
impatience, or pride, or contempt, or covetousness, or any such spot of life;
or if he do speak, or do any thing whereby any such suspicion is or may be
fastened on him, that he so clear it, that he quite wipe it out; for if the
truth be prejudiced, Mat. 18.7.
it is a stumbling block in a brothers way, and a woe is unto him that puts
a stumbling block before his brother to cause him to fall: or if his own
person be prejudiced, it is an hinderance unto the work of his Ministry, and
wherein shall he have any comfort if not in the work of his Ministry? If the
example of our Apostle even in this Chapter were not a sufficient president for
all Pastors of Gods people to this purpose, I might add thereunto both the
example of our blessed Savior, and likewise of the rest of the Apostles: for
who so looks into the new Testament shall see them always so diligent in
this point, as they do not miss the teaching of any thing which might either
prejudice the truth, or their own persons. But I pass over further proof for
this point.

This first might serve for a very good instruction unto many in the Ministry
in these our days; for how many are there in many places, that sometimes move
more doubts then they do answer? How many that sometimes so speak, as that they
leave their hearers in greater suspense then they found them? How many that so
speak, as that their hearers by that they speak, cannot discern whether they
be Protestants or Papists? How many that couch their matters so closely, and
handle things so obscurely, as if they would not be understood? of whom ye
shall hear some say when they come from them, they are fine men, great
scholars, learned Divines: but ask them what they learned? they can say just
nothing. How many are there that say they care not what, nor what men gather of
that they say? How many that speak smoothingly, how many that speak egrely,
and yet never labor to clear themselves of hatred, and of flattery? Some are
negligent and careless to consider what they speak, and these never think of
clearing things as they go. Others are so little zealous of ye truth, that
though something slip them which may hazard the truth, yet they will willingly
let it go; and these care no^ for clearing things as they go. Others love to
carry things in the clouds, and so to speak as that a man shall be little the
better or the wiser; and these will not clear points as they go. But beloved,
what should I speak to you of these things? Ye see what duty lies upon us by
the example of the Apostle; even so to clear things as we go, as that ye may
not misconceiue of what we speak.

Hence then learn you to give al diligence in hearkening to the things that we
speak: for if we be to be so careful as that nothing slip us which we clear
not, lest ye should misconceiue of any thing, then surely are ye to be as
careful of attending to that we speak, that so ye may conceive aright of
every thing that is spoken. Otherwise if your thoughts be wandering, and your
wits (as we say) a woll-gathering, what pains soever we take in clearing of
things, yet do ye mistake things. And hereupon it is that we sustain many
wrongs of them that hear us. We must take pains, and labor that ye may
conceive aright of all that we speak; and ye must sleep a little and hear a
little, and wander in your thoughts a little and hear a little; and then in
something mistaking us, ye must run upon us, and we said, ye know not what.
Howsoever this be commonly a fault amongst hearers, yet beloved, let it not be
so amongst you. When ye come hither, pray unto the Lord that he will stir up
your dull minds by his holy Spirit, that he will vouchsafe to bless the
ministry of his holy word unto you; and when ye are here, give all diligence
to hearken, that so ye may conceive aright of the things that are spoken, that
so by the things which ye hear the Lord may be glorified, and your selves
edified, and builded up into a perfect man in Christ Jesus.

The second thing which I note is, the Apostles fatherly affection toward the
Philippians; for in that he says, that he desires not a gift, but the fruit
which may further, etc. he shows that as fathers in their tender affection
toward their children desire not any thing of them but for their behoof and
good; so he in his tender love toward them, desires not any gift of them, but
for their behoof and good in the day of Christ Jesus. Whence I observe what a
fatherly affection there ought to be in the Pastor toward his people, namely
such, as that he seek not theirs, but them; not his own profit, but the
profit of his people, that they may be saved. Thus our Apostle often professes
that he did; as where he says, that he sought not his own profit, 1 Cor.
10.33. 2 Cor. 12.14.
but the profit of many that they might be saved; and again where he tells
the same Corinth. that he sought not theirs, but them. Wherein he has left a
president for us, that as he has done so we should do also. What then? Is not
the Pastor to labor with his people in the word and doctrine for their
salvation, and to desire nothing of them, to look for nothing at their hands?
No, not so; for we heard the last day, that where spiritual things are sown,
there carnal things are to be reapt, and that he that teaches may as well
require them of them that are taught in the word, as the soldier may do his
pay, or the labourer his wages, or he that planteth a vineyard of the fruit of
the vineyard, or he that feeds a flock of the milk of the flock. But as at
the first he is not to undertake this sacred and holy function in any covetous
or ambitious desire for worldly maintenance or promotion, but in an holy desire
to gain men unto the faith and knowledge of Christ Jesus; so at no time is he
so much to respect the gift and maintenance that he has by his people, as the
salvation of his people in the day of Christ Jesus. In a place therefore where
his living is allotted, and his maintenance set, the benefit of his living
should not so much rejoice him, as to see his people offer their duties
willingly, and give them chearefully; for that this is a token of their growth
in piety, and a fruit which shall surely further their reckoning. And so
likewise in a place where only a voluntary contribution is made for a time,
the allowance whatsoever it is, is not so much to rejoice him, as the evident
tokens of their piety therein which make it, which shall further their
reckoning. And the care which in both places is by him to be taken, is not to
be for his own profit, but for the profit of his people that they may be
saved, even for the gaining of them in the faith and knowledge of Christ Jesus.
To which purpose also is that of the Apostle Peter, Feed the flock of God
which depends on you, 1 Pet. 5.2.
caring for it not by constraint but willingly, not for filthy lucre but of a
ready mind.

But as our Apostle says to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4.15.
Though ye have ten thousand instructers in Christ, yet have ye not many
fathers; so may it now be said, though many Churches and many congregations
have many Ministers and teachers, yet have they not many so fatherly affected
as seek not their own profit, but their profit that they may be saved. If we
should look into the Popish Clergy, it would easily appear by their practice
what it is they seek and desire. For to what end are their trentals, diriges,
masses, bulls, pardons, and such other their trash, but for that they desire
gifts, and seek after their own profit? It were to be wished that they only
were such, and that there were no such amongst us. But what shall we say of
them that so they may get in, care not how they come in, in at the window, or
down at the house top? that stick not at these matters of simonie and
corruption, but swallow them down greedily? that take the fourth, fifth,
seventh, tenth, twentieth part of the living, and leave the rest unto the
Patron? that fly to Tarsus when they should go to Nineveh, and rather reside
any where then where they should? that heap living upon living, and dignity
upon dignity, and come either at none, or but at some one of them? that feed
themselves, and fleece their flocks, but do not labor with them in the word?
that keep no proportion concerning the matter of giving and receiving, but
reap as many carnal things as they can, and sow either none, or as few
spiritual things as they can? Do not these seek their own profit more then
the profit of the people that they may be saved? Are not these of those that
seek their own, and not that which is Jesus Christ's? If they could say any
thing for themselves, it is all well, surely I cannot say any thing for them. I
wish that they who by their place may and ought to look to the reforming of
these things, would in an holy care look unto them, and as much as in them is
reform them. Work there will be; for hardly will these things be reformed.

Now as there are many in the Ministry that neither are, nor will easily be
persuaded to be so fatherly affected toward their people as to seek them, and
not theirs, or more then theirs; so, beloved, are there many among you that
hear us, and unto whom we are sent, that will hardly be persuaded of any of us
that we seek not yours but you, that we seek not our own profit, but yours
that you may be saved. Nay if we tell you that it is not your worldly
commodities that we so much seek after, that it is not your carnal things
that we so much desire, but that the principal thing that we long after even
from our very heart root, is your godly growth in the faith and knowledge of
Christ, and your salvation in the day of Christ, what do ye commonly twit us
withal? namely this, that we shall long tell you thus before you will believe
us. And this is one great cause in my judgment why oftentimes we labor all
night and catch naught, why we spend our strength in vain, and for nothing
amongst you, even your hard persuasion of us as wanting all such fatherly
affection toward you. But as the fault is great of such in the Ministry as
want such affection toward you, so is your fault also great to think that
none in the Ministry are so affected toward you. Where therefore their
presence, their diligence, their watchfulness, their care over you give you no
other cause, there persuade your selves the best of your Ministers and
Teachers. Yea persuade your selves of this, that they seek not yours but you,
that they seek not their own profit but yours that ye may be saved, that they
desire not a gift, but the fruit which may further your reckoning.

The third thing which I note is that the Apostle says, that the fruit of
their liberality toward him shall redound to the furtherance of their
reckoning in the day of Christ Jesus. Whence I observe a notable commendation
of charitablenesse toward the poor, afflicted, and distressed, and generally
of good works. The commendation is this, that look what we give unto the
poor and afflicted members of Christ Jesus, look generally what good we do,
that shall as it were be reckoned upon our head in that day when we shall give
our accounts what we have done in the flesh, whether it be good or evil. For
imagine that it were with God as it is with man, and that he had a book
wherein were noted as our debts so our payments; in the day when the account
shall be made, whatsoever charitable work we have done unto any of Gods Saints
shall be reckoned unto us for good payment, and the more we have done, the more
shall our reckoning be furthered; nay the good works that here we have done
they shall then be recompensed with eternal glory in the heavens. Prou. 19.17.
He that has mercy on the poor (says Solomon) lends unto the Lord, and
the Lord will recompense him that which he has given. Mat. 10.42.
Whosoever (says our blessed Savior) shall give unto one of these little ones
a cup of cold water only in the name of a Disciple, verily I say unto you he
shall not lose his reward. And in the last day, Come (shall he say) ye blessed
of my Father, Mat. 25.34.35.
inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. For
I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, etc. The reason of such recompense of
reward is, because Christ reckons it as done unto himself, whatsoever is
done unto his members here on earth. If they be persecuted, he is persecuted,
as that his voice from heaven showed when he cried, Act. 9.4.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? when not he, but his Disciples were
persecuted. And again, if they be relieved he is relieved, as that place of
Matthew shows, Mat 25.40.
where he says, Verily I say unto you, in as much as ye have done it unto one
of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. Now shall any good
be done unto Christ the everlasting Son of the Father, and shall the reward
be less then everlasting glory in the heavens?

What shall we say then? Is salvation in the heavens the reward of our works?
yea, it is so. Is it a reward due unto our works? Yea, it is so. Is it a
reward due unto our works upon the merit of our works? No, in no sort. For
when we have done all that we can, Christ has taught us to say that we are
unprofitable servants, Luc. 17.10.
yea when we have done all things that are commanded us. And whatsoever
afflictions we suffer in this present life, Romans 8.18.
Paul has taught us, that they are not worthy of the glory that shall be
showed unto us. The merit that we can talk of for our works, Dan. 9.9. Job.
9.20.
is to say with Daniel, To us belongs open shame: and with Job, If I would
justify my self by standing upon the merit of my works, my own mouth shall
condemn me; Iam. 3.2. Esa. 64.6.
for in many things we sin all: and all our righteousness, even the very best
of it is as filthy clouts. How is salvation then a reward due unto our works?
Even for the promise sake made unto us in Christ Jesus. For therefore do we
claim salvation as due unto our works, even because God has made that
promise in Christ Jesus unto our works. But what was the cause of his promise?
was it our works seen, or foreseen that they would be of such desert? No,
but of his own free grace and mercy toward us, according to the good purpose
of his will he promised it unto us. And therefore the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2 8.
Tit. 3.5.
By grace are ye saved through faith, not of works, lest any man should boast
himself. And again, Not by the works of righteousness which we have done,
but according to his mercy he saved us. Thus we teach, and every where we
exhort all men unto good works, and holiness of life, without which no man
shall see the Lord.

First then here, beloved, learn you to skill what manner of men they be that
charge us that we preach only faith, but either mention not, or else condemn
good works. Ye see we tell you out of our Apostle here, that they shall further
your reckoning in the day of Christ Jesus. And therefore we beseech you to
abound in every good work until the day of Christ Jesus: and know them to be
of their father the devil that say, that either we mention not, or condemn
good works unto our people.

Secondly, hence learn to acknowledge and to magnify the great mercy of our
God, who accepts that for a furtherance of our reckoning, which if he should
deal with us in justice could stand for no payment; for how I pray you stands
it? We should bring gold for payment into the Lords treasury. But we bring
lead, and he accepts it for gold. Our best righteousness is full of
unrighteousness, yet does he accept it. What? for our righteousness sake? No,
for his mercies sake, and imputes unto us the righteousness of Christ Jesus.
Let our mouths therefore always be filled with his praises for such his
loving mercies toward us.

Thirdly, let this be a sufficient motive unto you to stir you up unto
charitablenesse, and unto every good work; for seeing such is their acceptance
with God that in that great account they shall further your reckoning, what
should stay you but that ye should labor to be fulfilled with the fruits of
righteousness? Time cuts me off that I cannot speak of these things, and I
shall the next time be farther occasioned to speak of them by occasion of the
text.

LECTVRE XCIII.
PHILIP. 4. Verse 18. Now I have received all, and am well filled; I was even
filled after that I had received of Epaphroditus, etc.
NOw I have received all. Hitherto we have heard the Apostles thankfulness
unto the Philippians for their care for him, and his commendation of them for
their liberality toward him. Now he commends their liberality, and withal
adds a promise of recompense of reward for their liberality, and so
concludes the Epistle with praise and thanksgiving unto the Lord. In verse 18,
first he signifies the faithfulness of Epaphroditus, when he says, Now I
have received all: all? what? to wit, all that you sent by Epaphroditus. For
herein he gives him this testimony, that he had received the whole sum of
him which came from them, which it is like they had specified. Secondly, he
commends their liberality of the quantity of it, when he says, I have
plenty, and am filled. For hereby he signifies that their liberality toward
him was not scanted, but was such as plentifully supplied his wants, such as
filled his desires; not that the gift which they sent him was so great and
magnificent, (for the Churches of Macedonia were but poor, 2 Cor. 8.2.
) but though it were but small, yet such was his contentment, as that he was as
well satisfied and as fully as the greatest man with his greatest riches.
Thirdly, he commends their liberality of the acceptablenesse of it unto God,
when he says, An odor that smells sweet etc. For herein by a speech
borrowed from sacrifices made by fire for a sweet savor unto the Lord, he
signifies that their liberality was as acceptable and pleasant unto God, as
the sacrifice that smells sweet in the nostrils of the Lord. These are the
principal points contained in these words, and this I take to be the meaning
of them. Now let us see what notes we may gather hence for our further use and
instruction.

The first thing which here I note is the faithfulness of Epaphroditus, who
kept nothing back of all that the Philippians sent unto the Apostle, but
faithfully delivered whatsoever they sent unto him. Whence I observe a notable
pattern of that faithfulness which ought to be in all Christians, to discharge
that trust whatsoever it is that is reposed in them: even such should be their
faithfulness, as that they whom it does concern, may safely give them this
testimony, that they have discharged the trust that was reposed in them. Such
was the faithfulness of Samuel, who when he had asked of the people of Israel,
Whose Ox have I taken? 1 Samuel 12.3.4.
or whose Ass have I taken? or whom have I done wrong to? or whom have I hurt?
or of whose hand have I received any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith? and I
will restore it you. They said unto him: Thou have done us no wrong, nor have
hurt us, neither have taken ought of any man's hand. So faithfully he had walked
amongst them in all things, that they gave him testimony of his faithfulness
before the Lord, and before his Anointed. Such faithfulness also our blessed
Savior figureth out unto us in the Parable of the servants, unto one of whom
he gave five talents, and unto another two, to occupy withal until he should
return whence he went, and in the end gave them this testimony, It is well
done good servants and faithful, Mat. 25.15.20. 1 Cor. 4.2.
ye have been faithful in little, I will make you rulers over much, enter into
your Masters joy. And the Apostle tells us generally, that it is required of
the disposers, that every man be found faithful. Be it public or private
things, for the body, or for the soul, goods of the Church, or other goods
that we are trusted withal to dispense and dispose, it is required of us that
we be faithful, even so faithful, that if need be, they whom it does
concern, may safely give us their testimony thereof.

A good lesson for men of all sorts to learn: for Prince and subject, that for
their faithfulness each to other, each may receive of other this testimony, I
have received all loyalty, I have received all right of sovereignty; For
Pastor and people, that for their faithfulness each to other, each may have of
other this testimony; I have received all wholesome instruction from you, I
have received all duties cheerfully from you: For master and servant, that
for their faithfulness each to other, each may have of other this testimony, I
have received all faithful service from you, I have received all that is just
and equal from you. But have those or other like learned this lesson? I will
particularly instance only in one sort of men, whose example best fitteth with
this we have in hand. Patrons of Ecclesiastical livings have the patronage and
donation of livings committed unto them. The churches of several places have
committed that trust unto them, to confer them wholly upon men willing and
fit to discharge a good duty in them. But use they the like faithfulness
herein that Epaphroditus did with Paul? Do they give all that is allotted unto
him, unto their Clerk whom they present? Does the Minister receive all that
the Church assigned him from his Patron? Nay I fear me, not many Ministers can
say, I have received all that the church gave me by my Patron. Many may say, I
have received by my Patron some part of that which the Church allotted unto me,
perhaps the one half, perhaps the fourth part, perhaps the tenth, perhaps the
twentieth part; but all cannot say, I have received all. But let such
unfaithful Patrons as thus neglect to discharge the trust reposed in them,
fear, that they shall never enter into their Masters joy. It is for the good
and faithful servant to enter into his Masters joy; but the bad and
unfaithful servant shall not enter thereinto.

As for us, (beloved) let us look on the example of Epaphroditus, and as he
did, so let us labor in all things faithfully to discharge whatsoever trust is
reposed in us; that as Paul did unto him, so others may give unto us, if need
be, their testimony of our faithfulness. If we have any of the Churches goods
in our hands, any orphans goods in our hands, any relief by any contribution
for any maintenance of any of Gods poor Saints in our hands, or any such like
trust be committed unto us, let us use all faithfulness therein, that even
they whom our faithfulness does concern may give us that testimony, that they
have received all that should any way accrue unto them. But as for the sin of
unfaithfulness touching any trust reposed in any of us, let it not be once
heard of amongst us, as it becomes Saints; that we may defy all the world to
their faces that shall, in the malice of their heart, seek to fasten any such
note upon us. Let us with David hate the sins of unfaithfulness, and let no
such cleave unto us: let us every man use faithfulness in whatsoever trust is
committed to him, and let us assure our selves of this, that as the Lord was
with Abraham's servant, to bless him for his faithful service unto his master
Abraham, so will he be with us to bless us in all our ways, and in all that
we put our hands unto.

The second thing which I note, is the Apostles great contentment with a
little. An evident token whereof is this, that he says, I have plenty, and am
filled. For wherewith was he filled? With that which came from the Philippians,
and which he received by Epaphroditus, which, it may be, supplied his present
wants, and somewhat more. Yet having received this, which it is very likely was
no great matter, he says, I have plenty, and I am filled. Whence I observe a
certain note of good contentment in the true Christian. If with that small or
great store wherewith the Lord in mercy has blessed him, he rest so satisfied,
that he can say, I have plenty, and I am filled; it is an argument of his
Christian contentment, and an argument that he is truly rich indeed. For, who
more rich then he that is best content? or who better content, then he that is
so satisfied with that he has, as that he says, I have plenty, and I am
filled? If a man shall ask the covetous rich man, whether he have plenty, and
be filled; his continual carking and caring, scraping and scratching together
all that ever he can, will speak for him, and say, that he is not full. If a
man shall ask the rich usurer, whether he be full, and have plenty; his
continual eating and devouring of men by his wicked and ungodly usury will
speak for him, and say, that he is not full. If a man shall ask the cruel
oppressor and extortioner, whether he be full and have plenty; his continual
grinding of the faces of the poor, and wringing from his brethren whatsoever
he can, will speak for him, and say, that he is not full. It is not great
wealth and store that always fills a man, but the more a man has, the more
(oftentimes) he craves: and the more cause he has to think himself filled,
the less he thinks himself filled: and therefore, to be filled, sticks not
at usury, oppression, extortion, bribery, or any unlawful and ungodly means;
and yet never is filled, because never content with that he has.

Will ye then know (beloved) who they are that are content with that they have?
will ye have an evident token of great contentment in a good Christian? Mark
where ye hear these speeches, I have enough I thank God, I have plenty, I am
filled; I am as rich as the Emperor, for he has but enough, and so have I. It
may be that they that thus speak have not the greatest wealth in the world, it
may be that they have but, as we say, from hand to mouth, or little more; yet
these are the speeches of them that are content with that they have, which
mind not earthly things, but have their conversation in heaven. Learn
therefore to skill of men's contentment in their desires by the words of their
mouth: and look by what token ye judge of other men's contentment, let others
also, by the like tokens in you, judge likewise of your contentment. None more
like to be free from ungodly desires, and attempts by ungodly means to be
rich, then they that are content with that they have: neither any more like to
be content with that they have, then they that are so satisfied with that they
have, as that they think and say, I have plenty, I am filled. As therefore we
desire to seem content with that we have, and to be free from all suspicion of
ungodly desires, and unlawful attempts to increase that we have, as not
content with that we have; so let us follow our Apostle: and as he having that
which supplied his wants, said, I have plenty, and I am filled; so whatsoever
be our store, if we have but food and raiment, let us think and say that we
have plenty, and that we are filled.

The third thing which I note is the acceptablenesse of the Philippians gift
unto God. Which the Apostle signifies by a speech borrowed from sacrifices,
the odor whereof smells sweet as persume in the nostrils of the Lord. Whence
I observe how acceptable and pleasant unto God our works of charity are
generally toward the poor and particularly toward the Ministers of Christ
his Gospel, they are as sweet smelling sacrifices wherewith the Lord is well
pleased. It is said that Noah after the deluge, Built an altar unto the Lord,
Genesis 8.20.21.
and took of every clean beast, and of every clean foul and offered burnt
offerings upon the altar; and it is added, that the Lord smelled a savor of
rest; that is, he accepted his sacrifice, and was so well pleased that he
ceased from his wrath. So in the mentioning of many sacrifices in Leuiticus,
it is often thus added, It is a burnt offering, an oblation made by fire for a
sweet savor unto the Lord. So that our Apostle calling our works of charity
sacrifice, and sweet smelling odours, evidently shows thereby how acceptable
and pleasant they are unto God. Such a sacrifice Obadiah offered up unto the
Lord, 1. Reg. 18.4.
when he hid the Lord his Prophets by fifties in a cave from the fury of
Iezebel, and fed them with bread and water. Such a sacrifice Ebedmelech offered
up unto the Lord, Ier. 38.13.
when he got Jeremiah the Lord his Prophet out of prison, where he was cast
into the dungeon, and dead almost with hunger. Such a sacrifice the house of
Onesiphorus offered unto the Lord, 2. Tim. 1.16.
when he sought out our Apostle diligently, and found him, and often refreshed
him, and was not ashamed of his chain. These all in their charitable works for
the Prophets and Ministers of the Lord offered up sweet smelling odours, and
sacrifices acceptable and pleasant unto God. Such a sacrifice likewise the
Churches of Macedonia offered unto the Lord, when in their extreme poverty they
were richly liberal to the relief of the poor Saints at Jerusalem. And with
such sacrifices whenever they are offered God is well pleased, as witnesses
the Apostle, where he exhorts to such sacrifice: To do good, Heb. 13.16.
says he, and to distribute, forget not: for with such sacrifice God is well
pleased. Yea he keeps the good deeds of a man as the apple of his eye, and
the alms of a man is as a thing sealed up before him. Yea look whatsoever
good he does unto the poor, Eccl. 17.20.
the Lord shall recompense it him again into his own bosom. Prou. 19.17.
For the day shall come wherein it shall be said unto such workers of charity,
Mat. 25.34.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you from
the foundations of the world, for I was an hungered, etc.

Here then first learn what the Christian sacrifice is wherewithal God is well
pleased. The sacrifices of the old Law they are now abolished and done away,
even since our blessed Savior gave himself for us to be an offering and a
sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor unto God. Other incenses and sacrifices
which now in many places are offered and sacrificed unto idols and images they
are an abomination unto the Lord. It is not perfumes in temples, burning of
incense unto Saints, sacrificing unto stocks and stones, or hoasts upon the
altars, that are acceptable and pleasing unto God. Nay he that does these
things is as if he cut off a dogs neck, as if he offered swines blood, as if
he blessed an idol: nay he is an idolater, and he is an abomination unto the
Lord. If we will be sacrificing, the Christian sacrifice which we must offer
unto the Lord to be a sweet smelling savor unto him, must be the offering of
the calves of our lips, even the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving for such
his loving mercies as he has vouchsafed unto us; or else the offering of our
selves a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is our reasonable
serving of God; or else the offering of our goods in a charitable devotion to
the poor afflicted members of Christ Jesus. These sacrifices are commended
unto us by the Apostles of Christ Jesus; Heb. 13.15.
the first where it is said, Let us by Jesus offer the sacrifice of praise
always unto God; that is, the fruit of our lips which confess his name:
Romans 12.1.
the second where it is said, I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God,
that ye give up your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which
is your reasonable serving of God: Heb. 13.16.
the third where it is said, To do good, and to distribute forget not, for with
such sacrifice God is well pleased. And these are the alone sacrifice left unto
Christians to offer, which are acceptable and pleasant unto God.

Secondly, let us hence learn to strive every man to go one before another in
doing good unto all the afflicted members of Christ Jesus. It is a sacrifice
acceptable and pleasant unto God, witness the Apostle here. It is more
accepted with God then all burnt offerings and sacrifice, witness the Prophet.
Hos. 6.7.
It shall further their reckoning in the day of Christ Jesus; witness the
Apostle in the words before. It shall bring with it great recompense of reward
through the promise made of God unto us in Christ Jesus; witness our blessed
Savior. Mat. 25. Gal. 6.10.
Let us therefore as the Apostle exhorts, While we have time do good unto all
men, but specially unto them which are of the household of faith. Let us, as
Daniel counseled Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.24.
Break off our sins by righteousness, and our iniquities by mercies toward
the poor. Let us, as Solomon wills, Prou. 3.3.
Bind mercy and truth upon our necks, and write them upon the tables of our
hearts. Let all hard-heartednes be far from us, and let the bowels of
compassion be kindled within us so often as we behold the distressed members of
Christ Jesus. The law commands mercifulnes and compassion even unto the poor
beasts. How much more should we that are members one of another, we that are
members of the mystical body of Christ Jesus, deal mercifully one with
another, and be fervent in charity one toward another. Beloved, let us
consider our selves? and provoke one another unto every good work. He that
has been slack let him be no more slack, and he that has been forward this
way let him be forward still. The day approaches when we must all appear
before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man may receive the things
which are done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it be good
or evil. Let us therefore make us friends of the unrighteous mammon, and let
us lay up for our selves treasure in heaven, whither neither rust nor moth
corrupts, and where thieves do not break through nor steal. And this shall
we do, if as God has blessed us we give unto the poor, and take pity and
compassion on the fatherless and afflicted.

LECTVRE XCIV.
PHILIP. 4. Verse 19. And my God shall fulfill all your necessities through his
riches, with glory in Christ Jesus.
ANd my God shall, etc. The Apostles commendation of the Philippians
liberality we have heard, which was this; First that in it self it was such
as that after he had received it, he had plenty, and was filled; Secondly,
that it was a sweet smelling odor, a sacrifice acceptable and pleasant unto
God. Now unto this commendation the Apostle adds a promise of recompense of
reward for their liberality, and so concludes the Epistle with praise and
thanksgiving unto the Lord. In verse 19. where the promise is, first I note the
Author of the recompense promised, which is God, whom the Apostle in great
strength of faith calls his God, both for his own comfort, and for the
Philippians encouragement. Secondly, I note what recompense is promised, which
is, that his God shall fulfill all their necessities; wherein he alludeth to
that he had said in the former verse, that as he was filled by them, and all
his necessities supplied through their liberality, so his God should fulfill
all their necessities, and supply all their wants. Thirdly, I note the
possibility of making this recompense, which appears to be easy because God
is rich: My God shall fulfill all your necessities through his riches.
Fourthly, I note the fullness of the recompense promised unto their
liberality, in that it is said that he shall fulfill all their necessities
through his riches with glory; all, with glory, that is, so plentifully and
abundantly, and gloriously, that it shall be to the glory of his name. Lastly,
I note the cause wherefore, or the means whereby such recompense shall be made,
which is Christ Jesus, in whom, and for whom, and through whom we have and
receive both all the promises, and all the blessings for this life, and for
that that is to come, My God shall fulfill, etc. with glory in Christ Jesus.
The sum then of these words is this, as if he had thus said: As I have
plenty, and am filled by you, so that all my wants are supplied; so my God
that helps me and comfort me in all my troubles, my God that sees and
regards your mercies toward me, shall for a full recompense of reward
fulfill all your necessities, and supply all your wants through his riches
plentifully to the glory of his name, not for the merit of your work, but in
and for Jesus Christ, in whom, and for whom, you and your works are accepted.
This I take to be the meaning of these words. Now let us see what notes we may
gather hence for our farther instruction.

The first thing which here I note is that the Apostle says, My God, etc.
which is not spoken by way of excluding them, as if he were not their God also,
but partly out of the powerful might of his saving faith, partly to comfort
himself in the midst of all his troubles, partly to note his upholding stay
in all his troubles, and partly to imply unto the Philippians that what they
had given unto him they had given unto God. For so it will appear, if the
speech be well observed, that such near application has always such
signification. So David, The Lord is my rock and my fortress, Psalm. 18.2.
and he that delivers me, my God, and my strength, my shield, the horn of my
salvation, and my refuge. So Esaias, O Lord thou art my God, Esaias 25.1. Mat.
27.48.
I will exalt thee, and I will praise thy name. So our blessed Savior, My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? In which and many other like places, where
the Prophets, and Apostles, and our blessed Savior do use these particular
speeches of, My Lord, my God, and the like, they do not use them as thereby
singling out unto themselves a peculiar God, but in some such like respect as
before was mentioned, to wit, either through the great strength of their faith,
or for their comfort in their troubles, or to note their upholding stay in
their afflictions, or else to imply the communication unto Gods Saints to be a
communication unto God. Whence I observe that such speeches are no note of
singularity, no speeches to be either scorned or reproved in them that use
them with reverence and in fear. Which I observe because of them that upon the
hearing of such speeches, are straight way ready to brand him that uses them
with some new name of Puritan, or Precisian, or the like; and in scorn to
ask him who is his God, who is his Lord, and whether he have any peculiar God
which is not our God, and our Lord. Of whom I ask again, whether the
Prophets, and Apostles, and our blessed Savior which used these speeches, were
Puritanes, or Precisians, or the like? If they were, why is it objected unto
any man that he is? if they notwithstanding these speeches were not, why upon
the like speeches is any man judged to be? Shall any man ask of any of them,
who is his God, or who is his Lord, or whether he have any peculiar God? Why
should then any such question upon the like occasion be made? It may very well
be that they who now ask such questions, if Paul were now living, and now
spoke or wrote thus, would ask him the like questions.

Wherein learn a notable policy of the Devil. He sees the great stay, and
the great comfort that the child of God has, when he comes so far as that
with boldness and confidence he can say, my God, and my Lord. He sees that
whatsoever troubles do press us, whatsoever scorners do blow upon us,
howsoever he seek continually like a roaring Lion to devour us, yet nothing
can cast us down, if through the powerful might of a saving faith we can say,
my God, and my Lord. He sees that to come so near unto God, as to call him my
God and my Lord, is to depart too far from him. And therefore he labors
against this boldness and confidence, and near approach: and to this purpose
has devised to brand them with odious names that shall at any time so speak.
Neither yet does my speech tend to persuade the ordinary use of those speeches,
my God, and my Lord. For our blessed Savior has taught us to pray, Our Father
which art in heaven, and I know that our most usual speeches of our Lord, and
our God, are most holy, and most Christian. Only this I say, that it ought not
to be prejudicial unto any man, if at any time he say, my God, and my Lord. He
may sometimes use them, and yet ought nor therefore either to be noted of
singularity, or to be scorned or reproved. Let them consider what I say, that
are so ready upon such occasions to brand men with names that they know not
what they mean, and let us in no sort follow their example. Let us join with
the^ that say, Our God, and our Lord; but let us not scorn or reproach them
that say, My God, or my Lord. Nay, let us know, that nor we, nor any can have
any greater stay or comfort then in this, that the Lord is his God, and his
Lord. Thus much of this note by the way.

The second thing which here I note, is, what recompense of reward the Apostle
promises unto the Philippians for their liberality toward him. The promise
is this, that as he was filled by them, and all his necessities supplied by
their liberality, so God should fulfill all their necessities through his
riches with glory. Whence I observe this lesson for us, that look what good
we do unto Gods Saints here on earth, God shall recompense the same into our
bosoms, both with blessings in this life, and likewise in that that is to
come. Deliver we the poor and needy in the needeful time of trouble? the
recompense is, Psalm. 41.1.
Blessed is he that considers the poor and needy, the Lord shall deliver
him in the time of trouble. Are we merciful unto the poor, and do we sell
them come good cheap? The recompense is, He that is merciful, Pro. 11.17.26.
rewards his own soul: and blessing shall be upon the head of him that
sells corn. Do we feed the hungry, clothe the naked, visit the sick,
lodge the stranger, go to him that is in prison? The recompense is, Come ye
blessed of my Father, Mat. 25.34.
inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you from the foundations of the world:
for I was an hungered, etc. In a word, are we ready to do good, to distribute,
and to communicate according to our ability? The recompense is, we lay up in
store for our selves a good foundation against the time to come, to obtain
eternal life. 1 Timothy 6.19. Mat. 10.42.
Not a cup of cold water, given unto any in the name of a disciple, shall lose
his reward. So merciful, and gracious, and bountiful, and liberal is the
Lord our God, as that he does repay one good turn unto our brethren, with an
hundredth blessings from himself, and gifts of no value, with an eternal
weight of glory.

A great mercy of our gracious God, to promise or to pay such recompense of
reward unto our works; and a notable inducement to stir us up unto all
works of charity. The same motive the Preacher also uses, where he says,
Cast thy bread upon the waters, Eccl. 11.1.
for after many days thou shall find it: Cast thy bread upon the waters, that
is, break thy bread unto the hungry, be merciful and liberal unto the
poor; though thy alms may seem to be cast upon the waters, though it may
seem that thou shall never have thanks or ought else for that good thou
do: (for so too many think, that what they give unto the poor, they commit
unto a dead hand, that it perishes, that afterward there is no remembrance of
it:) yet says he, Cast thy bread upon the waters. And why? he adds a promise
of mercy that shall follow upon it, for after many days thou shall find it,
that is, thy gift shall not perish, but thy God shall recompense it thee into
thy bosom. Thou shall find it in thy basket, and in thy dough, and in the
fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground, in the fruit of thy cattle,
in the increase of thy kine, and in the flocks of thy sheep; or if not in
these temporal blessings, yet in spiritual graces; or if not now for a
season, yet after many days, as the husbandman receives the increase of his
corn, which when it was first sown might seem to have perished; or if not in
this life, yet certainly in the heavens when the Lord shall wipe all tears
from thine eyes, and crown thee with glory and immortality. Here is then
another kind of reasoning then thy carnal sense and reason teaches thee to
make. Thou think that ye way to be rich, is to be sparing, to hold fast,
Ioh. 12.25.
to give away nothing that thou can save. But as our Savior says, He that
loves his life, shall lose it. So I say, he that thus loves his riches shall
not be rich: but the way to keep and to increase riches, is to bestow them on
the poor. Where they seem to be lost, there they shall be found; where they
seem to be cast upon the waters, there they shall be laid up in heaven, where
neither rust nor moath corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor
steal.

Why is it then that the bowels of our compassion are shut up against the
poor? for in many places the poor cry, and none helps them, they faint in
the streets and none succoureth them, they mourn in their souls and none
comfort them, they perish for want of food, and none relieueth them. I
persuade my self that it is not altogether thus amongst us: but in many places
it is thus. And what is the reason? Verily our diffidence and distrust is the
cause of all this. We see not how we shall have sufficiency for our selves if
we be bountiful unto others: we see not but we shall want our selves if thus
we do supply the wants of others; and though it may be we dare not openly
speak unto the point, of Gods promise of a recompense of reward unto
whatsoever we do unto his poor Saints here on earth, yet do we think with our
selves that if we should rely much upon this, we might quickly bring our
selves unto the beggars staff, and then who would pity us? Thus though the
promise be made unto us of fulfilling all our necessities, yet such is our
blindness that we cannot see, and such our distrustfulnesse that we doubt how
our necessities shall be fulfilled, and therefore we hold back, and do not
stretch out our hands unto the poor and needy.

Our Apostle therefore to meet with this doubtfulnesse, tells us that God
that makes this promise unto us is rich, and he will fulfill all our
necessities through his riches. If a poor man make a large promise of great
bountifulness, we may well doubt how he will be able to make good his promise.
But if a rich man make such a promise, especially being a good man, and one
that is wont to keep promise, who will make any doubt of the performance of
his promise? Now our God that unto our works of charity has made this
promise to fulfill all our necessities, is rich. Psalm. 50.10.12
For all the beasts of the forest are his, and so are the cattle upon a
thousand hills: the whole world is his, and all that is therein. The eyes of all
wait upon him, 145.15.16.
and he gives them their meat in due season; he opens his hand, and fills
all things living with plenteousnesse. All riches of grace and glory, of this
life, and of that that is to come, are with him, and unto whom he will he
gives them. And therefore the Apostle tells the Corinthians, saying, 2 Cor.
9.8.
God is able to make all grace to abound toward you, that ye always having all
sufficiency in all things, may abound in every good work. The Corinthians
they did as we do, they feared that if they should give much to the relief of
the poor Saints, they should impouerish themselves thereby. For they thought,
that whatsoever was given to others, was taken from themselves. And therefore
they gave, when they gave, very sparingly, and nothing chearefully. Whereupon
the Apostle tells them, that God is able, to wit, through his riches, to make
all grace to abound toward them; that is, to repay them all that they have
given with advantage, that they might have enough both for themselves, and also
to help others withal. So rich is our God that he can, and so good is our God
that he will do thus unto all them that sow liberally, and give chearefully.
And why should any man doubt of this? When thou sowest thy come in the ground,
do thou not hope to receive thine own again with advantage? and do thou
not reap oftentimes a great deal more then thou did sow? Why then
should thou doubt after thy dispersing to the poor to reap seven fold more
for it? Why should thou not hope to receive thine own again with very
great advantage?

Considering these things, beloved, let it be far from us to doubt that
poverty will follow our liberality. Let us not think with our selves that
the more we give the less we have, but rather that the more we give the more
through his riches we shall have. Let the poor therefore be our field wherein
we sow our corn, and surely we shall reap plentifully: let the poor be our
altar whereon we make our offering, and then surely our sacrifice shall be
acceptable and pleasant unto God: let the poor be our chist wherein to hourd
our treasure, and this shall surely further our reckoning in the day of Christ
Jesus. If our liberality abound according to our ability to the poor, our God
shall fulfill all our necessities through his riches, yea he shall fulfill them
with glory, even with such plentifulnesse and abundance as that his name may be
glorified thereby.

The third thing which I note is, that the Apostle says, that their recompense
of reward was in Christ Jesus. Whereby he gives them to understand that God
made this recompense of reward unto them of their liberality toward him, not
for their works sake as upon desert, but for Christ Jesus sake only by grace.
Whence I observe how the promises of God touching the recompense of reward for
our works, are made good unto us; the promises are made and paid only in
Christ Jesus, not any way for the merit of our works seen or foreseen. In him
God from the beginning loved us, and made all his loving promises of his sweet
mercies unto us, and in him partly now he does, and partly hereafter shall make
them good unto us through his riches with glory. This our Apostle witnesses
where he says, 2 Cor. 1.2.
that all the promises of God in Christ Jesus are yea, and are in him Amen;
that is, in him they are all made and performed, ratified and established. And
the reason is plain; for why does he make or perform such promises unto us,
but only in his gracious love and favor toward us, every promise of his unto
us being a testimony of his love toward us? And how does he love us but only
in Christ Jesus, in whom alone he is well pleased? Mat. 3.17.
His promises then unto us being made and performed only in love unto us, and
his love unto us being only in Christ Jesus, it is plain that all his
promises are made and performed unto us in Christ Jesus alone. By him we are
reconciled unto God, and in him, through him, and for him we have whatsoever we
have. So that whenever any promise is made unto us throughout the whole
Scripture, either of blessing for this life, or for that that is to come, of
temporal or of eternal reward, of safety from enemies, or of salvation in
the heavens; still we are to lift up our eyes unto heaven where Christ Jesus
sits at the right hand of God, and to know that in him alone both the
promise is made, and shall be performed unto us, through the love of God
wherewith he loves us in him.

Hence then, first, we learn not to credit any such as shall tell us that any
reward is promised or given unto us for the merit or worth of our works seen
or foreseen. For let but this ground be laid, which is most certain and true,
that all the promises of God unto us are made and performed in Christ Jesus;
then must it needs be concluded, that in us no merits or any thing were seen
or foreseen, wherefore such promises should be made or performed, and that we
are altogether unworthy in our selves unto whom any such promises should be
made or performed. For therefore are they made and performed in Christ Jesus,
because in us there is nothing wherefore they should be performed or made. Or
if there be, then as the Apostle reasons touching justification, saying, If
righteousness be by the Law; that is, by the works of the Law, then Christ
died without a cause; so do I touching this point, If in us there be any thing
wherefore the promises of God should be made or performed, then in vain are
they made and performed in Christ Jesus. I omit to speak of the great
unworthiness of our best works, because I have spoken to that purpose often
heretofore. Only for this time let this ground be considered, and if any man
at any time shall seek to persuade you that this or that reward is promised
and shall be given unto you for the merit of your works, tell him that it is
promised and given unto you in Christ Jesus, and therefore not for any merit of
your works.

Secondly, hence learn the stablenesse of all Gods promises made unto his
children. As this here is, so they are all made in Christ Jesus, and therefore
must needs be stable and never fail. Even as we say, that whom he loves once
he loves unto the end, because whom he loves in Christ Jesus, him he always
loves; so his promises being all founded and grounded upon his love, once made
unto his children shall not fail for ever, because they are all made in Christ
Jesus. A notable comfort unto all Gods children. Has he promised life and
salvation unto all that believe in his name? has he promised deliverance out
of troubles unto those that love and fear him? has he promised to fulfill all
their necessities that show mercy to the poor? Here is the comfort that not
one of these promises shall fail for ever, because they are all made in Christ
Jesus, in whom he loves us for ever, and therefore keeps his promises made
in him unto us for ever. Let us not therefore fail of what he requires of us,
and assuredly he will not fail of whatsoever he has promised us.

Thirdly, hence learn that the promises made of God belong only unto them
that are in Christ Jesus. The proof whereof is this, because the promises made
of God are only made in Christ Jesus: so that until such time as we be
graffed in Christ Jesus, and made one with him, we are mere strangers from the
covenants of promise, and quite aliants from the commonwealth of Israel. Holy
things are not for dogs, nor pearls for swine, nor the childrens bread for
whelps: his faithful oath is unto Abraham and his seed, and his holy
promises unto them that be at peace with him. And who are at peace with him but
they that are in Christ Jesus his Son, by whom we are reconciled unto him? In
vain therefore do they look after the promise that bear not fruit in the
true vine Christ Jesus. Worldly blessings they may have, and that in abundance.
Mat. 5.45.
For he makes his Sun to arise on the evil, and on the good, and sends
rain on the just and unjust. But the sure promises of grace and glory are unto
Jacob his people, and to Israel his inheritance. Will we therefore take comfort
in his promises? The Spirit must witness unto our spirit that we are in Christ
Jesus. Will we lay hold on the promises as belonging unto us? So we may, if in
the assurance of our souls we can cry, Abba, Father. And therefore as we love
and long to be partakers of the promises, so let us in all things grow up into
him, which is the head, that is, Christ. Let us be merciful as our heavenly
Father is merciful, and let us do good unto all, but especially unto them that
are of the household of faith. If we communicate unto the necessities of the
Saints, the Lord our God shall fulfill all our necessities through his riches
with glory in Christ Jesus. This promise is sure, because made in Christ
Jesus, and belongs unto us if we be in Christ Jesus, and walk worthy of
Christ Jesus, abounding in this, and every good work until the day of Christ
Jesus. Now one word of that wherewith the Apostle concludes his Epistle,
saying, Unto God, even the Father, etc.

Unto God, etc. In these words the Apostle concludes the Epistle, with praise
and thanksgiving unto the Lord. Where first I note that now he says, our God.
Before he said, my God; now, our God. So that howsoever more scruple be made
about the one, then the other, yet ye see there is warrant for both, to use
this or that speech as the occasions are. Secondly, I note that the Apostle
says, our Father. Not any but Christ alone says, my Father. He when he
speaks of himself says, my Father; when he speaks of us says, your
Father, as that place witnesses where he says, Ioh. 20.17.
I ascend unto my Father, and your Father, and to my God, and your God. He can
only say, my Father, because he alone is his Son by eternal generation; we
only can say, our father, because we are only his sons by Adoption through
Christ Jesus, and regeneration by his Spirit. Thirdly, I note that here he is
called our God in respect of our creation, and our Father in respect of our
regeneration: our God in respect of temporal, our Father in respect of
eternal blessings. Now unto God even our Father for both, even for all be
praise for evermore; that is, throughout all ages from generation to
generation, that as his mercies endure for ever, so his name may be blessed and
praised for ever.

Whence I observe, that always in all things God even our Father is to be
praised; write we, or speak we, remember we, or mention we temporal
blessings, or spiritual graces, still he is to be praised. And the reason is;
For of him, and through him, and for him are all things. In all things
therefore let us glorify God through Jesus Christ, and let us always have
that song in our mouths, Apoc. 7.12.
Praise, and glory, and thanks, and honor, and power, and might be unto our
God for evermore, Amen. And as our Apostle concludes this his Epistle with
praise unto the Lord, so let us remember to praise our God for that it has
pleased him so often to assemble us together to hear a great part of this
Epistle opened unto us, and thence to be instructed in the things that belong
unto our peace. The beginning of this work was his doing, and the continuance
of this work is his doing. Unto him therefore even God our Father be praise
for evermore, Amen.

LECTVRE XCV.
PHILIP. 4. Verse 20. Unto God even our Father be praise for evermore. Salute
all the Saints in Christ Jesus. The brethren which are with me, etc.
NOthing being needful to be spoken touching the coherence of these words with
the former for the better understanding of these, I will also omit the
repetition of what was spoken the last day, and trust unto your faithful
remembrance, the rather for that my desire is at this time to conclud my
observations upon this conclusion of the Apostle. In these words therefore now
read, we have the conclusion of this whole Epistle. Where first he concludes
the Epistle with praise and thanksgiving unto the Lord. Secondly, he adds, as
his manner is, certain salutations. First for conclusion of the Epistle he
says, Unto God even our Father, etc. or, unto our God and our Father,
referring our unto both, as usually it is wont.

Where first I note unto whom all praise is due, even unto God our Father, our
God, and our Father. And here by the way first I note that the Apostle says,
Unto our God. In the former verse he said, my God, now he says, our God. So
that howsoever more scruple be made about the one then about the other speech,
the one being used and approved by all, the other being scorned and reproved by
many, yet ye see there is warrant for both; and as the occasions are, so we may
use this or that speech, unless we will take upon us either to censure the
Apostle for using as well the one as the other; or think that the Apostles
example may not be our warrant to use as well the one as the other. It is, as I
told you the last day, the policy of the Devil, to the end that he may stay
men from this boldness and confidence, and near approach unto God, as to call
him my God and my Lord, to brand them with most odious names, and to heap on
them most opprobrious speeches that shall at any time so speak. But if we
keep the true pattern of the most wholesome words which we have learned of
our Apostle, 2 Timothy 1.13.
as he wills us, it is warrant enough for us; and if we do so, whatsoever
opprobrious name or speech is cast upon us, lights as well upon him as upon us,
and so long we need not much to move or trouble our selves thereat. The second
thing which here by the way I note is, that the Apostle says, Unto God, even
our Father. God he is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and he is the Father
of us all. And hereupon he says, Ioh. 20.17.
I ascend unto my Father and your Father, unto my God and your God. But not any
but Christ alone when he speaks of God, can say, my Father. The reason is in
the difference of the manner how he and we are called sons. For in a large
different manner are he and we called sons: he, by eternal generation of the
substance of the Father, we only by Adoption through Jesus Christ his Son,
and regeneration by his Spirit; he the only begotten Son of God by nature,
we all the sons of God, not by nature but by grace; nor only as the Angels
in respect of our creation, but in respect of our Adoption and regeneration.
Albeit therefore one God be the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Father
of us all, yet because of this different manner, how he is his and our Father,
we cannot say as he, my Father, but only our Father. Neither is it observed
that any says with Christ, my Father, 28.
as many say with Thomas, my Lord and my God. The third thing which by the way
I note is, that in this and other like places where these speeches are thus
joined together, our God is mentioned in respect of our creation, and our
Father in respect of our regeneration; our God in respect of temporal
blessings, and our Father in respect of spiritual graces, and eternal in the
heavens. For as our God he created us and made us, but as our Father he adopted
and redeemed us by Christ, and renewed us by his Spirit; as our God he gave us
life, motion, and being; but as our Father he makes us to live unto his
praise, to walk after the Spirit, and to be new creatures. So that the joy and
comfort of our souls is this, that our God is our Father, even our merciful
and loving God, and tendereth us as his sons and heirs of his promises.
These things I thought good to note by the way, by occasion of the first note
which here offers it self, viz. unto whom all praise is due, namely unto
God, even our Father.

The second thing which here I note is, the thing which is due unto him, which
is, glory, and honor, and praise, and thanksgiving; as witness also the four
and twenty Elders saying, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and
honor, Apoc. 4.11.
and power: For thou have created all things, etc.

The third thing which I note, is, the continuance of the time during which
this praise is to be given unto him, which is for evermore; that is, throughout
all ages from generation to generation. The reason of which everlasting
continuance is, not only because of his eternal majesty and glory, but
specially because of his everlasting mercy and love, that as his mercies endure
for ever, so his name may be blessed and praised for ever. Many notes ye see
might hence easily be gathered, and not unfruitfully insisted upon: as first,
from the person unto whom all praises is due, viz. not unto Saints, or Angels,
much less unto brutish or senseless creatures, but unto God only, even unto
God our Father. Secondly, from the thing which is, due unto him, which is,
praise and thanksgiving, not with lips alone, but from the heart and soul;
which is the sweetest smelling sacrifice that can be offered unto the Lord.
Thirdly, from the time, that his praise is not to be temporary but
everlasting, as his mercies are everlasting.

But for this time my meaning is to conclude all these in one short observation
which is this, That always in all things God even our Father is to be praised:
write we, or speak we, remember we with our selves, or mention we unto others
temporal blessings, or spiritual graces, for this life present, or for that
that is to come, still he is to be praised. And to this the Apostles give
witness in every place. Our Apostle concluding his Epistle to the Romans,
Romans 16.27.
To God (says he) only wise, be praise through Jesus Christ for ever, Amen.
And again, Unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we
ask or think, according to the power that works in us, be praise in the
Church by Jesus Christ throughout all generations for ever, Amen. 1 Timothy 1.17.
And again, Unto the King everlasting, immortal, invisible, unto God only
wise, be honor and glory for ever and ever, Amen. 1 Pet. 4 11.
And the Apostle Peter, Let God in all things be glorified through Jesus
Christ, to whom is praise and dominion for ever and ever, Amen. In which
testimonies, to omit infinite others which might be brought to this purpose, ye
see also the practice of the Apostles, that always in all things they praised
the everliving and only wise God. And the reason why it should be so is
evident and clear, as the four and twenty Elders yield it, where they cast
their crowns before him and say, Thou art worthy O Lord to receive glory,
Apoc. 4.11.
and honor, and power: For thou have created all things, and for thy wills
sake they are, and have been created. Romans 11.36.
Or as our Apostle yields the reason; Of him, and through him, and for him
are all things; to him therefore be glory for ever, Amen. But not to seek
after other reasons then our present text affoordeth: he is our God that has
created us, formed us, and made us for his glory: he is our Father, which has
blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ, and his
mercies toward us in Jesus Christ his Son are for evermore; therefore always
and in all things his name is to be blessed and praised.

But who is he that knows not this, that God is always in all things to be
praised, and that there is great cause so to do? If the question be asked, one
thing will be answered; but if the practice be looked into, another thing may
be judged. Luke 12.47.
If we know it and do it not, it cannot be but that we shall be beaten with
many stripes. And do we always in all things praise the Lord? If ten lepers be
cleansed amongst us of their leprosy, are there not nine of them that never
return back to give God praise? ten for one that never praise the Lord for
his mercies? May not the Lord now take up the complaint of Malachie, and say, A
son honoreth his father, and a servant his master. If I then be a Father
where is mine honor? And if I be a Master, where is my fear? May he not say,
An holy nation worshippeth their God, and good children honor their father. If
I then be your God, where is my worship? If I be your Father, where is mine
honor? I doubt not but there are who with the Prophet say, Thou art my God,
Psalm. 118.28.
and I will thank thee, thou art my God, and I will praise thee. But is it one
of ten? Nay, might we not go into a city, and with Abraham begin at fifty,
and come down to ten, and yet not find ten such there? We have certain words
of course which we use, as to say, God be blessed, God be praised, I thank
God, I praise God; but commonly they come but from the lips. It is not with
us as it was with Marie, that we can say, My soul does magnify the Lord, Luke
1.46.
and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior. For though we bless God with our
mouths, yet do we dishonor him in the ways of our lives.

If ye say with them in Malachie, Mal. 1.9.
Wherein have we despised thy name? wherein have we dishonored our God? I tell
you, in that ye have profaned his holy Sabboths. And if ye say unto me, Wherein
have we profaned them? I tell you out of the Prophet, In that therein ye have
done your own will, and not the will of the Lord? For, not to speak of your
absenting of your selves, some of you, from your Churches on that day, when ye
should come thither (as it were) to his School, there to hear his voice, to
learn his most holy will, and to be instructed in the things that belong unto
our peace; not to speak of your fruitless and unnecessary talking, on that
day, in your houses, or at your doors, or as ye walk abroad, when ye should
either meditate with your selves, or confer with others of the things that ye
have heard at the Church out of the word; not to speak of your running up and
down with your wares, of your selling of your wares even in open shop, and of
doing the works of your calling on the Sabbath day, when ye should be either
preparing your selves in all holy reverence to the hearing of the word, or
else be present in the congregation at the hearing of the word, or else be
meditating or conferring of the things that ye have heard; not, I say, to
speak of these and many such like things whereby the Lord his Sabboths are
profaned, in that your own will is only done, and the Lord his will neglected;
what will ye say unto piping, and dancing, and drinking, and lording, and
ladying, and may-gaming on that day? Is this the Lord his will, or is it your
own will? Nay, is it not to oppose your selves against his will? He requires
of you on that day to do his will, and not your own will; but ye do your own
will, and not his will. Can ye plead ignorance in this behalf? Nay, ye have
bin taught what is his will for this day, and that this is not his will, but as
much repugnant to his will almost as can be. And therefore is your sin the
greater, because being taught in these things ye have refused to hearken and to
obey, and chosen rather to follow the ways of your own heart. O but ye took
only the evening unto these delights. Yea but the evening is a part of the
Lords day, wherein he looks to be served as well as ye look to be served by
your servants on the working days in the evening. The whole day is to be
consecrated unto the Lord; so that that whole day we ought to employ, either in
an holy preparation to his service, or in hearing, or reading, or meditating,
or conferring of the holy word of God, and not otherwise. What? no honest
recreations and delights lawful on that day? First, these whereof we now
speak are not such, but dishonest and ungodly. Secondly, for those that are
such, it is doubted whether they be lawful on that day. For if worldly but
necessary duties be forbidden when we should attend on the Lords work,
(because we cannot be wholly occupied in both,) much more things which seem
but for pleasure, are then to be abandoned.

Beloved, being occasioned at this time to speak of our dishonouring of God,
whom we ought to praise and honor always, and in all things, I have instanced
only in this one point of our dishonouring of God, both because the
profanation of the Sabbath is one of the greatest dishonours of God, and one
wherein we too too much, and too too grossly offend. Nehe. 13.18.
Did not your fathers (said Nehemiah to the rulers of Judah) break the
Sabbath, and our God brought all this plague upon us, and upon this city, yet
ye increase the wrath upon Israel by breaking the Sabbath? Consider your own
ways in your hearts, and be think your selves well, whether amongst other our
sins, the breaking of our sabboths have not brought heavy plagues upon us. And
do ye yet increase the wrath upon Israel by breaking his Sabbath? Mark well
what I say, and the Lord give you a right understanding in all things. The Lord
is always and in all things to be honored and praised. Let us not in this or
any other thing dishonor his holy Name. Let us in all things glorify God
through Jesus Christ, and let us always have that Song in our mouths, Praise,
and glory, and honor, and thanks, and power, Apoc. 7.12.
and might be unto our God for evermore, Amen. And as our Apostle concludes
this his Epistle with praise unto the Lord, so let us remember to praise God
even our Father, for that it has pleased him so often to assemble us together
to hear a great part of it opened unto us, and thence to be instructed in the
things that belong unto our peace. The beginning of this work was his work,
and the continuance of it is his work: unto him therefore, even God our
Father, be praise for evermore, Amen.

Salute all the Saints, etc. Now in the end of this Epistle the Apostle adds
salutations from himself and others unto the Philippians, which manner also he
uses almost in the end of all his Epistles. And first he remembers his own
salutations unto them, saying, Salute all the Saints, etc. Secondly, he
remembers the salutations of his brethren, and fellow laborers in the Gospel
unto them, saying, The brethren, etc. Thirdly, he remembers the salutations of
all the rest of the Saints that were at Rome unto them, saying. All the Saints,
etc. Lastly he shuts up all and seals, as it were his letter with that
usual prayer which he uses both in the beginning and in the end of all his
Epistles, saying, The grace, etc. Salute, sometimes he adds the manner, with
an holy kiss. For that was the manner of the Christian salutation to embrace
one another, and to kiss one another. Salute then in token of my love and
affection unto them, all the Saints generally; nor only so, but particularly
every Saint in Christ Jesus, without omission of any one; that being washed in
the blood of Christ Jesus, and sanctified by his Spirit, do lead an holy and
godly life amongst you. For such here he calls Saints in Christ Jesus, and
that he would have every one of these in particular saluted, appears by his
using of the singular number.

Here then first I observe a good ground of that Christian custom commonly
used in writing of letters unto friends that are absent; which is, to send
commendations, to remember their salutations and health-wishes to such of their
friends as are joined unto them in any near bond of duty, or of love. Which as
it is a good testimony of their kind and loving affection toward their
friends, so is it a good means to preserve and to increase friendship, and is
(in effect) a prayer for their health and welfare. And for these causes it is
that this custom of long time has been, and is still amongst Christians
continued. Which may teach us always, by all means, to retain and maintain
our love and friendship with the Saints in Christ Jesus: and therefore, when we
converse with them, in all loving sort to use them; and when we are absent from
them, in our letters to salute them, even every of them, as here our Apostle
does. As therefore the Apostle before exhorts, so do I, whatsoever things
pertain to love, even to the preserving or increasing of your love with the
Saints in Christ Jesus, those think on, and do.

The second thing which here I note is, that the Apostle saluteth the Saints in
Christ Jesus. Whence I observe that the name and title of Saints is fitly and
truly given unto men upon earth, Psalm. 16.3.
All my delight, says David, is upon the Saints that are on the earth, and
upon such as excel in virtue. And the Apostle in all his Epistles still
writes unto the Saints and faithful brethren, as ye may see in the beginning
of all his Epistles. But who on earth are fitly and truly called Saints? Even
they that being purified by faith, and sanctified by the Spirit, and washed in
the blood of the Lamb, deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and live soberly,
and righteously, and godly in this present world. For they that are such, are
led by the Spirit of God; they have put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and he is
made of God unto them wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption. Yea but are not all the sons of men so long as they dwell in
these houses of clay, unrighteous and unholy? How then can any in this life be
fitly and truly called Saints? Job 15.
True it is that He lays folly upon his Angels, and that the heavens are not
clean in his sight, and that truly and properly the Lord only is holy, and
that of all the sons of men it is most truly said, that there is none that
does good, and sins not, no not one. Yet in Christ Jesus all the seed which
is according unto promise, is counted holy: holy, for that he is made of God
unto them sanctification and holiness; holy, for that they are washed from their
sins by the blood of the Lamb, and sanctified by the Spirit of grace; holy
for that what is wanting in their obedience and holiness, is hid and covered
in the perfect obedience and holiness of Christ Jesus; and holy for that
sanctified desire which is in them after holiness. And therefore our Apostle
writing to the Corinthians, says, Ye are washed, ye are sanctified, 1 Cor.
6.11.
ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God:
Ye are sanctified, that is, ye are made Saints, and holy. So that howsoever, in
themselves, all the sons of men be unrighteous and unholy, yet even in this
life all the Israel of God in Christ Jesus, are fitly and truly called Saints
in such sort as has been said.

Vain then and foolish is their conceit that imagine that there are no Saints
but such as have departed this mortality in the fear and faith of Christ
Jesus. They indeed are well called Saints, and holy is the remembrance of
them, neither need they the shrines of a sinful deceiuer to be called Saints.
But not unto them alone, but unto you also (beloved) is this title due, to be
called Saints, if ye be in Christ Jesus, and walk worthy of that calling
whereunto he has called you. Walk therefore worthy of that calling whereunto
ye are called. Mortify the deeds of the flesh, and walk not after the flesh
but after the Spirit. Be ye filled with the fruits of righteousness, and be
ye holy in all manner of conversation, as he which has called you is holy. The
greater impossibility that there is in it to be perfectly holy, strive ye the
more earnestly after it; and howsoever ye come short, yet with all eagerness
endeavor still your selves unto that which is before, and follow hard toward
the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. This is the
practice, and this is the study of them that are sanctified by the Spirit of
God, and these things if ye think on, and do, ye are Saints in Christ Jesus.
Otherwise ye are no Saints, neither do ye belong unto the covenant of grace.
And this know for a surety, that whosoever are not Saints on earth, shall
never be Saints in heaven. As therefore ye desire in your souls there to be,
so study and give all diligence here to be. Be ye in Christ Jesus, and then ye
are Saints; be ye Saints, and then ye are in Christ Jesus.

The brethren: Having remembered his own salutations, now he adds also the
salutations of others unto the Philippians. And first he remembers the
greetings and salutations of the brethren unto the Philippians. The brethren
etc. where by the brethren which were with him, he understands those that
labored with him in the Gospel.

Whence I observe, that in letters sent unto men absent, these forms of
speeches have not been unusual or misliked, to say, The brethren salute thee,
or, Salute the brethren. All the brethren (says the Apostle) greet you. 1
Cor. 16.20. Colos. 4.15.
And again, Salute the brethren, etc.

The more is it to be wondered at, that such forms of speech should now be
censured, and they that use them, noted and traduced for such and such men. Can
any man follow a better pattern then the example of the Apostle? Or can any
man have a better warrant then the warrant of the Apostle? It may very well be
thought, that if Paul were now living and should now use such forms of
salutations as these in the end of his Letters and Epistles, he should so be
censured and traduced as now those are that therein follow his example.

The second thing which hence I observe, is, that as all Christians generally,
so all Ministers of the Gospel in particular should write, and speak unto,
and account one of an other as brethren. For, as this is true in general, that
we have all one God for our Father, that we are all begotten by the immortal
seed of one God, in one womb of the Church; that we are all baptized into one
body, and have been all made to drink into one spirit, that we are all
adopted unto the same inheritance by the same Spirit, through Jesus Christ, and
therefore are all brethren in Christ Jesus; so is it also true in all the
Ministers of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, that we all build the same house, we
all preach the same Gospel, we are all called to the dispensation of the same
mysteries, we all seek the glory of the same kingdom, and we are all
shepherds and bishops under the chief Shepherd and Bishop of our souls
Christ Jesus. Howsoever therefore in degree we go one before another, yet
should we use and entreat one another as brethren.

A good note, as for all Christians in general, so for such in the Ministry
as in gifts, or degree, are before others of their calling. A better example
then this of the Apostle they cannot follow, to be so affectioned toward their
inferiors, as it appears our Apostle was, and in all kindness to entreat as
brethren them that labor with them in the Gospel, as it appears our Apostle
did. It follows.

All the Saints, etc. Here he remembers the salutations of all the rest of the
Saints that were at Rome, unto them. All the Saints salute you, to wit, all the
rest of the Saints, that labor not in the Gospel, and most of all they which
are of Caesar's household, he understands some of Neroes Court which did
embrace the truth. Which salutation the Apostle, no doubt, adds for the joy
and comfort of the Philippians, that when they should hear, that not only all
the Saints at Rome saluted them, but ye some of the Emperors Court which had
embraced the truth saluted them, yea and were as forward as the best in
saluting them. Whence I observe, that the Lord in mercy sometimes in the
Courts of wicked Princes, raises up faithful children unto Abraham, and
causes his truth to be loved, and embraced, and professed even of their
Courtiers. What a cruel tyrant, and wicked persecutor of Christians Nero was,
the Ecclesiastical stories mention. He was the beginner of all those wicked
persecutions under those ten cruel tyrants in the Primitive Church, and grew
to such a thirsting after blood, that not only Paul, and Peter, and many other
Christians, but his greatest familiars, his dearest friends, his nearest
kindred, his brethren, his mother, his wife were slain by his most cruel
tyranny. Yet even in this cruel tyrants Court, the Lord had some that feared
him, and favored the truth. Such a one was Joseph in Pharaoh his Court,
Jonathan in Saules Court, Obadiah in Ahabs Court, and Ebedmelech in Zedekiahs
Court. And such is his mercy, that he will, such is his power, that he can,
and such his goodness that he does cause light to shine out of darkness, and
beget children in the faith, where the truth is most oppugned.

Which may teach us many good lessons. As first not to despair, but that where
the truth is most oppugned, there the Lord has some that fear him, and
worship him in truth. No place more unlike to have friends unto the truth, then
Nero his Court, and yet there were such. And therefore we may hope that even
there where Antichrist usurps his tyrann^e, the Lord has his children which
bow not the knee to Baall. Only we are to acknowledge the glorious mercy and
power of the Lord therein, that so wonderfully deals for his children, and
provides for his own glory.

Secondly, this may serve to condemn us of great backwardlinesse in a
Christian resolution of a religious profession. In Nero his Court was great
danger of present death and cruel torture unto so many as should embrace and
profess the truth of Christ Jesus. There the same Paul in prison, and many
continually butchered and killed for a good profession: yet there were such as
embraced the truth in their hearts, and professed it with their mouths. And
how shall not this condemn our irresolute resolution of a religious
profession? We are in no peril of death, or of bonds, or imprisonment for
making a bold profession of Christian religion. Nay it is our honor with our
most gracious Prince constantly to maintain the truth against error and
superstition. And yet so cold are we a great many of us in religion, as that a
man cannot tell what we are, Papists or Protestants; and so frozen, as that a
man would take a many of us rather to be enemies then friends unto religion.
Either we are afraid and dare not make that profession which we should, for
fear of a day; or else to serve the time, we make show of one, and are indeed
another, and so cannot make a good profession. Howsoever it be, so it is that
many of us are of no resolution in religion. Well, it should not be so, but
though we were in Nero his Court, we should make a good profession; and though
there were no way for us but to be cast into the hot fiery furnace, yet
should we with the three children protest, Dan. 3.18.
We will not serve thy gods, nor worship thy golden image which thou have made
and set up.

The grace, etc. In these words the Apostle shuts up all, and as it were
seals his letter with that usual prayer which he uses both in the beginning
and in the end almost of all his Epistles. Where ye see the thing which he
wishes them is grace, which when he calls The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, he therein notes whence it is derived unto his children. By grace he
understands both the first and second grace, both the free favor of God
which is the fountain of all good things, and the good things themselves which
flow from that fountain. Now this is called the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, because it is derived from God by him unto his children, by him I say,
even by our Lord unto whom al power is given both in heaven and in earth; by
our Lord Jesus that saves his people from their sins; by our Lord Jesus
Christ anointed a King to defend us, a Prophet to teach us, a Priest to offer
up a sacrifice for our sins. So that the Apostles prayer here for the
Philippians is, ye see, that whatsoever grace our Lord Jesus Christ has
purchased for his Church, may be with them all, to fill them with all goodness.

Would ye then know how to pray for all good either unto Gods Church, or any of
Gods children? Learn of our Apostle, and pray that the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ may be with them. For herein ye pray both for all spiritual grace in
heavenly things unto them, and for all temporal blessings which in his
gracious favor he vouchsafes for the good of his Church and children, being
all couched in this, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Again, would ye know by whom all grace is derived unto us, be it spiritual
grace, or temporal blessing, the grace of God whereby he loves us, or the
grace of God whereby his love is made known unto us? Learn of our Apostle, it
is by our Lord Jesus Christ; for therefore is it called the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, because it is derived by him unto us, he having reconciled us
unto God, and we with him having all things given unto us. Knowing then the
exceeding great riches that we have in Christ Jesus our Lord, let us always in
all things glorify the name of Christ Jesus; and as by him we have all things,
so let us do all things to his glory.

Laus omnis soli Deo.
FINIS.

